
THE EVOLUTION
OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
An Essay in
Political Anthropology
MORTON H. FRIED
Columbia University
RANDOM HOUSE'
NEW YORK

STUDIES
IN ANTHROPOLOGY
Consulting Editors:
MORTON H. FRIED and
MARVIN HARRIS
Columbia University

CONTENTS
. ' ,-
INTRODUcnON
ix
1. Concepts and Definitions
3
Culture, Society, and Social Organization
5
Social Control and Sanctions
9
Power and Authority
11
Custom and Law
14
Political Organization and Government
20
Legitimacy
21
2. Egalitarian Society: Preliminary Considerations 27
Status and Role
29
Prestige
32
A Definition of Egalitarian Society
33
- ,
.' Egalitarian Society and Reciprocal Economy
35
A Note About Ethnography
36
Primate Societies
38
3· Simple Egalitarian Societies
51
The General Nature of Egalitarian Societies
53 .
Intraband Sources of Conflict
7°
Leadership
82
Law?
9°

External Relations in Band Egalitarian Society
The Transition to Band Egalitarian Society
4. Rank Societies
The General Nature of Rank Societies
Internal Political Features of Rank Society
External Relations
From Egalitarian to Rank Society
t:
1
I','
y
',-,iii /
Contents
94
106
109
110
128
153
182
5. Strati£ed Societies
185
The Origins of Stratification
191
Population Pressure
196
Shifts in Residence Rules
204
Was There an Ancient "Managerial Revolution"?
207
War
213
Slavery
216
The Stratified SoCiety
224
6. The State
227
. \'
'; ' , .
Pristine States
The Basic Nature of the State
Secondary States
BIBUOGRAPHY
INDEX
243
259
:j
"
"
;"y
'r

INTRODUCTION
Oh Meliboeus, I have half a mind
To take a writing hand in politics.
-Robert Frost
C";.'
:~;._,_
,-,"I"
. ~. ';':':<:< '-:'\
._, :;'.;' ~:,:" ...~;:_ :\. :
'~:/...
,
,-;
.
. . .
~
'...
~
"
j.
:'::,'.
. ,:'
.
" .-
~
"
There is much to be said for an introduc-
tion. It may warn you away from the rest of the book before
you've really invested in it. So I will try to tell you very
briefly what I go on about at greater length in the chapters.
Actually, it is good for me to do so, because in some impor-
tant respects this book runs against the current of present
theoretical tendencies in. my own field of anthropology and
in that fascinating adjacent neighborhood, political science.
As in much of contemporary social science, concern in these
fields is concentrated on behavioral and systems analysis;
the field of vision tends to be restricted to what is directly
observable. Functionalism reigns, and the view is synchronic.
The attempt to derive yet another set of generalizations
about cultural evolution will strike many as quixotic. To
talk about the evolution of polity will seem antediluvian.
Yet some problems don't go away. The fact that they

x /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
have not been solved by famous thinkers of the past might
serve as a warning to those who come later along the path,
but instead it sometimes seems to act as a goad. More seri-
ously, changes in the conceptions and methods of the rele-
vant fields of inquiry sometimes threaten to expunge "the
questions that previous thinkers struggled with in vain. The
language changes, and key words are repudiated, as are
"state" by the new political scientists and "tribe" in the
. present case. Many social scientists concerned now define
the political as a ubiquitous aspect of social organization
and treat it as something perduring and without determi-
nable beginning. But linguistic shifts and even changes in
the strategic concepts of social science are not enough to
abolish certain key questions. Some students continue to ask
how the ordering of social relations became so complex,
how invidious distinctions arose among the inhabitants of a
single society, how exploitation developed, and how the
political state came to be. Although some illumination of
parts of the answers to these questions may come from so
called "behavioral" approaches, the basic questions are
about evolution, and the basic answers will be evolutionary.
Because "the language of political science and political
anthropology is anything but standardized, the book begins
with definitions. Because the gap between any and all ex-
isting nonhuman primate societies and every known human
society is so great, the necessary treatment of political-like
elements in primate society is placed in the definitional
preamble. In a sense they are the elementary limiting con-
ditions out of a great range of which the behavior of our
.ancestors emerged 2 million years ago.
The simplest human societies of which we have knowl-
edge are those classified and described in this book as
"egalitarian." In the course of Chapter 3 we make an exten-
sive analysis of the way in which such societies are organ-
ized and how relations are maintained within them and
among them. We are particularly interested in certain ques-
tions of long standing: whether or not they are associated

Introduction
/ xi
with certain characteristic forms of economic organization,
whether or not they may be spoken of as having law, and
whether or not and to what degree they are warlike.
The next degree of complication in the evolution of po-
litical society is identified with the appearance of ranking.
The definition of ranking used in this book is a little un-
usual, but there are precedents for the usage here adopted.
Similarly, the next level is identified with stratification, and
.it is clearly distinguished from tanking by a somewhat
unique definition. Whereas the rank society, that is, a so-
ciety with ranking but not stratification, is relatively stable,
provided that it is not unbalanced by pressures emanating
from more highly organized societies, the stratified society
is by nature unstable. It must give way fairly rapidly to a
more complex system of political organization or return to
a lower level of organization, that is, revert to rank or egali-
tarian structure. Should it move successfully on to the
higher level of organization, its form will be transmuted
into that of a state. In the final chapter we briefly consider
the character of the state and the means by which this
/
form of organization takes shape. A distinction is proposed
between pristine and secondary states, between states that
took shape in the abs-ence of predecessors and those that
were formed because pre-existing states supplied the stim-
uli or the models for organization.
It is fitting that this introduction conclude with the
same sentiments I expressed in an earlier article covering
some of the same ground. I have been led to write this book
by my ignorance of any modern attempt to link up the con-
tributions that have been made in various subdisciplines
into a more or less unified theory of the emergence of rank-
ing, social stratification, and the state. That the theory of-
fered here is crude, often too special, and (still) by no
means documented seems less important than that it may be
used as a target to attract the fire and better aim of others.
That is the end of this introduction. It puts me in mind
of a story told by Machiavelli: Having been wearied by a
... .
F~:'~~:
£
:~: :

'-.'
-:'..
.J
-. . .~.~ .
.;-. . :-;.
,,':~r.
, -"
", ' .
'
0:'" 7~;::'·' '::.,-' ; . -',
" , : "
- -~ .'
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
longspeech, Castruccio Castracani wasasked by the o'"to" f~l
.
:.~
"Perhaps I have fatigued you by speaking so long?" To
which Castruccio replied, "You have not, because I haven't
listened to a word you said."
xii /
" .
\'
I
j'
I
,.
~ , .
: "
- !
':-.'

. 7? F ' ~ !J C5
THE EVOLUTION
OF POLITICAL SOCIETY

I:I.
i .
i
!l .'
j.. ."
r:.'- -
..
t~ -~~ ·
I ·
," -.
I
.
I
I'1.
I1
~I.
..,,"
i
I

CHAPTER
Concepts
and Definitions
1
Some scholars think definitions are poi-
son. Trying to free political science from the blight of pro-
crustean definitions, Arthur Bentley said, "Who likes may
snip verbal definitions (like paper dolls ) in his, old age,
when his world has gone crackly and dry" (Bentley, 1949,
p. 199; I came across the remark in Easton, 1953, p. 94).
Lucy Mair tells us that Bronislaw Malinowski hated defini-
tions, and her opinion of them doesn't seem much higher.
About the definition of law she regretfully remarks, "Floods
of ink have been wasted on this subject" (Mair, 1962, P: 19).
Among my friends and colleagues are those who have
warned that
~efinitions are old-fashioned and tend to pa-
rochialize a discussion. I agree that illfatuation with arche-
.
. .'
types IS likely to be fatal to the questing and particularly W\~ ..,
the scientific intellect. But there is an immense gulf between! cl0
hypostasized ideals and the tool use of definitions.
1. U'. :'

4 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
One really discouraging thing is the realization that a
great many truly brilliant people ' have played with the
same problems and have, in the course of their work, offered
many good words and definitions: so many, in fact, that the
problem of meaning lies all entangled and, turning to a sub-
ject, one must often begin by telling what his words Signify
for him. '
All these things have been said so many times before
that the present writer must shudder as he repeats that the
need for definition is akin to the need for tools. Basically,
~
the test of language used for scientific expression is utility,
and utility is measured, not by truth or falsity per se, but
by ability to convey distinctness, .similarity, identity, inde-
pendence, dependence, association, and other presences or
absences of relationship, all to the nicest degree.
Take the subject matter of this book. What is meant by
political organization? Should it be distinguished from gov-
ernment and, if so, how? Can a useful distinction be made
between government and social control? Between reinforce-
ments and sanctions, customs and laws? It is simple to gen-
erate such questions, most of which have already led to
.discussions running into thousands of pages. It is a matter
of utmost difficulty-probably impossible-to offer univer-
sally acceptable solutions. For this reason alone, it seems
Wise to give up the belief that definitions must be true or
false; for the purposes suggested here they are better evalu-
ated as more or less useful (ct. Cohen, 1935, p. 835; Seagle,
. 1941, pp. 3-6), In any case; the present attempt does not
seek to establish a new vocabulary but only to make as clear
as possible the statements and arguments that follow. How-
ever it may seem to the reader, my goal has been to avoid
what one journalist has called "the arcane language of the
professional . . . which. aims
at
precision
while
never
achieving clarity."
't. '
~.

Concepts and Definitions
/ 5
"
'""'-." -. -' > -<:~" ':". - "'-.
.,
," .'
" '.
:~, ".
, ~ .-
:".J
J~
CULTURE, SOCIETY,
···.·1
~t :O~:s:::::::~:c concept of culture ~l <:'~
the '?reat cont:?bution. of. anthropology to our times, but .
. ..:.:..;.',1.1
Leslie A. White, reVIeWIng Alfred Kroeber and Clyde
.
j
Kluekhohn's inventory of definitions of culture,
concluded
~ i
that the concept of culture is so protean as to be of dubious
'\.'j
value. Marvin Harm (1963), who is critical of the episte-
mological bases of many pronouncements about culture, has
;?'I
made an interesting attempt to place the concept of culture
·;1
on an operational basis. Present purposes are better served,
.. j
however, by treating culture in a way now regarded as con-
.
ventional, in terms of the process by which it is transmitted,
that is, through symbolic learning.
Behavioral psychologists are accustomed to dealing
with learning as a phenomenon of biological level. Prob-
lems faced by cultural anthropologists, however, are quite
different from those usually tackled by psychologists in-
terested in learning theory. In some instances, where cross-
fertilization has been possible, significant uses have been
made of models drawn from psychology; George P. Mur-
dock's drawing upon Clark Hull's theories is one notable
illustration. In terms of the broadest posing of problems of
culture, it seems profitable to make a distinction not usually
applied in psychology and to differentiate three kinds of
learning according to the 'contexts in which they occur: We
may refer to them as "situational," "social," and "symbolic"
learning. .
Situational learning i,Lthe most widely distributed of
the three and is almost synonymous with life. Certainly it
is found among protists and all forms of animal1i£e. It is
the process by which an orgawm adopts qr alters a be-
havioral response on the basis of experience. Presented with
a stimulus, the organism establishes a response pattern, and
recurrent presentations of similar stimuli elicit similar re-
;:-·~:2;:~~~~··~~~:~~·..?:t ;;~' ~:;~r ~ .~:::.
-
. ~ ." '

6 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
sponses, sometimes with increases or decreases in reaction
time as the series proceeds. Most significant about this kind
of learning situation is the immediate relationship between .
stimulus and response, characterized by the absolute need
for the organism personally to encounter the stimulus and
to form its own response pattern. Creatures limited to situ-
ationallearning cannot communicate, nor can they be com-
municated with. Situational learning by itself is and must
remain solipsistic. Consequently, its capacity for aggrega-
tion is almost zero. A creature may accumulate a small
number of learned responses during its lifetime, but they
will be wiped out with his death.
Social learning occurs when one organism, perceiving
an~ encounter a stimulus and emit a response, acquires
that response as part of its own behavioral repertory. Social
learning has limited possibilities of aggregation but repre-
sents an enormous advance over situational learning in this
respect. Organisms are capable of stockpiling learned re-
sponses for situations not yet encountered. It is also possible
for a certain amount of communication, often random, to
take place, and some of it may carry learned responses
across a generational threshold. Social learning also places
an adaptive premium upon the formation of certain types
of social interaction, favoring the transmission of informa-
tion through transient or semipermanent population aggre-
gates.
o organism can rely upon social learning alone. All
organisms that learn socially also learn situationally. Man is
one of the organisms that learns both situationally and so-
cially. But man, as remarked before, also learns symbolically.
Th~_91~~~~~c.}~E!!!!!g.iLthe__o]:Ili~sion of the
ori~al situation" In situational learning the learning or-
--~
ganism encounters and responds to a situational stimulus.
IIi social learning the organism perceives another organism
encountering and responding to the stimulus situation. In
symbolic learning the stimulus situation is not present but
is represented by something else-s-by a symbol. The symbol
I
I
\
Iltri
\
~,.-.t.

'f..'.:i
~
\
t
I;'r.b(
!1
trI
I..I
r
fI
. ;:
.e,
Concepts and Definitions
/
7
may be a fairly complex bit of representational behavior,
but most symbols are relatively simple, highly concentrated
substitutes for the originals.
Symbolic learning consequently has almost infinite pos-
sibilities for aggregation, as idea can be added to idea and
as new formulations can be tried symbolically with minimal
waste of time and effort. It is also supremely "time-binding,"
as one well-known phrase has it. The general behavior of
one generation shapes and, to a great extent, determines the
behavior of the next and is its raw material, apart from
genetic patterns. Although something similar can occur in
social learning, the difference in magnitude is so great as
to constitute a genuine difference of kind.
::
Against this background, "culture" may be defined·as
f
,V
the totality ..?fconventional beha,-:i.m.:.aI responses acquired r
primarily by symbolic learning.'
. r--~ It mayne -asKed, why de£lneculture when we want to
talk about political organization? It is precisely because we
want to talk about political organization that we define
culture: So~~ a~~h!.()RQl.Qgi.~~Lan<t.s.QmJLp-OJiti.G.al scientists,
as well as other social scientists..... have come very close to
identifying the political with the cultural. Such identifica-
tion
IS nofarmcult, particularly in Simple societies where,
as we shall see, political activities are not sharply set apart
and tend to be embedded in a very generalized institutional
setup. Beyond this level, some scholars have been impressed'
by the fact that most political norms exist, not because they?
are sanctioned by force, but_because they are conveyed to,?
the young in the course of growing up, as part of the process)
1 About the qualifying word, "primarily": Culture includes very many
socially learned traits. It is quite possible that the earliest stone-
working traditions, like the very ancient pebble industry, wer e trans-
mitted subculturally through social learning. All modern cultures are
heavily loaded with socially learned components, including kinesic
and postural traits, as we have been told by Ray Birdwhistell and
Gordon Hewes. That such a socially learned area should play an
important role in culture does not in any way compromise the de-
pendence of culture upon a system of symbolic learning.

THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
8 /
of enculturation. There are also the theorists who are im-
pressed with the integration of culture and see a shared
value system as the basis of a political system. Whatever
their theoretical point of departure, theorists of these per-
suasions end by confusing custom and law, social control
and the state, and culture and political organization.
Even more common is the confusion between social
and political organization. ApproachiDgtIlls pro~
may begin with the carefully phrased definition of society
offered some years ago by a group of social scientists: \
A society is a group of human beings sharing a self-
sufficient system of action which is capable of existing
longer than the life-span of an individual, the group
being recruited at least in part by the sexual reproduc-
tion of its members- (Aberle et al., 1950, P: 101).
We need not analyze this definition, though we warn critics
to read the article before raising comments. Our purposes
are served by the clear distinction between society thus de-
fined and culture as previously categorized.
.!f._"~_ci~ry" refers to a group of_parties, "social organi-
zation" .!"~f~:rst9_j:h_e--relatioil~_.!llat_~JP.st_amongjli~parties..
By-the term "social organization" we comprise the totality
of patterned relations among the members of a SOciety, the
subgroups formed in the COUTse of these relations, and the
relations among these groups and their component mem-
bers. As usually employed by anthropologists, the concept
of social organization includes all instances of the phe-
nomena under study and should therefore be described in
terms of statistical, that is, enumerative, models. Presenta-
tions of specific social' organizations should therefore be
heavily descriptive, and much care should be taken to
indicate ranges of variation and alternative patterns. Con-
versely, social structure, as usually taken by anthropologists,
relates to a more abstract level and comprises analytical
2 In the light of increased interest in primate ethology and nonhuman
forms of: grouping, it seems unwise to confine the definition to human
beings.

.'-,
i :
, r:
~
.',:J
Concepts and Definitions
/ 9
models constructed from, the data of social organization. It
tends to convey the basic modal structures of the society
and pays less attenti~~~cripti~e_ g.e.t~il:-and even less
't<l"vananons-6r---aJ.ternatives.
Because
social
structural
studies tend to concentrate on modalities and on more
abstract social data, it is not surprising that there shoul
be a tendency to confuse social structure and polity. Till
tendency is particularly unfortunate because "social struc-
ture" refers to exactly the same sectors of culture as does
"social organiZation." A1; we continue to refine our vocabu-
lary, each subsector of social organization will have an im-
plicit parallel in social structure.
I~;:T"
..•.
~::~
~~ " ,
SOCIAL CONTROL AND SANCTIONS
The universe of things designated as social organiza-
tion (social structure) can be divided into a ,large number
of categories of greater or less congruence, depending on
selections of focal points or, what is perhaps the same
thing, of problems. Do we wish to know how commodities
enter the system, circulate, and are consumedi', We differ-
entiate economic aspects from others. Do we wish to know
how members of the society, once recruited, are instructed
in the ways of the society? We concentrate on education
in its various guises, formal and informal. When we seek to
know something about the regulation of social relationships,
we realize that the sphere of regulatory activities overlaps
all others, but still we can concentrate on social control.
Social control is taken to consist of al.l the.nongeneti[rC->:f-
ally acquired processes by which individual and group be-
.
havior is directed along certain lines and diverted from
others. There can be little argument with the observation
that in all societies the Single most sigriificant complex of
social-control apparatuses is to be found in the system of
education, including both formal and informal means.
Given the existence of biogenetic restrictions on be-
havior, the process of enculturation may be viewed as the .
means by which specific behavioral alternatives are selected

10 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
and dispersed in a population. It is precisely Because the
biogenetic organism possesses a wide latitude of capabilities
beyond those selected in the process of education, and be-
cause that process is itself inexact, that additional mecha-
nisms are required to retain individual and group be-
havioral manifestations within established boundaries. The
essential device by which this goal is accomplished is the
sanction, a reward or punishment used by an individual or
group to lead or confine within stated channels the behavior
of others.
It is useful to
distin~~tions from reinforce.:-
ments. Reinforcements~extensive with lellming, cQ.l!l.prise
1=he broad~stffo.!1p~g...oL(fue _cti.y~~()g_lJ _~!mvior . Including
sanctions, they comprise all events that favor the adoption
or extinction of modes of conduct and thus take in things
that are neither social nor cultural and that may be com-
pletely fortuitous in relation to the behavior being influ-
-enced. On the other side, sanctions are distinctly social and
usually cultural as well alia--must be
con~9ously apE-lied,
which is to say tEat; dunng the course of their formulation
or application, the party that applies them does so with
awareness of the line of conduct that is to be approved or
censured. Not that the sanction will necessarily accomplish
its intended end or that it will have no other effects; but
there must be a concept of breach or there cannot be a
sanction. IT a field of social action and interaction is imag-
ined in terms of individual behavioral streams, two polar
patterns may be isolated. One comprises a chain al ~ lZ2 ~
a3~ an~, in which a represents any behavioral act that is
in general conformity with existing sociocultural standards.
These standards are known by different terms in different
vocabularies:
"norms,"
"usages,"
"customs,"
"folkways,"
"mores," and so on. Elements of conduct do not exactly
replicate one another in what we may call a "normal"
stream, but the discrepancies are small enough to be dis-
regarded. (Actually, the amount of discrepancy tolerated
is itself an important variable. Variations of limits of toler-

Concepts and Definitions
/
11
ation apply to different age groups, social classes, or even
to different kinds of relationships and situations.)
When th- die:)repancy is too large, a breach is said to
have occurred, and this breach also is referred to by a
variety of such terms as "deviation," "wrongful act," "tort,"
and "crime." In this second pattern, discovery of a breach
compels an attempt at correction, the primary function of
which is to restore the normal behavioral stream. It results
in a different type of chain:
a1-7 a2-7 b -7 C -7 an, in
which b represents a breach and c its correction. Rein-
forcements serve to establish and maintain a normal be-
havioral chain, particularly in the process of enculturation.
Sanctions serve as the major mechanisms for correcting
breaches that have occurred. It is both obvious and im-
portant, however, that sanctions have great latent affect
and that expectation of their use may lead to the avoidance
of breach. One of the most common types of reinforcement
is the telling of stories about sanctions, which is probably
a universal cultural component,"
POWER AND AUTHORITY
Situations are frequently encountered in which the
voice of reason counsels a particular course, but, apart
from uttering the advice, no action is taken to ensure that
3 Implicit in this discussion of sanction is general agreement with the
position elaborated by A. R. Radcliffe-Brown (1933, pp. 531-4) in
regard to positive ( also called "premial") sanctions (or rewards) and
negative sanctions ' (or punishments) . The outstanding alternative is
to return to John Austin, who scathingly denounced the concept of
positive sanctions that had been advanced by
John Locke and
Jeremy Bentham. For Austin, a sanction was an evil that any rational
creature would exert himself to avoid (Austin, 1954, pp. 16-7). Two
points may be made against the Austinian position: There is good
reason to believe, Following developments in behavioral psychology,
that positive reinforcements are more effective in a learning process
.and more resistant to extinction. There is also some difference in the
use to which the concept of sanction is being put. For Austin, sanc-
tion had meaning essentially in the context of law; we are using the
concept more broadly, and part of the difference is therefore related
to a divergent view of the problem.

.. :.:'::'.;: : :,:....
~, . ,,' -<·'.;-~:~1?
.,::'-;
12
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
the course taken will be the one recommended. In Bushman
hunting the lead is-usually taken by one of the men who is
considered luckier or more skilled, but no sanctions enforce
his recommendations (Thomas, 1959, p. 183). Many ex-
amples of parallel type can be given, but one small bit of
an account of a Fox Indian ceremonial sums it up. The
hero of the story had many wonderful abilities:
He did not Jail, it is said, to know everything. He even
knew where the game animals were and continued to
tell the hunters. "Yonder really is where you will kill
(them)," he said to the hunters. It it said that they con-
tinued to kill (the game) just where be mentioned to
them. He always told the truth that way. He never, it
is said, spoke falsely ; he always told the truth (Michel-
son, 1932, p. 25) .
What is described is the use of authority without any ap-
plication of sanctions. The minimal use of sanctions is prob-
ably withdrawal of company or withdrawal of reciprocity.
A simple case of the former is recited by Jane Richardson:
"Lone Wolf, a very prominent chief, and his brother-in-
law npeigudl, also a topadok'i, got into a bitter fight. People
moved away and went to camp with others" (Richardson,
1940, p. 21). She added the comment, "Should the topadok'i
of a band quarrel with anyone, particularly with his own
kinsmen, his followers might impose upon him their own
supreme sanction: withdrawal of support ..."
Withdrawal of support is a special case within the more
general area of reciprocity, which has been viewed, perhaps
most notably by Malinowski (1926), as the basis of social
organization. The importance of reciprocity in its various
forms and guises is such that more extended discussion is
required." At this juncture, however, it may be provisionally
• We can agree with those who see in social reciprocity one of the
great adaptively advantageous characteristics (see Service, 1962, p.
42), noting that this feature, like others exposed to selective pressure,
may also be nonadaptive, depending on the situation. A telling point
has been made by C. R. Carpenter ( 1942, p. 180), who describes

' __
'.•..,. .~ . ~ .:.. ..... ..,
,: '
",
. ,~: '..-..,
: .'~
.:' "
...... t.:' .: ·'
. ".
Concepts and Definitions
/
13
accepted 'as a sanction with the warning that its scope and
effectiveness vary to an unusual extent. At one extreme is
individual withdrawal of affection or esteem, which may be
expressed with exquisite subtlety and which can be called.
a "sanction" only at great peril to the utility of the term.
At ·the other extreme, however, is the forced exclusion of
an individual or a group from the basic reciprocal relations
of society.. Excommunication, particularly as it was practiced
in the pronouncing of anathema on specific individuals in
medieval Europe, was clearly a sanction of great potency,
which was used overtly as a political weapon.
The difficulty of neatly delimiting the concept of sanc-
tion parallels the difficulty of erecting a simple hard-and-
fast rule by which authority can be differentiated from
power. "Authori "is taken here to refer to the ability to .¥'¥- .
channel the behavior of others in the a sence 0
e
eat or
····
use of sanctions. B Power is the ability to channel the behav-~4
ior of others by threat or use of sanctions. Authority and
power may g~ together or appear separately. A splendid ex-
ample of authority without power is any dictionary or, more
properly, the writer of any dictionary or standard reference
work. It is more difficult to give an example of power with-
out authority, for demonstration of the former is usually
a prime source of the latter. Situatlons exist in which com-
pliance is obtained only by continual application and in-
social reciprocity as a universal characteristic "from the amoeba to
man" and certainly common to primates.
5 One of the best definitions of "authority" I have come across is that
of Bertrand de Jouvenal (1957, P: 29): "the faculty of gaining an-
other man's assent." A§ he also sees authority as lacking the element
of force and primarily as the basis for formation of voluntary associ-
ations, he is moved to comment on the obvious conflict with con-
temporary usage, as implied in terms like "authoritarian state." He
says that "authoritarian governments" are actually those with inade-
quate authority, which must therefore ' fall back upon intimidation.
As for modern usage, he claims that "this corruption of the word is
of quite recent date" (p. 30). Interesting. as this line of reasoning
may be, it seems to avoid the reality about which we shall say much
in the sequel: the inextricable association between state orgariization
and violent intimidation.

14 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
cessant threat of sanctions, as in Nazi-occupied France.
Such illustrations are tremendously complicated, however,
because many of the functions of government were sus-
tained for reasons and throughmechanisms that had nothing
to do with the German rulers. Also there were sectors of the
indigenous communities that did respond favorably to the
Nazi overlords. Though not entirely free of similar com-
plexities, the smaller world of the prisoner-of-war camp
displays clearer-cut power in the absence of authority, as we
.use these terms.
CUSTOM AND LAW
The purpose served by distinguishing sanctions from
reinforcements and power from authority is the same as that
involved in discriminating law from custom. It enables us
to treat a phenomenon characterized by continuous varia-
tion in terms of polarized criteria. At the cost of qualifying
detail, the analyst achieves relatively high degrees of clarity
and facilitates comparison and the development of models
showing process-how the phenomenon in question moves
and the probabilities of different directions of movement.
In the case of custom and law we wish to erect means of
separating a special class of cultural events froin all others.
To take an example from our own society, we should like
to be able to distinguish, inter alia, between what happens
when somebody breaks wind in public and what happens
when somebody passes a red light, takes someone else's
purse without first obtaining permission, or kills somebody.
Posing the problem in this way may conceal one of its
salient features. Our society makes a drastic distinction be-
tween the first action and the other three. In other societies,
however, there may not be such a sharp division, apart from
the precise content of the activities mentioned.
There has tended to be a rather sharp division among
social theorists respecting the evaluation of cultures. For
some, all attempts at evaluation are invidious, and evalua-
tion b~gins with the act of discriminating different institu-

Concepts and Definitions
/ 15
tional sectors of a given culture. Others raise objections at
the point at which some primitive cultures are said to lack
one or more of these institutional sectors. For example, if
the presence of religion is made to depend upon the pres-
ence of unmitigated belief in monotheism, many cultures
may be said to lack religion. By parallel processes of reason-
ing, there are objections to assertions that specific cultures
or societies of certain levels of developmental complexity
lack law or state organization. In recent years, those. who
view law as a universal component of culture have tended
toward
philosophical
idealism
and
cultural
relativism,
whereas those who would restrict the appearance of law to
a more rigid set of criteria have tended to be philosophical
materialists favoring some theory of cultural evolution. It
has not always been thus.
The study of jurisprudence has been one of many con-
tending schools of thought, few of which survive in the
sense of having active contemporary partisans. Two schools
present rather neatly the essence of the conflict. The earlier,
historical school was founded in the second decade of the
nineteenth century by Friedrich Karl von Savigny with
the appearance of the joumalZeitschrift fur geschichtliche
Rechtswissenschaft. A main thesis of historical jurispru-
dence is put succinctly by J. Walter Jones (1940 , pp. 55-6) :
A people's law, like its language or its moral or political
order, is the product of the Volksgeist-of something
vaguely conceived to be compounded only in part of
reason and primarily of intuition, custom, tradition,
animal instinct, authority; or, in Maine's words, of the
huge mass of opinions, beliefs, and superstitions pro-
duced by institutions and human nature reacting one
upon another.
The crucial statement is the one relating law to custom.
It seems clear that the work of Savigny, which fits brilliantly
into the romantic development of German nationalism, does
not confuse custom with legislation or with legal rules. For
him the question was one of sources of law rather than of

1.6 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
law itself, and that is why it is not surprising that he should
have devoted so much of his time not to Germanic custom
but to Roman law. Approximately a century later, however,
a late flowering of historical jurisprudence assumed more
and more often the position .that the only distinction be-
tween custom and law was one of degree.
Nineteenth- and early twentieth-century jurisprudents
were enthusiastic readers and users of ethnographic mate-
rials, and sometimes, as in the case of Sir Henry Maine,
they made substantial original contributions as well; indeed,
it should not be forgotten that Lewis Henry Morgan was a
practicing lawyer and that the discipline has since drawn
some of its most successful scholars from previous special-
ization in the law. At any rate, the close connections be-
tween jurisprudence and anthropology led to equal close-
ness in the development of their views of the evolution of
law and political society. In those views the progression of
ideas went from the identificatiori of custom as an impor-
tant source and basis for law through the holding of legisla-
tion subordinate to custom (cf· Jones, 1940, P: 57), finally
arriving at the point at which law was figuratively swallowed
by custom. A frequently cited illustration of the last position
is the remark of E. Sidney Hartland (1924, P: 5) , "Primitive
law is in truth the totality of the customs of the tribe." This
position is taken as a conscious revision of the definition
offered by Austin to which we shall advert later (Hartland,
1924, p. 137)·
Hartland's position, though rarely defended in terms
of his work, has continued to enjoy considerable currency,
if not domination of the field. Malinowski's views were sim-
ilar, although expressed in totally different ways. Julius
Lips took issue with Roscoe Pound and with Radcliffe-
Brown for their failure to acknowledge that law is a univer-
sal rubric and declared that
. . . there is no people without fire, without language,
without religion, or without law. Our social, religious,
and legal concepts do not coincide with those of the

~ .
, ,,
Concepts and Definitions
/
17
primitives; what we must do is to find the correct
equivalent for our modem institutions in primitive so-
cieties (Lips, 1938, P: 489; it is very interesting to com-
pare this statement with the orientation explained by
Paul Bohannan, 1957, Pl;>' 4-6 et passim, which both
resembles Lips' position and departs from it at signifi-
cant junctures).
Marcel Mauss, whose theoretical contributions lead us to
expect something grossly in harmony with Malinowski,
does not disappoint. His remark is also interesting for being
almost untranslatable. (If such an event can occur between
two such close cultures what are the problems of "trans-
lating" concepts of legal order between traditions without
a trace of common descent?) Mauss said, "Le droit com-
prend l'ensembledes coutumes et des lois" (Mauss, 1947, P:
r ro )."
,
A lengthy catalogue of similar opinions could easily be
gathered. I prefer to turn, however, to E. Adamson Hoebel's
criticism of Hartland for including too much in the concept
of law and for failing, therefore, to state any explicit criteria
of law (Hoebel, 1954, P: 21) .7 Hoebel is inclined to take a
position ,with strong overtones of Radcliffe-Brown, hence
necessarily of John Austin, when he associates legality with
the application or threat of sanctions by a determinate so-
cial body (Hoebel, 1954, P: z8). Yet he ,wants to eat his
cake and have it too. Although he excludes some customs
from the province of jurisprudence, he argues that no cul-
ture lacks law or, for that matter, the state (Hoebel, '1958,
pp. 467-507, especially P: 506). '
·,1 encountered this remark in an interesting but, on this point, in- ' ,
conclusive article by J. P. B. de Josselin de Jong (1948, P: 71). The
same problem of translation, of conveying the distinction between le
droit and la loi, occurs with German; see Stanley Moore's (1960, pp.
645-0) discussion of F. Engels' use of the terms Gesetze and Recht.
7 Compare Pospisil's criticism of Malinowski's approach to law: "The
present writer objects to Malinowski's view because law is defined so
broadly as to include most of the customs of a society. For this reason
-
the theory does not lend itself to being a workable tool for the eth-
nographer" (1958, p. 257).
' ,./.
:1
.....J

1.8 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
To understand better the problems raised so far, it is
necess
0 give a few particulars about the contributions
o
ustin
ose name is associated with analytical juris-
pru ence. Although he lectured in the first half of the nine-
teenth century, Austin's main influence was posthumous but
widespread. Central to his..E~tion of law, which had sub-
stantial intellectual antecedents in the work of English
rationalist philosophers from Hobbes to Bentham and later
~theconcept of sovereignty, a paramount and determin-
\ ate social locus of command with the power to enforce its
\ directives. Austin took pains to distinguish "positive laws"
'-frOm various things called "law," like natural law, laws of
nature, institutional rules, and morality, within which he
counted custom. The Austinian conception of law and its
relation to the concept of sanction has been summarized by
Edmund Robertson:
[The word "command"] is the key to the analysis of
law, and accordingly a large portion of Austin's work
is occupied with the determination of its meaning. A
command is an order issued by a superior to an inferior.
It is a signmcation of desire distinguished by this pe-
culiarity that "the party to whom it is directed is liable
to evil from the other, in case he comply not with the
desire." . . . Being liable to evil in case I comply not
with the wish which you Signify, I am bound or obliged
by it, or I lie under a duty to obey it. The evil is called
a sanctum, and the command or duty is said to be sanc-
tioned by the chance of incurring the evil. The three
terms command, duty and sanction are thus inseparably
connected (Robertson, 1911, p. 572).
It is the next step that is decisive. Not all commands are
deemed laws. Austin gave more than one reason for this
distinction, but the most important involves the require-
ment .that commands must emanate from a determinate
source. This requirement, in turn, involves several things:
the existence of an independent political society with pri- "
mary access to power concentrated in the hands of an in-

Concepts and Definitions
/
19
dividual or group, which individual or group constitutes the
locus of sovereignty. For Austin discovering this locus was
not difficult; he merely sought patterns of habitual obedi-
ence to a commonly recognized superior. Although mon-
archies or dictatorships seem to present the clearest ap-
proximations to the Austinian model, there is considerable
flexibility in his formulations permitting application of his
definitions and theses to all known forms of polity." The
most urgent matter is the discrimination of a locus of para-
mount political power. This power may well be shared, not
only among people, but also among institutional bodies, in
order to comprise mutually restraining executive, legisla-
tive, and judicial branches, but there can be completely
different systems of power delegation or diffusion. Austin
did not find it necessary to implicate the ideology of politi-
cal systems or to inquire into legitimacy or the source of
power. Admittedly, this omission has been one of the main
points at which criticism of Austin has been directed. Rob-
ertson points a way out:
We may here interpolate a doubt whether the condi-
tion of independence on the part of the head of a com-
munity is essential to the legal analysis. It seems to us
that we have all the elements of a true law present
when we point to a community habitually obedient to
the authority of a person or a determinate body of per-
sons, no matter what the relations of that superior may
be to any external or superior power. Provided that in
fact the commands of the lawgiver are those beyond
which the community never looks (Robertson, 1911,
P·574) .. .
Finally, in this very brief discussion of Austinian concepts,
it should be noted that the insistence upon defining law as
the command of a superior to an inferior does not mean
that the sovereign (whether dictator, king, or president)
8 Austin used examples drawn from the government of the United
States and was under
DO illusions about the extent of the power of
the British monarch.

20
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
has to originate the substance of the command, which is to
say he does not have to be its original legislator.That func-
tion may have been played in the dim past, perhaps even by
some nonsovereign individual or body. The important thing
is that the sovereign enforces some rule.
Returning tothe definitional problem of distinguishing
J customs from laws, we can turn to the dictionary for usage
~ of "custom" and identify it with any habitual or usual course
of action, any established practice. "Law," on the other
hand, we define in Austinian terms as a rule of conduct en-
forced by sanctions administered by a determinate locus of
power, whether by the sovereign itself or by a surrogate.
./.
We may pause in this context to define "deviation" as
/
any departure from custom and "crime" as any departure
7from law. As further detail is given in subsequent chapters,
} it will be found necessary to refine these terms and to add
( a few others. A few major concepts remain to be introduced
before the argument begins,
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION AND GOVERNMENT
Harold Lasswell's aphoristic definition of politics as
"who gets what, when and how" goes to the heart of the
matter but casually takes in all of economics in transit. A
dictionary is helpful in suggesting that politics refers to
"the theory or practice of managing affairs of public policy."
Politics also refers to "the organization or action of indi-
viduals, parties, or interests that seek to control the appoint-
ment or action of those who manage the affairs of a state"
(Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, 1961, P: 654). Al-
though the last phrasing has highly useful aspects , it intro-
duces a major problem by assuming the existence of a state;
one of the main problems upon which we are advancing is
the emergence of the state.
Political organization is an aspect of social organization.
Departing from the definition of social organization and
adding elements borrowed from the previous discussion,
we offer a formulation adapted to our own needs: ~

. ....<:
.. ,
:
LEGITIMACY
,
Concepts and Definitions,
I
21
organization com rises those
octions of social or anization J~ "
lliat speciHCilly relate to_tb.tLindividuals or groups :t1:w,t
'
manage the affairs of public Rolicy or seek to cQillI.Ql the
'
appoillti:iient or action of those individuals or
oups.
,
--
s 0
e noted that the definition of political or-
gaDi,zation does not prescribe the character or severity of
sanctions. Some sanctions are required, to maintain even
the simplest 'system of public policy. Probably the mini-
mum sanctions are those mentioned earlier in the Kiowa
example: Political inferiors can remove themselves from
the vicinity (that is, jurisdiction) of the commander, or the
commander can desert his unresponsive charges. As is well
known, the latter possibility remains even' in the most so-
phisticated systems, but opportunities for exercise of the
former decline, often to the vanishing point, in the presence
of the true state.
Government may be differentiated from political organi-
zation as an aspect.'of a larger whole and is taken here to
comprise the system and apparatus of.administration of the
political organization and the personnel carrying out those
administrative functions . As for personnel, it is obvious
that, although some cultures have minimal role specializa-
tion, all must to some degree distinguish between an indi-
vidual acting in a governrriental role and in any other.
One of the most central yet difficult concepts is that of
"-.
'legitimacy. It is frequently encountered.in definitions of the
state, sometimes in definitions of the political system, and
sometimes in -definitions of law. With regard to the last,
Hoebel (1954, p. 27) declares that, "The essentials of legal
coercion are general social acceptance of the application
of physical power, in threat or in fact, by a privileged party,
for a legitimate cause, in a legitimate way, and at a legiti- -
mate time."
S. N. Eisenstadt (1963, p. 5) similarly includes the con-
cept of legitimacy among the things he regards as attri-

22 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
butes of a political system: "The political system is the
organization of a territorial society having the legitimate
monopoly over the authorized use and regulation of force
in the society." As for the definition of the state, we may
turn to many commentators. The one selected is Hans Kel-
son, who has struggled with the problem of detaching law
from all other kinds of rules and the state from all other
forms of association. Kelson has written:
The sociological description of the State as a phenome-
non of domination is not complete if only the fact is
established that men force other men to a certain be-
havior. The domination that characterizes the State
claims to be legitimate and must be actually regarded
as such by rulers and ruled. The domination is legiti-
mate only if it takes place in accordance with a legal
order whose validity is presupposed by the acting indi-
viduals; and this order is the legal order of the com-
munity the organ of which is the "ruler of the State"
(Kelson, 1961, pp. 187-8).
What then is this principle of legitimacy? In Kelson's
view it is equivalent to the accepted rules ofthe game: the
principles of validation of the legal order of a community
"in the way in which the legal order itself determines"
(Kelson, 1961, P: 117).
When the concept of legitimacy, in the sense in which
we are using it, is encountered in contemporary social sci-
ence, it is probable that some influence of Max Weber will
be discernible. For Weber, legitimacy was the endowment
of a rule "with the prestige of exemplariness or obligatori-
ness" (Weber, 1954, p. 4; ct. the translation in Weber, 1947,
p. 125, and Weber, 1962, P: 72). Along with most other
commentators on this difficult subject, Weber refused to
attempt to make an absolute distinction between law and
custom: "But, of course, the transitions from the orientation
of conduct toward an order by virtue of mere tradition or
mere aim-rationality to the belief in legitimacy are indeter-
minate in actual life" (Weber, 1954,P: 4).

Concepts and Definitions
/
23
Weber classified types of legitimacy according to the
means by which it was guaranteed. One of his most funda-
mental distinctions was between subjective guarantees-
sometimes called "internalization," in which the actor ac-
cepts authority because he believes in it, whatever the rea-
son-and objective guarantees, which depend on expecta-
tions of reactions to one's behavior, Within this second
type, Weber discussed two major variants, distinguishing
convention from law.
A system of authority will appear to be a ) conoeniional,
where its validity is externally guaranteed by the prob-
ability that deviation from it within a definable social
group will be met with relatively general and signifi-
cantly perceptible disapproval. b) Such a system of
authority will be considered as law if it is externally
guaranteed by the probability that unusual behavior
will be met by physical or psychic sanctions aimed at
compelling conformity or at punishing disobedience
and administered by a group of men especially charged
with the authority for that purpose (Weber, :1962, P:
75)·
Weber leaves no doubt that the salient difference is in the
requirement of a determinate locus of enforcement. Com-
pare this View with Austin's conception, noting that his
definition of law comprises three criteria:
-
1. Laws properly so called are a species of commands
. . . (flowing) from a determinate source . . . a de-
terminate rational being . . . or aggregate of rational
beings. . . : (W) henever a command is expressed . . .
one party Signifies a wish that another shall do qr for-
bear: and the latter is obnoxious to an evil which the
former intends to inflict in case the wish be disregarded
... 2. Every sanction properly so called is an eventual
evil annexed to a command . . . purposely to enforce
obedience .. . 3. Every duty properly so called sup-
poses a command by which it is created (Austin, 1954,
PP·133-4)·

24 /
TIiE EVOLUTION OF POLmCAL SOCIETY
Austin emphasizes by repetition that "every positive law,
or every law strictly so called is a direct or circuitous com-
mand of a monarch or sovereign number to a person or per-
sons in a state of subjection to its author" (1954, p. 134) .
. VVhereas Weber was most concerned with the agents of
enforcement, Austin before him sought deeper sources of
law. No one would accuse Weber of mistaking the police-
man's nightstick for law, but Austin's critics have assumed
for a century that he placed the entire weight of his sys-
tem upon the utterance of legislation. It seems unjust in
view of Austin's support, among other things, of "judge-
made law" (1954, P: 191) . At any rate, as I hope to show
later, Austin's conceptions fit very well with analyses of
law and the state along lines of socioeconomic-class strati-
fication. Curiously, for someone whose contributions to the
sociological understanding of stratification have been so
important, Weber's approach is less well adapted to' this
kind of analysis than to the currently fashionable behavioral
.analysis of political systems.
The last statement furnishes a means of returning the
discussion to the concept of legitimacy. David Easton, a
political scientist of what Heinz Eulau calls "the behavioral
persuasion," quotes with approval a remark of Weber's .to
the effect that the idea of the state in empirical reality turns
out to be "an infinity of diffuse and discrete human ac-
tions . . . and . . . relationships . . . all bound together
by an idea, namely, the belief in actual or normative validity
of rules and of the authority-relationships of some human
beings towards others" (Easton, 195:1 p. 133n., citing Shils
& Finch, 1949, p. 99). Easton's own formulation is less tur-'
gid but to the same point:
"A policy is authoritative
(legitimate) when the people ... consider that they must
or ought to obey it" (Easton, 1953, P: 132).
Actually, when one follows even Austinian thought into
this question, the answers proffered are disappointing, al-
though certainly no more so than most of those offered in
the century since he lectured. At the crux of the matter is.

Concepts and Definitions
/ 25
the relationship between a government and the population
it administers. Particularly in the work of theorists who
themselves come from states based upon capitalist econo-
mies, there is an assumption that, in the final analysis, po-
litical power must be psychologically and sociologically
validated. That is to say, the mass of the populace must
obey most of the laws for some reason other than fear of
punishment. In Austin's words:
Now the permanence of every government depends on
the habitual obedience which it receives from the bulk
of the community. For if the bulk of the community
were fully determined to destroy it, and to brave and
endure the evils through which they must pass to their
object, the might of the government itself, with the
might of the minority attached to it, would scarcely
suffice to preserve it, or even retard its subversion (Aus-
tin, 1954, P: 302).
As for the sources of habitual obedience, Austin did less well
than Weber but clearly showed the way:
Supposing that a given society were adequately in-
structed or enlightened, the habitual obedience to its
government which was rendered by the bulk of the
community, would exclusively arise from reasons bot-
tomed in the principle of utility (Austin, 1954, p.
296) . ..
Since every actual society is inadequately instructed or
enlightened, the habitual obedience to its government
which is rendered by the bulk of the community, is
partly the consequence of custom: They partly pay that
obedience . . . because they, and perhaps their ances-
tors, have been in the habit of obeying it (Austin, 1954,
P·299)·
From this point Austin returns to his utilitarian orientation
and offers a version of contract theory: Even the poorly
instructed and unenlightened prefer to leave the "state of
nature" or the dread condition of anarchy, taking refuge

;. ,.
26 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
in organized government and thus offering themselves to
a sovereign.
Le@g1a9y,_no matter how its definition is phrased, is
~all~ . bywhich i~eology ~..~.lendeif with power. Le-
gitimacy is most clearly grasped in 'terms'-Of -fts-principal
functions : to explain and justify the existence of concen-
trated soctalpower wielded by a portion of the~~unit)':...
and to_~~S1!Pit
::int1pp6rtto-Spicific social ordeI:s.,.J:ha.t....is.,-
§pecific ways of apportioning and
dire~~ the floW:_.9i
s~cialEQwer.
. .-..- --. ..------
With our own definition of legitimacy we have moved
considerably beyond the simple presentation of key terms
and concepts and have plunged rather deeply into argu-
ment. It is time, therefore, to move directly into that argu-
ment. We begin with a brief survey of patterns analogous
to social control among animals other than man, concen-
trating on the recent increase in our knowledge of primate
behavior in natural environments.

CHAPTER
Egalitarian Society:
Preliminary
Considerations ,
2
~9uality is .a social
impossib~ty. De-
spite the soundness of this generalization, there is truth
in the American Negro slogan vVe shall overcome!" and the
inequality that the slogan challenges has begun to crumble.
The paradox is a trick, of course, since the word "equality,"
like most of the words already discussed, has a variety of
meanings; through slight degrees of difference these mean-
ings achieve polarity. It is necessary, therefore, to begin by
discarding one of the meanings : Equality need not be iden-
tity, things can be equal without being the same. Yet, even
as we attempt this circumscription, we may damage our
argument. In our example of the civil-rights movement in
the United States, the announced ultimate goal is identity:
identity of Negro and white opportunity and treatment be-
fore the law. But there are bound to be many dissimilar
components. For example, achieving identity (equality)

28 /
THE' EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
in the areas mentioned may require a transitional grant of
.superior treatment, of concessions to compensate for long .
deprivation and hasten the balancing. Equality, thus defined
in action, emphasizes limited areas of identity in a field 'of
differences.
The raw material for a society is comprised of individ-
ual organisms. Despite the remarkable efficiency of genetic
replication, no two organisms, even those proceeding from a
single ovum fertilized by a single sperm, are identical. Be-
yond this area lie broader and broader fields of divergence.
In all societies of interest to us, including those of primates
and various other mammals, there are finite differences of
age, sex, strength, endurance, speed, visual or - auditory
acuity, intelligence (this alone covers a variety of phe-
nomena usually confused ), beauty, disease resistance, and
so on. So standard is the probability of variation that in
evolutionary theory it has been treated as an element of
special significance in at least two ways: as the source of
necessary flexibility, providing the reservoir of forms for
adaptation, and as the basis for taking the population and
not the individual as the unit. As will be seen, the latter is
of particular interest because it seems to have an intimate
relationship with the structure of primate social groups,
which, to a high degree, are defensive constellations.
Because there can be no such thing as a society com-
, 'posed of exactly equal members, one may wonder that we
\ use the term "egalitarian society." Two justifications are
~
ered . First, the term may be understood as an ellipsis, the
issing word being "relatively." Societies so designated lack
ormal ranking and stratification as defined later and there-
fore approach, although they certainly do not attain, true
,fquality. Second, the term itself is usually somewhat pro-
grammatic and is encountered in political slogans. Though
most of the words chosen in a scholarly or scientific context
are valued, at least in theory, for their political neutrality,
the political coloration of "egalitarian"
fits our purpose
rather well.
..;:-
.>-. -.-.-. --.,.---=-~- -- - ~- - - ----- _ .

STATUS AND ROLE
Egalitarian Society
/29 -
,: '
,..:
The word "status" is fairly old in any meaning of inter-
est to our argument, that is, in the significance of "social
standing," even if the .most extensive glosses on this ~age
come from relatively modern sociology. Like the word
"state," status derives from a Latin form of "to stand" and is
also related to the word "estate," most clearly seen in the
sense of a great segment of SOCiety. The word "role," on
the other hand, is relatively new although equally clear in
the adaptation of its meanings. Derived from i French word
referring to the part played by an actor, role has been
characterized as the activity counterpart of status.
Though most of the following statements are obvious,
they have been included to make certain that all important
concepts used in our argument are presented.
Any given individual, even a member of the Simplest
known human society, certainly :el.~ys a number of roles and
~occupies a variety of statuses during his lifetime, usuall1'"
within relatively brief time spans, that is, within the sam:\
day or hour. Among the commonest roles that one may be I '
called on to play almost Simultaneously are disciplinarian,(
comforter, source 'of emotional warmth, lover, hater, food'<
supplier, food processer, entertainer, fighter, educator, and (
so on. Similarly, persons normally occupy a variety of sta- ~
tuses, often at the same time. 'While a man is "father" to A,
he is "husband" to B, "son" to C and D, "son-in-law" to E
and F, and so on. Also.ihe may be a Heron-s-that is, a mem-
ber of the Heron clan---:-or.a member of a lineage. In the
latter capacity he may be the eldest male in the senior
surviving generation, hence the "leader" or "chief." He may
be a member of a society that meets to sing, keep order in
the camp, or play a certain kind of game. He may have a:
specialized job, perhaps as a shaman, the steersman of a '
boat, or a skilled smith. Apart from entailing special be-
havior, each of these roles is a status or a position in a so-
i -..

30 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
ciety. There are many ways to group statuses: by similarity
of content, complexity, the sex or age of their holders, and
so forth. Certain ways of assorting statuses are of special in-,
terest to our argument. The first of these is the dichotomy
between achieved and ascribed status. To the extent, for ex-
ample, that the marital state is an achievement, and not
something made inevitable by birth and survival, it shows
that achieved status may be found in all societies. The sig-
nificance of the distinction is rather obvious; Other things
being equal, one expects societies with high proportions of
ascribed status to be more set, closed" and internally less
mobile than those with a lot of achieved status.
Following the example of Elman R. Service
(1960;
1960a; 1962, pp. 24-5), statuses can be distinguished ac-
cording to whether they shift from individual to individual,
as the reference group to which 'they apply also shifts, or
remain constant from one individual in one reference group
to the next. The most common example of the former, ego-
centric statuses are kinship terms. "While I am "father" to
my own brood I may be "uncle" to yours, if you happen to
have a culture in which the so-called "lineal" terminology
is employed. In other words, in no society can a man be
"father' to everybody in the kinship terminology. On the
other hand, if I am a priest of the Roman Catholic Church,
Imay have the status and designation "Father," and would
be so recognized by a good portion if not the whole of my
community. This designation is an example of 2'sociocentric"
~tus terminology, as are such terms ,as "editor," "fust base-
man," ."captain," "professor,"
or "President." Egocentric_
~_1:atuses can be endowed only with very limited social
power, effective only within the limits of such a small group
as the family. Even small formal groups structured about
kinship or the expansion of familial principles, like small-
scale lineages, have their power figures who are recognized
as occupying sociocentric statuses and are identified by so-
ciocentric terms. The matter is complicated, however, by
the fact that in many societies with complex political or-

Egalitarian Society
/ 31
ganizations the family, however it may be defined in that
culture, is deliberately endowed with strong powers.
It is commonly thought that the concept of status neces-
sarily implies hierarchy. There is good reason for this be-
lief: The social orders in which science has grown to the
point of making explicit analyses of status are invariably
organized hierarchically. Another basis for the association
of status and hierarchy is the content of some of the original
work on animal society that emphasized the linear domi-
nance hierarchy. The famous work of T. Schjelderup-Ebbe
on barnyard fowl contributed the notion of the pecking or-
der. Subsequent work, however, has made four things abun-
dantly clear. First, not all dominance series are linear:
Some show marked instability, the animals shifting relative
positions; others have more than one animal at particular
dominance levels; still others form discontinuous series, in
which an animal dominant over another may be not domi-
nant over a third, which in tum is dominant over the second.
Second, some animal social orders of variable duration are
devoid of superiority-inferiority relationships except to the
degree that the human observer projects his own values into
what he sees. This kind of projection is common in writings
about social insects. Third, particularly in observations of
some of the primates it has been noted that over-all domi-
nance ratings are of dubious Significance, for different ani-
mals are differentially dominant in different activities. Fi-
nally, research in the past ten or twenty years has shown
convincingly that dominance hierarchies, involving fighting
and other forms of aggressive behavior, are much more pro-
nounced under laboratory conditions than in nature. The
main independent variables seem to be two: artificial crowd-
.ing, so that many more animals are raised in a,far more re-
stricted area than would occur in a natural ecological situa-
tion; and artificial constriction of the food supply. Even
where food .may be adequate or more regularly available
and abundant than in nature, it is usually distributed by the
human attendants in a way that provides the opportunity

·. "
'~+~~ "fJ~-ry1JJj1~2;Z»~>' "" "'Fi'
32 /
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
{
.. .
r -
for "monopoly," although that ';ord with its heavy freight of
economic meaning may be inappropriate.
What we may conclude from past and current research
on dominance in nonhuman societies is that patterns are too
divergent and variable to present a clear model applicable
to human cultural evolution. The absence of a single tem-
plate does not mean that the work on dominance is not rele-
vant. It is exceptionally rewarding and continues to show
promise in many as yet poorly explored areas. We ' are
warned, however, that no simple gradient exists that jus-
tifies any conclusion about man's "real nature."
PRES'PIGE
~Prestige, a real and important factor in all known hu-
man societies, may be viewed as the ideological component
_ of status. I see no way to deal with prestige in the absence
of symbols, for prestige, stripped to its essentials, depends
upon shared evaluations of status. The dictionary says that
prestige is "the power to command admiration." Imitation
is said to be the sincerest form of flattery, and to some ex-
tent it may indicate prestige; behavioral deference also re-
flects prestige. Both exist in the absence of symbolic sys-
terns," but the main means of conveying prestige are sym-
"belie, and of these means speech is the most important.
,
. It is theoretically possible to have a society in which all
.statuses are at parity. Few if any known human societies
i
' have ever actually placed statuses at par; what they have
",done to create such an illusion is treated later. It must be
/noted, however, that all known societies do create status
/hierarchies; even the simplest usually have a few different
/ statuses that do not necessarily integrate into a single over-
.
all order. We have already mentioned age as an unavoidable
source of individual difference; it is a universal source of
status difference as well. In many societies, of course, age is
used extensively
to create highly formalized categories
'See pp. 42-3, for C. R. Carpenter's nonsymbolic "prestige."
,..,
.:~
- ,:;.,..,

Egalitarian Society
/
33
among the members; such societies usually have gradients
'of 'prestige that parallel the age-grade series. Even more
widespread is the difference in prestige associated with the
sexes. Most of the simplest and some of the most complex
societies regard women as inferior and restrict their roles
and statuses accordingly.
Our most signi£cant point about prestige, however, is
that it has no necessary connection with powerz although it
does have a necessary connection with authority, using both
of these terms as established in the previous chapter. This
does not alter the fact that a society may confer enormous
power on certain prestigious statuses-s-which, after all, is
one of the key political processes. Much remains to be said
about it ill the following chapters. At this. juncture, how-
ever, I am much more concerned with the possibility, the
reality of which I believe is subsequently illustrated, that
human societies -exist with statuses that are arranged in a
hierarchy according to prestige but that do not endow the
most vaunted sta~ses with any power whatever.
A DEFTh'1:TION OF EGALITARIAN SOCIETY
An egalitarian society is one in which there are as many
positions of prestige in any given age-sex grade as there are
persons capable of filling them. Putting that another way, ~
egalitarian society is 'characterized b
the adiustment of the
num er 0
va ue
statuses to
of
ersons with
e a
ties to
them. If a particular period is rich 'in able
J?ersons, their .number will be large, and at other times it
will contract. Let it be put even more strongly. _An egali-
tarian society does not have an
means of £ixin
or limiting
.
e num er of persons capable of exerting p0jyfr. As many
persons as can wield power-whether' through personal
strength, infI.uence, authority, or whatever meap.s-can do
so, and there is no necessity to draw them together to es-
tablish an order of dominance and paramountcy.
Let there be no mistake. An egalitarian society as here
defined has some members who are less assertive, less sue-

II
rI·.·.
1.
1
1
34 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
cessful than others. By and large, however, differences
among members, apart from sex and age, tend to be ephem-
eral. Strength, sensory. acuity, excellent performance-these
strong points constitute an ideal in all simple societies; ac-
cidents, bad luck, illness-such things can put the mighty
out of commission, making them temporarily dependent or
ruining them altogether. Furthermore most egalitarian so-
1~
eties have powerful leveling mechanisms that prevent the
ppearance of overly wide gaps in ability among members.
ven though the society may struggle to preserve its defec-
tive members, harsh environmental conditions, often met al-
most directly, regularly thin its ranks, particularly among
the young. But the society itself has mechanisms that, given
limitation of variability, produce even greater homogeneity.
Think, for example, of the various means by which simple
cultures identify the successful hunter. Many of the .animals
taken by primitive hunters are brought down through the
coordinated efforts of a group of men. At the end, the crea-
ture is pierced by many projectiles or struck by many clubs.
Whose blow killed it? Some societies award the kill to the
first man who actually makes the hit. Others, however,
make the award to the man who spotted the animal. Still
others say the animal belongs to the man whose weapon
struck the first blow, and that man may not have even been
there, having lent the weapon to another. Although ration-
alizations may be offered to explain each of these proce-
dures and others as well, true significance lies less in trying
to comprehend what are, at best, merely plausible recon-
structions of origins. It seems more significant to understand
the phenomenon as a whole-all the techniques by which
credit for bringing game to camp is randomized, spread
among all the eligible men in the society.

~~.. .
Egalitarian Society
EGALITARIAN SOCIETY
AND RECIPROCAL ECONOMY
/35
At the heart of an egalitarian society is a fundamentally
egalitarian economy. The model of such an economy ap-
proximates very well the type of economic integration that
Karl Polanyi (1953, pp. 162-84) epitomized as "reciprocal."
We welcome Marshall Sahlins' recent refinement of Po-
lanyi's scheme, which includes the discrimination of three
types of reciprocal economic behavior. Although they obvi-
ously overlap, they are remarkably clear and distinct in
their essentials. According to him "The spectrum of reci-
procities proposed for general use is defined by its extremes
and mid-point" (Sahlins, 1965, pp. 147-9). This eminently
logical proposal offers three models: First is the model that
emphasizes "altruism" and solidarity. Called "generalized
reciprocity," its main characteristic is, somewhat paradoxi-
cally, "the vagueness of the obligation to reciprocate" that
follows any donation. Actually, there are serious pressures
for reciprocation, but they are largely implicit, setting no
equivalents or time limits, and being in the general nature
of expectations that when the opportunity arises a return
will be made. It is of the greatest importance to note, as does
Sablins (1965, P: 147), that the system does not require
return transactions. In other words, balance is not required:
Those who can, give and continue to give. It is equally true
to say that those who need, take and continue to take. They
may do so even if the donor fails his responsibility to give
while still having things to be given. It is exceptionally diffi-
cult to talk about "theft" in such a context, and we discuss
this situation and its consequences later.
The second model, entailing the relatively swift ex-
change of a quid for a quo is called "balanced reciprocity."
The limiting case, in which the same amounts of the same
kinds of things are exchanged in an on-the-spot transaction,

., '.
36 /
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
is amply illustrated and documented (ct· Sahlins, 1965, P:
148) . However:
"Balanced reciprocity" may be more loosely applied to
transactions which stipulate returns of commensurate
worth or utility within a finite and narrow period. Much
"gift-exchange," many "payments," much that goes
under the ethnographic head of "trade" and plenty
that is called "buying-selling" and involves "primitive
money" belong in the genre of balanced reciprocity
(Sahlins',1965, p. 148).
'
A 'third model, at the farthest extreme from altruistic
generalized reciprocity, is "the attempt to get something for
nothing with impunity" (Sahlins, 1965, p. 148). SahIins calls
this "negative reciprocity" and describes it as the most im-
personalized exchange, carried out purely for the sake of
advantage.
The second and third models of reciprocity have only
minor application in egalitarian societies and serve, as Sah-
'lins has indicated, in peripheral areas of social relations,
that is, in the area of "tribal" and "inter-tribal" activities
(Sahlins, 1965, pp. 151-2) . We use these models in turning
to larger political phenomena; at this point, however, we
are concerned with equality and find that it rests at the
outset upon the workings and requirements of areciprocal
mode of economic integration.
A NOTE ABOUT ETHNOGRAPHY
Before going further, we offer a few remarks about the
ethnographic basis of the arguments in this book.
To begin with, our relative brevity of treatment does
not.allow for presentation of an extended case record. Ac-
cordingly, the material presented is in the nature of illustra-
tions and should not be confused with proof.
An alternative method sometimes used is to present
general statements followed by elaborate bibliographic
glossing as every recoverable instance is enumerated, not
: ,>;-
-' .(
,"
:.~
,
' ;0

..: ' ~ '.
~
'. "
"
.. .. .
-; .
t-'.
:)~....
i\..t
t
~.
Egalitarian Society
/ 37
by presentation; but by furnishing the information nec-
essary to enable the reader to retrieve the item himself.
Even this technique would have been unsuitable for the
present format, being more appropriate'to the monograph
and dissertation. That unsuitability is not the only or even
the basic reason for failing to use it. It is worthwhile ro
raise the question of the real meaning of extended ethno-
graphic citation.
Broad-gauged citation of ethnographic works is imme-
diately subject to several caveats..There are obvious. ques-
tions .about reliability: Who made the observations and
under what circumstances? Is the account primary, or has it
gone through various hands? In dealing with different ac-
counts, has the writer paid attention to time differences and
accompanying differences in exposure to other cultures?
How do We know that the recorded responses are repre-
sentative? Who were the informants, the interpreters? Who
was observed? Above all looms the question: What is an
ethnographic sample? How does one count n studies in the
same culture area but relating to different "tribes"? To such
qualifying questions must be added another major prob-
lem. Most of our data come from societies that may be
markedly different and certainly live in very different cir-
cumstances and 'environments from those of-the remote past.
Other things being equal, our most reliable information
comes from scientifically trained ethnographers whose ob-
servations have been made in a period when hardly any
society has not'felt the weight of contact with a more com-
plex society. Even if such contacts have been slight and
have not resulted in massive importations of alien elements, .
the past centuries have featured the elimination or total in-
corporation of almost all primitive societies in the prime
environments.
Most
primitive cultures that survive are
found in rather inhospitable habitats (Fried, 1.952, pp. 391.-
41.2). The consequences of this condition can hardly be
overstated. As we show further on, one of the most im-
portant variables in the development of complex political
. -;"

38 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLrnCAL SOCIETY
systems is population size and,density; these factors rest, in
turn, upon the carrying capacity of the environment inter-
acting, of course, with cultural features. Simple extrapola-
tion from observations of Eskimo, Bushman, or other cul-
tures in marginal habitats to paleolithic cultures in the
Pleistocene is dangerous.
'
Dangerous but not impossible. Obviously, we must use
the data that are available; we cannot cast information out
because it is not ideal. The important thing is to know what
we are working with and, to the extent that we can, to take
account of probable divergences and complications. It may
be comforting to reflect that other sciences have similar
problems. One of the most respected is astronomy, despite
the fact that the carefully exposed photograph of the night
sky taken through the world's largest and most powerful
lens is something of a fiction. The "stars" and other phe-
nomena in the picture never were, m-e not now, and never
will be in the relative positions shown.
Without pursuing this theme further, we wish at this
juncture to make clear our awareness of the difficulties of
using the ethnographic record. As the discussion proceeds,
comments on methodological compensations designed to
meet these hazards are introduced.
PRIMATE SOCIETIES
At the risk of alienating friends among zoologists and
anthropologists specializing in primate ethology, I begin this
. section by referring to some remarks of Paul Vinogradoff,
the proponent of historical jurisprudence whose work was
discussed briefly in Chapter 1. Surveying some of the most
important contributions to the problem of the origin and
development of domestic groups, Vinogradoff came to the
conclusion: "Considering the immense variety of conditions
in ancient times, it is improbable that any exclusive theory
will be true in all cases. . . .:This being so, we shall not
attempt to trace one line of normal and continuous evolu-
tion of marriage" (Vinogradoff, 1920, p. 167).
- ,
::f
- ,I,
. f

Egalitarian Society
/
39
What may have been a shrewd piety about fifty years
ago, when the actual field study of primates was scarcely
begun, becomes a procedural necessity now that there is a
reasonable, although rapidly expanding, volume of reports
on the organization of the societal patterns found among
different primate species. In a nutshell, variety is the rule.
What is worse, the principle of phylogenetic closeness is of
extremely dubious usefulness in this area.
Information is now available on the social patterns of
at least nine different species of primates other than man,
which was obtained by careful observation under natural
or seminatural conditions, that is, where the animals range
freely over extensive parcels of land. Usually the habitat
is an island, for it has natural boundaries. Some of the food
in such an environment is naturally available, but usually
additional, foods must be supplied," The area occupied by
the animals is large enough to permit a number of distinct
social units to form without having continuous contact. In
some instances the area is large enough to permit different
groups to live for long periods without coming into contact.
The animals that have been observed under wild or
seminatural conditions include gibbons, spider monkeys,
two kinds of macaques, gorillas, baboons, howlers, langurs,
and orangutans.' Some of these animals live in tiny groups,
for example the gibbon, reported to average about six in a
group. Japanese monkeys sometimes congregate in groups
of several hundred (Chance, 1961, P: 18). Sex ratios vaq
as Widely, with the gibbon at parity and the rhesus running
5:1 in favor of females. Among some of the primates, the
gibbon being most notable in this respect, mating is very
stable and based upon pairs. Other primates do not seem
to form mating pairs for any length of time. The rhesus
2 Supplying food to the undomesticated primates is such a regular
feature that the primatologist Kinji Imanishi has suggested the recog-
nition of a stage between domestication and the wild which he calls
"provisionization." The term was developed as part of an interesting
vocabulary applied to the description of the ethology and social be-
havior of the macaques of Japan (Imanishi, 1963, p. 70).

' j
,
40 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOClETY
monkeys copulate and separate, sometimes within a matter
of minutes; in any case, the females copulate with at least
two or three males in each breeding season (Koford, 1963,
P: 150) . Observation of copulation among wild gorillas has
been limited to two sequences (Schaller, 1963, pp. 283-6),
but they are very interesting, as in one case the female was
mounted by the second most dominant male in the group
and in the other case she was mounted by a peripheral
male, that is, one only loosely attached to the group. In
both cases the dominant male was present and observed
with little or no involvement.
Fascinating as primatological data are, we cannotre-
view that picture for its own sake but are concerned only
for the light it may throw on the evolution of political so-
ciety in man. So far we have illustrated the generalization
accepted by all primatologists: Primate behavior is quite
variable and presents nothing like a unified model from
which human behavior may be considered to have.emerged.
As previously remarked, the principle of phylogenetic
closeness is not useful in this context. That is to say, pri-
mate species standing closest to man in the sense of physical
evolution do not necessarily show the closest resemblance
to human SOCiality. The reason is simple. Much of behavior
derives from specific functions that must be carried out in
certain kinds of environment. The fact that an animal is
primarily an eater of fruit and insects carries with it be-
havioral and social implications quite different from those
implied by a taste for meat.
Accepting this mise en scene of limitations and caveats,
let us inquire into the social behavior of the primates, seek-
ing information about whatever might be called political
activity.
Role ·Differentiation
4 Primatologists divide the life spans of the animals they
observe into a number of stages. There is no uniformity
either with regard. to the number of stages discriminated or
'.,'.
,'- ~
·•.1.;
.~
.
~
. ,~~

Egalitarian Society
/
4~
their duration. Phyllis Jay describes five stages for languis:
infant-one, infant-two, juvenile, subadult, and adult (Jay,
1965, pp. 223-43). Vernon and Frances Reynolds distinguish
eight stages in the life history of the chimpanzee: infant-
one, infant-two, juvenile-one, juvenile-two, adolescent, sub-
adult, ' adult-one, adult-two (Reynolds & Reynolds, 1965,
P: 390) . The criteria for these stages are mixtures of physi-
cal and behavioral traits and, reflect some of the simplicities
of role differentiation in primate society. For example, play
is usually confined to the period that spans late infancy and
the juvenile stage. The final role structure of a primate
group varies with species, and there is a latitude of ex-
pression permitting a certain individuality. The observers,
after a period offamiliarization, could recognize many ani-
mals by their distinctive deportment and could predict what
they would do in certain situations.
.
A few samplings of adult role structure in primate .so-
ciety from a growing literature will have to suffice. About
the langurs Jay says:
f~J?"
·
~:. ~ ~
.~.
Adult males are leaders and coordinators of group
activity. Their roles are extremely important in the
maintenance of group unity and stability. as well as
in determining the group's use of its range and its re-.
lationships to other langur groups (Jay, 1965, P: 242).
She goes on to enumerate some functions from which cer-
tain roles may be extrapolated: Males are conductors in the
sense of initiating and conducting group movements. They'
are "pillars of society" (my phrase, perhaps an unfortunate,
overly anthropomorphic one) in that the dominance hier-
archy of the males supplies most of the group 'structure.
This is done in a number of ways. 'Dominant males are
surrounded by empty space to an extent proportionate With
their .level of dominance (number one, number two, and
so on) and temper. Dominant males also "take positions,
food, and estrous females from other males" (Jay, 1965, p.
243). Finally, langur males act to reduce group tensions in
-r, ;...

42 /
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
two ways. Conflicts between two langurs are sometimes
broken up. by threat or movement of a more dominant ani-
mal, although the top dominant is said rarely to perform this
function. Dominant males also start a kind of furious dis-
play that quickly spreads through the group. After a period
of great activity and noise, a period that is not fully under-
stood, the langurs relax, and the band returns to normal
peacefulness.
The role prescription of a dominant male baboon is
more clearly discerned. K. R. L. Hall and Irven DeVore
isolate five "key functions or behavior patterns," of which
three have
obvious
role
signilicance
(Hall
& DeVore,
1965, p. 56). The most dominant male is also the most ag-
gressive as indicated by his participation in the largest num-
ber of agonistic episodes. When the band encounters a new
or strange situation, the most dominant male goes forward
to investigate and might threaten or attack. Mothers carry-
ing newly born clustered in the vicinity of the dominant
male.
Dominance
It might be thought from the foregoing discussion that
one universal feature of primate society is the dominance
hierarchy. Such, indeed, was the conclusion of C. R. Car-
penter in the early days of scientific primate studies. His
remarks are of interest and marked relevance:
Extensive studies both in the field and in laboratories
have emphasized that competition and associated domi-
nance behavior are conspicuous characteristics of the
behavioral interactions of monkeys and ape societies. An
individual is said to be dominant ooer another when it
has priority in feeding, sexual and locomotor behavior
and when it is superior in aggressiveness and in group
control to another or other individuals. The dominance
of an individual is closely related to its social status and
prestige in the group (Carpenter, 1942, pp. 191-2, em-
phasis his).
.•..

Egalitarian Society
/
43
Carpenter's use of "prestige" is explained in these terms:
By the term prestige I mean the pers everation of the
effects of previous conditioning of an individual and of
the reactions of other individuals to him without his
showing behavior which would secure his dominance
status (Carpenter, 1942, P: 192, n.g).
This usage departs from that suggested earlier and is closer
to the meaning suggested for "authority." We prefer to
associate prestige with symbolic expression for reasons
previously given.
Since Carpenter's pioneering statement much more data
have accumulated, and the dominance picture is less uni-
form than indicated. Dominance is clearest and apparently
most significant among rhesus; it is least clear and ap-
parently least significant as an organizing principle among
the animals closest to man in the scale of phylogenetic evo-
lution, the gorillas and chimpanzees.
.
The situation with regard to the chimpanzee is summed
up by the Reynolds:
Although there was some evidence of differences in
status between
individuals,
dominance
interactions
formed a minute fraction of the observed chimpanzee
behavior. There was no evidence of a linear hierarchy
of dominance among males or females; there were no
observations of exclusive rights to receptive females;
and there were no permanent leaders of groups (Reyn-
olds & Reynolds, 1965, p. 415) .
The general tenor of these remarks is supported by Jane
Goodall (1965, r- 453).
Dominance is more clearly discerned among gorillas,
and its display fits some of the situations specified by Car-
penter. There is also similarity to the langur in the frequent
absence of actions assertive of dominance on the part of
the highest male. Nonetheless, George B. Schaller (1963,
pp. 240-4; 1965, pp. 346-8) has no difficulty placing his
animals in a linear order roughly corresponding to age and
size.

.;
:
,'~'!.
'
',.
,." , " : ,
44 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
Leadership
Goodall's definition 'of leadership among chimpanzees
. ."
seems to apply to the concept as used by other primatolo-
gists: "the leader ... initiates group movement and regu-
lates jts speed and direction"· (Goodall, 1965, P: 454). It
scarcely needs pointing out that so limited a definition of
leadership is almost meaningless when applied to human
society. What is lacking, of course, is the most essential
ingredient of leadership in human society: its application
to the division of labor.
Division of Labor
As far as I know, Sahlins has not been challenged on
his statement that, "In subhuman primates there is no sexual
division of economic labor" .(Sahlins, 1959, p. 193). Of
course, females have the babies and nurse them. Beyond
this point there is scarcely anything done by one sex' that
is not done by the other; this generalization is true of all
the tasks involved in what might be identified as the econ-
omy of primate groups. As may be imagined, the category
of objects called "possessions" is so limited as to be almost
nonexistent. Compared to the state of any primate society,
the most rudimentary material culture is in a qualitatively
distinct class. (For an interest:iDg discussion of tool use in
primates see A. KortIandt and M. Kooij. Their relevant con-
clusion is summed up: "Technological use of tools occurs
extremely rarely in wild Primates" [Kortlandt & Kooij, 1963,
p.87]·)
.
The basic point about all primate societies is that, with
the exception of the smallest infants, all animals are essen-
tially on their own in the food quest. Even isolated in-
stances of food sharing are rare. Schaller observed not a
single instance among gorillas. Chimpanzees also seem to
lack sharing patterns, but the Reynolds, Goodall, and Kort-
landt independently report observing juveniles "begging"
,;"
'
"~

~ .
Egalitarian Society
I 45
and being given morsels by mothers. As we show further
on, itt is difficult to overstate the significance of the gulf
between this kind of behavior and the widespread sharing
known in simple ethnographic societies. Elman Service has
summarized this situation most efficiently, and his remarks
need no qualification because of the additional data that
have been collected:
There is one sense in which primate food-getting may
favor group life -and another in which it does not.
Within a primate group, sociability is not favored in
the foraging enterprises because food is never shared.
That food-getting is competittve and that dominant
animals (male and female) take it away from the sub-
ordinate animals must be a socially divisive trait, if any-
thing. This is one of the most obvious points at which
noncultural "apeness" is different from cultural human-
-
ness which so strikingly features collaboration and
sharing. But group life is favored, with respect to an
individual's
food-getting, when
competition among
groups occurs. In competitive circumstances primate
groups defend a
gr~:)Up territory and in the course of
defending themselves they also defend their food sup-
plies. Thus even the most subordinated ape in the group
has opportunities to get food in the group's territory
that he could not get if he were not a group member
(Service, 1962, P:38, emphasis his).
Territoriality
Service's remarks lead us into a final but highly impor-
tant topic. Let us approach the matter from the wrong
direction, so to speak, by raising an old but persistent de-
bate about the evolution of human society. The theorists of
sociocultural evolution who were active from fifty to one
hundred years ago made the point that the evolution of
society was a development from kinship to territoriality as
the basis of association. Robert Lowie (1927, pp. .51-73, et
passim) made this thesis one of the butts of his own theory.
For Lowie, territoriality was at least as old as consanguinity
.' '.~;'
"
\

46 /
TIm EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
as an organizing principle. There is much to recommend
Lowie's conclusion or, at least, in certain aspects of that
conclusion. What we cannot accept is the implication that
the territoriality that underlies state formation has any but
superficial resemblance to the. kind of territoriality that
seems quite definitely to be much more ancient than the
cultural recognition of kinship. We return to this part of the
argument elsewhere; at this point let us consider territorial
manifestations among nonhumans..
The phenomenon of territoriality" is known . and re-
ported in some detail among species of fish (Ratner &
Denny, 1964, P' 310), mice (Anderson & Hill, 1965, pp.
1753-5), deer (Vos, 1965, pp. 1752-3), birds (Scott, 1958,
P: 135), and various other animals.
A survey of data on territorial phenomena observed on
wild or "provisionated" primates yields the results in Table 1.
With the exception of the chimpanzee, all primates
studied in the wild seem to have more or less distinct areas
within which their movements are concentrated for long
periods of time. Chimpanzees move so freely from group to
group that the only limits on their movements seem to be
geographical, in terms of natural boundaries (Goodall, 1965,
p. 456). H the ranges traversed by most primates are fairly
wide and therefore tend to overlap with the ranges of other
similar groups of the same species, this overlapping is less
usual in what some observers call the "core areas," portions
of the range most frequently inhabited. Overlapping of
cores does occur but is less frequent and generally occurs
to lesser depths of penetration.
.
.
Only the howler, of the six primates surveyed, seems
almost incapable of being in a group which experiences
peaceful meetings with other like groups. Actually, even in
this case fighting is rare, but threats and display are the
3 "Territoriality ... is any behavioral phenomenon which effects the
exclusion of some category of conspecific organisms from space in-
habited by the territorial individual or group" (Anderson et al., 1965,
p. 1755)·

r
f-R??007 . ~Mrr_
r
Egalitarian Society
TABLE
1.
Territoriality Among Selected Primates
/ 47
:BAB OON
CIlIMP
GORILLA
HOWLER
LAN'GUR
RHESVS
Restricted area
+
0
+
+1- e
+
+
Overlapping ranges
+
+
+
+
+
+
Overlapping cores
+
+
0
Peaceful meetings
+
+
+
0
+t
O§
Active fights seen
0
'0
0
+
0
+
Avoidance tendency
LIM
0
0
0
+
0/+....
Permeability
+
E
MIH
L
ot
0
Symbols: + clearly reported present; 0 clearly reported absent;
-
concept not employed by reporting scientists; E extreme; H high ;
M medium; L low.
e "Howlers do not defend boundaries or whole territories; they defend
the place where they are .. ." (Carpenter, 1965, p. 273; his empha-
sis) .
t Langur groups depend.greatly on avoidance and rarely come closely
enough together to interact.
§ Rhesus were observed in "brief periods when all normal aggressive
tendencies had disappeared" (Southwick, et al., 1965 , P: 144). The
authors were unable to explain such periods.
00 Imanishi reports that Japanese rhesus "oikia" or discrete social
groups manage most interactions by avoidance based on shared per-
ception of a dominance series (Imanishi, 1963 , p. 72 ). Possibly be-
cause the area studied was much smaller and complete avoidance
impossible, much more interaction was reported in the North Indian
case (Southwick, et al., 1965, pp. 143-44).
t Jay (1 965, p. 206) says, "A langur group appears to be a closed
social system and monkeys rarely change groups." The fiercest fight-
ing she saw was associated with the repulse of a nongroup male
attempting to follow a group
(Jay, 1965 , p. 207). Yet two adult
rhesus, one a 'male, were observed to be apparently permanent mem-
bers of a langur group (Jay, 1965, p. 2U, fig. 7--8, and p. 212) .
rule (Carpenter, 1965, pp . 273-5 ). The rhesus, too, usually
finds himself in a fight if his group encounters another, but
there are peaceful episodes. For the others, peaceful meet-
ings are much more frequent than hostile encounters.
Perhaps the most amazing thing, considering the my-
thology about animal society and the strength of Hobbesian
images of uncivilized society, is the discovery that a number

.<
.',.:
, '.":
...·....·-,; ..<1
~
':: =-:.
, ~
'.~';: , .,.'-
'. " ..-
48 /
THE EVOLUTION. OF POLmCAL SOCIETY
of primates-gorillas and chimpanzees in particular-live
in relatively open social groups. Not only is it possible for
animals to shift groups, but the ones who do so most fre-
quently, as far as we know, are adult males. The process
occurs without fighting.
We can now 'sum up this brief overview of primate
social life before venturing to review some materials about
the Simplest human societies known to ethnography. Pri-
mate societies lack at least three things that by their ab-
sence help account for the qualitative gap between fully
cultural societies and all others. One of these things is the
division of labor, another is sharing, and the third is a
means of specifying different types and degrees of relation-
ship. It is interesting that the absence of these things has
a result which parallels the result of the absence of sym-
bolic learning: the development of social structure tends to .
be noncumulative. The outcome is simplicity of patterning.
There is nothing conceptually difficult about any primate
society; problems in studying primate society stem from
arduous physical difficulties, from the physical mobility of
the animals, and from the trouble of telling many of the
animals apart. Of course, the single greatest problem is
created by inability to talk with them and find out what
they think about it all."
With regard to functions that may be loosely described
as political,
some
primate phenomena
are
interesting.
Though Simple pecking orders never provide the basis of
organization of a human society, all human societies include
various forms of dominance hierarchy. Perhaps more sug-
gestive are the clear indications in such primates as the
baboon of dominance based upon combinations, an alliance
serving to offset individual dominance (Hall & DeVore,
• My colleague, Marvin Harris, thinks that this would only introduce
a further source of error probably greater than all the others and
points to the heavy freight of misconceptions already carried in an-
thropology because analysis has been geared to the informant's men-
tal ordering of his universe (ct. Harris, 1963, pp. 165-6).

·:"::' ,'.' ".<
~-:.
Egalitarian Society
I 49
1965, pp. 60-5)· The forms of cooperation descriped remain
insignificant, taking the form of mutual but uncoordinated
harassment.
Leadership, too, is rudimentary, being confined in es- ,
sence to the role of actually initiating a group movement,
and setting its speed and direction. For most primates the
evidence does not seem to suppqrt too strongly the. view
that leadership also involves disciplinary dispute adjudica-
tion. Most activity of this kind that has been described
shows a more dominant animal making its presence felt by
two less dominant animals who are fighting or quarreling
and who break off .what they are doing and scamper away.
Although it is easy to find human behavior that seems to
amount ,to the same thing, what cannot be found is the
counterpart in primate society to settling disputes in human
society, which serves to redress social balance. With these
remarks
~t is necessary to turn from' the fascinating world
of our nonhuman relatives and to the world of our own
species, divided among myriad patterns by their cultural
affiliations but linked by the overwhelming commonality of
their physical bodies and mental equipment.

.\
'
",:

~ " . '
..'
' ,\
CHAPTER
.Sirnple Egalitarian
Societies
3
"While Hobbes' state of nature was in-
tolerable and Locke's was inconvenient, Rousseau's was
idyllic" (Sait, 1938, p. 103). However appropriate their
existential judgments, the social orders described by these
and many other political philosophers of great eminence
,' simply never existed . What then was the nature of the
simplest cultural societies ?
Matters of method comp el postponing consideration of
the structure of societies transitional from those of the pri-
mates discussed in the last chapter to the simplest ones
known to ethnography. At the conclusion of this chapter
there is a brief discussion of possibilities. Before it can be
rendered meaningful, however, a review of what is actually
known about simple human societies is required.
Egalitarian societies can be defined in positive terms,
as in Chapter 2. The essential criterion seized upon was the

52 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
social recognition of as many positions of valued status as
there were individuals capable of filling them. One can also
define egalitarian society in negative terms, identifying ab-
sent features or institutions that play crucial roles in other
forms of society. The combination of features present and
features absent should make for greater clarity.
Though there are a host of subsidiary specific details
that vary in precise combination from one society to an-
other, there are only two key institutions which must be
introduced at this point. One of these is ranking, the other
stratification.
.......Ranking ~sts when there are few~E.positions of valued
status than persons capable of filling them. A rank society
~ 'hasllre-ans of lurutmg the access of its members to statUs
, positions that they woulcCoi"herwlse].iQld on the basis of
sex, age, or Eersonaf attrloufes 'Ba-I;i: has no necessary con- -
nectlon'\.vith economic status in any of its forms, though it
- frequentIy-dO"es acqurre economic significance. The point is
that rank can and in some instances does exist totally in-
dependent of the economic order.
.Stratification, by contrast, is a term that is preferably
limited to status diHerencesoas=e,d'QfJ -e..c9Domic differences.
'S"trat:ilicatlOIi'ill-this se~ a system by which t~ adult
members of a society enjoy differential rights of access to
basic'"resources:--'fhese-resouTces':are'-the physical things
.needed 'to sustain- life, either directly (air, water, and food)
or indirectly (things that cannot themselves be consumed
but are required to obtain other things that are). Outstand-
ing examples of the latter are land, raw materials for tools,
water for irrigation, and materials to build a shelter. Though
a few things would appear on the list of strategic resources "
of all societies, there is such evolution of cultural ecology
that new strategic resources are created that are totally un-
known in Simple cultures. Thoreau is dead, and Walden
pond, though in a state-protected reservation, has been
swallowed between a suburb of Boston and superhighway
128.

Simple Egalitarian Societies
I 53
Simple human societies are egalitarian -and "lack both
ranking and stratification. How, then, do they run?
THE GENERAL NATURE
OF
EGALITARIAN SOCIETIES
Volumes can and have been written on specific egali::
tarian societies and on comparisons at this cultural level.
The present treatment must be brief and ~ concentrate
on general features of such societies that have been de-
scribed in ethnographic literature. Emphasis is placed on
features relevant to political functions.
Physical Settings
One of the major differences between most ethno-
.graphically mown Simple societies and those that must have
flourished in the Pleistocene period and persisted well into
recent historical times is the nature of the habitat. Until
perhaps 5,000 to 8,000 years ago competition for areas must
have been relatively"slight, and I presume that there was not
very much large-scale displacement of societies in the in-
habited regions of the earth. Without pursuing this- point, I
Simply register the opinion that in the not so remote past,
perhaps 1,000 years ago or less, many quite simple human
societies were settled in well-watered areas with rich vege-
tation, abundant animal life, and moderate climate. At the
present time there seem to be no independent cultures of
preneolithic productive economy in any area of the world '
even remotely fitting this description. Some "neolithic-like"
agricultural societies are still found relatively untouched in
fine environments in New Guinea, but the last hunters and
fishers who occupied prime territories were probably the
Indians living along the Pacific in northern United States
and Canada. That was in the last century; by the time they
were studied their economies and political structures were
already seriously changed by contact.
Societies dependent upon natural, undomesticated food
: ....
I
~
~
. ~.: .
. ""
."-,
:-:i'
. :::

54 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
supplies are particularly vulnerable to environmental limi-
tations. Limited technology plus limited natural food re-
sources can only sustain small and scattered populations.
But the demographic capacity of the same limited tech-
nology in a rich food area will obviously sustain a larger
and potentially more concentrated population, and this will
have demonstrable consequences on the development of
social and political institutions.
Keeping this in mind, let us look at the environments of
the ethnographically known Simple societies. Physically di-
verse, they share what has been regularly called marginality.
The word is usually employed in two senses by ethnog-
raphers, and usually both meanings apply. First, ~
vironment is considered marginal if its return of calories
for work-energy expended is-illli:iii:DaI-S"econd, it is on or
.~ oeyond the margms of moredeveroped cultures; more
Significantly, such an environment is not desired by a de-
.
veloped ,culture for economic reasons, although in some in-
stances the discovery of subsurface minerals or similar
scarce civilized values creates a demand for portions of the
area. More usually, the area's main value for more complex
societies has to do with concerns of military strategy or the
maintenance of trade routes.
The best known marginal societies of the past century
or so have included dwellers in the icy tundra, various kinds
of deserts, and relatively inaccessible jungles. Our-examples
shall come, therefore, from the Eskimo, African Bushman,
Australian Bushman, Pygmy, and Negrito cultures and from
some equally Simple cultures that were found in the New
World. Occasionally, when the ethnographic record permits
it, we shall submit data from cultures located in more pro-
ductive settings.
Demography
According to Ferdinand Okada, who made a com-
parative study of published ethnographies about marginal
societies, the highest density reported for any such society

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 55
was about three persons per square mile, a figure offered
by A. R. Radcliffe-Brown for the aboriginal population of I vJ
the Andaman Islands (Okada, 1954, p. 30; ci. Radcliffe- IlJ
Brown, 1933, p. 28). The lowest density found by Okada
ru~l
was one person per 300 square miles reported by William
JJJ\~
Duncan Strong for the Barren Ground and Davis Inlet
bands of the Naskapi (Okada, 1954, P: 31; cf. Strong, 1929,
p. 278). These figures supply much wider limits than those
offered by Julian Steward in his well-known article on band
social organization. Steward set the limits in terms of his
sample, which did not include the Andaman Islanders or
the Naskapi, and found that "the population is sparse,
ranging from a maximum which seldom exceeds one person
per 5 square miles to one person per 50 or more square
miles" (Steward, 1955, P: 125).
Acceptance of these figures, and let us assume that
Okada's are more appropriate simply because their range
is greater, is like acceptance of the Chinese census of 1954;
few if any .demographers believe that the census .was ac-
curate, but there is little else to go on, particularly because
the 1954 census seems, to some extent, to be a projection
of previous Chinese census data. In precontact and early
postcontact aboriginal demography, most of the Significant
statements are based on fairly crude estimates. Today we
have apparently reliable figures for many aboriginal popu-
lations; at least the methods used to collect the data are
those associated with modem census taking. Then too, most
of the populations in question are small, and the discrete
populations are few in number. Access to these groups has
been facilitated by modem means of communication, and
contact with them tends to be much more regular than
ever in the past because, through acculturation, the mem-
bers of simple societies have come to value products and
services that bring them to trading or administrative cen-
ters. As a result, we know, inter alia, that "According to the
1944 census of aborigines, carried out in all the states of the
Commonwealth [of Australia] except New South Wales,

56 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
the aboriginal population amounted to 71,895 persons, of
whom 47,014 were 'full-blood' and 24,881 'half-caste'"
-(LL.O., 1953, P: 84). It is interesting to compare this With
an estimate of the number of aborigines in Australia at the
time of European settlement, 211,000, according to Rad-
cliffe-Brown, not including the 40,.000 estimated for New
South Wales (1930, p. 6g6; cited in I.L.O., 1953, p. 85).
The shrinking of the population to a third or a quarter of
previous size is a usual characteristic of the century or two
after initial intensive contact with more highly organized
societies, but thereafter it is not unusual for population to
rise again. Nevertheless, some groups will have long since
expired as discrete populations, although some of their
genetic and cultural capital will have flowed into the domi-
nant population and culture.
Apart from the process of depopulation itself, which
is an interesting, if grim, phenomenon, the social conse-
quences are of first importance. Population reductions stem
from many causes, which often work together: New diseases,
dislocated food supplies, forced movement into arid or
other near-lethal environments, "anomie," and the hunting of
aborigines for sport are some of the things that have pro-
duced decimation in some areas. The results have triggered
further social processes, two of which are of particular
interest to our present discussion. One of 'them is warfare
and its frequency; it is discussed later in the chapter. The
other involves a fascinating argument about the nature of
primitive society, the character of the marginal band.
The standard position is that put forward by Steward
in 1936 and somewhat enlarged by him in 1955. The leading
counter has been offered by Elman Service (Service, 1960) ~
~
Steward offers an ecological-demographic explanation for
i
~the organization of the band, itemizing four causal factors:
I,\low population density, dependence on the hunting of game,
I ~ Itransport limited to shanks' mare and human back, postu-
U 'lated acceptance of the extension of incest taboos to all
coresident members of an extended family (Steward, 1955,
· .:)

., -r ~' .:. ~. ":"'" ~.-: .: ..:
.......::
:..-:":
~..
....r -:
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 57
p. 135). The outcome is what Steward calls a "patrilineal
band," the most widespread form of social aggregation
among marginal societies and the second most simple. Ser-
vice takes issue with Steward on three counts: He cannot(.
. accept the family as an ;wlated ,ocia! unit;' he discoun"the
C-omposlte band as other than a phenomenon of contact
dislocation; and he feels that the narrowing of c?-uses to
.
ecological factors alone" is merely partial or actually in-
correct, depending on the specific case. The stimulus for
Service's criticism was the discovery "that the band so-
cietiesin their aboriginal form do not in fact correspond to
the social organizations they are supposed to have by the
ecological explanation"
(Service, 1962, P: 73, emphasis in
original). Service also defends a point of view that overlaps
with the one we stressed in earlier pages: ", . . there is
more to social organization than demography. Human so-
cial'organization is.cultural and a form of explanation which
is adequate for societies of wild animals is not sufficient for
human societies, even those at the lowest levels of com-
plexity" (Service, 1962, p. 73, emphasis in original). Crucial
to "Service's argument is the analysis of the structure and
functions of sodalities, forms of social groupings that cross-
cut localities and, depending as they do on symbols for
their very existence, cannot appear in precultural SOciety.
Though the issue is not directly related to the central
problem of this book, I cannot refrain from stating that in
1 Steward says that the most simple is the "family lever in which the
main social tasks are regularly carried out by family units dwelling
in relative isolation. Steward's examples are Eskimo, Basin Shoshone,
Nambicuara, Guat6, Mura, "and perhaps other groups"
(Steward,
1955, p. 119). Service argues convincingly that the pattern of iso- .
lated families acting as the sole aggregate for extensive periods of .
time seems to be a consequence of European contact, disruption, and
depopuIation-a view supported by the work of others (Service, 1962,
pp. 94-107; cf.-Wagley, 1940, pp. 12-6; Murphy, et al., 1956, pp .
335-55; and so on).-
, Service admits that Steward has 'avoided simple monolithic state-
ments of the ecological position, but he points to the work of others.
who, in cited passages, do make such statements (Service, 1962, p.
73)·

58 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
,
Il". . '
rl
.1..:1
my judgment Service is correct in his criticism of Steward's
,family level. The cases Steward crresamt1he' Shoshone he
(analyzes in detail may be considered under the composite
band. Service's argument, in placing all examples of the
composite band in relation to breakdown following contact
or its effects, is not altogether convincing. One of the salient
differences between Service and myself on this issue is the
matter of primitive warfare, to which I return at the end
of this chapter. Regarding 'one more aspect of Service's
thesis, it seems to me that, in criticizing the demographic-
ecological explanation of simple human social organization,
Service essentially succeeds in revising and strengthening
it. I believe that is the Significance of his argument that
sodalities are a function of dispersed settlement. Here, too,
he refers to primitive warfare, and further discussion is de-
ferred to the end of this chapter.
Economy: Means of Production
All Simple societies depend on wild sources of food,
which, willi a few obscure and not aItogether certain ex-
ceptions, are not increased by the members of those so-
cieties. Most of the work of obtaining food and preparing
it for consumption according to local cultural standards is
accomplished with very few tools and weapons but with
natural objects like leaves and sticks. In no Simple society
known to ethnography is there any restriction on access to
the raw materials necessary to make tools and weapons.
This statement can be made flatly about resources in the
habitation area of a given unit, and with moderate reserva-
tions it may be extended to resources located in alien areas.
For example, a description of Eskimos west of Hudson Bay
warns:
At the outset it should be stressed that the very notion
of exclusive rights in land or hunting and fishing terri-
tory-whether private, familial or communal-is non-
existent and outside the conception of these Eskimos.
. It is true that each band has a more or less traditional,

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 59
yet vaguely definable, hunting and fishing area where
its hunters feel most "at home," but these grounds are
open to everybody, also non-Eskimos, and any game
or fish is res nullius, all and no one's property, as long as
it has not been touched. The same view is taken of other
resources like soapstone, wood, etc. (Steenhoven, 1962,
P·57)·
The Eskimos are famed for presenting so clear a case
(cf· Birket-Smith, 1929, pp. 261-2; Rasmussen, '1931, p. 173;
Balikci, 1962, pp. 60 ff.). The Eskimos may be taken as al-
most a limiting case, but they differ from other simple soci-
eties in degree rather than kind. For example, among !Kung
Bushmen each band occupies a traditional territory the
boundaries of which are known to all who are likely to
come into the area (Marshall, 1960, p. 331). The boundaries
seem vague to the outlander, possibly because they are often
set in virtually trackless country in what the Bushmen
themselves treat as marginal areas. Furthermore, "!Kung
hunting customs do not require that hunters confine them-
selves strictly to their own territory, and the ownership of
the animals which are hunted is not based on territories.
The animals belong to no one until shot" (Marshall, 1960,
P: 331). The situation is not quite as obvious with respect to
another crucial resource, drinking water. Rain water ac-
cumulated on the surface, which occurs for more than three
months each year, is free to all. But Lorna Marshall tells
us that 'permanent or semipermanent water holes are owned
by the bands. What the ownership amounts to is not 'alto-
gether clear. To begin with, the most significant water re-
sources seem to be "owned" by two or more bands; further-
more, in drought years some bands split up into smaller
components, which then distribute themselves about the
territory, attaching themselves to other bands and thus to
other water holes (Marshall, 1960, pp. 336--7). Perhaps the
most serious question of limited ownership of productive
resources amongthe Bushmen involves veldkos, the 'eighty
or more varieties of plants that have edible parts and that,

· .,
." ~ ' .
60
/
.
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
in Marshall's phrase, are what' "the !Kung depend on
for their daily living." Although meat is much desired, it is
eaten only "intermittently," whereas Marshall estimates that
the veldkos account for some 80 per cent of !Kung food
(Marshall, 1969, p. 335).
Lorna Marshall maintains that the fertile areas in which
veldkos grow most abundantly are all thoroughly lmown to
the Bushmen and "are owned by the bands with strict defi-
nition and jealous concern" (Marshall, 1960, P: 335). This
statement is based, at least in part, upon an incident in
which, despite the Marshalls' urgings, the Bushmen would
not extend their area of harvest of a certain wild nut beyond
what seemed to the observers to be a definite, though pre-
sumably quite invisible, line
(Marshall, 1960, P: 335).
Furthermore, veldkos are not shared, at least not as game
is shared. vVe shall shortly discuss sharing patterns, in-
cluding those of the Bushmen, but here I wish to say only
that in the case of the Bushmen's veldkos the absence of
organized sharing does not seem truly aberrant. To begin
with, veldkos apparently .are neither stored nor preserved
but are gathered each day for that day's consumption. As
the whole group is together at the veldkos patch, I cannot
imagine why veldkos should be shared beyond the de facto
sharing reported by Marshall herself: "Each gatherer owns
what he has gathered and may give it to and share it with
whomever he pleases. Visitors are given veldkos by the
persons they are visiting or may join a gathering party as a
courtesy" (Marshall, 1960, p. 336). As far as we can see,
therefore, the Bushman case may join that of the Eskimos
as an illustration of the absence of restrictions upon access
to basic resources.
.
To avoid prolonging this section with further examples
from a copious record, let us turn to one area in which there
was a lengthy debate regarding sharing and ownership. In
1915 Frank Speck described the family hunting band as
the basis of Algonkian social organization, and he attributed
to it exclusive ownership of land with summary punishment

', ' ".:
""
-
'•.,,
S~mple Egalitarian Societies
/
61
for,trespass (Speck, 1915; Speck, 1926). We need not-review '
the history of the refinement of Speck's position as he and
others , added to the picture. In '1950 and 1951 Eleanor
Leacock carried out ethnographic research among the Mon-
tagnais-Naskapi of Labrador and took. as her dissertation
topic rebuttal of the thesis that there is strict family owner-
ship of basic hunting resources among the Algonkians. In
brief, Leacock demolishes the case built by Speck and
others. Using historical sources as well as her own field data
she shows that the "family hunting territory" as an exclusive
possession represents an adjustment to European-introduced
fur trade. Among the interesting pieces of evidence is -a
French source of the middle of the eighteenth century that
remarks that the Indians of the region could take beaver
out of another man's trap, if hungry, provided only that
after"consuming the meat they would replace the fur (La-
Potherie, 1753, P: "132; cited by Leacock, 1954, P: 16). In-
deed, 'Leacock found that the Indians she studied resisted
the development of.family and individual hunting territories
and preserved important aspects of older communal hunting
and sharing patterns' (Leacock, 1954, P: 9).
The evidence for significantly undifferentiated
co~m­
munal access to resources and the relatively permissive
attitude toward "trespass" in simple societies is abundant.
In addition to the cases mentioned there are many others,
including the Semang (Schebesta, 1929, P: 83) , Apayao
(Vanoverbergh, 1925, p. 430), Shoshone (Steward, 1938,
P: 254; Cappannari, 1960), Yaruro (Petrullo, 1939, P: 199),
and so on.
" We have alluded only by implication to the actual
processes of production in these simple societies. Generaliza-
tions are made difficult by the variety of specific environ-
ments, hence of the tasks confronted. The various animals
hunted have diverse life patterns of their own to which the
hunt must be adapted, and similar conditions exist with re-
gard to collectable foods. Beyond ecologically derived
differences, however, loom broad areas of similarity.
~*2;i~{0;~{~\; ':'< ':"~' :" : .: :.<
~';'
,
.
[~: ' ..
i '
f'
L· .
i
'

62
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLrrICAL SOCIETY
All simple societies maintain fairly distinct divisions of
labor between the sexes. Within these divisions, however,
all adults are expected to fulfill almost all roles, particularly
in subsistence-oriented activities. Nobody can exist in such
a society on the basis of professional performance of a
limited specialization. If there is any exception to this rule
it lies not in the field of religion, for all available evidence
indicates that the specialized religious practitioner in simple
societiescarries out a rather normal role in food production.
The exception is the lazy person. Considerable pressure .is
directed against laziness, but, if the person can stand being
the butt of jokes or if he is perhaps a little hungrier than
his energetic neighbor" or does not care what others think
of him, he may survive as a drone. .
Cooperative teams are frequentlyrequired in the
p~o­
ductive process, but the circumstances of their assembly
vary widely. The mere fact of assembly does not necessarily
mean that labor is concerted; a number ofberry pickers may
work in close proximity without' any significant cooperation.
It is true, however, that work of this kind is usually preferred
in company that converts a simple repetitive task into a
pleasurable social gathering. The obvious gain from such
esprit may be at least partially reduced by loss of work
efficiency due to diversion. Needless to say, such a way
of looking at the situation would be most curious in pre-
contact simple societies. One further comment prior to our
discussion of related matters: Cooperative labor parties,
whether for hunting or for gathering, take place with very
little apparent leadership except for certain interesting situa-
tions like the Shoshone rabbit drive. As shown further on,
3 It is by no means certain that the laggard will fare poorly ,in this
regard (ct. Fortune, 1.932, pp. 55-6, for the case of Negwadi, who
lived a life of ease and eating among her diligent fellow Dobuans ).
As will be seen in the discussion of sharing and reciprocity, hunters
often give out much more 'than they-keep and beggars willing to ask
are difficult to turn down (ct. Sahlins, .1.965, pp. 1.86--200, for ex-
cellent bibliographic commentary on this).

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 63
whatever leadership is generated for such events is not ap-
plied to other aspects of the group life.
Economics: Distribution
.
Liebig's "law of the minimum" is a statement abOU~
biological evolution which calls attention to the fact that
selection and adaptation respond to minimum rather than
maximum features of the environment. If there is adequat
water most of the year but a regular period of drought, the
animals that show the best maintenance rates are likely to be
those able to withstand the shortage. Such reasoning is help-
ful in understanding the absence of narrow rights of access
to strategic resources in simple societies. It is equally useful
in understanding the prevalence of sharing and the patterns
of reciprocity that are also usual in these societies.
There can be no question that all ethnographically
known societies have institutionalized individual ("private")
property in nonstrategic objects. I agree with both L. T.
Hobhouse (1922, P: 7) and Stephen Cappannari (1960, P:
136) in not applying the term "property" to things that "all
the world can use." There are in all known societies things
that are property on two accounts: First, while they are
being used they may not be removed from the user without
social disruption. Second, the user can give such a thing
to someone else thereby accomplishing the creation of some
kind of obligation for some kind of return and the enhance-
ment .of his own prestige. Leaving the matter of prestige
for subsequent discussion, we find that the obligation for
return lies at the heart of the most widespread mechanism
of economic distribution, namely reciprocity.
As Sahlins has shown and so well documented:
'""
'
Reciprocity is a whole class of exchanges, a continuum
of forms. This is especially true in the narrow context
of material transactions. . . . At one end of the spec-
trum stands the assistance freely given . . . the "pure
gift" Malinowski called it, regarding which an open

•. • '
''>~
<1
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
stipulation of return would be unthinkable and unso-
ciable. At the other pole, self-interested seizure, ap-
propriation by chicanery or force requited only by an
equal and opposite effort on the principle of lex talionis,
"negative reciprocity" as Gouldner phrases it (Sahlins, .
J.965, P: J.44)·
In addition to distinguishing and identifying three points
along this continuum as generalized, balanced, and negative
reciprocity, Sahlins notes that any particular transaction is
likely to be affected by a number of additional factors, sug-
gesting four: kinship distance, kinship rank, relative wealth
and need, and the type of goods involved (Sablins, J.965,
p. J.58 ).
The next thing to note about this mode of distribution
r\ is that it exists, as we have already indicated, in all societies
.~ \from the simplest to the most complex; in the simplest so-
J\T
~ cieties, however, it is the mode of distribution. One must
\ti\
~ ~lso realize that participation in reciprocal transactions usu-
P
'<
,\lily occurs as a matter of course in which the donor has
minimal possibilities of free decision. The chain of reci-
procities to which his act is a contribution started long before
and will continue into the remote future; the donor acquires
this role largely by the action of other sociocultural sub-
systems. He is son, son-in-law, husband, father, brother-in-
law, and so on. He is friend, partner, neighbor, camp mate,
and so forth. He is generous,.kind, a good hunter, and so
on. Through the interaction of such established categories
the individual finds himself with limited alternatives. Not
that members of primitive societies are intellectually or
emotionally incapable of defying custom. The "savage auto-
. maton" concept of primitive society, if it ever carried in-
tellectual weight, is long dead, but this does not mean that
we are incapable of recognizing the structural limits to the
possibilities of individual decision making in simple society.
A general principle of reciprocal economic exchanges,
particularly those in the area .Sahlins calls "generalized
reciprocity," is that the mechanism for balancing exchanges

-: -
~.
· ..' ..
Simple Egalitarian Societies
j
65 -
is vested in set formulas for distribution. Once again the
Eskimos offer a clear illustration, as in this observation by
Kaj Birket-Smith:
The most important rules [according to which the kill
is divided] are:
If two men go hunting together and one kills an animal,
he takes the fore-part and the other gets the hind part.
Others say that the fore-part goes to the one who first
reaches the caribou. If there are three hunters together,
each of the helpers receives a hind-quarter; but if there
are still more company, there is no sharing. In return
the .hunter is obliged to provide the inhabitants of the
camp with meat in the evening.
For walrus and bearded 'seal the rules are the same
(Birket-Smith, 1929, P: 262).
In m~y societies ~e disp~sition of particular sections Of~
.,.
game IS not according to the rules of the hunt, but follows
strict kinship protocol and specifies that certain choice por-
.
tions of the carcass go to parents, .to wife's parents, and so.
~
on. While pertaining to a rather inore complexly organized . .
culture than those to which we have addressed ourselves .
'until now, H. N. C. Stevenson's discussion of the distribu-
tion of slaughtered domestic cattle includes a diagram that
has always struck me as the equivalent of our own "cuts of
beef' butcher chart among people living in a fundamentally
reciprocal economy. Stevenson's chart doesn't show where
the tenderloin or sirloin is, it shows which part must be
given to which relative or affine (H. N. C. Stevenson, 1943;
cf. Firth, 1956, p. 86, for the diagram and discussion).
Actually, even before customary procedures for distri-
bution are brought into action, many cultures are already
at work, so to speak, separatmg specific individuals from
monopolistic possession. This method of designation is
shown beautifully, though by no means uniquely, among
the !Kung Bushmen, who regard as the "owner' of game
: ,1
.:;
s

66 /
- THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
not the hunter who killed it but the man who made the
projectile that brought it down. The arrowmaker might
not even be on the hunt; arrows are freely given as gifts
or loaned (though how one tells the difference between
"gift" and loan" in such a context I cannot guess). The
results are such that the ethnographer is led to remark that,
"The society seems to want to extinguish in every way pos-
sible the. concept of meat belonging to the hunter" (Mar-
shall, 1961, P: 238). Other societies award "ownership" t~
the spotter, to the first one to strike, or sometimes to the
last to strike before the animal dies. Perhaps more signifi-
cantly, "ownership" does not really mean the ability to
do with the game exactly what one wishes, There is no
reason to believe that most hunters have strong -desires
other than to fulfill -the role for which they have been
educated, so that "ownership" really means that the man
who fulfills the social requirements of "owner" is the one
to whom prestige will accrue as the distribution proceeds.
In most societies this prestige is viewed as cumulative.
Consistent successful return from the hunt will build a
man's reputation. He is a good hunter, then a very good
one, great, truly the greatest! Considering social techniques
of randomizing success and the empirical difficulties of the
hunt it is no wonder that the truly great hunters are some-
times held in awe and assumed to benefit from supernatural
assistance. On the other hand, the prestige which even the
mightiest hunter enjoys is not transferable to other areas
and does not constitute a firm basis for political power.
General Social Structure
The simple societies with political forms identified as
eg~J1~iin· tena-to- display~tWo · kind~_o~ --g~o~~The
~~allei group is a form of
family, _g~p-era_Uy ~ucI~~r as
chifdien _·old enough to marry_u~tIalJy_~~t..lJp.their own
c-1i9u·seholds. Thelarger group !s..the band, Since the family
is ·u:suanYf ound in the context of a band, it is not treated
as an autonomous unit. The question, however, is not en-

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
67
tirely settled; as we have seen, Steward analyzes Shoshone
society as an example of the "family level," whereas Service
disagrees (Service, 1962, pp. 64-6) . We need not be drawn
into this dispute except insofar as an absence of warfare
is implied by. the individual family existing independently.
It is more than probable that the harsh environment found
in conjunction with a settlement pattern based on autono-
mous families would also ensure such general poverty and
isolation as to make unlikely any need for defense-.
It is improbable that human families existed as isolated,
autonomous units until the bands of which they were part
were forced into areas of low natural food potential or-
what amounts to the same thing-were not able to leave
areas that, through dessication or other geoclimatological
processes, were becoming low in natural food potential.
But, placing the question of the independent family to one
side, there can be no disputing the signillcance of the nu-
clear family as the main component of the band. Bands like
the ones now being discussed are reviewed in some ethno-
graphic detail in another volume in
~his series
(Service,
1962, pp. 59-109) , and need not occupy us long. We make .
only those points relevant to our problem.
The band is a local group composed of a small number
of families. The Marshall party conducted precise enumera-
tion of thirteen !Kung bands out of an estimated twenty-
seven bands that occupied the region of Nyae Nyae in South
West Africa in 1952-1953; four other bands were counted
approximately. Of the thirteen whose exact composition is
known, the smallest included eight families, the largest fifty-
seven; the average was a fraction over twenty-four. The
four bands known approximately were larger on the whole,
ranging from twenty-three to forty-seven, averaging 32.5
(Marshall, 1960, P: 328).
Most of the data on band size is approximate; the
original sources rarely tell exactly how the figures were ob-
tained; A sampling of the figures gathered from other eth-
nographies by Steward (1955, pp.
122-42) and Okada

68 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIEJ::Y
(1954, pp. 29-45, 84-90 ) brackets the averages obtained by
Lorna Marshall but tends to be higher. Here are some
characteristic figures: The Yahgan show especially brittle
band composition, and families tend to live by themselves,
coming together for ad hoc assemblies with other families
with which they mayor may not cohere again. They are
rarely reported to aggregate in bands of more than fifteen
individuals or so at a time. The Cuayaki, rare because of
their matrilocality-matrilineality, run about twenty indi-
viduals per local group, the Semang up to fifty, the Waicura
fifty to sixty. Most of the African Pygmies are said to run
in the sixty-to-sixty-five range, but Patrick Putnam (1948,
p. 335) places the average at ISO, which probably reflects
the aggregation of groups in the vicinity of what was then
.Camp Putnam, a source of goods and medical care. The
Botocudo bands are said to range from fifty to 200, with
perhaps the largest bands those of the Patagonian Te-
huelche, running 400 and 500. These last can easily be dis-
counted, however, as occurring in response to European
influence, which included, among other tangibles, the Te-
huelche acquisition of domesticated horses. Prior to this ac-
quisition Tehuelche band size seems to have been com-
parable to that of the Ona, said to have ranged from forty
to
120 with larger -aggregates forming briefly to devour
beached whales.
On the basis of the foregoing and additional similar
evidence it seems reasonable to conclude that social units
on this level are fairly small, particularly With regard to
the interacting persons of the same sex and age status. Given
such groups it is likely that all parties to social intercourse
generally have intimate knowledge of the others and can
reasonably expect and predict behavioral reactions. Finally,
the component units -of higher level (band) organization
are not compelled to remain together but can and do
separate and form new alignments. The apparent contradic-
tion between this point and the one that preceded it can
be easily explained. People are familiar with. those in ad-

' .. -," 0" .".
. -'~.
. : '
. - ' .
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
69
jacent bands; very likely they are related and probably by
marriage. In addition, the possible role sets in primitive so-
ciety are relatively few and variation out of the expectable
is unlikely although possible.
The
terminology used by anthropologists in desig-
nating different types of bands-"matrilineal," "patrilineal,"
"composite"-reveals the frequent assumption that the char-
terof a band lies in kinship. Though the social organizations
concerned are simple, the problem of distinguishing kinship
from other bases of affiliation is not. It is complicated by
the fact that the farther one travels from the immediate
territory of his band the more remote genealogically and
socially will be the inhabitants or.relatives one encounters.
Indeed, this point is one that Sahlins makes in his analysis
of reciprocity, showing that there is an intimate relation-
ship among kinship distance, residential sectors, and the
quality of reciprocal exchanges (Sahlins, 1965, P: 152, fig. 1;
151 if.; 186-200).
.
One of the major consistencies found from one band-
organized society to another is the institution of exogamy.
Steward cites this institution, phrased in terms of an ex-
tension of incest taboos to the extended family, as a causal
factor in the genesis of the patrilineal band (Steward,
1955, p. 135), and Service comes to the same conclusion,
although using different phrasing (Service, 1962, pp. 66-7).
A much underscored remark by Edward B. Tylor, not only
introduced the notion but also served to explain it in evolu-
tionary terms, the "simple practical alternative between
marrying-out and being killed-out" (Tylor, 1888, P: 267}.
I prefer to say today that the alternative is "dyfug out," to
suggest that exogamy, which forces alliances, has great
economic potential for expanding the area of resource ex-
ploitation. To the extent, and it is empirically known to be
very considerable, that reciprocal exchanges are deeply
involved with affinal ties, Tyler's dictum stands amendment.
Maintenance of band society requires that certain mini-
mum conditions be met..The strategic condition,'of course,
!
~"
-. ",'.

70 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLffiCAL SOCIETY
is that the members of the band be able to live and repro-
duce. This minimum requires, in turn, a division of labor
permitting the accumulation of foods from afar as well as
from near the campsite, while taking care of the young. Exo-
gamic prescriptions that extend the exchange and sanctuary
range of the immediate group also help to ensure its per-
petuation under difficult conditions. There are many other
things the band requires, like a communication system and
a program for enculturating the next generation; it also re-
quires means of maintaining internal and external order.
It is to these things that we shall now turn.
INTRABAND SOURCES OF CONFLICT
It has been a long time since any serious support could
be mustered for Thomas Hobbes' view of primitive society:
"during the time that men live without a common Power to
keep them in awe, they are in that condition which is called
Warre; and such a warre, as is of every man against every
man" (Hobbes, 1929, P: 96) . William Seagle. (1941, P: 378,
n.?) cites an article of Sir Henry Maine published in
188~
that referred to war being older than peace and also spoke
of "the universal belligerency of primitive mankind."
The polar alternative to the war of all against all is the
theory of the, submissive savage. It is difficult to fuid im-
portant figures who have offered unqualified statements
supporting this position. Rather, it is easier to find .extreme
statements of this theory in the work of opponents who
denounce it. (The history of the concept of "unilineal evo-
lution" shows a remarkable parallel, being more distinct
and elaborated in the works of its critics than its advocates. )
Bronislaw Malinowski and hi's pupils have said:
The savage-so runs to-day's verdict of competent an-
thropologists-i-has a deep reverence for tradition and
custom, an automatic submission to their biddings. He
obeys them "slavishly," "unwittingly," "spontaneously,"
through "mental inertia," combined with the fear of

.~
~j.,.
'
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
71.
public opinion or of supernatural punishment; or again
through a "pervading group-sentiment if not group in-
stinct" (Malinowski, 1926, p. 10).
Both in the famous work published in 1926 and in his
lengthy introduction to a later book by H. Ian Hogbin
(1934), Malinowski comes no closer to specifying who the
"competent anthropologists" were than offering words from
E. Sidney Hartland and W. H. R. Rivers that are consider-
ably less decisive than his own statement. I am very close to
concluding that "the figment of an automatically law-
abiding native" (Malinowski, 1934, p. xxvii) is really the
unintended result of critical exaggeration.
During the more than seventeen months that Lorna
Marshall observed Bushman bands in Nyae Nyae, South
West Africa, she saw four incidents of interpersonal con-
flict and was told about three other incidents that occurred
during that period but which she did not observe as they
took place in neighboring bands (Marshall, 1961, P: 246) . If .
.the point has to be established that members of primitive
societies know both deviation from established norms and
conflict, there is ample evidence of both. But I believe that
some earlier anthropologists were quite right to state or
imply that the possibilities of both were COnsiderably re-
duced by the structural absence of alternatives. There was
also comparatively little incentive to violate norms.
Property and Conflict
As has long been understood despite occasional state-
ments of denial or ridicule, there is a definite relationship
between the concept of individual property and crime. Re-
calling our picture of access to basic resources in egalitarian
societies, we can see that a major source of social unrest
in more com lex!
or an'
societies i
lackin .
e Significant sources of food available to simple SOCieties?
are not foreclosed to any member of the group and, as
shown, usually are available to outsiders as well. Whatever

72 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
men and women may fight about in egalitarian societies, it
cannot be land.
..
~~ is somewhat-mor-e-l:ikely.-that...cQgflict may be en-
gendered by food. No effective means exist in simple so-
"- -cieties1:o resmcC access of individuals to land. But with
food, different amounts are found in different hands-based
on differential skill, diligence, perseverance, luckwhat have
you. The positive action of society is needed to overcome the
unequal distributions of nature. As we have seen, however,
systems to accomplish this end are deeply embedded in all
ethnographically known simple societies. It may seem one
of those typical nineteenth-century overestimations of hu-
man rationality to assume that young and vigorous hunters
think of the time they will be old and feeble or of what may
befall their families if they are killed or injured. But the
actual data of recorded mythology and the stories that are
told around campfires inform us that such anxieties are in-
deed common, though they are not necessarily harnessed
consciously to social patterns of reciprocity.
Indeed, it is possible that the patterns of reciprocity
may trigger conflict precisely through the raising of un-
uited expectations. What happens when people don't
share as they are supposed to according to normal practice?
In brief, one of four things usually results; unfortunately,
considering the nature of the subject, it would be ridiculous
to attempt to rank them in order of statistical occurrence.
First of all, cases when nothing happens are probably quite
frequent. The person who does not receive does not com-
plain or press a case; there is no social disturbance, no
breach bas been acknowledged.
Second and at least equally probable, for this is amply
documented in ethnographic cases, is individual retaliation
by threat or actual suspension of reciprocity. A lovely illus-
trative case is given by Allan R. Holmberg (1950 , pp. 59-
60) in his description of a furious Siriono "chief" who de-
mands a share of the game taken by a successful hunter. Re-
fused, the man has a tantrum which ends with a vow that
,'.\
"
';t'
..~

-
"" ,
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
73
when he, the "chief," gets something he will certainly refuse
to give any of it -to the withholder. Holmberg does not tell
us whether the threat is realized, but the account gives no
indication of any further social dislocation stemming from
this act.
-
Third, threa! of withdrawal from reciprocity is often
m~~t?~ more br<?,adly social a.9..ti..Q!Lby a calcUlated at-
tempt to humiliate and demean the offender. In a society
in which generosity and the ability to be generous are al-
most the sole means of achieving prestige, it is -no little
thing to be identified as stingy. We have no way of knowing
whether identification as a niggardly person tends to de-
velop
wider social consequences. Possibly other people
react to the label by avoiding transactions with the person;
close relatives might align themselves accordingly, though
this is not likely in bands of small size. In any case, some
social disruption is likely to follow accusations of this kind.
Among the results of such events is the achievement of .
"prepolarization," or the division of the band into latent
factions to provide the basis of a later split when conditions'
demand it.
Fourth beyond labeling an individual ?s.stin~ustL
of real or fancied slig.hts in the process of reciprocal ex-
Clianges,there is a continuum of disapprobation, a kind of
escalation of revenge. This may involve lengthy harangues
in prose or poetry before the entire camp or may include
more violent outbursts. Surprising to members of our own
force-loving
SOCiety, intraband violence seems .to occur
very infrequently in these Simple societies. The Eskimos
and some other peoples of the far north, like the Chukchee,
may be an exception. They seem to esteem violence, but the
frequency of their homicides does not seem so-great,
al~
though more violence is reported for them than for _most
Simple societies. Furthermore, Marshall's notation that none
of the conflicts she saw or heard about were over-food while
four of seven "were flare-ups of sexual jealousy" (Marshall,
1961, p. 246), finds an echo in a modern ethnography of
. ,

74 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
the North Alaskan Eskimo in which Robert Spencer (1959,
p. 99) remarks that "killings arose less because of anti-
social behavior relating to food and personal property than
because of sexual involvements."
Trouble can arise if someone refuses to accept a gift.
Marshall was told by one Bushman that he accepted gifts
even when the last thing he wanted was to be obligated to
the donor. If he failed to accept the gift "the giver would be
terribly angry" (Marshall, 1961, P: 244). Again, the com-
parison with Eskimos is instructive:
Mine and thine are distinguished among these Eskimos
and ownership is conceptualized, though it lacks the
connotation of absolute rights to which we are accus-
tomed. . . . A man who has made something is owner
of it as long as he needs and uses it. But at a given
moment someone else will need it and the owner will
lend it .to the former.... To these nomads who in
principle have no use for more property than one can
load on a sled, nothing that is not really needed for
daily use is regarded as property.in any strict sense
(Steenhoven, 1962, pp. 47-8) .
. And once again, the Bushmen:
In their nomadic hunting-gathering life, travelling from
one source of food to another through the seasons . . .
they carry their young children and their belongings.
With plenty of most materials at hand to replace arti-
facts as required, the !Kung have not developed means
of permanent storage and have not needed or wanted
to encumber themselves with surpluses or duplicates.
They do not even want to carry one of everything. They
borrow what they do not own .
~ . and the accumula-
tion of objects has not become associated with status
(Marshall, 1961, pp. 243-4) .
. The illustrations could be multiplied, but our purpose is
served by the very clear examples already given. Conflict
over things, whether land, food, water, tools, weapons, orna-
ments, anything, is most unlikely in simple societies because

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
75
the things are either immediately open to all or so-mobile
as to obviate problems of possession. Equally clear is the
obviation of theft, for in a sense Proudhon was right. Actu-
ally in a simple egalitarian society the taking of something
before it is offered is more akin to rudeness than stealing.
Once more the Eskimos are instructive as Birket-Smith re-
ported: "Theft can never be a matter of grave importance,
and a thief is regarded as something the same as a liar, i.e.,
an unpleasant person, and if the victim has enough moral
courage and authority over the thief, he will probably de-
mand the return of the stolen articles (Birket-Smith, 1.929,
P· 265)·
Sex and Conslict:
Statements cited above from the work of Marshall and
Spencer indicate that sexual tensions are the cause of much
of the conflict they saw or heard about :ill13ushIrian and
-Eskimos OCiety:-Oiii kDowfedgeol-the-sexu~l li£e of people
in most societies, simple and complex, is generally inade-
quate for the weight of generalizations it has been made to
bear. As we know from the researches begun by the late
Alfred Kinsey, detailed statistical data can overturn or
necessitate the revision of the prevailing view of the sexual
behaviour of an entire population. Kinsey reports have their
limitations, procedural biases, and sources of error as a
number of critics have made clear. When all is said and
done, however, such information is more reliable and cer-
tainly more comprehensive than the anecdotal material usu-
ally supplied. And it is precisely the latter material that
dominates anthropological study of sex in most alien so-
cieties. -
What is on record indicates surprising range of varia-
tion of sexual practices in simple societies, although there
is a fairly regular core built about concepts of incest, ex-
ogamy, and adultery. Unfortunately for my own argument,
what little evidence exists-does not seem to show a correla-
tion between permissiveness to sexual behavior and low

I
1
I
i
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL· SOCIETY
incidence of conflict due to sexual rivalry. The Eskimos are
among the more permissive peoples with regard to sexual
relations; their attitudes toward homosexuality are not al-
together clear, but bestiality, although regarded as some-
what unusual, was not treated with contempt but in a
matter of fact way (R. Spencer, 1959, P: 246). Sexual-inter-
course holds few if any secrets for Eskiino children who
regularly observe copulation in their own homes. Mastur-
bation is not taboo, and Spencer reports observation of
mothers masturbating infants as a pacifier (R. Spencer, 1959,
p. 245). Sexual experimentation is common around the age
of puberty. Girls are advised that promiscuous relations
"might complicate the system of mutual obligations be-
tween families which could arise from sexual ties" (R. Spen-
cer, 1959, P: 245). He does not elaborate this remark, but it
is evident from other statements he makes, as well as from
the works of others, that sexual relations among Eskimos
usually presuppose special economic relations-a more inti-
mate and intense reciprocity than would otherwise be the
case. Maintenance of too many such relationships would be
very difficult and somewhat dangerous, not to say expensive.
Eskimo marriage is noted for its brittleness, if that is
the proper word. The reluctance to engage in fully promis-
cuous relations leads to something that is structurally like
the vogue for "going steady" in contemporary American
adolescent society but is actually developed further into
trial marriage. Two or more of these affairs might precede
the first relatively durable marriage. This marriage is co.n-
tracted in one of several ways, by long-standing agreement
between families, by independent decision of the man and
woman, or by abduction, sometimes with the connivance
of the woman, sometimes not, sometimes with the aid of
one's relatives, sometimes purely solo. Rape is common-
place, almost all women being considered fair game. There
is also the famous Eskimo institution of wife exchange, not
a casual matter but tending to establish or reinforce ties of
reciprocity between the males. While most adult Eskimos
- ::
.-.- ~'I"
. ~ :J.~.,..
,
,::~

Simple :t:galitarian Societies
/
77
for whom any details are reported are said to marry at least .
twice and many are said to marry six times or more, the rate
of shifts of partners- seems to decline as full adulthood is
assumed. This does not mean, however, that sexual relations
are equally circumscribed.
.
If the situation among the Eskimos be compared with
that reported for the Bushmen wide differences are seen.
According to Marshall (1959, pp. 335-65) the Bushmen are
rather prudish and push sex into the background of their
lives. Sexual intercourse is engaged in discreetly, but in
proximity to children. We are not explicitly told about ob-
servation by others but, although it might take place, it
would tend to be covert. Unlike the Eskimos, the Bushmen
do not talk much about sex. Marshall attributes this to .the
tightness of the camp which necessarily brings close
rel~­
tives of both sexes together. Avoidance taboos of various
kinds operating in such close quarters, she thinks, tended
to produce a general reluctance to engage in sexy repartee
. or jokiJ;lg (Marshall, 1959, P: 339), although joking relation-
ships exist. To the polygyny of the Bushmen Marshall at-
tributes the premium. placed on marriageable women and
much of the restraint which is shown toward them." "Rape
did not appear in stories or gOSSip" (Marshall, 1959, P:
36()). Premarital sexual experimentation is ruled out by
Marshall on the grounds that most people marry very
young. (Apparently she is unaware, for example, that very
• This is difficult to comprehend by the figures Marshall gives. In the
sample of 353 persons of fourteen bands, 136 were Unmarried ado-
lescents or younger children. Of the remaining 217 the greater por-
tion, 125, was women, ninety-seven. of these being married at the
time of study (1952-3); the remainder comprised two young widows
and two young divorcees, and twenty-four old widows. Of ninety-
two adult men, eighty-eight were married (nine had two wives each,
accounting for the ninety-seven married .women), three were wid-
owers and there was one eccentric old bachelor. Though the future
seems dark for males wanting their own wives because among young-
sters there are seventy-eight boys and only fifty-eight girls, the reverse
seems true for the current crop of adults who know a surplus of
females.
·.·.' ·:·:1.:,
.. ..;.,

78 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
small Eskimo children play the "copulation game"; at any
rate her view is consistent with her picture of Bushmen
sexual repression.) Adultery is also said to be rare, hemmed
in by incest taboos or their extensions, or by the lack of
privacy. There is, however, one institution that is very much
like the Eskimo-jkamheri, temporary wife exchange ar-
ranged by men with consent of the women.
It would seem from the evidence, of which I have given
a small but representative sample, that the Eskimos are
far less constrained about sexual matters than the Bushmen.
If sexual access .were a factor in establishing conflict, con-
:I1icts over women should be more frequent in Bushman
society than in Eskimo. Hard statistical data are, of course,
absent, but what we have show the reverse. I think, but
cannot prove, that the vital element is not sexual access per
se, although it certainly plays a role in any particular trans-
action. A more decisive factor seems to be the role of the
women in the division of labor. Again I take recourse to a
kind of social Liebig's Law according to which the minimal
adaptive unit requires the combined labor of a man and
woman. It is more than this: Against the infrequent situ-
ations of dire sexual need there is the constant requirement
of marriage to play a full adult role in the society. While
the latter probably derives from the former and in simple
societies continues to rest directly .upon it, the effective
cause of conflict is the threat that the female's normal roles
ill the division of labor will be upset by attentions -paid to
her lover or lovers. This is exacerbated by the fact that
adultery falls outside the established patterns of reciprocity.
We have already seen that husbands are perfectly willing
to offer.their wives to other men,'provided that they receive
something inreturn and provided that they have an impor-
tant role in making the transaction.
Sources of conflict in primitive society may be found
in a few other institutional areas, but none are of very great
significance. Apart from things directly concerned with sub-
sistence which, as we have seen, do not usually spark con-

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
79
tests leading to conflict, there are things which are not
directly needed in .ordinary life and may therefore be called
luxuries. Those produced locally are no problem so long as
the elements from which they are made are not of restricted
access, which is indeed the usual case. There are differences
of skill in making some things, but here the normal patterns
of obtaining prestige through giving come into play to es-
tablish a high degree of circulation for such things. Up to
a point trade goods fall under the same kind of treatment,
Where they are likely to diverge from this treatment is
where massive dependence on a more complex culture is
involved. Frequently this dependence occurs when money
and subsistence goods from the outside subvert the old
economy and the society begins, often without much con-
sciousness of the change among its members, to play by
new rules.
Another potential source of conflict reminds us of domi-
nance hierarchies in other animals. Do conflicts break out
in simple societies as a manifestation of a competitive drive
for power? The evidence is largely negative and confirms
in a gross way the theoretical stipulation contained in our
definition of egalitarian society. Rather than being struc-
tured hierarchically, such societies have as many people of
paramount prestige as can display the qualities necessary.
There is, however, one source of conflict in the way this
kind of situation usually develops. While men in these so-
cieties do not seem to display any drive for universal domi-
nance within their groups, they do display a considerable
drive to achieve parity, or at least to establish a status that
announces "don't fool with me." Among other things, this
attitude helps make understandable the violence that can
develop over such adulterous situations as those discussed
above. As for the general structure of interpersonal rela-
tions with regard to power, we take this up further in this
chapter when we discuss leadership.

80
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
Abnormal Psychic States
What we have said so far fits generally under the rubric
of frustration and aggression, about which there is a fairly
large and growing literature in various fields (ct. Scott,
1958, pp. 135-41). We are aware of John Paul Scott's warn-
ing that "frustration leads to aggression only in a situation
where the individual has a habit of being aggressive"
(Scott, 1958, P: 35) and recognize the special meaning of
that remark for the influence of culture on expressions of
hostility. Avoiding the interesting and important work that
seeks to understand aggression' by reducing it to chemical,
physiological, or psychological constituents, I have tried
here only to show that in simple egalitarian societies the
I
structural sources of frustration-induced aggression are rela-
tively-few. But to say that there are few is to admit that
there are some; also, some sources of frustration lie outside
the sociocultural order, or their etiology is uncertain with
present knowledge. Here must be included some of the
forms of behavioral deviation that outside observers call
"mental illness" and all those that threaten the ordinary
continuance of social order.
There are a number of words, like "latah," "amok," and
"windigo,' taken from diverse aboriginal languages to ex-
press a variety of abnormal psychological states, which, if
not properly handled, are potentially disruptive of normal
social patterns. Though not universal, they occur in cultures
of varying degrees of complexity, including some Simple
egalitarian societies. The Montagnais-Naskapi of whom we
spoke earlier, for example, .are among cultures displaying
what is known as "windigo psychosis." "The outstanding
symptom of the aberration . . . is the intense, compulsive
desire to eat human flesh" (Teicher, 1960, P: 5). At times
the windigo (that is, the person with windigo) succeeds in
killing and eating others, often members of his own most
intimate kin group; at other times the windigo is killed or
"cured" before he can achieve his goal.

•
•
• ~
"
0
. Simple Eg~lita;ianso~ieties
'/8i
Windigo terrifies people, and they"are much given to
talk about real or imagined instances of the unsettling be-
havior. In addition to verified and possible but unverified
Cases the. theme is built deeply into mythology, and the
boundary is lost between persons who have gone windigo
and evil spirits
themselves.
Morton Teicher, who
has
searched both published and unpublished literature and
field materials, summarizes the results. For a period of
about 300 years, for a population which even today totals
about 5°,000, the total number of recorded cases of actual
windigo is seventy (Teicher, 1960, p. 107). Teicher admits '
that recording depended on the event reaching the ear of
a literate person, probably a European trader or missionary,
but concludes that "windigo psychosis is a relatively rare
phenomenon." There seems to have been a concentration of
cases during the period of most intense European contact,
when aboriginal society was undoubtably undergoing its
greatest stress.
One of the more fascinating aspects of windigo is the
apparent frequency With which the windigo himself coun- .
sels and wges that he be killed to prevent or stop his
activity.
Incidentally, a surprisingly high
proportion of
windigos have been women, their ratio to male windigos
being about 3:4 in the sixty-nine cases in which sex is spe-
cified (Teicher, 1960, P: 108). Many of Teicher's cases are
so sketchy as to be of little value, but one of his generaliza-
tions fits very well the evidence he presents: The usual
means of disposing of windigos is to kill them, and those
who do not request death are dispatched, not as a penalty
for what they have done, but to prevent them from doing
it again. The second most common way of dealing with
windigos would seem to confirm this emphasis on protec-
tion of others as it consists of making certain that they go
far away where, if they do revert to cannibalism, believed
by the Indians to be inevitable, it will be among strangers.
Windigo is of special interest because the aggressive
forces it represents are usually turned inward within the
"\
"'
0 ; ....:

82 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
band, camp, or even the family. Most of the simple egali-
tarian societies also know sorcery in various forms, but for
the most part the action of evil magicians is turned out-
ward. This seems particularly true of cultures in which al-
.most all deaths are attributed to the activity of a sorcerer.
We have a number of accounts of different Australian ab-
original societies ill which this is true (cf. Berndt & Berndt,
1951, pp. 76-8 for sketch and bibliography; Meggitt, 1962a,
pp. 324 et passim) and return to the matter when we con-
sider political relations between groups, especially "war-
fare."
The special character of windigo, which is very much
like amok in more complex societies, is also manifest in the
fact that violence frequently receives direct, unambiguous
expression. There are many forms of what is usually identi-
fied as psychotic behavior in simple egalitarian societies, but
these display inversions of hostility or keep intragroup vio-
lence to a minimum. This is the way, for example, that
'. David Aberle treats "Arctic hysteria" (Aberle, 1952,. pp. '
291-7), and the cases he cites show this strange condition as
a kind of withdrawal, rather than as a violent onslaught. The
fact is that in most cases the victim is either in the unhappy .
situation of making a fool of himself, or actually runs off.
The Australian bengwar, "silly persons," although capable
of "using physical violence without 'reason'" (Berndt &
Berndt, 1951, p. 79) usually are protected to some extent
by those about them, but we are told that they tend to die
young with the implication that they cannot fend for them-
selves. The descriptions of the bengwars are reminiscent of
Ralph Linton's description of Comanche "contraries," who ·
usually meet the same fate
although by other means
(Kardiner, 1945, pp. 62-3)·
LEADERSHIP
No ethnographically known human society has com-
pletely lacked leadership, the setting of a course of action
followed by others. Leadership in simple egalitarian socie-

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 83
ties can be described in terms of a small number of very
general patterns: First, it rests upon authority and lacks
connotations of power except as shall be noted below. Sec-
ond, it tends to be displayed in transient fashion, moving/
from one competent person to another. Third, the shifts in ' }
the locus of leadership are less associated with persons than/
with situations. Fourth, the limited presence of power is\
associated with exceptionally small groups like families and}
vanishes as the scope of the group .widens. Fifth, authoritv-,
has a much wider range than power but also declin:s ?
sharply with expansion of the scope of the group con-
sidered. Finally, variations in the effectiveness of the pre-
ceding five principles are related to variations in ecology
and demography. Denser populations associated with morfr",t
productive subsistence regimes have more extensive leader-
:J:t
ship areas and, to a lesser extent, more power underlying
leadership.
It is difficult, in ethnographies of simple egalitarian so-
cieties, to find cases in which one individual tells one or
more others, "Do this!" or some command equivalent. The
literature is replete with examples of individuals saying the
equivalent of "If this is done, it will be good," possibly or
possibly not followed by somebody else doing it. More usu-
ally the person who initiates the idea also performs the
activity. Since the leader is unable to compel any of the
others to carry out his wish, we speak of his role in terms
of authority rather than power (see P: 12).
Though others have probably come upon the idea
themselves, the notion that the state is the political order
of the family unit writ large is usually attributed to Aris-
totle as conveyed in his Politics (1:2). A series of distin-
guished scholars have followed in this train, Sir Henry
Maine and Woodrow Wilson among them (ct. Sait, 1938,
p. 106 ff.). Despite this eminent group of spokesmen, the
thesis is based upon a culture-bound view of the family,
especially in those versions which assume some form of
patria potestas, the theoretically uncurbed power of the

"
_ .'
84 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
father. It has long been clear that in many societies the
kinship status of father is devoid of any of therole content
usually associated with pater; to the extent that some por-
tions of this role are carried out they may be assigned to
mother's brother or some other person. More Significantly,
however, there is no abstract structural necessity for the
family to be structured hierarchically with a fixed locus of
power.
As already indicated, there is a range of conditions
even within the restricted arc of empirically noted situations
among Simple egalitarian societies: Perhaps the limiting
case in the direction of an absence of power is that of the
Eskimo. R. Spencer,(1.959, P: 249) says that "the house or
tent owner generally made family decisions." But he im-
mediately qualifies this, indicating that the decisions were
invariably informal and nonbinding on other members of
the household. Others might cause the decision to be re-
versed or altered or they might Simply ignore it and do
what they choose as individuals. In an ultimate case in
which a wife kept running away. the husband might ham-
string her, but this is one of those reported actions in which
no examples were observed and there is only the statement
of informants wbo themselves know no actual cases but
have beard that in the old days that was the way it was
done. Obviously, in such instances it is exceptionally diffi-
cult to pinpoint exactly what the old situation was, since the
present account is embedded in idealization.and mythology.
I.must digress briefly, as the point is of utmost impor-
tance to our interpretation of ethnographic data extracted
from accounts obtained by our contemporaries. Few will
deny ' that informant accounts are a necessary source of
etlmographic data, that they are extremely valuable in dis-
covering covert as well as overt ideals. They can also throw
what may be the only light on what went on in the scien-
tifically unobserved past. It is absolutely essential, however,
that the etlmographer make crystal clear what he observed
and what be was told so that the different kinds of evidence

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 85
can be properly evaluated. Unfortunately, the effects of this
requirement upon the writing style are completely negative;
perhaps that is why so few ethnographers are scrupulous in
adhering to this stricture.
A good example may be taken from the work of a
highly respected professional whose reputation can easily
withstand such criticism. W. Lloyd Warner's work on the
Murngin includes some information of use to the present
analysis, including fulsome detail about sorcery, warfare,
and other politically relevant activities . Unfortunately, his
only remarks that throw any light on the conduct of the
fieldwork are casual asides made in pursuit of some other
.points; even these are uninstructive: for example, "I was
in very intimate contact with the Murngin natives." Most of
the data presented seem to be based upon informant state-
ments, but if Warner says anything about the language in
which they were taken I missed it. Apart from what I pre-
sumewere problems of, translation, there is this overriding
question of social fact and social fiction. Warner talks about
some six kinds of warfare practiced by the Mumgin and
says that some are associated with fairly heavy casualties,
including many dead. Perhaps it is so, but no ·authentica-
tion is given. In the one instance where Warner did witness
a conflict the result was interesting. It was an example of
what Warner calls intracamp hostilities, although one of
the parties to the dyadic contest came to the camp of the
other from elsewhere (Warner, 1958, pp. 166-7). We are
told that, in such nirimaoi yaZoo encounters, talk is more
prevalent than violent physical action and damages are
more frequent among those who would restrain the parties
than among the "fighters" themselves. In the case observed,
no one restrained the participants, who consequently ex-
changed no blows. It is precisely the point of my repeating
this incident to note that Warner assumes that what he
saw is unusual, deviant, not the real way to handle such a
situation. I should say, rather, that it is the usual, and I
venture that, if he had returned some time later to take the

86 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
story of that encounter from one of the participants, he
would have found it much more violent than his notes show
, and it would have continued to grow more violent in the
retelling until interest was lost.
While we are at it we may as well note that few things
are more conducive to unsupported conclusions than the
perception of political organization in simple societies by
observers from more complex cultures. Burt Aginsky (1949,
ppo 28-30) gives a fine example in the perception of Porno
political organization by Sir Francis Drake.
Three days after June 26 [1579], the News [of the com-
ing of the Europeans] having spread itself farther into
the Country, another great Number of People were
assembled, and among them their KING himself, a
Man of comely Presence and Stature, attended with a
Guard of an hundred tall stout Men, having sent two
Ambassadors before, to tell the General their Hioh, or
King, was coming
0
•
0 A while after, their King with
all his Train appeared in as much pomp as he could
•
0
0 In the Front before him marched a tall Man of
good
Countenance, carrying the Sceptre, or Mace .
Royal ... upon which hung two Crowns
0
0
0 Next
the Sceptre bearer came the King himself, with his
Guard about him .
0
0 (Aginsky, 1949, p. 28)
0
I am fond of an' instance drawn from the correspondence
of Captain Archibald Blair, who . explored the Andaman
Islands about 200 years ago. While regarding the people of
those islands as "probably in the rudest state of any Rational
animals which are to be found," he noted that the "only
Appearance of civilization was their being formed into
tribes and some attention which they paid to their Chiefs
which were generally painted red" (Blair, 1789, pp . 112-3).
For the uninitiated it should be added that subsequent
ethnographic study of Porno and Andaman has revealed
no trace of formal chieftainship, much less monarchy.
Returning to the phenomenon of leadership per se, we
pick up the Eskimos once again as the leading illustration

-,
'.
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 87
of a society with minimal regular leadership. Steenhoven
and Asen Balikci are the latest in a remarkably consistent
group of observers and commentators on Eskimo society.
Steenhoven says that, in the large European-influenced
summer camp at Eskimo Point, there was absolutely no
trace of leadership in the conduct of hunting or movements
away from camp. Inland, away from alien influence, a par-
tial and intermittent leadership was found with regard to
hunting. Kannajok, an informant, said to Steenhoven:
In course of time it becomes clear who is having much
success in finding the right spots. He will be followed
by the others, but only in respect of finding the best
hunting grounds. If he loses his luck and another has
more success, we follow that other hunter (Steenhoven,
1962, p. 50, emphasis in original).
Earlier, among the Caribou Eskimos, Steenhoven observed
the institution of ihumakortuiok, people of wisdom of non-
shamanistic kind whose advice is sought but not binding
(Steenhoven, 1956, P: 30; cited in his 1962, p. 67, n.1$.). We
can only agree with his remark that, "Though 'chief is a
rather loose term, it certainly does not denote an individual
whose advice is taken voluntarily" (Steenhoven, 1962, P: 66,
n.8).
"
Moving to the !Kung Bushman, we find a slightly more
regular institution of leadership. Isaac Schapera sums up the
situation: "The Bushman .. . chief ... has
no
judicial
functions or organized penal powers; his main duties are
to direct the migrations and subsistence activities of his
people and to perform certain ceremonies for their wel-
fare" (Schapera, 1956, P: 41; the same remark is cited
and glossed by M. Gluckman, 1965, PP. 86-7)·
More information comes from Marshall who distin-
guishes between the functions of headman and leader in
Bushman bands, although noting that the functions might
reside in a single individual. Inasmuch as I have laid great
stress on defining egalitarian society in terms of an urispeci-

88 / '
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
fled and varying number of valued.statuses, Marshall's ap-
plication of a concept of "headmanship" to the (Kung seems
a serious challenge. The word is necessarily freighted with
connotations of hierarchy and paramountcy. I think it is the
wrong word .
"The authority of a band's headman is limited almost
entirely to control of the veldkos and water" (Marshall,
1960, p. 351). She says that the headman "owns" the veldkos
and water (Marshall, 1960, P: 346) . It is a curious kind of
ownership, for those who use these resources "do not feel
that they receive a gift from the bounty of the headman."
This is not strange, because the headman "does not have
the right to withhold them from rightful members" (Mar-
shall, 1960, P: 346). It seems clear that ,"rightful members"
comprise all persons in proximity to the resources."
The headman has no authority; Marshall rules out
supervision of tasks and adjudication (Marshall, 1960, p.
352). He has two or three prerogatives: to take the head
of the line when the band moves, to choose the campsite,
and to select his own lean-to and hearth site first. Very
interesting is the indication that the headman is expected
to be particularly generous, a statement that seems ideal-
iZing and exaggerating because it is difficult to imagine
more sharing than has already been described. However,
the position seems to have no special leadership weight,
since we are told that most moves made by the band "follow
long established customs and usually cause little if any
controversy." If there is any discussion, "the actual plan
adopted is more likely to be a consensus than the decision
s "The headman's permission should .be asked by travellers or visitors
before taking water, 'because he knows how much he has and knows
what can be done: someone said. But one of the listeners laughed
at this and said, 'H you are very thirsty, you have no time to ask
,
permission' "
(Marshall,
1960, p. 337). We are not surprised
to
discover in the same context that water is taken without permission,
which is said to show. that people no longer behave properly as they
did in the past. Unquestionably many Bushmen believe this, but that
does not establish its verity.
.. "

;
t.
..
T:".
. ;
-,
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 89
of the headman alone" (Marshall, ig60, p. 351, also cites
Brownlee, 1943, P: 125, for parallel observation) .
Another curious thing about the position is that it is
not particularly desired. Since it descends by essentially
primogenitural inheritance, the desire would be fruitless for
all but the next in line. To abridge an already overlong
discussion, there are at least two specific indications of
what this office truly represents. One clue is the absence
of any necessary relationship between headmanship sand
leadership. We are particularly interested in observed ex-
amples of the position being filled by a juvenile who went
several years before he managed to kill a buck, pass through
the "ceremony of the First Killing," and get married. So
much for being more generous than others! It should also
be said that.the person or persons other than the headman
manifesting leadership did not do so in the form of a
regency, but Simply as themselves. The position of leader
is also devoid of power, honors, or rewards (Marshall, 1960,
P·352)·
The other clue is the already mentioned emphasis on
genealogical inheritance of the position of headman. It
seems somewhat inappropriate in this social milieu. It may
be that light is thrown on this !Kung situation. by what
Warner has to say about a facet of Murngin culture in
North Eastern Australia. I refer to concepts of the inalien-
able association of territories with social groups, so that
even long after the extinction of a particular group, its
former territory will be thought of as still pertaining to that
group (Warner, 1958, pp. 18-g). I suspect that it is a kind of
charter, this headmanship.:that it represents the corporate
access of the entire group to an entire area. Marshall comes
close to stating just this (Marshall, 1960, P: 344) but veers
off into what her own evidence seems to undermine-con-
cepts of ownership and control.

"; ".-- "
OJ .,.
./
90 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
LAW?
Does law exist on the social level so far described?
Obviously the reply to this query hinges on the definition
of law. E. Adamson Hoebel thinks that the term "law" can
be extended to the Eskimos because in his usage the de-
cisive criteria are two: some kind of court, no matter how
descriptively remote from our own formal law courts, and
the "really sine qua non of law in any society . . . the
legitimate use of physical coercion" (Hoebel, 1958, p. 470).
He then rests his judgment on cases such as describe the
-reaction of a community to recidivist homicide, which he
asserts is the community imposition of a privileged sentence
of death. My reading of the same data leads me to an oppo-
site conclusion. There is no legitimacy here, for those that
carry out the killing of an offender cannot know that they
themselves will not suffer the same fate for their act unless
they liquidate all of the offender's relatives who might try
to avenge him. It does not seem useful to me to identify
such action as law though it does clearly pertain to social
control.
Leopold Pospisil joins Hoebel in recognizing the im-
portance of the "court" situation but, where Hoebel sub-
ordinates that principle to legitimate coercion, Pospisil finds
"the casuistic approach" the best touchstone of law. This is
a logical product of his view that a crucial aspect of the
"process of law" is that it must have the form of a decision.
(This statement represents my fusion of his ideas as he sets
them forth in Pospisil, 1958, p. 258, and in an unpublished
paper, 1965.) Apart from the question of the form of a
legal decision, he offers four attributes of law: "authority,
true obligatio, intention of universal application, and sanc-
tion" (Pospisil, 1958, p. 258) . Lthink this is an outstanding
characterization of law but it seems to me that Pospisil does
not apply it consistently, being inclined to value the crite-
rion of "having the form of a decision" above the others.

},.
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 91
If we apply Pospisil's formula to the Eskimos, it is my
opinion that we have only the "form of a decision" and
none of the other criteria. There is no authority for it is not
recognized by the malefactor or those who would avenge
him. For that matter, the recognition that he might be
avenged indicates that even those who carry out the action
have no faith in its legitimacy. To talk of obligatio under
such circumstances is ridiculous: Nothing that happens is
binding upon any of the parties except as they are members
of a society carrying out the patterns of their culture. This
statement also would seem sufficient to take care of any
intention of universal application. All Eskimo cases are
notable for the fact that they seem to exist by themselves;
the only precedents that may be formed are those advanced
by outside observers.
As for sanction, the last criterion offered by Pospisil, it
obviously exists to the extent that at some point violence is
directed against an offender. But, while law without sanc-
tion is chimerical, sanction itself cannot define law. In this
case we move full circle, back to the criticism of Hoebel,
. noting again that there is nothing in the case record of
aboriginal Eskimo situations that establishes anything like
an effective concept of legitimate employment of sanctions.
It seems unnecessary to repeat what I have said about
the Eskimo for the African Bushman. It appears, however,
that my argument regarding the absence of law in Simple
egalitarian societies is most likely to be challenged from a
curious direction-the Australian aborigine. This arises, at
least in part, from the the fact that many distinguished
writers have applied the term "law" to customary actions or
idealized versions of situations described by informants.
Hoebel, for example, speaks of the law of Australian abo-
rigines (Hoebel, 1954, pp. 301-9 ), although he concludes
that on "the particular level of social development" found
among Australians, Andamanese, and "for the most part
among the Shoshones" law is weak because "the responsi-
bility for adhering to established procedure still rests for

":r("1?1
.:i
.. ~j
i';;,
. " : , -.
~ , .
....-..
92
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
the most part with the two contending parties" (Hoebel,
1954, p. 310 ).
Actually, it is not so much that commentators and
analysts like Hoebel apply the word "law," it is that the '
primary documents produced by ethnographers in the area
utilize the word. Warner, to give one instance, speaks in
various contexts of "law" or "customary law" or "tribal law,"
all apparently meaning the same thing and that thing being
rather vague
(Warner, 1958, p. 605, index item, "law,
tribal").
.
A more recent example is afforded by an excellent
ethnography of the Walbiri of North Central Australia. Its
author, Mervyn Meggitt, identifies the Walbiri word djuga-
ruru with the English word "law," noting that it may also
be translated as "the way." If I understand it correctly, the
word has a sense closely parallel to the concept expressed
in the phrase "the Hopi way" or the Chinese concept of
tao. The parallels, if correct, are very instructive. To my
knowledge no one has confused either the Hopi way or tao
with law, recognizing both of these as important parts of the
idealized-ideological self-image of the culture in question.
Violations of such standards are more likely to be regarded
as normal than would be adherence.
Meggitt goes on to find the equivalent of the tradi-
tional distinction between law and custom in Walbiri (Meg-
gitt, 1962a,'P: 252) on the basis of the presence or absence
of physical sanctions. Meggitt's argument distinguishes be-
tween the illicit use of ceremonially acquired meat, which
is met with ridicule or humor, and the failure to share a kill,
which is said to be reprobated by physical attack. No cases
are given as far as I could discover, and I must note that
the job was made difficult by an index'which managed four
references to penis holding and not one to "sharing," "reci-
procity," or even "economic activities."
Meggitt leads directly to theoretical conflict by admit-
ting the "absence of individuals or groups in Walbiri so-
ciety with permanent and clearly defined legislative and

I -
.,
;..
:- ;
'21
..;.J
_ :i
<I
.' . J-.
·~.. ' '.; ,
~: '
Simple Egaiitarian _Societies
/ 93
judicial functions" (Meggitt, 196za, P: 251; 1962b) and then,
a few pages later, discussing the legal use of personages
- who decide whether a breach has occurred, what the punish-
ment should be, and who is to administer the punishment
and prevent retaliation by the relatives of the person disci-
plined. If the latter statements were validated I, for one,
-would have to accept the-existence of law in aboriginal
Australian society, at least in Walbiri. But what is offered
falls far short of this desideratum. Supernatural sanctions
and mythology are what we are actually given (Meggitt,
196za, P: zoo ff.). Unfortunately this is precisely what we
have had up to now.
As an instance I would like to cite the famous emphasis
upon kinship that is attributed to the Australians. A key
aspect of this concern is the assertion of abhorrence for
incest. A. P. Elkin (1g64, P.l44) tells us that, "a 'couple
caught committing an act of serious incest would be speared
on sight." Hoebel says that "Incest . . . results in the spear-
ing to death of both offenders after judgement by the
elders" (Hoebel, 1954, P: 303). Meggitt collected no cases
of incest, but Ronald and Catherine Berndt discovered one
actual case, the parties to which lived iri a community they
studied. A man took his own daughter (not a classificatory
daughter) as his second wife, the girl's mother remaining
as first wife. The daughter had a child by her father. Of
this situation the Berndts tell us Simply that, "There ap-
pears to have been no fight or severe quarrel resulting from
this union; there was some-talk at the time, but it soon died
down" (Berndt & Berndt, 1951, p. 59).
I should like to emphasize that I -do not believe that
isolated cases of lack of enforcement obviate law; if that
were the case law would not exist in any 'society yet known,
including our own. 0i:J. the other hand, I do wish to ques-
tion the assertion of law when the record of observed cases
does not accord at all with idealized normative statements
about. hypothetical cases or with legendary or mythical case
accounts. I think it is a grave error in such instances. to
. -
-
I "
- '-
1. ,'

94 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
assume the validity of the informant's story and rationalize
the discrepancy with observed behavior on the grounds of
dislocation produced by European contact. The latter, of
course, is usually taken to have upset the old social struc-
ture. It is at least equally possible that European contact,
usually associated with imposed legal standards and equally
imposed ethical standards, creates a demand for a new
mythology that bridges the gap between the acculturating
native society and its new master.
The question is not solved but remains moot. It is made
especially difficult by unavoidable semantic disputation. Be-
yond this difficulty lies a diminishing supply of pristine
cases, perhaps already shrunken to zero. It seems to me,
however, that when an' assertion of the existence of law in a
simple egalitarian society is encountered, one may expect
that the burden of proof will lie with the author of the
assertion.
EXTERNAL RELATIONS
IN BAND EGALITARIAN SOCIETY
Maintaining the internal .character of the group is only
one aspect of the political life of any society; there is also
the problem of holding itself as a unit in a world of other
.integral units of equal or larger scale. The topic is a large
one; the present treatment will be relatively brief, com-
pressed, and highly selective. Only a few topics will be dis-
cussed: the bounding of the group's territory and member-
ship, some of the main means of conducting peaceful inter-
. group activities, and a consideration of the extent and char-
acter of hostile interactions between units.
Territoriality
Elsewhere in this chapter (pp. 71-72) we reviewed
some aspects of the relationship between individuals or
small units and basic productive resour~es, especially land.
Little remains to be added, although an extensive catalogue

r'~ ·
(
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 95
of details might be supplied. Such simple egalitarian socie-
ties as most Eskimo groups are broadly permissive with re-
gard to the territories they inhabit. While there may be a
strong attachment to certain areas, which they know best,
there is no concept of trespass. We have already discussed
th e status of resource ownership among the !Kung Bush-
men, noting that nominal rights to water and veldkos are
said to be vested in a headman who cannot, in effect, deny
permission for their use.
With regard to Australian aborigines, Meggitt's infor-
mation on the relations between local groups and territories
conforms with the work of earlier ethnographers and has
the advantage of being a conscious attempt to clarify as-
pects of aboriginal social and economic organization which
had been more or less neglected by generations of scholars
interested in other kinds of problems. It is interesting, there-
fore, to see that the Australians deal with territoriality much
like the,African Bushmen, except that the Australians seem
to place much more emphasis on ritual connections with
certain sites and, a matter we must shortly investigate, are
represented as much more warlike than most other Simple
egalitarian societies. For all of this, however, Australian
band territories are not closed, however well described their
boundaries.
I cannot refrain from noting here that there seems to
be a sharp qualitative difference between all noncultural
societies and those of human beings with regard to the con-
cept of territorial boundedness. There is nothing short of a
fully symbolic medium of communication, other than an
extrasensory transmission of whole cognitive patterns, that
can convey concepts of boundary such as Meggitt describes:
The older Walbiri men ... have no difficulty in de-
fining the limits of their own countries fairly precisely
, . . . The positions of the boundaries are fixed, vali-
dated and remembered through the agency of religious
myths. These stories not only plot the totemic tracks
and centres but also specify the points at which the
-
-

96 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
custody of the songs, rituals and decorations associated
with them should change hands as the tracks pass from
one country to another. An investigator able to spend
long enough in the field could produce from such data
a detailed map of the borders of the four countries [of
which they believe their territory to be comprised]
(Meggitt, 196za, pp. 48-9).
Having cited this passage at length, I should like to demur
at the use of the term "country," which seems inappropriate
because of its usual political charge. Also, let us note that
the implication of the passage is that the Walbiri do not
ordinarily think in terms of continuously bounded territory,
but are capable for special purposes of saying that this area
stops and that area .begins at a fixed set of points, or the
border is conceived as marked by a line. C. W. M. Hart and
Arnold R. Pilling, for example, explicitly deny that the
Tiwi, Australians who live in the Melville and Bathurst
Islands, twenty-five miles north of the continent, thought of
boundaries as sharp lines. Thus, for the Tiwi
the boundary was not a sharp line but a transitional
zone-perhaps of several miles-where the change from
trees to open savannah became noticeable, with the
band territories thus fusing into one another . . . The
Tiwi, so to speak, thought of the landscape as a sort of '
a spectrum where a man moved gradually out of one
district into another as he passed from one type of hori-
zon to the next (Hart & Pilling, 1960, P: 1Z).
Because the Tiwi have one of the highest population densi-
ties for Australian aborigines it might be expected that their
boundaries would be even more sharply conceived than
those whose sparse numbers inhabit vast desert stretches.
On the other hand, it is true that these islands inhabited by
the Tiwi have sharper landscape contrasts, possibly offering
more 'raw material for boundary marking. In either case, the
model seems to be one of core area with relatively vague
surroundings, not unlike the territoriality displayed by a
number of other primates.
.,\ ,
" '~~
.,
\, .'

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/ 97
Ethnographies differ on the degree to which
lo~al
groups could move into the lands usually associated with
neighboring groups. Spencer and Gillen (1912, p. 232-3;
1904, p. 31) and Warner say that adjacent groups usually
had friendly relations. The latter jn particular has remarked:
"The ownership of the land includes the use of it, but there
would be no thought of excluding the members of other
clans from using it; rather, mutual use would be encouraged
if the two groups were friendly" (Warner, 1958, P' 147).
The Berndts have recently offered a summary statement:
Sometimes, however, it is difficult to know to which
tribe a certain territory belongs; or members of one
tribe may have hunting rights over country held by
another . . . Contrary to popular belief tribal territo- .
ries and boundaries are, or were, relatively flexible.
Also, people are not invariably afraid to move across the
territory of an adjacent tribe. As a rule they have
grounds for fear only if they deliberately or inadvert-
ently interfere with a sacred site (Berndt & Berndt,
1964, P: 34)·
Meggitt, however, carried out a careful survey of rela-
tions between neighboring aboriginal communities and dis-
covered great variation in their quality, ranging from open
friendship to naked hostility. Proximity by itself does not
seem to Meggitt to be a decisive variable in deciding ra-
tional quality; factors ranging from "cultural similarity to
temperamental characteristics" seem to him more reliable
determiners. I can see some connection between cultural
similarity and proximity,. and, although I do not quite under-
stand "temperamental characteristics," I accept variability
in the quality of relations among adjacent peoples, satisfied
that they may vary according to historical circumstances in-
volving what can be defined in this situation as chance
factors. An accident precipitates a hostile reaction between
two groups, and this newly exposed hostility may require
that older breaches with others be at least temporarily
neglected. Thus over time several adjacent cultures may
. ,.
;

98 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLTI"ICAL SOCIETY
change their attitudes toward one another without affecting
physical distance.
Meggitt acknowledges that aborigines' territories are
not always sacrosanct but may be entered and used by
aliens upon occasion. Here we encounter something quite
reminiscent of both Eskimos and African Bushmen: Sharing
seems to increase with scarcity. Says Meggitt, "Outsiders'
may enter the territory uninvited only in an emergency,
such as when they face the threat of starvation in their own
country . . ." (Meggitt, 1962a, P: 44). This hospitality
should be compensated. Presumably, the reciprocation thus
reinforced remains a characteristic of the interaction unless
disturbed by other forces or events.
Membership
To some extent, albeit usually a limited one, all human
societies are open systems with regard to membership. Indi-
viduals"can enter alien groups at almost any point in their
life cycles, but formal procedures must be followed. In
most cases it seems th at the membership thus acquired
results in few, if any, immediate disqualifications, but the
entrant usually has a special and somewhat equivocal status,
particularly with regard to the ceremonial aspects of life.
Apart from this reservation, members acquired other than '
by birth can be Significant to the group. Being at least
theoretically open as membership aggregates enables these
societies to extend their gene pools beyond limits set by
marital restrictions in force. More important, however, is the
increase in potential for cultural development as carriers of
new elements can be incorporated. Obviously, from the
point of ,view of this book, another matter of Significance
is the implicit limitation of hostilities in the acceptance of
members from outside. Finally, to the degree that adopted
members stand outside the regular kinship system they
complicate the political relationships within the group.
Actually, the reasons for shift of permanent group affili-
ation seem variable in aboriginal society. Among the Aus-

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
99
tralians it appears to have been a rare phenomenon, made
especially difficult by the elaborateness of ritual and the
closeness of the association between ceremonial life and
territorial features. But, of almost equal significance for our
argument, the Australians seem to have been frequent visi-
tors to other camps, often drawn by invitations to particular
ceremonials.
One of the important consequences of the mechanisms ~
which permitted people to enter alien bands was the growth
of composite social structures in the decades following the
original post contact breakdown of aboriginal societies.
Thus in many parts of the world came to pass what Stefans-
son has described for the Cape Smyth Eskimo. Visi.ted
twice, thirty years apart, the population was found to total
roughly the same number, about 400. But on the second
visit only four of the inhabitants were found to be survivors
or descendants of the original company (Stefansson, 1919,
P: 104; passage cited with comment in Service, 1962, P: 104).
I agree with Service that heterogeneous camp membership,
at least in larger-scale manifestations, is likely to be a con-
sequence of population loss and dislocation following con- \
tact. The "composite band" sg-ucture that results usuallyl
requires more complex political arrangements since there is
no unified framework of kinship upon which most if not all
relationships can be articulated.
War and Peace
The problems that arise in defining war are much like
those encountered in defining law and social control. There
are some scholars who see war as a universal cultural phe- .
nomenon while others would define it by such criteria as
to have it appear only in fairly complex societies. Harry
Holbert Turney-High, for example, identifies a number of
features as characterizing "true war": tactical operations,
definite command and control, capacity for sustained at-
tack should the first assault fail, clear motivation phrased
as a group end, and adequate supply (Turney-High, 1949,

1.00
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
P: 30) . Contrast this with the definition used by Maurice R.
Davie: the competition between groups struggling for exist-
ence, particularly as manifested in contests by force (Davie,
1929, p. 12). Stripped of social Darwinist implications,
Davie's formulation is much like John R. Swanton's: 'War
. is . . . the most violent relation that may exist between
groups of people" (Swanton, 1943, p. 1). For my own pur-
poses I favor a slightly amended version of a definition
proposed by Quincy Wright: "the . . . condition which
. . . permits two or more hostile groups to carry on a con-
flict by armed force" (Wright, 1942, P: 8, emphasis his).
Even using such a definition the problem of the uni-
versality of war is vexing. Davie asserts at the outset of his
study that, "War, then, is universal" (Davie, 1929, P: 8) .
Hobhouse has opined that warfare was not the perpetual
state of priInitive society but he was equally certain that
it was not one of perfect peace (Hobhouse, 1956, p. HZ).
His review of a number of primary reports indicates that
of a sample of fourteen Simple societies seven had pro-
longed feuds and four others indulged in hit-and-run am-
bushes and attacks. A few had such low incidence of inter-
group violence as to seem institutionally peaceful, but these
are among the most sketchily known societies in ethnog-
raphy, such as the Kubu and aboriginal Yedda.
Primary data relating to warfare in Simple societies can
lead the analyst to despair of generalization. He may read
that, "Warfare is one of the most important social activities
of the Murngin and surrounding tribes. Without it, Murngin
society as it is now constituted could not exist" (Warner,
1958, P: 155). Compare this with Steward's remark, "Ex-
cept for temporary conflict with the white man, warfare
was an unimportant factor in amalgamating the native
population . . . Paiute bands did not fight with one an-
other or with the Shoshoni. Conflicts Over pine-nut areas
were brief and never involved weapons more dangerous
than the sling, which did little damage" (Steward, 1938,
P·55)·
::i
i

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
201.
To some extent the differences in these remarks may
be attributed to genuine cultural differences. I wonder,
though, if time and the character and results of contact
with more complex societies might not have produced some
of the seemingly aberrant features. Thus, as previously indi-
cated, the passage of time and the presence of an impres-
sionable audience in the form of a notetaking ethnographer
may act as an inflationary factor with regard to conflicts in
the past. This is one way of explaining why there is so much
less fighting in the actually observed present than in the
recollected past. Of course, to be fair, it should be noted
that the expansion of "civilization" usually is the extension
of the monopoly on killing by a state, so that reduction of
hostilities may well reflect the presence of armed police.
. Unfortunately, it is not possible to make a Hat generali-
zation at this time characterizing egalitarian band societies
as either peaceful or warlike. However, on the basis of fairly
extensive but not always reliable evidence a few _highly
provisional generalizations may be offered about inter-
group ~ghtingin a simple society.
". ;
•
•<,
Frequency
'
"
Even among peoples on .this level who have been dfJe
.'
"
»:
scribed as warlike, the time applied to actual hostilities, in-
"
eluding preparations and postbattle ceremonials, seems lit-
.
tle. The time devoted to hostilities can only be figured as
.
extensive on this level if the latency periods in the course
of feuds are considered. In that case some societies can be-
treated as if never at peace. This is an ethnocentric ap-
plication of the hig~y formalized treatment accorded war
'in complex societies to Simpler societies in which such
institutions as peace treaties have no place. Conversely,
ceremonies which may have as their point the purification
of warriors after contact with ritual defilement of blood and
death are often taken as celebration of the elosing of hostili-
ties. Finally, there is no time devoted to material prepara-
tions for conflict on this level. None of the societies de-

J.02
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
scribed in the literature build fortifications. None have been
reported to stockpile food and supplies for military pur-
poses. None engage in special training activities for war-
riors. None possess a special military technology but use
ordinary tools and the weapons of the hunt when they
fight men. Discounting latency periods when frictions lie
dormant, and apart from the few hours or few days that
are actually consumed in a clash or raid, it may be said
that a state of peace prevails.
Intensity
~RtJ1as_alrep"dY:J?'''~~!l;_~~d explains the low intensity
. of
combat in
simp"~~?~ieties.
Protracted
attacks
and
SIegeSdo not occur. The typical action is a raid involving
few attackers; the appropriate word for what takes place
seems to be clash-there is a sudden violent set-to and most
of the participants return hoarse from screaming threats
and insults but are otherwise unscathed. Again it is tempt-
ing to compare this behavior with that of the other primates
who, we are told, expend most of their energies in combat
situations carrying out threatening behavior rather than .
actual onslaughts. This is not to say that warfare on the
egalitarian-band level is devoid of casualties. Warner, for
one, estimates that in the general region he studied there
were perhaps 200 deaths from warfare in twenty years,"
Possibly closer to the norm for societies of this level are the
Siriono who were reported to be warlike by Nordenskiold,
On the basis of his own observation of the Siriono, what
the Siriono told him, and study of their history and present
distribution, Allan Holmberg concludes: .
• Warner's "statistics" are pathetic, but he cannot be blamed for the
vagueness of his informants and the absence of independent docu-
mentation, He can be faulted, however, for not making absolutely
clear exactly what he himself observed as opposed to what he was
told. In view of the likelihood that his totals represent, at best, the
multiple inclusion of ·the same event, I think his estimates grossly
exaggerated (ct. Warner, 1958, p. 158 et passim; also Schneider,
1950, pp. 772-7).

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
103
Warfare between bands simply does not exist, and
where the Siriono have come in contact with other
peoples, Indian or white, it is they who have been
raided and rarely they who have done the raiding. In
fact, the entire history of the Siriono, from what little
we know about it, seems to reflect a strategy of retreat
rather than one of attack. Whenever they have come in
contact with other groups, they have been forced to
retire deeper and deeper into the impenetrable jungle
in order to escape defeat, and in retiring from previ-
ously occupied lands they seem to have made few firm
stands in defense of their territory (Holmberg, 1950,
pp.62-3)·
This comes close to what Steward says about the Shoshone:
In aboriginal times most of the Shoshonean people had
no national or tribal warfare. There were no territorial
rights to be defended, no military honors to be gained,
and no means of organizing groups of individuals for
concerted action.. When war parties of neighboring
peoples invaded their country, the Shoshoneans ran
away more often than they fought (Steward, 1955, P:
112).
/
Service has recently argued that "the fact that bands ~
are not warlike in modern times does not mean that they
never were" (Service, 1962, P: 49). He attributes this rela-
tive peaceableness to being "enclaved among more powerful
neighbors." While he admits that warfare must have .been )
on a small scale and sporadic, he argues that its psycholog- )
ical effect would have been a factor in producing virilo-
cality, hence the patrifocal band. Basing his case in part
upon very early accounts of contacts with these simple
societies, Service seems partially to refute his own position
when, some pages later, he remarks that "fighting often
greatly increased when the first contacts with the Euro-
peans produced dislocations and migrations, and greatly
diminished in later times when control had been estab-
lished" (Service, 1962, p. 49).

104 /
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
Admittedly, the problem isa tough one. There are in-
dications, for example, that the Vikings
feared people
whom they knew as "Skraelings," who seem to have been
Eskimos, for these people paddled right out to the Viking
ships and attacked th e Norsemen fiercely. This also reminds
us of the awesome reputation of some of the Andamanese
who are reported to have destroyed many crews of 'wrecked
vessels over the centuries.
'
The problem is worthy of much more serious attention
than it has been given because the nature of warfare
throws much light upon many problems of comparative
sociology. The final revelations may be surprising. Some
simple societies of the ethnographic present may be dis-
covered through combined archaeological and ethnohistor-
ical techniques to have previously been more complex, with
the more complex structures having been among the casu-
alties of massive contact.
Military Organization
It does not take great imagination to picture the re-
action of people living in ghost- or demon-ridden cultures
to a small number of howling savages, stark naked or
dressed in furs from top to toe, brandishing obviously lethal
spears or bows or clubs. Knowing the terrain, as the aliens
could not possibly know it, and accustomed to hitting by
raid, a tiny party of such warriors could strike terror in a
more civilized crew and do quite a bit of damage, too. By
the time the survivors returned to their native shores it
would not be unlikely their attackers had grown in number
and their grasp of military organization and tactics would
become commensurate with the invaders'.
Speculation? Almost entirely, yet without some sort of
explanation like this it is very difficult to understand even
the few military successes that have been recorded for the
impacted simple societies. What we do know about military
organization in such societies indicates a~~p~ete absence

Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
J.05
of command or coordination; every man stands and fights
or rUns away by himself. Radcliffe-Brown's description of
Andamanese warfare could apply, with little or no altera-
tion, to most intergroup combats in simple society. He
tells us that stand-up fights are rare, most encounters being
surprise raids. Since most raids are for revenge, the person
seeking it gets some relatives and friends to come along,
but there is no leadership. If the attackers "met with any
serious resistance or lost one of their own .number they
would .immediately retire" (Radcliffe-Brown, 1948, p. 85).
The absence of any leadership in milit:gy affairs in~
Simple societies is of exce tional si!mifi ance. There have
een many
u
a social analysts who have rested con-
siderable weight in their schemes of the evolution of po-
litical society upon the role of war leaders, for what could
be more logical than to assume a war chief would refuse to
relinquish his powers in peacetime and thus become a per-
manent monarch? Herbert Spencer, to give but one illus-
tration, put it in this way: "how command of a wider kind
follows military command, we cannot readily see in soci-
eties which have no records: we can but infer that along
with increased power of coercion which the successful head-
warrior gains, naturally goes the exercise of a stronger rule
in civil affairs" (H. Spencer, 1893, p. 337).
As yet in the development of my own argument I can-
not apply anything that has been said to the emergence of
the state, because that event lies still far ahead, after ranking
and stratification have come upon the social scene and been
matured. What has been said, however, does apply to the ~
evolution of ranking and stratification from an undifferen-
tiated egalitarian base. Whatever emerges when we at-
tempt to show how this occurred, it seems evident that it
will not be related to any prior evolution of military organi-
zation or command. On the other side, I think I will be
able to show that the evolution of warfare and military
statuses, at least during the earliest breakthroughs to more

,>
:....
.:: . .
, '. '
~o6 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
complex forms of society, followed and was dependent upon
developments in technology, economic organization, and
nonmilitary aspects of social organization.
THE TRANSITION TO BAND
EGALITARIAN SOCIETY
I have deferred my comment on the relation between
band egalitarian society and nonhuman primate society un-
til now when a sufficient picture has been .drawn of the
former. Despite recognizing the validity of a few objections
made to his presentation, I believe that Sahlins' essay (1959,
pp. 186--g9) is still the best overview of an admittedly diffi-
cult subject. My treatment takes off from his, but has the
. advantage of the publications of several extraordinarily pro-
ductive years in primatology since his article was written.
The paramount invention that led to human society was
sharing because it underlay the division of labor that prob-
ably Increased early human productivity above the level
of competitive species in the same ecological niches. Shar-
ing and the division of labor are also eminently suited to
the solution of maintenance problems as the human species
radiated overmuch of the globe, encountering most of the
possible types of environment. At times the question was
obviously of simple survival and to this the sharingpattern
was particularly adaptive. We have reviewed enough evi-
dence to be able to agree with Service that, "The more
primitive the society and the more straitened the circum-
stances, the greater the emphasis on sharing, and the more
scarce or needed the items the greater the sociability en-
gendered" (Service, 1962, pp. 42, 38~).
Of almost equal importance was the concomitant re-
duction in the significance of individual dominance in a
hierarchical arrangement within the community. In part the
structural possibility' for such a hierarchy was undermined
by the demands of sharing; at least such demands altered
the form of dominance by introducing the factor of symbol-

,..... .,- ..
Simple Egalitarian Societies
/
107
ically expressed prestige which could substitute for physical
dominance. Another restraint on simple dominance was af-
forded by the invention of a symbolic environment, espe-
cially by the differentiation of the social world into symbolic
categories: females I can copulate with, females I must not
copulate with, and so on.
These basic inventions, plus a few others of very great
Significance in such areas as tool and fire use and symbolic
communication per se, must have placed our early man
ancestors at an enormous advantage because their success
dominates the history of the past two million years. Though
the bands probably very rarely exceeded fifty individuals
until Upper Pleistocene times, they obviously kept split-
ting, sending off shoots until, as remarked above, most
regions of the earth had some people as inhabitants.
The threat to this very successful level of sociocultural
development was less a hostile, untamed environment, nig-
gardly resources, or fierce predators, than the emergence
of new forms of society. Even at that, many of the simplest
societies persisted, some of them in excellent environments,
until the primitive world model was genuinely shattered by
completely new inventions in technology and innovatio~n
in economic and political organization. This is the subject
of our remaining chapters.

.\
..._-. .

CHAPTER
Rank Societies
4
A rank society is one in-whiG~
of valued status are somehow limited so that not all those
ofSi:iHlclent talent to_9cc.upy such statuses actually achieve
'· them ~ SUCli'_a=society- may--(')r-rnay-not be stratified. That is,
a:-.sncIetY may sharply limit its positions of prestige without
affecting the access of its entire membership to the basic
resources upon which life depends. It is usually unwise to
treat as wealth such sumptuary marks of prestige as bird
plumages, dentalium shells, or other paraphernalia of rank,
because that term conjures up a vision of universal ex-
changeability. In our society, of course, wealth is com-
prised of a variety of holdings all having monetary values.
All items can circulate freely, being exchanged through the
explicit or implicit use of monetary equivalencies. Such is
not usually the case in a rank society. The phrase "spheres
of exchange" has been suggested by Paul Bohannan (196:3,

110
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
pp. 248-53 ) to express a vital character of this kind of sys-
tem, although recognition of the division of an economy into
more or less exclusive sectors, such as subsistence versus
prestige, has been extant for decades. In any case, there is
usually little or no infiltration of objects of value from one
sphere into the other. The marks of prestige cannot be used
. to acquire food or productive resources. The significance of
this point to my argument is probably apparent: Accumula-
tion of signs of prestige does not convey any privileged
claim
to the strategic resources on which a society is
based. Ranking can and does exist in the absence of strati-
fication.
THE GENERAL NATURE OF RANK SOCIETIES
The spectrum of rank societies is much greater than
that in egalitarian societies. While part of this impression
may be illusory, based upon the relatively recent elimina-
ton of many egalitarian societies as a direct or indirect
consequence of the expansion of the modern states, there
can be little doubt that the greater spread of rank society
has a firm demographic base. Before we look into that as-
pect of the problem, a brief overview of environmental
factors is called for.
Environments
Most of the egalitarian societies known to ethnography
have been located in areas remote from the centers of com-
plex cultural development over the past 5,000 or 6,000 years
or more. Particularly as we approach our own time, we find
egalitarian societies
in relatively impoverished habitats,
frequently extreme in climatic conditions and poor in natu-
ral food resources. On the other hand, rank societies have
managed to come down into our .own historical period still
in occupation, if not control, of some of the most desirable
stretches of the earth's surface. Indeed, some of the areas
occupied by such societies have been so bountiful that pop-

Rank Societies
/ III
ulation size and density have seemed to be out of proportion
to the development of their technologies, as in the Pacific
Northwest until the last century. Fortunately, environmental
determinism as a single-cause interpretation of cultural
development has been dead for some time, and I have no
intention of trying to revive it. Environment plays an im- ¥
portant and active role in ecological formulas, however,
although always in combination with a number ofO£Eier
. variables. It is not accurate, therefore, to treat the habitat
Srmply as a permissive factor. This is particularly the case
with reference to what may be called the pristine develop-
ment of ranking.
As my argument unfolds, I will make use of a distinc-
tion between pristine and second§!TY situations, applying this
distinction alroto the development of stratification and the
state. A
ristine situation is.one in which development oc-
curs exclusively on the
asis 0
ill 1 enous
ac ors.
s,?-c
-
a Sl ua on
ere is no external model of more complex de-
sign to help shape the new society. t'Jeitber is there the
lesence ora more complexly organized society to stimulate
'the process of development. Any stimuli that motivate
change in the pristine situation are internal to the develop-
_ illgyoCletY:-One-furtber-observauon must be added to en-
sure clarity: To the extent that no society exists in a super-
organic vacuum, but is necessarily surrounded' by other
sociocultural entities, part of its developmental process will
result from and be influenced by interaction with .those
external entities. However, there are situations in which
none of the external cultures are any more complex than
the one being considered, and these situations can be re-
garded as pristine.
The pristine emergence of ranking is signi£cantly de-
~
Eendent on the availability of food. So far as is known, only
a Fewsocieties in the long course of history have been fortu-
nate enough to occupy areas sufficiently rich in natural
food resources to permit the growth of population beyond
the low levels characteristic of technologically unsophisti-
"'.'
. :
. ~
· .i
", ;
".
'~ -,~
. >,
:

J ,
. '
HZ
/
THE EVOLUtiON OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
-cated .band egalitarian society. The- foremost means of
breaking this barrier, of course, was the complex of inven-
tions that we know as the "neolithic revolution." Before
that "event" took place, however, probably a few societies
did enjoy exceptionally favorable habitats as far as food re-
sources were concerned. Possibly the horse hunters of West-
ern Europe during the Solutrean period of the late Paleo-
lithic were so favored, and it may be that their social
organization was of the rank type. This possibility may
ultimately be .confirmed by archaeological discoveries of.
socially differentiated burials, but ranking societies do not
always dispose of their dead in ways that confirm to later
generations the existence of differential status. There was
one culture area where ranking societies flourished that did
not have neolithic control of their food supplies. The North
Pacific Coast lacked plant and animal domestication but
had a fairly complex ranking system,· although the full
development of that system seems to have awaited contact
and commercial relations with European-derived culture.
Demography
There is a dramatic demographic difference between
,:-anking and balla egalihinan sOcie:ty. This difference is
poorly expressed in ratios of population per square mile,
although the minimal figures for this ratio in ranking society
far exceed those of the bands. What makes these ratios mis-
leading is the fact that the bands, invariably gatherers and
hunters, use most or all of their territories in the food quest,
while ranking societies, usually agricultural, use only a
portion of it during any particular time period. Thus, the
actual social density of population tends to be several times
the figure obtained by dividing the total units of area by
the total population. This is the case even after adjustments
are made for the fact that hunters and gatherers also tend
to cluster at any given time within a portion of their range,
and for the fact that agriculturalists, particularly those with
primitive fanning techniques, are likely to continue to ex-

Rank Societies
/
113
..:\~'J~ '.":. '.
I
"';j::" · · ploit larger ranges for wild foods as well as for new or re-
:. '
vitalized crop land in the cycle of land occupation required
by swiddenage.
Differences in population between egalitarian and rank
, ~
. · society are manifested not only in density figures, but also in
·::: .·:,the size of the total residential community. Though few
" ::.'egalitarian bands manage to surpass fiftyillaividuals living
:t ogether with any degree of stability, few rank communities
. ' would fall below this figure, and most would have popula-
,;) ;, " tioris in the hundreds. Reliable statistical data are absent,
.i'I> but it is likely that the age and sex distributions vary sig-
<~::? :./Dificantly between egalitarian and rank society. It may be
guessed that infant mortality is reduced with growing con-
i .
.trol over the food supply. Simultaneously, warfare appears
;7i.~:~:
:
to be much increas~ which might account for a s~
.:;,;,;':' : ' ,cantly lower proportion of males in the adult population.
;~~l{
:
,,:' Actually,_ the composition of the p~pulatio::_~~ems ~ _be -a ~
t:--'<:.':~ul.t..Iather than.a.causeof. the_dis:tincti.v.e..feablres..,ofianli_~
< ; :.:;.:;~--,.. --,, -
">..'. One other hypothesis about population in rank society
(/:\~ Can be offered. Population growth in this type far exceeds
:::)~'<anything known in band egalitarian society. Fairly constant
~:·;,: ':' .population increase coupled with limitations of subsistence
:':,;-'" .JeChnology 'and immediately exploitable land resources tend
'; ":. t c:i, produce, in
turn,
a pattern of physical expansion,
; "frequently in the development:of satellite communities.
'>Actually, the term "satellite" is less than appropriate. In
" some instances relations are maintained between the original
"and the new settlement and in part of these cases the re-
, lations have elements of subordination, particularly in mat-
ters of ritual. In other instances, connections may be weak
..and almost devoid of content, forgotten with the passing
of the pioneer generation which could actually look to a
_parental group in the old village. Where relations are main-
tained, the ranking system of the offshoot village uSl3JallY
articulates with that of the parent village, a situation rein-
forced by using kinship categories and terminology.
'

THE ,EVOLUTION
OF
POLrTICAL SOCIETY
114 /
Subsistence Economy
Ranki:a.g may develop, as previously indicated, in the
absence of domesticated sources of food, but such situations
~
I ave probably been very rare. Expectably less rare are
situations of secondary ranking, that is, ranking that has
grown not out of indigenous factors but through the impo-
sition of a model of organization developed outside the
society in question. I shall not belabor the point here, but
one of the best described-instances of this pr0gess is given
by Julian Steward (],938, pp. 149-50), describing the rise
of Tiimuko, a Shoshone, to a chiefs position in the middle
of the nineteenth century. 1
A distinctive feature of the ranking society is the em-
ployme~ all indiYid]]als in labor tasks Wical of their
age and sex. Rank does not bring ?:~s.~_ents that take its
J.ossessor out of tli~"~'egurarlabor force, nO";does"tbe mamp-
wation of rank $,1Jffi.ce t,9 excuse the manipulator from regu-
1~_tas~:. .Indeed, if anything, the holder of rank in such
a society is _com"p~.n.§4__ to__~orl< more"?iQ.Uol.!~y..!:J.1an any=-
1 Steward argues that "Basic patterns of organization and chieftain-
ship obviously could not be borrowed unless conditions to support
them were present. If such conditions were present they would auto-
matically develop without the necessity of borrowing" (Steward, 1938,
p. 246 ). There is considerable reason to support an amended version
of the first statement: Borrowed patterns of organization and chief-
tainship will collapse and disappear unless conditions capable of sup-
porting them are also borrowed or developed. On a very similar
theme related to Steward's work but using data from a much more
complex sociocultural system, see Fried (1964, pp. 47~2). But there
is nothing that will prevent abortive attempts, and it may take some
time before the experiment is realized to be abortive. As for the
"automatic development," I agree with regard to long-run phenomena,
but think that the lag in time prior to the autochthonous develop-
ment of the institutions in question gives ample room for diffusion.
Actually, the type case I have in mind is one in which the model of
organization is imposed in toto by an external, ruling power. For
purposes of its own rule, such a power may treat a politically inferior
society as if it were more complexly organized, going so 'far as to
recognize chieftains not in the native system. The Reindeer Tungus
have been treated in this way (Shirokogoroff, 1929, P: 192).

-bQQy else, because he is expected to be more generous in
his distributions.
There is no indication that ranking develops out of any Jf
managerial necessity-.QS:curring in hunting and gathering
society. Such vectors of supervision that develop on that
level? such as might be associated with leaders of rabbit
drives or whale hunts, are dispelled with the end of the
activity, and no halo effect is discerned. The genesis of the
ranking society, in terms of individual psychology, may _
well lie in the demand for affect, so that some individuals
seek reinforcement by giving more and-morefrequently than
they should, thereby creating obligations among those that
have received goods. It is thoroughly consistent with such a
model that the "high-ranking" individual at times might
appear to an observer as not particularly a wealthy person
in the society (ct. Smith, 1940, P: 125; McIlwraith, 1948,
pp·17~o) .
.
In rank society the division of labor is much the same
as in egalitarian society, being determined primarily by age
and sex. No conspicuous specialization of craftsmanship
develops, except as natural divisions of interest occur. These
bestow no particular benefit on their possessor e-1Ccept for a
transitory prestige ic], Leacock, 1955, pp. 31-47). In any
case, .no political power derives from such specialization.
The major subsistence event underlying rank society is
the transition to domesticated food supply, although, as
ID:dicated, It IS posslble that temporary shifts to this more
complex societal level occurred much earlier in windfall
environments. IT such developments have occurred in fact,
there has also been a subsequent local devolution back to
the simpler level of integration. This is not surprising for
there is nothin..g.1mp.Qssible about reversibility in an evolu-
tionary process, and relatively short-run reversals may be
fiilily prooabJ:e.""What most concerns us, however, is not the
abstract dynamics of cultural evolution, but the connections
_between a domestic::.ted food supply and ranking. The
rmmIutrSeems to be centered in the demographic effects
Rank Societies
/
1.15
,.' :
. :..- '
, ,
' -. ';

Redistribution
To the extent that things circulate through an egali.-
tarian society, instead of being consumed on the spot by a
producer, the form of circulation is the reciprocal exchange
Q!.. the more certain and more concentrated food supply:
Communities become larger on the average and much more
permanent. Though they are larger P?.E~I£t~o_~ggregates,
rank villages are still built on the framework of kinship with
the kin network becoming more formalized than in simpler
oana.-egautarian society. One of the major developments
~rs-ilie-emergenc~oTaclearly distinguished descent prinCiple
requiring demonstration of relationship. The basic tech-
mqu:eof accomplishing this is the specific genealogy which,
at least in theory, specifies all consanguineal ties and many
affinal ones, and thus stands distinctly apart from the vague,
mythological "genealogies" that, in equalitarian society, act
as 'the charters for band membership. Incidentally, it should
be remarked in this context that the descent lines and
genealOgies are not necessarily unilineal as was assumed to
be the case some years ago. Various forms of postmarital
residence option can be integrated with demonstrated
genealogy, so that corporate kindreds as well as lineages
become a typical form of grouping at this level. Literature
.on this point has accumulated rapidly in recent years. One
of the most comprehensive statements occurring in the con-
text of an extensive ethnography is to be found in Harold
W. Schemer (1965, p. 47 et passim). Given such forms of
grouping and the device of the genealogy, it is possible to
develop a hierarchical arrangement of kin such that, for
example, proximity or distance to a particular ancestor be-
comes significant (Kirchhoff, 1959, pp. 260-70; Fried, 1957,
pp. 1-29). This factor does not succeed in explaining why
ranking comes about, but it does suggest one means by
which it can be realized. We shall return to the larger prob-
lem at the end of .this chapter; at this juncture there are
still other characteristics of ranking to consider.
I. ·
,, .
i··
116 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
, ....-~
..~...

Rank Societies
/ 117
previously discussed. Reciprocal forms
continue to be
significant in all subsequently developed types of economic
integration, but they may be replaced as the paramount
form.
J.~ .!:ank society the _mmQ.Lpr.9.c~.LoLeconomicinte.-
gration is
r~distriliution , in which there is a characteristic
. flow of goods-into and out from a finite center. Invariably
that center is the pinnacle of the rank hierarchy or, as com-
plexity mounts, the pinnacle of a smaller component net-
work within a larger structure.
A classic example of a redistributive economy is that
of the cultures of the North Pacific Coast:
Among the Indians of the North Pacific Coast the so-
cial units-localized kin groups-were the owners of
wealth, not individuals.... major riches such as the
lands, houses, and important wealth tokens were group
property. Even the objects possessed by the individual
were made available to the group in case of necessity.
Though the highest-ranking member of each group
spoke of himself, or was spoken of by others, as the
"owner" of his group's house or houses, its real estate,
and most if its treasures, he was the administrator
of his - group's possessions, not an individual owner
(Drucker, 1965, P: 50).
'~Y' > It is Significant that the core of redistributiQn--J~
-;;':;:.lies less in the spectacular exchange displ~ such as the
k\ .?,equentIy misrepresented potlatch, than in the basic daily
\i:relationship between a community and its productive capi-
-;tal and the consumable yield of that capital. Of great 00-
. portance is the fact that redistribution has its locus on the
") evel of the villa~..Q~~ ~g...ar:t~?j:j..QD.aI. unit. This
:r~~ecomes clear in an example drawn from Fiji:
The village is and has been an economic entity as well
as a political one. It is a proprietary unit, with titular
ownership of all land and the lagoon offshore vested in
. the paramount [chief]. . . . Yet insofar as a village
traditionally achieved a collective economic existence,
this was organized and directed by the old-time chief.
........

:.;
,"
uS /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
' it :: '';t~
The paramount could summon the community's labor ' ,':):'
on his own behalf, or on behalf of someone else who
)~
requested it, of for general purposes. . . . Besides his
:.~
right to summon labor he accumulated the greater pro-
":I
portion of the first fruits of the yam crop . . . and he
.' '~
benefited from other forms of food presentation, or by
::~-;
~:~~~~~~~~ ~f t~~~:l~:a;~r~~~~~~~a~t~~~
<fii
a significant part of the surplus production of the com-
' };
munity and redistribute it in the general welfare (Sah-
<:
lins, 1962, pp. 293-4).
:",
,,11
':!j
Ai
': );
::..~
-~
>.~
. ~ ~
"".';
Unlike even the strongest economic roles in societies based'
exclusively upon reciprocity, the regularity of the role of
village redistributor conveys prestige and bolsters political
status. This is not altered by the fact that in some societies
the acquisition of the role of paramount redistributor de-
pends in some measure upon personal achievement often
measured in cumulative instances of unbalanced reciprocity.
It is the carrying out of large-scale distributions on the
way to achieving the status of redistributor that accounts
for the often puzzling observation in the past of the im-
poverished chief. Now we know that such Eersons were
~~at they dispensed and not for what they hoarded.
Settlement Patterns
The characteristic mode of settlement is the village.
Population size is quite variable, but the range presented
in the galaxy of ethnographic reports may not be reliable as
a guide to pre-European situations. This is one way of in-
terpreting the existence in contemporary times of very tiny
villages comprising only a single household. Considering
that in the past warfare was both serious and endemic in
these societies, one may question the viability of such tiny
settlements. At the large end of the scale the limits on vil-
lage size are primarily set by the predominant mode of ob-
taining subsistence. Curiously, among the largest villages
reported for this level are those of the North Pacific Coast.
.~

.......
· """
/ ug
Rank Societies
Though they grew. from the exploitation of marine re-
sources, their greatest size was probably reached as the
result of trade with Europeans. Actually, these peoples
show a movement from summer to winter quarters or, more
accurately, a movement from the main winter village to
a less permanent summer habitation site or sites, the num-
ber being an outgrowth of the diversification of natural
food resources.
Warfare lias a major effect on village size and organiza-
~ As noted, it tends to set lower limits on population .
size since a minimum ·force is necessary to forestall raids,
even though size alone does not eliminate the possibility-
of attack. U.,.Eper population limits probably reflect circum-
st.ances of warfareJ_Given existing levels of swidden agri-
cultural productivity, a fair amount of land must be kept
out of operation for every unit cultivated. It might be
thought that a further limitation is the increasing element
of danger as .distance from the center of population is .in-
creased.
Although logically evident, this proposition is
difficult to document.
- In rank society villages tend to exist as largely independ-
ent, autonomous social systems, although most have some
pomt or points at which they are articulated with a larger
and usually cooperative network. For one thing,·most such
villages, even if not ritually exogamous, see a significant
portion of marriages occurring outside the village. The af-
final ties thus established may have considerable signifi-
cance for the ranking system. as a whole. A well-known
instance is offered by the so-called mayu-dama system of
the Chingpaw (Kachin) of northern Burma as described
by E. R. Leaeh-f 1954, P: 78 ff.). Apart from kinship alli-
ances, the hierarchical rank structure of a village tends to be
specific to it although two major exceptions may be men-
tioned. In :one, an over-all ranking system may crosscut ..
the rankings associated with particular villages, so that a
kind of moiety arrangement is superimposed on all inter-
acting villages. The Toda organization described by W.

1.20 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLmCAL SOCIETY
H. R. Rivers (1906)" may be an example. Also of this type
is the organization of the Lolo, although this society is more
accurately classified as stratified (see P: 186; this position
is based on Lin, 1961, pp. 97-106 ). The other exception
is a relatively unformalized version of the first and refers
to the formation of special marriage alliances between
high-ranking families, an institution that is functionally .
equivalent to the development in some societies of special
endogamy to preserve rank priyileges;
this often leads
to marriages among
high-status families
that may be
considered incestuous in other sectors of the society.
Important as the village pattern of settlement is in rank .
society, it is obviously not specific to this form of social
organization. Unfortunately, what I surmise to be the most
Significant aspect of settlement pattern is not ususally given
with clarity and accuracy in the ethnographic accounts. I
refer to the density of village settlement-the number of
villages to be found in delimited and measured districts
and their component populations. Some work has been
done on reconstructing general population densities, and in
Chapter 5 we briefly review the problem.
Kinship
.The articulation of most interpersonal relationships in
rank society is an -aspect of the kinship system. "It would
scarcely be possible to overemphasize the importance of
kinship in the social structure," says Philip Drucker (1951,
p. 274), speaking about the Nootka. "As it is said," Ray-
mond Firth (1957, p. 234) reports for Tikopia, " 'the whole
land is a single body of kinfolk.'" There are exceptions,
such as the Australians with their remarkably widespread
network of kin relations, but in general the significance of
the web of kinship is greater in rank society than in band
egalitarian society and in stratified and certainly in state
society. In band society there may be de facto descent
groups, but these tend to be precipitated out of ecologically

/
1.21.
Rank Societies
£~vored residential rules.
Unlike rank society,
which is
" dominated by the ideology of kinship, band society seems
.to be dominated by the ideology of coresidence. (AI; pre-
yiously mentioned, this type of territoriality is only super-
,'ficially like that which is associated with the nation-state.)
-Stratified society shows growing concern for a class-and-
territory focus. It should be mentioned, if only because mis-
Interpretationshave .been common in this field, that just as,
.:kinship plays an important role in band society, despite
;.: .emphasis on coresidence, so kinship 'continues to play a
','i ' major role in stratified and state society. In rank society,
ii' ,however, the role of kinship seems to occupy the greatest
)G<~ ,relative proportion of the total social field.
g~>:'
:
,
Despite the g~eat importance of kinshi~the principle
.i !/tof
~sociation, there is little uniformity about the precise
/~t:' <iliarader of the kinship system. In brief, examples may be
;"found which are either unilineal or bilateral, matri- or
r, patrilateral, multilateral, or given to one or another kind
:: ~: ' : o£ option. In conformity with this variable situation we find
~/.: ,(ariability of kin terminology. The previously mentioned
k.Nootka, for example, have a variant of .Eskimo terminology,
;;:;';\while that of Tikopia is bifurcate merging with Iroquois
' ::~' CoUsin terms. It is patent that kinship terminology has little
\c pt no diagnostic value as a criterion of egalitarian, rank, or
; ,'~tratified organization.
'; "
There is no particular uniformity in postmarital resi-
r :dence choices, but at least one important generalization
S:may be essayed . Though there are some societies on this
r:,level which maintain fairly rigid postmarital residence rules
':(:(and these are the societies with the firmest unilinealities,
'~:7 as might be expected), most of these societies place ad hoc
)~{ benefits before other considerations in the determination
,,!?~;.of any specific case of residence. This applies not only to
>~i persons of low rank, .who look for easily available, high-
:r/ 'jielding resources
and compatible neighbors, but also
f', !~t(} those of high rank, who can shop about to achieve.op-
"> .timum rank possibilities. In'an cases, of course, the persons

ii
I"
I
I
II'
Il
:\
j
~22
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
in question live with some relatives; the question is which
ones and how to trace the relationship.
The Nootka, to continue with the examples already
introduced, stated a verbal preference for viripatrilocality
but actually moved about so freely that most abstract
possibilities actually occurred ethnographically:
"Chiefs
tended to stay most of the time with the group in which
they owned property . . . , whether this came from the
paternal or maternal line. But even they moved about, and
, might spend a fishing season, a year or even 2 years, with
another group to whom they were related"
(Drucker,
1951, P: 278). As for common folk, they moved even more
frequently, unless they Were seduced into staying more
permanently in a particular house because of special priv-
ileges offered by the chief. This feature of Nootka society
was but a somewhat extreme version of something that is
rather commonplace: the qualification, in the sense of modi-
fication, of the residence rule. Sometimes it is institutional-
ized as a pattern of visiting, thus disturbing the basic
residence procedure very little, as in Tikopia. In Moala,
Fiji, there are significant deviations from normal patri-
local residence. Of the variant modes ambipatrilocality is
the most common. Marshall Sahlins (1962, p. 103) is care-
ful to establish these patterns as aboriginal features of social
organization and not the result of contact derived from
disruption of aboriginal patterns. Indeed, one of the out-
standing examples of the social use of diverse residence
preferences in association with extensive use of the principle
of ranking is to be found in the Trobriands. The most com-
mon type of postmarital residence is viri-avunculocal, and it
is associated with land rights. But higher ranking subclans
have taken advantage of rank and a secondary preference
for viripatrilocality to acquire agricultural lands superior
in quality to those with which they were mythologically
associated (cf. Fathauer, Ig61, P: 244)·
.
~
.
at seems to be general about residential preferences
Iin ranking society can be summarized: First, from the point
>'
' -.";

~'.
Rank Societies
/
123
of view of those of low rank, the process is often dominated
by ad hoc opportunism and a search for advantages; Sec- .
ond, from the point of view of those of high rank, the prob-
lem is to attract and keep a suitable number of lesser fami-
lies in the community. Third, in spite of possibly improving
rank through moving, it is common for a group of closely
related persoI!S, usually males, to constitute the nucleus of
a group; thus, even a nonunilineal society may have a tight
kin core. Consider, for example, the Choiseulese, among
whom "Anyone is said to be always welcome in any descent
group of any sinangge with which he can trace a consan-
guineal connection, and many persons are in fact living
with groups into which they were not born as a conse-
quence of parental residence"
(Schemer, 1965, P: 47).
Despite this: "through patri-virilocal residence the men of
a cognatic descent category come to form the 'core' (kapa-
kapa) of a residential segment" (Schemer, 1965, P: 46).
The character of this core group seems to me to be of
the greatest importance for it not only lies at the heart of
the concept of the rank society but contains the seed of the
next stage of development, stratification. This is the way it
looks in Choiseul, where, despite the general significance
of cognatic ties, the core group that forms may begin to
resemble a patrilineage:
Those who trace their descent from the apical ancestor '
of the descent group solely through males are said to
be popodo valeke, "born of men,". of agnatic status.
These men are said to have primary rights and interests
in the property and affairs of the group; they are
"strong" within it. Primogeniture is said to determine
precedence in the agnatic line and thereby who will be
batu, or man~ger, of the people and their estate (Schef-
fler, 1965, P: 46).
Even when brothers do not live together as a core unit of
a community, they may function as a specially united group;
again the Nootka are illustrative (Drucker, 1951, P: 274).
Emphasis on closer rather than more distant kin is
. :,. ~
. ~ ,
"

not an invention of rank society in one sense, but in another
it is. ' Band egalitarian society, as we have seen, and as
Sahlins (1965, P: 186 ff.) has neatly begun to document,
knows the distinction as is conveyed, for
example,
by
M. J. Meggitt's (1962a, P: 120) description of a Walbiri,
Australian aboriginal man, asked to part with a very scarce
object: «If he is asked, the man usually gives the single
article to an actual or close father or son, but he refuses
distant 'fathers' and 'sons.' '' On this social level, however,
there is a very strong relationship between kinship distance
and physical distance, a relationship which in good part
flows from the previously discussed emphasis on coresi-
dence. The basic formula for the band egalitarian society,
then, is "we are probably close relatives because we live
together." In rank society the formula is, "because we are
close relatives, we probably live together." As we have seen,
this is particularly the .case as the ranking system matures
and tends toward stratification. One visible indicator of the
difference is the presence of specific kinds of unilineal
descent groups. Elman Service has stressed the character of
"clans" as sodalities linking distinct residential groups; for
him the clan is not a local group (Service, 1962, P: 126).
This usage is diametrically opposed to that suggested by
George P. Murdock (1949, p.. 68), stressing "residential
unity" as one of three criteria of clanship. My own prefer-
ence in defining the essential aspects of clanship is for cri-
teria that leave the question of localization for empirical
testing. The most important .criteria are unilineality, cor-
poration, .and the means of establishing membership. The
last is usually accomplished by birth, as far as any indi-
vidual is concerned, but with regard to the membership
of the whole and the connections among these members
the linkage at crucialjunctures is by agreement or what
I have called elsewhere "stipulated descent." By this is
meant that ultimately membership is based on an unestab-
lished, unestablishable descent from a common ancestor.
In the absence of any means of demonstrating genealogi-
124 /
THE EVOLtrrION OF POLmCAL SOClETY

Rank Societies
/
125
:~;'~a.ny exactly how all the different members of the clan are
related it is simply assumed that because they are mem-
bers they must be related. The problem in a clan is then
....: ..<
"'.
to clarify the relative kinship statuses of the members so
!.I.t.•··~~~;~~~~~F~~~~~~~~lt~
= :
'
'elusive unit, tending to include all possible members even
i!i,\:O
t~[
' though that means offering shares in the clan's corporate
~ ..
~: i ': .. resources. In some societies clans
contain members or
~i:6 < groups of members of obviously alien origin now assimilated
~0)<
,>under the ethic of kinship. (Under certain circumstances
~t.~? therefore even birth can be dispensed with as a means of
~~:; . entrance.)
I{:~< "
<,
In contrast to the clan is the lineage, similar in struc-
~{{
.' tural detail except for the means of establishing member-
~~{, s~p. ~ the lineage this requires dem0n:'tration
~f rela-
,,,;,,£' , tionship to all the other members of the lineage. Since all
It..:;:' existing members already know their precise ties, the newly
~\;:.,
'. arrived can easily locate himself vis-a-vis all others. The
~~:r~
fact is that this is done, though' there are alternative means
~£i
by which it is accomplished. The lineage differs from the
~~i;
' -'. elan in tending to be exclusive, refusing entrance to some
r~';;<;. and generally paring membership to the minimum. Lineages
~$.', · :
di:£fer also in offering members partial or restricted access
~\((
to corporate resources. While this exists in potential in all
'c·:.lineages, it does not always appear as a major operating
principle. When fully active, however, it usually signifies
,·the presence of full stratification, as is discussed in the
·
~iJ.ext chapter. Apart from its use in narrowing access to
productive resources, lineage' functions to narrow access to
,, :'status, in particular to the scarce and valued statuses that
•
comprise the basis of rank society.
Before moving more deeply into the implications of
the last remarks, let it be made clear that clans and lineages

126 /
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETYr
can and frequently do coexist in a single society. For ex-
ample, in contemporary Taiwan there are thriving clans
and not quite so vigorous lineages, both serving different
social ends. Some of the clans include numbers of lineages
although the clan is not simply or even in any sense the
expansion of the lineage network. Conversely, that a whole
lineage may constitute a corporate segment of a clan does
not affect its autonomy and separate origin. The fact that
clans and lineages serve different purposes and sometimes
contradictory purposes may be one good reason for their
coexistence, as societies are rarely harmoniously integrated
systems but more usually display some measure of conflict
and disequilibrium. In the case of clans and lineages, the
latter may serve as instruments of ranking and stratifica- ·
tion, tending. to produce a society of potentially hostile
socioeconomic class segments. At the same time the clan
may operate to crosscut these class lines thus discouraging
incipient class conflict.
_
This takes us to the heart of the distinction between
lineages and clans. What matters in the lineage is precisely
what Paul Kirchhoff (1959, pp. 260-70) pointed to when
describing-the structure and Significance of what he calls
the "conical clan." The crucial thing was to establish for
every member of the society his closeness of relationship
with the founding ancestor. Actually, this is not the clearest
way to phrase it, despite the ease with which the point is
understood by people who have grown up in a ranking (and
stratified) culture. It would be better to say that what must
be known is the distance of relationship between anymem-
ber and the highest-ranking person of his generation. This
is frequently -interpreted in the folk ideology as distance
from the founding ancestor. The concept is made possible
by adding a simple principle of seniority to that of descent,- _
so that even in the case of multiple births, siblings can be
sorted out on the basis of different moments of birth and
given I different privileges on this basis. In such a society
the first born of a first born is considered closer to the an-
. ,(

. cestor than the first born of a 'second born, and so on. The
line of descent is not simply the transgenerational tie that ·'
recedes toward the first-known ancestor (for example, the
sunl ), but the string of first born through time. This may
be further delimited by specifying chat only one .of the
sexes can be recognized as an authentic link.
. Kirchhoff recognizes that such concern for descent had
several concomitants. Genealogies, unnecessary in a clan,
become charters of preferred status in a lineage.
The
keeping of genealogy becomes a serious matter, a preoccu-
. pation of what Kirchhoff calls the "aristoi," although at
times the actual work of remembering (later of recording,
or tracing) went to nonaristocratic specialists and scribes.
Marriage, always problematical and usually beset with tra-
ditional taboos and exhortations, becomes even more con-
strained as ranking systems become more sophisticated.
The marriage arrangements of the Australian aborigines are
perhaps more impressive for their systematization of a so-
ciety, but are nothing as confining as the self-imposed limi-
tations developed in a rank society. Often in such a society
the end result is a revolutionary violation of previously
held norms of exogamy as a highly ranked innovator marries '
a woman from a previously tabooed kin group. Kirchhoff
also suggests that emphasis on nearness of relationship
rather than type of descent might lead to bilateralism as a
consequence of the attempt to manufacture suitable family
trees
(Kirchhoff, 1959,' pp. 266-7). If ' such factors have
indeed produced bilateralism, it has been the history of our
own society that offers one of the best examples. In other
traditions the growth of ranking and stratification can be
contained within strongly unilineal systems. It is understood
now, for example, that even the strongest unilineal systems
provide significant roles for what may be called "the other
.side" of the descent picture. This may include transmis-
sions 'of certain kinds of scarce. value, while withholding
others as inalterably associated with the uniline. The latter
situation is exemplified in a number of Indonesian societies,
r,
-: '
-,
.',":
".:" .
.
,~ .
,... -
/
127
Rank Societies

such as the Minanangkabau, which differentiate between
"earnings" and "heirloom property" (Josselin de Jong, 1951,
pp. 50-7; ci. Gough, 1962, pp. 588-g0).
INTERNAL POLITICAL FEATURES
OF RANK SOCIETY
A member of an egalitarian society put down by a set
of curious chances in the midst of a rank society would
probably experience relatively little dislocation. He might
marvel at the opulence of life, the stability of settlement,
and the size of habitations, but in his social life little would
strike him as really strange. The institutions which flowed
from and supported the social ranking system would per-
vade his life but in a gentle and subtle fashion, unlikely
to rouse his anxiety. As we shall see, this is a far cry from
what might be expected to occur when a member of an
egalitarian society is introduced into a stratified society. In
such a case the very basis of livelihood is threatened and
almost every aspect of life is changed with the ahnost
total reversal of the expectations of economic behavior.
.In rank society the changes in economic behavioral ex-
.pectations are relatively mild, but there are some im-
portant shifts in political behavior.
~
.
As in egalitarian society, most of the institutions that
apply to what was earlier defined as the political areas are
embedded in other institutional activities. What this means
is that in rank society, as in egalitarian society, few if any
activities are carried out as explicitly political. Actually,
this may be somewhat misleading, as even in stratified and
state societies political activities are frequently carried out
in the context or guise of other activities. In rank society,
as in egalitarian society, the analyst has difficulties in' dis- '
criminating the political action, whereas in stratified and
state societies there is little question except for certain
borderline phenomena. Accordingly, in the following analy-
sis, as in our discussion of egalitarian society, the political
128 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY

/
129
Rank Societies
::p ivision of Labor
.
:~ "'
:
The age and sex bases for the division of labor noted
";;'/in egalitarian society continue but with differences. Where
;;;/·the universally valued role of the male as a hunter in many
::-li 'egalitarian societies contributes to his ritual and political
"; superiority, there is often an increase in the direct partici-
Cpation of women in decision making, apparently con-elated
i; ~th the importance of the female role in agricultural pro-
Li.:ductivity. There is, of course, no direct relationship be-
}~ tWeen significance in the labor process and political im-
;\ portance: Slavery should establish that fact. Furthermore,
:',the range of participation of women in the political ac-
i) ivities of rank society vary widely with the society. Per-
~ l1aPS the optimum role played by women is that described
':,among the Iroquois, where they had a right similar to recall
>~:h.at could control the way in which certain sachems used
:~~eir positions (Morgan, 1922, P: 84). A contrary example is
~' offered by the Kapauku of New Guinea. Women are con-
:'sidered important economic assets because of their garden-
i)iig and pig raising (Pospisil, 1958, P: 57; 1963, pp. 63-4),
i.;lmt they are supposed to be docile and obedient and leave
;:Xdecisions to men (Pospisil, 1958, p. 57). Yet Kapauku knows
t~imtippe and because the society has no institutionalized ~.
FIoie for assertive females, such a woman enjoys "an un-
) xmtrollable status" (Pospisil, 1958, P: 58) but does not
<seem to have much influence beyond her own henpecked
.household.
.>.
Apart from age and sex, there is little significant di-'
; Visionof labor. For the most part everybody does the same
jasks. There is the barest beginning of professional speciali-
'(zation, as some people can do certain tasks better than
;') he average, and there is a small but visible tendency to
'nature of the activity or institution in question is often
'{: secondary or even more remotely tied to some other func-
:~::: tional goal.
.(~ : .' -

130
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
relieve persons of high rank of some or all participation
in some phases of work.
In Tikopia, for example, degrees of skill are not recog-
nized in basic agricultural production, although degrees
of industriousness are recognized. In deep-sea fishing, how-
ever, a distinction is made between those who are pro-
ficient and all others. Despite this distinction, Firth tells
us that "Skill as such does not entitle a person exclusively
to his individual product, any more than industrious labor"
(Firth, 1965, P: 63). The ultimate device by which this is
achieved is what he calls "forced exchange" (Firth, 1965,pp.
316-8), which we have already seen operating on the
egalitarian level. In Tikopia it is usually accomplished by
coupling a request with an unsolicited gift, but in other
societies the request might be made without such an ac-
companiment. Sahlins describes kerekere as "the prevailing
form of economic transaction among kinsmen as individu-
als." "More goods change hands through kerekere than
through any other form of distribution, excepting familial
pooling" (Sahlins, 1962, P: 203). He vigorously denies that
kerekere is either "borrowing" or "begging"; it is a request
or solicitation for some good or service and "often a re-
quest cannot be directly refused" (Sahlins, 1962, P: 205).
Interestingly enough, there is a form of kerekere in which
the request is prefixed by a gift, called "a more unsociable
form" by Sahlins (1g62, p. 207).
A particularly clear example is recorded by Philip L.
Newman on the basis of his work among the Gururumba
of West New Guinea. He was impressed with the incessant
banter among people of all ages and statuses, banter which -
was largely compounded of pestering demands for all sorts
of things. If I may take a little liberty with his account
(Newman, 1965, P:52), the form of the request may be seen
as equivalent to standard American "Gimme!" and the re-
ply to "Take, dammitl"
Yet in all of this there is a strong current of rank, such

"as not detected in egalitarian societies. This is perhaps most
conspicuously manifested in the growing tendency for ex-
changes of this kind not to be strictly reciprocal, with an
inhibition becoming manifest on the likelihood that the
'person of superior status will make such demands of his
. rank inferiors. To do so is to risk a loss of prestige.
A logical expectation of increasing significance and .
formalization of rank differences is that they should be ac-
companied by decreasing participation of high-ranking in-
dividuals in the primary productive labor of the society or,
as put by Sahlins (1958, p. 7) , "the segregation of chiefs
from subsistence activities and their dependence upon the
produce of other members of the SOCiety." Conversely,
there is an expectation that this withdrawal from the crude
labor process is related to a development of managerial
responsibility for larger-scale productive enterprises and,
for management of important parts of the distributional
system. One curious wrinkle may develop in the unfolding
of this generalization. In societies which blend emergent .
ranking systems with substantial egalitarianism the persons
holding the rank positions may be the hardest working
.people in the system . This is a foreseeable concomitant -of
the fact that their positions rest upon generosity, with the
bulk of 'things that must be given away being their own
in the sense of resulting from their own labor and that
of their households.
This' is the case in Siuai society in the Solomon Islands
as described by Douglas Oliver (1955, P: 338) : "Some
recognition is also accorded men on the road to becoming
wealthy-in other words, men who are effectively indus-
trious . . . the man who toils abnormally long hours pro-
ducing taro or pots, etc., for sale is regarded with respect
and wonderment, even though he may not be considered
a potential leader." The qualification about potential leader-
ship fits quite well into the previous argument. Wealth alone
does not a mumi (big man) make; he. has to give much of
Rank Societies
/
.I3.I ·

I."
t'
i
i\'
1.32 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOClETY
it away-in the approved fashion, by throwing well-
attended feasts (Oliver, 1955, pp. 360-1 ). Compare this
with what is said about the Mandari of the South Sudan:
Of equal importance with the power of giving judg-
ments is the obligation of the Mar to feed his people
. ..
The Mar is expected to give assistance to those
in need as well as providing food entertainment for the
elders ... and visitors. In theory, a Mar should never
refuse
a
request for
shelter, food,
implements ' or
weapons for hunting, and because chiefs are anxious
to keep their dependents, and in the past, to attract
new clients, they give economic assistance where they
are able (Buxton, 1958, pp. 81-2) .
The anxiety of the Mandari chieftain to please and retain
his followers reminds us of Drucker's remarks about the
Nootka, each of whose chiefs
was in every way dependent upon his tenants. Every
chief recognized this; it was taught him from child-
hood. His problem was, therefore, to attract lower-rank
people to his house, and to bind them to him as much
as possible. This he did by good treatment, generosity
(giving many feasts and potlatches), naming their chil-
dren, etc. (Drucker, 1951, p. 280).
Whereas in most rank societies the chiefs worked as hard
and often harder than the rest, things were otherwise in
Nootka, where chiefs are said to work not at all. Actually,
this is not completely true. A chief does little or no menial
labor, but he does participate in ·some of the important
productive activities. For example, he might initiate and
take part in the first fishing expedition of the season; in-
deed, it is only after he or a formally chosen surrogate ritu-
ally opens such a Significant activity that the generality of
folk can participate in it (Drucker, 1951, pp. 244, 251-7).
This was not the case in Moala, where the prerogatives of
chieftainship
did not exempt the chief and his household from
manual labor. Moreover, the traditional economic ob-
.; '-,
::.~
: 7<
. '.~
.~

/ 133
Rank Societies
ligations of the chief to dispense goods must have
matched his ability to amass them. The chief would
be required to subsidize the labor he called and to
distribute food and goods in great quantity at life
crisis rites. His gardens were open for appropriation
by his people, and his house for hospitality (Sahlins,
1962, pp. 293-4)·
.
Similar observations are made by Firth about Tikopia.
Chiefs work. "Most of their food comes from their own
exertions" (Firth, 1965, p. 191). By initiative and example
.' a chief inspires and directs community production (Firth,
1965, P: 231). He gives elaborate feasts, and this generosity
~sets the seal upon his status" (Firth, 1965, pp. 222-3~, 230).
There is perhaps no other area of social theory where the
variables cohere so neatly.
.'Leadership
.
In rank society leaders can lead, but followers may noD
:i:-follow. Commands are given, but sometimes they may not
,,: be obeyed. Does this mean that they are not commands?
:'..Perhaps, but then there is no society in which all commands
- ."are obeyed. In rank society, however, there are few if any
effective sanctions that can be used to compel compliance.
What there is tends to be similar to what was seen operating
on the egalitarian level, although there are some new ele-
ments. Certainly there is a different feeling and intensity
. about the situation of leadership, and this is often best con-
veyed by religious and ritual phenomena. Before analyzing(
a few examples of the conjunction of religious and political!
elements, a closer look at the rcle of rank in the economy~
will be of advantage.
-
In egalitarian society the size of cooperative worQk~
parties is usually very small; when large parties are as-
" sembled they are for periods of short duration and subse-
\.:q uent reassembly is not likely to duplicate previous mem-
-'r bership. Furthermore, no trace of authority displayed at the
collective activity is transferred to any other aspect of social

.;.:
..,'
. . ~.~,
~<"'\i!l
.
" ....~.
. J.34 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
life. In rank society there is clear .departure from these
':J
generalizations: Authority is regular and repetitive and
.::,'
extends into various aspects of social life.
It is through his role as feast giver and host in inter-
group celebrations that the person of rank most commonly
shows greatest influence on the productivity of his society.
By his actions in initiating such activity he encourages
maximum output by a number of his followers, though
often it would seem that he does not succeed in galvanizing
all of his potential followers. He also succeeds in scheduling
the productive ' activities. Again, a qualification must be
added: Though some headmen or big men in s0Il{e situa-
tions do manage to set a kind of calendar for some pro-
ductive tasks, it would seem that in many cases the sched-
uling is imposed on the community by ecological factors sub-
stantially beyond its control. Thus, reaching a cyclical peak
of the pig population, which varies with other food avail-
abilities, might be the incentive to a big mans invitation
to attend a great feast (cf. Vayda et al., 1961, pp. 69-71).
Desire to have someone undertake leadership may it-
self lead to a productive outburst, although the level may
not be thereafter sustained beyond what is considered
normal. H. Ian Hogbin (1951, p. 134) tells of such a case
among the Busama of New Guinea. As usual with the Bu-
sama, leadership was being declined by a preferred candi-
date and "to prevent him from withdrawing at the last
moment his fellow clubmen rallied round and put a huge
garden into cultivation."
The Camayura of the northern Mato Grosso in Brazil
show, among other things, the haplessness of classification.
In terms of their social organization and its operation they
are egalitarian. But the effective unit of social organization
is the village of about 100 people which has a chief whose-
descent line may go back to the sun and who receives a
special burial (Oberg, 1953, pp. 50, 68). Nevertheless,
"When an Indian is asked who is the chief of the village he
will mention the chief's name but will immediately name one
.:
'.
' .

Bank: Societies
/
135
or two other men who are considered chiefs as well" (Oberg,
1953, P: 46). The main function of the Camayura chief
seems to be economic. Though the Camayura chief is not
mentioned for generosity, his role in distribution as well as
in production is clear, as this description of a fishing expedi-
tion shows:
Early one morning while it was still dark, Tamapu, the
chief, could be heard walking up and down in the
plaza in the village, giving ·instructions to his people
. . . He detailed certain men to go and prepare their
weirs .and .hand traps . . . Tamapu, himself, made a
new conical hand trap in order to show the details of its
manufacture.
..
[During that day the preparatory tasks were carried
out.]
The next morning all the able-bodied men, boys, and
little gn:ls set off for the stream [where final prepara-
tions were being made].
Tamapu now gave instructions to the timbo beaters.
[Afterward the beating went on for about two hours.]
. . . While the beaters were thus occupied, the older
men, Tamapu among them, went up and down along
the shallow weed-filled margins of the stream with their
conical basketry hand traps . . . [Poison was put in the
water and bowmen began to shoot the fish that sur-
faced for air.] . . .
After the shooting began, Tamapu and the men too old
to shoot, sat on the shore giving instructions and advice
to the bowmen . . .
Tamapu kept watching the [bow]men . . . and was
evidently dissatisfied with their performance. Even-
tually he called out that they were missing too many
fish because they had had sexual intercourse the night
before [a violation of ritual propriety-M.H.F.] and

~v ,
I
I.
I--_~
-136 j
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
that they had better let the boys do the shooting. This
obviously was not meant as a joke, for the men obeyed
and were replaced by the boys. . . .
The next day ... the chief saw to it [first] that every
house group had its fair share of the several hundred
fish caught (Oberg, 1953, pp. 27-8)·
Firth's detailed analysis of the produc~ve role of the
Tikopian chief (Firth, 1965, pp. 190-212) need not be re-
peated here. Examples of most of the functions have al-
ready been given. In one particular function, however,
there is something additional and important. This is the use
of the sacred powers of the chief to declare taboo some
activity, food, or location. Firth concludes that:
Some of the taboos . . . merely limit immediate pro-
duction and consumption in specific places while allow-
ing similar effort elsewhere; others divert productive
energies partially or entirely from one field to another.
Most marked here is the effort of a chief . . . to take
charge of the economic forces of his clan or district in
the interests _of the community, and limit present ap-
plication of labour in order to get an increased product
later (Firth, 1965, p. 212).
Again-we see a calendric function in the work of the chief.
Actually, Firth would take us even further. In keeping with
his conviction. that "an analysis of a primitive economic
system ... can be made without sacrifice of the basic ap-
proach of modem economics (Firth, 1965, P: 13),2 Firth
views the chief as "to some extent" a rational manager of a
multifaceted economic enterprise, although not as "an ex-
ploiting capitalist, taking in return for productive risks the
profit of the enterprise" (First, 1965, pp. 232, 231). A scrupu-
lous ethnographer, Firth offers evidence of the limitations
under which such a generalization would operate. It would
b~ infernally difficult to tell exactly how much economic
2 In Firth's own qualification this applies to formal and not to sub-
stantive analysis.

/
1.37
Rank Societies
value lay in the chief's decisions to taboo something, and
the chief himself usually applies the taboo for some ritual
purpose. Perhaps more significant is the absence of power
by which the chief can force compliance. The case record
shows workers coming late or not at all, or otherwise de-
fying the chief's wishes. This makes the chief unpleasant
and he grumbles (Firth, 1965,P:232).
Biiual Leadership
The individual of high rank is frequently also of com-
parable religious standing. This is ahnost automatically the
case in societies dominated by lineage organization. Given
the value of nearness of relationship, recognizing the overlap
between the ancestors and the significant gods, acknowledg-
ing the close tie between religious ritual and episodes of
, : feasting, it is understandable that rank and religious status
.would be vested in the same indiViduals~-
' -~--~.....-
t "'"-1n1iKopla;-for exampre,-the~~-i;;-~;;- ~~tensive pantheon
';in addition to venerated ancestors, but worship and ritual
~ ,tend to be associated with the clan or kainanga, whose
,./ ariki, or chief, is simultaneously high priest. While some of
'-;',:the rituals, particularly certain dances, attract almost uni-
versal participation, much of the activity is carried out by
:';the ariki alone or with the assistance of his immediate
':family (Firth, 1940, pp . 10-1) . In a very real sense, how-
,"ever, all of the religious activities carried out in Tikopia
':: (which had a population of about 1,200 in
1928, when
.i Firth's original studies began) are integrated and form
« me consistent pattern despite the autonomy of the clans
" which carry out portions of the ritual. The absence of po-
':litical paramountcy among the chiefs, not to mention their
.Iack of power, does not seriously hamper the course of the
~: ceremonial cycle. The four clan chiefs are arranged hier-
,"archically, rather than in order of the burden of ceremonial
",obligations. It is reported, however, that there is a Tikopian
;;belief in one deity being supreme over the others; this is the
.}:Atua i Kafika.

The very best ethnographies are more than adequate
condensations of the observations made on a particular
society by a particular observer. A truly outstanding eth-
nography permits a symbolic equivalent of fieldwork to go
on with the reader as fieldworker. Firth's extensive account
of Tikopia, available in a number of publications, several
of them revised to include new theoretical interests as well
as some new data acquired on a subsequent field trip, is one
such outstanding resource. While working 'through Firth's
account of Tikopia, it became apparent that the Atua i
Ka:6.ka should have been both more and less than Firth
reported, if my speculations about the relationship be-
tween rank society and ancestor worship have any va-
lidity. In brief, I expected at every mention of this divinity
that Firth would identify him as ancestor of the Kafika as
well as its leading deity. Each time, however, he identi.6.ed
the figure as a god and said nothing about ancestry.
The best I could discover was a mention such as this:
"... 'The yam has only one deity, the god in this family,'
said the Ariki, meaning by his last statement the Atua i
Kafika" (Firth, 1940, P: 94). Finally, my study of Firth's
work included his History and Traditions of Tikopia (1961),
and patience was rewarded:
it was through his special relation with powerful gods
that he [the Ariki Kafika] was believed to exercise his
superior role in the social and economic as well as in
the religious spheres.
These gods were first of all his culture-hero ancestor
the Atua i Kafika . . . who was generally recognized
as the supreme deity of Tikopia (Firth, 1961, p. 53).
With this statement Firth introduces a set of themes which
lie at the heart of his study. The gods are ancestors, and the
ancestors are gods. The keeping and telling of the tradition,
its conservation or amendment, its rejection and subsequent
return, all are part of the political activity most character-
istic of rank society. Though most of the versions of im-
, -
f;~
j ';
I
I
j
1-
1--
138 /
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY

Rank Societies
/
1.39.
portant tales collected by Firth are similar from informant
iIl1;' ',to informant, first in the unauthorized versions obtained
I
~'.":.'~.
from nonspecialist informants and then in the versions told
F
by the chiefly priests, there were significant discrepancies.
;'1,-
This, he decided, is because "the traditional tales may not
~ "
reflect a unitary society. They may reflect the social struc-
~" .
ture, but in its competitive, opposition aspects rather than
t(
in its integrative ones" (Firth, 1961, P: 174). "The lack of
W'r
agreement between . . . different versions, often in conflict,
k~
is due not so much to differential memory as to differential
~ '
interests (Firth, 1961, p. 175).
!',
Firth comes to the conclusion, after some very inter-
~;
esting comparative analysis of versions of tales and degrees
t
of agreement on such key matters as aboriginal priority in
~.:
the land, that the tales reflect less the social status quo
~
,
than the dynamic situation of continual realignment. I am
•
not prepared fully to accept this intriguing suggestion, but
~,f
neither can I here do it justice in attempting to qualify it.
i:'.
I feel, however, that both streams are of great importance ·
~'
and that to neglect one is to miss the point. (This is not a
"
criticism of Firth, who does analyze both.) I really wonder
V
if the lack of a monopoly on the ideology is not particularly
~:
characteristic of rank society. In the absence of a higher de-
f
gree of political power there is no genuinely "official" ver-
I?
sion.
;:
r.
Returning to the problem of leadership in ceremonial
[:
aspects of life, we may note an apparent discrepancy in
!'
the religion of the cultures of the North Pacific Coast.
t
Drucker summarizes the situation: "Although social life
F
revolved about minute gradations-of rank, the Indians did
r
not endow their deities with a divine counterpart of gradu-
t"
~ted status",'{Drucker, 1965, p. 83). Actually, this is less
~sturbing to the thesis alluded to above than is the seem-
ing absence of genealogy and claims of descent from gods.
On the other hand, there is no absence of evidence of con-
nection between chiefly rank and leadership in ceremonial
activities. For example, in Drucker's account of major Nootka
:'..
:". ::

I
I
~ .
!'
1.40
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLrrrCAL SOCIETY
rituals chiefs frequently figure in key roles. That chiefs
figure so prominently in a number of rituals is due to their
close association with the economic activity involved, that is,
hair seal hunting, sea otter hunting, whale hunting, herring
and salmon fishing, and so on (Drucker, 1951, pp. 168-81).
Though chiefs of old might have carried out shamanistic
activities, or so legends credit them with doing (Drucker,
1951, P: 181), most shamans are common folk. He believes
that shamanistic success was used as a pathway to prestige
in a society where most prestige was already ascribed.
Shamanism
was
not,
however,
a
lucrative
profession
(Drucker, 1951, P: 183).
More like Tikopia is what we are told about the pre-
viously mentioned Mandari of the Southern Sudan. The
Mar, chief, "is the guardian of the rain, the land and natural
phenomena." He conducts major sacrifices and is considered
a more potent religious practitioner than the bunit, who is
more like a curing shaman (Buxton, 1958, P: 83)' Although
it is said that the Mar's sacrifices are not to divinities as
ancestors while those of the bunits are, the importance of
descent is very great. No single founding ancestor of the
Mandari is recognized, as the population arrived at differ-
ent times from different places. However, priority of arrival
is an important factor in legitimizing rightful claims to
land. "The people of Bora extraction represent the largest
group who claim a single ancestor, and clans of this stock
are found throughout the country. They base their right to
land and their religious superiority on an important myth
[about their descent] known in some form to all their de-
scent groups" (Buxton, 1958, P: 70).
Among the Tallensi there is exceptionally close inter-
weaving of political and religious roles. Beyond his status
as symbolic owner of the land of his lineage, the chief
takes ritual responsibility for most things considered to
have some aspect of supernatural danger about them like
firing the bush, responsibility for serious accidents or for
the safety of special expeditions, and so on. "His office is

Rank Societies
sacred, imposing upon him observances and taboos" (Fortes,
1940, P: 259). Chiefs not only conduct the great ceremonies
.but supply much of the major contributions which make
.them possible. Meyer Fortes makes it clear that in a very
real sense the playing out of the ritual life of the Tale is a
major portion of the political life of the community (Fortes,
1940, pp. 258-64).
Without further expanding this section, for which the
materials are almost superabundant, due to the traditional
.interest anthropologists have taken in the religious aspects
of the societies they have studied, it should be clear that
,. variations in intensity and greater variations in detail can-
~. not obscure certain conspicuous general characteristics. The
;:,_.charter of the ranking society tends to be its view of the
:;-supem atural world as represented in tales and sometimes
i·.in genealogies. Frequently the demand for certain kinds
'of ceremonies, logistically organized by lineage heads, big
:men, or chiefs, coordinates or provides the stimulus fRr the
.coordination of different sectors of the economy. Yet, in all .
.of this, the chiefly figures bring little in the way of power
.to their priestly roles. Instead, it seems more accurate to
:.believe that such small power as they control is likely to
(Stem from their ritual status, although even here there is
,rOinimum possibility of transfer of power from one situation
to another.
~onflict
@ the sources of interpersonal conflict found in egali-
. . n socie!X..persist in !~1L~9cie~ inaeecr~~y persist
;
S?~CJE~gtl-y~lve~t:yp'~s_ of SOCiety. Certain 1<:4J.ClS
91 irritation not present in egalitarian society n:lake-ilieir-
l:\.ppearance .fu rank societies, alfuoughtheir expression-
,.
"Stifr-be-relatively··siiodued. For example, while access
.~'.•.basic resources within the corporate unit is not signifi-
.' tly altered, there
tends~to
b§'_IDJ!GlLroo.1SLQQ;QL~~
roperty in rank sociery-. Patterns of reciprocal exchange
o operate-to'keeirt11e'se things in circulation, but there is a

1.42
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
qualitative break with egalitarian societies as accumulation
of nonstrategic values is often the .basis or means of vali-
dation of rank distinctions.
Even against this background, it is difficult to speak of .'
. ,
conflict arising in these societies out of situations conveyed
. ~
by words from our own culture. The word "theft," for ex- "
ample, seems to be simple in its connotation: Something
i
belongs to somebody and is taken without his permission.. :
Epistemological questions to one side, we must immediately -,
ask what is meant by "to belong," "to take" (or "to' be
taken"), and "permission"? As )Ve have seen, ownership in
simple societies usually connotes the right to give some-
thing away. This expression is somewhat better than the
more usual reference to the right of disposition, for the
latter suggests a very wide range of possibilities where
the actual situation may be quite ¥ting as certain rela-
tives, in-laws, neighbors, and so on, must be taken care. of
in given order of priority and with respect to fixed quanti- ,
ties and qualities. As previously indicated, this system can
engender its own conflicts, quite apart from 'notions of
"theft" as individuals can quibble over what they receive
as compared with what they think they deserve, or over
'tte way they are treated during the transaction, or the time
it takes before they receive what they think is coming to
them. Such conflict, probably endemic in all societies, tends
to be among the most minor irritants, usually being ex-
pressed in gossip or by deliberate snubbing. It may, how-
ever, trigger a sequence of escalated insults which, if not
contained, can end in community-splitting acts of violence.
The situation is exacerbated on the level of ranking
~
society by the tendency to convert any act of actual or
potential hostility into a threat to status. The potential pro-
gression is a real one in some societies: Acts of omission, tlie
failure to give gifts at appropriate junctures, can be inter-
preted as "stealing" (Schemer, 1965, p. 86). This, in turn
can be treated with great seriousness "as though the ofFen-
der were saying to the offended, 'You are a man of no

account. and I can do as I please with regard to your
property'" (Scheffler, 1965, P: 219). Here, SchefIler is dis-
cussing stealing, especially misappropriation of garden prod-
uce, but the remark seems appropriate to the broader prob-
lem. Where the progression goes so far as to threaten to
compromise the status of a high-ranking person, the next
event could be violent, involving an attempt to kill the
offender. As we shall see, there are numerous social bafIles
operating against such an event.
Especially with reference to theft, it is difficult to pro-
ceed further without raising a warning, the long familiar
l?laint that 'care be taken to differentiate between.societies
operating under aboriginal as opposed to postcontact con-
ditions. The concepts of property in aboriginal society are
exceptionally subject to alteration upon relatively slight
degrees of contact, not to mention such massive encounters
as leave in their wake wage employment, cash cropping,
money, and an imposed, if only dimly comprehended and
unwanted, legal system. Add to this the widespread, if not
universal, experience of the encroaching aliens .from more
complex societies, who find the natives stealing everything
they can get their hands on. From the native point of view,
of course, what is usually happening is explained either in
terms of anticipatory balanced reciprocity or, because the
aliens are so far outside their own inner circle, negative
reciprocity, which places a premium on divesting the other
of what he has while giving minimum return. One resu1t
of this is the emphasis placed on theft and its punishment .
in colonial law codes, and the probably high rate of diffu-
sion of such attitudes into the changing aboriginal society,
Though it has nothing to do with ranking, the fact
that ranking societies tend to be more sedentary introduces
another source of potential conflict, namely the area which
.in our own legal culture is known as personal liability.
Because few anthropologists have been explicitly interested
in lega}raspects of the cultures they have studied, few have
expressly dealt with the area. Leopold Pospisil'S study of the
Rank Societies
/
1-43
: ",~.

144 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLffiCAL SOCIETY'-
New Guinea Kapauku is a conspicuous example to the con-
trary. His treatment of the category is limited to cases of
damage inflicted by huntin~traps and by domesticated·pigs
loose in somebody else's garden. Even in Pospisil's unique
account 'of a New Guinea society, the only one that is said to
believe in and practice a capitalist economy (Pospisil, 1958,
P: 15) and that has a neat little legal system to go with
its cherished private property, cases of liability seem at least
as likely to end in conflict as in the payment of damages
(Pospisil, 1958, pp. 197-200).
Unfortunately, it is impossible, except by inference, to
say anything about compliance with decisions rendered in
Pospisil's Kapauku judicial system. He relates a few cases
in which the defendent absolutely refused to abide by the
decision, but in many of the other cases the outcome is
merely a statement of the acceptance of the "verdict," with
no explicit following up of subsequent events
(Pospisil,
1958, P: 272). Of course, even in our own complex and dis-
crete legal system, judgments are not always met; failure
to specify actual case dispositions, however, weakens Pos-
pisil's account. This is of considerable theoretical signifi-
cance, since Pospisil may stand alone among New Guinea
ethnographers in claiming that societies at this level know
law in their aboriginal state.
Do Rank Societies Have Law?
Apart from Pospisil, ethnographers dealing with rank
societies sometimes explicitly deny that these societies oper-
ate under an institutional system with the characteristics of
law; most, however, do not address themselves directly to
the problem, but are often content to describe the system
of social control without characterizing it. As an example
of the former, Scheffler's characterization of the Choiseulese
may be cited: "The single most fundamental fact about
Choiseulese society seems to have been that it was without
formal juridical institutions" (Scheffler, 1965, P: 180). Yet
Oliver, describing a society virtually adjacent to those on

Rank Societies
/ 145
., Choiseul, and similar in many structural features, says that
"in a descriptive work like this one it seems best to . . .
~t;
leave it up to the reader, using his own favored terminology,
~,-
to decide ... whether a control measure is a 'custom' or
~.; a 'law'" (Oliver, 1955, p. 57.3, n4)·
~{':'~'~"
hiWhat is permhissdible or even desII'rable for and ethno-
.
grap'c monograp
oes not necessari y convey a vantage
!':~ . -
:r~ to the synthetic work of comparative analysis and generali-
J:. zation. What in any study of a single culture may be a
't'f: semantic problem becomes the very end of the analytical
~ ii~ process in the attempt to generalize about cross cultural
:.! and trans-societal regularities.
[l',:ij: ,
When we turn to the actual data on conHict resolution
' ;,f in ranking societies, even if Pospisil's Kap\uku case record
;g;., be included, I think it relatively a simple matter to establish
; the absence of law whether the criteria used be those sug-
.'.gested in Chapter 1, or even those of Pospisil himself (see
:'Chapter 3, pp. 90-1). The most that can be seen in the avail-
',able illustrations might well be called "law-like" processes
:.' of repairing social breaches. Law-like, because one or more
:of the criteria of law are present and active, yet at the same
:time one or more of the criteria of law are absent so that,
'like John Austin more than a century earlier, we can analyti-
;cally distinguish legal institutions from those that fall short,
thereby assisting in discovering what developments go with
others in the evolution of general sociocultural systems.
The Siuai of Bougainville, like all other people known
'to. ethnography, whether simple or complex, egalitarian,
ranked, stratified or what have you, possess a fairly extensive
catalogue of behavioral norms. The Siuai tell ethnographers,
:and whatever other questing souls may come their way,
'that this is the way they behave and possibly they do think
they behave that way or attempt to behave that way. As
::Oliver, after often being misled, observes: "deviations from
--.family-household norms are numerous and occur much more
frequently than generalizing informants would have us be-
lieve" (Oliver, 1955, p. 442). Oliver selects the family-

. j
.
~. . '
.. , .
.,
I:·J
1\
I
I:.
I· ·
I '
j
l '
\r .II.
II
III.
II
II
III[
II
IiI
·:i
":,
'I
'"q
.t
',i
:1:'.j
·1
"q
d..,
i :'
"I i! .
: ij
I"
I '"
I ':.:j
I
. ~
:!i.,
,:
".J
l'. ."
~ '
'I.:'
"
fl','
I
,
:1:
:1-
'I'li
~:::hold:e~:=;Nb:~:~~~~::;ill·no=~e '::'
followed with even less regularity and are "maintained . . .
.:~
with even less organized social control than occurs in the
')]
case of the family-household" (Oliver, 1955, P: 443, empha-
;]
'hsiS in origthinal). With regard fto chal! l~vels 0nff this. socie:rth'
}~
owever,
e major means 0
a
leVlDg co
ormity WI
'<!
norms is through indo ctrination and continuing ideological
.:~l
reinforcement, particularly of ritual character.
On the
.~
family-household level there is more power than at any
~
other. But even here the Siuai are unaccustomed to the
'J
..
~
employment of physical sanctions. Oliver speaks of the na-
' J
';.~
tive catechist in one village as somebody whose children
fear and obey him. He beat them freely when they were
small. "He learned this custom when he worked for a white
family"
(Oliver, 1955, P: 195) . Oliver regards the Siuai
as, in general, tending to the overindulgence of children;
even should one parent tend toward strictness, the other
parent would probably compensate by additional leniency.
Most attempts at correction are verbal, so often reiterated
as to lose Significance and rarely if ever accompanied by
action.
When all is said and done, Siuai social control rests
upon the inculcation of norms which are supported by
ritual and ·the force of public censure and ridicule. Should
one faced with such pressures nonetheless breach norms he
would face sorcery wielded for vengeance. Siuai
mumi
(big men ) are leaders; indeed, Oliver's book is a specialized
study of leadership, Leadership in Siuai, as is generally the
case in rank society, is a matter of frequencies of initiating .
behavioral streams as opposed to carrying on a behavioral
stream initiated by someone else. Oliver (1955, pp. 331-2)
.speaks of "orders" and "obeying" but his own examples
suggest that the words are too strong for what actually
occurs. A.t the core of a mumi is a generous and popular
host whose authority rests on the threat that he will not
proffer an invitation. Sahlins describes the "big-man":

' :.,
.... 1/;
. ,.,: -
. , .
/ 147
Bank Societies
the indicative quality of big-man authority is every-
where the same: it is personal power. Big-men do not
come to office; they do not succeed to, nor are they in-
stalled in, existing positions of leadership over political
groups. The attainment of big-man status is rather the
outcome of a series of acts which elevate a person
above the common herd and attract about him a coterie
of loyal, lesser men. It is not accurate to speak of "big-
man" as a political title, for it is but an acknowledged
standing in interpersonal relations-a "prince among
men" so to speak as opposed to "The Prince of Danes."
In particular Melanesian tribes the phrase might be
"man of importance" or "man of renown," "generous
rich-man," or "center-man,' as well as 'big-man" (Sah-
lins, 1963, p. 289).
In the final analysis, a Siuai big-man exerts whatever au-
thority he has to prevent a serious breach (Oliver, 1955,
pp. 443-4) because once such a rupture occurs, it is be-
yond his power to repair. Fiji, much more structured poli-
tically than anything to be found in aboriginal Solomon
Islands society, knew similar uncertainty about breach:
"Given pervasive rivalry in the village, the private right to
secure redress and the chiefs only limited command of
force, the traditional chiefs peace was an uncertain busi-
ness, depending ·largely on the willingness of contending
parties to adhere to it" (Sahlins, 1962, P: 327).
Precisely the same state of affairs is described for the
North Pacific Coast (Drucker, 1965, pp. 74-5). One particu-
lar case is recorded in which a chief turned bully and terror-
ized a village. One man, a "commoner," wanted to kill him
because the bully had maliciously destroyed work on which
1;1e had lavished considerable time and energy. (The bully
was reported to have already committed three murdersl )
The commoner was dissuaded by others "with great diffi-
culty," but the offending chief 'became frightened and
moved [away]." He lived
elsewhe~e but occasionally re-
c·
;..'

'.
' . '....-,/ -
I ·
",I
1:
I
I
I ,
i
I,
I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOClETY
turned to the village in which he had committed his violent
acts; nothing was ever done to him. Drucker concludes:
there was no formal machinery to punish wrongdoers.
People did not know quite what to do about the situ-
ation. They talked against [the offender] and refused'
to cooperate with him, but his rank gave him a certain
immunity from physical harm. To the advice and pleas
of his elders he turned a deaf ear. Finally the resent-
ment became so obvious and unpleasant that thick-
skinned as he was he had to leave. Informants do not
know what would have happened to a man of lesser
rank who behaved [thus] ; none ever did (Drucker,
1951, p. 319).
The remark about rank conferring immunity from physical
harm does not quite jibe with the rest of Drucker's account
for, as in Siuai and Fiji, the usual means of control is the
counsel and cajolery of kin. Beyond this is public ridicule.
Beyond that, the fear of vengeful sorcery or immediate re-
taliatory violence. Beyond that, nothing. Everything is done
to avert open breaches within the community, especially
between persons contained, as almost all were, within one
or another web of kinship ties-agnatic, cognatic, or affinal.
Again, Drucker has put it well, although others before him
have said the same thing in almost the same words: "In the
rare instances in which blood was shed, usually nothing was
done 'about it. The group would not take vengeance on it-
self, nor demand wergild of itself,and there was DO higher
authority" (Drucker, 1965, P: 74). Drucker goes on to say
that "serious crimes" such as clan incest were punished by
death, but in most societies, including those of this kind,
there is a tremendous gap between the ideology, including
its own reinforcing mythology, and social reality. Drucker's
own account of the Nootka and Chickliset, for example,
states flatly that while such unions were avoided, they
"aroused no feeling of horror" and no adverse social action
seems to have followed marriages, much less temporary sex-
ual unions between close relatives (Drucker, 1951, P: 301).

/
149
Rank Societies
.
Probably the outstanding recent attempt to controvert
the view so far presented is that of Pospisil. As already in-
dicated, he has undertaken in both comparative and ethno-
graphic study to establish the existence of law as a cultural
universal, with his own research among the Kapauku of
present day Irian as his primary example. Unlike some
other analysts whose assertion of the universality of law is
based ultimately upon a definition which makes itcoter-
minous with custom, Pospi~ offers a straightforward, clear-
cut set of criteria. What is more, Pospisil willingly foregoes
the device of the will of the whole community or society,
agreeing that "such expressions are virtually identical with
a statement of the absence of authority" (Pospisil, 1958, P:
258). IThe does not take refuge in such usual qualifications,
he does so in a more unusual one, in something akin to
what Julian Steward has called "levels of sociocultural inte-
,. gration." For Pospisil there is not one legal system in a
given society but a plurality of systems. Indeed, "every func-
tioning subgroup of the society," in his view, "has its own
legal system which is necessarily different in some respects
from those of other subgroups" (Pospisil, 1958, p. 272).
Pospisil compounds his rejection of law defined as a
.' . special emergent system of social control that develops in
response to the need to regulate behavior attendant upon
the expansion of the community and the declining effective-
< ness of kinship. Not only does he fragment law so as to make
it equivalent to a congeries of partially overlapping, par-
tially discordant value systems, but he is led to the follow-
, .ing declaration: "I dare to say that it is inconsistent to make
: a qualitative distinction between the law of the state and
c the 'criminal gang's ethics.' Both of these phenomena . . .
; belong to the same category; both should be classified as
, laws" (Pospisil, 1958, P: 278).
,
IT it is true that there are as many legal systems in a
.:.society as there are subgroups, then every member of the
~.•society must be operating Simultaneously under multiple
: conflicting directives. Now, we are fully aware of "double-

1.50 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
J.
bind" and similar situations in which individuals do, in fact,
face contradictory norms or inducements, but few of these
are associated with the terrible paraphernalia of law which
ultimately intends the destruction of those who do not con-
form and possesses the physical means to carry it out and
to prevent further vengeance. Pospisil enumerates four cri-
teria of a legal system, but his own case record requires
him to dilute each to the point of abandonment. Of 176
"cases" presented in his monograph exactly fifteen were
personally observed by him. I have nothing but respect for
Pospisil's ethnographic talents and readily grant that he
took great pains while collecting stories about other cases
to check details with as many informants as possible (Pos-
pisil, 1959, p. 145) , but this is one area in which memory
may not be the best servant. This is underlined not only
by such ethnographies as Oliver's on Si:uai (Oliver, 1955,
p. 442; see p. 145), which compares the generalizing of in-
formants with what the ethnographer actually observes, but
also by examination of the fifteen cases Pospisil recorded on
the spot.
Many of the episodes observed and recorded are de-
void of even law-like character. Here is one case:
Imo, a member of the Enona sublineage of Botu, took
wood from an old felled uwaa tree which grew on the
territory of Jamaina sublineage. He was stopped by Jok
[headman of Itod] and asked to lay down the wood
he was carrying. Since he did not obey, the authority
[jok] knocked the .whole pack of wood from his shoul-
der. A violent argument started which threatened to
evolve into a fight. However, the culprit quieted down
and left the wood in It~d (Pospisil, 1958, p. 181).
Lest it be thought that I have selected one conspicuously
weak "case" upon which to base my criticism, let me present
. three more in succession. The first involves the same [ok,
the headman who was the "authority" in the previous anec-
dote.

Rank Societies
I
1.51
[The "plaintiff"] Mab's father loaned Jok, his daughter's
husband, money for buying an additional wife. [Years
later] Mab, because he wanted to get married, came
to jok's house to ask for payment. The debtor explained
that he had no money on hand and promised to pay in
the future. The infuriated young man . . . left with
an ultimatum which gave the debtor only three days'
time . .. Jok, though a brave warrior and a coura-
geous man who had killed many enemies, strangely
enough was scared by the threats of a boy who be-
longed to a confederacy too weak to £ght the political
unit of the debtor.
Outcome: Jok collected the necessary shell money and
repaid in due time.
Comment: The concern of the debtor can be inter-
preted as fear of losing face in public because of his
violation of the rule (Pospisil, 1958, P: 227).'
Ipo was sick and impatient. He ordered his wife around
so much that the latter was quite upset. When she was
cooking, he shouted at his wife again. Annoyed, she
threw a stick into the fire, thus unintentionally scatter-
ing some ashes over the meal.
Outcome: The husband beat her with a stick. She
wanted to leave him and go back to her village, but
later she changed her mind and stayed (Pospisil, 1958,
P·239 )·
Ama went to . . . visit her parents. Although her hus-
band had reminded her to leave ' him enough sweet
potatoes at home, she had forgotten about it in the ex-
citement.
Outcome: After she returned, she was slapped twice by
her husband (Pospisil, 1958, p. 239).
One can only imagine what a jurisprude like Austin
might have done with "cases" such as these. Most gener-

~52 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOClETY
ously, he would probably have rejected them for their
spontaneity and formlessness, which is to say that there is
no reason to believe that they would recur in anything like
their reported form and Austin would probably have con-
cluded that "the party who will enforce [the same sanction]
. against any future offender is never determinable and as-
signable" (Austin, 1954, P: 143). More seriously, such cases
make a shambles of Pospisil's own criteria of law. Pospisil
dissociates authority and power," While I recognize that
the law usually involves authority," I am much more im-
pressed with the role of power. Pospisil, on the contrary,
not only strips power from the law but removes formality
from authority thus making an authority comprise "one or
more individuals who initiate actions in a functional group
and' whose decisions are followed by a majority of the
group's members" (Pospisil, 1958, P: 259). In not one of
Pospisil's cases, including those dredged from informants'
memories, is there a possibility of showing that the de-
cision, was followed by a majority of the members of the
group. In a substantial portion of the cases, as a matter of
fact, there is no final disposition beyond a notation of the
promise to do something. In additional cases it seems that
the disposition of the case is synonymous with its "hear-
ing" interpreted as a scolding for the malefactor. The so-
called Kapauku authority has the legal status of the child
who led "Our Gang."
In the absence of a volume of genuine cases showing
the
repetitive
application of
uniform
settlements
and
penalties, Pospisil establishes "the attribute of intention
of universal application" by linguistic criteria. In essence,
this attribute is said to be manifest when such usages are
employed as is conveyed by the expression "it is always
• Once again we come upon a point which has been of much con-
cern in the past; see Carl Friedrich, 1963, pp .
~1.l6-3 1.
.."He who believes upon authority, entertains the opinion, simply be-
cause it is entertained by a person who appears to him likely to think
correctly on the subject" (Lewis, 1849, as quoted in Friedrich, 1963,
p.216).

Rank Societies
/ 153
,.{done that way" (Pospisil, 1958, p. 262) . How the attribute
> of intention of universal application fits with Pospisil's
'
~Inyriad legal systems within a single society is not dis-
cussed.
Having already devoted perhaps too much space to
, .a criticism' of this particular work I shall merely brush by
Pospisil's remaining
criter~ of obligatio and sanction. The
•. former is reduced to the ~polarity in any social relation-
ship (Pospisil, 1958, pp. 264-7 ), and the latter is stripped
of all physical force. As far as Pospisil is concerned sanc-
tions can be reduced to withdrawal of rewards which
otherwise might have been expected, or to psychologically
uncomfortable experiences, such as mild public rebuke or
ridicule (Pospisil, 1958, P: 268).
The significance of this critical harangue can be briefly
. . put. The effect of Pospisil's relativized criteria of law, taken
.'
singly or in combination, is to achieve universalization at
the familiar price of equating it in application to social con-
o
trol. As a matter of fact, though Pospisil pays lip service to
the distinction between law and social control, he some-
times seems to go beyond even this position to identify law
with general cultural norms. As I hope this short critical dis-
cussion of the Kapauku has shown, however, they seem
ev-en in Pospisil's account to have as much-I say as little-
law as any other rank society of relatively simple type. In
this respect they are quite comparable to the Siuai or the .
people of Choiseul.
EXTERNAL RELATIONS
I think it is already becoming clear that the ~
enc:.e.s.between.egalitarian and ·ra~~t.h~
, . fuunsl..41_implic<l:!i.~~,
~~.e. ,fairly subtle. i? .!~.e m.a.~~E...!E
which!h~y are played out.In.the behavior .of real people. (
Many of the institutions remain the same; others are altered )
only to the slightest degree. Some institutions are new but )
impinge only in a minor way upon everyday life. Though
the general conditions of egalitarian society overlap those
..;:
c
'."

of rank society, the potential for social development is dra-
matically different. In a sense what takes place in the move
I
from egalitarian to ranking society is analogous to what
Isome biologists refer to as "preadaptation," Nothing mysti-
[cal, I take this to refer in sociocultural evolution to aggre-
gating minor changes which themselves exert only small
visible effects on the status quo but suddenly occupy quite
different functional roles when the society is transformed.
Ranking is like this. Until coupled with stratification it dis-
turbs .the old equalitarian order only slightly, but, after
stratification sets in, ranking emerges in the form of a socio-
economic class system. As such its Significance is impossible
to overestimate.
The lack of clear-cut distinction between egalitarian
and rank society is apparent in certain aspects of territori-
ality. The effective community in rank society usually occu-
pies a much smaller area than its egalitarian counterpart,
but this is not in any sense the result of ranking. It is true,
however, that ranking and increased demographic concen-
tration. have cOiiUnon causes. Before gomg l'tiftlier "wit}rtb'is
queSTIOn we must look somewhat more deeply into the
critical but undefined term "effective community." I should
like to attempt this in the context of a discussion of the
concept of "tribe."
154 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
The Concept of Tribe"
IT I had to select one word in the vocabulary of anthro-
pology as the single most egregious case of meaningless-
ness, I would have to pass over "tribe" in favor of "race."
I am sure, however, that "tribe" figures prominently on the
list of putative technical terms ranked in order of degree
of ambiguity.
To select arbitrarily one textbook approach, let us turn
• This discussion of "tribe" ,is from my article, "On the Concepts of
'Tribe' and 'Tribal Society:" Transactions of the New York Academy
of Sciern;es,Series Tl, ~8 (1966), 5~7-40, and is reprinted with some
changes by permission of The New York Academy of Sciences.
.,~
"
,I
;;...,
'"

to the definition of "tribe" offered by E. Adamson Hoebel
(1958, P: 661): "a social group speaking a distinctive lan-
guage or dialect and possessing a distinctive culture that
marks it off from other tribes. It is not necessarily organized
politically." The definition, when scrutinized, proves to be
a thicket of difficufues. For example, what is meant by the
concept of a "social group"? If a tribe must be a "group,"
as that word has been used as a technical term, all its
members would have to interact or at least participate in
a theoretically interacting structure. Precisely on these
grounds Oliver refuses to classify the Siuai as a tribe. They
do possess a common language but, notes Oliver ,(1955, P:
103), "They do not all together cooperate ... in any kind
of common enterprise, nor are they united in any sort of
separate hierarchy." The Siuai do not act together in land
use, are fuzzy about boundaries, intermarry with people
speaking another language, and , as a matter of fact, are
bilingual. All Siuai do not comprise a potentially exclusive
interactive network; what is more, some Siuai interact more
frequently and regularly with some adjacent non-Siuai than
they do with Siuai. Consistent with a terminology of which
he approves, Oliver prefers to consider the Siuai an aggre-
gate rather than a group. It should be made dear, before
'.the point gets lost, that however a tribe be defined, it should
be in terms of an aggregate and not of a group, although
expectably rare cases may be found in which a true group
exists.
Returning to Hoebel's definition, which I am using for
sake of convenience and not because of any desire to single
him out for criticism, let us confront, albeit briefly, the ques-
tion of delineating distinctive culture, Apart from consider-
ing the problem in terms of social structure, what is at
stake is a question of inventory. Three different focuses
can be induced: First, there is the inventory of trait types,
each trait type being considered a unit without regard to
frequency or functional importance. Second, given parallel
inventories of trait types, units may be differentiated on the
Rank Societies
/ 155

~
· ~1
~~:i/of di:~:~:qO:e::e:O:;:pC:~::::ents. Third;J : :/'J~
....;I)l
rather than compute total profiles in contrasting frequen-
'
;~
cies, units may be compared with regard to one or a few
. j~
traits that have extraordinary significance in one unit but
.~~
are no great matter in others. In fact, all of these three
' ;'~
inventory methods
are
unsatisfactory for
distinguishing
,
;.~
ethnic units and equally unsatisfactory for tribes, as Moer-
' }~
man and others have indicated. The problem, seemingly
. ,~~
insurmountable when approached in terms of the
ethno-
; :~
graphic present, becomes ludicrous when treated through
5~l
history. This is not to say that functions do not exist for 'a
::~
myth of ethnic or tribal purity through time. Like racism,
~;'~
which it resembles and with which it overlaps, tribalism as
. ' ~
a mythic structure is a contemporary sociocultural response
n~
to contemporary .situational stimuli, but this is a matter
I
:;~
discuss later in this chapter.
.~~
Another topic can be disposed of at this juncture. In-
;~
formant statements of tribal self-identification provide no
: ,~
w~y out of the dilemma, although such statemen:s com-
:'~
pnse a valuable body of data that throw much hght on
'..
other questions of social process. While I do not believe that
"
Edmund Leach invented the point, his exposition of ambi-
.~
guities of self-identification in Political Systems of Highland
, 3~
Burma (1954) has been the point of departure for many
statements about alternative identities. Rather than repeat
any of the better known examples, I offer one from testi-
mony recorded in the Progress Report to the Legislature by
the California Senate Interim Committee on California In-
dian Affairs:
Mrs. Morris, [r., a Hoopa resident of mixed Indian
ancestry raised the question of the eligibility of her
sons to fish upon their return from overseas service with
the armed forces. The following exchange between
Mrs. Morris and Princess Brantner, President, Yurok
Tribal Organization, Inc., would indic~e the complexi-
ties involved in the matter of tribal affiliations:

Rank Societies .
/
.Brantner: "Are you enrolled at the Yurok Tribe?"
. Morris : "Well, that is what I would like to know, be-
cause my mother was bom.in the Yurok Tribe."
Brantner: "Well, I said, did you sign up as a. Yurok
Indian, or did you sign as a Hoopa?"
Morris: "Well, I am just in the middle. I don't know
which one to be."
.
Brantner: "Well, you will have to decide which one you
want to be, because there are many of us that are the
.same. There is a lot of Indians that belong to the Yu-
roks, that are half Yuroks or half Hoopas, and they
have decided they want to be a Yuroks Indian, and
some have decided they want to be a Hoopa Indian.
Some have decided they want to be from the Smith
River Tribe. So right now we have a chance to eat
salmon up here-if you want to eat salmon, you better
say you're a Yurok and join us" (California, 1955,
. p. 411 ) .
Because of such difficulties, many anthropologists have
seized upon the criterion of linguistic discreteness, which
also featured prominently in the sample definition of tribe
that we borrowed from Hoebel. Raoul Naroll's summary _
discussion (Naroll, 1964, pp. 283-91, 305-12) is a useful
point of departure: Some ethnic groups, differentiated by
name, speak tongues that are regarded by linguists as the
same or, what is probably merely another way of putting it,
form part ofa continuum that cannot be divided for sound
linguistic reasons. Of course, such linguistic continua are
often divided for other reasons, such as the already held
notion that the speech communities are distinct in other
aspects. This is interesting, because there are examples of
the joining together of two or more different language
groups under the rubric ofa single tribe. Naroll ends with

r:f . .
ii:
1J
JI'
i:
I',I:,
11!j
i'd
II
)1
11
"I!Ii i-
11I',!:1
'l
158 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
the warning that "the operational difficulties of applying the
linguistic criterion are formidable." Actually, it seems to me
that few, if any, ethnographers have systematically ex-
amined the linguistic data of their societies towardthis end.
In this regard some comments by H. H. Vreeland prove
illuminating. His work, deeply involved with and related to
the production of area handbooks, 'required the acceptance
of sociocultural units, not necessarily tribes. For a long
while, Vreeland was satisfied with essentially linguistic cri-
teria for these units, although he was aware of their short-
'comings. Now he is less certain of their empirical utility.
At least, he has come against cases that do not respond to
linguistic handling (Vreeland, 1958, pp. 82-4) .
The retreat from overemphasis of a linguistic criterion
for tribe or ethnic group is usually coupled with movement
toward a common sense group of criteria so manipulated
that no single criterion is absolutely essential. Under such
procedures, the sets of criteria may vary from case to case,
with obvious deleterious effect upon comparability. In the
previously mentioned contribution of NarolI, four types of
"cultunits" are differentiated at the junctions of two sets of
criteria. Naroll's critics have taken issue with him for neg-
lect of specific additional criteria; Frank Bessac wants to
add the possession of a common group name; Simon Mes-
sing wants to include demographic size of the unit, and so
on. Thus it goes, an interesting and useful discussion des-
pite some total disclaimers such as that of Leach (NarolI,
1964, P: 299). Whatever its value in establishing compara-
ble sociocultural units for structuring HRAF-type analyses,
however, it tends to drift away from our central concern
with the concept of tribe.
More interesting to me at this time is the last element
in Hoebel's definition, a disclaimer of the necessity that a
tribe be a politically organized body. By this is usually
meant that the tribe as a group does not necessarily have a
consistent body of sanctions applied by any individual or
group to the membership at large, nor is there necessarily
:~
' "
.,~

Rank Societies
/ 159
any gathering together of the group as a whole or even
males sent from each constituent smaller grouping to com-
prise a military force for offense or defense. According to
H. J[an Hogbin and C. H. Wedgewood, this would seem
the traditional, not amodern view. They have written:
The word "tribe" has in the past been used for any
large cultural or linguistic group irrespective of whether
the component members form a single political unit.
Recently, however, the distinction between a large
group with an organized political unity, and one whose
members are associated only through the possession of
a common language and generally similar culture, has
been seen to be very important (Hogbin & Wedge-
wood, 1953, p. 251).
They then cite the definition of tribe given in the most re-
cent edition of Notes and Queries in Anthropology: "A
tribe may be defined as a politically or socially coherent
and autonomous group occupying or claiming a particular
territory" (Royal Anthropological Institute, 1951, p. 66).
The statement of Hogbin and Wedgewood is not alto-
gether justified, although it is certainly in step with the
concept of, for example, Tribes Without Rulers. Neverthe-
less, further along in the same edition of Notes and Queries
one reads that: ". .. there may be no supreme tribal au-
thority; and the political unity of the tribe emerges only in
co-ordinated or collective action, by the more or less in-
dependent subdivisions of the group each under its own
elders on special ceremonial occasions or in opposition to
enemies" (Royal Anthropological Institute, 1951, P: 136) .
This .does not differ too significantly from the definition
that appeared in Notes and Queries half a century ago: "A
group of a simple kind, nomadic or settled in a more or
less definite locality, speaking a common dialect, with a
rude form of government, and capable of uniting for com-
mon action, as in warfare" (Freire-Marreco & Myres, 1912,
p. 156). This usage differs from the one, for example,
Frederic Seebohm used in his influential study, The English

I·
i
!
I
I
; ,
:
~
1.60
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
.i
Village Community, in which is identified the Welsh tribe,
as a collection of free households united by kinship under '
a brenhin, or chief, the households seeming "to have been
grouped into artificial clusters mainly . . . for purposes of
tribute or legal jurisdiction" (Seebohm, 1883, pp. l!j<r-l).
The range of this small sampling of definitions is a suit-
able introduction to the confusion that surrounds this term.
But the word "tribe" carries confusion back to its origins.
A tribus was one of three segments of the Roman patriciate.
Each segment was thought to have been a completely au-
tonomous political unit in the past. As far as is known,
neither of these conditions 'applied in ancient Rome: The
word "tribe" lacked sociological rigor from its inception.
It was precisely in the dual sense of common descent
and autonomous political integration that the concept of
tribe was applied by Lewis Henry Morgan to the Iroquois
and, indeed, to "the great body of the American aborigines"
(Morgan, 1878, P: 103). Rather than dwelling on the seven
"functions and attributes" of tribeship described by Morgan
as his preliminary to the analysis of the Iroquois examples,
and which include such items as the right to invest sachems
and chiefs elected by the gentes, and the right to depose
them (Morgan, 1878, pp.
11~7), I offer my own list of
what I take to be the essence of Morgan's view of the cri-
teria of a tribe: first, the presence of a number of kin units
(gentes in his specific view) mutually interconnected by
affinal ties; second, possession of a common language."
Third, possession and defense of a territory; fourth pos-
session of a name; fifth, possession of a structure of govern-
ment surmounted by a supreme authority which embodied
the popular will. It is, of course, to the last point that we
must now direct our attention. First, let us note that Mor-
gan is explicit in identifying the tribe as a "necessary and
e Morgan actually says: "The exclusive possession of a dialect" (Mor-
gan, 1878, p. 103). He recognizes exceptions but believes that tribe.
and linguistic unit tend to be coextensive; as he says, "the tribes
were as numerous as the dialects" (Morgan, 1878, p. 102).

Rank Societies
/
~6~
logical" stage "in the growth of the idea .of government"
(Morgan, 1878, pp. 102-3).
Treating. the tribe as a political structure, Morgan
made a uniform analysis of examples from the American
Indians, heroic Greece, and formative Rome. To these,
Engels added a comparable analysis of the Germans. The .
crucial political point was believed to lie in the significance
of democratic institutions, as in each of these cases ultimate
control was believed to rest in some form of popular as-
sembly. In the Iroquois case, it was the famed requirement
of unanimous decisions at various levels, so that sachems .
in the highest council of the confederacy were, at least in
theory, merely expressing opinions that had been iterated
and approved on levels even lower than the tribal. In the
Greek case, it was the boule; among the Romans, the co-
mitia curiata; and among the Germans, the Umstand. Once
again, I would like to take the opportunity to note that for
better or worse the societies analyzed by Morgan, and, of
course, by Friedrich Engels as well, were all subject in par-
ticularly strong ways to what may be called the skewing
effects of secondary situations. That is, all were undergoing
the shift in the complexity of their political institutions in
the presence of more highly organized political societies,
although in this regard some were more directly and con-
tinuously exposed than others, and to stronger or weaker
emanating centers.'Simply by way of illustration, let me re-
call for' you that Morgan's account of Greek history was
dependent to a considerable extent on the work of George
Grote (184&-1856). Though disagreeing with Grote on vari-
- ous matters, such as the interpretation of the Grecian gens
vis-a-vis the Grecian family, he could not but adopt Grote's
view of the age of Greek civilization, to wit, that it began
to enter history with the composition of the Homeric poems
in the ninth fentury B.C. or even later, at the time of the
first olympiad, in 776 B.C. Curiously silent about develop- .
ments in Egypt and Mesopotamia, Morgan noted that when
the Greeks entered the stage of history they "were striving

1.62
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
to establish a state, the first in the experience of the Aryan
family, and to 'place it upon a territorial foundation, such
as the state has occupied from that time to the present"
(Morgan, 1878, pp. 222-3). Ancient Society appeared, of
course, in 1877.
Rather than develop a dialogue with the long dead, no
matter how important their role in the history of anthro-
pological theory, I prefer to move this discussion into our
own century and decade, Let me turn first to the recent
work of Carl J. Friedrich (1963 )" Friedrich specifies the
tribes as the second of four levels of government, coming
after the local community and preceding the national com-
munity and the imperial community, (He also .has a pro-
visional fifth, the world community.) Actually, he identifies
the "tribe" with the "regional community." As Friedrich
sees it, there is often an intermediate level of government
between the strictly local community and "the 'all-inclusive'
community of nation or empire" (Friedrich, 1963, P: 543).
.Indeed, he thinks that intermediary levels such as this are
"bound" to exist in larger states. What makes this interest-
mg is that he sees the level as being associated with "dis-
tinct political institutions," stating that the units on this
.level may have "a distinctive tribal foundation." As illustra-
tion, he gives the Bavarians, Swabians, Saxons, etc., of Ger-
many, noting that the Weimar Constitution began with the
phrase, "the German people, united in its tribes" (Friedrich,
1963, p. 543)·
Friedrich associates tribalism with "marked linguistic
peculiarities, the dialects," also with what he calls "dis-
tinctive ... features of folk culture." For him, tribalism
and regionalism seem much the same; this is consistent with
his terminology, as previously indicated. This appro-ach sug-
gests certain parallels in the thought of Friedrich and
J. H. Steward-parallels that are all the more provocative
for being the products of discrete intellectual environments.
However, Friedrich is not terribly concerned with technical
problems-of sociocultural evolution, and he turns instead

\ ..
Rank Societies
to the second of the two questions raised at the outset of
this discussion. In this regard, he makes several interesting
observations, which I shall merely bring to the reader's at-
tention. He sees ~nsiderable significance in tribal or re-
gional phenomena in the modern political world. He notes
the clashes between different language groups in India and
comments that such differences are having much more im-
pact on modern nation building than has older provincial
organization. However, he warns against the assumption
that a well-drawn linguistic map solves problems of political
organization, "because language is only one of the factors
entering into community-building"
(Friedrich,
1963, p.
544). He pursues a similar point with regard to newly
emergent African states, noting that "the effective and tradi-
tional African community is the tribe . . . definitely dis-
tinguished on the basis of language and other cultural
traits." Finally, while Friedrich admits that "tribal units
could either be destroyed or employed as the basis of po-
litical organization," he does claim for tribes a natural
reality, which is to say in his terms that, given "conditions
in which the people themselves have a voice in their politi-
cal association" and given the probable prior dissection or
~gglomeration of tribal units by the previously dominant
colonial power, "they naturally tend to reunite."
IT Friedrich is correct, we can expect to find ongoing
political activity wherever there is a discrepancy between
ethnic boundaries and political boundaries; We must be
sophisticated about this. We can readily recognize that
ethnic groups are transitory phenomena with variable mem-
berships oscillating about shifting mythic charters. Simul-
taneously we can recognize that such associations do possess
at least contemporary reality and may raise demands that
have to be dealt with on the political level. Indeed, revert-
ing to Harold Lasswell's epigrammatic definition of politics
-who gets what, when and how-it may be noted that
ethnic groups have functioned politically with varyillg
degrees of success and may be expected to contiriue to do

1:.
"11 :':
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
so. What the political situation is in tribal groups will be
taken up below.
"Tribe" as a Stage in Political Evolution
. Unlike many others who have used the words "tribe"
or "tribal," Marshall Sahlins and Elman Service have been
precise, clear, and consistent in attempting to apply them
to a specific level of sociopolitical development. Like Fried-
rich, Sahlins and Service identify tribe as a second level of
general political evolution. Their first level is that of the
band, an explicit community comprising a small population
in constant face-to-face interaction, sharing life in a locality,
although usually wandering about some restricted range,
camping together. Being exogamous, each band must main-
tain at least some relations of affinality with one or more
adjacent counterparts, but these gossamer ties do not con-
stitute any significant alteration of the independent nature
of the group. (Note that bands are groups in the narrowest
sense proposed above.)
The distinctive thing about a tribe in Service's view
is that it must be more than "simply a collection of bands"
(Service, 1962, P: Ill ). The increment of difference is
found in his analysis of tribes as a boundable system of
relationships whose armatures, the devices connecting the
members of the component polar bands, are sodalities,
cross-cutting associations devoted to kinship affiliations,
age-grades" secret societies, ritual congregations, and cere-
monial parties. Like bands, Service's tribes are characterized
'by embedded political structuring, since the major institu-
tions of social control are distributed throughout the socio-
cultural fabric and are carried out through available roles
and statuses, none of which are specialized for governmental
functions. Since Service's tribe, as defined, is an exception-
ally fragile structure, he looks to its superorganic environ-
ment for the stimulation to its development and mainte-
nance. The raison a:etre of a tribe is conflict, basically for
scarce resources. Tribalism extends the peace group; it

Rank Societies
also presents military possibilities that Service believes su-
perior to those available to bands (Service, 1962, pp. 113-
15). Without retra&g the steps of his reasoning, we note
that it is consistent with the foregoing when Service boldly
identifies the emergence of tribal society with the neolithic
revolution. Sahlins agrees:
The tribal level may have emerged in a few exception-
ally favorable environments in the food-collecting, Pa-
leolithic era. However, it was the Neolithic Revolution
that ushered in the dominance of the tribal form, that
precipitated great sectors of the cultural world to a new
level of general standing (Sahlins, 1961, p. 324).
Unfortunately, and I say unfortunately because ' the
Sahlins-Service argument seems very elegant to me, the .
arrangement of band and tribe in a general evolutionary
sequence of forms leaves much to be desired. It seems
possible, for example, to place both on the same temporal
level and level of complexity, with the band representing
the semipermanent membership group sharing a common
camp, and the tribe constituting the shifting grouping of
camps (that is, bands) that comprises an area of relative
peace and that would include a demonstrably high fre-
quency of intermarriage. In other words, it seems to me
that Service has not justified his statement that a tribe must
be more than simply a set of bands, for if that is the case,
his band societal level becomes semantic and somewhat
hypothetical, like Steward's family level. As Steward puts it,
I classify the Shoshoneans as an exemplification of a
family level of sociocultural integration because in the
few forms of collective activity the same group of
families did not cooperate with one another or accept
the same leader on successive occasions. By another
definition, however, it might be entirely permissible to
view this ever-changing membership and leadership as
a special form of suprafamilial integration. While the
Shoshoneans represent a family level of sociocultural
integration in a relative sense, their suprafamilial pat-

.:;
.",
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
:z66 /
i
tern involved no permanent social groups of fixed mem-
bership despite several kinds of interfamilial coopera-
tion (Steward, 1955, P: 109).
It requires very few alterations to convert that into a
parallel statement about tribes conceived in the Sahlins-
Service sense. What is more, we have their repeated assur-
ances that tribes by their structural nature involve, to
paraphrase Steward, no permanent social groups of fixed
membership, despite several kinds of interband cooperation.
Sahlins is explicit about this: "a tribe will automatically
return to the state of disunity-local autonomy-and remain
there when competition is in abeyance" (Sahlins, 1961, P:
326). This suggests, of course, that tribe in this conception
is one form of a series comprising a cycle, rather like the
cycle of family forms that have been described in certain
societies, and thus is not an aspect of any general evolu-
tionary process as has been defined elsewhere by Sahlins
and Service (Service, 196oa, pp. 747-63).
Actually, Sahlins seems to have some 'doubts a~t
this very point but his resolution of the problem has been
far from satisfactory:
In comparison with groupings of intermarrying bands,
pantribal social institutions are perhaps the most in-
dicative characteristic of tribal society. Such institu-
tions clearly demarcate the borders of a tribe, separat-
ing it as a social (and ethnic) entity. Intermarrying
bands may carry a vague sense of tribalism-as in Aus-
tralia-but as dialect shades off into dialect and cus-
toms change gradually from band to band, no one can
say where one so-called "tribe" ends and another be-
gins. This is a clearly less integrated condition than
that of tribalism properly so-called (Sahlins, 1961, p.
343, n·3)·
As we have already indicated, the ethnographic record .
does not support this view. Boundaries separating tribes
are no clearer than those separating bands; indeed, they
cannot be clearer, for to the extent that bounding mecha-

Rank Societies
nisms exist, they are precisely the same for band and tribe.
Purely by way of illustration, let me cite P. Brown and
H. C. Brookfield to the effect that the Chimbu (New
Guinea) "tribes" in the pre-European period were "unstable
. . . composed of shifting alignments of clans, pbratries
and parts of pbratries" (Brown & Brookfield, 1959, p.
46). While otherwise according very well with Sahlins'
conception of a tribe, it is patent that tribal borders need
not be more clearly demarcated than band borders. Actu-
ally, most so-called tribes seem at close range to be curious
melanges rather than homogeneous units. Here, for illus-
trative purposes, a sample from the Philippines:
The name "Kalinga" is an Ibanag word
meaning
"enemy," and was widely used in Spanish times for
mountain peoples adjacent to the lower and middle
Cagayan valley . . . the upper Saltan communities ad-
jacentto Abra show strong marks of Tinguian infiltra-
tion, and the Tinglayan communities adjoining the Bon-
tok higher up the Chico are transitional to that ethnic
type. Yet there is still much to be learned about the
congeries of people classed under the Kalinga rubric.
. . . Spanish writers . . . used a variety of district and
ethnic names in characterizing the Kalinga groups.·
Beyer, in his 1917 survey of the Philippine population,
was led to say, "[They consist] of several distinct peo-
ples who are now so exceedingly mixed in physical
type, language, and culture that it is difficult if not im-
possible in the state of our present knowledge to sepa-
rate the constituent groups and define their distinguish-
ing characteristics" (Keesing, 1962, pp. 221-3).
To which Roy F. Barton added this amen: "As Professor
Beyer has said, the Kalinga tribe is an ethnological hodge- ·
podge" (1949, p. 13). It is precisely because tribal units are
ill defined that we have the ongoing discussion mentioned
earlier in which anthropologists seek stable and repetitively
useful criteria:for ethnic groupings.
While the remarks of Beyer, Barton, and Keesingare

168 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLmCAL SOCIETY
"
~ .'
r,l l ,.: . ;'
,
.
,
;. .
1
~ .
I,
£ '
~:,
I
~.,
•
I'
',. 1
;"i'
j
I
I
I,.
still before us, so to speak, I would like to abstract three
generalizations from the sector they illuminate. First, with
regard to so-called "tribal" names, it is a commonplace that
such names are often derived from two particularly frequent
sources: from a designation applied to a population by out-
siders, or from a word equivalent to the concept "person" or
"human being." I would like to argue, although I cannot
substantiate the point now, that such names are proteanly
flexible through space and time and probably have always
varied situationally as well.
Second, if residence is relatively stable, particularly
among peoples with
agricultural subsistence bases
(al-
though we note the Significance of swiddenage as an incen-
tive to a certain physical mobility), the agglomeration of
units into what have been called "tribes" is likely to have
been very variable. Given a series of settlements or camps,
there has been a tendency in ethnography to assume that
the synchronically observed pattern of agglomeration repre-
sents a reality transcending time, whereas diachronic obser-
vation might well have revealed shifting assortments.
Third, there seems to be a widespread tendency among
anthropologists to assume prior conditions of purity and
homogeneity whenever the data indicate a later situation of
heterogeneity. Actually, putting it this way fails to bring
out all of the gratuitous assumptions usually associated
' with this view. An analogy from human paleontology
will be useful: Fossil populations like that found at Skhul
or in the upper cave at Chouk'outierr have usually been
interpreted as the result of the fusion of previously discrete
pure racial elements. Similarly, with regard to such societies
as the Kalinga, it is often assumed that the heterogeneous
condition they display could only be the product of modem
conditions, and efforts are made to separate them into their
pristine constituents. It seems more likely that, apart from
certain conspicuous elements derived from modem societies,
, the heterogeneity of these societies is a relative matter that
should go back into time, shifting with changes in associa-

Rank Societies
tional alignments, micro ecological changes, and so on. Inci-
dentally, this point of view is compatible with the new
archaeology and Its emphasis on statistical rather than
archetypal site profiles; it is less inclined to view cultural
changes as the result of migrations with seemingly recurrent
genocide and is more inclined to accept migration as a
more or less constant factor in human history, shifting the
emphasis to the containment of the migrants and their
novelties.
~
To retreat to the Sahlins-Service view of tribes once
more, I should like to say a few more words about tribe as
a way-station between band and state in the evolution O~f.
political organization. As we have already seen, the tribe
and the band do not differ with regard to boundaries an
distinctiveness of character as much as SahIins and Service
would like. But apart from this, there is, at least in Sahlins'
work, the explicit recognition of what can only be called the
"unprogressive nature" of the tribe as he defines it. This I
take to be the significance of the finding that tribes as politi-
cal structures are ad hoc responses to ephemeral situations
of competition. It is the chiefdom, the next stage visualized
bySahlins and Service, that bears the weight of evolutionary
advance, for it genuinely bridges a previous level of organi-
zation, the acephalous society, with the state. But, as
SahIins and Service imply, tribes and chiefdoms are not the
same thing.
It may seem as if the tribe is a necessary construct for.!
logical reasons, if for no other. How else can the gap be')
bridged that lies between the discrete autonomous settle-S
ment and the nation-state? It was reasoning such as this"
for example, that led Steward to deal with "tribal society"/
as a level of sociocultural integration, one that he believes
.
overlaps Robert Redfield's "folk society" construct. Yet
Steward, too, recognizes that the tribal designation is unusu-
ally difficult to explicate. "It is Significant," he says, "that
the term 'tribal society' remains an exceedingly ill-defined
catchall" (Steward, 1955, P: 53). Indeed, in the same paper

:v-'
:" .
170
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL socrsrv
Steward was inclined to define "tribes" in terms of a group
)
of negative traits, in terms of the lack of state organization,
absence of classes, absence of literacy, and so on; he also
offers the opinion that "there are no features shared by
tribes that are common to all mankind" (Steward, 1955, P:
44), by which I assume he means that there are no specific
positive features common to all tribes.
In fact, there is no absolute necessity for a tribal stage
as defined by Sablins and Service, no necessity, that is, for
such a stage to appear in the transit from a single settle-
ment with embedded political organization, to a complex
state-structured polity. Such a developmental process could
have gone on within a unit that we may conceptualize as a
city-state, such a unit as Jerieho might have become in its
later stages or as villages became cities in Mesopotamia,
India, China, and elsewhere.
"Tribes" as Secondary Phenomena
in Political Evolution
While being bold, I shall go on to say that most tribes or
seem to be secondary phenomena in a very specific sensei
They may well be the product of processes stimulated by
the appearance of relatively highly organized societies .
. amidst other societies which are organized much more
simply. If tbis canbedemonstrated, tribalism can be viewed
as a reaction to the formation of complex political s~cture
rather than a necessary preliminary stage in its evolution.
Whatever be the truth about this problem, it is already
abundantly clear that there are important social aggregates
usually called "tribes" that have nothing to' do with any-
thing I have said so far. These are the "tribes ," so-called,
that spring up in colonial situations. One of the most illu-
minating examples I have found is that presented by Eliza-
beth Colson in her study of the Makah Indians of the North-
west Coast.

" ':.
., .....
... ::.
' ,,' '.-
.:
-
.,
" .:":.'
Rank Societies
/
171
In eighty years, the entity of the Makah Tribe has been
created from the descendants of the formerly independ-
ent villages about" the Cape Flattery region. . . .
It was undoubtedly their common residence at Neah
Bay and their status as Indians and wards of the gov- ,
ernment ois-a-ois the Indian agency which created the
tribe from the former independent villages . . ." (Col-
son, 1953,P· 79)·
The story is somewhat more complex than this and skill-
fully analyzed. What it amounts to is a tribe created by
governmental action, its members showing considerable
diversity in culture, language, and in physical type (Colson,
1953,p. 87)·
The Makah represent a kind of limiting case, since they
exhibit the scrambling of all the categories normally implied
in a discussion of "tribe." The significant point, however, is
not their diversity, but the means by which they became
organized. Colson describes the Plateau Tonga of Northern,
Rhodesia in similar terms ;
In a sense it is probably false to regard the Tonga as
a definite group or real unit which is set off by definite
criteria from other peoples . . .
Today the Tonga exist within one political unit, the
'Plateau Tonga Native Authority, but this is of recent
origin and due to circumstances beyond their control,
Covernment has placed them within the bounds of a
single administrative district and has organized them
into [seventeen] chieftaincies ... [which] represent
Government policy and convenience, and not cultural,
linguistic, or political distinctions among the Tonga
themselves (Colson, 1951, pp. 95-6).
Rather than press the extreme view that all contempo-
rary tribes are the result of contemporary political and eco-
nomic forces, I conclude by taking the more moderate view
developed by May Edel in a posthumously published paper.
,',
f '
>"
,." .
.:
""
I"

1.72 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
As she sees it: "... however much tribal affiliation and
identification may enter, the issues and conflicts of today
are rooted in problems and social interactions of today, and
are not just atavisms rooted in some pre-existent past and
continuing on a momentum of traditionalism" (Edel, 1965,
pp . 358-g). She quotes the much-cited work of A. L. Ep-
stein: "Intertribal relations on the Copperbelt . . . and the
cleavages within political organizations along tribal lines,
cannot be explained Simply as vestiges from a tribal past
which have survived into the present. On the contrary, they
reflect processes at work within the urban social system"
(Edel, 1965, P: 359, from Epstein, 1958, P: 239)· She also
summarizes her view of M. Gluckman's position which
comes to much the same thing, although I would be less
charitable and say that Gluckman's position strikes me as
being variable (ct· Gluckman, 1960, pp. 55-70 ; 1965).
Confusion seems to predominate in one of his most recent
treatments, where he states that, "basic to a tribal society
is the egalitarian economy, with relatively simple tools to
produce and primary goods to consume. The powerful and
wealthy use their might and goods to support dependents;
for they are unable to raise their own standards of living
with the materials available" (Gluckman, 1965, P: xv).
Gluckman's attached list of tribes includes the Bushmen
and the Eskimo as well as Nuba and.Dahomey (Gluckman,
1965, pp. xv-xx), He also applies the term "tribal" to Scots,
Welsh, Irish, French, Jewish, Lebanese, and African deni-
zens of British towns on the ground that they "have their
'own associations; and their domestic life is ruled by their
own national (sic) customs insofar as British law and con-
ditions allow" (Gluckman, 1965, P: 292).
Like Colson viewing the Makah and the Tonga, Edel
described Chiga tribalism as a condition of response to con-
temporary stimuli:
For such a people as the Chiga, whatever sense of
ethnic unity they possess can only be an emergent one,
a response to experiences of the recent past. For the

... .,..-
,,,,.Rank Societies
/ 173
Chiga as I knew them in the nineteen-thirties had no
"tribal" unity whatsoever . . . The only sense of com-
mon Chiga identity came from a common rejection of
alien overlordship (Edel, 1965, pp. 368-9 ).
I do not believe that there is theoretical need for a
tribal stage in the evolution of political organization. Such
a stage explains nothing but does divert attention from
more important questions: How does ranking begin and
how does it undergo adaptive radiation? How does strati-
fication get its start, and how does it catalyze societies?
How does it reinforce itself, and what are its effects on
other societies? These questions, it seems to me, do not
necessarily involve tribalism. Indeed, if I read the evidence
correctly, tribalism is an evolutionary cul-de-sac, part of a
spasmodic cycle that in and of itself lacks the institutional
raw materials capable of leading to more complex forms of
polity.
It seems to me that the so-called "tribal" groups to
which I have so far turned my attention (and I admit the
smallness and inadequacy of the "sample" ) are not social
organizations whose integrity recedes into a remote past.
Rather, there are clues indicating that the tribalism dis-
played is a reaction to more recent events and conditions.
That such tribalism can be made to playa major political
role in a real present is not a modern discovery. Long
before recent European colonialism, not to say neocolonial-
ism, the Roman, the Chinese, and other expanding state
societies had grasped the essentials of divide and rule. What
is more, in the relations between these states..and simpler
organized societies it was understood, within the complex
cultures, that effective manipulation demands a certain
minimum of organization within those simple societies.
There have been examples in which "tribes" have been
consciously synthesized to advance a scheme of external
political control. It is not beyond belief that groups within
former colonial powers would consciously or unconsciously
do whatever they could to create and maintain factionalism.

'. , 1
>. '
.'
,',
174 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLr;o:CAL SOCIETY,
Having completed this critical synopsis of a group of
classical and current theories about probable events and
transitional institutions in the evolution of political society,
from acephalous conditione-to chieftaincy, we turn to an
alternative view and consider !11~ _ ~!ll~rgence and evolution
OftIle--raIik"society from an egalitarian base. 'teCilS"fusr-
'consIder
ra'nlCsbcIemis-as- -umfs~VieweCT,'-so-tO speak, from
the outside. What, for example, is the composition of the
, social groups that they comprise?
Groups
While a completely definitive statement must await
an exhaustive check of the entire literature, my own spotty
sample reveals considerable uniformity. Most rank societies
are strongly based on villages. However, the conspicuous
feature is that the largest continuously functional unit and
the village tend to be congruent. While there are supra-
village aggregates, the village is essentially autonomous,
and Significant agglomeration is either rare or. quite tran-
sient. The major qualifications appear to be two. Where a
more complex political society has encapsulated the rank
society, there is often a formal policy of enlarging villages
by incorporating a number of previously discrete groups
into a single administrative unit within which extensive
interaction is strongly encouraged. The other qualification
has to do with a certain kind of environmental situation that
happens to pertain in a significant portion of all ethno-
graphically known rank societies, that is, many of these
societies tend to be on relatively small islands. Although
various barriers may interfere with movement on land,
distances are short and the lagoon or the sea offers a more
rapid
means
of
communication. Where this
landscape
occurs, there seems to be a higher degree of intervillage
integration than is the case elsewh"1re. The title of Firth's
book, We, the Tikopia, is instructive. The phrase translates
a Tikopia saying; moreover, there is no doubt that in the
sense urged by Oliver the Tikopia form a group, albeit a
\

secondary group ultimately linked through the relations
among their chiefs (Firth, 1959, P: 257). The consciousness
of being Tikopia should not obscure the functionally more
Significant identification of. villages as the largest effective
social groups in that-society.
Territoriality
A Siuai returned from laboring in New Guinea gold
fields told Oliver that his own Siuai landscape was great
and asked how anybody with sense could want to live else-
where (Oliver, 1955, p. 104). Such feeling of identification
with a whole region is rare in Siuai, as it is rare throughout
rank society. As just.noted, the village is usually the largest
effective social group~ and it is the land associated with this
group that tends to be the largest expanse which people
regard as theirs to have, hold, and struggle over.
~
Since rank society is associated."with domestication or
with the exploitation of rather concentrated resources, such
as fish-rich streams, it is also ~~, as we have seen,
with greater demographic density.
As a further conse-
quence, even though productive regimes by no means simul-
taneously exploit the total territory in intensive fashion, the
gross size of the territory tends to be very much smaller
than the enormous ranges within which the simple egali-
tarians wander and camp. Another concomitant is the
.s~~er bounding'of the area believed t(~..?~ associ?,ted
q ~th
~.~i~~Il~~._~~ This matter of boundaries and the
identification of a specific group with a specific territory
can be grossly overdone. In Tikopia, for example, there has
been considerable physical mobility, many persons move
from natal villages to others where they cultivate gardens
on land turned to their use by cognatic or affinal relatives.
This represents a departure from the normal continuity of
viripatrilocality, but is too frequent to be merely a deviation.
What is more, as Firth's restudy of Tikopia indicates, mem-
bership in the four locality crosscutting clans was much
more widely dispersed in 1952 than in 1929. There was .a
>
/ 175
Rank Societies
~, .

::..
.....~... .
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
process of clan dispersion under way that might ultimately
turn all Tikopia into precisely the kind of group that was
mentioned earlier (Firth, 1959, p. 201). This process was
encouraged by the underlying egalitarianism in usufruct
that enables individuals to share land access with those
whose strict genealOgical title should exclude them. The
curious thing is that this is going on in Tikopia just as the
island is experiencing what may be its most serious popula-
tion crisis ever, an increase from some 1,300 to 1,750 people,
.a matter of 35 per cent in less than twenty-five years. Al-
though such an increase is quite modest compared with
areas experiencing rates in excess of 2.5 per cent a year,
Tikopia is a tiny island that was already pushing its re-
sources in 1929. In times past population was held in
balance by various things, including infanticide and natu-
ral -disaster, but some reliance seemed to be placed upon
war, with the people of a defeated village not only being
driven from their site but from Tikopia, perhaps to perish
at sea during a journey to nowhere (Firth, 1961, pp. izg-
39). With the older violent solutions being refused to the
Tikopia by impinging external government and by mis-
sionaries, it would seem that much of the u;.terstitial area
is being slowly filled. Actually, part of the immediate solu-
tion is already discernible in changes in the social pattern;
if they continue, Tikopia will drop from the lists of rank
societies and become stratified and a more integral part of
the externally supplied state organization than it is at
present.
The vagueness of the association between some rank
villages and their territories is reflected in ethnographies
from geographically separated areas. Without going into
much detail, one additional example may be given from
Africa, particularly because the work done by Colson among
the Tonga of Nothern Rhodesia has shown outstanding con-
cern for this particular problem. She says, "In a sense a vil-
lage does not even exist as a territorial unit, though it 'has
a spatial distribution" (Colson, 1951, p. 119). The distinc-

Rank Societies
/ 177
~ "
~~~~ :'. ,
,"-~~f..
,/. ,
i!I: :
....-
'~ ", :
,~
.
;..:.,
tion is a nice one and very important. The fact is that in
this Tonga society, as in most rank societies, the concept of
title, of legally specific ownership, is absent. A population,
with its ranked head, is associated with area but, "In former
days a headman and his people could not prevent a strange
village from coming to settle nearby unless they resorted to
,
>Ii'-
force" (Colson, 1951, p. 119). Newcomers might appropriate
'bush by what amounted to squatting or they might go
through the motions of discovering the original user and
ask the right to use it from him. It is worth remarking that
Tonga village headmen are described by Colson as leaders
whose effectiveness rests upon prestige and authority rather
than'force and privileged access to sanctions. of great
interest is the observation that the headman and only the
headman is considered to have everybody in his village as
his following. His name and the village name are the same
(Colson, 1951, P' 115), indeed, "the position of the headman
... apparently establishes the identity of the village and
differentiates it from other groups of like nature" (Colson,
1951, P: 116). Despite this, "the headman cannot allot land;
for he possesses none save that which he has cleared him-
self" (Colson, 1951, P: 119) .
I stress .the fact that the intensiv~g­
raphies is an occupation that :Ui1meCflately produces stag-
'genng ly vanaotlnmt"a1t."'~~societies handfe~1an(C
tenure-mane-is mo're--orless like .the Tonga, others show
great variation. The compendiums of principles underlying
land tenure in various colonial regions testify clearly about
this matter. Nonetheless, two factors can be discerned to
appear in a multitude of guises. The underlying egalitariaa
economy in rank society drastically limits the power of
those in high-ranking statuses to manage the distribution
of usufructory rights to strategic property. Beyond this
however, the ranking system itself not only is one of the
templates of local organization but offers a potent means of
linking discrete communities. It usually does so not merely
by reinforcing existing kin ties of various kinds, but by

....::>
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
channeling these kin relations and setting them within an
implicitly hierarchical structure. Viewed metaphorically in
terms of ·process rather than as a frozen level of organiza-
tion, the ranking system has great potential for the presenta-
tion of a societal skeleton upon which the musculature and
specialized organic development of stratification can grow.
External Polity
At the risk of being querulous, I must again take issue
With Service for his finding that the "external polity of tribes
is usually military only" (Service, 1962, P: 114). To the
extent that this remark covers what L designate as rank
societies, it seems misleading, although I hasten to
a,.gr~
with Service that rank societies tend to .be combative, -tEat
DUlDy"QTthem exist in ;hat m;yb-;; -;~;-;~ "'~ chronic' state
~
=t"~~~ .~.~a £fiat terrorancIpsy6h'ological warfare are com.:
.
man means of maintaining group integrity in the face of .
competition for survival. I suspect, but cannot prove, al-
though I hope others will subject this hypothesis to severe
. test, that this aspect of rank society has temporal and eco-
~1S!:~lcl¥nen~s. Briefly, nIiink'That Itslrouldbeposstbfe"
to find a significant statistical correlation between the in-
tensity and frequency of martial orientations in rank society
.and pressure of populations on resources. Apart from this,
however, it is necessary .to recall that most rank societies
e~gage with equal or greater'frequency in other intercom-
munity activities, most notably in feasts, parties, ceremonies,
and other events predicated upon organized hospitality. It
is 'in the conduct of such events that ranking reaches its
apogee as the effective organizer of the population. Warfare
produces nothing like it in rank societies, even when the
manifest purpose of the conflict is to protect a specific
ranked individual or group.
So much has already been said about the role of great
feasts in rank society that I can be brief in this treatment.
We begin with an example, drawn deliberately from the ac-
count of certain districts in the eastern highlands. of Aus-

. ',
," - .".
,
,-;-,-: ;;
Rank Societies
/
:z.79
tralian New Guinea. The source is a work of Ronald Berndt,
an interesting analysis of warfare and "social control. Pre-
cisely because the stress is laid on war and because of the
extended discussion of torture, cannibalism, and other acts
of terror, Berndt's treatment offers strong supp.ort to the
Service contention mentioned above. Yet, without belittling
the Significance of military postures .among these people, we
can indicate that actual periods of hostilities are brief,
"Few interdistrict fights last longer than two or three days"
(Berndt, 1962, P: 235) . Though "potential hostility from
members of other districts is part of the normal :process of
living" (Berndt, 1962, P: 240), the periods between overt
clashes are of much greater duration, so that it seems pos-
sible to say that this SOCiety, in a sense oriented around war,
is generally in a state of actual peace.
While war is irregular in spacing and concentrates little
energy, major intervilla e ce e
are comparatively
regular, re
e ong periods of elaborate preparation, and
playa significant role in r~lating the.,gl'lp:eral economy of
r=~~~ating 'illw§·)n one iliStrict studied, activities ili3:t •
c
te in a great pig festival span a period of almost six
years with the final six months being extraordinarily active
ones. Not only a mountain of food must be assembled,
but also sufficient quantities of firewood, water, leaves, and
other essentials of the feast. Perhaps the two most impor-
tant. tasks are the raising of the pigs and the deliveryof
invitations to surrounding villages and districts. Quite apart
from the feasting and distribution at the formal ceremony,
the arrangements negotiated from village to village to solicit
loans and contributions represent a major portion of the
ties binding discrete villages into a wider-ranging, if loose,
social system. While hostilities might follow such a feast,
they are customarily .suspended during the six months of
intensive preparation (Berndt, 1962, p; 64). At the .actual
distribution, lineage headmen, as a group, act as hosts and
call in tum the names of districts and lineages to receive
food. Hearing the name, "the headman or warrior leader"

comes to get his share, dancing, and returns to his group
where his younger brothers take the meat back to their own
village. Incidentally, from Berndt's own accounts of warfare
it would seem that the term "warrior leader" is inappropri-
a~e since the leadership qualities are 'not pronounced. In-
stead, these individuals seem better indicated by such a
phrase as "outstanding warriors" (cf. Berndt, 1962, pp.
174-5)·
'
"
Perhaps the best known ceremonies of the general type
described are those formerly carried out among the Indians
of the North Pacific Coast. Although it is now established
that the climactic, tremendously elaborated potlatch was a
product of European contact and trade-borne wealth, the
early potlatch, though less sumptuous performed similar
functions (Codere, 1950, P: 94). The structure of the pot-
latch was such that it simultaneously expressed the rank
structure of all relationships, both between villages and
within villages, and served as a device for organizing dis-
crete villages into overlapping economic networks (Codere,
1950, pp. 64 ff.; Drucker, 1965, pp. 5EKi6, 127). Describing
Tsimshian mortuary potlatches, Drucker conveys all the
familiar points. Preparations, primarily the stocking of foods
and gift items, took a year or more and required the host
village to solicit aid of various kinds from near and distant
Villages. Invitations were sent and required smaller ritual
occasions when presented and accepted. Although the usual
Northwest Coast procedure was to treat high rank first, the
Tsimshian went from low to high rank in making presenta-
tions. In any case, the affair was saturated in ritual com-
memoration of rank differences.
Potlatching has been called "fighting with property"
and could lead to out-and-out fights. Apart from the meta-
phor, or what might be the results of a local inability to
respond to .crushingly lavish hospitality, the potlatch rep-
resented a peaceful activity. It brought out the highest
development of administrative abilities in the societies con-
180 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY

.;. >...~: ; ..
,...:... ......
Rank Societies
-.....
/
~8~
cerned. In this respect it differed sharply from war that
was carried out in much less organized fashion.
Warfare
Although rank societies tend to be warlike for the rea-
sons previously indicated, the degree to which intergroup
relations are settled with violence varies considerably. As I
put it earlier, there may be a correlation between fre-
quency of intergroup violence and density of settlement. I
think that a somewhat less direct relationship exists between
the significance of ranking and the amount of warlike ac-
tivity. Some information on the relationship has been pre-
sented by A. P. Vayda (1956, pp. 2, 222££.) in the context
of Polynesian ethnology. The Maori, whom I would treat
as representative of simple ranking, are characterized as
having warfare small in scale, brief, with relative absence
of command and discipline. The model of Maori military
organization, to the extent that one can find it organized,
is, like that of the equally simple Pukapuka society, based
upon existing kin and village structure (ct. Beaglehole, 1938,
pp. 373-4; Fried, 1961, pp'. 141-5). On the other end of the
continuum, in the more complex ranking societies and strati-
fied societies of Polynesia, such as those of the Society
Islands and Hawaii, warfare is more thoroughly organized.
A similar picture is presented by the situation in the
North Pacific Coast region. The highest development of
ranking occurs among the Nootka and Kwakiutl and the
societies in their part" of the area. Military sophistication
also increases as one moves into that area. Unlike the situ-
ation, for example, in the New Guinea Highlands, observed
by Berndt, where outstanding warriors are simply those who
are individually strong, crafty, and fearless, but who have
no visible command functions, the Nootka had some spe-
cialization of military function. There was a commander-
in-chief, tactical splitting of parties for flanking or other
maneuvers, and the employment of sentinels and scouts.

\.
·\' .
Z82 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
Despite this, discipline was poor with no provisions for
replacing a fallen commander while still in combat. Drucker
notes that, "the lack of succession of command . . . caused
attacking forces to withdraw when on the verge of victory
because of the loss of their commander" (Drucker, 1951,
p. 341) . This may be compared with Vayda's comment
about the Maori: "Even when on the verge of victory, an
attacking force might withdraw because of the loss of a
leader" (Vayda, 1960, p. 26).
.
Perhaps the most important question for the present
inquiry has to do with the relation between military prowess
and political position. It has been held quite frequently and
by some of the major thinkers in
~socio1ogy that political
status originated in either religious or military roles and
of these the latter are often adjudged the more signiflcant
since they appear to convey intrinsic physical power that
can be used to sanction the behavior of others. But as has
already been indicated, the military organization of rank
societies is but a partial utilization of the pre-existing kin
and community structure. IT a direction must be found in
the developmental sequence, it would seem that signiflcant
military leadership
status
depends
upon prior general
status. The leading possible exception to this is in a society
where war leaders are distinct from peace leaders. Yet
where such a division exists it rarely develops that the
war leader enlarges his sphere of influence at the expense
of the peace leader (cf. Drucker, 1951, P: 343). When he
does, there will usually be special circumstances, the most
common being the impinging of a more complexly organized
society.
FROM EGALITARIAN TO RANK SOCIETY
The question has long been a favorite one: Why have
people permitted themselves to be seduced, bilked, mur-
phied, or otherwise conned into relinquishing a condition
of egalitarianism for one of inequality? The question, of
course, is loaded, not only politically but culturally. Apart

.»:
'.: .::: :.
from being biased, however, the question-is wrong in its
irpplication that individuals faced a conscious choice and
sel~cted_the alternative of rank society. I believe that the
evidence is quite to the contrary and that events conceived
retrospectively as cataclysmic actually passed Without no-
tice until they were fully accomplished. Rank society grew
out of egalitarian society Without the conscious awareness
,of the members of the society in which it occurred;~
li!ve that stratified society and the state emerged in the
same quiet way and were institutionally fully present be-
.fu.re any~~~Jl!lP.J?J~.<f.f2!- _a ~Qi:dJiy- whiGh_t.o-Jksigg~te them.
In the move from egalitarian to rank society, the first
thing tc? note is the persistence of the ,!!!ain frame of eco-
nomic relations. In terms of access to the things necessary
to maintain me, equality is retained. Standards of living,
even with regard to items beyond subsistence, are also
generally equal. ,!:?e outstanding differences are essentially
___based upon varying increments of prestige and upon the
.
hierarchical ordering of status positions.
.
'
What woUld lead to the narrowing and institutionaliza-\jM,...
tion of positions of rank? Undoubtably there are many cir-
r:-j .,
,cumstances involved: problems of maintaining connections
between parent settlements and those that have budded off; -
possibilities of diversifying the consuming sector of the
economy by maintaining regular trade relations with com-
mumties exploiting somewhat different resources; the pos-
sibility of better handling of food supply by organizing
special labor forces for simple irri...gation tasks; rationaliza-
t!~~ _~I-=~_se9.~oIJiiibita.ti.Qn in which original settlers
are joined, albeit peaceably, by subsequent settlers; the
formalization, as Service has pointed out, of trans-settlement
sodalities, often as a means of enlarging the area of rela-
tive peace. These are but a few of the more obvious and
probably most Widespread stimuli to the emergence of
ranking.
m··.)
H I had to select the two most Significant factors, .I
-•. .>:1
would. c~oos_~ ~oill~~~hy and the
e~g(;m~e
,. i::
of redistribution, These have already been analyzed at the
. •. •.
......
". : "' .'
'; ~ :~
Rank Societies
r.
~- .

THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
beginning of this chapter; a more detailed investigation is
not attempted here. Neither of these factors, of course,
comes out of the blue. Both stem from an underlying revo-
lution in the relations between man and environment, ex-
panding and stabilizing subsistence. Once accomplished,
rank society is quite durable but as we already know and
now must investigate, there are circumstances under which
further developments occur which introduce a much more
fundamental kind of inequality. This is the stratified society.
"

Of the several types of societies dis- '
cussed in this book, that called the "stratiliedJQciety is
the most difficult to illustrate with ethnograp-hic examples.
'That is to say, 'StratlBed societies laclcfiig political insti-
tutions of state le~el are almost impossible to find, although
the stage of stratification-without-stateship must have oc-
curred several times ,in the evolution of complex political
and economic organization.1 The cause of this rarity is not
difficult to isolate. Once stratification exists, the cause o~
'stateship is implicit and the actual formation of the stat
is begun, its formal appearance occurring within a rela-
tively' brief time. Justification of this statement is the task
. of the p~esent chapter. The main argument can be stated
l.The aCtual road to the -state is variable. All states did not have ~o
' . go through a stage of stratification-without-stateshtp. But each pris-
•
. »
~e state certainly had to traverse this stage or level.
CHAPTER
Stratified Societies
5

THE EVOLUTION OF .POLITICAL SOCIETY
::z86 /
2 I have elsewhere (Fried, 1957, p. 24) defined "strategic resources"
in essentially similar terms. The present term "basic resources" seems
closer to the mark.
briefly. The maintenance of an order of stratification
de-~
.,----------- ----
li.:lands sanctions commanding power beyond the resources
'""of a kinship system: -\;!iich-is adequate for-·the -purposes of
egalitarian ancCeven rank society as the previous chapters
have shown. By differentially distributing access to basic
~~<2.~oodand by simultaneously makinKPossible
the exploitattonofliiiman IabofIrithe conventional Marxist
~- strat:ili.ecr··s6de!i:e~··cie~f~.E!~~s~e~.~Pho\\'IlJll..~~li-
tarfanand rank societies, and these pressures cannot be con-
Wlied- by-mternalized "social controls or ideology alone .
~
urthermore, the pressures are usually exacerbated by the
ansformation, attenuation, or destruction of -kin relation-
ships in the stratified society, thus making it unlikely, to say
the least, that kinship relations will provide a universal
means of social control and adjudication within the society.
But these remarks run ahead of the analysis; let me return to
the definition of stratification.
A stratified society is one in which members of the same
sexa~hqulv.a:rent-_~K~2!~1!!~Ulo not hsve.equal.access.to
the basic resources that sustain life. It seems both con-
venient and tactically wise-to- consioer the basic resources-
of a society in an ecological context and therefore to some
extent relative rather than absolute. Thus, different societies
may be said to have different basic resources, the variation
being due to differences in geographical environment, tech-
nological equipment, and what may be called the histori-
cally determined perception of the exploitable environment.
For example, few American Indian cultures of the Plains
regions drew any portion of their subsistence from the rivers
that flowed through the areas in which they farmed or
hunted and it would be pointless to consider riparian re-
sources in any way basic.
Conversely, other American
Indian cultures, such as the Yurek of California, did derive
part of their subsistence by river fishing, and access to
.'..'~ ,
Ig{)
~~~~~;.: . .

. .. /
" ' \ . ;"
'~
'. "::- '
f
,
·: __~ ..r
-.,
"
,
Stratified Societies
/ 187
::'fuose waters would have to be considered as access to a
J(b <iSic 'resource. Elsewhere, the raw materials for making
~? :'t6ols and weapons may be limited to stands of wild bamboo,
i~ ' Jortuitously distributed stones, or deposits of ore. Similarly,
, in the simplest situations water is a basic resource only for
". drinking purposes, but in more complex situations it may
be basic to agricultural production, to the generation of
power, or to the carrying off of wastes. Though our analysis
does not carry through to highly organized political sys-
tems dependent upon the most complex technologies, it can
be expanded to include them. In some instances, particu-
larly in our discussion further on of recent types of state
formation, the flexible nature of the concept of basic re-
sources is advantageous.
It should be emphasized that our concept of basic re-
sources refers to what might be considered capital rather'
.!han consumer goodS. CentraJ are the things to which ac-
cess must exist in order for life to be maintained for the
individual.
Given
those things, or, better, given unre-
stricted access to those things, anyone can manage his own
support, particularly given a domestic division of labor. We
are less interested in such actual consumables as food itself,
:
or specific tools, than in the u;!timate source of food and"4-
the raw materials from which tools are fashioned. Accumu-
'lations of harvested food supplies and stockpiles of tools
in a primitive society confer only limited and transitory
advantage. Storage and preservation facilities for the former
are lacking and overaccumulation of the latter might be
disadvantageous where survival depends on mobility. The
1nost obvious and efficient means of investing supplies be-
yond consumption is to give them away, establishing a pat-
tern of exchange, and this fits the model we have discussed.
It is possible, however, for individual accumulation of con-
sumables to occur. In addition to having only transitory
character, such accumulation is an explicitly antisocial act,
fostering hostility. It is interesting that in prestratified so-
cieties individuals or families hoarding food in famines

3 This limitation helps to locate, vis-a-vis the categories we are using,
the nonstratified peasant communities that periodically avoid land
concentration by redivisions taking account of waxing and waning
family size. In the short run some of the families may seem to be
moving ahead of others but a longer view reveals a process of leveling
which obviates stratification.
must move away from their less fortunate neighbors to en-
joy their advantage, because if they remain in association
with the destitute there is no way to avoid their demands.
This behavior should be compared with that displayed in
stratified societies in similar circumstances. Shortages raise
prices, and profiteers withhold essential commodities unless
their prices are met. The actions taken by complex govern-
ments to establish war or emergency price and rationing
controls confirm this distinction, as does the reality of the
black market.
.
Dangerous deprivation of individuals in nonstratified
societies usually does not occur until there is a sharp reduc-
tion in the standard of living of all. All individuals physi-
cally capable of securing food can attempt to do so for
there are no barriers between them and the basic resources.
Where stratification, in the sense in which the term is used
in this book, does not exist, each individual, bound only
by such division of labor as accords with age and sex, has
unimpaired access to the raw materials of survival. In strati-
fied societies there are ~ents in the way of access;
they can be exceptionally diverse but can be reduced to
two very broad categories; First is total exclusion by virtue
.Qf assigning all available usufructs to specific individuals
~~groups,tE:e latter being composed of members fewer
than the total population of the society. This condition im-
plies that periodic redistribution of usufructory rights either
does not occur or is confined to a portion of the population
and not the whole." As a consequence it is apparent that
some members of the society face problems of subsistence
different from those who enjoy direct access to the basic
resources. ~lld_categ.ory_o.umpairment of access arises
as a consequence of societal size and complexity. In com-
'--
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
188 /

.. . >-
/ 189
Stratified Societies
plex societies, of course,
tEl_c4.l1QI.Qgi~~_and economic con-
ditions are such that most transactions occur in ways and
locations
see~g!y' remote from the.-.-EE-0duction of basic
subsU!!en~ .29!1:~~~Q!~~ but.!IJ._simplesocieties the prob-
lem is one of getting some kind of access to the sources of
]59g~4IPe_ obtaining of such-access--req~i!esE~ygierits- or
labor outputs in excess of
thos~_!~9.uire~ of peoEle with_
direct access rights. Indeed, it is precisely at this juncture
tllaCthe"'e'conoillic phenomenon of exploitation is born as
the persop wi!Eim~ded_Jjgh~Qr~GCElss..m~Lbuy this right
with a share of his labor, perha@s a ;ortion of his produce,
trom a holder of unimpeded agu: ofccess. Obviously labor'
exploitation can take a variety of forms, any combination
of which may be found in a specific society, although there
is rather strong patterning along lines of ascending socio-
economic complexity. For example, payment for access may
involve personal services, military assistance, or drudge
labor.
Given stratification, but holding other things constant,~ ~
assuming equal energy inputs, a person enjoying Unimpede~ W1wz. ,
access to basic resources will end up with a larger final
~r,.o
product under his control than will one who lacks such ac-
,
cess. Without laboring this point let us note a relevan
corollary: Some individuals without primary access rights
to basic resources may actually enjoy a higher standard
of living than seme who have them if their capital is
greater or if the amount and quality of capital is the same
" and energy input of the latter is very great while that of the
, 'Despite the complications of a higWy elaborated division of labor,
and even of the welfare mechanisms of diverse modem economic sys-
tems, the question of access to basic resources remains the central
problem of contemporary national states, both old and new. Two ex-
, ' amples indicate the spectrum: The problem of differential investment
, , iii. agriculture and industry' in Communist China immediately implies
'. differential access; so does the character of "racial" riots in the United
states, which have displayed a uniform feature in raids on food mar-
.:kets,
among
other targets. Obviously, this
is a. difficult question
" requiring lengthy ,analysis falling beyond the scope of the present
work, which is, concerned with simpler forms of society.

1.90
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITIcAL SOClliTY
former is very low. In more complex social arrangements
a class of highly skilled managers may stand between the
owners (perhaps even the state) and the laborers and from
their strategic positions derive the greatest return known
in the society. In complex societies, as already indicated,
the division of labor is so complex as to have a great por-
tion of the labor force working at specialized tasks far re-
moved from the production of subsistence. Consequently, a
major portion of the population in such a society will never
act in direct relation to basic resources. Their existence
continues to depend on diverting great portions if not the
entirety of the returns of their labor to acquiring subsistence
goods. BL~~ stage, however, .there.has-been-a-dramatic
increase in the kinds of things~~t m~.! 1:Je c..Q!l.?jp,ered basic .
' re"sourceii: t\J'-ot only have a variety of natural substances of
no significance in Simple societjr,'1lke -iron;-lead,'coal, or
molybdenum, joined the things necessary to the physical
support of life, but tools and factories have as well. Unlike
~
imPle cultures, wliere any mature person, given access
to raw materials, can make usable copies of the tools of his
or her own culture, in a complex civilization it is not pos-
sible for individuals to reproduce that culture's technology,
even 1£ granted access to all necessary raw materials. It is
very much to the point that something like a great factory,
which cannot be .constructed with the labor of an individual
or even a large kin group, may be held as an exclusive
possession by a single person.
It is not the complex forms of stratification found in
modem industrial society that lie at the core of this chapter.
Our concern is with the Simplest stratified societies that are
known or can be sketched from available data. We are in-
terested in the processes by which stratification emerges,
and we must inquire also into the problems of social con-
trol that must accompany the emergence of stratification.
This leads us to consider the means by which order is main-
tained in such a society. Finally, in this chapter we will in-
vestigate the internal instability of Simple stratified systems
. ,~
',:
' -~

.-....., ;- .
Stratified Societies
/
191
:/ ;m-d relate this to warfare and to the central theme of the
,>;:riext chapter, the emergence of the state.
I -' THE ORIGINS OF STRATIFICATION
The question of the origins of stratification refers to
,- ~e development of d:fferentiated rights of access to basic
_ resources. It-is possible thus to narrow the question because
- pristine stratification develops in a simple technological
milieu, probably equivalent to that associated with neolithic
peasant villages. Appearing before the
development of
.E1etallurgy and complex full-time craft specialization, there
are few
IT ~y technological instruments of production
_which cannot be constituted an~vhere in the society, pro-
vided that there is unimpeded...access to...haskxesQ]~. The
major qualification is limited but interesting and has to
QO with the assembling of a work force since the manu-
facture o~ som~_~~ents of production, for example large
fishing craft, is facilitated by the coordinated labor of several
fudlviduaIS. As we have seen, in egalitarian societies there
is little difficulty in assembling such a force when it is neces-
sary and the product of combined labor is available to all.
Rather than pursue this point here, I prefer to suggest that
the Q.l9c1dEg.QL?:s.,.
~ess .to enlarged labor groups is derived
froD;l an earlier process of blocka e from basic resources.
Because the question of the origins of stratification re-
volves about the process by which basic resources were con-
verted from communal to private property, it is well to
grasp the bull by the horns and face the problem that has
-f# inspired so much verbiage since the eighteenth century
and before, much of it by some great social commentators
and all of it tendentious (just as this book is). Cutting
through a voluminous literature; let us approach the matter
by criticizing the work of Melville J. Herskovits, who
stated his position flatly and in a highly conventional an-
thr(B~mm.
'
-H
0
was perfectly 'content to !!lake the concept
of proB~ a dependent variable but resisted any effort to
I

THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
192
/
view it as 'a causal agent vis-a-vis any other significant
aspect of sociocultural process.
Our task ... is to obtain a sense ofthe variation pos-
. sible in this, as in other aspects of the economic life·of
the folk with whom we are concerned and to seek to
determine the mechanisms operative in bringing about
such property arrangements as exist ::unong nonliterate
peoples (Herskovits, 1960, P: 330).
Ridiculing as meaningless the effort to understand economic'
evolution as a process involving a transition from some
kind of communism to private ownership, Herskovits felt
that such an approach could not be divorced from biased
political pamphleteering. His major reason for .antipathy,
however, was methodological; he flatly denied the validity
of any and all types of reconstruction utilizing data from
observed simple societies:
For here, no less than in other segments of man's social
life, to attempt to draw specifications of the first forms
of property, to search out the dawn of a property sense
in man through the study of forms of property in the
"rude" civilizations of contemporary nonliterate man, is
but an academic enterprise doomed to scientific futility
by the simple fact that no hypothesis of this order is
subject to the ultimate test of reference to relevant data
(Herskovits, 1960, P: 326).
I cannot refrain from saying that the specifications for proof
demanded by Herskovits cannot be met in any science that
.deals with the past, but would abolish much of biological
science, especially almost all of evolutionary biology, and
.would wipe out much of astronomy in passing. _Geology
and some other sciences would also have to go, at least in . '
those of their aspects that treat of the origin and develop-
ment of the earth and its crust.
Actually, so demanding are Herskovits' canons that he
violated them himself. In the same book .previously cited,
.,
for example, he offered a refutation of "the doctrine of .':'

Stratified Societies
/
.193
communal ownership of land among hunting and food-
gathering peoples" (Herskovtts, 1960, P: 335). He gave a
number of examples, most of them shared with others, like
Robert H . Lowie, who had moved along the same theoreti-
cal path somewhat earlier. It does not seem to have occurred
to Herskovits that his use of these examples violates his
own rule of method. Indeed, there is justification for re-
garding his use of this material as a particularly flagrant
violation of standards of accuracy. The reason for this is
Simple and has to do with the quality of the data cited. In
all of the cases, as it happens, the conditions described are
not aboriginal but result from strong acculturative pressures
emanating from much more highly organized societies. This
is the case with the Eastern Algonkians (ct.Leacock, 1954),
and there is a special rub in the case of the Ceylon Yedda,
for the source Herskovits cited (Seligman, 1911) itself con-
tains the evidence that the Veddas were living in completely
nonaboriginal ways .
The position of Herskovits outlined here is completely
consistent with the relativism of which he was a foremost
" exponent and which is manifest in his calculated use of the
':'
term "nonliterate" in the matter quoted. The despised term
\', is "preliterate," which Herskovits found pejorative and,
'~' :worse, a symbol of an evolutionary scheme that requires
':~ nonliterates ultimately to become literate. Against this
,:'a9kground it can be understood why Herskovits delighted
',\culling definitions of property that stress recognition of
". e fact that in the course of its development every society
·~' ;:devised a special mold in which to cast its traditions of
~:~. ¢isbip" (Herskovits, 1960, p. 318). This leads inexorably
,~' ;.IOgical relativistic conclusion: "the ultimate determi-
· j.~fwhat is property and what is not is to be sought in
" 'itude of the group from whose culture a given in-
'"-'{g{ ownership is taken' (Herskovits, 1960, P: 326;
iJ,loriginal) .
.:i,tting1y or no, by giving the anthropologist an im-
,e::assignment, Herskovits buried the question. That
,; :

r.
r<. -
',..':"
.,. ;"
194 I
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
he actually saw what he was doing is likely, for he followed
the preceding remark with the observation that, "[i[f this
makes generalization the more difficult, the difficulty must
be accepted and taken into account" (Herskovits, 1960, P:
326 ).
IT generalization built on multiplex ernie ethnography
is impossible, the reverse of the procedure demanded by
Herskovits is simple enough to be feasible. Rather than in-
quire into interior understandings of property concepts held
by denizens of a variety of societies, information is gathered
on access, first to basic resources. Such information as we
have on hand' indicates that most simple societies-how-
ever they may be embedded in an ideological web of per-
missions, rights, obligations, reciprocations or.what have
you- do not interfere with the individual's access to the "
places where the means of subsistence may be acquired.
IT we study production, distribution, and consumption in
such societies and do not ask selected informants to tell us
what it is we are seeing, the resultant data will come much
closer to substantiating the model we are offering than the
antigeneralizing congeries discussed by Herskovits.
It should be added that our objections to Herskovits
are aimed explicitly at the portion of the total phenomenon
of "property" that relates to access 'to basic resources. That
all societies known to ethnography permit some very close
control by some individuals over the use, disposal, and de-
struction of some objects is patent. It is worthy of discussion
only to the extent of remarking that even with regard to
humble, nonbasic, nonstrategic items, the web of social re-
lations sometimes creates such demands for exchange as to
obviate most of our own culture's concepts of private
property.
When it comes to the problem of the origins of private
property Herskovits, as might be expected, buried the
issue in a failure to make any distinctions about the kind
of property involved. As far as he was concerned, "the phe-
nomenon is a universal one, since there is no' group who live
: ~~
..•..

::,'\
Stratified Societies
/
~95
so precariously that there is not some tool, some weapon,
. some bit of ornament or clothing that is not regarded as
indisputably the possession' of its maker, its user, its wearer"
(Herskovits, 1960, P: 327). Believing this, and seeing no
distinction between basic resources and other kinds of
property, Herskovits saw the role of the anthropologist as
limited to the description of the ethnographic variations in
the institution and analysis of its social and economic role.
As for origins:
The ownership of wealth may have arisen from the
exploitation of the weak by the strong; it may have
arisen from differences in privileges possessed by the
two sexes; it may be the result of differences in energy
and foresight between members of the earliest human .
community. Or it may have been none of these; or
again it may have been one of them in one part of
the earth, and another in a different locality; while in
still other areas it may have been anyone of several
combinations of these possibilities (Herskovits, 1960,
PP·326-7)·
With regard to the ownership of noseplugs, penis sheaths,
and even digging sticks or hand axes, I doubt that any of
them arose from any of the conditions specified by Her-
skovits, singly or in combination, anywhere in the world.
I am even more certain that none of these conditions can
explain any case of the emergence of private property in
respect to access to basic resources. One blanket reason
should suffice although others might be given: Every con-
dition mentioned by Herskovits is either of such antiquity
as to have arisen no later than the earliest appearance of the
hf>minids if not before, or is the other kind of anachronism.
The last seems to apply to the condition of exploitation
of the weak by the strong, at least in the usual economic
sense of exploitation, which requires the prior existence of
the phenomenon to be explained.
We have already seen that differences of energy and
foresight, to attend to the only condition mentioned by
., .
."
. :,.
... ~.'
. ;:;":

:-..
POPULATION PRESSURE
In a very well-known passage Meyer Fortes and E. E.
Evans-Pritchard state flatly: "it would be incorrect to sup-
pose that governmental institutions are found in those soci-
eties with greatest density [of population]. The opposite
seems to be equally likely, judging by our material" (Fortes
& Evans-Pritchard,
1940, p.
7)"
By gbvernment, these
authors mean "centralized authority, administrative ma-
chinery, and ·judicial institutions" (Fortes & Evans-Pritch-
ard, 1940, P: 5); we briefly consider their theses
and
this demographic generalization in particular below. At the
moment, however, my interest in introducing the statement
196 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
Herskovits which might have a bearing on the problem,
may be assumed to be universal in man and probably ex-
tend to many other animals as well. If the assumption is
correct, such differences could account for the origin of
private property only if that trait were universal. It must be
admitted that Herskovits is consistent, for he not only
claims universality for private property but also implies that
it is as old as "the earliest human community." But these
contentions cannot be accepted if my analysis of egalitarian
"..
economies (see Chapter 3) is valid.
If restricted access to basic resources is not a universal
~~acteiis~humavocieties and if it appeared fairly
late in nistory and at different places at different times, what
can be its initiating conditions? In juxtaposition to those
conditions proposed by Herskovits, I offer the follOWing as
a provisiopalJi1?t;_I1opulation pressure;
sliif:tS:1rijilJstom~
~t:?:~~~~_:eside!1_~~,Ratj;~mS;-cOntractionor.sharp.natnral
alteration of basic resources;_shifts_in_s.-uhsis.ieu,c.e_p.atterns
ansmg·rrom.SUC11~s
,!~£hnQlQgk~L.QhangsLQLJ;he
imiimgeolent-'ofa market'system; development of mana-
~
. gerial' Toles as an aspect
o~!ill:~tioJi' o(~~9.2iaI .and
, '4" -ceremomiiIsystem'.·TexpIicitly reject warfare and slavery
.if-
as initiating conditions and turn to this question after dis-
..
. cussing the positive conditions.
, ." ,

Stratified Societies
/
1.97
is to call attention to one instance of reluctance by a~!hro-(
-R~!ogist~_to accept demographic phenomena as causal fac-S
tors in cultural development. .
., .,,-,,_ .
._n"'M:ore recently, Robert Adams
haLtakf,:tn~~vegative
~tand on the causal efficacY2.L~rp.ogrl!Phicfactors, Indeed,
discussing the originS' of the state he cuts directly across
the provisional list of conditions that I see as the context
for the emergence of stratification and the state as itemized
just above. Adams writes: "The effect of regarding ecologi-
cal response as the primary creative process . . . is to en-
courage the search for misleadingly self generating extra-
cultural factors, such as population pressure, or the mana-
gerial requirements of irrigation systems, as the effectively
independent causes of cultural development" (Adams, 1966,
p. 15). Especially with regard to population size and den-
sity, Adams seems to hedge after his bold negative state-
ment. We understand the reason for his negative position;
indeed, we had better take note of it:
Particularly in Mesopotamia, where the sedentary vil-
lage pattern seems to have been stabilized for several
millennia between the establishment of effective food
produetion and the "take-off" into urbanism, it may.be
noted that there is simply no evidence for gradual
population increases that might have helped to precipi-
tate the Urban Revolution after reaching some unde-
fined threshold (Adams, 1966, pp. 44-5).
This might be enough to frustrate my whole intention, de-
spite my conviction that social evolution is a real process
~that occurs in real but shifting environments and not ~
of an
infini~ygIi~y- _qLg~~~sthat_p.~~:ele may choose to
~_'Y.i.!h .t1:le:rnwmate.D3ls of culture. The games are those
of the analysts; most call them models. In real life there
. are sequences of causes and effects, and these sequences
.occur at real places separated by time and space. Indeed
,
this point may be discerned as a central theme of Adams'
; ~ book, for he takes full account of local differences before
;.: telling us that "the parallels in the Mesopotamian and

Mexican [political evolutions] . . . suggest that both in-
stances are most significantly characterized by a common
core of regularly occurring features" (Adams, 1966, pp.
174-5). But, to return to the reasons for my optimism about
the possibilities of a demographic thesis for the emergence
of stratification and the state, I tum once again to Adams'
own critical description of the available and relevant ar- .
chaeology:
An increasingly serious problem in both areas is the
disproportionately greater share of attention that the
earliest agricultural origins are receiving than subse-
quent phases in the consolidation of -a sedentary way
of life. Late prehistoric villages are virtually unrepre-
sented by excavations carried out according to modem
(post-World War II) standards. As a result, changes
in ecological adaptations or subsistence patterns that
might have contributed to the onset of the Urban Revo-
lution remain on the whole hypothetical. Reconstruc-
tions of individual settlements based on large-scale
clearance ... are
still virtually unknown
(Adams,
1966, pp . 26-7)·
So the question is still archaeologically open, despite Adams'
general statement of position. Perhaps this is why in pre-
senting the details of his argument he sometimes seems,
despite himself, to adopt a populationist approach (ct.
Adams, 1966, pp. 43, 44, 46).
When we tum from the admittedly inadequate ar-
chaeological record to the world of ethnographic observa-
tion, we discover a rich supply of data. All of it is "second-
ary," of course, in the sense that it derives from situations
set in motion not by indigenous forces but to some extent
by pressures released by outside influences, specifically from
other societies which had already developed more advanced
patterns of economic organization, stratification, and gov-
ernment. Although the definition of a secondary situation
is extremely simple, the actual patterns it may include are
quite diverse and complex. For example, the pressures often .
,
. ...•..,.,.
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
1.98 /
~~~~;:r-·;-::·
"'-,~'..
~.,:;".
/.

"
....
:~
:.
:
Stratified Societies
/ 199
t arise not from direct political interaction with the outside
- but from a number of traits accepted without awareness of .
their consequeI).ces. The precise combination of traits and
their effects can be viewed as unique if analyzed in sufficient
detail, but the forces they release and the way these play
upon further developments show great regularity around
the world.
Let us consider the case of Tikopia to which we have
previously had recourse in other contexts and which can
be used because it bas been the subject of the extraor-
dinarily competent work of Raymond Firth. It is also of
great interest because it bas been studied since Firth's
original work in 1.9Z8-1.929, not only by Firth in 1952, but
also by James Spillius i c]. Spillius, 1.957; Firth & Spillius;:
1963)·
Between 1929 and 1.952 the population of Tikopia in-
creased by about 35 per cent, until it was in the throes of
famine (Firth, 1.959; P: 53). To be sure, this was not the
first time famine had occurred, but this time one of the
major restraints on overpopulation, the organization of the
society to inhibit marriage and conception, was greatly
weakened if not destroyed by exposure to the outside world.
To the extent that famines occurred in the past-and this is
somewhat speculative, as put by Firth (1959, p. 52 )~the
solutions seem to have developed along the lines of war-
fare and "expulsion of some section of the people." These
solutions have been eliminated by the encroachments of
European society in the form of more frequent colonial
government visits and interference and more particularly
by an established branch of the Melanesian Mission. Firth
believes that the sum total of outside forces offsets the "pen-
dulum" rhythm in Tikopia demography. His succeeding
conclusion is most appropriate to the present argument: "In
my opinion, such changes in demographic
pressur~ on
subsistence are far more responsible for much of the struc-
ture- of primitive.societies than anthropologists have gen-
erally allowed" (Fo/b, 1.959, P: 54)·

200
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
When we inquire explicitly into the consequences of
population expansion for the native system of land tenure
and access in Tikopia, we discover:
The results included a division of land holdings by
married brothers, a tendency to restrict the interests
of married women in their lineage land, and a sharper
definition of personal rights in land as against rights of
other lineage and clan members, and community mem-
bers (Firth, 1959, P: 180).
More particularly, there has been mounting pressure to
exclude nonaffines from easy access to lineage-held land
or at least to insist that temporary access, granted, for ex-
ample, to a sister's son, conferred no title. Firth offers the
statement of ,a Tikopian informant to this effect:
. . . If a man has had trouble with his patrilineal kin
he will go and live with his mother's brother. If that
family dies out then he will continue to live there . . .
He himself will say, "T live on my mother's brother's
lands." But should he say "My lands," then in course of
time his mother's brother's clan will come to him and
will chase him away because he called the lands his.
But so long as he acknowledges their ownership they
will allow him to stay (Firth, 1959, P: 160).
This statement takes on added Significance when it is
realized that:
A "rent" (in ' Tikopia view, more in the nature of
acknowledgement of land ownership) was paid in the
.form of a small proportion of the crop. By 1952, there
was a definite hardening of attitude 'by owners, due
primarily to the famine (Firth, 1959, P: in).
,
.
Under known demographic pressure, then, Tikopia has dis-
played increasing narrowness in granting access to basic
resources, plus the growth of invidious distinctions and
new emphasis on a Simple system of rent.
Before leaving the excellent Tikopia material, there is
a further point made by Firth that is of great importance.
·r.
..".
-.;
-I;
,.',
: '~..,.;::..
,
' ~
' ._ '.
•... . -. ' .r •
•_
'~: .. "
__
:

Stratified Societies
/
201
I refer to his observation that the narrowing of access rights
has not yet brought about much in the way of individual
rights to land; rather, there has been increasing emphasis
on small-scale agnatic lineages. I raise this point because
some treatments of the theme of developing stratification
make an unwarranted assumption that stratification requires
individual ownership. Such seems, for example, to be the
view of Robert Adams in the work cited earlier. Adams,
following' Jacques Soustelle, sees the possibility that in
Mexico, "as late as the time of the arrival of the Spaniards
private property was still 'in the act of coming into ex-
istence'" (Adams, 1966, P: 64, citing Soustelle, 1962, P: 80).
While the institution of individual private property is of
great importance, particularly in the later evolution of eco-
nomic and social systems, it is ethnocentric to view it as the
only form of "private" property. In many societies the sys-
tem of stratification is couched in terms of unilineal or
bilateral core kin groups holding preferential rights of
access to basic resources.
'
The thesis that stratification is related to demographic
density is far from original.' I am not sure how old the idea
is, nor shall I attempt to pursue this matter here. It is
sufficient to point out that C. K. Meek, a pioneer in the.
study of land tenure systems in the far-Hung British colonial
empire just before its collapse, has put the essential point
quite succinctly:_
If land is plentiful, population sparse and the people
are still content with a subsistence economy, then it is
possible to practise a system of shifting cultivation
without the necessity of imposing rigid rules. of tenure.
But when the population becomes denser, or for some
reason there is a marked increase in the area of culti-
vated land, it may become necessary to devise more
settled systems {Jf holding land (Meek, 1946, pp. 1-2).
The point can be illustrated by many examples; I choose
one in which the statement is unambiguous and based on
,. direct observation of the reporter. In Northern Nigeria
.~..~
. '

The allocation of arable land and the regulation of the
commonage were traditionally the business of the chief
or village headman in council, which was guided by
traditional law (for the system is but a modification of
the traditional tribal system), but as the population is
increasing and land grows scarcer and scarcer, the law
is, of necessity, changing (Mills & Wilson, 1952, p. 8).
Actually, though many statements of this kind appear
in the literature, and some are supported by citations of
evidence, it is surprising ,that to my knowledge no com-
parative studies have been undertaken to determine em-
pirically exactly what relationships exist between popula-
tion density and forms of land tenure. My own interest in
this problem has been limited to the assembly of a limited
number of cases, but I have recommended the problem
to someone else for more extensive search, analysis, and
perhaps a dissertation.
This section may be concluded by turning back to the
quotation with which it began. Fortes and Evans-Pritchard
.:
.
: : .
202 I
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
the practice some fifty or more years ago was for individuals ':;,
and 'families to apply to a "chief" or to a family head for
:~:,
usufructory rights to land. Such a grant could have been , "
without temporal limit but gave no privilege of alienation
by exchange. Then in 1921 Meek himself observed:
that in crowded areas applicants for land were inclined
to offer, and chiefs to accept, more than the modest
presents which are normally,given, not as rent, but as
an acknowledgement of the chiefs political authority,
which includes the authority to dispose of vacant lands.
In virtue of these larger payments there was a growing
tendency for the occupier to regard his farm as alien-
able property (Meek, 1946, pp. 149-50 ).
Examples such as Meek gives can be found elsewhere
in Africa, M. E. Elton Mills and Monica Wilson take note
of the problem in their survey ofaXhosa-Mengu district
in South Africa in 1949-1950:
.'-
."..

Stratified Societies
/
203
Phave attacked the frequently held assumption that com-
} plexity of government, specifically the emergence of the
;, state, is related in some way to population density. Since
':' the statement quoted was published, the question has been
::- seriously studied by Robert F. Stevenson, who added several
cases to those on which the two British social anthropolo-
gists based their conclusion. By contrast, Stevenson's find-
•• ings strongly support the hypothesis of a positive relation-
. ship. However, he suggests:
that the hypothesis should be modified to acknowledge
that along the borders of states or within the interstices
of states, formerly acephalous systems may develop or
maintain quite high [population]
densities in small
areas, well in advance of the development of spe-
cialized political institutions of their own (R. F. Steven-
son, 1965, p. 331) .
This does not upset the main conclusion:
Once this modification is made there is rather impres-
sive support of the hypothesis. In short, analysis of
. both the African Political Systems' cases and the total
picture of Tropical Africa as a whole (viewed as a
general pattern) shows a pronounced general conjunc-
tion between state formation and higher population
density (R. F. Stevenson, 1965, pp. 331-2).
This does not completely settle the issue. Clearly, what
I have'elsewhere called the "secondary" developments can,
if analyzed as pristine' examples, lead to the formulation of
deviant models which apparently confound more basic
regularities. Proper analysis rl;#'eals these for what they are:
special cases referable to special rules governing secondary
developments and not directly applicable to problems of
pristine emergence.
Stevenson recognizes that high population density by
itself does not always appear in association with state in-
stitutions. He deduces from this that such density cannot
be the necessary and sufficient cause of the development
. :...
z: ..
, ..:

204 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLmCAL SOCIETY
of state structure. Rather, he prefers a model involving
several factors, among which relatively high population
density would play a very important role.
While Stevenson's analysis pertains explicitly to state
formation and not to the emergence of stratification, it has
obvious significance for the latter. I certainly agree, for ex-
ample, that the idea of a single cause in this area is weak
and untenable. On the other hand, I am inclined to believe
that additional causal factors, when identified, will be diffi-
cult to isolate since I expect them to be capable, at least in
part,.of being represented as aspects of basic demographic
problems,"
SHIFTS IN RESIDENCE RULES
.
That increasin~population densll}:'may lead to strati-
~fication is a logical hypothesis capable of empirical verifi-
cation and perhaps even proof. Meanwhile, a few other
tasks can be essayed in the same spirit of hypothesis. In
particular, we may ask for some specification of the actual
~echanismsby which population pressure can lead to strati-
fied forms of tenure.
In his analytical description of the society of the
Kachin (Chingpaw) of northeastern Burma, E. R. Leach
'has focused attention on the institution of maqu-dama, a
system of relations between affinally related groups, such
• One factor adduced by Stevenson is trade and its effects on social
structure. The trouble with trade as a cause of stratification is that,
other things being constant, the flow of goods in and out of a non-
stratified society will be regulated by mechanisms neutral or more
probably antipathetic to the formation of stratification. We need only
refer back to earlier sections of this book which discuss economic
circulation in egalitarian and rank societies to see that there are built-
in devices that prevent accumulation and that dispel the possibility of
using trade goods as capital or as the basis of a system of socio-
economic exploitation. Again, the situation will be markedly different
between the situation in which one or more parties to that trade are
already stratified or' even organized as states. In the latter situation
there are many possibilities for a rapid change in the constitutions of
the previously nonstratified societies.
. -.'
~ .
': ~ ': '~J~
......"".•
':,.:

.
;". -.
Stratified Societies
/
205
that wife takers display significant inferiority in their rela-
tions with the group that has given them women. The
mayu are the superiors, the dama the inferiors. The desig-
nations are particular to the situation, especially in the form
of Kachin social organization that is known as gumlao and
may be classified as egalitarian in the terminology we are
using. In other words, in the egalitarian form of Kachin
society the superiority of mayu to dama is dependent upon
an actual flow of marriages. What is more, the superiority
of any particular mayu status is compromised by the fact
that marriage exchanges form a circle, so that "A" may be
mayu to "B" while "B" is mayu to "C" who might well be
mayu to "A," effectively dissolving any over-all class system.
What is of interest to our immediate problem is what hap-
pens when the normal viripatrilocal rule of postmarital
residence is broken.
First, let us emphasize that gumlao Kachin tenure is
egalitarian. The basic situation is one in which a differ-
entiation is made between usufruct and something called
madu, which Leach translates as "ownership" (1954, p.
_ 155), but which might more appropriately be identified as
"stewardship." As Leach says: "This latter kind of owner-
ship implies claims of sovereignty over the land rather than
rights over its products. The claims are of value as status
symbols; from a strictly economic point of view their value
is, if anything negative, since they involve the owner in
expense" (Leach, 1954, P: 155). (It could be argued that
gurnlao Kachin society is ranked, in our terms, but the
.hierarchy is not clear. In any case, ranking is compatible
: with economic egalitarianism, and our problem is to gen-
. erate stratification.) Usufruct does not involve tributary
'; dues of any kind from villagers to headmen (Leach, 1954,
i p. 204). But in gumsa (stratified) Kachin society :
All those who are not in a favored status and recog-
nized lineage kinsmen of the chief must contribute to
the chief a thigh ... from every four-footed animal
slain, and they must contribute free labour to the
......

THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
206 /
The formal seniority of the mayu to the dama in such
cases provides the basis for claims to prior land title
on the part of the mayu. Some affinal links are associ-
ated with land tenure while others are not, but it is al-
ways the former which are given emphasis and which
are the most enduring. The basis of the dama inferi-
ority seems to lie in the fact that where mayu and
dama are members of one territorial unit the dama
must, by implication, have broken the normal rule of
patrilocal residence. The fact that the dama are settled
alongside the mayu implies that the founder of the
dama [lineage] must have settled matrilocally with his
father-in-law, and it is thus a token of inferior status
(Leach, 1954,P:83; ct. p. 168).
Once more I must admit that the data are not altogether
clear and tend to suggest the point I am making, rather than
to prove it. Leach scarcely goes into the question of motiva-
tion for uxoripatrilocal residence. He says that such a "situa-
tion usually originates in circumstances where the bride-
groom is on bad terms with his relatives or else they are
very poor" (Leach, 1954, p. 16g). It seems reasonable that
such a phenomenon would be related to microecological
variation and the fact that population may not increase
uniformly even between two sites rather close to each other.
Analysis is sigci£icantly redirected to the question of
population pressure. Kachin, like many other societies,
makes a distinction between original settlers and later com-
ers, with the former holding preferential rights. While I
cannot pursue the point here, it can be hypothesized that
some of the latecomers, especially in secondary situations
such as the Kachin, which exists in a region that has long
been adjacent to much more highly organized economies
and polities, are not only alien to the local Kachin lineage,
preparation of the chiefs bill field and to the build- -
ing of the chiefs house (Leach, 1954, pp. 204-5).
c-
-
Now we are ready for the relation of stratification to
residence rules in this one illustrative case:

•.1.;
"
~~{i~~ - "
" -
. : . '~
", " . '
,
.. '
WAS THERE AN ANCIENT
«MANAGERIAL REVOLUTION"?
The emergence of the giant .corporation in modern
capitalist society led theorists some decades ago to em-
phasize the distinction between ownership and m~
_ment. It is common for writers who dwell on this subject to
begin their analyses with a fe~ remarks about feudal Eu-
rope, move rapidly to the Industrial Revolution and then
to our own time. That is the case in the work of A. A. Berle,
Jr., and Gardiner Means
(1932)
and James Burnham
(1941). Such an approach, well fitted to the problems
those authors contended with, is not appropriate for our
present problem, but some of the general notions that they
developed in handling problems of ownership and manage-
ment are of use.
Berle and Means, for example, see that "the corporate
system tends to develop a division of the functions form-
erly accorded to ownership" (Berle & Means, 1932, P: 119),
and these functions include: having interests in an enter-
,
Stratified Societies
/
207
:;'-but are not even Kachin, Such cases are widely distributed
,. in the ethnographic literature and bring up a matter dis-
cussed in more detail below, namely clientship and slavery
and their relation to stratification. In addition to clients,
Kachin are said to have slaves who occupy somewhat con-
fusing statuses. AI> we show, the confusion is a structural '
matter, for sometimes they are treated as dama or inferior
affinals, but worse, at other 'times they are treated as people
beyond aUkinship ties. Yet there is a dialectic working here,
for as stratification mature~t1ie upper group which com:
mands privileged access to the basic resources can develop .
political power more rapidly by resting on a nonkin labor
force and even by playing off the interests of relatives and
clients who are in fact resident aliens. But I am now out-
running the original point of this section and will turn
instead to the question of the _growth of managerial spe-
cialization and its role in the development of stratification.

,
. '
,
,: . ~
.,
208
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
prise, acting with respect to it, and having power over
it. The first implies that there is a socially recognized status
which is entitled to whatever yields may be forthcoming.
The second implies that there is a status associated with the
right to make all effective decisions concerning the enter-
prise. The third implies that the actual function of man-
agement can be delegated, that is, dissociated from the
first. Implicit in the first two functions ' is the concept of
right to commit energy to the enterprise thus obtaining a
yield. This point is made explicitly, although without em-
phasis, in Burnham (1941, P: Si ). But Burnham, like Berle
and Means, neglects almost evssything that happened in
Europe before feudalism, and none of them have any place
at all for events occurring outside of Europe (or modern
America) at any time. Fortunately, there is at least one
other strong managerial theory covering a wider range than
the foregoing. I refer, of course, to the so-called hydraulic
theory presently associated with the name of Karl Wittfogel
(1955, pp. 43-54), but, as Wittfogel himself has shown,
it is a theme in the work of many outstanding classical
.,
economists. At the heart of the thesis is a distinction between
'
rainfall agriculture and any system of farming that either re-
'I~
quires a significant amount of irrigation or special drain-
:.:
age. As Wittfogel explains it, water' for crops may be in-
_
adequate, untimely, or in too great abundance. The first two
';~~
require some means of getting moisture to the soil, and
.
:~
the last requires a means of rapidly getting rid of excess
;
.~
water or preventing floods. Wittfogel then argues that ir-
J
rigation and drainage works are likely to extend .beyond
'
.~
and crosscut small-scale interests so that nothing lessWhthan .
: .1'.
a community, if not several communities, is involved.
at
is more, the labor required for such enterprises is likely to
.;
exceed the Pfotential of small groups, requiring some regu-
. ~I
lar system
0
labor recruitment on a community or even
'»oJ
wider basis. This need for labor, in turn, soon establishes :j
an additional requirement for managerial organization of .·:..:..,,~,·.·.I
.. .
this labor force. ' Meanwhile, there are also managerial
~~

-v" .
Stratified Societies
/
20g
requisites connected with disbursing the water in the irriga-
tion system and with the adjudication of disputes concern-
ing water use.
.
With special regard to property, Wittfogel has sug-
gested distinguishing three grades of hydraulic society.
Given other aspects of hydraulic farming, "[w]hen inde-
pendent active property plays a subordinate role both in its
mobile and immobile forms, we are faced with a relatively
simple pattern of property. We shall call the thus struc-
tured conformation a simple hydraulic society" (Wittfogel,
1955, p. 46; 1957, pp. 230-1). A semicomplex hydraulic
society is then defined in terms of the development of inde-
pendent active property in industry and commerce but
not in agriculture, and a complex hydraulic society in terms
of strong independent active property in agriculture as
well as industry and commerce (Wittfogel, 1955, P: 46;
1957, p. 231; see his explanation of "strong" and "active").
Actually, Wittfogel has displayed only passing interest
in the problem we are now confronting. Though he has
intense concern for the relations between hydraulic agricul-
fure and the emergence of formal political power and the
.-:state, he passes off the problem of the relation between
hydraulic faf:!Ili;,lg and the emergence of stratification with
a few highly generalized statements. Indeed, he sees no
necessary special relationship: "Agricultural tribes handle
their property in many different ways; and this is as true for
hydraulic as for non-hydraulic communities" (Wittfogel,
1955,P: 48; 1957, p'. 232). He documents this statement with
'~
a reference to George P. Murdock (1949, P: 38ff.) that
:~ proves less than enlightening because Murdock is discussing
,'inheritance rules without making any distinctions as to
.: type of property involved or the level of the society in
:which the variations appear. Returning to Wittfogel, his
, most comprehensive statement is that "in both nonhydraulic
:and hydraulic small farming communities the forms of land
.tenure vary; and the tendency toward communal control
:is strong but not universal" (Wittfogel, 1955, pp. 48-9;

210
/
TIlE EVOLUTION OF POLrITCAL SOCIETY
1957, p. 233)· Yet Wittfogel does expose a possible differ-
ence, although he views it as the earliest form of the
prooess whereby governmental power in a hydraulic situa-
tion tends to undermine private property rights:
Note that Wittfogel adds the following comment: "small
ditches that require the labor of only a few individuals or
a kin group are the property of those who make them"
(Wittfogel, 1957, p. 234) '
A critical article by Leach has taken Wittfogel to task
because of asserted comparative irregularities drawn from
Ceylon. That is to say, Leach argues that Ceylon, although
hydraulic, deviates sigi:Jificantly from the Wittfogel model.
Actually, Leach's evidence may be read to confirm or at
least support Wittfogers position. At any rate, Leach con-
tributes a concise statement of the issue that is central to
the argument raised here: "the key element ... [is] the '
In the sphere of hydraulic works . . . antiproprietary
forces appear regularly. A primitive peasant, using his
own tools, cultivates land that mayor may not be
communally regulated, and the seeds for his crops may
belong to him personally or to his kin group. Under
nonhydraulic conditions this is the whole story. In a
hydraulic setting cultivation proper follows a similar
pattern; but the "preparatory" operations do not. The
tools are privately owned, but the raw materials for
making the hydraulic installations (earth, stone, and
perhaps timber) either are communal property-that
is, owned by nobody or everybody-or, if they are
found on land held by a particular individual, family,
or clan, are taken over by the community. And the end
products of the community's coordinated effort, the
ditches or canals, do not become the property of the
individual farmers or farming families that participate
in the work, but, like the water which they carry .to
the individual fields, they are controlled ("owned") by
the community's governing agency (Wittfogel, 1957,
P·234 ).
',;
.~
,." :'
" .
. ~" :' .....

:;"~. '
Stratified Societies
/
211.
.esistence of a self-perpetuating bureaucracy which ruled by
::-owning the rights to power and office rather than by own-
~ . ing rights to property" (Leach, 1954, P: 4).
This formulation raises two problems: Can a complex
polity arise in the absence of stratification, as I have de-
fined it? Can stratification emerge out of a system of differ-
ential access to political power?
To offer a brief but tendentious response to the first
question, it can be said that there is a gap of great mag-
nitude between the concept of "weak property," Wittfogel's
device for minimizing the role of property in the political
structure of hydraulic society, and the absence of stratifica-
tion. As a matter of fact, in China, a major stage for Witt-
fogel's thesis,thearchaeological evidence for stratification
appears to be much earlier than the earliest signs of large-
scale irrigation (ct. Chang, 1963, pp. 92-3, 171-3). A simi-
1ar order of events has also been suggested for the New
World. Presumptive evidence of stratification (for example,
burials showing marked wealth differences;
housetypes
ranging from small to grand; sumptuary goods, and so on )
may actually relate to situations closer to ranking as the
term is used in this book. Conversely, the absence of clear
evidence of major irrigation or drainage projects does not
necessarily convey a total lack of hydraulic or hydroagri-
cultural concerns. That simple irrigatjm construction may
go hand in hand with the emergence of stratification is sug-
gested by what is mown about the modern Kalinga of
the northern Philippines. Among the Kalinga "ownership" of
a source of irrigation water went to the person placing tinder
cultivation the first field to use it. Subsequent users, pre-
sumably lower on the watercourse, are required to pay for
water, although the price may be waived ~or close relatives.
The "owner" of the watersource has significant restraints
on his control. Like users farther down the drainage system,
he has responsibilities to let the water through, to facilitate
its passage and, in a dry spell, he may not hoard or use up .
all the water. Furthermore, the "owner" has no vested right
-I.--
-J
-·1
:--::.
.." ,
.
I;
: -:'-
.....-,
--: j
'" ·:-,
. .~
"':-:. >,
. '.> '~~'
. I
-!

- . -:
...< > r -, -r'
212
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOClETY
to the water beyond a fair share for his original plot. This
is shown by the fact that such an owner, should he prepare
a new field along the lower course of the water supply, re-
quires the permission of all his partners in the existing
canal system. Clearly underlying this requirement is the
work situation-irrigation ditches and canals are the product
of collective labor, as is the continual task of cleaning the
watercourses (Barton, 1949, pp. 103-6).
One fairly obvious means by which managerial roles in
an irrigation situation may logically give rise to a form of
stratification is by relieving the manager from drudge labor,
or by requiring lesser members of the team to work for
him, or both. None of t1'Iese things occurs in Kalinga, but
in the eastern Pueblo area in the United States the chiefs
fields were cultivated, at least in part, with the labor of the
villagers (Wittfogel, 1955, pp. 50-1; 1957, p. 235). At the
level of Hawaii the system was much more complicated
and formalized; what is more, control over water resources
in Hawaii was used to bolster control over land. This was
. achieved by using the sanction of restricting access to ir-
rigation water rather than to land (Sahlins, 1958, 15-6) .
Once again, however, the indications are that some form of
stratification, defined as .differential access to basic re-
sources, precedes the emergence and certainly the crystalli-
zation of sophisticated political institutions. It is perhaps
worthwhile to note that once emergent stratification has
prectpitated more complex political forms there is strong
probability that the new and burgeoning political roles will
afford new paths of development for stratification. Indeed,
it is precisely when such a situation is created that war and
conquest as social institutions begin to play their most sig-
nificant role in the maturation of the state. We return to
this matter later.
The speculative nature ofthis section is not relieved by
the difficulties that hamper research into these problems.
Where there are good possibilities for investigating rela-
tions between population density- and forms of land tenure,
;.:,
.

As this differentiation by which there arises first a
temporary military head, who passes insensibly into a
political head, is initiated by conflict with adjacent so-
cieties, it naturally happens that his political power
increases as military activity continues (H. Spencer,
1896, p. 524)·
Proponents of the theory that war was the precipitating
cause of complex political organization also quite generally
, held that stratification originated in military action and con-
quest. Here is Ludwig Gurnplowicz on this point:
Stratified Societies
I
213
for example, there is no place where a field worker can
investigate questions of pristine stratification. Not one of
the simple irrigation societies now extant is free of sub-
stantial economic and political interference from one or
more more complexly organized alien societies. It is rea-
sonable to suppose, however, that some valuable work may
be done on the kinds of tensions and conflicts that arise in
such societies; the more valuable knowledge of the means
by which these difficulties are overcome seems unlikely to
be forthcoming except by logical construction and extrap-
olation.
WAR
.
Jt was a widely held idea in the nineteenth century
that the root_9fJ:£1_~_l'tatewas finnJy_pl~~~<i.i?_~~. Herbert
Spencer, for example, wrote:
Everywhere the wars between societies originate gov-
ernmental istructures, and are causes of all such im-
provements in those structures as increase the efficiency
of corporate action against environing societies
(H.
Spencer, 1896,P:520).
This development of Simple headship in a tribe by
conflict with other tribes, we find advancing into' com-
pound headship along with larger antagonisms of race
with race (H. Spencer, 1896,P:523).
, ' :
",
.' , .
.:
,.
" ~-
..•..
.,
}'

214 /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
~.: . >
we first recognize the beginnings of separate im-
movable property when one horde has overpowered an-
other and uses its labor force. As soon as there are
subjects
who are
excluded from the enjoyment of
certain goods which their own labor contributed to
produce, in favor of the ruling class, and when the
members of the ruling class are protected in their en-
joyment of them by the well-organized whole, then
there arises separate or private property in immovable
goods . . . The primitive horde emerges from
[the]
condition of ... [equality] ... only when a strange
horde comes within its reach as the result generally
of migration or a plundering raid. If it subjects the
strangers its wants are more easily satisfied and its
economic life is raised above the primitive condition.
The "extra" labor of some for others begins (Gumplo-
wicz, 1899, pp. 116, 125).
.. .
The American anthropologist Otis T. Mason joined the
chorus, insisting that, "In the fourth period, the ownership
of land, still respecting natural boundaries, began to as-
sume a more artificial form by reason of improvements in
the apparatus of war" (Mason, 1892, P: 120).
I doubt that we can ever mow with complete cei-
tainty, for the simplest societies now verge on extinction or
live in vastly different physical and cultural environments,
but I defend on the basis of available ethnographic data
and on the basis of logic the proposition that warfare in-
(' creases in frequency as societies become more complex. As
~ I have elsewhere stated (Fried, 1961, pp. 134-47), warfare
increases in rank society over egalitarian society, increases
still more in stratified society over rank society, and crests
after the appearance of the state. Furthermore, it seems to
me that warfare serves. to institutionalize stratification only
when the social orders of one or more parties to the war-
fare are already stratified.
While it is a matter of ethnographic record that some
rank societies have engaged in warfare for explicit goals of
territorial expansion, pressure to engage in.such warfare has
}
.'

'.,
:J:;'
x.:
' -~';
Stratified Societies
/
215
every reason to be less in a rank than a stratified society.
With specific reference to economi.c m0!ives for war, there
is s~stantially l~.ss occasionforthese in rank thanjn strl!!i-
.fl.~~L.~()cie!y'. This is a consequence of the economic egali-
tarianism of rank society; sjpge all members have access to
,basic reso~<:~s? consumptioI1~fsl:112si§t~}}~~~g9.9Q~_wjII show
a"lllgli~.:de~ .()f uniformityand thisIs ,reJm 9r9§d by- the
.~~~~ti,o~ of-2.~~_~s systems Q.f.. redistribution__a~ ,~_lready
,sketched..i:!J.theE:.~YiQ~s. ..chapter. Contrast this
witl.L.ili~
situation in stratified societies where whole sectors of the
_E2~ati().n have precarious relations t~ . subii~~~I1£~ while
other sectors 'are' not oury freeto accumulatesurpluses of
b§tli productive and
consumpJio.n...go.Qds,J:~~tare encour-
agea-todO 'SO bY_~very .,struQtur.e of their so.cie.~nd the
~deology wIiiCIl supports it. In such societies the noneco-
Aomic motives for war .are.also.hkely.tc he much enhanced.
What is more, the cultural development of warfare is more
likely to receive special attention in a stratified society as
owners can make economically rational decisions to divert
resources and labor into military activities. For example,
.'in stratified society there is much more opportunity to estab-
lish a professional military force. Obviously, it is not the
earliest form of society that can achieve such organization;
an arrangement of age grades can achieve something of pro-
fessionalism in this respect even in an egalitarian setting.
It seems unlikely, however, that such societies would them-
.selves manage to develop the specialized technology of war
that has grown parallel with the flourishing of stratification
and the state.
There remains the question of a special relationship
between military status and the basic resources of society.
Could the holding of a s ecial martial r 1
the founda>
tron of stra .
ClltiOllL.On. .empitiQ~l.grm,rodLthe answer tQ
this~~~~..!.~_be ill ~ep~g~tive, despite the seeming at-
tractiveness of an argwnent..thllt applies to,our own cultural
. experience in which military success is readily translated
.'. Into economic advantage. But in rank societies military
I
, r

statuses tend to be ephemeral, and, even more, they are
contained within the patterns of kinship that are the main
coordinates of group formation. In such groups military
pre-eminence is usually segregated from other socioeco-
nomic functions. Referring to war and peace among the
Nootka, Philip Drucker tells us that "the two fields of ac-
tivity and the attitudes and values that went with them
were sharply compartmented off from each other" (Drucker,
1951, P: 343). He also says flatly that "war chiefs . . . did
not use their strength nor their reputations as killers to
bully their fellows" (Drucker, 1951, p: 343). Rather than
war and military roles being the source of stratification, it
seems that stratification is a provoker of war and an en-
h'&'cer of military status.
SLAVEJ;{Y
.§.!~v~ry~.~einK.3-j.Q..;-m
of._?.!!a~~~tion,
~nn...:>t_be its
root or cause. The phenomenon of slavery is worth discuss-
ing in the context of this chapter for at least three reasons.
For one thing, a natural inclination to take and hold slaves
has sometimes been pronounced a fundamental trait of hu-
man psychology. More seriously-as few who read this
book will react to the previous statement with anything but
amusement or:irritation-slavery has been asserted to exist
in societies otherwise described as egalitarian. If so, this
might indicate that slavery was one of the initial forms of
stratification, perhaps the very first. Whatever the truth
about this, the incidence of slavery does require some of
our attention. A third problem therefore arises from this
and the fact that slavery is polytypic. We are therefore
inquiring into . some of its main forms and especially into
its relations with other forms of stratification.
Like most words in the lexicon of social science,
"slavery" is not easy to
d~fine once for all in a manner
subsuming all possible treatments. My purposes are best
served by a definition given more than half a century ago
by H. J. Nieboer; his definition was not original, but I spare
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
zi6 /
/....:
':.1.
. - ... -
:-" . ;
I·

Stratified Societies
/
21.7
myself and the. reader further elaboration of this point.
More
significant to
the
present argument is Nieboer's
awareness of the difficulties which are described at the out-
set of his work on the subject (Nieboer, 1900, P: 1 ff. ). The
problems still existed a third of a century later; covering
the subject for the first edition of the EnCyclopedia of So-
cial Sciences, Bernhard J. Stern was of the opinion that "It
is frequently difficult . . . to distinguish with any precision
between such categories as slaves, serfs, subjects, sub-
merged classes and low castes" (Stern, 1934, P: 73). It was
a Simple step, after thus setting the stage for further con-
fusion, for .Stern to replace the useful Nieboer definition
with something quite amorphous: "the ownership of per-
sons outside of family relations whereby the owners control
the lives of their slaves, often sanction their use in ritual
sacrifice and frequently subject them to compulsory labor"
(Stern, 1934, p. 73)·
It is perhaps unfair to criticize Stern too much for this
formulation; after all, Nieboer did try to Simplify his own
definition to: "slavery is the fact that one man is the prop-
erty or possession of another" (Nieboer, 1900, P: 7; ital-
ics in original). In Nieboer's case, however, "property or
possession' implied without exception that some kind of
compulsory labor was being performed (Nieboer, 1900, P:
8). So as to make this feature an explicit feature of the
institution I prefer his fuller statement. A slave is "a man
who is the property or possession of another l1uzn, and
forced to work for him' (Nieboer, 1900, P: 7; italics in orig-
inal. Obviously the use of masculine nouns and pronouns
introduces an unnecessary limitation, which we can Simply
ignore ).
Concern for the definition of slavery is not merely a
matter of sociological pedantry or hairsplitting. Consider-
ing the question of the existence of slavery in otherwise
egalitarian societies, it is of prime importance to determine
if the person asserted to be a slave indeed is required to
act as one. An example may clarify my intention. Alfred

r •. .....
THE EVOLUTION OF
POLITICAL SOCIETY
218 I
Metraux has written about so-called slavery among the
Mbaya of the South American Chaco: "The most severe
punishment that a Mbaya could inflict on an unruly slave
was to threaten to take back the horses and other things
he had given him and refuse to employ him any longer"
(Metraux, 1946, p. 309)' If the criterion of compulsion be
applied to the Mbaya, their alleged institution of slavery ,
evaporates. Slaves may be beaten or bartered, slain or sold,
they may be manhandled or even manumitted, but they
cannot be fired. More precisely, even though there may be
, something of a voluntary element in some means by which
some slaves enter the status, there is nothing properly called
voluntary in the subsequent performance of their assigned
tasks. Any weakening of the principle of involuntary servi-
tude is a reduction of the degree of slavery. Where there
are such reductions, and many kinds of cases can 15'e cited,
it is preferable to employ some other word, like "prisoner,"
"indentured laborer," "peon," "serf," "bondman,"or other.
Such usage will not totally eliminate cases of ambiguity but
should reduce them to a manageable minimum; the relative
simplicity of applying the criterion of involuntary servitude
also commends this usage.
Although his concentration was on the means of subsis-
tence, the sample of societies labeled "hunters and fishers"
by Nieboer comes close to overlapping my category of egali-
tarians; in any event, though some of his sample societies,
like those from the Northwest Coast, are rank societies,
none is stratified by my criteria. It is interesting to note,
then, that of Nieboer's eighty-two hunting and fishing tribes
eighteen were reported to keep slaves. This amounts to 22
per cent and might suggest the strong possibility that slavery
paves the way for a more general stratification of society
were it not for certain critical deficiencies in the picture
presented by these data. There is not sufficient space in the
present book to attempt a full treatment of this subject, but
the main points can be indicated. First, there remains, even-
after Nieboer's refreshing skepticism, considerable doubt of
-..;:'
..~"
"

r.
, '.,.,
·
'. ~
, --~"
. .. - .~
":. .~...
Stratified Societies
/
219
the aboriginality of several cases in iris sample, such as
Abipone and Tehuelche. Second, there is much value in
raising the question of whether the institution reported is
indeed to be considered slavery. Third, the greatest portion
of hunting and fishing societies asserted by Nieboer to have
slavery were located in the Northwest Coast area.
Before taking a slightly closer look at Northwest Coast
slavery, a couple of methodological points should be made.
Nieboer was working with available ethnographic data of
mixed quality, to say the least. Some world areas, like New
Guinea, were very poorly known, and the accounts from
many other areas lacked any claim to rigor or precision. Un-
fortunately, though many of the ethnographies in question
relate to societies which underwent irreversible change a
century or longer ago, the same criticism can be applied to
present treatments, as I interpret statements from the old
works. In our favor, however, is a much heightened aware-
ness of culture change.that informs more recent analyses.
Similarly, although the point was first made long ago, there
is less inclination in modern anthropology to accept at face
value the formula that one "tribe" equals one statistical
case in a sample. Unfortunately, no simple alternative has
replaced this formula. As it happens, however, the value of
the number of cases is insignificant when compared with
the value of more critical analysis of the structure and
internal coherence of those cases or of a smaller number of
them for which the data are relatively clear.
.
Perhaps the most positive statement concerning the
magnitude of aboriginal Northwest Coast slavery was made
by W. C. MacLeod: "slavery on the northwest coast among
the natives was of nearly as much economic importance to
them as was slavery to the plantation regions of the United
States before the Civil War" (MacLeod, 1928, P: 649).
This contrasts sharply with a more recent overview of the
situation by a specialist in Northwest Coast culture: "It is
difficult to estimate the slave population of the area, butit
was certainly never very large, for slave mortality was high.
:.,.-

Slaves' economic utility was negligible. They gathered fire-
wood, dug clams, and fished, but so did their masters"
(Drucker, 1965, P: 52).
The over-all picture I would like to present of North-
west Coast slavery can be sketched briefly, although I.can- .
not properly defend it in the present short treatment.· I
believe that "slaves" should be better referred to as "cap-
tives" and that their numbers, as Drucker says, must have
been small at almost all times, although the general situa-
tion probably varied. (Compare this treatment of North-
west Coast "slavery" with that in Leslie White [1959, pp.
200-3].) It is likely that in pre-European times, before the
end of the eighteenth century, captives must have been
quite
few
and
comprised,
with
negligible
exceptions,
women and children. With the .growth of certain aspects
of Northwest Coast economy triggered by developing trade,
much stimulated and multiplied by exchange with Euro-
peans, and with elaboration of political structure stimulated
by European contact and the technological facilitation of
warfare (also a product of the heightened emphasis on
ranking which fed back from the previous influences and
others we cannot here detail), the social and to a lesser
extent the economic value of captives increased. This led
to a peak population in this status and also to the closest
approximation that was to be achieved between the North-
west Coast status of captive and that of slave as earlier
defined. The latter phenomenon may also be attributable, at
least in part, to increased knowledge of slavery practiced
elsewhere in the United States, although I must admit that
this is merely a speculation on my part. At any rate, the
peaking of slavery came shortly before its decline, which
was the result of a battery of causes, including outright
prohibition by newly imposed superordinate authority (the
Canadian and United States governments), of war by the
same superordinate colonial power, and transfomiation of
aboriginal economy, again largely through suppression of
.-::--- -.
220
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLmCAL SOCIETY

Stratified Societies
/
22~
the rank-bestowing and rank-validating potlatches
and
other giveaways.
One difficulty in this hypothesis arises from a lack of
reliable first-hand accounts of the progress of slavery in
the Northwest Coast area. Those references which I have
seen, although admittedly only a small portion of the rele-
vant literature, are alike in attributing a prevalence of
slaves to an earlier period. It was never the generation
being observed that possessed a lot of slaves and only rarely
even the generation of their fathers. Usually the holding
of large numbers of slaves was projected into a shady and
remote past.
It would not be proper to turn this section into a full-
scale inquiry into Northwest Coast slavery despite the in-
. terest and Significance of the subject. We must conclude,
therefore, with a brief consideration of certain salient points
having to do with the social status of slaves and their rela-
tion to Northwest Coast economy and ideology.
Aurel Krause, writing in 1885 on the basis of an ex-
tended trip to the Northwest Coast including a stay among
the Tlingit, had little to say about the contemporary slavery
and placed the holding of larger numbers further in the
past (Krause, 1956, pp. 105, 111-2). Consulting earlier·
travelers' accounts he presents a picture of the institution
that is not altogether clear. Some of the earlier accounts
indicate that the lot of slaves was not severe, but other
statements stress their condition as "a very sad one." Few of
the accounts throw any light on the status of .the slave as
laborer. Such remarks on this topic as I have seen tend to
be along the lines of this statement by Edward S. Curtis:
Slavery was firmly established among the coast Salish.
But the harrowing pictures which that word .brings be-
fore our mind have little connection with the institu-
tion as it existed among the Indians of this region.
Slaves were captives taken in war and traded from
tribe to tribe, and almost always the prisoners were

222
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
women or children. They wielded paddles in their mas-
ters' canoes, fished, gathered wood, cooked, and made
baskets and other utensils, but they labored no more
strenuously than the free members of the lower class,
and in return they were well treated as members of the
household . . . As concerns his labor the slave was no
great asset, and the principal reason for the existence
of the institution of slavery was that the possession of
captives reflected honor and dignity upon their owners
(Curtis, 1913, P: 74).
It is my impression, subject to correction, that though
chiefly}tatus may have depended on "slaves," this depend-
ence was not on labor power. That is, slaves did not spend
their time producing commodities to enhance their master's
wealth and improve his position as the giver of potlatches.
It is explicitly stated that the highest value of a captive was
as a sacrifice; be might be killed at the climax of various
rituals; and it was for this potential moment he was kept.
One hypothesis about the nature of Northwest Coast
slavery advanced some. time ago by Drucker suggests that
the slaves' "principal Significance was to serve as foils for
the high and mighty, impressing the inequality of status on
the native consciousness" (Drucker, 1939, p. 55). It is easy
to agree with the first part of his assertion; not only could
a captive be murdered during various ceremonies, but he
could also be killed at what seems a whim of his master,
perhaps as an object for venting anger. That slaves func-
tioned as a means of reinforcing native concepts of status
is less certain. The logic of society is not necessarily that
of Occam's razor, but the ranking system of the Northwest
Coast was quite coherent in the absence of a slave stratum.
Indeed, one of the most commonly encountered remarks
about Northwest Coast slavery is that the members of
these societies did not regard the slaves as a part of the
social system (Boas, 1897, p. 338; Drucker, 1939, p. 55;
and so on).
Actually, the question of the role of captives in North-
: ~

r·
t '
..-::- '.
Stratified Societies
I 223
west Coast society is a confused one. Whatever statements
may have been collected purporting to represent the cogni-
tive attitudes toward slaves, the empirical data reveal a
contradictory picture. Take the Bella Coola, for example:
In former times it probably would have been difficult
for a stranger to tell married slaves from members of
the Bella Coola community until he had been long in
the country to understand more than appeared on the
surface. . . . Marriages between Bella Coola men and
slave women were not infrequent, while like
partner~
ships between slave men and even the daughters of
chiefs were not unknown. The slave might become an
influential member of the community, though the fact
that he was not free was never forgotten. . . . [T]he
public life of the village, where all lived and ate to-
gether, tended to break down the unsystematically en-
forced differences of rank (Mcllwraith, 1948, pp. 160,
161, 162).
This might be compared with the situation reported among
the Owikeno Kwakiutl:
Low class or ne'er-do-wells are called xa'mala . . . and
are just above slaves. The latter are called kla'ku and
are usually war captives. If slaves are freed, they are
then classed as xamala .. . Even a person born of
xamala parents could rise above his station. In other
words, caste is neither rigid nor dependent solely on
birth (Olson, 1954, P: 220).
It should be clear by now that the status called "slav-
ery" in the Northwest Coast cultures bears little resem-
blance to that associated with stratified societies. It is also
difficult to see how such captive statuses might have de-
veloped into a generalized system of stratification. Clearly
being a captive or a descendant of captives was a matter
that could be used to one's disadvantage within the ranking
game played by the society, but in the societies this did not
seriously engage any question of access to basic resources.
,}~i
· ·-, · ;1
....:..:.~;,
. -
~t
.,'.'.:-,
.
"' ..~
. -,
. .,::'

THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
224
/
....-... \
THE STRATIFIED SOCIETY
Having inquired into a few of the things that may have
been conducive to emergence of a stratified society and
~ ~ .... .
C'"
having rejected still others, we still must say something
:; ',"
about stratified society as a political field, At this point our
:.-:~.:>' '"
treatment becomes even briefer and more programmatic.
;., '
This' stems from the empirical condition previously nien-
;~~;.:' " 7
tioned: Societies that are stratified but lack state institu-
':. ,
. -!ions are not known to the ethnographer. Indeed, as argued
F~ .. elSewhere, ~ristine examples of such societies have prob-.
'~', iJ?.. I-~~~\
ably not existed on our planet-for 2 ,000 years or more. It
:)~t>V;'"V
is doubly unfortunate that the invention of writing occurred
no earlier than at the time of the emergence of the most
ancient states. There are no authentic written records from
which the development of a pristine state can be directly
read.
As a methodological consequence, it is necessary to
reconstruct a probabilistic model of a stratified, nonstate
society by extrapolating from what is known about the
earliest states, by . constructing a logical model which
bridges the gap between the most complex rank societies
known and the Simplest states, and by cautiously drawing
upon data supplied by modem secondary (perhaps "terti-
ary" or "quaternary" would be more appropriate termi-
nology ) states. With apologies I must admit that I am not
going to attempt such a reconstruction here, although I look
forward to making the attempt in a future publication. For
the most part, I shall rely in this book on the brief analysis ,
of the state in the next and final chapter, hoping that the
reader is stimulated to supply his own intermediate model.
It is necessary, however, to make a few minimal comments.
While a model of stratified nonstate society can be
built 'within the confines of a congruent model of kin re-
lations, the probability is slight that the kin model will in
fact contain it. This ties in the first instance to the associ-
ation we have tried to find between the emergence of the
."
t-..• '
~~. - .'.

Stratified Societies
/
225
state and the growth of population both in total size and
density. It also has to do with the emergence of genuine
socioeconomic classes associated with markedly contrasted
standards of living, security, and even life expectancy. Even
the most marked differences of rank in a rank society do
not, as we have tried to indicate, lay any basis for a com-
parable division of the population. I assume that as a
consequence of these differences the stratified society will
face a magnitude of internal disputes, pressures, conflicts,
such as is unknown and inconceivable in rank society. If
there is a partially congruent kin-organized system of re-
straints and balances, it is doomed to increasing incidence
of failure if relied on to maintain the political integration of
the society.
(Despite this recurrent failure, there is no
dearth of effort in stratified and state societies to use what-
ever is available of kin systems to maintain order.) Limited
successes to one side, a kind of Liebig's Law of the Mini-
mum comes into play and increasing emphasis is placed on
non-kinship mechanisms of political and economic power.
It is precisely these mechanisms that mature, coalesce, and
form the state.
Note that such a picture does not present the emer-
gence of the state as a simple event. The state forms in
embryo in the stratified society, which, by this reasoning,
must be one of the least stable models of organization that
has ever existed. The stratified society is torn between two
possibilities: It builds within itself great pressures for its
own dissolution and for a return to a simpler kind of or-
ganization, either of ranking or egalitarian kind, but lack-
.
ing differential access to basic resources. It is likely, as ~
matter of fact, that such a process goes on within small
enclaves even after a state has been formed. That is my in-
terpretation, for example, of what goes on in what Eric
Wolf has called the "corporate peasant community" (Wolf,
1955, p. 456 ff.). On the other side, the stratified
COID-
~u.pity:, . to.rnaintain itsglf,-must. evolve. more.powerful.fn,
sti~E~nsy~_p'o~t.i?
~_~ _control than eyer W-.e.re called upon

to maintain a system of differential rankin.-&=-To be sure,
many of the specffic institutions are-'-ess~ntially ideological
and amount to internalization of norms, which requires the-
identification of the unprivileged with such political slogans
as "the sanctity of private property" or "the good of the
state." It must be underlined, despite some recent work by
behavioral political scientists, that the acceptance of such
slogans and the concurrent behavior it induces is invariably
backed by a variety of forms of naked power. It is possible
for such applications of power to be made in the context
of a preexisting set of kin relations, but it is not likely that
this will long remain the case. We are aware that some of
the
l most repressive individual-to-individual relations are to
be met within the framework of kinship; there is no dearth
of cases of parental cruelty. Yet such cases exist within a
larger fram e of reference which implies that to survive is
to assume ultimately the superordinate role, albeit with a
victim who was not the original persecutor. In relations
within stratified societies there can be no such assumption,
and therefore there must be additional bolstering. Usually
that bolstering involves the appearance of agents
who
function to maintain the economic and political system
and whose position in that system has nothing to do with
kinship. Indeed, that position usually represents the antith-
esis of kinship.
It should not be thought that the generally unhappy
tone of the preceding remarks indicates any feeling on my
part that the state as a form of political and economic or-
ganization would have been better avoided. My view is
that it could not be avoided. No individual choices in the
matter were ever presented in any signillcant sense. Just
. as stratification grew within unstratified societies without
the conscious awareness of the members of the affected so-
cieties, so the state emerged and was hard at work con-
centrating its power on specific cases long before any re-
flective individual took the effort to isolate and identify the
novelty.
The novelty was the state. Let us turn to it.
THE EVOU,JTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
,.
,
- '...-
226 /

For some time now there has been a
movement to abolish the word "state," at least from the
works of political scientists. David Easton (1953, P' 108)
says, "The word should-be abandoned entirely." He says
that if the word is scrupulously avoided, "no severe hard-
ship in expression will result. In fact, clarity of expression
demands this abstinence." Gabriel Almond and James Cole-
man, to offer another influential example, echo and enlarge
upon this point of view:
[The] rejection of the "state and non-state" classifica-
tion, which is found throughout the anthropological,
sociological, and political science literature is not
merely a verbal quibble. It is a matter of theoretical
and operational importance. Such a dichotomous classi-
fication could come only from an approach to politics
which identifies the political with the existence of a
CHAPTER
-..
" .
; .
..;. ; "~: . , " ~" ~. ;. :.~ ;~:: "
.: 1.:': ~~ ': : '''':~~31
.; ':::l
6
.c:...-:-. ..: _-.•_,•.- . " .-
._.~ :
.
r',
:"
". .: :~
.~ ,,: : ·'-0_':<:
The State

specialized, visible structure, and which tends to. re-
strict the political process to those functions performed
by the specialized structure . . . Indeed, it is this em-
phasis on the specialized structures of politics which
has led to the stereotyped conception of traditional and
primitive systems as static systems, since the political
systems most likely to be differentiated are executive-
legislative and adjudicative structures. The mechanics
of political choice are there as well, but in the form
of intermittent political structures. The rule to follow
which we suggest here is: If the functions are there,
then the structures must be, even though we may find
them tucked away, so to speak, in nooks and crannies
of other social systems (Almond & Coleman,
1960,
p.12).
This strikes me as a-lengthy phrasing of what the anthro-
pologist E. Adamson Hoebel stated flatly a decade earlier:
"where .there is political organization there is a state. If
political organization is universal, so then is the state"
(x.,ebel, 1949, P: 376).
The contents ofthe previous chapters should make it
clear that I cannot agree with these distinguished social
scientists. I do agree that the issue "is not merely a verbal
quibble." We must not be confused by the persistence of
political functions in "nooks and crannies" of social sys-
tems, that is, in other aspects or subsystems of the larger
social system, even after the emergence of specialized ap-
paratus. Appreciation of the efforts of modern political sci-
entists to cast broader nets and catch important political
processes outside the formal institutions of modern gov-
ernment must not lessen our dismay at the implicit emascu-
·lation of the concept of force and power as the fountain-
head of those institutions designated "the state."
Furthermore, to press the "nooks and crannies" theory
into the analysis of simple societies, as suggested by Al-
mond and Coleman, can have the precise result they de-
plore, the obscuring of the dynamics of political develop-
ment. On the other hand, recognition of the fact that there
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
228
/
'~ , .

'": ,
/
229
The State
was a time, not too long ago by anthropological reckoning,
.when there were no states does not obscure anything. Cer-
tainly it does not necessarily encourage a static point of
view; for example, the discussion of the instability of strati-
fied society at the end of Chapter 5 shows how dynamic
analysis can be if it is related to the nonstate-state di-
chotomy. Nor does use of this dichotomy necessarily pre-
vent broad-gauged analysis that includes, inter alia, evalu-
ation of economic, kin, ritual, or other relationships. This
conclusion, too, should be obvious from the discussions in
our earlier chapters.
Although the question goes beyond the simple prob-
lem of definitions, it is necessary to confront that problem
at the outset. Once again it is not a matter of determining
the "true" meaning of a word but of stating clearly what
that word is to mean in our usage and why it is advan-
tageous to use it that way.
Admittedly, earlier tendencies to hypostasize the state
-to associate the state with some mystical concept of "peo-
ple," .of mass will, or of highest good-did considerable
damage. It is not surprising that such usage would prompt
reaction. But it would be foolhardy to dispense with a use-
.ful and necessary concept because it has been improperly
refined.
A state is not Simply a legislature, an executive body,
a judiciary system, an administrative bureaucracy, or even
a government. From the point of view developed in earlier
chapters, a state is better view~<!-~~complex of institu-
tions by means of which _~p.Q_w.e.LQLth{l_s_qcie!y- is or-
ganized on a basis .superior !o_}dnship. ,Note that all the
power available in 'a society does not necessarily become
.Ere-empted biJliiiSfate. Of course, the state may be ill-
volved in a number of contests for major and minor sources
of power and it may even temporarily lose some of those
contests, although to lose too big a one, or too often, will
invariably lead to a shift in the de facto power-holding
group.
... . .
..
~( . -," " '

When I say that the state is an organization of the .
power of society I refer to ma)ly different things. Of great
!
importance is the claim of the state to paramountcy in the
~
application of naked force to social problems. Frequently
this means that warfare and killing become monopolies of
the state and may only be carried out at times, in places,
and under the specific conditions set by the state. Other.
episodes involving killing will draw the punitive reaction
of the organized state force. Sometimes this concern for the
control of violence invades the narrowest of kin groups and
even extends to the individual's rights to his own person as
in the frequent prohibition of suicide.
In the final analysis the power of a state can be mani-
fested in a reaLp1J¥si.caUOI:Ce~ an
army,
· icC~a-police
force, a constabulary, with specialized weaponry, drill, con-
scription, a hierarchy of command, and the other para-
phernalia of structured control. How different from what
we encountered in exploring political control in egalitarian
and rank society. To the extent that a stratified society
lacks formal and specialized mechanisms of control it courts
disaster, for in the face of weakening bonds of kinship, in
""
face of the commonplace realization that the web of kin
cannot contain the enlarged population or the increasing
numbers of others, of non-kinsmen in the society, it be-
comes a question of developing formal, specialized instru-
ments of coercion or reverting to a more easily maintained
system of access rights to basic resources. It is the task of
if Elliintaining general social order that stands at the heart
of the development of the state. And at the heart of the
problem of maintaining general order is the need to defend
¥ the central order of stratification-the differentiation of
~categones of population in terms of access to basic re-
sources. Undoubtedly, as already indicated, <;me means of
doing this is to indoctrinate illffiembers of society with the
beITe"tlliat the social order is right or good or Simply in-
evitable. But there has never been a state which survived
on this basis alone. Every state known to history has had a
23° /
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY

The State
/
231
TINE STATES
.;11 "
i2; 'All contemporary states, even those that seem to be
"'~lly descended from the states of high antiquity, like
,>:, a, are really secondary states; the pristine states per-
" " ~ long ago. The word "perished" is unfortunate. States,
~spite several efforts to deal with them as organic entities,
c,e not organic at all, and although they may come to an
:~d, they certainly do not "die" in anything but an ana-
ggical sense. Indeed, few and legendary have been the
,#ites which came to termination by the extinction of their
:' bpulations; usually a rather large body of survivors has
,:cirrried on under a new political system. Perhaps it"'ould
:pe more appropriate to consider the end of a state to be a
,:process more like dismantling or disassembling, as the com-
. ~,~,ponent institutions and their related social groups or associ-
:': ations break apart and fall individually, or, more signifi-
: ::': ~tly, fall collectively into disuse.
",
At any rate, there once were states that emerged from
:" stratified societies and experienced the slow, autochthonous
~: ; . growth of the specialized formal instruments of social con-
:t:: trol out of their own needs for these institutions. Through
"r'time the institutions coalesce and with this unification
~:'~: : emerges a power, held and manipulated perhaps by a
{(: priest, a warrior, a manager, or 'a charismatic madman who '
!:. :.just happens to be the genealogical leader of the largest
,,>::-kin group in the now heterogeneous social fabric. The
power itself represents a quantum leap over anything pre~
,viously wielded, but it is a long time before the wielders
of the new power realize its full extent and possibilities.
Far from being a conscious creation of naturally power.,
hungry psychological types, it is at least as probable that
. the power develops more rapidly than the abilities of its
. handlers. It takes time for a king to become a god.
~en a pristine state emerges it does so in a political ..

':",J!
:j;
-
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
232 /
~acuum . · '!'!J.~U~.Jhere_i~_Ao..oJ:h_erm.Qr.~JljgQJy_g.eveloped
~.~res~?t ~~~.~~~~~1£i~to~~<:!_S!_~~es~~p. A pristine
_ state ClOes not appear as a reaction to colomal pressures.
No outside
socie~i,unan:ip.ulating-~no.my, drawing
~ off or developing resources, putting in money, drawing off
labor, or even supplying a How of goods, the motion of
which might call forth a new group of entrepreneurs either
native to the society or drawn from abroad. The pristine
state does not have models available to build on or to re-
jed. There are no constitutions, legislatures, bureaucracies,
armies, commissariats, or police departments to copy. There
r
are not even full-scale kings but only lineage heads, tempo-
rary war chiefs, or big-men-the private redistributors
. whose power is as fragile as their last successful party.
It is not the case, however, that pristine .states grew
without company. By the very nature of the population
distribution in late Neolithic times, the stratified-society-
gOing-pristine-state
was
surrounded by other societies,
some of these, also agricultural, developing in tandem.
This development is helped by rivalry, trade, warfare, and
communication in sharpening needs for more political spe-
cialization,
for more professional organization, and for
~
tighter internal control. There is one thing, however, that
~uch a society can do in such an environment that is not
possible in a ranking SOCiety, much less an egalitarian one.
It can overrun less well-organized neighbors and incorpo-
rate them within its own system as an inferior social stra-
tum. This is the developmental juncture where conquest
theories _of the state fit. The state is virtually born, and
stratification is well established as a fully functioning sys-
tem; then warfare can lead to conquest and the emergence
of s~erstratification on the basis of an already well-elabo-
rated system of stratification.
To discuss fully the identity of the pristine states and
to attempt to'describe the precise nature of their emergence
is not pOSSible in these pages. It may be that the .task is
ultimately impossible in any context for the reasons alluded
:.~: .
:.".~.

; .: " ,
, ~. ..
The State
/ 233
to earlier: Literacy appears only with the emergence of the
earliest states, and recorded history is much younger. The
kinds of evidence we have are essentially archaeological and
inferential. Although the general patterns of emergence may
be discerned, details are fragmentary at best.
How many pristine states have been known? Note first
the phrasing of the question, which deliberately implies
that some pristine states may have flourished at least briefly
without leaving behind any clues to their existence. It may
well be, for example, that one or more pristine states may
have appeared in Africa south of the Sahara three or more
millenniums ago. As knowledge of Africa is enriched and
more and more archaeology is undertaken, it may be pos-
sible to detect remnant influences that will enhance the
probability that one or more such states existed, only to dis-
appear from sight and memory.
,.
In terms of actual empirical evidence the problem of
, the number of pristine states remains complex. Should all
, . known examples of pristine state formation be contracted
to two, one center-in the Old World and the other in the'"
New? If so, what are the candidate's for the primary initiat-
.ing centers? In the Old World, to take the earliest known
appearances of state organization, the contest for priority
seems in the studies of recent years to have tipped in favor
- of Mesopotamia rather than Egypt. Yet to what extent in
this very first situation does the juxtaposition of two cen-
'.ters figure- as a crucial aspect of the situation. That is, it
. must be asked whether this matter of juxtaposition was
. :Itself a necessary ingredient in the rise of the state in the
: Near East. Beyond the immediate realm of Mesopotamia
_ - and Egypt, cases can be made for the pristine emergence
:d:;: or the state in the Indus and Yellow River Valleys. Yet
fc,.. both of these cases, particularly the latter, are weakened by
(~:~, the relative lateness of state development vis-a-vis the se-
t;::::.quence of events in the Middle East. Furthermore, the
f::'-archaeology of the early Indus civilization reveals elements
'(:othat certainly originated farther west, suggesting that some

:u:nc.,,::vf~~;:~:O:O::L::.:::;., that aI~ J~'
ready existed. In China too there is some debate about the
:~
";1
independence of its Neolithic foundations and also of its
subsequent development.
Although the question is partly an empirical one that
must await further archaeological contributions, it has sub-
stantial theoretical aspects that I apologize for raising with-
out being able to settle. Once pristine states are well de-
veloped and actively pushing out the limits of their popula-
tions and areas, the relations between such states and their
less well-organized hinterlands are relatively simple to fol-
low. But what of the earliest periods? Central to the matter
is the question of how much or how little pressure or stimu-
lation of a higher center on a lower one constitutes a case
of secondary development? Skipping over the Indus situ-
ation, the problem is most clearly presented in the Chinese
data. At the time of emergence of the earliest known Chinese
state, perhaps 3,500 years ago, the Near East had already
known some 1,500 years of state organization. Furthermore,
as Chang Kwang-chih, among others, has noted: "many
essential elements of Chinese civilization, such as bronze
metallurgy, writing, the horse chariot, human sacrifice, and
so forth, had appeared earlier in Mesopotamia" (Chang,
1963, p. 136). The conclusion was quick to follow: "Many
scholars argue that civilization came to China as a result
of stimulus diffusion from the Near East ..." (Chang,
1963, P: 136). Chang himself does not think that the ques-
tion can yet be resolved, with regard to Chinese civiliza-
tion, but he obviously favors the opposite interpretation,
that many of these developments were convergent. Part of
his case rests on the demonstration that if Chinese civiliza-
tion did arise "suddenly," it did not arise without substantial
previous foundation. But even accepting the older hypothe-
sis of stimulus diffusion, can such a theory be extended to
embrace the origins of the state? ,Really there are two ques-
tions here. It is one thing to imagine or find examples of the
stimulus diffusion of an object or a technique. The idea of

:::..
/ 235
The State
:::-~:,: ,~. ::>
". , :.
.. "
\.
;" ~Siltivating plants, of making ceramics, or of using a certain
",{'kind of tool can be envisaged as spreading over vast dis-
V tances, largely through the actual transport of the end prod-
/ ' ucts or the spread of information about them. It is not so
h easy to envisage the spread of a collection of institutions
<:, comprising a particular form of the state unless at the same
, ,t ime there is some substantial ongoing revision of the so-
.. ciety that prepares a climate receptive to the new institu-
".tions, It is just such preparation that is lacking in China, ex-
;; "'cept as a normal indigenous process that is almost completely
contained within the core ' area of Chinese culture. In the
.face of such considerations, then, I personally lean to in-
terpreting China as a case of pristine state formation, and
, for similar reasons I consider the earlier Indus valley state
(or states?) in the same way. Not so, however, dJ.e growth
of the states ,that appear in so many nineteenth-century
treatments of the origin of the state. Without going intOf
detail here, I simply state that it seems to me that such fa-
mous states of antiquity as those of Crete, Greece, Troy, and
Persia-and certainly Rome and all the states of western
and northern Europe-are secondary.
,
THE BASIC NATURE OF THE STATE
T~~ state,_~eIbjs, a, _~lJ"~~tiQ11.9..u.:p~cialized
institu-
tionsand agencies, some formal and others informal, that
,,"
Iillillifams-an oraer ofsrratiUcauoo".usualIy its point of con-
;~>
centration-is ontheoasic principles of organization: hier-
"
ar~ d_ifferential ~~es ot. acc~9Ji~§1f.Lt?~~ obe-
dience to o:f!ici~and d~i~p.se of the area. The state mus~
mbtain itself externally as well as internally, and it at-
,
tempts this by both physical and ideological means, by sup-
' '
porting military forces and by establishing an identity
-among other similar units.
,
, The £rimary functions of the state, internal and exter=4!
nat 'maintenance ' of a speCilic order of stratification, give
,
rise immediately to a number of characteristic institutions.
Here, of course, ~ere is much more latitude in what any

"
I
.....
THE EVOLtlnON OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
particular state may develop. The situation can be analyzed
in terms of Marshall Sahlins and Elman R. Service's general
and specific evolution: The leap to the state is of general
evolutionary status a.ruL.a)uates, both pristine and sec-
ondary, have a core of features in common. But the subse-
quent development of particular states, ev;n of parti~
pnstille states, is, ~P~Ci§??!-J:~Il~~e?~~I1t::\~J1y--!2~al-~~ptive
ina 'divergent: Nonetheless, all must have dealt or must
""continue to deal with some combination of the following:
Population must be controlled in a number of senses. The
State shoUld have some means of identifyinz. its own sub- '
jects or citizens, of distinguishing members and nonmem-
bers. This is often accomplished by setting boundaries, but
it can be done through birth and parentage. In either case
it is necessary to define the unit and, beyond this, to have
individuals identify themselves with this unit. Sometimes
this also involves the construction of a variety of categories
of membership or it may require effective limitation onthe
physical mobility of the members or of nonmembers, the
latter being forbidden to enter, or admitted in small num-
bers under special restrictions. Sooner or later most states
are cqncerned about the size of their membership, and
..censuses are run to discover this. Censuses, of course, re-
late to another 'common attribute of states to which we
shall turn very shortly; they tax or otherwise make levies
upon their memberships, for the activities that the state
carries out must be subsidized.
The state must deal with trouble cases. Quite early
the;;-appea;:s some statement of 'norms associated with
('sanctions. ,Customary handling of disputes does not auto-
i, matically disappear, but customary rules and procedures
) are reinforced by formal iteration and application. Rules
"(/ that niight have applied between kin groups are now ap-
,
plied within kin groups by an external force. With the
:I state comes the possibility that members of a common kin
.. \ group can accuse one another, sue one another, and betray
" ( one another to a larger society that stands beyond kin. If
,,: ~ ::

/ 237
The State
the emergent state 'defines the limits of interpersonal injury
and aggression, it also is soon required to handle disputes
over things and over agreements. Beyond the growth of law
in this sense, there is the necessary growth of procedure,
of courts or their equivalents, of officers of adjudication,
officers of punishment, record keepers and communicators,
and varieties of functionaries that differ from system to
system.
The state must establish and maintain sovereignty,
which may be considered the identification and monopoly
-.Q[paramount COI)..b;:pLQYJ2I,_:;l_l2QP.J.!J.ati9!J: and an area. When
,the state is defined as in this chapter, it follows that its
structure must be in a sense cellular, that is, made up of a
" variety of different kinds of components, with these com-
"ponents being joined into subsystems that articulate with
:,/ the whole, with the larger structure of government, only at
,·<higher levels. Examples of component cellular subsystems
~
include family and kin groups, communities and regions, "
offices and bureaus, clubs and gangs, and even layers and
levels of the administrative apparatus itself. In the com-
,.munications among these sometimes disparate entities there
,(") s always auunderstood priority of arrangement of orders
and coercive inducements to decisions, the level of highest
:, ultimate priority is equivalent to the internal concept of
}' sovereignty. There is also an external aspect of sovereignty
:{:as discrete political units recognize or dispute each other's
< :a1itonomy. It is not necessary, however, to go more deeply
'( -iJ?to these difficult matters in the present discussion (cf. ·
::.:Fried, n.d. ).
;:: .~
'
.
.§xternally oriented maintenance of sovereignty has
':j:hrough most.9Lb.ist0..!X:!~s.!~9-_!..l!..~~d.~
)~ activities. Yet a moment's pause and reflection will
k~ing many questions , about this sweeping statement. A
·tDilitary establishment is always dependent upon the gen-
eral economy of the state which supports it. It also is liable
\to ideological pressures on its morale, and these relate to
larger aspects of the society. It is also evident that history

.:-.
_ ~:.:-"
, ,
-, '.'-
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
'. ~
. .r.
has known many small states, militarily weak, that have en-
dured for relatively long periods amidst more powerful
neighbors. Thus weak sovereignties may be protected by
concatenations having little to do with the small state in
question, as when Thailand remained sovereign between
French and British colonial expansions. Still, the fact has
been that even the smallest states have had some military
sting, and this they frequently maximize through combina-
tions established by treaties that retain their sovereignty
while promising broader military support.
It is in the maintenance of internaLs.QY.~onty, how-
ever, that some of the most fascinating questions about
.-
political organization lie. As discussed in Chapter 1 , sover-
;;
eignty is tied to legitimacy and that in turn requires ~
"
£hall naked power. No state know~a;' ever-beeD.devmd
, :'",;,'~.:
of an ideology that consecrated its power and sanctioned its
,
~e~~p.y statei;;;nowever;l1ave-Undergone'sifuations 'in
'i~
.:which, to use the familiar Chinese phrase, the mandate of .
:11
,?
.heaven has been lost by a ruling group. Where this has
';'~
happened within a social system, or even as the result of
: .~
'violent overthrow attendant upon invasion, the basic princi- ·
'j,
/
ples of the previous order of stratification have rarely been
'0
.seriously altered. Instead, a new portion of the population
Cl'tf
"J'
-assumes the vacated roles and statuses, and the old order
is resumed with minor alterations.
;-
/'
.:..--- That analysis of the concept of legitimacy is an ulti-
mate problem for the social scientist is patent from the
nature of the phenomenon. As indicated in our first chapter,
even such a crusty proponent of positive polity as John
Austin recognized that physical power alone was not suffi-
cient to integrate a state. Yet growing sophistication brings
the realization that power lies not merely in the ability to
direct police or other military force at a specific social ob-
ject, but in such things as control of sources of information
and the means of communication. From what we know of
the ancient pristine states, these were matters of great sig-
nificance from the outset. That early ruling elites sometimes

/
239
;·:-Y.
The State
~appeared in priestly guise, making the specialized business
::-:of government and management an esoteric art, or that
some nonpriestly ruling classes achieved the same end by
controlling literacy and making recorded history their per-
sonal tool is evidence of this.,
A very early complication in the rise of states is the
development of a social. ~~~or that stands beneath the rulers ,
~ )utacts as the agency of control. Here is the inevitable
''. !?ureaucracy iliatIi:l'SOr:ne--stateSburgeons and seems to
<'overwhelm all other aspects of administration. Elsewhere a
::military establishment may play the central role, or it may
,::,be the ritualists, or a group whose po';Ver stems from cru-
S\ cial roles in the system whereby goods are produced or
>o therwise obtained and circulated. Often there is a com-
:\bination of these, varying through time and with other
::,:£actors that affect the society at large. Analogists, who
de- ~
';:'tect the functions underlying these roles in simpler societies,
',t'Qften jump to the conclusion that the state is omnipresent or,
;,what is much the same thing, that there is no distinctive
!:,thing as a state. To the extent that such a view encourages
(,'understanding of the means by which even the simplest so-
j;'Gieties are articulated and integrated it may be tolerated. But
i'such a view has its cost, that is, the obscuring of great regu-
( larities in the evolution of society and of the central and re-
~ current role of the limitation of rights of access to basic
,;i:esources in the quantum leap in social structure that has
;':~ attended the emergence of the state.
"
We may conclude this brief consideration of the nature
iO£ the state by briefly noting one function that begins as a
' derived need and soon contends for dominance amon
all
}he function~ To carry out all the other functions, the spe-
~cialized apparatuses of the state must have means of trans-
, orming basic resources into more fluid kinds of wealth.
;1:'here must be a ~asury or bursary which can support and
underwrite the activities of state minions whose efforts are
,irr removed from the daily tasks of subsistence. It is not
' ecessary at the outse~ that this wealth be in the form of

SEC NDARY STATES
There is an interesting theory that the evolution of air-
reathing life transformed the earth and paradoxically
created conditions under which further appearances of such
life from nonliving matter could no longer take place as.a
spontaneous phenomenon on this planet. Whether or not this
is a valid picture of an event in biochemical evolution, some- vs
thing much like it..l~LoJ~".place when pristine states apP'eilr~ ,
240
/
THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
media of exchange, but the efficiency of the state is so much
increased by the invention of all-purpose money that few
experiments in stateship have long endured without it. But,
whether a state has adopted all-purpose money or not, it
must have means of separating the Ero~~~!.~_?f raw wealth
from a greater or lesser portion of the output. Taxation has
many forms. One of the most interesting is the conscription
of labor which, for all its crudeness, has the advantage of
flexibility, enabling the rulers to concentrate effort on tasks
in their own order of priority.
At this juncture the involuted character of the state
becomes predominant. Operation of the fiscal apparatus,
though almost an end in itself, 'feeds back into every other
function already mentioned and creates additional ones.
More and more specialists are needed to operate the sys-
tem. More and more devices are needed to maintain in-
creasing exploitation of the population. More than any
other form of human association, the state is devoted to
expansion-of its population, of its territory, of its physical
and ideological power. Small wonder that there have been
so few pristine states in history for when such a state ap-
pears in a given area of the world it quickly sets about
converting its environing societies into parts or counterparts
of itself. The appearance of a pristine state, then, is the
,
~gger of a usually vast movement toward state formation.
States that arise due to such a process, however, do not
..
epeat the steps which the original state experienced. These
are the secondary states.
I
I"

,
', ' .......
The State
/
241
jn a
fe~_pJi!-.c::~~..between about 5,000 and 3,000 years ago
in the Old World and the New. While such states did not
succeed in transfonning all other societies into parts or
counterparts of themselves, they did begin a process of
"penetration that seems to be culminating in our own time.
More to the point, the appearance of a pristine state in an
area freq~entlyprec1ude~further spontaneous Eristine de-
velopment as
ad~~enLs9J:~ie..ties_aJ&..1mced into secondary
molds.
If the analysis of the previous pages and of the pre-
vious chapter is essentially correct, the appearance of a
pristine state is not a random process but is determined by
. the presence of certain finite conditions. It follows from
'. this that those areas in which the state has appeared most
.recently, and of course always through secondary processes,
are areas where deficiencies in local conditions have to be
made up by pressures and models and stimuli originating
from already established states. In our own contemporary
~i>world colonialism has played this role. It can be shown,
'::for example, that states that in their expansion, overrun
< Simpler societies have grave problems in effectively exploit-
?J"j,ng the areas occupied by those societies, or their labor
'\ p9tential, unless they make far reaching changes in the
W:>cial organizations they encounter. Because the basic insti-
'"tions of stateship are lacking in the invaded societies,
ere is no means by which the intruder can obtain the
inpulsive holds it requires. The natives are described as
.....
and shiftless, disorganized, undisciplined and unco-
erative. One solution, much favored in the past, is the
:,~
ation of the entire population. If pressure to occupy
" /area is not so great, other means are employed, and
'~.• among these is the imposition of external organization,
1:1am of command. Where no chiefs exist, chiefs are
:'4, usually created by fiat. Such political reformation of
'Ie societies never goes on in a vacuum. Simultaneously,
'~tive economy is undermined and transformed by the
'~uction of money, new commodities, wa'ge labor or '

THE EVOLUTION OF POLITICAL SOCIETY
slavery, and a more or less subtle erosion of older patterns
of access to basic resources. At the same time new ideologies
are introduced and despite varying amounts of syncretic
maintenance of older belief systems, new religions bring
new ideas of hierarchy and subordination, a new view 'of
labor, and altered ideas of interpersonal relations.
Secondary states emerge through processes quite dif-
ferent from those that give rise to the pristine states. It is
unfortunate that all real examples of state formation avail-
able for first-hand investigation are of secondary type. All
too often, students of such state formation have assumed
that, except for the inevitable unique elements that mark '
any particular case, the process of developing stateship
they observe is the one that must always transpire. The
present book has been an: attempt to controvert that view,
and attempt also to sketch a theory of the evolution of rank-
ing, social stratification, and the state compatible with die
information presently on hand and in the spirit of contempo-
rary political anthropology.
.~.
)
.-'
.,

.-: .
BIBLIOGRAPHY
",' Aberle, David F. 1952. " 'Arctic Hysteria' and Latah in Mon-
golia," Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences,
Series 11,22:291-7.
.
.
Aberle, David F., A. K..Cohen, A. K. Davis, M. J. Levy, Jr., and
F. X. Sutton. 1950. "The Functional Prerequisites of a So-
ciety:' Ethics, 60:2.
Adams, Robert M. 1966. The Evolution of Urban Society. Chi-
cago: Aleline.
Aginsky, Burt W. 1949. This Man-Made World. New York:
Rinehart (preliminary edition).
Almond, Gabriel A., and James S. Coleman (eds.). 1960. The
Politics of Developing Areas. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
Anderson, Paul K., and James L. Hill. 1965. "Mus musculus:
Experimental Introduction of Territory Formation," Science,
148:1753-5.
Austin, John. 1954· The Province of jurisprudence Determined

244 /
Bibliography
and the Uses of the Study of Jurisprudence. New York:
Noonday. First published 1832 and 1863.
Balikci, Asen.
1964.
Development of Basic Socio-Economic
Units in Two
Eskimo
Communities.
Ottowa:
National
Museum of Canada Bulletin 202.
Barton, Roy F. 1949. The Kalingas, Their Institutions and Cus-
tom Law. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
.
Beaglehole, Ernest, and Pearl Beaglehole. 1938:. Ethnology of
Pukapuka. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Bulletin 150.
. Bentley, Arthur F. 1949. The Process of Government. Bloom-
ington, Ind.: Principia Press. First published 1908.
Berle, A. A., Jr., and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. The Modern
Corporation and Private Property. New York: Commerce
Clearing House.
Berndt, C. H. 1961. "The Quest for Identity: The Case of the
Australian Aborigines," Oceania, 30:81-1°7-
Berndt, Ronald M. 1962. Excess and Restraint: Social Control
Among a New Guinea Mountain People. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Berndt, Ronald M., and Catherine H. Berndt. 1951. Sexual Be-
havior in Western Arnhem Land. New York: Viking Fund
Publications in Anthropology 16.
---. 1964. The World of the First Australians. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Birket-Smith, Kaj,
1929. The Caribou Eskimos, Material and
Social Life and their Cultural Position. Copenhagen: Gy1
dendal.
Blair, Archibald. 1789. "Capt. Blair's Report, Dated 9th June,"
in "Extracts from the Bengal Consultations of the XVlllth
Century Relating to the Andaman Islands,"
in R.
C.
Temple (ed.), The Indian Antiquary, 29 (1900): 103-16.
Boas, Franz. 1897. "The Social Organization and the Secret
Societies of the Kwakititl Indians," Annual Report of the "
Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution for the
Year Ending June 30, 1895, pp. 311-738. Washington,
D. C.: Government Printing Office.
.
Bohannan, Paul. 1957. Justice and Judgement Among the Tio.
London: Oxford.
.
.
---. 1963. Social Anthropology. New York: Holt, Rinehart ,
& Winston.
-:
-:

Bibliography
/ 245
.: Brown, P., and H. C. Brookfield, 1959. "Chimbu Land and So-
.
ciety," Oceania, 30:1-'75.
.• . Brawn, W. Jethro. 1906. The Austinian Theory of Law. London:
c>
Murra.y. .
>: Brownlee, Frank. 1943. "The Social Organization of the Kung
(!Un) Bushmen of the North-Western Kalihari," Africa,
14: 124--9.
": Bumham, James . 1941. The Managerial Revolution. New York:
.. ..
Day.
0;; Buxton. Jean. 1958 . "The Mandari of the Southern Sudan," in
.
John Middleton and David Tait (eds.) , Tribes Without
0"
Rulers. London: Routledge.
'.,-California, State of. 1955. Progress Report to the Legislature by
",
the Senate Interim Committee on California Indian Affairs.
,
Sacramento: Senate of the State of California.
J ::appannari, Stephen C. 1960. "The Concept of Property Among
r
Shoshoneans," in Gertrude E. Dole and Robert L. Cal}leiro
;"
(eds.), Essays in the Science of Culture in Honor of Leslie
A. White. New York: Crowell.
.~arpenter, C. R. 1942. "Societies of Monkeys and Apes," Bio-
;,::
logical Symposia, 8: 177-204.
'&-. 1965. "The Howlers of Barra Colorado Island," in
';
Irven DeVore (ed.) , Primate Behavior, pp. 2So--g1. New
i :.> York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
'lJ.ance, M. R. A. 1961. "The Nature and Special Features of
the Instinctive Social Bond of Primates," in Sherwood L.
Washburn (ed.) , Social Life of Early Man, pp.
17-33·
. Chicago: Aldine.
.
g Kwang-chih. 1963. The Archaeology of Ancient China.
;
'~ New Haven: Yale University Press.
'~ere, Helen. 1950. Fighting with Property. Monograph of the
~; American Ethnological Society 18. New York: Augustin.
'l1eI!, Felix S. 1935. "Transcendental Nonsense and the Func-
'~ :
tionalis t Approach," Columbia Law Review, 35:809-49.
lLson, Elizabeth. 1951. "The Plateau Tonga of Northern Rho-
·-,; desia," in Elizabeth Colson and Max Gluckman
(eds.),
." Seven Tribes of British Central Africa. London: Oxford.
' . . 1953. The Makah Indians. Minneapolis: University of
:~ Minnesota Press.
' . , Edward S. 1913. The North American Indian, Vol. IX:

246 /
Bibliography
The Salishan Tribes of the Coast. Cambridge, Mass.:
Har~:::~
vard University Press.
>
Davie, Maurice R. 1929. The Evolution of War. New Haven: :;'
Yale University Press.
.
DeVore, Irven, and K. R. L. Hall. 1965. "Baboon Ecology," in 't
Irven DeVore (ed.), Primate Behavior, pp. 20-52. New
'~,
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
~;;
Drucker, Philip. 1939. "Rank, Wealth and Kinship in Northwest 'f.
Coast Society," },.,merican Anthropologist, 41 :55-65.
')~
---. 1951. The Northern and Central Nootkasi Tribes. Bureau
.r.
of American Ethnology Bulletin 144. Washington, D. C.:
U. S. Government Printing Office.
---. 1965. Cultures of the North Pacific Coast. San Fran-
cisco: Chandler.
Easton, David. 1953. The Political System. New York: Knopf.
~
Edel, M. M. 1965. "African Tribalism: Some Reflections on
:~
Uganda," Political Science Quarterly, 80 :357--Z2.
:t
Eisenstadt, S. N. 1963- The Political Systems of Empires. New
::"
York: Free Press.
,.,
Elkin, A. P. 1964. The Australian Aborigines. Sydney: Angus
\'
& Robertson.
~~~
Epstein, A. L. 1958. Politics in an Urban African Community.
.':'1
Manchester: University of Manchester press.
·,,',',:
Fathauer, George H. 1961. "Trobriand," in David M. Schneider
,
and Kathleen Gough (eds.), Matrilineal Kinship. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
{~
Firth, Raymond. 1926. "Proverbs in Native Life, With
Special,
il
," ~
Reference to those of the Maori," Folk-lore, 37:134-53,
1
5
~
24
-70 .
;~
---. 1940. The Work of the Gods in Tikopia. London School
.']
of Economics and Political Science Monographs on Social
. '~
Anthropology 1 and 2.
"
---.1956. Human Types (rev. ed.). London: Nelson.
]
---. 1957· We, the Tikopia
(snd ed.). London: Allen &
:l
Unwin. First ed. published 1936.
.'1
---. 1959· Economics of the New Zealand Maori (znd ed.).
".,,:,j
Wellington, N. Z.: R. E. Owen, Government Printer. First
ed. published 1929.
/1
---. 1959 . Social Change in Tikopia. New York: Macmillan. ·
" ~

.:.;.
. : ";.
-.: ~ .
:
'
.: :.
.
.
,~. ':" .
Bibliography
/
247
e:
1961. History and Traditions of Tikopia. Wellington,
.: .N. Z.: The Polynesian Society Memoir 33.
.. :.
. 1963. "Bilateral Descent Groups: An Operational Per-
. spective," in Isaac Schapera (ed.), Studies in Kinship and
Marriage, pp. 22-37. Royal Anthropological Institute Oc-
casional Paper 16.
. . 1965. Primitive Polynesian Economy (znd ed.). Lon-
,
don: Routledge. First ed. published 1939.
.irth, Raymond, ana James Spillius. 1963. A Study in Ritual
•
Modification: The'Work of the Gods in Tikopia in ~929 and
:.
~952. London: Royal Anthropological Institute Occasional
Paper 19.
Fortes, Meyer. 1940. "The Political System of the Tallensi of
the Northern Territories of the Gold Coast," in Meyer
Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard (eds.), African Political
'".
Systems, pp. 239-71. London: Oxford.
.,''fortes, Meyer, and E. E. Evans-Pritchard. 1940. African Political
.~. .
Systems. London: Oxford.
:,;'Fortune, R. F. 1932. Sorcerers of Dobu. London: Routledge.
<:Freeman, J. D. 1961. "On the Concept of the Kindred," Journal
.
of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 91 :192-220.
. Freire-Marreco, B. W.,
and J. L.
Myres.
1912. Notes and
i,
Queries on Anthropology, (4th ed.). London: Royal An-
;
thropological Institute.
.: Fried, Morton H. 1952. "Land Tenure, Geography and Ecology
.
in the Contact of Cultures;' The American Journal of Eco-
nomics and Sociology, 11 :391-412.
---. 1957. "The Classification of Corporate Unilineal De-
scent Groups," Journal of the Royal Anthropological In-
stitute, 87: 1-29.
--.-. 1961. "Warfare, Military Organization, and the Evolu-
tion of Society," Anthropologica, 3:134-47.
---. 1964. "Ideology, Social Organization and Economic De-
velopment in China: A Living Test of Theories," in Robert
A. Manners (ed.), Process and Pattern in Culture, pp. 47-
62. Chicago: Aldine .
.---. n.d, "State," in Encyclopedia of Social Sciences, in press.
Friedrich, Carl Joachim. 1963. Man and His Government: An
,.,
Empirical Theory of Politics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
.,•....

:: : .
-
-" -:",:"
248 /
Bibliography
Gluckman,
M.
1960. "Tribalism in Modern British
Central
Africa," Cahiers d Etudes AfriCaines, 1:55-70.
---. 1965. Politics, Law and Ritual in Tribal Society. Oxford:
Blackwell.
..
Goldenweiser, A. 1922. Early Civilization. New York: Knopf.
Goodall, Jane. 1965. "Chimpanzees of the Combe Stream Re-
serve," in Irven DeVore (ed.), Primate Behavior, pp. 425-
73. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Gough, Kathleen. 1962. "Variation in Interpersonal Kinship Re-
lations," in David M. Schneider and Kathleen Gough (eds.),
Matrilineal Kinship, pp. 577-613. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Grote, George. 1846-1856. History qf Greece (12 vols.). Lon-
don : Murray.
.
Gumplowicz, Ludwig. 1899. The. Outlines of Sociology, Fred-
erick W. Moore (trans. ). Philadelphia. American Academy
of Political and Social Science.
Hall, K. R. L., and Irven DeVore. .1965. "Baboon Social Be-
havior," in Irven DeVore (ed.), Primate Behavior, pp. 53-
110. New York: .Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Harris,
Marvin.
1963. The Nature of Cultural Things. New
York : Random House.
Hart, C. W. M., and Arnold R. Pilling. 1960. The Tiwi of North
Australia. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Hartland, E. Sidney. 1924. Primitive Law. London: Methuen.
Herskovits,
Melville J.
1960.
Economic Anthropology. New
York: Knopf.
Hobbes, Thomas. 1929 . Hobbes's Leviathan. Oxford: Clarendon.
Reprinted from the edition of 1651.
Hobhouse, L. T. 1922. "The Historical Evolution of Property, .:
in Fact, and in Idea," in Property, Its Duties and Rights, '
pp. 3-31. New York: Macmillan.
..
Hoebel, E. Adamson. 1949. Mctn in the Primitive World. New .:;
York: McGraw-Hill.
:1
---. 1954. The Law of Primitive Man. Cambridge; Harvard ]
University Press.
j
---. 1958. Man in the Primitive World (znd ed.). NewJ
York: McGraw-Hill.
j
Hogbin, H. Ian. 1934. Law and Order in Polynesia: A Study ot: j
Primitive Legal Institutions. London: Christopher.
.~j
"
.;~
;~

.....: :...
Bibliography
/
249
. 1951. Transformation Scene, The Changing Culture of
.'
a New Guinean Village. London: Routledge.
. ogbin, H. Ian, and C. H. Wedgwood. 1953. "Local Grouping
.
in Melanesia, Part 1," Oceania, 23:241-76.
.' olmberg, Allan R. 1950. Nomads of the Long Bow: The Siri-
ono of Eastern Bolivia. Smithsonian Institution Institute of
'-
Social Anthropology Publication 10. Washington, D. C.:
.
U. S. Government Printing Office.
.
'.' anisbi, Kinji. 1963. "Social Behavior in Japanese Monkeys,
Macaca fuscata," in Charles H. Southwick (ed.) ~ Primate
Social Behavior. Princeton: Van Nostrand. Originally pub-
lished in Psychologia, 1 (1957): 47-54.
ternational Labour Organization. 1953. Indigenous Peoples.
Geneva: International Labour Office.
~y> Phyllis. 1965. "The Common Langur of North India," in
'<
Irven DeVore (ed. ), Primate Behavior, pp. 197-249. New
~ ~. York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
pes, J. Walter. 1940. Historical Introduction to the Theory of
Law. Oxford: Clarendon.
'~elin de Jong, J. P. B. de. 1948. Customary Law
(A Con-
i: fusing Fiction). Amsterdam: Koninklijke Vereeniging In-
;
disch Instituut, Mededeling 80, Afr. Volkenkunde 29.
_~elin de Jong, Patrick Edward de. 1951. Minangkabau and
. Negri-Sembilan,
Socio-Political
Structure
in
Indonesia.
Leiden: University of Leiden.
enal, Bertrand de.. 1957. Sovereignty, an InqUiry into the
Political Good. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
. er, Abram. 1945. The Psychological Frontiers of Society.
·;.N ew York: Columbia University Press.
.~ . ., g, Felix.
1962. The Ethnohistory of Northern Luzon.
.-Stanford: Stanford University Press.
_'on, Hans. 1961. General Theory of Law and State, Anders
:: Wedberg (trans.). New York: Russell. Originally published
" 'as Vol.
1 , Twentieth Century Legal Series, Cambridge:
'.' Harvard University Press, 1945.
Chhoff, Paul. 1959. "The Principles of Clanship in Human
,: Society," in M. H. Fried (ed.), Readings in Anthropology,
i-II, ,260-70. New York: Crowell. Originally written in 1935 .
First published in 1955 in Davidson Journal of Anthro-
pology.

250 /
Bibliography
Koford, Carl B. 1963. "Group Relations in an Island Colony
of Rhesus Monkeys," in C. H., Southwick (ed.), Primate
Social Behavior, pp. 136-52. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
---. 1965. "Population Dynamics of Rhesus on Cayo San-
tiago," in Irven DeVore (ed. ), Primate Behavior, pp. 160-
74. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Kortlandt, A., and M. Kooij. 1963. "Protohominid Behavior in
Primates," Symposia of the Zoological Society of London,
No. 10, pp. 61-88.
'
Krause, Aurel. 1956. The Tlingit Indians, Erna Gunther (trans.).
Seattle: University of Washington Press. First ed. pub-
lished in 1885.
La Potherie, Bacqueville de. 1753. Histoire de l:Amerique Sep-
tentrionale, Vol. 1. Paris : Nyon.
Leach, E. R. 1954. Political Systems of Highland Burma: A
Study of Kachin Social Structure.
Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Leacock, Eleanor. 1954 . The Montagnais "Hunting Territory"
and the Fur Trade. Menasha, Wis.: American Anthropo-
logical Association Memoir 78.
---. 1955. "Matrilocality in a Simple Hunting Economy
(Montagnais-Naskapi)," Southwestern Journal of Anthro-
pology, 11:31-47.
Lewis, George C. 1849. An Essay on the Influence of Authority
in Matters of Opinion. London: Parker.
Lips, Julius E. 1938. "Government," in Franz Boas (ed.), Gen-
eral Anthropology, pp. 487-534. New York: Heath.
Lin, Yueh-hua. 1961. Th e Lolo of Liang Shan, Pan Ju-shu
(trans.) . New Haven: Human Relations Area Files Press.
Lowie, Robert H. 1927. The Origin of the State. New York:
Harcourt.
McIlwraith, T. F. 1948. The Bella Coola Indians
(2 vols.) ,
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
MacLeod, William Christie. 1928. "Economic Aspects of In-
digenous American Slavery," American Anthropologist, 30:
632-50 .
Mair, Lucy. 1962. Primitive Government. London: Pelican.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 1926. Crime and Custom in Savage So-
ciety. London: Routledge.

. " --:':
~ . .. ..
"
"- ':, ..,
"
....
' . ,
Bibliography
I
251
---.. 1934: "Introduction," in H. Ian Hogbin, Law and.Order
in Polynesia: A Study of Primitive Legal Institutions. Lon-
don: Christopher.
_
Marsden, Samuel 1932. The Letters and. Journals of Samuel
- Marsden 1765-1838, John Rawson Elder (ed.). Dunedin,
Scot.: Coulls, Somerville, Wilkie.
Marshall, Lorna.
1959. "Marriage Among !Kung Bushmen,"
Africa, 29:335-65·
---.-1960. "IKung African Bands," Africa, 3°:325-55.
---. i961. "Sharing, Talking, and Giving: Relief of Social
Tensions Among IKung Bushmen," Africa, 31:231-49.
Mason, Otis T. 1892. "The Land Problem," in Brooklyn Ethical
Association
(sponsor) , Man and. the State, pp. HI-30.
New York: Appleton.
Mauss, Marcel. 1947. Manuel d:ethnographie. Paris: Payot.
Meek, C. K. 1946. Land Law and Custom in the Colonies. Lon-
don: Oxford.
Meggitt, M. J. 196za. Desert People, A Study of the Walbiri.
Aborigi~s of Central Australia. Sydney : Angus & Robertson.
---. 1962b. "Indigenous Forms of Government Among the
Australian Aborigines." Paper presented at the Fifteenth
Reunion de la Societe Jean Bodin, Brussels, 1962. (mimeo.)
Metraux, Alfred. 1946. "Indians of the Gran Chaco," in Julian
H. Steward (ed.). Handbook of South American Indians,
1:197-370. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing
Office.
Michelson, Truman. 1932. Notes on the Fox Wapanowiweni,
Washington, D. C.: The Smithsonian Institution, Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bulletin 105.
Mills, M. E. Elton, and Monica Wilson. 1952. Land. Tenure.
PietermaritzbUrg: Shuter & Shooter.
Mitchell, J. C. 1956. The Kalela Dance. Rhodes Livingstone
Papers 27. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Moerman, Michael. 1965. "Ethnic Identification in a Complex
Civilization: Who Are the Lue?" American Anthropologist,
67:1215-3°.
Moore, Stanley. 1960. "Marxian Theories of Law in Primitive
Society," in Stanley Diamond (ed. ). Culture in History:
Essays in Honor of Paul Radin. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press.

252 ./
Bibliography
Morgan, Lewis. 1878. Ancient Society. New York: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.
---. 1922. League of the Ho-De-No-Sau-Nee or Iroquois.
New York: Dodd Mead. First published in 1851.
.
Murdock, George P. 1949. Social Structure. New York: Macmil-
lan.
---: 1960. "Cognatic Forms of Social Organization," in G.
P. Murdock (ed. ), Social Structure in Southeast Asia. Chi 4
cago: Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology 29. Quad-
rangle.
Murphy, Robert F., and Julian H. Steward. 1956. "Tappers and
Trappers: Parallel Processes in Acculturation," Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 4:335-55.
Naroll, Raoul. 1964. "On Ethnic Unit Classification," Current
' . Anthropology, 5:283-91, 306-12.
Newman, Philip L. 1965. Knowing the Gururumba. New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
_
Nieboer, H. J. 1900. Slavery as an Industrial System. The Hague:
Nijhoff.
Oberg, Ka1ervo. 1953. Indian Tribes of Northern Mato Grosso,
Brazil. Smithsonian Institution, Institute of Social Anthro-
pology, Publication 15. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Govern-
ment Printing Office.
Okada, Ferdinand E. 1954. A Comparative Study of Marginal
Societies. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia Uni-
versity.
.
Oliver, Douglas. 1955. A Solomon Island Society. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Olson, Ronald L. 1954. Social Life of the Owikeno Kwakiutl.
Anthropological Records, Vol. 14. Berkeley : University of
California Press.
Parsons, Talcott. 1961. "An Outline of the Social System," in
Talcott Parsons, Edward Shils, Kaspar D. Naegele, and
Jesse R. Pitts (eds.) , Theories of Society, pp. 30-79. New
York: Free Press.
Petrullo, Vencenzo. 1939. Th e Yaruros of the Capanaparo River,
Venezuela. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No.
123, pp. 163-290. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government
._
. Printing Office,
'Polanyi, Karl. 1953. Semantics of General Economic
History~ .
• •;.'<;:

/
253
Bibliography
New York: Columbia University Council for Research in
the Social Sciences. Reprinted in M. H. Fried (ed.), 1959,
Readings in Anthropology, 2:162-84. New York: Crowell.
Pospisil, Leopold. 1958. Kapauku Papuans and their Law. New
Haven: Yale University Publications in Anthropology 54.
---. 1963. Kapauku. Papuan. Economy. New Haven: Yale
University Publications in Anthropology 67.
Putnam, Patrick. 1948. "The Pygmies of the Ituri Forest," in
Carleton S. Coon (ed.), A Reader in General Anthropology,
pp. 322-41. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. 1930. "Fonner Numbers and Distribu-
tion of the Australian Aborigines," Official Yearbook of the
Commonwealth of Australia, 23. Canberra: Commonwealth
Bureau of Census and Statistics.
---. 1933. "Sanction, Social," in Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, 18:531-4. New York: Macmillan. Reprinted in
A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, Structure and Function in Primitive
Society. New York: Free Press, 1952.
"':, ,-
-
- . 1948. The Andaman Islanders. New York: Free Press.
Rasmussen, Knud. 1931. The Netsilik Eskimos, Social Life and
,
Spiritual Culture. Copenhagen: Gyldendal.
," Ratner, Stanley C., and M. Ray Denny. 1964. Comparative
,
Psychology: Research in Animal Behavior. Homewood, Ill.:
.
Dorsey,
:'.Reynolds, Vernon, and Frances Reynolds. 1965. "Chimpanzees
of the Budongo Forest," in Irven DeVore (ed.), Primate
Behavior, pp. 368-424- New York: Holt, Rinehart & Win-
.
ston.
;' Richardson, Jane. 1940. Law and Status among the Kiowa In-
.
dians. Monographs of the American Ethnological Society 1.
New York: Augustin.
'Rivers, W. H. R. 1906. The Todas. New York: Macmillan.
Robertson, Edmund. 1911. "Jurisprudence," in Encyclopaedia
,
Britannica (a rth ed.), 15:571-g. Substantially reprinted
from the 9th ed. of 1875-1889.
oyal Anthropological Institute. 1951. Notes and Queries in
.
Anthropology (6th ed.) . London: Routledge.
ahlins, Marshall. 1958. Social Stratification in Polynesia. Seattle:
,
University of Washington Press.
. 1959. "The Social Life of Monkeys, Apes and Primitive

. : ».
'., .~ -: .
254 /
Bibliography
Men," in M. H. Fried (ed.), Readings in Anthropology, '\:
2:186-99. Alscprinted in Human Biology, 31 (1959): 1.
.
---. 1961. "Segmentary Lineage: An Organization of Preda-
tory Expansion," American Anthropologist, 63:322-45.
---. 1962. Moala: Culture and Nature on a Fijian Island. .
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
---. 1963. "Poor Man, Rich Man, Big Man, Chief: Political
.
Types in Melanesia and Polynesia," Comparative Studies in
Society and History, 5:285-303.
---. 1965. "On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange," in
The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology. Associ-
,
ation for Social Anthropologists Monograph 1. New York:
Praeger.
~'}' .
Sait, Edward McChesney. 1938. Political Institutions, A Preface.
New York: Appleton.
Schaller, George B. 1963. The Mountain Gorilla: Ecology and
Behavior. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
---. 1965. "The Behavior of the Mountain Gorilla," in Irven
DeVore (ed.), Primate Behavior, pp. 324-67. Princeton:
Van Nostrand.
....
- :~
Schapera, Isaac. 1956. Government and Politics in Tribal'So-
"
cieties. London: Watts. . ,{
/p
Schebesta, Paul. 1929. Among the Forest Dwarfs of
Malaya.
,~
London: Hutchinson.
':1
Schemer, Harold W. 1965. Choiseul Island Social Structure:
.)
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Schneider, Joseph. 1950. "Primitive Warfare: A Methodological
'L
Note," American Sociological Review, 15:772-7. Reprinted
.2:
in Leon Bramson and George W. Goethals (eds.) , War:
Studies from Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, pp. 275-
83. New York: Basic Books.
Scott, John Paul. 1958. Aggression. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.
Seagle, William. 1941. The Quest for Law. New York: Knopf.
Seebohm, Frederic. 1883. The English Village Community. Lon-
don: Longmans.
Seligman, C. G., and B. Z. Seligman. 1911. The Veddas. Cam-
bridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press.
Service, Elman R. 196oa. "Kinship Terminology and Evolution,"
American Anthropologist, 62:747-63.
I ··' .
I
I·

-- - - - - - - - - - - - --
-
·r
: "~
. :.j- ~ J
. . "": -
/ 255
Bibliography
1960b. "Sociocentric Relationship Terms and the Aus-
tralian Class System," in Gertrude E. Dole and Robert L.
Carneiro (eds.}, Essays in the Science of Culture in Honor
of Leslie A. White. New York: Crowell.
---. 1962. Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary
Perspective. New York: Random House.
Shils, E. A., and Henry A. Finch. 1949. The Methodology of the
Social Sciences. [by Max Weber] New York: Free Press.
Shirokogoroff, S. M. 1929. Social Organizcition of the Northern
Tungus. Shanghai: Commercial Press.
".' Smith, Marian W. 1940. The Puyallup-Nisqually. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Sorokin, Pitirim. 1959. Social and Cultural Mobility, pp. 11-70.
New York: Free Press. Reprinted in Talcott Parsons, et al.,
(eds.), 1961, Theories of Society, Pp.57o-3.
Soustelle, Jacques. 1962. The Daily Life of the Aztecs on the
. . Eve of the Spanish Conquest, Patrick O'Brian, trans. New
York: Macmillan.
Southwick, Charles H., Azhar Beg, and M. Raffiq Siddiqi. 1965:
"Rhesus Monkeys in North India," in Irven DeVore (ed.),
Primate Behavior, pp. 111-59. New York: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.
Speck, Frank G. 1915. Family Hunting Territories and Social
Life of Various Algonkian Bands of the Ottawa Valley.
Canada,
Geological
Survey
Memoir
70
(Anthropology
Series). Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau.
---. 1926. "Land Ownership Among Hunting Peoples in
Primitive
America
and
the
World's
Marginal
Areas,"
Twelfth International Congress of Americanists, 2: 323-32.
Rome: Garroni.
Spencer, Baldwin, and F. J. Gillen. 1904. The Northern Tribes
of Central Australia. London: Macmillan.
---. 1912. Across Australia, Vol. 1. London: Macmillan.
Spencer, Herbert. 1893. The Principles of Sociology, Vol. 2.
New York: Appleton.
---. 1896. The Principles of SOciology, Vol. 1. New York:
Appleton.
.
Spencer, Robert F. 1959. The North Alaskan Eskimo. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin
171. Washington, D. C.:
U. S. Government Printing Office.

..'
:f
256 J
Bibliography
Spillius, James. 1957. "Natural Disaster and Political Crisis in
a Polynesian Society: An Exploration of Operational Re-
search," Human Relations; 10:3-28, 113-26.
-.--. 1957. "Polynesian Experiment: Tikopian Islanders as
Plantation Labour," Progress, 46:91-6.
Steenhoven, Geert vanden. 1956. Research Report on Caribou
Eskimo Law. Ottawa: Canadian Department of Northern
Affairs.
---. 1962. Leadership and Law among the Eskimos of the
Keewatin
District,
Northwest
Territories.
The
Hague:
Nitgeverij Excelsior.
Stefansson, Vilbjamur. 1919. My Life with the Eskimos. New
York: Macmillan.
Stern, Bernhard J. 1934. "Slavery, Primitive," in EncyclOpedia
of the Social Sciences, 14:73-4. New York: Macmillan.
Stevenson, H. N. C. 1943. The Economics of the Central Chin
Tribes. Bombay: The Times of India Press.
Stevenson, Robert F. 1968. Population and Political Systems in
Tropical Africa. New York: Columbia University Press.
Steward, Julian.
1938. Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical
Groups. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 120.
Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing Office.
---. 1955. Theory of Culture Change. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.
Strong, William Duncan. 1929. "Cross-Cousin Marriage and the
Culture of the Northeastern Algonkian," American Anthro-
pologist, 31:277-88.
Swanton, John n. 1943. Are Wars Inevitable? Smithsonian In-
stitute War Background Studies 12. Washington, D. C.:
U. S. Government Printing Office.
Teicher, Morton 1. 1960. "Windigo Psychosis," in Verne F. Ray
(ed.) , Proceedings of the 1960 Annual Spring Meeting of
the American Ethnological Society, pp: 1-129. Seattle: Uni-
versity of Washington Press.
.
Thomas, Elizabeth Marshall. 1959. The Harmless People. New
York: Knopf.
Turney-High, Harry Holbert. 1949. Primitive War~ Its Practice ,
and Concepts. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press. :,
......
;' , :

Bibliogmphy
/
257
TyIor, Edward B. 1888. "On a Method of Investigating the
Development of Institutions: Applied to Laws of Marriage
and Descent," loumaloi the Royal Anthropological Insti-
tute, 18:245-69.
Vanoverbergh, Morice.
1925. "Negritos of Northern Luzon,"
Anthropos, 20: 148--99, 399-443·
Vayda, Andrew P.
1956. Maori Warfare. Manuscript Ph.D.
dissertation, Columbia University.
---. 1960. Maori Warfare. Wellington, N. Z.: Polynesian
Society Monographs 2.
Vayda,' Andrew P., Anthony Leeds, and David Smith. 1961.
"The Place of Pigs in Melanesian Subsistence," in Viola E.
Garfield
(ed.), Proceedings of the
1961 Annual Spring
Meeting of the American Ethnological Society , pp. 69-77.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Vinogradoff, Paul. 1920. Outlines of Historical Jurisprud ence,
Vol. 1. London: Oxford.
Vos, A. de. 1965. "Territorial Behavior Among Puku in Zambia,"
Science, 148: 1752-3.
Vreeland, H. H. 1958. "The Concept of Ethnic Groups as Re-
lated to Whole Societies," in W. M. Austin (ed.), Report of
the Ninth Annual Round Table
Meeting on Linguistics
and Language Studies, pp.
81-8. Monograph Series on
Languages and Linguistics 11. Washington, D. C.: George-
town University Press.
~ Wagley, Charles. 1940. "The Effects of Depopulation Upon So-
.
cial Organization; as Illustrated by the Tapirape Indians,"
Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences, 3:
12-16.
; Warner, W. Lloyd. 1958. A Black Civilization (rev. ed .), New
. .
York: Harper.
i Weber, Max. 1947. The Theory of Social and Economic Organi-
.
.zation, A. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons (trans.) , Tal-
.
cott Parsons (ed.).
;.-: --. 1954. Max Weber on Law in Economy and Society,
Edward Shils and Max Rheinstein
(trans.), edited and
annotated by Max Rheinstein, Twentieth Century Legal
Series, Vol. 6. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
-
~ --. 1962. Basic Concepts in SOciology, H. P. Seeher (trans.).
'.
New York: Citadel.
.
I
.:
..'.'.
..:.

· ,
258 /
Bibliography
White, Leslie A. 1959. The Evolution of Culture.
McGraw-Hill.
Wittfogel, Karl A. 1955. "Private Property in Simpler Hydraulic ;
('Oriental') Societies," Sociologus, 5:43-54.
---. 1957. Oriental Despotism. New Haven: Yale University :
Press.
Wolf, Eric R. 1955. "Types of Latin American Peasantry: A
Preliminary Discussion," American Anthropologist, 57:452-
71.
Wright, Quincy. 1942. A Study of War, Vol. 1. Chicago:
versity of Chicago Press.

