JENNIFER SHANNON, LMFT 
ILLUSTRATIONS BY DOUG SHANNON
FOREWORD BY CHRISTINE A. PADESKY, PHD
CBT and ACT skills to help 
you build social conﬁ dence
improve your 
relationships
stop worrying about 
what others think
speak with 
conﬁ dence 
don’t let
 embarrassment 
get in your way
the shyness 
& social anxiety 
workbook for teens
a n  
n s t a n t  h e l p  b o o k  f o r  t e e n s


“This book is superb! No longer will teens need to suffer with anxiety and be on the 
sidelines of life. Full of clear, effective, and engaging strategies, this workbook will 
show teens exactly what to do to overcome their fears and shyness and will reassure 
them that they are not alone. Truly, every teen struggles with these issues to varying 
degrees. All teenagers would benefit from reading this book.”
—Tamar Chansky, PhD, author of Freeing Your Child from Anxiety 
and Freeing Yourself from Anxiety
 
“With The Shyness and Social Anxiety Workbook for Teens, Jennifer Shannon has hit 
a bull’s-eye. Each page is fun, engaging, and filled with practical strategies to help 
teens break free from their social fears and worries. The book is certain to become an 
essential resource for teens, parents, and therapists. I highly recommend it.”
—Michael A. Tompkins, PhD, founding partner of the San 
Francisco Bay Area Center for Cognitive Therapy and author of 
My Anxious Mind: A Teen’s Guide to Managing Anxiety and Panic
“Teens who follow the steps described in this book can overcome shyness and social 
anxiety and change their life path. Shannon’s recommendations are based on the latest 
scientific findings, and are accompanied by delightful cartoons and drawings. An 
outstanding contribution.”
—Jacqueline B. Persons, PhD, director of the San Francisco Bay 
Area Center for Cognitive Therapy and clinical professor in 
the department of psychology at the University of California, 
Berkeley
“Good basic information on social anxiety as well as how to overcome it using 
cognitive behavioral therapy. The concise text and abundant illustrations make the 
book available, easy to grasp, and engaging for teens.”
—Edmund J. Bourne, PhD, author of The Anxiety and Phobia 
Workbook 

“This practical and straightforward book is highly recommended for any teen who 
worries too much about being judged by others. These tried-and-true strategies have 
been shown over and over to be among the most effective methods for reducing social 
anxiety.  Every teen who struggles with shyness should read this book!”
—Martin M. Antony, PhD, ABPP, chair of the department of 
psychology at Ryerson University and author of The Shyness and 
Social Anxiety Workbook

JENNIFER SHANNON, LMFT 
iLLusTraTions by DOUG SHANNON
Instant Help Books
A Division of New Harbinger Publications, Inc.
 
the shyness & 
social anxiety 
workbook for 
teens
CBT and ACT 
skills to help 
you build social 
confidence

Publisher’s Note
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter 
covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering psychological, 
financial, legal, or other professional services. If expert assistance or counseling is needed, the services of a 
competent professional should be sought. 
Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Books
Copyright © 2012 by Jennifer Shannon
New Harbinger Publications, Inc.
5674 Shattuck Avenue
Oakland, CA 94609
www.newharbinger.com
Cover design by Amy Shoup
Interior design and illustrations by Doug Shannon
Acquired by Tesilya Hanauer
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Shannon, Jennifer.
  The shyness and social anxiety workbook for teens : CBT and act skills to help you build social 
confidence / Jennifer Shannon ; illustrated by Doug Shannon ; foreword by Christine A. Padesky.
       p. cm.
  ISBN 978-1-60882-187-7 (pbk. : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-1-60882-188-4 (pdf e-book) -- ISBN 978-1-60882-
189-1 (epub)
 1.  Bashfulness--Juvenile literature. 2.  Social phobia--Juvenile literature. 3.  Cognitive therapy for 
teenagers--Problems exercises, etc. 4.  Acceptance and commitment therapy--Problems, exercises, etc.  
I. Title. 
  BF575.B3S5193 2012
  155.5’18232--dc23
                                                            2012005433
Printed in the United States of America
14    13    12
10    9    8    7    6    5    4    3    2    1
First printing

Contents
	
Introduction	
1
Chapter 1: 	
Socially Anxious Are You Missing Out?	
8
What is the difference between being a little shy and having a problem with 
social anxiety? The real question is whether you are missing out by avoiding 
situations due to your anxiety. It is important to understand that if you are 
socially anxious, you are not alone.
Chapter 2:	
Why Me? The Origins of Social Anxiety	
12
Being shy is not your fault. There are three main causes of social anxiety: 
genetics, how you were raised, and upsetting events that may have triggered 
your anxiety. One or more of these causes may be at the root of your problem.
Chapter 3: 	
The Chain Gang Thoughts, Feelings, and Actions	
17
This book is based on cognitive behavioral therapy, which helps us understand 
the connections between our thoughts, our feelings, and our behavior. 
Avoidance behavior, which is what shy teens do, is caused by feelings of 
anxiety, which are sparked by spontaneous, often unconscious, automatic 
thoughts.
Chapter 4:	
Disastrous Distortions Don’t Believe Every Thought You Think	
31
The automatic thoughts that lead to avoidance behavior are often inaccurate 
and distorted. This chapter outlines six of the most common distortions in the 
thinking of people with social anxiety. Understanding that your thoughts are 
distorted helps you begin to question them.
Chapter 5: 	
The Values Compass Stepping Off the Perfectionist Path to 
Nowhere	
44
Is not making mistakes what really matters? This chapter will outline how 
unrealistic it is to attempt social perfectionism and will help you identify your 
own values as a compass to guide how you live your life.
Chapter 6: 	
What Was I Thinking? Fact-Checking and the Values Test	
53
There are two ways of evaluating your thoughts. The first is to figure out how 
accurate they are, and the second is to see if that way of thinking leads you 
toward avoidance or toward your values.
Chapter 7: 	
Talking Back to Your Thoughts Training Your Brain to Challenge 
and Cope	
62
Once you have identified your distorted thoughts, you are ready to learn how 
to come up with some alternative ways of thinking that will help lower your 
anxiety and help you face situations that are scary for you.

iv
Chapter 8: 	
The Exposure Ladder From Avoidance to Action	
67
To master social anxiety, you will need to face your fears. There is no better 
way to challenge your thinking and live the life you want. But don’t worry; 
you don’t have to start with the scariest situation. This chapter will show you 
how to turn situations you’ve been avoiding into situations you can face.
Chapter 9: 	
Grab a Rung! Getting a Grip on Your Exposure Ladder	
75
Here you’ll learn to develop coping strategies and use realistic goals to make 
exposures successful.
Chapter 10: 	 Bella’s Ladder Exposure, Exposure, Exposure	
86
In this chapter, watch and learn as our socially anxious teen Bella faces her 
fear of blushing, one rung at a time.
Chapter 11:	 Troubleshooting What to Do When You Get Stuck	
104
What do you do when you become so anxious that you don’t feel like you 
can do your exposure? What if the thing you are afraid will happen actually 
happens? These are common challenges, and this chapter will give you 
strategies for coping with them.
Chapter 12: 	 Above and Beyond How Mistakes Make You Stronger	
113
Facing your fear head-on helps you really master your social anxiety. You will 
learn that you can cope a lot better than you thought. This understanding 
frees you up to embrace life and to live according to your own rules.
	
Conclusion	
117
Appendix A: 	 For Teens and Their Parents or Guardians About Therapy 
and Medication	
119
Appendix B: 	 Helpful Resources 	
124
Appendix C: 	 Paruresis 	
125
Appendix D: 	 Other Common Types of Anxiety	
128

Foreword
When we get anxious, we often think we suffer alone. We think we are 
messed up and everyone else is strong and confident. This is not true. 
Almost everyone gets anxious about something. Some people are afraid of 
spiders, others worry about lots of different things, and some people get 
nervous when they have to give a speech or meet new people.
The good news is that we know a lot about how to overcome anxiety. A form 
of psychological therapy called cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can help 
most people overcome their anxiety. CBT is based on research about how 
emotions work and what people can do to feel better. CBT teaches people 
skills that help depression, anxiety, and lots of other issues. These skills take 
practice, but anybody can learn them.
That’s where this book comes in. It tells and shows you what you can do to 
overcome social anxiety and shyness. If you fill in the worksheets and try 
the experiments recommended, this book can help you overcome your social 
nervousness and feel a lot better.
Some of the exercises will make you feel nervous. That is a good thing, 
because one thing we know about anxiety is that it gets smaller only when 
we approach it rather than avoid it. To make it easier for you, the authors 
describe small steps you can take to help you build your confidence.
Most books like this are written for adults. That is too bad, because teenagers 
often get even more nervous than adults do. That’s why I was so happy 
when Jennifer Shannon told me she and her husband were writing this book 
for you. Jennifer is an expert CBT therapist who has helped lots of teens 
overcome social anxiety. And her husband is a really good artist, which you 
probably already noticed when you flipped through the book. Together, they 
make a great team to explain clearly what social anxiety is all about and how 
you can overcome it.

vi
Small steps can lead you to good places when you have a map. If you feel 
nervous around people, this book is your map. Take it a step at a time, and 
by next year you will be easily doing things that scare you this year. Think 
of all the things you can do when your nervousness shrinks! Read this book 
and follow its tips. Your confidence is just around the corner.
—Christine A. Padesky, PhD
Coauthor, Mind Over Mood: Change How You Feel by 
Changing the Way You Think
Director, Center for Cognitive Therapy
Huntington Beach, California

1
Introduction
Wouldn’t it be nice if you could just flick a switch and make your shyness 
go away? No more worrying about what others think about you, no more 
embarrassment in front of other people. You could just relax and feel 
comfortable and confident, the way you probably think everyone else feels.
Unfortunately we can’t get rid of anxiety altogether; it is part of human 
nature and we all have it. The oldest and most primitive part of the brain, 
popularly referred to as the reptile brain, is something we have in common 
with many other species. When the reptile brain senses danger, it activates 
a part of the nervous system, that causes us to experience anxious feelings. 
Without anxiety we would take unnecessary risks.
Our nervous systems are designed to help us know when we need to be 
alert in social situations. Almost everybody feels a little nervous starting a 
conversation with someone they don’t know or asking a question in class, 
and teens who are shy feel anxiety during social interactions like these. 
Some teens are socially anxious, which means they experience such high 
anxiety that they avoid social situations. If you feel like your anxiety has you 
on the wrong end of the leash, then this book is for you.

2
Chapter 1: 
Socially Anxious 
Are You Missing Out?
When you are at school, a restaurant, or a party, do you worry that people 
might think something you do is stupid or dumb? Do you think that people 
might laugh at you? Do you worry that you might do something that will 
make you feel ashamed or embarrassed? If so, you might be among the one 
in twenty teens who suffer from social anxiety.
Being concerned about being observed by others and negatively judged is 
normal for teenagers. Most everybody has experienced feeling nervous, 
scared, panicky, insecure, embarrassed, or ashamed in social or performance 
situations.
Introducing 
Liz, Alex, Bella, 
and Brandon, 
four socially 
anxious teens 
who will help 
you understand 
social anxiety 
and learn what 
you can do 
about it.

3
Here are some common situations 
that can trigger social anxiety. 
Check off each situation that 
makes you anxious.
F
F Answering or talking on the telephone
F
F Answering questions in class
F
F Asking someone out
F
F Asking the teacher a question or for help
F
F Attending parties, dances, or school activities
F
F Blushing, shaking, or sweating in front of others 
F
F Eating in front of others
F
F Entering a room where others are already seated 
F
F Giving a report or reading aloud in front of the class
F
F Going on a date
F
F Having your picture taken
F
F Inviting a friend to get together 
F
F Participating in P.E. class
F
F Performing in public
F
F Speaking to adults
F
F Starting or joining a conversation
F
F Taking a test
F
F Talking to new or unfamiliar people
F
F Texting
F
F Using school or public bathrooms
F
F Walking in the hallways or hanging out by your locker
F
F Working with a group of teens
F
F Writing on the whiteboard or chalkboard

4
You probably identified with several of these trigger situations. Does that 
mean you are socially anxious? Not necessarily. It is normal for teens to 
feel anxious and awkward a lot of the time. Many social problems resolve 
themselves with time and experience.
The real test is not whether you feel 
anxious in a situation . . .
. . . but whether you go out of your way to 
avoid that situation.

5
You can live with social anxiety by avoiding 
situations that make you uncomfortable, but 
if that were working for you, you wouldn’t be 
reading this book.

6
Chapter 2:
Why Me? 
The Origins of Social Anxiety
Anxiety is a tool that we need for survival—what scientists call an 
adaptation. We’ve been using the primitive part of our brains, our reptile 
brains, for thousands of years to protect us from threats as varied as a 
charging wild boar to crossing a busy intersection.
We need anxiety in the same way a house needs a smoke detector: to alert 
us to danger. But if you are a socially anxious teen, your personal smoke 
detector is going off every time someone fries an egg or makes a piece of 
toast.
So why is your smoke detector so 
hypersensitive while other people’s aren’t? 
There are three causes of social anxiety. You 
might have one or you might have all three, 
but as you’ll see, none of them are your fault.

7
Genetic Disposition 
You didn’t come up with this trait all by yourself. If you shake your 
family tree, you will likely find an uncle or a great-grandmother 
or even one of your parents who shows anxious traits similar to 
yours. They may not have had full-fledged social anxiety, but they 
were “dialed up” in a way you might recognize. Scientists haven’t 
discovered a specific social anxiety gene yet, but just like blue eyes 
or curly hair, anxiety is passed down through generations.* 
	
	
	
	
List any of 
your relatives 
who you know 
or suspect 
have anxiety 
in social 
situations. 
* In addition to shyness, there are a variety of other anxiety problems you or your relatives may have 
experienced. Appendix D at the end of the book lists these common anxieties.

8
Parent Modeling 
Do your parents rarely 
socialize? Are they 
preoccupied with making 
good impressions? If your 
parents are overly cautious 
or shy themselves, their 
modeling could very well have 
contributed to your social 
anxiety.
Describe any ways that your parents model anxiety and avoidance. 
	
	
	
	
	

9
Upsetting Events 
Almost everyone has experienced forgetting 
their lines in a school presentation or play. 
For most people, the experience is a memory 
to chuckle over, but for the socially anxious it 
may have been a traumatic disaster. They are 
so worried about a repeat performance that 
being called upon in class or doing an oral 
presentation is genuinely terrifying. 
Your own personal traumatic event could 
have been giving the wrong answer in class, 
finding out you weren’t invited to a party when 
everyone else was, a rumor that you liked a 
classmate you really didn’t, or a mean teacher 
who shamed you in front of the class.
What upsetting events stand out in your memory? 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

10
Unfortunately we can’t undo the past, 
so your upsetting events, your parental 
models, and your genes are yours forever. 
The good news is that whatever the 
underlying cause of your shyness, the 
solution is the same. You can harness 
your anxieties—tweak your smoke 
detector—so that they work for you when 
you need them and stay out of the way 
when you don’t.

11
Chapter 3: 
The Chain Gang 
Thoughts, Feelings, and Actions
Scenario: Alex notices Ginelle, whom he finds attractive, approaching in the hall. 
He quickly buries his head in his locker and pretends to be looking for a book. 
Within a few seconds, Ginelle turns the corner and the danger has passed. 
What actually happened here? If we are going to get a 
handle on social anxiety, we have to break it down so 
we can identify the links in the chain of events. Let’s 
start with what we can observe: Alex’s behavior. Alex 
stuck his head in his locker, apparently to avoid contact 
with someone he is actually attracted to. Is this in Alex’s 
best interest? Why would Alex act in a way that reduces 
his chances of getting to know someone he likes?
If we asked him, Alex might have an explanation like “I needed a book in 
my locker,” but if he’s honest with himself and us he might say that he felt 
uncomfortable when he saw Ginelle. He might describe his discomfort with a 
word like “anxious,” “panicky,” “insecure,” “embarrassed,” or just plain “scared.”

12
In this book, when we talk about feelings we are talking about both your 
emotions and your physical reactions. Here are some common emotions that 
shy teens feel:
EMBARRASSED—foolish, humiliated, self-conscious
ANXIOUS—worried, panicky, nervous, frightened
INFERIOR—worthless, inadequate, defective, insecure
LONELY—unloved, unwanted, rejected, alone, abandoned
HOPELESS—discouraged, pessimistic, defeated
ASHAMED—remorseful, bad, guilty
SAD—blue, depressed, down, unhappy
FRUSTRATED—stuck, thwarted, defeated
JEALOUS—envious, distrustful
CONFUSED—befuddled, confounded, lost
HURT—wounded, upset, injured
DISAPPOINTED—let down, disillusioned, disheartened
ANGRY—mad, resentful, annoyed, irritated, upset, enraged

13
The other feelings we’re talking about are sensations you experience in your 
body. These sensations are common with all kinds of anxiety, but especially 
important for people with social anxiety. Have you ever worried that people 
would notice your physical symptoms—like sweating, blushing, or having 
a shaky voice or hands—and negatively judge you? When you are afraid 
people might judge you, your mind sends a danger signal to your body. Your 
physical reactions may include:
One thing to remember is that your physical symptoms of anxiety are much more 
obvious to you than they are to other people.

14
But what caused Alex’s anxious feelings? What could make Alex feel like 
disappearing into thin air every time he sees Ginelle? We could ask him, 
but Alex may not even be aware of what goes on in his head during the 
nanosecond between Ginelle’s surprise appearances and his hasty retreats. 
He might say, “I’m not really sure what I was thinking. Ginelle always 
makes me feel this way.”
The thoughts that go through our 
minds when we are presented with 
our own personal social anxiety 
triggers are often so familiar, so tried 
and true, so ingrained in our brains that 
they are automatic. Let’s replay Ginelle’s 
entrance in slow motion and see what 
flashed through Alex’s mind when he saw 
her.
While Alex might perceive Ginelle’s 
entrance as the trigger for his personal 
chain reaction, it is actually his 
interpretation of her entrance, his 
automatic thoughts, that set off his 
anxious feelings.
The theme of socially anxious teens’ 
thoughts is always that other people 
are judging them. These thoughts make 
them feel like they are in danger. What 
do we do when we are in danger? We 
do what we’ve done ever since the first 
caveman confronted a mountain lion: 
run away and hide!

15
When people face situations that make them anxious, avoidance is the most 
common action they take. Avoidance prevents the thing that they are afraid 
will happen from happening. 
Alex is afraid he won’t know what to say to Ginelle. If he hides in his locker, 
there is no risk of this happening. It’s a foolproof short-term solution. The 
problem? In the long run, Alex never gets what he really wants, which is to 
get to know Ginelle better. He winds up feeling isolated, discouraged, and 
depressed.
If you let your reptile brain lead the way, it will lead you astray.

16
Automatic thoughts, anxious 
feelings, and avoidance 
behavior are the three links in 
the chain of events that make 
up social anxiety.
Let’s look at some typical 
scenes in the lives of Liz, 
Bella, and two other socially 
anxious teens, Chris and 
Elisha.

17
Liz 
Let’s review Liz’s thought-feeling-action chain in this situation.
    I have nothing to say, so I’m weird.   
    Embarrassed and insecure       
    Silence and withdrawal         

18
Have you ever been with a group of people who are conversing about 
something you don’t know much about? 
What were you afraid might happen?
	
	
What were you feeling at the time? 
	
What did you do?
	
	

19
Bella 
Can you describe Bella’s thought-feeling-action chain in this situation? 
	
	
	

20
Think about times when you have to introduce yourself. 
What are you typically thinking in those situations? 
	
	
What are you typically feeling? Describe any physical signs of 
anxiety you are afraid others might notice.
	
When you feel that way and are worried that someone might 
notice visible signs of your anxiety, what do you tend to do? 
	

21
Chris 
Here’s a situation that triggers Chris’s anxiety. He thinks he’s strange, but 
many teens share similar thoughts and feelings.
Write down Chris’s thought-feeling-action chain. 
	
	
	

22
Elisha
What is Elisha’s thought-feeling-action chain? 
	
	
	

23
Like Chris and Elisha, you may find it very hard to do certain activities 
in the presence of others even though you do them perfectly naturally 
when you are alone. Think of a situation or activity that makes you feel 
self-conscious.
What are you afraid others might think of you?
	
	
How do you feel when you find yourself in this situation? 
	
	
What action goes along with these thoughts and feelings?
	
	

24
The thought-feeling-action chain happens quickly in anxious situations, so 
quickly that it often seems beyond our control and we feel helpless to stop it. 
Does that mean you are doomed to a life of everlasting avoidance? Certainly 
not!
A chain is only as strong as its weakest link. Let’s take a closer look at your 
chain reactions. If you can identify the links, you can strategize how to 
go about breaking the chain. Go back to the list on page 3 and look at the 
situations you checked as those that make you anxious. Choose 
the two that make you most anxious, and see if you can label each 
link—thought, feeling, and action—in the space below.
Situation 1 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Situation 2 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

25
Chapter 4:
Disastrous Distortions 
Don’t Believe Every Thought You Think
Imagine you are looking at yourself in a funhouse mirror at a carnival or 
fair. Yes, that is you, but your face is not that long, your stomach is not that 
fat, and your legs are not that skinny. The mirror is distorting the reality of 
what is there. 
When we are anxious, our thoughts get reflected in a funhouse mirror. 
Worse still, we are unaware of the distortion and take those thoughts at face 
value, making us even more scared.
This chapter explains six thinking mistakes, or distortions, that people with 
social anxiety commonly make. When you recognize the distortion in your 
thoughts, it becomes easier to take them less seriously.

26
You’ve probably 
heard people ask, 
“What’s the worst 
that can happen?” 
When a trigger 
situation occurs, 
and your mind 
jumps to the worst 
possible outcome—
even though there 
are a hundred 
other possible 
outcomes—you are 
using catastrophic 
thinking.
When this teen is turned down for a date, he assumes it is so newsworthy 
that the whole school will soon know and be laughing at him. That might 
qualify as a catastrophe, but is it likely to happen?
Catastrophic Thinking 

27
Describe a situation in your own life where you used catastrophic thinking. 
	
	
	
What was the worst possible outcome that you assumed would happen? 
	
	
	

28
Discounting the Positive 
When something good happens to you, do you 
chalk it up to luck? When somebody praises you, 
do you assume the person was just trying to 
be nice? Say you were talking to someone and, 
instead of getting all tongue-tied, you actually enjoyed the conversation. 
Instead of feeling good that sometimes you really do have something to talk 
about, you conclude, “Well, she’s really nice, and that’s why I felt comfortable, 
but most people aren’t like that and I’d totally freeze up talking with them.”
It is difficult to develop confidence when you ignore your successes, when 
you discount the positive.
Here’s Cyndi, who 
has a nice voice, yet 
doubts her abilities 
in her choral class.
Have you ever been given a compliment you 
didn’t feel you deserved? Write it down. 
	
	
How did you discount the compliment? 
	
	

29
People who see the good in 
everything are sometimes said 
to be wearing rose-colored 
glasses. A socially anxious 
teen in a trigger situation 
could be said to be wearing 
gray-colored glasses. All her 
senses are working and she is 
taking everything in, but she 
discounts all the information 
that is positive, leaving only 
the negative.
In what situations do you seem able to see only what isn’t working?
	
	

30
Labeling 
Sticks and stones may break your 
bones, but words can really harm you. 
By calling someone else names, you are 
degrading that person. Calling yourself 
names degrades you. For example, you 
drop your books in the hall, and you 
tell yourself you are lame. But we have all made clumsy mistakes. Are we all 
lame?
Losing a game of chess doesn’t make you a loser. Blurting out a silly idea 
doesn’t make you an idiot. Words like “lame” and “loser” and “idiot” are 
labels that don’t really explain who you are.
Socially anxious teens often 
use labels like these to 
describe themselves. Which do 
you use on yourself?
F
F Pathetic
F
F Stupid
F
F Hopeless
F
F Defective
F
F Incompetent
F
F Idiot
F
F Boring
F
F Jerk
F
F Loser
F
F Lame
F
F Disgusting
F
F Mentally ill

31
Spotlighting 
When a great golfer is driving the ball off the tee 
in a close match, she isn’t thinking about her grip 
on the club or the arc of her stroke. An actor on 
stage doesn’t watch his hands as he gestures, nor 
does he listen to his voice as he speaks his lines. 
The golfer and the actor want to lose themselves 
in their roles, not reflect on the mechanics of their 
performances.
So it is with us in our daily lives. When we turn 
the spotlight of attention onto ourselves, we 
become self-conscious. What should be natural 
and spontaneous self-expression becomes an agonizing performance. 
Spotlighting makes you feel different and separate from others. Everything 
you say starts to sound odd or fake. You don’t trust or like how you are 
coming across, and to make matters worse, you assume everyone else is 
watching you as closely as you are watching yourself. How can you get into 
the flow of life and connect with others when you are preoccupied with 
what is going on inside yourself?

32
Everyone feels self-conscious from time to time, but most people notice it 
happening and let it go. They flick a switch and turn the spotlight off. But 
when socially anxious teens feel self-conscious, they dial the spotlight up, 
increasing their self-awareness to the point where they are paralyzed.
You can spotlight what is going on in your body as well. If you are sweating, 
shaking, or blushing, and you focus your attention on that, these normal 
signs of anxiety intensify. For example, when you are speaking in class you 
may notice that your heart is beating fast. Then, as you focus your attention 
on your heartbeat, the pounding intensifies until it feels like your heart 
might jump right out of your chest. “Everyone around me can see what’s 
happening,” you think to yourself. “They know I’m freaking out!”
As you leave the room after class, the spotlight follows you, showing 
everybody how awkwardly you walk. And so it goes throughout the day 
when you are living in the spotlight.

33
Describe a situation where you feel as if you are in the spotlight.
	
	
How do you imagine you are coming across to others?
	
	
What feelings do you have that you’re sure people around you must see? 
	
	

34
Mind Reading 
If you feel like you are in a 
spotlight and everyone is 
watching you, it’s only natural 
for you to also worry that 
everyone is thinking about 
you. As a mind reader, you 
assume you know what people 
are thinking, especially when 
it is something bad about 
you. You haven’t any psychic 
powers, but somehow you just 
know.
And because you are so 
certain, you don’t bother to 
check out what is actually happening. For example, you are hanging out 
with a friend who suddenly becomes distracted. Since you are a mind reader 
you know that your friend was bored and looking for an excuse to move on.
Describe an interaction you had with someone 
that made you anxious. 
	
	
What did you think that person was thinking about you? 
	
	

35
Social Perfectionism 
For the social perfectionist, there are only two categories: either you are 
brilliant, funny, smart, and popular or you are dull, boring, stupid, and an 
outcast. There is simply no such thing as being okay or good enough. If 
you aren’t invited to every party, then nobody likes you. If people do not 
listen with rapt attention every time you open your mouth to speak, you are 
boring. 
When your idea of normal is everyone’s approving of you all the time, you’ve 
set the bar too high, and you’ll never clear it. Nobody is socially perfect, and 
thinking you can be will only lead to shame.
Here’s how social perfectionism works in your brain:
Because I told a bad joke, I am not funny.

36
Fill in the blank perfectionist thought.
Because someone laughed at my coat, I 	
	
	
	
.
Because he didn’t ask me out again, I 	
	
	
	
.
Because she didn’t text me back, I 	
	
	
	
	
.
Now try this exercise with your own perfectionist thoughts.
Because 	 	
	
	
	
, I 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
.
Because 	 	
	
	
	
, I 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
.
Because 	 	
	
	
	
, I 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
.

37
Social perfectionism allows no room for error. It’s 
a ruthless way to judge yourself, yet it is the most 
universal distortion and the most damaging for shy 
teens. In the next chapter, we’re going to take an 
even closer look at this disastrous distortion.

38
Chapter 5: 
The Values Compass
Stepping Off the 
Perfectionist Path 
to Nowhere
Remember the close relationship between thoughts, 
feelings, and actions? Social perfectionism becomes a problem when it makes 
you feel so anxious that you want to avoid situations. And the problem is 
even greater if those situations are ones that are important to you.
This rating exercise can give you a clue to your level of social perfectionism. 
Evaluate each statement on a scale from 1 to 5. Use 1 = disagree strongly and 
5 = agree strongly.
When I tell a joke, it should be funny to everyone.
   
If I stumble on a word, people will think that there is something wrong 
with me.

   
If I say something that turns out to be wrong, people will think I am 
stupid.

   
If I forget people’s names, they will think I don’t care about them.
   
If someone criticizes what I am wearing, I have bad taste in clothing.
   
Awkward silences don’t happen in normal conversations.
   
If I say something that someone takes the wrong way, I am insensitive.
   
When giving an oral presentation, I should be relaxed and confident.
   
If I appear nervous (for example, I blush or shake), others will see me 
as weak.

   
Total
   

39
How did your answers add up? Your total isn’t a scientific measurement, 
but generally speaking the higher you scored, the more likely it is that you 
don’t allow yourself any slack in social situations. Any effort you make to 
connect with others that isn’t received with a 100 percent positive reaction 
is considered a failure. This is social perfectionism, one of the disastrous 
distortions from chapter 4, and it is shared by nearly all shy people.
Right now you may be saying to yourself: “Those statements don’t sound 
like perfectionism, they sound realistic. I’m not a perfectionist. Perfectionists 
are overachievers, people who believe that nothing less than an A+ is good 
enough, right?”
By not allowing any possibility of failure 
in your social actions, you are expecting 
yourself to always be interesting, relaxed, 
funny, smart, or whatever you think 
you should be. You are setting a higher 
standard for yourself than for others who 
are not so shy. It is this high standard, an 
impossibly perfect standard to maintain, 
that is making you feel more anxious.
Social perfectionists 
are setting an 
impossible standard 
for themselves.

40
Social perfectionists perceive others as being perfect, but of course nobody 
is. Everybody has moments of awkwardness and even times when they fail 
outright. So how do you get a reality check on this standard? One way is to 
look around you at the behavior of others. Observing others can sometimes 
give you a more realistic view of how people normally act—they may not 
be as perfect as you think.  What you learn by watching them may help you 
lower the expectations you place on yourself.

41
During the next week or so, watch your friends or acquaintances in the 
following situations and rate them on a scale from 1 to 5. 

42
Your True Values 
What’s important to you? Is it not making mistakes? Having everyone like 
you? Never being rejected? Social perfectionism is what most shy people 
fixate on, acting as if it were what life is all about.
“What’s so cool about Alex is that he’s so 
fun and spontaneous. He’s a risk taker.”
Alex avoids talking with girls he is attracted to because he’s afraid that 
he won’t have anything clever to say or that he will say something 
painfully boring or weird. Are the most important things in his life 
that he never say anything weird, or that he never be the cause of an 
awkward silence in a conversation? If avoiding those conversational 
pitfalls is so crucial to Alex’s happiness, why isn’t he happier? He’s 
certainly done a good job of avoiding them. To help Alex figure out 
what his true values are—what really matters most in life to him—let’s 
have him try the following exercise.
Alex imagines that he is at his 
twenty-first birthday party. He 
pictures someone who knows 
and cares about him: a friend, a 
romantic partner, or a coworker. 
This person is telling everyone at 
the party how he or she feels about 
him. What words or phrases would 
Alex like to hear used to describe 
himself?

43
Now he pictures himself at his 
thirtieth birthday party. He 
imagines the person he is closest 
with. What would that person say 
he stands for?
“You’re the most important person in my 
life because you’re the most honest, reliable 
friend a person could have.”
Now Alex is at his fiftieth 
birthday party. He pictures 
someone who knows and cares 
about him. What about Alex does 
this person admire?
“I’ve always looked up to you because you 
are true to yourself. You do the right thing 
no matter what.”

44
Let’s look at the words and phrases Alex would like people to use to 
describe his character.
• 
fun and spontaneous
• 
risk taker
• 
honest
• 
reliable
• 
true to himself
• 
does the right thing
These are more than just words to Alex. These are his true values. When 
Alex sticks his head in his locker to avoid meeting Ginelle, is he living 
according to any of these values?

45
It’s Your Turn! 
Now try this exercise thinking about yourself. Close 
your eyes, and imagine your birthday party in the future. 
Picture someone who knows and cares about you. It 
could be someone that you know now or that you imagine 
you might know in the future: a friend, a romantic partner, 
a husband or wife, or a child you may have someday. This 
person is telling everyone at the party how he or she feels 
about you. What words or phrases would you like to hear 
used to describe you?
On your twenty-first birthday: What’s so cool about you is …
	
	
On your thirtieth birthday: You’re the most important person in my 
life because …
	
	
On your fiftieth birthday: I’ve always looked up to you because …
	
	

46
The words and phrases that you imagined other people said about you 
reflect personal qualities that are important to you.  They show how you 
want to be in the world. These are your true values. 
Write down these words and phrases here:
	
	
You will use this list of values to help guide your behavior in future 
exercises in this book.
Your values can act as a compass in life. They can help you move in the 
direction that you know in your heart you want to move in. Imagine that 
you are on a boat in the sea of life. North is toward your values. South is 
toward perfectionism and avoidance. When you move south, you may feel 
safer, but you will not end up where you truly want to go.

47
Chapter 6: 
What Was I Thinking? 
Fact-Checking and the 
Values Test
If what we think determines how we feel, and 
if how we feel guides our actions, then our 
thoughts, being the first link in the chain, play 
a pretty important role in our lives. Our success 
and happiness are riding on those thoughts, but can we always believe 
them? There are many different ways to interpret the situations we find 
ourselves in.
On the next page let’s look at how three 
different thoughts about one situation can spark 
three different sets of feelings and actions.

48

49
You may very well be wondering, “So how do I know what thoughts to 
trust? How do I know what to believe?” These are good questions. The 
answer is that we can’t really know for sure. A better question is, how do we 
evaluate the various thoughts that drive our actions?
There are two ways to evaluate a thought. The first way is to check the 
accuracy of the thought by looking for distortions. The second way is to 
examine what that thought leads you to feel and ultimately do. Does that 
action move you toward or away from what you value?
Remember Elisha eating in the 
mall food court in chapter 3? She 
was eating lunch alone when a 
group of her friends happened by. 
Let’s retrace her thought-feeling-
action chain, this time identifying 
the disastrous distortion that set 
it off, and the result of the action; 
did it take her toward avoidance or 
toward more important personal 
values?

50
Anxious 
Thoughts
Distortions
Feelings
Actions
Toward 
Avoidance or 
Values?
“They’re going 
to watch me 
eat.”
spotlighting
self-
consciousness
stop eating 
immediately
avoidance
“I’ll disgust 
them.”
mind reading, 
labeling
shame 
avoid any 
social situation 
that might 
involve eating
avoidance
Of course, we don’t actually know what Elisha’s 
personal values are, but it’s a good bet turning 
down social situations that might involve eating 
will make her less connected and more alone.

51
Let’s do this exercise with Liz, who thinks she’s a 
boring conversationalist.
Anxious 
Thoughts
Distortions
Feelings
Actions
Toward 
Avoidance or 
Values?
“I don’t have 
anything to 
say.”
social 
perfectionism
self-
consciousness
be quiet
avoidance
“They are 
noticing how 
quiet I am.”
mind reading, 
spotlighting
embarrassment
don’t speak 
unless spoken 
to
avoidance
“They think I’m 
weird.”
labeling
self-
consciousness
withdraw from 
conversation
avoidance
What does Liz’s withdrawal from 
the conversation tell us about the 
reliability of the thoughts that drove 
her action?

52
Remember Bella, the girl introducing herself to a group? Let’s break it down for her.
Anxious 
Thoughts
Distortions
Feelings
Actions
Toward 
Avoidance or 
Values?
“When it is my 
turn to talk, my 
face will turn 
beet red.”
spotlighting, 
catastrophic 
thinking, social 
perfectionism
self-
consciousness
lower head, 
pull up 
turtleneck
avoidance
“Everyone 
will see how 
anxious I am.”
spotlighting, 
social 
perfectionism
embarrassment
cover face to 
hide blushing
avoidance

53
Take a look at a personal situation that makes you anxious. If you need 
ideas, go back to the chain reactions you filled in on page 24.
Situation
Anxious Thoughts
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow 
for mistakes) 
Feelings
Actions
Toward Avoidance 
or Values?

54
You’re on a roll; let’s do a couple more.
Situation
Anxious Thoughts
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow 
for mistakes) 
Feelings
Actions
Toward Avoidance 
or Values?
Situation
Anxious Thoughts
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow 
for mistakes) 
Feelings
Actions
Toward Avoidance 
or Values?

55
By now you are probably thinking, “Okay, I get the point. My anxious 
automatic thoughts aren’t necessarily true, and they are making me do stuff 
that isn’t helping me move toward my values. But I can’t just block them out, 
can I? I can’t simply not think them!”

56
Chapter 7: 
Talking Back to Your 
Thoughts 
Training Your Brain to 
Challenge and Cope
Ever try not to think of a banana? It doesn’t have to be a banana—it could be 
any word—but for argument’s sake, let’s try it with “banana.” For the next 
thirty seconds, don’t think about a banana. 
. . . 27 . . . 28 . . . 29 . . . 30.
How did that work for you? Fact is, trying to push thoughts out of our minds 
won’t get rid of them; in fact, it can make them come up more often. Changes 
in our thinking are usually caused by changes in our experience. But as long 
as you believe your same old anxious thoughts, you are not likely to have 
new experiences.
If we want to try new things, to gain new experience, to move toward our 
values, we need to challenge our anxious thoughts—not block or wipe them 
out—but challenge them with reasonable questions.
What sort of questions might Alex have asked 
himself when he was faced with Ginelle?

57
Alex’s anxious thought: “I won’t know what to say.”
Distortion: Social perfectionism
His challenge question: “Do I know for certain that I won’t have anything 
to say?”
Alex’s anxious thought: “Ginelle will think I’m weird.”
Distortion: Labeling
His challenge question: “Does not saying something clever equal being 
weird?”
Alex’s anxious thought: “If I embarrass myself in front of her, she will talk 
to all her friends about how weird I am, and then the whole school will 
think I am weird.”
Distortion: Catastrophic thinking
His challenge question: “What is more likely to happen? How could I cope 
with that?”
And after the experience . . .
Alex’s anxious thought: “She barely recognized me. All she did was say hi.”
Distortion: Discounting the positive
His challenge question: “What did I do that was okay?”
The answers to challenge questions 
become your coping thoughts. Let’s 
see what coping thoughts Alex 
came up with:

58
Alex’s challenge question: “Do I know for certain that I won’t have 
anything to say?”
His coping thoughts: “I might be able to think of something to say. I’m 
pretty sure I can smile and say hi. That’s something.”
Alex’s challenge question: “Does not saying something clever equal being 
weird?”
His coping thoughts: “When other people don’t know what to say, I don’t 
think they are weird. She may not think I’m weird either.”
Alex’s challenge question: “What is more likely to happen? How could I 
cope with that?”
His coping thoughts: “Ginelle might not even look at me. She could act all 
rude and stuck up. If that happened, I could talk it over with a friend 
and at least I would know she’s not for me.”
And after the experience . . .
Alex’s challenge question: “What did I do that was okay?”
His coping thoughts: “I was assertive. I walked right up to her and said hi. 
I proved to myself that I’m braver than I thought. Now she knows I exist 
and I have a chance of getting to know her better.”

59
Fill in the following chart based on one of your own anxious thoughts. Feel free to 
use these challenge questions.
Catastrophic thinking: What is more likely to happen? How could I cope 
with it?
Discounting the positive: What did I do that was okay?
Labeling: Does this word apply to me all the time in every situation?
Spotlighting: What else might everyone be paying attention to besides me? 
Do people really care that much about what I am doing?
Mind reading: What evidence do I have that this is what people are 
thinking?
Social perfectionism: Am I asking more of myself than I would of others?
Anxious Thought
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow 
for mistakes) 
Challenge 
Question
Coping Thought

60
Remember the thought-feeling-action chain? Each new coping thought 
you come up with gives you an alternative to the automatic anxious 
thoughts you’ve been using for so long. The good news is, with practice and 
persistence, coping thoughts will help you face your fears, and facing your 
fears will give you new experiences that will create new ways of thinking.

61
Chapter 8: 
The Exposure 
Ladder 
From Avoidance 
to Action
Alex has done some good work. He’s defined his values, and he understands 
how avoiding scary situations takes him further from getting what he 
wants. He’s identified the automatic thoughts that drive his anxious feelings 
and avoidance behavior. He’s examined those thoughts for distortions and 
challenged them with coping questions. He should be okay now, right? 
Shouldn’t his avoidance behavior pretty well have disappeared for him, and 
for you too, if you’ve been doing the work in this book?
Not so fast. Coping thoughts won’t simply replace your distorted anxious 
thoughts. Reasoning won’t kill them. Like vampires, these thoughts will live 
forever unless they are exposed to sunlight. To really change the way we 
think, we need to purposely experience what we’ve been avoiding. We need 
exposure. Exposure is moving toward your fears instead of away from them. 
By facing your fears repeatedly you will learn to manage them and move on.
For Alex to gain 
confidence in himself, 
he’s going to have to 
actually talk to Ginelle.
Alex knows what situation is important 
to him—any situation with Ginelle. He’s 
avoiding the very person he is most 
attracted to, and he’s sick and tired of 
it. Alex needs to turn his avoidance 
situation into an exposure.

62
Take a moment to choose your own avoidance situation to transform into an exposure. 
Consider each situation in this chart. Rate it for scariness, and check the box that, 
given your values, best indicates how important each situation is for you. At the 
bottom of the list is a blank line where you can write a situation of your own. 
Avoidance Situation
Scariness 
Rating 
(1–10)
Very 
Important 
Important
Not 
Important
Answering or talking on the telephone
Answering questions in class
Asking someone out
Asking the teacher a question or for help
Attending parties, dances, or school activities
Blushing, shaking, or sweating in front of others 
Eating in front of others
Entering a room where others are already seated 
Giving a report or reading aloud in front of the class
Going on a date
Having your picture taken
Inviting a friend to get together 
Participating in P.E. class
Performing in public
Speaking to adults
Starting or joining a conversation
Taking a test
Talking to new or unfamiliar people
Texting
Using school or public bathrooms
Walking in the hallways or hanging out by your locker
Working with a group of teens
Writing on the whiteboard or chalkboard

63
Now that you’ve identified which of 
the situations you’ve been avoiding are 
important to you, let’s pick one to work on. 
It should be a situation that reflects your 
values. You are going to turn that avoidance 
situation into an exposure. “Expose myself 
to the very thing I’ve been avoiding?” you 
may say. “I could never do that.”
Don’t worry; you won’t be starting off on the high dive. You’ll begin at the 
shallow end of the pool.
Let’s look at the avoidance situation Alex chose: asking Ginelle out on a 
date. It was very important to him, and he rated it as a 10 in scariness (on 
a scale of 1 to 10). Exposing himself to that level of embarrassment seemed 
an impossible goal, certainly not something he could accomplish all at once. 
Alex put this new exposure situation at the top of his ladder, with rungs of 
smaller, less scary steps leading up to it. This is Alex’s exposure ladder.

64
Let’s put Alex on hold for a moment and get back to you. On the top rung of 
the ladder that follows, write the situation you’d like to face. On the bottom 
rung, write the least scary step you can think of that would lead in that 
direction. For example, if your top rung is to give a presentation in class, 
your bottom rung might be to tell a joke to a friend. One by one, fill in the 
rungs of your ladder so that each exposure builds on the one before. Take 
your time building your ladder; you’re going to need it for the rest of this 
book. 

65
If you need ideas, here are several sample ladders built for common 
avoidance/exposure situations. The order of the rungs would probably be 
different for each person completing the ladder, so rate how scary each 
exposure is for you by putting a number from 1 to 10 in the circle.
Joining a 
Group
Walk up to a group 
and start talking to 
someone in it.
Ask someone for advice 
about a class assignment.
Compliment someone on 
their appearance.
Friend request 
someone online.
Smile and say hi to 
someone you are 
interested in.
Start a conversation with 
someone new from a group 
you are comfortable with.

66
Initiating 
Conversations

Start conversations 
while waiting in line.

Talk to someone sitting 
next to you in class.

Ask a barista to suggest 
a coffee drink.
Ask for directions or 
what time it is.
Give an opinion on a 
movie you saw or your 
favorite video game.

Talk about something 
you have done recently.

67
Dating
Ask someone you like 
to do something, like 
having coffee.
Talk about things you are 
interested in to find out what 
you might have in common 
with someone.
Sit next to someone 
you like and initiate a 
conversation.
Make eye contact with 
people you find attractive, 
smile, and say hi.
Contact someone online 
and then follow up in 
person. 
Join a club or special 
interest group to meet 
people.

68
Public 
Speaking
Present an oral report in 
front of the class.
Speak briefly in front 
of a class as part of a 
group project.
Ask or answer a 
question in class.
Read aloud in front of 
1–3 people.
Tell a joke to a group of 
friends.
Practice prepared 
reports or speeches in 
front of family or friends.

69
Chapter 9:
Grab a Rung! 
Getting a Grip on Your Exposure Ladder
Have you completed your exposure ladder? Great—good work! Chances are, 
you are not exactly jumping at the opportunity to do your first exposure. 
You may have tried something similar in the past and regretted it. This time, 
you’re going to need a new strategy, better support, and a more accurate 
way to judge the results. Let’s follow along with Alex as he prepares for his 
bottom rung by filling out this exposure chart.
Alex begins by naming the exposure, or situation he has been avoiding, 
that he is now planning to face—the lowest rung on his ladder, saying hi 
to Ginelle. The next row, his anxious prediction, is what he is afraid will 
happen—and probably feels absolutely certain will happen—when he 
exposes himself to the situation. Next is his perfectionist goal, an unrealistic 
expectation that only makes him more anxious. Social perfectionism allows 
no room for mistakes or surprises, and if Alex goes into his exposure with 
this goal in mind, he is doomed for failure.
Exposure
What feared situation are you facing?
Saying hi to Ginelle
Anxious 
Prediction
What are you afraid will happen?
I’ll look nervous. She’ll think I’m weird or creepy.
Perfectionist 
Goal
How do you think you should act and appear in 
this situation? 
Calm and confident
Alex‘s idea that he has to appear calm and confident around girls is unrealistic and 
only makes him more anxious.

70
Before Alex moves forward to the next part of the exposure chart, there is 
one more very important question he must answer, which has to do with his 
past behavior, not his thinking. The question is, what did he do to keep his 
anxious prediction from coming true? 
Alex was once in a science class group project with Ginelle. He stayed in 
the group, and he even actually spoke to her once, but before he opened his 
mouth he mentally rehearsed everything he was going to say so it wouldn’t 
sound dumb. He never looked directly at Ginelle, and he spoke only about 
the project itself, not about anything personal. The moment the conversation 
turned spontaneous, Alex fixed his eyes on his notes and waited until the 
crisis had passed.
What Alex did is called safety behavior, and it is another more subtle form of 
avoidance. Safety behaviors are what we do to keep the things we are afraid 
will happen from happening. It’s like swimming with water wings on to 
keep yourself from drowning. Yes, you are in the water, but you’re not really 
swimming. Water wings don’t help you gain confidence in your own ability 
to stay afloat. You might always think the reason you did not drown was 
that you had your water wings on.
Here are some examples of safety behaviors:
• 
Calling a friend but thinking out what you are going to say first, or texting 
instead of calling
• 
Going to a party, but not initiating conversations
• 
Asking someone out, but not the person you are really interested in
• 
Going to school, but avoiding looking people in the eye
• 
Talking only to people who do not intimidate you
• 
Sitting in the back of the class so people cannot watch you
• 
Using alcohol or other drugs at social gatherings
• 
Never ordering things at restaurants that you are afraid you will mispronounce

71
Alex knew from past experience that when he was around girls he was 
attracted to he said only what he’d rehearsed and avoided eye contact. If he 
does that now with Ginelle, he won’t be truly testing his anxious prediction, 
so he’d better write it down in the chart to help him remember what not to 
do.
Safety Behavior
What would you normally do to prevent your anxious 
prediction from happening?
Avoid eye contact, rehearse what I’m 
going to say.

72
Alex has identified correctly what’s been wrong with his thinking and 
behavior in this situation. The next section of the chart is designed for Alex 
to outline the new thinking that will help him stop avoiding. Taking the 
time to reflect on these questions and write answers is crucial to a successful 
exposure.
Anxious 
Prediction
What is your anxious prediction?
I’ll look nervous and Ginelle will think I’m 
weird or creepy.
Distortions 
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow for 
mistakes) 
Coping 
Thought
What can you remind yourself of when you are feeling the most 
anxious?
I am just being friendly. If she reacts negatively 
to me, I can cope with that. She may not even 
be the girl for me.
Realistic 
Goal
What can you accomplish even though you feel anxious?
Smiling, looking her in the eye, trying to start 
a conversation
Values
What motivates you to move in this direction?
Being true to myself



73
Because he has questioned his automatic thoughts, Alex can identify 
the distortions in them and recognize that his anxious prediction won’t 
necessarily come true. His coping thought is a direct answer to his distorted 
anxious thoughts above. His realistic goal is what he will use to replace 
his perfectionist one; it is the observable behavior he reasonably hopes to 
accomplish even though he may feel anxiety while accomplishing it. The 
goal may be simply to not resort to safety behaviors. If Alex walks up to 
Ginelle, looks at her, and says hi, he gets an A+.
To complete the chart, the most important question Alex can ask himself is 
“What personal value is driving me in this direction?” He’ll need to have 
that ready in his mind when the going gets rough; it is the compass that will 
keep him on course.
But as Alex prepares, his anxious thoughts start to 
intensify, getting louder and more persistent. His 
body reacts, with his heart beating faster, his face 
getting hot, his muscles tensing, and his hands 
shaking. His mind is telling him not to do it, that 
she will think he is an idiot and he won’t have 
anything to say. It will be obvious to Ginelle how 
nervous he is, which will make her think he is 
weak and weird. If he listens to his thoughts right 
now, he’ll stick his head in the locker.
If Alex is going to go through with this exposure, 
he’s going to have to do it with the same old 
drumbeat of anxious thoughts that have 
been playing in his head for years every time 
an attractive girl is around. He’s sick of that 
soundtrack; he knows it’s not for him, but when 
it’s blasting away it makes him feel anxious, and 
when he feels anxious his feet move him away 

74
from his values. 
The bottom line is that, like Alex, you have to decide who is going to be the 
boss: your reptile brain or you. You won’t move toward your values if you 
give all your attention to your doubts and fears. In life, as well as sports, we 
win by keeping our eyes and ears on the prize.
When the drumbeat of 
anxiety doesn’t go away, 
you’ll have to focus on your 
coping thoughts, and, as the 
Nike slogan says, “Just do 
it.”

75

76
Well, that was awkward! As the anxious thoughts and feelings fade away, 
Alex sighs with relief. And we might well be wondering, was it worth it? 
Would Alex have been better off simply avoiding all that pain?
True, Ginelle didn’t smile brightly and fall in love with Alex on the spot. She 
couldn’t even remember his name. Alex isn’t really sure what she thinks 
about him now; she might even be laughing at him.
After any exposure or any social interaction, shy people often begin 
obsessing about what they may have done wrong. Thoughts like “I should 
have said . . .” and “Why didn’t I . . .?” echo in their heads. Replaying what 
they should have done is more perfectionist thinking. Nobody can meet that 
standard, and if Alex evaluates his experience on those terms he’ll feel like a 
failure and go back to avoiding Ginelle.
The important things for Alex to ask himself are “Did I meet my realistic 
goal?” and “Did I move toward my values?” And the answer is yes to both 
questions. To help him appreciate what he accomplished and interrupt 
his “would have, should have, could have” thinking, Alex filled out this 
postexposure chart.
Did I meet my realistic 
goal? How?
Yes. I walked up to Ginelle, smiled, and said 
hi.
Did I use safety 
behaviors? What did I 
do instead?
No. I spoke clearly and looked her straight in 
the eye.
How did I move 
toward my values?
I was friendly and I was true to myself.
What was the actual 
outcome?
She knows my name now. She knows that I 
am friendly and that I am interested in her. 
What have I learned?
I said hi and it wasn’t as bad as I thought it 
might be, and not as good as I had hoped, 
but okay and I am glad I did it.

77
Alex is in the pool now, up to about his ankles. This may seem like a small 
step, but it is an important one and it sure beats watching longingly from the 
deck. Ginelle may or may not remember him next time their paths cross, but 
if he continues using his compass he will get to know her better. He might 
become her friend, or he might find out that Ginelle really isn’t his type and 
wind up pursuing other girls instead. Alex’s world is opening up. It won’t be 
perfect; he’ll certainly make mistakes, and he’ll probably have to tolerate lots 
of anxious thoughts and feelings, but it is a slightly bigger, more interesting 
world to live in now. Your world can be expanded too. Are you ready to act 
on what is important to you and move ahead toward your values?
At which end of 
the leash do you 
want to be?
On the next page are blank pre- 
and post-exposure forms for you. 
Remember to start with the least 
scary aspect of your avoidance 
situation, preferably one with a fear 
factor of less than 5. And remember 
that even though this is the lowest 
rung on your ladder, it should be 
treated as seriously as though it were 
the highest. Think carefully about 
each and every field in the charts. 
Each step helps you prepare for the 
next one.

78
Exposure
What feared situation are you facing?

 
Anxious 
Prediction
What are you afraid will happen?

Perfectionist 
Goal
How do you think you should act and appear in this situation?

Safety 
Behavior
What would you normally do to prevent your anxious 
prediction from happening?
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow 
for mistakes) 
Coping 
Thought
What can you remind yourself of when you are feeling the 
most anxious?
Realistic Goal
What can you accomplish even though you feel anxious?

 
Values
What motivates you to move in this direction?

Exposure Date: 	
	
	
	
 Time: 		
	
	
	

79
Did I meet my 
realistic goal? 
How?
Did I use safety 
behaviors? What 
did I do instead?
How did I move 
toward my 
values?
What was the 
actual outcome?
What have I 
learned?

80
Chapter 10: Bella’s Ladder 
Exposure, Exposure, Exposure
Now that you’ve started doing exposures, you are on a 
new path, headed in an unfamiliar direction. You will 
need to consult your values compass often. There will be 
new, more challenging situations around every bend, and 
tempting avoidance detours that promise to quiet your 
fears. To continue forward and meet your goals, you will need to repeat the 
exposure process over and over. The good news is that every exposure, if 
done correctly, builds insight and confidence, making possible a life lived 
according to your values.
To help you understand how repeated exposures move you up the ladder, 
let’s follow Bella as she climbs hers. Like you, Bella started off by choosing 
something from the master list of avoidance situations in chapter 1—in her 
case, situations where people would see her blushing. This avoidance has 
been a problem for her because it has gotten in the way of answering or 
asking questions in class, talking to her friends, and applying for jobs. And 
those things were all consistent with her values:
• 
to share more of herself and be known by others
• 
to go to college (she’d need to participate in class to get better grades)
• 
to be more independent
Bella made a list of the situations she’d have 
to stop avoiding in order to reach her goals. 
She started at the top with the scariest thing, 
and worked backward, listing less and less 
scary things toward the bottom. 

81
With no money for eating out, Bella decided to start out by telling a personal 
story to a group of her friends. Some funny things had happened when she 
went for her driver’s test the previous weekend. The story would be easy to 
tell everyone in a text or online, but she had some very anxious thoughts 
about doing it face-to-face.
Bella’s 
Exposure 
Ladder
Going for a job 
interview
Asking for a job 
application at a 
coffee shop
Talking to a 
boy I like
Answering a 
question in class
Telling a personal 
story to a group of 
friends
Ordering food at a 
restaurant
10
  8
  7
  6
  4
  4

82
Bella was pretty sure her anxious thoughts were accurate, but she’d been 
dying to tell someone the story, so she asked herself, “If those things happen, 
what will I do?” To help herself answer that question, she filled out an 
exposure form.

83
Exposure
What feared situation are you facing?
Telling my friends a funny story face-to-face
Anxious 
Prediction
What are you afraid will happen?
I’ll blush really badly. Sammie and James will 
laugh and Jason will get creepy.
Perfectionist 
Goal
How do you think you should act and appear in this situation?
Don’t blush or show any signs of anxiety.
Safety 
Behavior
What would you normally do to prevent your anxious prediction from 
happening?
Wear extra makeup. Cover my face.
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel inside 
shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow for 
mistakes) 
Coping 
Thought
What can you remind yourself of when you are feeling the most 
anxious?
It won’t last more than a minute before they start 
into something else. I can tough it out.
Realistic Goal
What can you accomplish even though you feel anxious?
Telling the story without stopping or resorting to 
safety behaviors
Values
What motivates you to move in this direction?
Sharing what I think about, being known to 
others





84
After school on Friday, the topic of driving came 
up, so Bella swallowed hard, cleared her throat, and 
said, “You guys wanna hear about my driver’s test?”
Bella was right about one thing. She 
definitely blushed. But her predictions of her 
friends’ reactions were off. Here’s what her 
postexposure chart looked like.
Did I meet my 
realistic goal? 
How?
Yes. I told the story.
Did I use safety 
behaviors? What 
did I do instead?
No. I wore just a little makeup and kept my hands 
away from my face.
How did I move 
toward my 
values?
I shared something personal and my friends all 
know me a little better.
What was the 
actual outcome?
I did blush and they did notice, but their reactions 
were friendly, not judgmental.
What have I 
learned?
My friends seem to accept the fact that I blush.

85
The next rung on the ladder was to test 
the danger of blushing in front of a bigger 
group by raising her hand and answering a 
question in class. Although she usually knew 
the answers, Bella never raised her hand; 
in fact, she sat in the back row and angled 
herself out of the teachers’ lines of vision to 
avoid being called upon. She was certain that 
if she spoke in class everyone would look 
at her and notice her crimson face. Her last 
exposure had gone well, but it didn’t give 
her enough courage for this. “After all,” she 
thought, “they were my friends. I’m sure I 
won’t get that kind of slack from my algebra 
class.”

86
Bella’s mind was reeling. Writing it all down in the chart really helped her 
organize her thoughts.
Exposure
What feared situation are you facing?
Raising my hand to answer a question in class
Anxious 
Prediction
What are you afraid will happen?
I’ll blush and the class will think I’m pathetic.
Perfectionist 
Goal
How do you think you should act and appear in this situation?
Don’t let them see that I’m scared.
Safety 
Behavior
What would you normally do to prevent your anxious prediction 
from happening?
Wear extra makeup. Cover my face. Turn away 
from teacher!
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow for 
mistakes) 
Coping 
Thought
What can you remind yourself of when you are feeling the most 
anxious?
If kids are mean or judgmental to me, it says 
more about them than about me.
Realistic Goal
What can you accomplish even though you feel anxious?
Answering the question
Values
What motivates you to move in this direction?
Participating in my classes, preparing for 
college




87
In math class the next day, just thinking about raising her hand brought 
a rush of blood to Bella’s cheeks. She felt like she was doomed, but she 
rechecked her values compass and reminded herself where she wanted to 
go. When the teacher asked a question that nobody seemed to know the 
answer to, Bella inched her hand upward into the void.

88
It took several minutes for her heart to stop pounding and her cheeks to 
cool down, but Bella survived the test. She couldn’t be sure, but it seemed as 
though her blushing didn’t matter that much to the class. She filled out her 
chart as soon as she got home from school.
Did I meet my 
realistic  goal? 
How?
Yes! I raised my hand and answered the question.
Did I use safety 
behaviors? What 
did I do instead?
No. I faced the teacher and did not cover my face 
with makeup or my hands.
How did I move 
toward my 
values?
I participated in class. That will help me get a 
better grade and help me get into college.
What was the 
actual outcome?
I blushed a LOT! But hardly anyone was even 
looking. The people who did look didn’t react 
badly.
What have I 
learned?
I can sometimes get away with blushing in a big 
group.

89
It was halfway through May, and school would be letting out in a few 
weeks. Bella knew that if she didn’t line up a job soon, she might be 
unemployed all summer. She decided to move up her ladder a couple of 
rungs and get a job application. Doing that was rated an 8, and Bella wasn’t 
looking forward to it one bit.
But Bella didn’t want to go back to her old avoidance 
behavior; she’d never get a job that way. To prepare herself, 
Bella took the time to fill out the following form.

90
Exposure
What feared situation are you facing?
Asking for application at a coffee shop
Anxious 
Prediction
What are you afraid will happen?
I’ll blush and the barista will think I’m uncool.
Perfectionist 
Goal
How do you think you should act and appear in this situation?
Don’t blush or show any signs of anxiety.
Safety 
Behavior
What would you normally do to prevent your anxious prediction 
from happening?
Lower my head and pull up my collar.
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow for 
mistakes) 
Coping 
Thought
What can you remind yourself of when you are feeling the most 
anxious?
I can survive a few seconds of humiliation to 
move me closer to my goal.
Realistic Goal
What can you accomplish even though you feel anxious?
Getting the application
Values
What motivates you to move in this direction?
Being more independent


Filling out the form really helped. It gave Bella just 
enough clarity and confidence to get her feet moving in 
the direction of the coffee shop.

91
Bella felt good. Getting the application without being humiliated was a 
surprise; none of her awful predictions had come true. “Even though I was 
blushing, the manager didn’t notice,” Bella thought. “Gotta love makeup!”
Oops!
There was something Bella had conveniently forgotten about. This time, she 
was wearing extra-heavy foundation to hide her blushing. If nobody could 
see her blushing, then she wasn’t really exposed.

92
All shy people use sneaky or subtle avoidances that keep them from being 
completely exposed. Using tons of deodorant to hide sweating, mumbling 
to avoid being heard, not initiating conversation at a party, and drinking 
to lower inhibitions are all techniques for playing it safe. These safety 
behaviors trick us into thinking we are engaged in the world when we are 
actually avoiding it. 
For Bella to keep climbing her ladder toward her goal of getting a job, she 
was going to have to repeat this exposure without using her safety behavior, 
without makeup. So she went to another branch of the coffee shop chain to 
ask for an application. This barista was a guy who looked right at her as the 
color rose in her face. Bella felt embarrassed, but he acted normal and told 
her the shop was a cool place to work. If Bella hadn’t left right away, they 
might even have had a longer conversation. Bella felt relieved.

93
Here’s the chart she filled out to evaluate her experience.
Did I meet my 
realistic goal? 
How?
Yes. I got the application.
Did I use safety 
behaviors? What 
did I do instead?
No. I did not wear heavy makeup and kept from 
covering up my face.
How did I move 
toward my 
values?
This is a step toward independence.
What was the 
actual outcome?
I did blush but he didn’t seem to notice. And I got 
the application!
What have I 
learned?
Some people don’t notice if I blush.
After she filled out the chart, Bella filled out her application. But as satisfy­
ing as it was to have her potential future job in hand, the thought of actually 
going in for an interview was terrifying. A solid 10!

94
“I just can’t do it,” Bella thought. She was dead certain of what would 
happen to her in a job interview. But Bella couldn’t bear the thought of being 
unemployed and broke all summer. She decided that getting a shot at the 
long-term gain was worth some possible short-term pain. She and her friend 
Sandra got appointments to be interviewed at the coffee shop the same 
morning. Sandra dropped a bombshell at the last minute when she insisted 
that Bella comb her hair out of her face, saying, “So we can see you!”

95
“That’s just my hairstyle,” Bella insisted, but she realized that hiding behind 
her hair was a safety behavior, so before they left she added it to her chart.
Exposure
What feared situation are you facing?
Going for a job interview
Anxious 
Prediction
What are you afraid will happen?
The manager will see me blushing and know 
I’m not fit to work behind the counter.
Perfectionist 
Goal
How do you think you should act and appear in this situation?
Relaxed and confident
Safety 
Behavior
What would you normally do to prevent your anxious prediction 
from happening?
Wear makeup, cover my face with my hair.
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow for 
mistakes) 
Coping 
Thought
What can you remind yourself of when you are feeling the most 
anxious?
The worst thing that can happen is that I won’t 
get the job.
Realistic Goal
What can you accomplish even though you feel anxious?
Going through with the interview
Values
What motivates you to move in this direction?
Being more independent



96
Going into the interview with her hair pulled back felt like the hardest 
thing Bella had ever done in her life. Here’s the chart Bella filled out after the 
interview:
Did I meet my 
realistic goal? 
How?
Yes. I made it through the interview.
Did I use safety 
behaviors? What 
did I do instead?
No. I let my face show the whole time!
How did I move 
toward my 
values?
I took a step toward independence.
What was the 
actual outcome?
I definitely blushed, but I made it through the 
interview. The manager seemed to like me.
What have I 
learned?
I am pretty sure she noticed my blushing, but she 
didn’t seem to think it was a reason not to hire me.

97
Bella didn’t get that job, but she 
continued to go to interviews until 
she was hired. Funny thing Bella 
noticed about the ladder, though: 
the higher she climbed, the more 
rungs there seemed to be. Working 
a busy shift at a new job and 
dealing with people all day long 
rated 11 on her exposure ladder. Off 
the chart! But after what Bella had 
gone through, it was manageable. 
Her new experience has prompted 
some new, confident thoughts 
that speak almost as loudly as 
the anxious ones. Now she loves 
following her compass and she is learning to accept herself, as well as the 
nickname her new boss gave her—Blushing Bella.

98
Chapter 11: Troubleshooting 
What to Do When You 
Get Stuck
Exposures, like life, don’t always go as planned. In this chapter we will 
explore the three most common problems that happen during exposures and 
how to deal with them.
1.   You planned an exposure and were psyched to do it, but when you got 
into the situation you felt much more anxious than you had predicted. 
Your impulse to avoid took over and you bailed. What to do?
It is possible that you picked something too high on your ladder. If you 
think that is the case, pick a lower rung. If you do not have anything lower, 
brainstorm and see if you can come up with something.
For example, Liz, who thinks she is a 
boring conversationalist, planned to 
join a couple of friends at lunch and 
share two things she did over the 
weekend. She did join her friends but 
when the time came for her to talk, 
she got sweaty and started thinking 
it would sound weird to suddenly 
start talking about herself. Before the 
exposure, she had thought this would 
be pretty easy, and she did not have anything else on her ladder. To 
move it down a rung for next time, Liz came up with two ideas:
1.	
She could change the situation by choosing people she felt more 
comfortable with or talking with one person instead of two.
2.	
She could change what she was going to do by asking two 
questions, which was easier for her, and sharing just one thing she 
did over the weekend.

99
Liz decided to do the same exposure but with relatives who were 
coming over for dinner at her house.
Remember that it is perfectly normal to get anxious. In fact, if you are really 
anxious, you have picked something that 
you really need to work on. Conversely, if 
you aren’t feeling anxious, you’re ready for a 
higher rung. It is also normal that the more 
you do an exposure, the less anxious you will 
become and the more confidence you will 
gain, so at least you have that to look forward 
to.
Get a coach; sometimes involving a 
friend or even a parent can help you 
do your exposure. Just telling someone 
what you plan to do can help you 
stick to it. Depending on what your 
exposure is, you may be able to get 
someone to go with you when you do 
it. For example, when Bella went for a 
job interview, which she rated as a 10 
in scariness, she took her friend Sandra 
with her.

100
2.   You are just as afraid doing an exposure for the tenth time as you were 
the first time you did it.
Usually when you do repeated exposures you will experience a decrease, 
even if only a slight one, in your anxiety. When this doesn’t happen, 
naturally it can be discouraging. But before you give up and go back to 
avoiding that situation again, take a look at what could be hanging you up.
Are you doing a safety behavior? You wouldn’t necessarily be aware of 
it if you were, so take a hard look at how you have been approaching the 
exposures. Are you protecting yourself in some way from an embarrassing 
result? If you get through the situation without experiencing the actual 
risks, you will also miss the rewards. 
Remember, safety behaviors are like 
water wings. You are in the water, but 
you believe the only reason you are not 
drowning is that you’re wearing them. 
Your fear of water isn’t going to diminish 
until you actually have to paddle and kick 
to stay afloat.
When Bella went to the job interview wearing heavy makeup 
to hide her face, the makeup made it impossible for Bella to (a) 
test the probability that people would notice and/or comment 
on her blushing and (b) practice her ability to cope if they did 
notice and comment.
Doing exposures while maintaining 
your safety behaviors is like trying 
to learn how to ride a bike without 
ever taking off the training wheels.

101
Perhaps you are using disastrous distortions, 
those warped ways of thinking from chapter 4. 
Like a funhouse mirror, they are an inaccurate 
way of viewing yourself and the world.
Suspect number one is spotlighting. You may be so self-conscious, so 
aware of everything that you say or do that you have trouble getting 
into the swing of things. In a way, spotlighting is like another safety 
behavior. You are watching yourself super carefully so that you don’t 
screw up.
Try taking the spotlight off yourself. Uncensor yourself; say what comes 
to mind. Pay attention to the people and the environment around you.
And while you are paying attention, make sure you are not negatively 
biased. Socially anxious teens tend to discount the positive things 
around them and overreact to the negative. Do you hyperfocus on any 
facial expression that might reflect boredom, disgust, disappointment, 
or irritation? It is common for anxious teens to misinterpret people’s 
innocent facial expressions as being judgmental.
Is the situation you are practicing one you will always feel anxious in? 
In some cases, repeated exposure won’t get rid of anxiety no matter how 
much you practice. Some activities are scary, but we do them anyway. As an 
extreme example, you might ride the roller coaster over and over, year after 
year, and yet your heart still pounds, you still scream, and you still hang on 
to the grab bar for dear life. Public speakers and stage performers still get 
butterflies in their stomachs before they step out in front of audiences, even 
after years of experience. We keep right on doing things that make us scared 
or nervous because of the rewards—the exhilaration of the G forces on the 
roller coaster or an audience’s applause. Anxiety is an essential, normal 
part of the human experience. If you’ve done an exposure repeated times, 
anxious or not, you are now doing something you have avoided in the past.

102
3.   You do your exposure and things 
go wrong—horribly, terribly 
wrong!
The most common thing that might 
make you think your exposure 
went wrong is when your anxious 
prediction comes true. Here are some examples:
• 
You blush and sweat, and someone comments on it by saying something like 
“Look at you blushing; how cute!”
• 
Your exposure is to start a conversation with someone. After you say hi, your 
mind really does go blank, and you stand there not saying anything more, just 
smiling, while the person walks away.
• 
You speak up in English class, giving an opinion on the book your class is 
reading, and another student rudely disagrees with you.
Are you using catastrophic thinking? Teens with social anxiety are 
hypersensitive to rejection and embarrassment. When something goes 
wrong, they tend to feel it really was catastrophic, that they are doomed 
to a life of ridicule and rejection. As we know from chapter 4, catastrophic 
thinking is a type of disastrous distortion that leads to more anxious 
feelings and more avoidance. 
Trusting catastrophic thoughts 
to guide you is like letting 
your anxieties sit in the 
driver’s seat.

103
If you suspect yourself of catastrophic thinking, ask yourself these challenge 
questions:
•	
What did I do that was okay?
•	
What value am I moving toward?
•	
Am I 100 percent certain that my catastrophic thought is true?
The fact is, learning to navigate bumps in the road will both help you 
become a better driver and get you where you want to go.
It’s also possible that your bad result is actually good. The only truly wrong 
thing that could happen with your exposure is your not doing it. So if you 
did it, even if it did not turn out as you hoped, pat yourself on the back. 
Mission accomplished! 

104
Regardless of the problem you may be having with your exposures—
overwhelming fear, persistent anxiety, worst-case outcomes—the single most 
effective troubleshooting technique is to revisit your exposure chart. “What?” 
you may say. “I actually needed to fill those things out? Like a test or a school 
assignment?”
Skipping or skimming the charts is really tempting. Nobody enjoys paperwork. 
A lot of teens feel that they can wing it, that this stuff is so simple, that writing 
everything down is a waste of time. If you do exposures without a chart, you 
are more likely to go back to your old automatic thoughts and safety behaviors. 
And without taking the time to fill in the postexposure chart, you are more 
likely to obsess about not meeting a perfectionist goal and less likely to see the 
experience in a new way; that is, moving toward your values and doing what is 
important to you.
As an experiment, try charting the exposure you’re having trouble with, starting 
with the first five sections, which are all about your fears and distortions. Take 
the time to think each question through, answering as honestly as you can.
Exposure
What feared situation are you facing?
Anxious 
Prediction
What are you afraid will happen?
Perfectionist 
Goal
How do you think you should act and appear in this situation?
Safety 
Behavior
What would you normally do to prevent your anxious prediction 
from happening?
Distortions
What distorted thinking does your anxious prediction rely on?
 Catastrophic thinking (assuming the worst possible outcome)
 Discounting the positive (refusing to take credit when you deserve it)
 Labeling (putting a negative name on yourself)
 Spotlighting (thinking everybody is watching you and/or how you feel 
inside shows on the outside)
 Mind reading (guessing what others are thinking or will think)
 Social perfectionism (setting a standard for yourself that doesn’t allow for 
mistakes) 

105
Those first five sections of the chart can be pretty tough to get through, 
but making an honest assessment of your unproductive thoughts, goals, 
and behaviors is a necessary step before you can come up with new ones. 
The next part of the chart is your cheerleading section. When the going 
gets tough, what can you tell yourself that will keep you from retreating? 
Remember to focus on what you can actually accomplish and why you are 
doing this in the first place.
Coping 
Thought
What can you remind yourself of when you are feeling the most 
anxious?
Realistic Goal
What can you accomplish even though you feel anxious?
Values
What motivates you to move in this direction?
Did you fill it out? Great! Review the chart as often as necessary. Share it 
with a trusted friend or an understanding parent. Exposures are like tests; 
better preparation tends to get better results. And once you’ve done an 
exposure, remember to fill out the postexposure evaluation. If you feel the 
exposure went badly, your answers to these questions will help you recover. 
If you feel the exposure went well, your answers will help set up the next 
rung on your ladder.

106
Did I meet my 
realistic goal? 
How?
Did I use safety 
behaviors? What 
did I do instead?
How did I move 
toward my 
values?
What was the 
actual outcome?
What have I 
learned?
Managing your fears with charts and ladders can feel unnatural and 
tedious at first, especially before you begin enjoying the rewards your hard 
work will bring you. As you gain momentum and start getting closer to your 
goals, you’ll start to understand your anxiety in a new way. Rather than 
fighting your fear, you’ll learn to lean into it. What does it mean to “lean into 
the fear”? Read the next chapter to find out!

107
Chapter 12: Above and Beyond 
How Mistakes Make 
You Stronger
In this chapter, we are going to encourage 
you to embarrass yourself. Maybe you’ll ask a 
stupid question; maybe you’ll bore someone. “On purpose?” you may think. 
“Are you kidding?” 
It’s not as crazy as it sounds. Remember, it was your attempts to prevent 
bad things from happening that got you on the avoidance path to nowhere. 
Doing your exposures so far, you have probably already suffered some 
embarrassment. And because you are still reading this book, clearly it has 
not killed you. In fact, you have probably discovered that you are stronger 
than you thought you were and that you’ve developed some coping skills. 
Now just imagine how powerful your coping skills could be if you exercised 
them purposely, actually making your anxious predictions come true.
Have you ever heard a skater say, 
“If you’re not falling, you’re not 
skating?” What that means is that 
real skaters are always challenging 
themselves beyond their ability, 
always trying new moves and 
bigger jumps. It’s true that to get 
better in any sport we have to move 
out of our comfort zones, to lean 
into our fear and put ourselves at 
risk.

108
This is a lesson we learn during our first baby steps. Babies fall. They fall 
and they cry a lot. But what babies don’t do is get embarrassed. Babies 
are not self-conscious about falling, even when everyone in the room is 
watching them. But let’s just imagine a socially anxious baby girl who thinks 
that if she falls people will laugh at her, her parents will call her clumsy, or 
she will hurt herself and maybe even die. These thoughts would make her 
avoid trying to stand up and take those unsteady steps. She’d have to crawl 
everywhere she wanted to go, and that would be embarrassing too, so she’d 
wind up just sitting in place, playing it safe.
To learn to walk, you needed to learn to fall. To be comfortable in social 
situations, you must make embarrassing mistakes. You can wait for those 
mistakes to happen accidentally, or you can make them happen on purpose. 
Guess which method gets the best results?
Coming up with situations is easier than you may think. One thing you can 
do is go back over your anxious predictions forms, then think up ways that 
you can increase the likelihood of being embarrassed. There’s your new 
exposure.

109
Here are some examples for Liz, Brandon, and Bella.
Liz thinks she is boring. She is afraid 
to draw attention to herself for fear 
that others will judge her. What does 
she do?
• 
She makes a list of boring 
topics and then talks and texts 
about them.
• 
She interrupts people on 
purpose.
• 
She yells across the hall to say 
hi to someone.
Brandon is worried he will say 
something wrong and make a fool of 
himself. What does he do?
• 
He orders something that he 
knows the restaurant doesn’t 
serve.
• 
He calls someone by the 
wrong name on purpose.
• 
He mispronounces someone’s 
name.

110
Bella is afraid people will notice she’s 
blushing. What does she do?
• 
She rubs her cheeks hard 
before talking to people or 
making a presentation.
• 
She wears extra blush.
• 
She makes certain everyone 
notices her blushing, even if 
she has to point it out.
Here are some other above-and-beyond ideas:
• 
Spray water under your arms and on your forehead to mimic excessive sweat.
• 
Make your hands shake while you are drinking something.
• 
At the gym, count your reps out loud so everyone can hear.
• 
At your favorite clothing store, try on clothes inside out and ask the clerk how 
you look.
• 
At a convenience store, pay with a pocketful of change.
• 
When the teacher asks the class a question, raise your hand and answer it 
wrong.
• 
Call a pet store and ask if they sell dog food.
• 
Walk into a movie theater and sit in front of someone after the movie has 
started. Or set your phone alarm to go off an hour into the movie.
• 
Buy an ice cream cone, drop it, and ask for another one for free.
You get the idea. If the thought of it makes you feel anxious, chances are it 
would be a great exposure.

111
Conclusion
Understanding your social anxiety can help you realize that there are 
thousands of others exactly like you. Recognizing how distorted thoughts 
drive feelings and behaviors can help you question your thoughts and break 
the chain of avoidance. By facing fears one at a time, using coping strategies, 
and taking manageable risks, you can move from a life limited by social 
anxiety to one in which you can go where you want and have the friends 
you deserve.
If you have tried the techniques outlined in this book, hopefully you’ve 
experienced a decrease in your social anxiety and are able to do some things 
that you were avoiding before. To maintain the gains you have made, you 
will want to continue to practice your coping thoughts and pushing yourself 
to keep doing exposures. You are like an athlete in training; if you stop 
exercising, your muscles weaken. If you challenge yourself with regular 
workouts, you will get stronger.
There’s no guarantee that your social anxiety will completely go away. Even 
after significant progress, you will undoubtedly still have days when you 
want to avoid situations that didn’t bother you at all the day before. This is 
normal. Your level of anxiety, like other moods, can be influenced by lack 
of sleep, what you eat, menstrual cycle, and the use of alcohol and drugs, to 
mention just a few factors. If you can identify what seems to make you feel 
more anxious, you can help yourself by regulating that influence. In fact, just 
identifying it can bring some relief. For example, if you notice that you feel 
more anxious after a poor night’s sleep, you can remind yourself that you 
will feel better when you are more rested.
Disruptive life events—like starting a new job, going to a new school or 
away to college, or moving to a new neighborhood or city—can all trigger 
an increase in social anxiety. These are all opportunities to review what you 
have learned in this book and practice the techniques.

112
So how can you tell whether you are really making progress? The best way 
is to look honestly at what situations you are avoiding. Your motto is Avoid 
Avoiding! If you are avoiding what is important to you, you have fallen 
into your old traps of social perfectionism or any of the other disastrous 
distortions. Get out your values compass, and remember what is important 
to you. Then turn to the skills that helped you before; they are the same 
skills that will help you again. Remember …
You are not alone
and
You can master social anxiety!

113
Appendix A: For Teens and Their Parents or 
Guardians About Therapy and 
Medication
This book is a self-help book. It explains what social anxiety is and how 
to get through it so that it does not get in the way of doing what you want 
in life. But sometimes self-help is not enough. If you are having trouble 
following through with the exercises and exposures in this book, or if 
you are doing the exercises but don’t seem to be moving ahead, finding a 
therapist to work with may be what you need.
It is sort of like learning a sport. You might read about how the game is 
played and what you need to practice to get good at it, and yet still need 
a coach. Therapists are like coaches. They can work with you to develop 
the skills you need and point out things that you may not be aware of, 
like safety behaviors. They can also give you the encouragement to follow 
through with exposures that are especially challenging.
This book is based on cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and acceptance 
and commitment therapy (ACT). CBT focuses on the relationship between 
thoughts (cognitions), feelings, and action (behavior). A CBT therapist will 
help you identify and challenge the thoughts that are making you more 
anxious and change the behaviors that are making your problem worse. 
ACT is a type of CBT that focuses more on changing behavior and less on 
changing thoughts. The objective in ACT is to identify values and commit to 
actions that will lead you to live a more rich and meaningful life.
CBT and ACT are very effective for all anxiety problems, including social 
anxiety. If you decide to see a therapist, it is very important that you find one 
who is trained in CBT or ACT.

114
What to Ask a Therapist 
You will want to feel comfortable with the therapist you see. You have every 
right to ask questions to make sure that the therapist you choose will be a 
good fit for you and has the experience to treat the issue you want to work 
on.
These questions are good ones for you and your parent or guardian to ask:
•	
What is your training in cognitive behavioral therapy? (Therapists 
will ideally be able to talk about workshops they have taken, 
experienced clinicians they have consulted with, organizations they 
belong to, and certificates they hold in CBT.)
•	
What is your training or background in treating social anxiety?
•	
How much of your current practice involves treating social anxiety?
•	
Do you feel you have been effective in treating social anxiety?
•	
What techniques do you use for social anxiety? (You want your 
therapist to talk about using exposure techniques and working with 
distorted thinking.)
If needed, are you willing to leave your office to do behavioral therapy? 
(Some of your exposures may require you and your therapist to be in public 
spaces.)
About Medication 
You may be wondering or have heard about medication for social anxiety. In 
fact there are medications that can help with social anxiety, as well as other 
types of anxiety. There are basically two types:

115
Benzodiazepines 
Benzodiazepines are relaxants that work very quickly in the body and brain. 
People usually take them when they become anxious or panicky or when 
they are going into situations that make them anxious.
Common benzodiazepines include Xanax (alprazolam), Valium (diazepam), 
Ativan (lorazepam), and Klonopin (clonazepam). Each name in parentheses 
is the generic version of the brand name and is based on the drug’s chemical 
structure.
There are pros and cons to taking benzodiazepines.
Pros:
•	
They are quick acting.
•	
They can be taken as needed.
•	
They are not that expensive.
•	
Most people find it easy to take pills.
Cons:
•	
There can be side effects, like drowsiness, light-headedness, 
confusion, and depression.
•	
They can be deadly if you mix them with alcohol.
•	
They can become physically addicting.
•	
They can become a safety behavior that you are dependent on. Even if 
you are not physically addicted, they can get in the way of your facing 
your fears and gaining confidence in yourself.

116
Antidepressants
You may be wondering why antidepressants are prescribed for anxiety. The 
reason is that the way the drug works in your brain to decrease depression 
decreases anxiety as well. Also, it is not uncommon for people who have 
social anxiety to have depression too. These medications can help with both 
problems. 
The most common type of antidepressants are called selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs. Serotonin is a brain chemical that influences 
mood, and these drugs work by increasing serotonin levels; they also 
work on other chemicals in the brain that affect mood. Some common 
SSRIs include Prozac (fluoxetine), Paxil (paroxetine), Celexa (citalopram), 
Zoloft (sertraline), Lexapro (escitalopram), and Luvox (fluvoxamine). Other 
antidepressants that are sometimes used are Effexor (venlafaxine), Cymbalta 
(duloxetine), Serozone (nefazodone), and Remeron (mirtazapine).
Like benzodiazepines, SSRIs have pros and cons.
Pros:
•	
They are not that expensive.
•	
Most people find it easy to take pills.
•	
These medications are not addictive.
•	
Because you take these medications every day, as opposed to only 
when you feel anxious, they are less likely to be used as safety 
behaviors.
Cons:
•	
There can be side effects. The most common are nausea, diarrhea, 
constipation, drowsiness or jitteriness, dry mouth, headaches, 
yawning, shakiness, and sexual side effects, such as difficulty having 

117
an orgasm and/or decreased sexual drive. Many of these side effects 
decrease over time.
•	
These medications can take from four to six weeks to have a 
noticeable effect.
•	
Going off the medication can cause uncomfortable symptoms, 
like dizziness, nausea, headaches, difficulty sleeping, or flu-like 
symptoms. If you decrease your dose slowly when going off these 
medications, these effects will be less intense.
•	
When you stop taking these medications, social anxiety symptoms 
often come back.
Should you or shouldn’t you take medication for your anxiety? Well, first of 
all, thinking you should or should not do anything is the wrong approach. 
These words imply that there is an absolute right and wrong for everyone, 
which is perfectionist thinking.
If you are experiencing extreme anxiety that is getting in the way of your 
functioning, like getting out of the house and going to school, or doing the 
exercises in this book, you may want to talk to your doctor about medication. 
It is usually a medical doctor who prescribes medication for anxiety, most 
commonly a family doctor, general practitioner, or psychiatrist (a medical 
doctor who specializes in mental health).
For those who try medication, the best results have been obtained by people 
who combine it with CBT. This makes sense. The medication can help lower 
the volume on your anxiety. The therapy will teach you skills to overcome 
the anxiety now and in the long run. That way, when you stop taking 
medication, you will be much less likely to experience a return of your social 
anxiety.

118
Appendix B: Helpful 
Resources 
Books 
My Anxious Mind: A Teen’s Guide to Managing Anxiety and Panic by Michael A. 
Tompkins, PhD, and Katherine A. Martinez, PsyD
Freeing Your Child from Anxiety: Powerful, Practical Solutions to Overcome Your 
Child’s Fears, Worries, and Phobias by Tamar Chansky, PhD
If Your Adolescent Has an Anxiety Disorder by Edna B. Foa, PhD, and Linda 
Wasmer Andrews
Websites 
These sites offer information about anxiety, CBT, and ACT:
Anxiety Disorders Association of America: adaa.org/
This organization is dedicated to spreading awareness about the severity of 
anxiety disorders and effective treatments.
Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies: abct.org
This organization focuses on promoting ongoing research regarding the 
effectiveness of therapies used to treat a variety of mental health conditions.
Academy of Cognitive Therapy (ACT): www.academyofct.org
This organization helps people access cognitive therapy resources, learn 
more about mental health disorders, and find a certified cognitive therapist.

119
Appendix C: Paruresis 
If you have ever had trouble peeing in a public restroom, you are not alone. 
Most of us have experienced this at some time in our lives. The technical 
term for this problem is paruresis (pronounced par-yu-REE-sis). It is 
commonly referred to as shy bladder or bashful bladder, and it can range 
from mild to quite severe. 
Millions of people suffer from paruresis, but they usually suffer alone 
because they are embarrassed to tell anyone. Shy bladder is caused by social 
anxiety. Sufferers are usually afraid of being watched, listened to, and in 
some way negatively judged. Their anxiety makes it impossible to allow 
urine to flow, no matter how full the 
bladder is. So not only is this problem 
embarrassing, it can also be very 
painful.
As we know, socially anxious 
teens will always attempt to avoid 
situations that make them anxious: in 
this case, peeing in a public facility, 
or even at home when there are 
other people around. This avoidance 
can really get in the way of living 
their lives and doing the things that 
are important to them. Going to 
restaurants, to friends’ houses, to 
parties, or anywhere can be a big 
problem.

120
This self-test can help you figure out how much of a problem paruresis is for 
you.
Do you have a marked and persistent fear of using 
public restrooms while others are present? 

       Yes        No
Do you experience problems starting your urine in 
public facilities when others are present? 

       Yes        No
Do you worry about what other people are thinking 
when you are trying to urinate?

       Yes        No
Are you able to urinate at home even though you can’t 
do so away from home?

       Yes        No
Are you concerned about being humiliated or 
embarrassed by problems passing urine?

       Yes        No
Does attempting to urinate in public restrooms always, 
or almost always, make you anxious? 

       Yes        No
Does the fear of using public restrooms seem silly or 
unreasonable to you?

       Yes        No
Do you avoid urinating in public restrooms and/or do 
you endure using public restrooms with intense anxiety 
and distress? 


       Yes        No
Does your avoidance of public restrooms, or anxiety and 
distress about using them, interfere significantly with 
your relationships, social activities, or work? 


       Yes        No
Has a doctor ruled out a physical cause for your 
difficulties urinating in public? 

       Yes        No

121
The more yes answers you gave, the more of a problem paruresis probably 
is for you. The good news is that the problem is very treatable with many 
of the same strategies outlined in this book. Because of the unique brain-
bladder connection, however, there are specific ways to go about treating 
paruresis that are not covered here. These resources can help you learn 
more:
Shy Bladder Syndrome: Your Step-by-Step Guide to Overcoming Paruresis by 
Steven Soifer, MSW, PhD, George D. Zgourides, PsyD, Joseph Himle, 
MSW, PhD, and Nancy L. Pickering
Shy Bladder Center: shybladder.org
International Paruresis Association: paruresis.org

122
Appendix D: Other Common Types of Anxiety
People with social anxiety often have other types of anxiety as well. Here is 
a list of the most common types and some typical symptoms. While many 
of the exercises in this book can help with the problems listed below, it is 
best to learn about specific tools and exercises for each type of anxiety. The 
websites on page 118 may also be helpful for these types of anxiety.
Panic Attacks
•	
Suddenly feeling really scared when you don’t expect it
•	
Physical sensations like racing heart, trouble catching your breath, or 
dizziness
•	
Fear of going crazy, dying, or losing control
•	
Fear of leaving your home
•	
Feeling trapped when in a store or in class
General Anxiety
•	
Worries that are hard to control
•	
Worry that you or someone you love might get hurt or die
•	
Worry about natural disasters like earthquakes, tsunamis, or 
hurricanes
•	
Worry about homework assignments, tests, or getting in trouble at 
school

123
•	
Worry about being late to things
•	
Physical symptoms like stomachaches and headaches
Phobias
•	
Fear of specific places like elevators, heights, or bodies of water
•	
Fear of certain animals or insects
•	
Fear of needles or blood
•	
Fear of vomiting 
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
•	
Unwanted and unpleasant thoughts that get stuck in your head
•	
Fear of germs or getting dirty 
•	
Worry that you hurt someone or did something bad 
•	
Need for things to be even or just so
•	
Need to repeat certain actions even when you know it does not make 
sense
Separation Anxiety
•	
Fear of being along or sleeping alone
•	
Fear of being away from your parents
•	
Anxiety when you go to school, on field trips, or away overnight

124
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
•	
Intense fear, helplessness, avoidance in response to a traumatic event
•	
Reexperiencing the trauma through flashbacks or nightmares
•	
Feeling numb and avoiding people, places, or activities that are 
reminders of the trauma

Jennifer Shannon, LMFT, is clinical director and cofounder of the Santa Rosa Center for 
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy in Santa Rosa, CA. She is a diplomat of the Academy of 
Cognitive Therapy.
Illustrator Doug Shannon is a freelance cartoonist. He illustrated The Two-Step, a book 
that has been translated into several languages. He authored the nationally syndicated 
cartoon strip Claire and Weber from 1997 to 2000.
Foreword writer Christine A. Padesky, PhD, is a clinical psychologist and director of the 
Center for Cognitive Therapy in Huntington Beach, CA. She has more than thirty years 
of experience using cognitive behavioral therapy and is coauthor of Mind Over Mood and 
other books. www.mindovermood.com


(VISA, MC, AMEX  /  prices subject to change without notice)
Like us on Facebook 
Follow us on Twitter
@newharbinger.com
1-800-748-6273 / newharbinger.com
newharbingerpublications, inc.
Coping with Cliques
A Workbook to Help Girls Deal 
with Gossip, Put-Downs,  
Bullying & Other Mean Behavior
ISBN: 978-1572246133 / US $16.95 
Also available as an e-book  
at  newharbinger.com
Don’t let Your emotions 
run Your life for teens
Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills for 
Helping You Manage Mood Swings, 
Control Angry Outbursts & Get 
Along with Others
ISBN: 978-1572248830 / US $16.95 
Also available as an e-book  
at  newharbinger.com
the stress reDuCtion 
workbook for teens
Mindfulness Skills to Help 
You Deal with Stress
ISBN: 978-1572246973 / US $15.95 
Also available as an e-book  
at  newharbinger.com
the AnxietY workbook 
for teens
Activities to Help You Deal  
with Anxiety & Worry
ISBN: 978-1572246034 / US $14.95 
Also available as an e-book  
at  newharbinger.com
think ConfiDent, be 
ConfiDent for teens
A Cognitive Therapy Guide to 
Overcoming Self-Doubt &  
Creating Unshakable Self-Esteem
ISBN: 978-1608821136 / US $16.95 
Also available as an e-book  
at  newharbinger.com
beYonD the blues
A Workbook to Help  
Teens Overcome Depression
ISBN: 978-1572246119 / US $14.95 
Also available as an e-book  
at  newharbinger.com
Don’t miss out on new books in the subjects that interest you. 
Sign up for our Book Alerts at newharbinger.com
ArE YOU SEEkinG A CBT THErAPiST?  
The Association for Behavioral & Cognitive Therapies (ABCT) Find-a-Therapist service offers 
a list of therapists schooled in CBT techniques. Therapists listed are licensed professionals who 
have met the membership requirements of ABCT & who have chosen to appear in the directory.  
Please visit www.abct.org & click on Find a Therapist.
More 
for Teens


                                                                                                        TEEN / SELF-HELP

If you struggle with shyness, you’re all too familiar 
with the feeling of not knowing what to do or say, and 
you’ll do anything to avoid feeling that way. But, most likely, 
you also know that you’re missing out on a lot—friend-
ships, potential relationships, and fun. You’ve chosen this 
book because you’re ready to stop hiding behind your 
shyness and start enjoying everything life has to offer.
The worksheets and exercises in The Shyness and Social Anxiety 
Workbook for Teens will help you learn to handle awkward social situations 
with grace and conﬁ dence, so you can make real connections with people you 
want to get to know. The skills you learn will also help you speak up for yourself 
when you need to and stop dreading class projects that put you on the spot. 
Actually, there’s no aspect of your life that this workbook won’t help. So why let 
shyness rule your life one day longer? Let this workbook guide 
the way to a more conﬁ dent, outgoing you.
“Full of clear, effective, and engaging strategies, this workbook will 
show teens exactly what to do to overcome their fears and shyness . . .  
All teenagers would beneﬁ t from reading this book.” 
—Tamar Chansky, PhD, author of Freeing Your Child from Anxiety 
JENNIFER SHANNON, LMFT, is clinical director and cofounder of the Santa Rosa 
Center for Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy in Santa Rosa, CA. 
Illustrator Doug Shannon is a freelance cartoonist. He illustrated the book The Two-Step 
and is creator of the nationally syndicated cartoon strip, Claire and Weber.
Foreword writer CHRISTINE A. PADESKY, PHD, is a clinical psychologist and director of 
the Center for Cognitive Therapy in Huntington Beach, CA. 
are you tired 
of feeling 
awkward 
in social 
situations?
A Division of New Harbinger Publications, Inc.
www.newharbinger.com

