

The
Overload
System for 
Strength
A Modern Application of Old-School Training
Christian Thibaudeau
Tom Sheppard

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Thibaudeau, Christian, 1977- author. | Sheppard, Tom, 1982- author.  
Title: The overload system for strength : a modern application of 
   old-school training / Christian Thibaudeau, Tom Sheppard.  
Description: Champaign, IL : Human Kinetics, [2024] | Includes 
   bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2023015946 (print) | LCCN 2023015947 (ebook) | ISBN 
   9781718216044 (paperback) | ISBN 9781718216051 (epub) | ISBN 
   9781718216068 (pdf)  
Subjects: LCSH: Weight training. | Muscle strength. | BISAC: SPORTS & 
   RECREATION / Bodybuilding & Weightlifting | HEALTH & FITNESS / Exercise 
   / General 
Classification: LCC GV546 .T55 2023  (print) | LCC GV546  (ebook) | DDC 
   613.7/13--dc23/eng/20230425 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023015946
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023015947
ISBN: 978-1-7182-1604-4 (print)
Copyright © 2024 by Ballistic Management Inc. and Tom Sheppard
Human Kinetics supports copyright. Copyright fuels scientific and artistic endeavor, encourages authors to create new works, and 
promotes free speech. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this work and for complying with copyright laws by not 
reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without written permission from the publisher. You are supporting 
authors and allowing Human Kinetics to continue to publish works that increase the knowledge, enhance the performance, and 
improve the lives of people all over the world.
To report suspected copyright infringement of content published by Human Kinetics, contact us at permissions@hkusa.com. 
To request permission to legally reuse content published by Human Kinetics, please refer to the information at https://US.
HumanKinetics.com/pages/permissions-information.
This publication is written and published to provide accurate and authoritative information relevant to the subject matter pre­
sented. It is published and sold with the understanding that the author and publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, medical, 
or other professional services by reason of their authorship or publication of this work. If medical or other expert assistance is 
required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
Acquisitions Editor: Korey Van Wyk; Developmental Editor: Laura Pulliam; Managing Editor: Kevin Matz; Copyeditor: 
Chernow Editorial Services; Indexer: Dan Connolly; Permissions Manager: Laurel Mitchell; Graphic Designer: Denise 
Lowry; Cover Designer: Keri Evans; Cover Design Specialist: Susan Rothermel Allen; Photograph (cover): David Laplante; 
Photographs (interior): Samuel Tessier, except photos on pages 51, 65, 95, and 205 courtesy of Tom Sheppard; Photo Produc­
tion Specialist: Amy M. Rose; Photo Production Manager: Jason Allen; Senior Art Manager: Kelly Hendren; Illustrations: 
© Human Kinetics, unless otherwise noted; Printer: Sheridan Books
We thank Dave Tate and EliteFTS in London, Ohio, and Sport Évolution le Gym in Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, for assistance 
in providing the locations for the photo shoot for this book.
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book excerpts can also be created 
to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics
1607 N. Market Street
Champaign, IL 61820
USA
United States and International
Website: US.HumanKinetics.com
Email: info@hkusa.com
Phone: 1-800-747-4457
Canada
Website: Canada.HumanKinetics.com
Email: info@hkcanada.com
E8809

I’d like to dedicate this book to the generations of old-school lifters 
who paved the way with their passion, hard work, and willingness 
to experiment to always find better ways to get stronger and more 
muscular. I also want to dedicate this book to my wife, Geneviève, 
as I intend to not be killed in my sleep or in a freak lawnmower 
incident. 
—Christian Thibaudeau
I dedicate this book to my father, Kevin, who sadly left this world 
before this book was ever finished. The world doesn’t have 
enough heroes like him, and I was lucky enough to call him Dad. 
Rest in peace.
—Tom Sheppard

This page intentionally left blank

v
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments  vii
Introduction  ix
CHAPTER 1	
The Overload System Methods	
1
CHAPTER 2	
Science and Application 
of the Overload System	
13
CHAPTER 3	
The Overload System 
Foundational Exercises	
45
CHAPTER 4	
Deadlift	
51
CHAPTER 5	
Squat	
65
CHAPTER 6	
Military Press	
83
CHAPTER 7	
Bench Press	
95
CHAPTER 8	
Pendlay Row	
119
CHAPTER 9	
Explosive Pulls	
129
CHAPTER 10	 Assistance Exercises	
141
CHAPTER 11	 The Overload System Programming	
167
CHAPTER 12	 Training Program Design	
193
CHAPTER 13	 Specialization Training	
205
Epilogue  213
Appendix: Strength Standards  215
Index  217
About the Authors  227
Earn Continuing Education Credits/Units  228

This page intentionally left blank

vii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Naomi, my wife, who has always supported me in everything 
I do and who continues to push me past my own self-doubts and insecurities. 
Nothing great can ever be achieved without someone even greater behind you 
supporting you along the way.
I thank my eldest brother, Damian, for being the person who reached out to 
me at one of my lowest points and dragged me to the gym. It began the obsession 
that would define my life. Without you, I probably wouldn’t be here.
Also, a special thank you to Dave Tate and EliteFTS for their support in allowing 
us to use their facility for much of the photography for this book.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my coauthor. You have propelled my 
career to levels I thought I would never reach. Your trust in me and guidance have 
opened up so many possibilities that I can likely never truly repay you. But, more 
importantly, you’ve become a close and dear friend in the process. Thank you.
—Tom Sheppard

This page intentionally left blank

ix
INTRODUCTION
Ever since I started taking strength training seriously, I have continuously found 
ways to combine two of my biggest passions: inventing ways to increase strength 
and muscle size through the study of its history. I have always been attracted to 
what the old-school lifters—from the 1920s all the way to the 1970s—did to get 
stronger and bigger. They were not afraid to try new, outside-the-box methods 
and did not confine themselves to popular training ideas just because everyone 
else subscribed to them.
There was no social media (and very little actual media presence) in those days. 
Serious lifters didn’t give a damn whether a method looked cool, was marketable, 
or would be socially acceptable. There wasn’t much, if any, research being done 
on serious strength and hypertrophy training, which meant that serious lifters 
did not wait for numerous peer-reviewed studies to tell them that a method they 
wanted to try would work. There was also little arguing over minutia or armchair 
quarterbacking over what successful lifters did.
They found out the old way if something worked: They tried it.
Unsurprisingly, most of the effective strength-building methods come from 
those old-school lifters. Science is just now proving these methods to be effective 
(even though lifters have known for decades). I am not against science. Quite 
the contrary. It can help us understand why certain methods work and maybe 
help us better use the tools at our disposal. The fact remains that the ultimate 
test of a training approach is whether it works in the trenches and if it stood the 
test of time.
Would you rather use a method that has consistently helped people obtain 
strength and size over and over but is yet to be supported by scientific findings, 
or something that has been proven in experiments (often with beginners or 
less trained individuals) but has yet to be used in the trenches to produce real, 
hardcore results? That’s why I’ve always gathered inspiration from legends of 
the strength game to develop my arsenal of methods.
I especially love to research lifters from the 1950s and earlier. Why? There are 
two main reasons:
	
• Lifters in the low-tech era had to be incredibly imaginative to develop 
effective training methods. The 1930s to late 1950s were also the first boom 
period of strength training. At this point, squat racks and stands didn’t even 
exist. Neither did benches. These old-school lifters would probably think, 
“Why would I go to the gym to lie down?” Everything had to be based 
around big, basic lifts out of necessity. There was no option to be a coward 
and skip your squats in favor of leg extensions; it didn’t exist.
	
• Lifters from that era were not using steroids. While testosterone injections 
started being used by athletes in 1956 (this was pretty much limited to 
Russian lifters and throwers), it was not until the early 1960s that testos­
terone and synthetic steroids began to be used more commonly by athletes. 
And even then, the dosages were extremely low. In fact, during the late 

x
Introduction
1960s, bodybuilders were arguing whether it would be safe to go from 5 
milligrams (mg) of Dianabol per day to 10 mg. Compare that to today’s 
bodybuilders who use between 1,000 and 3,000 milligrams per week of 
various steroids—sometimes more. Despite the lack of steroids or modern 
equipment, old-school lifters were able to build superhuman strength that 
rivals or even exceeds what many lifters are doing today with their heavy 
use of performance-enhancing drugs. Note that this is not an anti-steroids 
book, but it takes the position that methods that worked great for natural 
lifters are more likely to be effective across the board.
This book is influenced by the methods and training of some of the strongest 
men who ever lived. Guys like Paul Anderson who squatted 1,200 pounds (544 kilo­
grams), push-pressed 560 pounds (254 kilograms), military-pressed 435 pounds 
(197 kilograms) or more, bench-pressed over 600 pounds (272 kilograms), and 
deadlifted 1,000 pounds (454 kilograms) with special hooks. Bob Peoples dead­
lifted 725 pounds (329 kilograms) at a body weight of 175 pounds (79 kilograms) 
in the 1940s. Herman Görner deadlifted 840 pounds (381 kilograms), did a 730-
pound (331 kilograms) one-hand deadlift and clean and pressed 390 pounds (177 
kilograms) in the 1920 and 1930s. And Anthony Ditillo could press 405 pounds 
(184 kilograms) overhead and do a 350-pound (159 kilograms) behind-the-neck 
press from a dead-start.
I also am greatly influenced by the worth of strength-training authors like 
Harry Paschall, who wrote for the pioneer magazine Strength & Health in the late 
1940s and 1950s and was an advocate for heavy lifting, including a lot of heavy 
partial lifts, over the “pump” style that started to become more popular with the 
advent of the Weider publications.
And that’s just to name a few.
What all these men, and most of the strongest men from that era, have in 
common was the belief that to build superhuman strength, you had to move the 
biggest weights possible. While full-range lifts were very important and the true 
measure of a champion’s strength, the total weight moved was more important 
than the range of motion. In fact, many strongmen contests or shows used partial 
lifts. A good example is the back lift, in which a strongman would lift a platform 
held on his back while he was bent over, hand on a bench. He would use a small 
bend in his legs and arms to push the platform up a few inches. French Canadian 
strongman Louis Cyr, for example, did 4,337 pounds (1,967 kilograms) in this 
manner in the late 1800s.
And, unsurprisingly, the training of the strongest old-school lifters included a 
lot of partial lifts. The reason was that these partial movements allowed them to 
use a lot more weight and thus would contribute to making them stronger over 
the full range of motion. They didn’t understand why (I will cover the science 
behind the overload system in chapter 2), but they knew that overload exercises 
made them stronger, period. As such, they developed tons of methods that allowed 
them to use heavier weights than they could over the full range. Partials, heavy 
holds, or even negative-only reps. Their core principle was simple: Practice han­
dling heavy loads and you’ll get stronger.
They also did plenty of full-range movements or even exercises with a longer 
range than the competition lifts. For example, Bob Peoples invented deficit 
deadlifts: deadlifting with a longer range of motion than the regular deadlift to 
complement his use of heavy partials.

xi
Introduction
As you will see, partial lifts are a fantastic tool for several reasons, but not 
everyone can fully transfer the gains from partial lifts to the full-range movements. 
That’s why full-range lifting as well as special methods to facilitate the strength 
transfer from partial movements to the full-range lifts need to be an integral part 
of a program that will work for everyone.
This is what this system is about.
I am not going to lie. This is, first and foremost, a program to get you to gain 
strength at the fastest rate possible. If you do it properly, you can expect rapid 
and dramatic strength gains. However, it is not strictly a plan to get you strong. 
While strength and human performance are my true passion, I also like to be 
jacked and tanned! As such, a program that would add a huge amount of weight 
on my lifts but leave me looking the same would be of no interest to me. For that 
reason, I am not interested in developing a system that will not also allow me to 
build muscle and look more impressive, even if it means getting a lot stronger.
While this is far from a bodybuilding plan, it still uses plenty of hypertrophy 
work to support the neurological methods that are the cornerstone of the system. 
After all, improving neurological efficiency only allows you to use a greater pro­
portion of the strength than your muscles can already produce; it will always be 
limited by the actual amount of muscle you carry. If you want super strength, 
you also want to increase muscle mass.
Another benefit of this program will be an increase in muscle density and 
firmness. In fact, if you are lean, this will be one of the most noticeable effects 
of this training style. Increased neurological efficiency is the most important 
element in increasing muscle tone (i.e., how hard the muscles look, even at rest). 
And overload work is the best way to develop that. When you do overload work, 
you also stimulate the fast-twitch muscle fibers more. These fibers typically lie 
in the superficial layer of the muscle tissue, and developing them will further 
increase that carved-out-of-stone look.
The scope of this program still makes use of isolated high-rep and low-load 
work. This type of work serves two main purposes:
	
• Increasing muscle tissue to boost strength potential
	
• Developing the tendons (which respond better to high reps and accentuated 
eccentrics), which will help increase your strength potential while reducing 
the risk of injuries
This system will use a combination of partial overloads, heavy holds, heavy 
eccentrics, and high-rep isolation work to maximize your strength and body.
The goal of this book is to first open your eyes to how some of the strongest 
individuals in history have trained, because many of these methods have been 
lost and are rarely seen nowadays. Then it moves on to the movements that will 
form the foundation of this system, including an in-depth chapter on the tech­
nical points of each main lift to ensure that you are performing them correctly. 
Next, the book will delve into the science of why and how these methods work 
and how to program them effectively before finally showing you how to put it 
all together and build your own overload system program. I hope that with this 
information, you are able to broaden your knowledge and experience with what 
are now seen as unconventional training methodologies and, of course, get super 
strong and jacked in the process.

This page intentionally left blank

1
The Overload 
System Methods
The overload system pays homage to old-school strength training that was all 
about lifting heavy stuff in as many different ways as possible. It was how strength 
training was done before the water became muddied by the widespread use of 
performance-enhancing drugs (PEDs), before people made up exercises just to 
look cool on Instagram, and when people were happy to focus on working bru­
tally hard with minimal equipment in the pursuit of superhuman strength. The 
overload system is about providing a very strong stimulus for the nervous system 
in order to achieve the fastest strength progression. Let’s take a closer look.
What Is the Overload System?
The overload system is a training system that uses a variety of training methods 
that would now be viewed as novel. But, in reality, most of the methods in this 
system have been around for decades. They simply went out of fashion as the 
strength-training world diversified.
The core, or motor if you like, of the overload system is providing a very strong 
stimulus for the nervous system. This is what will lead to the fastest strength 
progression.
CHAPTER 
1

2
The Overload System for Strength
Training strategies that are a common feature in this plan are the progressive 
range of motion and neurological carryover training method from Paul Ander­
son; supramaximal partial lifts espoused by Bob Peoples, Anthony Ditillo, and 
Harry Paschall; functional isometrics promoted by Bob Hoffman; and eccentric 
overloads. These methods have the strongest effect on maximizing the nervous 
system’s capacity to increase force production.
These overload methods are also effective at inhibiting the muscle’s protec­
tive mechanism—the Golgi tendon organs (GTOs)—allowing you to use a much 
greater proportion of your strength potential. They also include properly selected 
assistance work to fix weaknesses either in the range of motion of a lift itself or 
in a muscle involved in a lift. After all, a chain is only as strong as its weakest 
link. And, finally, we will also include high-repetition work on (mostly) isolation 
exercises with the dual purpose of increasing muscle mass and tendon resilience.
Because of the wide array of methods and types of training used, this system 
is just plain fun and exciting. This is not something to be dismissed, as the more 
you enjoy your training program, the more motivated you will be to train, and 
the better results you’ll get.
What Are the Methods of 
the Overload System?
In chapter 2, we will thoroughly cover each method used in the overload system. 
But for now, let’s take a broad look at the key methods and why they are effective 
at increasing strength and muscularity.
Progressive Range of Motion
Progressive range of motion, also known as neurological carryover training (NCT), 
is an integral part of this system. NCT involves using a progressively greater range 
of motion on the main lift as the program progresses.
This is a method developed by Paul Anderson to boost his squat and deadlift. 
What Anderson did was dig a hole in his backyard and place a loaded barbell 
(or a bar attached to loaded barrels for squats) over the hole. Every few weeks 
he would fill in the hole a little, which effectively increased the range of motion 
of the lift. He would use a load that was 20 to 30 pounds (9 to 14 kilograms) 
heavier than what he could currently lift over the full range of motion and started 
with a partial movement (one-third of the range, roughly) and perform as many 
repetitions as he could with that weight.
Every few weeks he would increase the range of motion while keeping the 
same weight, still attempting to get as many reps as possible. In the first position 
he might get 12 to 15 reps, and every time he increased the range, he would lose 
a few repetitions. The goal was to work all the way to a full-range movement 
while being able to do 1 to 2 reps with the weight, which exceeded his starting 
maximum by 20 to 30 pounds (9 to 14 kilograms).
This worked for four main reasons:
	
• It provided an overload that trained the nervous system, muscles, tendons, 
and skeletal structure to handle a certain weight. Because the overload was 
conservative, it facilitated positive adaptations. Essentially, you got your 
body used to handling a certain weight, and as it became more comfortable 
with that weight, you gradually increased the range of motion.

3
The Overload System Methods
	
• It gave you a lot of repetitions with the load you wanted to adapt to. Sure, 
most of these repetitions were over a partial range of motion, but your body 
was still under the full load. The higher number of repetitions along with 
the more conservative overload made it easier to get your body to positively 
adapt and adjust to the load. The high number of repetitions was especially 
important for strengthening the tendons and skeletal structure.
	
• It inhibited the GTOs, which can be thought of as the sensors in your ten­
dons. Their job is to evaluate how much tension is present on the muscles 
and whether that tension is dangerous (e.g., if it is excessive and there is 
an increased risk of tearing your muscle or tendon). If the GTOs deem 
the tension excessive, they inhibit muscle force production to protect 
against injury. Now, the GTOs are overly protective. As a result, “normal” 
(not weight-trained) individuals might only use 30 percent of their muscle 
strength potential. A well-trained individual might be able to use 50 to 60 
percent and a world-class lifter 80 percent or more. Overloads speed up that 
inhibition. And a more conservative overload might be even more effective 
in that regard, at least for nonelite individuals.
	
• It gave a psychological boost by getting you used to the feeling of a very 
heavy weight.
Heavy Partials
When we say heavy partials, we are referring to performing a segment or a por­
tion of the main lift with a load that is at least near maximal (compared to what 
you can lift on the full lift). An example is performing sets of 3 to 5 reps on a 
top-half squat with 95 percent of what you can lift for one rep on the full squat.
Heavy partials fall in the same category as the NCT method discussed pre­
viously. The main difference is that we do not gradually increase the range of 
motion; rather, we select the starting point that will provide the greatest benefit 
for the lifter. In general, the greater the range of motion, the easier it is to transfer 
the gains to the full movement. An effective strategy is to start slightly below the 
lifter’s sticking point, to strengthen that weak point specifically (there is almost 
a 100 percent strength transfer for up to 10 degrees in joint range of motion, so 
you don’t need to start exactly at the weak point).
This method leads to even higher tension produced by the muscle, which can 
potentially lead to more rapid increases in strength. It should also provide a more 
rapid inhibition of the GTOs and give you an even greater psychological boost.
However, for individuals with less of a strength-oriented background, the over­
load from heavy partials can actually be too much to lead to maximal positive 
adaptations. It’s kind of like catching some sun to get a tan: If you go out for too 
long under sunlight that is too strong, you might get burned. More is not always 
better and, in some cases, can cause regression rather than progress.
Heavy partials are very useful and effective, but they are to be used with indi­
viduals who already have a good amount of experience with strength training 
and who have already used NCT or functional isometrics before.
Functional Isometrics
Functional isometrics is a training method that involves performing a partial 
range of motion using two sets of safety pins in a power rack. The pins are set to 

4
The Overload System for Strength
encase the desired range of motion. The bar starts on the lower set of pins and 
is lifted until it makes contact with the second (upper) set of pins.
Functional isometrics were developed by Dr. John Ziegler (who also contrib­
uted to the development of Dianabol) and then popularized by Bob Hoffman. 
Ziegler was the doctor to the U.S. weightlifting team, and Hoffman was the 
coach and sponsor of the team. Ziegler had two lifters train almost exclusively 
with isometrics or functional isometrics (along with one Olympic lifting work­
out): Louie Riecke and Bill March. Both made spectacular progress, going from 
average lifters to the top of the national ranking. Full disclosure: It was later 
found that both Riecke and March used Dianabol also, which diminished the 
desire to include functional isometrics as some lifters believed it was the drugs 
that were the primary agent in the progression. However, while 5 milligrams 
of Dianabol a day certainly helped (an anabolic dosage more than 10 times 
lower than what many bikini competitors use), we are not talking about a huge 
anabolic boost here.
Another reason isometrics didn’t catch on among the masses was that it 
required special equipment (a power rack) that was not widely available at the 
time. The equipment was sold by Hoffmann, who owned York Barbell, but it was 
far from being a mainstay.
Finally, a lot of lifters disliked isometrics because they didn’t see the weight 
move, and in many cases, they didn’t use a weight, just a bar that they pulled 
against pins. This was less the case with functional isometrics, which included 
a very short range of motion and the use of heavy weights.
I (Christian) personally began using isometrics in 2001 when weightlifting 
coach extraordinaire Pierre Roy included them in his programs. The work of 
track-and-field coach Jean-Pierre Egger, who coached shot-putter Werner Gunthor 
(you can find his training videos on YouTube; if you want to see a freak, look no 
further!), further confirmed my passion for isometric and eccentric work. Both 
have been a staple in my programming ever since.
I especially like functional isometrics, as opposed to the more traditional 
overcoming isometrics in which you push or pull against an immovable object 
(e.g., a bar pulling and pushing against pins). Functional isometrics allow you to 
actually move a weight, thus measuring progress. I also believe that the movement, 
albeit small, facilitates transfer from the isometric to dynamic movements. In 
a functional isometric exercise, you pull or push a loaded barbell from one set 
of safety pins to a second one placed a few inches higher. When you contact the 
second set of pins you hold the weight there for 6 to 9 seconds. You can either 
work up to the heaviest weight you can keep in contact with the pins for the 
desired time or do multiple reps and sets.
There are several ways of using functional isometrics, and we will cover them 
more in depth in chapter 2. You can even use them to train the full movement, 
in which case you need to use two to three positions. Alternatively, you can use 
them to fix a weak point or strengthen a specific range or as an overload. In both 
of these uses, you only use one position.
Eccentric Overloads
This method involves loading the eccentric portion of the lift supramaximally, 
either by using special tools, such as weight releasers, or by only performing the 
eccentric portion of the lift (i.e., lowering a bar down to pins only). Emphasizing 

5
The Overload System Methods
the eccentric portion of a lift has several benefits that will help you get stronger 
and bigger and reduce the risk of injury. In chapter 2, we take a deeper look into 
the methods of the system.
I also began using eccentric overloads in 2001, when Pierre Roy was including 
them in his programs. Then, just like isometrics, I became more familiar with 
them after reading the work of Jean-Pierre Egger. Charles Poliquin also taught 
me to see eccentric strength as a form of “strength potential”: the higher your 
eccentric strength was, the more room you have to gain concentric strength and 
the more rapidly you could progress.
An eccentric overload consists of either executing exclusively the eccentric, 
or lowering, portion of a movement (e.g., starting a deadlift from the top and 
lowering it slowly to the floor) or using a greater load for the eccentric phase of 
a movement, either by using a tool like weight releasers or by lowering the load 
by yourself and having a partner help you with the lifting part.
Typically, you would use loads of 90 to 120 percent of your lifting maximum. 
When using 90 to 100 percent of your lifting maximum, multiple reps per set are 
done (typically 3 to 5 reps); when going above 100 percent of your max, we use 
either single repetitions or clusters (a set consisting of several singles performed 
with 20 to 45 seconds of rest). With very strong athletes I’ve used as much as 
140 percent of their lifting max, but that was done after years of training with 
accentuated eccentrics.
Eccentric overloads are performed with anything from a controlled to a super-
slow tempo, but typically I prefer a speed of 4 to 5 seconds down. The duration 
itself is not that important; rather, it’s making a certain load as demanding as 
possible by being forced to control the load as much as you can.
Dead-Start Lifts
Here we are referring to movements that either naturally start from a dead-stop 
position (with no momentum) or, in most cases, where we set up a lift to begin from 
pins from a specific position of a lift. Some movements are naturally done from a 
dead-start lifting portion (where there is zero movement on the bar): the deadlift 
being the best example. But we can also include the strict military press in there.
Be aware that when training the deadlift or strict military press, we want to 
start every repetition from a dead-start if the goal is to maximize 1RM strength. 
When you use a touch-and-go (or even bounce-and-go) method on the deadlift 
or military press, as opposed to starting each rep from a stationary position, you 
will notice that the first rep is much harder than any of the subsequent reps. It’s 
not unusual to have a lifter struggle with that first rep on deadlifts, only to get 5 
to 6 more reps using the touch-and-go method.
The touch-and-go method is thus effective for muscle growth, but an overre­
liance on it will fail to improve the start of the movement as more of the reps 
will use a combination of the stretch reflex and a rebound to get the bar moving, 
thereby decreasing the contribution of muscle contraction in the start position.
That’s the main benefit of lifts from a dead-start, even when used on exercises 
in which you don’t actually start your reps from a dead-start: You are forced to 
increase the reliance on muscle contraction to get the bar started. It thus has a 
large impact on your strength at the beginning of a movement. It is also good 
for reducing the risk of injury by making your muscles stronger when they are 
elongated, making them more resistant to tears.

6
The Overload System for Strength
Note that our system already uses a lot of dead-start exercises simply because 
we have adopted methods like NCT and heavy partials. These always start from a 
dead-start, but we will also use them on full-range movements like the Anderson 
squat, bottoms-up bench, and full-range overhead press from pins.
Loaded Stretching
Loaded stretching involves placing a muscle into a lengthened position while 
supporting an external load. This is different from traditional stretching and can 
bring with it many benefits that other types of stretching do not provide. The 
first person to use loaded stretching for something other than increasing range 
of motion might have been 1968 Mr. World, Chuck Sipes, who used the dead lats 
hang (hanging from a chin-up bar with a heavy dumbbell attached to his waist) 
as his main lats-building exercise.
More recently, strength coach Jay Schroedder used loaded stretching for 
almost 50 percent of the volume in his training system. When Schroedder was 
training NFL physical freak Adam Archuleta in the early 2000s, the workouts 
were a combination of loaded stretching, plyometric and absorption drills, and 
heavy lifting (often combined with electrical muscle stimulation). In the modern 
bodybuilding world, loaded stretching has been a staple in the training system 
of Dante Trudel and Dr. Scott Stevenson. I have personally been using loaded 
stretches since 2003, and they are included in my 2005 book Theory and Appli­
cation of Modern Strength and Power Methods.
Loaded stretching consists of performing a stretch while the target muscles are 
under a high level of tension, normally through the use of a weight. An example 
could be going down to the low point of a dumbbell fly and holding it there for 
anywhere from 45 seconds up to 3 minutes (Schroedder uses extreme durations 
of 2 to 3 minutes per set, while others recommend a 45 to 60 seconds mark). 
The load used has to make the selected duration challenging. If you can easily 
complete the prescribed duration, use a heavier load next time. In chapter 2, we 
will discuss why loaded stretching is so effective.
In the overload system, loaded stretching’s main use is to strengthen the mus­
cles while they are in their elongated position (something that the main methods 
tend not to focus on) and thickening the tendons to increase strength potential 
while reducing the risk of injuries.
Clusters
Cluster training is one of the simplest yet effective strength methods you can use. 
Clusters simply involve taking a specific rest period in between the individual 
reps of a work set.
I’ve been saying for years that clusters are my favorite training method to rapidly 
increase strength. Clusters were likely invented by Carl Miller, who was both an 
international weightlifting coach and an excellent lifter himself. Clusters were 
developed in the late 1960s and consisted of doing a series of single repetitions 
with a short rest period of 30 to 60 seconds in between each rep.
A cluster series (set) could include anywhere from 2 to 6 repetitions using loads 
ranging from 87.5 percent up to 97.5 percent. The principle is that by taking short 
breaks between reps, you can lift more weight for a certain number of repetitions 
than if you do the same number of reps as a regular set. This would obviously 
be conducive to more strength gains.

7
The Overload System Methods
Now, there are many other benefits to cluster training, which has recently been 
proven to be more effective for strength than regular sets, and there are several 
variations that you can use—all of which will be presented in chapter 2.
Very High Repetitions
A particularity of using high reps is that very little work is actually done in the 
traditional bodybuilding zone (8 to 12 reps per set). We either go low reps and 
heavy (5 reps or less) or use very high repetitions (20 to 30 reps per set, or more). 
Very high repetitions are superior to sets of 8 to 12 (and very low reps) to develop 
the tendons. However, if they are taken to failure, they are just as effective as the 
8 to 12 zone when it comes to building muscle.
Because high reps use several methods that place a huge demand on the ner­
vous system already, we want to minimize fatigue as much as possible; isolation 
exercises with 20 to 30 reps per set (or more) are less neurologically demanding 
than the heavier 8 to 12 reps per set.
We also want to accomplish as much as possible with the least amount of work 
possible. Very high rep sets are more effective at building the tendons, which is 
something we need on this system, both to maximize performance and reduce the 
risk of injuries. Additionally, because high reps are just as effective as intermediate 
reps if a set is taken to failure, we can get the same hypertrophy response. We 
can thus achieve two things we need with a single method or exercise instead of 
using two different types of stimuli, which would increase volume significantly.
The very high rep work is done mostly on isolation exercises. I share Louie 
Simmons’ view of using assistance work to develop muscle mass and tendons 
while minimizing the neurological cost of the exercise. If you are already demand­
ing a lot out of your central nervous system (CNS), the last thing you want is to 
use assistance exercises with a high cost on the CNS. After all, we are only using 
assistance exercises to build muscle and tendons. Strength is developed with the 
main lifts and methods.
Loaded Carries
Loaded carries are generally associated with Strongman training and appear 
in nearly all Strongman competitions. There are many variations you can use, 
but the premise is simple: Pick up a weight and move it. As long as I’ve been a 
strength coach (over 20 years), I’ve used loaded carries with athletes. Whether 
in the form of sled, farmer’s walks, or (more recently) Zercher carries, I have 
always been a fan of loaded carries to get someone stronger, more stable, and 
better conditioned.
I personally started using sled dragging in 1999. I was still competing in Olym­
pic lifting then, and I was trying to drop down not one but two weight classes 
to have a shot at qualifying for the World University Games. This was around 
the time I had started reading articles by Louie Simmons, and one that piqued 
my interest was an article about sled dragging to improve work capacity. What 
attracted me to sled dragging was that I saw it as a way to lose fat while (hope­
fully) correcting my main weaknesses: my glutes and hamstrings.
The problem was that I didn’t have a sled, and they were hard to come by. 
So, I simply attached a strap to a couple of 45-pound (20 kilogram) plates and 
then to my weight belt, and I would walk around the gym for 30 minutes per 
day. I was able to drop down from 222 to 182 pounds (101 to 82 kilograms) in 

8
The Overload System for Strength
around 10 weeks. Sure, dieting had a lot to do with it, but the sled work certainly 
contributed. And my strength actually did not go down. In training, my snatch, 
clean and jerk, and squat remained the same. However, at the competition, I 
sadly blacked out standing up from a clean and didn’t register a total. Despite 
that poor ending, sled dragging—and later, loaded carries—remained one of the 
main tools that I used.
To make a connection with old-school lifters, some of the best lifters of the 
1940s, 1950s, and 1960s were physical laborers. Bob Peoples was a farmer (and 
thus likely did a lot of carrying), and Paul Anderson also had a farm. While they 
didn’t program loaded carries in their plan, they certainly did them quite a bit.
When it comes to using loaded carries, you can use them four ways:
	
• Short distance and heavy weight: Here we are talking about 10 to 50 meters 
done with the heaviest weight you can use for that distance. This is, obvi­
ously, to maximize strength development.
	
• Moderate distance and moderate weight: Here we are shooting for distances 
of 60 to 100 meters done with a challenging weight, but one that you can 
do smoothly for the whole distance. This is favored for developing muscle 
mass, especially in the 60 to 80 meter zone.
	
• Intervals with a moderate weight: Here we go for a set duration rather than 
a distance: roughly 45 to 60 seconds of work and eventually shooting for a 
1:1 work-to-rest ratio. At first, you will likely need to rest twice as long as 
you work; over time, however, as conditioning improves, you will be able to 
reach that 1:1 ratio. The load used should be challenging for the duration 
prescribed but not all-out, since you’ll have 4 to 8 sets to do and you want to 
be able to do all of them with the same weight. This is mostly a condition­
ing and fat-loss approach, which is why it is not really used in this system.
	
• Long duration and low weight: This is the combination I use a lot when trying 
to get ripped—for example, carrying a 25- to 50-pound (11 to 23 kilogram) 
sandbag or weight vest (or sled, like I first did 20 years ago) for 30 to 45 
minutes. While there will be some benefits when it comes to the core and 
some muscles, it is mostly a fat-loss tool, and as such it is not included in 
this system, but it can be if your main goal is leaning out.
Loaded carries are awesome because they strengthen muscles in a way that 
regular exercises don’t and are, as such, complementary. I also find them to be 
the most effective method for developing core strength, which is one of the most 
important factors in being strong on the big basic lifts.
Specialized Training
Training specialization is the process of concentrating a large part of your training 
load on developing a specific facet of your training. Most commonly this is done 
to improve a specific lift or to focus on one or two (often lagging) muscle groups.
One thing that was a lot more common with old-school lifters was specializa­
tion on a few lifts or body parts. Sure, balanced overall training was important 
to build a strong overall base, but most high-level lifters included specialization 
work at some point in their career and even used a rotation of specialization 
programs for overall development. As examples, Bob Peoples’ specialization was 
the deadlift, and for Chuck Ahrens it was overhead strength. A plethora of arm 
or chest specialization courses were sold at the time.

9
The Overload System Methods
The fact is that specialized training absolutely leads to a faster strength and 
size progression than overall training. Doing more work, with advanced meth­
ods and more frequency for a lift (or muscle), will speed up progression. With 
one caveat: You can’t exceed your body’s capacity to recover from the systemic 
stress of training. A mistake people make when they concentrate on a muscle or 
a lift is that they do not decrease the amount of work for other muscles or lifts—
they should still be trained, but to a lesser extent. This will lead to an excessive 
overall training stress, which will prevent optimization of the results from the 
specialized work.
The best example I can give you about how effective specialized training can 
be is an experiment I did with snatch-grip high pulls (i.e., using a wide grip and 
lifting the bar explosively up to the mid-chest or clavicle level). I was training at 
Biotest/T-Nation headquarters around 10 years ago. Tim Patterson, T-Nation’s 
owner, walked in during my workout and said, “Wow, this is cool. It’s violently 
explosive but also doable by most people. We should film it with a truly impres­
sive weight . . . like 180 kilograms [nearly 400 pounds].”
Never mind that I had 110 kilograms (242 pounds) on the bar when he walked 
in and that even when I was competing in weightlifting with a 140-kilogram (309-
pound) snatch, the most I used on high pull was 130 to 140 kilograms (287 to 
309 pounds)! But Tim seemed to have his mind set about the project. So, for just 
over three weeks, all I did was explosive pulls. Six days a week I would do high 
pulls and low pulls (with more weight, only pulled to the sternum). I would do 
a small amount of bench-pressing once a week just to stay sane. Well, after that 
three-week period, I actually was able to do a 180 kilogram (397 pounds) high 
pull. Even though this story is only to illustrate the power of specialized training, 
the high pull will be one of the exercises used in this plan. It is, bar none, the 
best way to build the traps and upper back.
What Are the Exercises Used in 
the Overload System?
The exercises are divided into three main categories: main lifts, assistance exer­
cises, and remedial exercises.
Main Lifts
These are the six foundational exercises that constitute the core of the program 
and that we will discuss in more detail in chapter 2. The premise of this system 
is to make you as strong as possible on these movements. These exercises are 
the deadlift, squat, military press, bench press, Pendlay row, and explosive pulls. 
These are the most common big lifts used by lifters around the world, but you 
are free to select different variations of these movements as your main lifts if 
you feel that they are better suited for your body type or your goal. For example, 
those with long legs (especially long femurs) will not get much quad loading 
from a regular back squat. Why? Because they will have a much greater degree 
of hip flexion in their back squat, making it more posterior chain dominant. 
In that case, an anterior-loaded squat, like a front squat, is a better choice for 
leg strength. Unless you compete in a strength sport, there are no lifts that you 
must perform, so feel free to adjust based on your individual needs. Just make 

10
The Overload System for Strength
sure you respect the broad categories we have chosen (squat pattern, hinge 
pattern, etc.).
Assistance Exercises
These are exercises that will directly improve a main lift because they are struc­
turally close to those main lifts; we will cover these exercises in chapter 10. There 
are five components that make an assistance exercise structurally similar to a 
main lift. An assistance exercise doesn’t have to combine all five components, 
but the more it has, the more effective it will be at directly improving the main 
lift. These components are
	
• same joints involved, moving in a similar way,
	
• same muscles involved, doing the same function,
	
• same range of motion,
	
• same contraction types, and
	
• same rhythm.
When we say “same,” it doesn’t have to be exactly alike. For example, in a front 
squat the hips, knees, and ankles do not move the exact same way and reach the 
same angles as in a back squat (unless you have very short legs with a very long 
torso or have long tibias and short femurs, in which case it can be very similar 
to performing a high bar squat). However, the front squat is far more similar to 
the back squat when it comes to joint action than a leg press or hack squat, for 
example, because in the latter two examples, the hips move linearly.
Remedial Exercises
These are movements that target a specific muscle, or muscles, involved in the 
main lift. Remedial exercises are more often isolation or machine exercises, but 
if a lower stress multijoint movement is what gives you the best mind-muscle 
connection with a specific muscle, they can be used, too.
The goal of these exercises is to build and strengthen muscles, not train 
movements. It doesn’t mean that they are not effective. Far from it. Remedial 
exercises are often the best way to fix a lagging muscle group and thus a weak 
point, and they do so with a lot less neurological stress than assistance exercises. 
The Westside Barbell Conjugate System is based mostly on the use of remedial 
exercises. This is often lost on people who look at that system: They see the max 
effort work and the dynamic effort work, but the use of remedial exercises, which 
constitutes 80 percent of their volume, is one of the keys to the system.
Note that we will not cover remedial exercises in this book because they would 
basically include every isolation and machine exercise known!
In the overload system, the main lift and assistance exercises are trained heavy 
while the remedial exercises are trained more “bodybuilding style,” with 10 to 20 
repetitions and even as many as 40 to 50 reps if you want to focus on developing 
tendons or preventing injuries.
The main lift is trained the heaviest and with the lowest rep range and typically 
includes more sets than the other movements in the plan. The assistance exercises 
still use heavy weights and low reps but not to the same degree as the main lift, 

11
The Overload System Methods
especially when the main lifts are trained for sets of 1 to 3 reps. Typically the 
assistance exercises will be trained for sets of 5 to 8 reps (in this system). There 
are also generally slightly fewer sets per exercise on the assistance movement 
versus the main lift. The remedial exercises use the lightest weights, the highest 
reps, and the smallest number of sets. It is not unusual for me to program reme­
dial exercises using the heavy-duty style of one set to total muscle failure; rarely 
do I program them for more than three sets (usually one to two work sets with 
one warm-up set, if necessary).
Now that you have been introduced to the methods involved in the overload 
system, hopefully you can see why it is different from any other training system 
out there. This is why we were excited for this book: It involves a whole bunch 
of fun and interesting methods that really aren’t being used anymore. In chapter 
2, we will go through how to use these methods in more detail and how to put 
them together into our overload system to create your own training program.

This page intentionally left blank

13
Science and 
Application of the 
Overload System
Strength is a multifactor trait; it has many contributing factors. This is why we 
need to use several different methods that target different mechanisms if we truly 
want to build maximal strength. In this chapter, we will address what factors 
lead to the ability to express strength and how the overload system is set up to 
target all of these factors.
How to Get Stronger
To better understand why the overload system is so effective, and the reason 
behind the selection of the methods used in this system, we must talk about the 
various factors that can increase your strength and, to some extent, your muscle 
mass.
Getting stronger can actually be accomplished through several different paths. 
That’s why you have strong people who can have completely different looks. You 
CHAPTER 
2

14
The Overload System for Strength
have massive muscular lifters who are strong, almost skinny wiry lifters who 
can lift a lot of weight, thick lifters, and lean and hard ones. There really isn’t 
one type of body that is required to be strong. That might be one of the reasons 
why training for strength is so cool: While not everyone can develop the huge 
muscles of bodybuilders (especially drug-using bodybuilders), everyone can get 
significantly stronger. Throughout history, there have been the more compact 
and big-boned (not to say rotund) strong lifters, like Louis Cyr (5 ft 9 in. and as 
much as 330 pounds [150 kilograms]), Paul Anderson (5 ft 10 in. and as much 
as 360 pounds [163 kilograms]), Doug Hepburn (5 ft 9 in. and as much as 300 
pounds [136 kilograms]), or Anthony Ditillo (5 ft 6 in. and as much as 300 pounds 
[136 kilograms]).
And you also had the mesomorph lifters who were muscular on a big and wide 
body and seemed to be born to be strong. This body type included Hermann 
Görner (6 ft 1 in. and over 265 pounds [120 kilograms] in lean condition); George 
Hackenschmidt, who actually invented the bench press and hack squat (a lean 
225 pounds [102 kilograms] on a 5 ft 10 in. frame); Steve Stanko, who at 5 ft 
11 in. and 225 pounds (102 kilograms) was both a member of the U.S. national 
weightlifting team and a Mr. Universe winner; and John Grimek (5 ft 8 in. and 
215 pounds [98 kilograms] in lean condition), who was also a member of the 
U.S. national weightlifting team and a Mr. Universe winner. Heck, you even had 
ectomorphs (lanky, thinner, with long limbs) develop elite strength, with Bob 
Peoples (5 ft 9 in. and 165 pounds [75 kilograms]) being a prime example.
The point is that strength can be increased by optimizing several systems; 
everybody can significantly increase their potential, whereas not everyone can 
become huge. With the overload system, we are aiming to maximally develop all 
the facets that contribute to strength, with the goal being to get every individual 
as strong as they are capable of being regardless of their body structure.
Muscle Mass
All else being equal, bigger muscles are capable of producing more force than 
smaller ones. As such, increasing muscle mass will get you stronger. However, 
not everyone is as strong as they look (we will see why in the nervous system 
subsection). You do have large and muscular bodybuilders who don’t lift heavy. 
That might be because of an inefficient nervous system, excessively conservative 
protective mechanisms, lack of joint stability, or simply a choice of training style.
However, anybody who gains muscle will get stronger provided that the other 
factors contribute to strength do not lessen. The way I like to explain it is to 
say that your muscle mass represents your strength potential. The bigger your 
muscles are or get, the higher your potential to produce force is. Whether you 
are strong or not is a matter of being capable of using a large proportion of this 
potential. How much of your potential you can use depends on several factors, 
including neurological efficiency, level of protective inhibition, joint stability, and 
technical efficiency. Having big muscles is like having a large factory with lots 
of employees: it certainly should allow you to be more productive, but to do so 
your employees must work hard and work well together.
Neurological Efficiency
The nervous system, in large part, dictates how much of your strength potential 
you can use. The nervous system controls how many muscle fibers are recruited, 

15
Science and Application of the Overload System
how fast they twitch (firing rate is a huge part of strength production), how 
coordinated the fibers within a muscle work together, and how synergistically 
the muscles involved in a movement are recruited.
Let’s get back to our “muscle = factory” analogy. If the factory and the number 
of employees you have represent your muscle mass, the various neurological 
factors refer to how well your employees are working. Being able to recruit a lot 
of muscle fibers and make them twitch rapidly (high firing rate) represents how 
many of your employees actually show up to work and how hard they work. If 
you have lots of employees but they are lazy, you won’t live up to your production 
potential. If your employees work hard but the workers at a similar workstation 
do their own thing and don’t work well together, you still will not live up to your 
production potential. It’s the same thing with your muscles: Intramuscular coor­
dination is how coordinated your muscles fibers are when doing a movement. 
The better their coordination is, the more of your potential you can use.
And even if your employees work hard and work well together, you could still 
come up short of your potential if the various workstations are not in sync. This 
is called intermuscular coordination and refers to how well the various muscles 
involved in a movement are working together.
As you can see, if you want to use a large proportion of your strength poten­
tial, you must optimize your nervous system. When it comes to producing high 
levels of force, you must be frequently asking your body to produce a lot of force. 
Strength is a skill. You can have the body necessary to be strong, but if you don’t 
practice heavy lifting, you will never reach anywhere close to your full potential.
Protective Mechanisms
Continuing the factory analogy, even if you do have a lot of employees who 
work hard and well together, you could still come up short of your production 
potential. If the supervisors are extremely worried for the safety of their workers, 
they could impose several security protocols and limit the production speed to 
reduce the risk of injuries among the employees. This would, of course, limit 
production in the name of safety. And it’s a good thing. Just like we don’t want 
any serious work-related injuries, we don’t want to pull or tear a muscle or tendon 
because we are producing more force than is safe for our body. But when a fac­
tory’s supervisors are overly conservative, they could very well limit production 
potential for no good reason.
It’s the same thing with your body. The muscle protective mechanisms (mostly 
the Golgi tendon organs) are extremely conservative in the normal human body. 
They allow the average person to use (under normal circumstances) 30 to 40 
percent of their muscle strength potential. That’s why under situations of high 
adrenaline, you can produce a lot more force than you normally would: the 
adrenaline doesn’t suddenly add muscle to your body; it inhibits the protective 
mechanisms and allows you to use more of your strength potential.
Now, the more experience you have with producing force (either from training 
or physical work) and the more force you are asked to produce, the less conser­
vative your protective mechanisms become. Weight-trained (think “bodybuilding 
style”) individuals might be able to use 50 to 60 percent of their muscle potential; 
strength training (more focused on heavy lifting) will increase that percentage 
even more. In fact, elite strength athletes are likely able to use 80 to 90 percent 
of their potential.

16
The Overload System for Strength
While any type of weight training will gradually reduce the sensitivity of the 
protective mechanisms, the heavier you go, the faster and more effective the 
process is. The caveat is that if the heavy lifting leads to trauma or injury, it could 
backfire and have the opposite effect. Overload exercises are thus more effective 
at inhibiting the protective mechanisms because they use more weight than you 
can use on the full-range movement. And even though you are using more weight, 
if you are using good mechanics, the risk of injury is actually lower because most 
muscle or tendon injuries occur when the muscle is in a lengthened position.
Stability
This is actually another part of the body’s protective mechanisms. The more stable 
a joint is, the more of your strength potential your body will allow you to use. On 
the other hand, if a joint is unstable, you will be limited in how much force your 
muscles will be able to produce. To quote the great Fred Hatfield, who squatted 
1,014 pounds (460 kilograms) at age 45, “You can’t shoot a cannon from a canoe.”
I see two main types of stability: passive and active.
Passive Stability
Passive stability is created by having, and pardon the scientific lingo, lots of stuff 
around a joint to create a compression. The compression puts pressure around 
a joint and stabilizes it. It is kinda like wearing knee wraps around your knees 
to make them more stable in order to lift more.
What is this “lots of stuff” I speak of? It could be intramuscular glycogen, water, 
and fatty acids blowing up a muscle to make it bigger and press more against the 
joint. It could be water outside the muscle, or it could even be fat.
By the way, the main reason that you lose strength on multijoint movements 
when dieting down is because of this loss of passive stability. When you do a 
fat-loss phase, you reduce calories and (most likely) carbohydrates. You often 
decrease sodium intake (not necessarily voluntarily, just by eating less sodi­
um-dense foods). The result is that you lose a little bit (and eventually a lot) of 
that “lots of stuff.” You decrease intramuscular glycogen, water, and fatty acids; 
retain less extracellular water; and lose fat around the various joints.
Active Stability
Active stability is when you create a more stable joint by contracting the muscles 
surrounding the joint. We often talk about “stabilizer muscles,” which is really 
a misnomer because there is no such thing. Stabilizing (or fixating) is a muscle 
function, and every muscle is capable of doing that function. Furthermore, a 
muscle can stabilize in one movement but act as a prime mover in another one. 
Heck, it can even stabilize in some parts of the range of motion and be a prime 
mover or synergist in another part!
That’s why movements seen to be working the stabilizers (e.g., isolated rotator 
cuff exercises) really do have a limited impact on improving your strength poten­
tial unless these muscles are inhibited or extremely weak to start with.
There are more effective ways of improving active stability during heavy lifting.
	
• Isometric work or stato-dynamic work. This type of workout increases 
the recruitment of the synergistic and antagonist muscles to create more 
stability.
	
• Lifting under conditions that require a greater effort to stay stable (e.g., tall 
kneeling overhead press, hanging band technique, loaded carries). Note that 

17
Science and Application of the Overload System
making the object you are lifting less stable is more effective than making 
the base less stable.
	
• Eccentric work. When done by focusing on controlling the load (going 
down slowly), you develop the capacity to maintain tension throughout the 
range of motion, increasing stability. Plus, an eccentric overload activates 
the motor cortex more than other types of lifting, which will lead to faster 
motor learning and a more durable motor pattern.
Tendon Thickness and Resilience
It has long been known that tendons play a huge role in producing strength. 
Even the old-school lifters instinctively knew this to be true. They might not 
have known all the reasons why, but they knew that thick, resilient tendons 
were a huge part of being strong. In many old-school training books, they 
were typically referred to as “sinews,” and getting them strong was a big part 
of many programs.
There are many reasons why thicker and more resilient tendons are import­
ant for strength production. One reason, first and foremost, is because tendons 
attach the muscles to the bones that they are moving. We tend to think of lift­
ing as moving a bar (or another source of resistance), but in reality, what we 
are doing is moving our skeletal structure to produce movement while we are 
holding an external load. Essentially, your muscles move bones, which creates 
movement and allows you to complete a lift. The heavier the weight you are 
moving is, the more force the muscles must create to be able to “pull the bone” 
and create movement. The more force is produced, the greater stress the ten­
dons are under.
As I explained earlier, the body has protective mechanisms in place to prevent it 
from tearing itself apart through voluntary actions. I mentioned the Golgi tendon 
organs (GTOs) that are situated, as the name implies, in the tendons. When the 
GTOs sense that there is too much tension and force applied to the tendons, they 
will trigger an inhibitory mechanism that will prevent further force production. 
It can even go as far as promoting relaxation (loss of force production) through 
its action on the inhibitory neuron. This mechanism is extremely conservative in 
a normal individual and is easily triggered by tension or by a rapid and forceful 
stretch. As you become more experienced with lifting, especially heavy lifting, 
you will develop some desensitization of the reflex.
Another way of reducing this reflex is to make the tendons thicker and more 
resilient. Thicker and stronger tendons can withstand a lot more tension and 
also stretch to a lesser extent. Having thicker, stronger tendons has an obvious 
positive impact on strength production, but so does having stiffer tendons. A 
tendon that is more easily stretched will transfer less force from the muscle to 
the bone because it will dissipate some of that tension through the stretch. To 
illustrate, attach a rope to a weight. Put the weight on the floor and try to yank 
it up by forcefully pulling on the rope. It should not be an issue at all. Now try to 
do the same with an elastic band instead of a rope; it will be a lot harder to get 
the weight moving. The stretchier the band is, the harder it will be to move the 
weight. Not to mention that stiffer tendons have a stronger stretch reflex, which 
can also contribute significantly to force production.
Some people are born with naturally thicker tendons, which gives them a 
mechanical advantage when it comes to building strength, but you can also 

18
The Overload System for Strength
develop the thickness of your tendons by using a combination of accentuated 
eccentric actions and high rep exercises, especially if the high reps work the 
muscle over the fullest range of motion possible or emphasize the portion of the 
range of motion where the muscles and tendons are stretched the most.
Adrenergic Sensitivity
This is also a neurological factor, but it is mostly peripheral rather than central. 
As a brief explanation, adrenergic receptors interact with adrenaline to either 
activate or inhibit a certain tissue. The beta-adrenergic receptors, when turned 
on, activate the tissue. For example, if you activate the beta-adrenergic receptors 
in the muscle, you increase the muscle strength, power, and speed potential as 
well as muscle tone. If the beta-adrenergic receptors in the heart are activated 
by adrenaline, your heart rate and heart contraction strength increase, allowing 
you to deliver more blood, faster. This is useful for physical activity because it 
sends more oxygen for energy production to the muscles as well as clears out the 
metabolites (waste products) of muscle contraction faster. If you bind adrena­
line to the beta-adrenergic receptors in the brain, you become more motivated, 
driven, competitive, and aggressive. You also speed up motor programming and 
muscle fiber recruitment.
Another important thing to understand about receptors is that they can vary 
in their response to a hormone or neurotransmitter. If a receptor is sensitive, it 
will have a strong response, meaning that even a small amount of the hormone 
or neurotransmitter will elicit a strong response (and of course a large amount 
will lead to an even greater reaction). If a receptor is resistant, it will take a very 
large amount of the hormone or neurotransmitter to elicit a response.
What’s even more important is that most receptors can be made more resistant 
(downregulation) or more sensitive (upregulation). The normal mechanism to 
achieve this has to do with the amount and frequency of stimulation of a recep­
tor. The more often you bind a hormone or neurotransmitter to a receptor, the 
more it will start to downregulate (respond less and less to the hormone or neu­
rotransmitter). This happens to an even greater extent if the amount of hormone 
or neurotransmitter is high. On the other hand, you can make some receptors 
more sensitive by reducing the frequency at which it is stimulated. The beta-ad­
renergic receptors are especially prone to downregulation. If they become less 
sensitive, your performance—both physical (drop in strength and speed, lower 
endurance and recovery) and mental—will drop considerably.
If you constantly “train on the nerve” (to quote weightlifting legend Alexeyev), 
the risk of downregulating the beta-adrenergic receptors is great. People who 
train all-out too often (or too often with a lot of volume) may start to see their 
performance degrade. They can even start to look worse as their muscle tone 
diminishes, making them look softer and smaller. This is all because they stim­
ulate their beta-adrenergic receptors too much.
That also explains how deloading and peaking works for strength sports. It 
has very little to do with glycogen super-compensation. What happens is that 
the pre-contest training will downregulate the beta-adrenergic receptors to some 
extent. While the muscles are stronger, some of those gains are hidden by the 
fact that muscles are made less sensitive to adrenaline.
When you deload or do a peak week, you dramatically reduce training stress, 
which lowers adrenaline and allows you to upregulate (make yourself more 

19
Science and Application of the Overload System
sensitive through less stimulation) your beta-adrenergic receptors, which will 
make you more responsive to adrenaline and allow you to showcase more of the 
strength you have.
The take-home message is that doing too much, too often, too hard can make 
you weaker, and it is something that is extremely common among passionate 
lifters. As you can see, people can get strong several different ways, which explains 
why strength comes in all shapes and sizes.
We could have easily included technical mastery of the lifts as a way to get 
stronger. And it certainly is important to be able to demonstrate your strength in 
a specific lift. It is one of the reasons why Olympic weightlifters can lift two to 
three times their body weight from the floor to overhead in an explosive action. 
However, technical mastery does not really get you stronger. It simply allows you 
to apply the strength you have to complete a specific movement as efficiently as 
possible. While technical mastery is extremely important ( which is why we have 
a whole chapter on mastering each of the basic lifts in this plan; see chapters 4 
through 9), it is not a physiological key to get stronger.
With all of that in mind and a deeper understanding of the factors that can 
make you stronger, let’s look at the effect of the various methods we will be using 
in this plan.
How the Overload System Methods Work
 In chapter 1, we briefly outlined the various methods that are going to be used in 
the overload system. Now is the time for us to delve deeper into those methods: 
how they work, how to use them, and how they fit in to the overload system as 
a whole.
Progressive Range of Motion Training
This training, also known as neurological carryover training (NCT), uses three 
phenomena to its advantage.
	
• Supramaximal weights downregulate the GTOs to allow you to use more 
of your strength potential.
	
• The more force you have to produce, the more muscle fibers you recruit. 
If you reach a point where you are recruiting all the available fibers, then 
further force is produced by making the fast-twitch fibers twitch faster. 
This is called “firing rate,” and it is the key to maximum voluntary strength 
production. The heavier you go, the more you increase it. Doing it over 
time will improve your nervous system’s capacity to have a higher firing 
rate.
	
• Load habituation is a phenomenon in which the more you practice han­
dling a certain load, the easier it becomes to lift and the less stressful it is 
on the body. In normal training, when your body is habituated to a load 
and it becomes easier to handle, you add weight to further challenge the 
body. For example, if you start with 200 pounds (91 kilograms) for 6 reps 
and it’s hard, after a while it becomes a lot easier. If you graduate to 220 
pounds (100 kilogram) and 6 reps, it will be the same level of difficulty as 
the original 200 pounds (91 kilograms) and 6 reps. With NCT, when you 

20
The Overload System for Strength
start to be habituated to a load and it becomes much easier than it was the 
first few times you did it, you make the movement harder not by adding 
weight but by adding range of motion instead.
I also find that this method offers other benefits:
	
• If done properly (controlling the eccentric on each rep and respecting the 
proper mechanics of the movement), the overload done over a progressively 
larger range of motion dramatically increases active stability, which, as we 
saw earlier, will make you stronger.
	
• It gives you a psychological boost because you become used to the feeling 
of a certain weight. I find that when training for strength and using big 
weights, a lot of missed lifts occur not because the lifter lacked strength but 
because they were intimidated by the weight when they unracked it. This 
psyches them out, creating tension through anxiety and negatively affecting 
lifting technique. Practicing handling supramaximal weights, even if it’s 
over a partial range of motion, will help you better handle the psychological 
stress of moving those loads over the whole range of motion.
	
• It allows you to work on technique. It’s much easier to make technical 
adjustments to short-range movements, with less moving parts, than 
addressing the full movement right away. That’s one of the reasons why most 
Olympic lifting coaches teach the snatch, clean, and jerk by segmenting 
the movement and gradually building up toward the full lift as the pieces 
are mastered.
To ensure this method works for you, when doing your partial reps, it is 
important that your body position and movement are the same as they would be 
at that point in the full-range movement. The most common example (which we 
mostly see during simple partial reps training) happens when someone is doing 
rack pulls from above the knees: They will wedge their knees and lower part of 
their quad under the bar. This brings the knees far forward, making the torso 
more upright, allowing them to leverage the weight up by doing something like 
a quarter squat. You can use a lot more weight like that (but it will not transfer 
to the full lift) or even when you simply move to below the knees. When I started 
doing heavy partials at age 20, I would use that wedging technique and could do 
over 1,000 pounds (454 pounds) from above the knees. The only thing was that 
my full deadlift was a mere 500 pounds (227 kilograms)!
Heck, I remember doing a Strongman competition (if I’m not mistaken it was 
in 2000, so I was 22 years old) and actually winning the train wheel deadlift 
against guys who were a ton stronger and bigger than I was. I was 5 ft 9 in. and 
190 pounds (86 kilograms), and the next smallest guy was 6 ft 2 in. and 260 
pounds (118 kilograms), with a few of the other lifters in the range of 280 to 
320 pounds (127 to 145 kilograms). I actually beat a guy who could deadlift 780 
pounds (354 kilograms) from the floor (I was doing 550 pounds [250 kilograms]) 
simply because I could wedge myself under the bar and he couldn’t. While that’s 
good for the ego, it will not help you get stronger over the full range of motion, 
which is the goal of partial lifting, or the progressive range of motion method 
of lifting.
The basic principle of this method is to start with a very short range on the 
selected lift. The starting position is on safety pins in a power rack or on blocks, 

21
Science and Application of the Overload System
and the initial height will be somewhere in the upper third of the range of motion. 
I personally believe that you should start with the smallest range of motion 
possible while still feeling like a lift. For example, in the bench press, I will start 
from a position that is around two inches from the lockout. The only downside 
with starting from a very short range is that it lengthens the time it will take you 
to reach the full range. However, that is actually a benefit as it gives you more 
time to get habituated to a weight.
You select a load that is 10 to 30 pounds (5 to 14 kilograms) more than your 
maximum on the full-range lift. How heavy you go really depends on your 
strength gain potential. For example, if you are already deadlifting 800 pounds 
(363 kilograms), I doubt that you will be able to add another 30 pounds (14 
kilograms) in 6 to 8 weeks, whereas if you are deadlifting 400 pounds (181 
pounds), it should be fairly manageable. It’s better to be more conservative, 
anyway. Patience is the greatest attribute a strong person can have. In an ideal 
world, you should shoot for 12 to 15 reps in that initial position the first time 
you do it. If you can do more, by all means do, but if you only manage 7 to 11 
reps, the load is likely excessive, and you will hit a wall before the end of the 
cycle.
The goal is to increase the range of motion very gradually (I’m talking about 
0.5 to 1.5 inches). The more gradual the progression, the easier the strength trans­
fer will be as you progress through the range of motion. If you go with smaller 
increases (0.5 inch), you can increase the range every two or three workouts. If 
you need to use larger increments (1.5 inches), then you will need to do more 
workouts for each position, four to six workouts ideally.
In a program, we don’t have a choice but to write when to increase the range 
of motion. In reality, you should increase the range only when a certain position 
is significantly easier than it was. Let’s compare that with weight increase in 
regular lifting: If you did 200 pounds (91 kilograms) and 6 reps, and it took you 
everything to complete that sixth rep, then going up to 210 pounds (95 kilograms) 
the next week is likely a bad idea and will lead to rapid stagnation. But when 
you work up to a point where 200 pounds (91 kilograms) and 6 reps is almost 
easy, then you are ready to progress. The same thing applies to range of motion 
training. Do not add range if you don’t feel like you have had a progression. For 
example, if you did 14 reps with 300 pounds (136 kilograms) in your first session, 
15 reps in your second session, 15 in your third session, I would say that you are 
not ready yet to move up in range. That’s the art of training, and sadly it cannot 
be taught in a book.
Obviously, as you increase the range of motion, reps will drop down. It is unre­
alistic to think that you can start with 15 reps lifted for 2 inches and that after 
6 to 8 weeks you’ll be able to do the same 15 reps over the full range with the 
same weight. The method is powerful, but it has its limits! That’s why we want 
to start at a point where you can get 12 to 15 reps in the first position. With a 
normal rep drop-off, this should allow you to reach 1 to 2 full-range reps at the 
end of your cycle.
Don’t forget, it’s perfectly fine to extend the cycle by spending more sessions at 
a certain range of motion level. I would rather have you take 2 to 3 more weeks 
to finish your cycle and be successful than force yourself to do it in 6 to 8 weeks 
and fail because you increased the range before you dominated a certain range 
of motion.

22
The Overload System for Strength
TRAINING PARAMETERS
PROGRESSIVE RANGE OF MOTION
•	Load: 10 to 30 pounds (5 to 14 kilograms) more than your current full-range 
max.
•	Reps: Variable depending on range.
•	Sets: 1 to 3.
•	Effort level: We don’t want to go to real failure, as each rep must be done with 
good technique, but we do need to push ourselves. I’d say keep a rep in the 
tank.
•	Frequency: 1 to 2 times per week per movement (I prefer 2).
Supramaximal Partials
The purpose of this method is similar to that of the progressive range of motion 
(PRM) method, but let’s just say that it is the less elegant and more brutish version. 
The PRM method is more of a high precision method in which you are using a 
small overload and gradually working toward transferring the capacity to lift that 
weight over the full range of motion. Supramaximal partials do not share this 
transfer. Instead, it is simply about creating the greatest overload possible while 
maintaining a decent range of motion. As such, the starting position can vary 
depending on the lifter and the lift. We normally use either a low supramaximal 
partial (starting at around one-half to two-thirds of the range of motion) or high 
supramaximal partials (doing the last quarter, or even less, of the movement). 
What I find is that the lower you start, the easier it is to transfer the gains to 
the full range of motion. However, the higher you start, the heavier you go, the 
greater the psychological benefit is, and the more effective the exercise becomes 
to downregulate the GTOs.
Throughout my 20 years of using supramaximal partials, I have also learned 
that some people can more easily transfer gains made on partial movements 
than others. These people should use a higher starting position (shorter range of 
motion) to create the greatest overload possible. Those who are not as efficient at 
transferring gains made on partial movements should start lower and more likely 
start just above their weak point (mostly as a tool to strengthen their weak point).
There are several ways of using this approach. Chuck Sipes, who bench-
pressed over 560 pounds (254 kilograms) at 220 pounds (100 kilograms) in the 
1960s, used “free partials” on his bench press. This meant doing a regular bench 
press but lowering the bar only one-third of the way down before reversing and 
pressing it back up.
Anthony Ditillo started his partials from pins. More recently, with the Westside 
Barbell Conjugate System of training, you have people using boards placed on 
the chest for the bench press and a box to sit on for squat (they start from pins 
for the deadlift).
All three approaches work and have their pros and cons. The Sipes free partial 
method is likely going to transfer better to regular lifting because you are training 
the eccentric-to-concentric reversal, which you don’t do in the other two methods 
(or not as well or as much). However, it is much harder to be consistent with 
the range of motion you use because you don’t have a reference point for where 

23
Science and Application of the Overload System
you need to stop the bar. A lot of people will subconsciously start reducing the 
range of motion so that they can use more weight. A way to counter that is to 
use safety pins as markers, lower the bar until it almost touches the pins, and 
then lift up. This solves the issue, but it can be hurtful to your focus and affect 
performance for a while.
The Ditillo pin press-pull partials method is the one I personally use the most 
because you can reset properly on every repetition and because it is the only 
pure concentric method (where the concentric is not preceded by loading of the 
muscles and eccentric action or the activation of the stretch reflex). As such, it 
is a superior method to improve voluntary contraction of the muscles. It is also 
easy to keep using the same range of motion or to adjust it upward or downward 
precisely to get the desired training effect. The main drawback is that people 
subconsciously fail to control the bar properly when they are lowering it back 
down to the pins. Special attention should be paid to returning the bar slowly and 
under control to the pins. The complete lack of eccentric or concentric transition 
(you pause and release tension when the bar is on the pins) also makes it harder 
to transfer the gains to a regular lift.
The Westside board press and box squats are a middle-of-the-road solution. 
When the bar is on the boards or when you are seated on the box, your body is 
still under load. However, when you use pins, it becomes unloaded. If the pause 
on the boards or box is less than 2 seconds, you still get a stretch reflex (albeit 
a small one) and train the eccentric-to-concentric transition (less than with the 
Sipes method but more than with the Ditillo approach). Because you are lowering 
the bar to a board or sitting down on a box, you can easily regulate the range 
of motion. I actually like the board press, but I find the box squat potentially 
hazardous if someone is not technically efficient and doesn’t control the bar 
properly. Although there will be individual differences, I find that you can use 
the most weight (for the same range) with the partial from pins, followed by the 
Westside box approach, and finally, the free partials.
Supramaximal partials are much less complex than the PRM method. You 
simply want to increase the amount of weight you handle over time. However, 
adding weight should not come at the expense of altering the technique to lever­
age more weight up; your positions and actions should mirror that part of the 
range of motion during full-range lifts. I find that to get the most out of partial 
repetitions, you need to use slightly higher reps than you would with full-range 
strength work yet use a rep range that will still allow you to load significantly 
more weight than your maximum on the full-range lift.
I do believe that accumulating a sufficient amount of mechanical work in a set 
is necessary to maximize both size and strength, and I also believe that the ner­
vous system needs to be able to produce force for the duration of a true maximal 
effort for the training set to be transferable. For example, a true maximal effort 
on the bench press might last 3 to 4 seconds (including the eccentric, transition, 
and concentric phases) and the squat up to 5 seconds. If you do 1, 2, or even 
3 partial repetitions, you might not put the muscles under tension for the 4 to 
5 seconds minimum you need to make sure that you can keep producing high 
tension for long enough to complete a full maximal effort—it’s always best to 
have some reserve. It’s not a muscle or energy thing. It’s mostly about being able 
to maintain a strong neural drive for the duration of the max effort.
Gymnastic coach Carl Paoli once told me during a session that in gymnastics, 
when you train for a strength-based skill (iron cross, maltese, etc.), you typically 

24
The Overload System for Strength
use a duration that is three times what you will need in a routine. I find this to 
be fairly accurate for partial lifts, too. As such, I feel that supramaximal partials 
are best performed for sets of 4 to 8 repetitions (depending on the range). This 
falls in line with Chuck Sipes’ method. You can use 2 to 3 reps for short periods 
of time to work on your capacity to increase you peak force potential, but most of 
your training on supramaximal work should fall in the range of 4 to 8 repetitions. 
The shorter the range, the more reps you should do. Why? First, because each 
rep has a shorter duration and, second, because even when doing 6 to 8 reps on 
a one-quarter or one-eighth range, you will be able to use a lot more weight than 
your max on the full lift, whereas if you do a half-range movement, you probably 
won’t be able to use a weight that constitutes an overload if you have to do 8 reps.
With supramaximal partials, you do want to add weight over time, but you 
should use an old-time Strongman mentality and consider your sets as practice: 
You want to dominate every rep in your set. Going to failure on partials might 
actually delay the downregulation of the GTOs. Failing is seen as a dangerous 
situation by the body, especially when handling supramaximal loads, whereas if 
you dominate each rep in a set, you tell your body that this load is not dangerous.
The goal is to add weight over time, but only do so if you know that you will be 
able to dominate every repetition. That is the beauty of supramaximal partials: 
even if you have to stick to the same load for 4, 5, or 6 weeks (or more), it still 
works because it’s still an overload versus your full-range poundage.
TRAINING PARAMETERS
SUPRAMAXIMAL PARTIALS
•	Load: 40 to 100 pounds (18 to 45 kilograms) more than your full-range maxi­
mum (depending on movement, range, and number of reps).
•	Reps: 4 to 8 with occasional work for 2 to 3 reps for a week or two.
•	Sets: 2 to 5, often done ramping style (gradually adding weight until you reach 
your top weight for your last set).
•	Effort level: You want to dominate each repetition. Only add weight when you 
know that you will be able to do that.
•	Frequency: 1 to 2 times per week for a lift (I prefer 2).
Functional Isometrics
I (Christian) have been a huge fan of isometric training since around 2003. My 
first experience seriously using isometrics occurred after I had stopped training for 
Olympic weightlifting for two years. It was a period during which I focused mostly 
on “bodybuilding-type work.” I read Bob Hoffman’s books on overcoming isomet­
rics (basically pushing or pulling against the pins in a power rack with an empty 
bar) and on functional isometrics, which combined a very short-range movement 
with an isometric. This is achieved by using two sets of safety pins a few inches 
apart from one another. You start the loaded barbell on the lower set of pins and 
press it into the second set of pins and hold it there while pressing and pulling as 
hard as you can. Because Hoffman was a weightlifting (Olympic lifting) proponent, 
the system was originally marketed for lifters, not bodybuilders. I decided to try it 
while refocusing on the Olympic lifts to see how well it would work.

25
Science and Application of the Overload System
I would do functional isometrics three times a week (I found that pure iso­
metrics did not motivate me as much, and there was no feedback regarding 
progression) and snatch, clean, and jerk and squat once a week (which was the 
original recommendation), and I regained my previous best performance level 
in less than a month, then actually achieved a snatch and squat PR a few weeks 
later: I snatched 315 pounds (143 kilograms), whereas my previous best had 
been 291 pounds (132 kilograms), and squatted 550 pounds (250 kilograms) 
times 5 reps and 600 pounds (272.5 kilograms) for a single, whereas my pre­
vious max had been 550 pounds (250 kilograms) for a single rep. As you can 
imagine, I was easily convinced of the power of functional isometrics! But in 
my typical fashion, as soon as I find out how well something works, I wanted 
to try something new!
To understand why functional isometrics work so well, you must first under­
stand the benefits of pure isometrics—that is, isometrics where there is no 
movement. There are two main forms of pure isometrics:
	
• Overcoming isometrics: producing force while there is no movement but 
while attempting to lift the immovable resistance (e.g., pushing or pulling 
against pins)
	
• Yielding isometrics: producing force while there is no movement, attempt­
ing to prevent the weight from falling down (e.g., holding a barbell at the 
mid-range of a curl)
Functional isometrics are a combination of a partial movement (more often 
a supramaximal partial) over a few inches, ending with an overcoming isomet­
ric. Overcoming isometrics are effective for strength because they increase four 
important things:
Muscle fiber recruitment: During a maximal overcoming isometric effort, you 
can recruit up to 10 percent more muscle fibers than during a maximal concen­
tric and dynamic effort.
Fast-twitch fiber firing rate: On top of better fiber recruitment, if you try to 
produce as much force as humanly possible during an overcoming isometric 
action, you can reach a higher firing rate in the fast-twitch fibers. This is likely 
the most important muscle factor in reaching a very high level of strength, and 
you need to train it to improve it.
Recruitment of the synergistic muscles: The muscles that assist the prime 
movements in a lift have been shown to be recruited to a greater extent during 
a maximal isometric action than a maximal concentric action by an average of 
13 percent. This can, over time, train your nervous system to better use these 
muscles during a regular lift, which will obviously increase your strength.
Recruitment of the antagonist muscles: Antagonist muscles, those that oppose 
the prime movers (e.g., biceps in a bench press), also get recruited to a greater 
extent during a maximal isometric effort. The initial reaction would be to think 
that this would actually decrease strength because the antagonist would resist 
more, making it harder to lift. In reality, it actually makes you stronger because 
the reason for this increased recruitment is to increase active joint stability. Iron­
ically, being able to increase the activation of the antagonist muscles at certain 
phases of a lift (e.g., activating the hamstrings more when you are at the half 
squat position) will make you stronger because as the body feels more stable and 
better braced, the protective inhibition will not be turned on as easily and you 
can use a greater proportion of your strength potential.

26
The Overload System for Strength
Maximal overcoming actions thus train the nervous system to be more efficient 
at motor tasks that will be useful for you to increase overall strength production. 
The main drawback is that pure isometric actions have specific effects:
The strength gained occurs mostly at the joint being trained. There is some 
carryover for up to 15 degrees, but the further you get from the train angle, the 
lesser the transfer will be.
The strength gained in purely isometric actions are harder to transfer to dynamic 
movements. The muscle recruitment pattern is different between isometric, 
concentric, and eccentric actions. As such, improving the neurological compo­
nents involved in force production in one type of contraction doesn’t necessarily 
transfer well to other types. Some people are more efficient at doing it than 
others, though. That’s why I prefer the use of functional isometrics instead of 
pure overcoming isometrics.
The fact that you initiate the set with a concentric action makes the gains 
more transferable to a dynamic movement. It also increases the strength transfer 
range. What I like the most about functional isometrics is their effectiveness at 
strengthening a specific portion of a lift. They can also almost perfectly mimic 
the sticking point of a lift. Essentially, a sticking point occurs when the barbell 
speed slows down at a specific position in the range of motion. As lift speed and 
momentum decreases, you require a lot more effort to be able to push through, 
and if the momentum stops completely and speed drops to zero, you miss the 
lift. Functional isometrics stimulate and train the nervous system to be able to 
grind and produce an even greater neural drive when the bar reaches that sticking 
point and the momentum is killed.
From the previous discussion, you probably already understand the usefulness 
of functional isometrics to fix a weak point, and it is indeed the main use for this 
method in my system. Another is to fill the range of motion gap, if you are using 
the PRM method, for instance, and are not yet in the low ranges. In this case, I 
will often use functional isometrics in the low portion of the movement to make 
sure that it will be strong once you reach a full range of motion lift.
I should also mention that functional isometrics were originally designed as 
a stand-alone training system to be used as the only training method to gain 
strength over the full range of motion. This required the use of three positions 
per lift. It is not something I use, or if I do, it is extremely rare. I find it more 
effective to combine lifting and isometrics, using isometrics to strengthen a 
specific range only.
The original recommendations were to hold the bar against pins (trying to push 
or pull on them as hard as you could) for 8 to 12 seconds. If you could not keep 
the bar in contact with the pins for 8 seconds, you decreased the weight; if you 
could hold more than 12 seconds, you had to add weight. I generally agree with 
these recommendations because this method stays in the phosphagen energy 
system (which is what you want for intense neurological work), and it is long 
enough to train the nervous system to maintain a maximal neural drive to be 
able to grind through a sticking point.
I sometimes recommend 6 to 9 seconds, but really anything in the zone of 6 
to 12 seconds will work just fine. As I explained, I personally prefer to use only 
one position, either to train a neglected range or to target a weak point. If you 
are using functional isometrics to fix a weak point, the second (highest) set of 
pins should be just below or at the sticking point (and the lower set of pins about 
2 to 3 inches lower than your sticking point).

27
Science and Application of the Overload System
TRAINING PARAMETERS
FUNCTIONAL ISOMETRICS
•	Load: As much as you can use for the prescribed duration.
•	Reps: 1 rep of 6 to 12 seconds per set.
•	Sets: 3 to 4, but only the last set is a maximal effort.
•	Effort level: The last set is an all-out effort. In the first 2 to 3 sets, you work up to 
your top weight.
•	Frequency: 1 to 2 times per week for a lift (I prefer 2).
Isometronics
This is essentially an advanced form of functional isometrics. I tend to prefer 
functional isometrics to strengthen a weak point and isometronics to strengthen 
a specific range, but only once the lifter has experience with regular functional 
isometrics. In an isometronic set, you also use two sets of safety pins that are set 
up exactly the same way as for a functional isometric set. Just like with functional 
isometrics, you press and pull the bar from the lower set of pins up to the higher 
set of pins. The main difference is that with isometronics, you actually do several 
reps going from pin to pin, and you do not hold against the higher set of pins, 
except for the last repetition. This was a favorite of Anthony Ditillo, who used it 
extensively on pressing and deadlifting movements.
The best use for isometronics is to strengthen a range of motion that is neglected 
by other methods or to strengthen half or a third of a movement. While it will 
work to strengthen a sticking point, it is not as effective as functional isometrics 
for that specific purpose because the load used will be much smaller (it will 
normally be around 70 to 75 percent of your maximum).
I also find isometronics to be an effective tool to stimulate muscle growth. You 
do 4 to 8 partial repetitions (depending on the position in the range of motion and 
the length of the range you select). On the last rep, you push against the higher 
set of pins and try to keep the bar in contact for as long as possible. Normally 
you want to use a weight with which you can do your planned reps and be able 
to hold for about 6 seconds on the last rep. To finish the set, you attempt to do 
TRAINING PARAMETERS
ISOMETRONICS
•	Load: While it will vary depending on the position being trained, in our system it 
is more often used for the lower half of the range of motion, so 70 to 75 percent 
of the full-range max is a good starting point.
•	Reps: 4 to 8 plus a 6-second isometric and an attempted last rep.
•	Sets: I would only recommend one all-out work set. You can take a few sub­
maximal and gradually heavier sets to work up to the work set poundage.
•	Effort level: The last set is an all-out effort.
•	Frequency: 1 to 2 times per week for a lift.

28
The Overload System for Strength
one last repetition after the isometric. There is a good chance that you will not 
be able to get it, but you push and pull as hard as you can, trying to get it, for up 
to 6 seconds. As you can see, it’s a very demanding method!
Supramaximal Holds
This is technically a form of functional isometrics in that you will lift the bar 
over a short range of motion starting from safety pins (top quarter or top eighth 
of the range) and then hold the position for 9 to 12 seconds. It is a very short 
partial followed by a hold (yielding isometric). Note: There is also a powerlifting 
version where you don’t really lift the bar. If you do it on a squat, you unrack the 
bar and just walk out as if you were going to squat it, and in the bench, you get 
a handoff by your spotter. This allows you to practice your walkout and handoff 
skills, which are often neglected when training for a powerlifting competition. A 
lot of lifters actually miss their lift because of a poor walkout or handoff.
The main use of this approach is really just to get the body and mind used to 
being under a huge amount of load. Your focus should be to keep everything as 
tight as possible when holding the weight. Lifting heavy is, first and foremost, 
dependent on the capacity to avoid strength leaks, and this is done by keeping the 
whole body braced and under tension when under load. Like with all supramax­
imal work, there will obviously be a positive effect on GTOs inhibition over time.
The first time I used supramaximal holds was when I did Dr. Fred Hatfield’s 
80 days powerlifting program. As a sidenote, I’m proud to have been involved 
with Dr. Hatfield as a contributor of articles to his website some 23 years ago and 
also having published a website with his son Fred Hatfield II. Dr. Hatfield (Dr. 
Squat) was one of the first to apply science to training. He was a great teacher 
and also one heck of a lifter, with a 1,014-pound (460-kilogram) squat at 45 years 
of age! Chuck Sipes was also a big proponent of very heavy holds. He actually 
treated them like an exercise with multiple sets. However, Sipes was known for his 
inhumane training volume (he would do 3 full training sessions per day, training 
for up to 5 hours a day). Not everyone can take as much punishment as he did.
The main differences between the way Sipes and Hatfield used supramaximal 
holds was the intent and the load used. Sipes used it as a strength-building tool, 
going as heavy as he could for 6 to 9 seconds. That was sometimes 150 to 200 
pounds (68 to 91 kilograms) more than his full-range maximum! To do that, Sipes 
lifted the bar from pins over one-eighth of the range of motion, then he would 
hold. Hatfield used supramaximal holds simply to get the body used to handling 
a bit more weight than his maximum, to prepare for handling bigger weights in 
competition without being surprised by the load. He would use around 5 percent 
more than his current maximum and hold for 6 seconds. On squats, Hatfield 
would walk the bar out, and on the bench he would unrack it himself from the 
rack and bring it to the start position of the bench (he didn’t use the method on 
deadlifts). Basically, he also used the holds to train the walkout and get into the 
starting position of a competition bench.
The Sipes method was seen as an exercise in itself, and you would normally 
work up until you reached your top weight, whereas in the Hatfield method you 
would just do 1 to 2 holds after your work sets on squats or bench, so there was 
no reason for a gradual load ramp-up. I personally use the Sipes method more 
often but normally stick to the Hatfield method with competitive powerlifters. 
Just understand the difference and when each is the best tool to use.

29
Science and Application of the Overload System
TRAINING PARAMETERS
SUPRAMAXIMAL HOLDS
Sipes Method
•	Load: Working up to as heavy as you can.
•	Reps: 1, holding for 6 to 12 seconds.
•	Sets: You gradually work up to the heaviest weight you can hold for the pre­
scribed duration (only do a single set at the top weight).
•	Effort level: The last set is an all-out effort.
•	Frequency: 1 to 2 times per week for a lift.
Hatfield Method
•	Load: 5 to 10 percent more than your max on the full-range movement.
•	Reps: 1, holding for 6 to 12 seconds.
•	Sets: 1 to 2 after your work sets on the full-range lift.
•	Effort level: Focus on the quality of the walkout and the solidity of the position.
•	Frequency: When you train the target lift heavy, or heaviest, in your microcycle.
Clusters
Cluster training is my go-to method for rapidly increasing strength. It never 
fails. Clusters consist of rest periods between all the reps in your set. One set 
becomes a series of single reps with very short rest periods in between. While 
you can do clusters with any type of loading and rest intervals, the traditional 
cluster requires you to use a load of around 90 percent of your 1RM (which is 
normally your 3RM load) and to do 4 to 6 reps with that weight. You would do 
so by resting anywhere from 10 to 20 seconds between reps, depending on the 
exercise. A set could look like this:
Unrack the bar and do rep 1.
Rack the bar and rest 15 seconds.
Unrack the bar and do rep 2.
Rack the bar and rest 15 seconds.
Unrack the bar and do rep 3.
Rack the bar and rest 15 seconds.
Unrack the bar and do rep 4.
Rack the bar and rest 15 seconds.
Unrack the bar and do rep 5.
Rack the bar (end of set).
Several factors explain why clusters can influence strength gains:
	
• You recruit and fatigue the fast-twitch muscle fibers.
	
• You develop the capacity to make the fast-twitch fibers twitch as fast as 
possible. This is called a high firing rate.

30
The Overload System for Strength
	
• You build muscle mass.
	
• You desensitize the GTOs.
	
• You become more psychologically comfortable with the lift.
You achieve maximum fast-twitch fiber recruitment when the load on the bar 
is around 80 to 82 percent of your maximum at that moment. Sure, you can get 
there by using lighter weights and using fatigue to increase the relative load of the 
bar, but by using clusters with 88 to 90 percent of your max, you are recruiting 
all those fast-twitch fibers from the get-go. As a result, you won’t have any reps 
that simply drain energy.
It is not enough to recruit the fast-twitch fibers. The real strength gains will 
come from improving your capacity to use a high firing rate. This is a motor 
skill, and motor skill acquisition depends not only on the number of repetitions 
done with the skill emphasized but on the ratio of “good” and “bad” reps. The 
closer you are to your maximum strength, the higher the firing rate. Firing rate 
increases the most when you need even more force and you can no longer recruit 
more fibers. At 90 percent, you have a very high firing rate from the start. If you 
do 5 cluster reps with 90 percent, you’ll get 5 reps with a very high firing rate and 
no reps with a low firing rate. From a motor-learning standpoint, that’s golden. 
Now compare that to doing 10 reps with 70 percent. Because of fatigue, you will 
still end up with 5 to 6 reps where the fast-twitch fibers are maximally recruited 
and probably 3 reps with a high firing rate. But you also get 5 reps with a lower 
firing rate. From a motor-learning perspective, this is vastly inferior. It’s like 
trying to play golf and doing 30 great swings, 20 suboptimal ones, and 50 bad 
ones. Chances are you won’t improve rapidly.
Clusters are also very good at building muscle. Hypertrophy has a lot to do 
with the number of maximally effective reps. A maximally effective rep is one 
where you are recruiting as many fast-twitch fibers as possible. Since these 
have the greatest growth potential, it’s all about stimulating them as much as 
possible. As we just saw, when the load represents 80 percent of the max weight 
you can lift at that moment, you will be recruiting the max number of fast-
twitch fibers you can recruit. You can get there by using less weight because 
each rep fatigues you. As you are fatiguing, your strength will go down (by 2 
to 4 percent per rep), so the weight on the bar is relatively heavier compared 
to what you can lift.
Relative load refers to how much of your strength potential a load represents 
at that precise moment in time. If we start with 80 percent on the bar, then the 
relative load before we initiate the first rep is 70 percent, as we have not accu­
mulated any fatigue yet. But let’s say we have performed 3 reps with that load. 
If our max force output fatigues at 3 percent per repetition, then by the time 
we have performed 3 reps we have also accumulated 9 percent fatigue. This 
means that the relative load has now risen from 70 percent to 79 percent (see 
table 2.1).
As you can see, by rep 5, you would have maximally effective reps. That 
gives you six maximally effective reps in the set. Now let’s look at a cluster set 
in table 2.2. Because of the rest period you’ll have some recovery, so fatigue is 
a bit slower.
Clusters allow you to get as many growth-producing reps as you normally 
would in a higher-rep set, without having to waste energy doing reps that don’t 
contribute to growth.

31
Science and Application of the Overload System
Because all the reps in a cluster will be above 85 percent of what you can lift 
at that moment (it will range from 90 to 100 percent at the beginning of the 
rep), not only are you recruiting all your available fast-twitch fibers from the 
start, but each of those reps has a high firing rate. The better you are at having 
your fibers twitch fast, the higher the firing rate. This means you will be able to 
produce more force.
Developing the capacity to have the fibers fire at a high firing rate is a motor 
skill. It’s not only the number of reps with a high firing rate that counts, but the 
ratio of reps with a high firing rate to reps with a normal one. In a cluster of 6 
reps, all 6 reps have a high firing rate. That’s awesome for motor learning. In our 
70 percent set above, you’ll have 3 reps with a firing rate comparable to what 
it is during a cluster, 5 reps with a low firing rate, and 2 reps with a moderate 
firing rate. From a motor-learning standpoint, this is vastly inferior to clusters 
because of the inferior ratio.
What if we compare a set of 5 cluster reps and a regular set of 5 reps? In the 
regular set, you also have no wasted repetitions and do all the reps with a pretty 
high firing rate. This is true; sets of 5 repetitions are awesome for strength and 
size, but clusters are just a little bit better because of the higher average load. In 
a cluster, you use around 90 percent of your max, and with regular sets of 5 reps, 
between 80 and 85 percent. While fatigue evens out the relative load at the end 
TABLE 2.1  Relative Load and Fatigue: Straight Set
Rep
Weight on bar
Fatigue level
Relative weight
1
70%
0%
70%
2
70%
3%
73%
3
70%
6%
76%
4
70%
9%
79%
5
70%
12%
82%
6
70%
15%
85%
7
70%
18%
88%
8
70%
21%
91%
9
70%
24%
94%
10
70%
27%
97%
TABLE 2.2  Relative Load and Fatigue: Cluster Set
Rep
Weight on bar
Fatigue level
Relative weight
1
90%
0%
90%
2
90%
1.5%
91.5%
3
90%
3%
93%
4
90%
4.5%
94.5%
5
90%
6%
96%
6
90%
7.5%
97.5%

32
The Overload System for Strength
of the set, the heavier weight still has a greater mechanical load than the lighter 
one, which will cause more muscle damage. In a cluster with 90 percent versus 
a set of 5 reps at 82 percent, you still have 3 more reps with a very high firing 
rate (the closer you are to a 100 percent effort, the higher the firing rate). With 
82 percent, it will take you 2 to 3 reps to reach a relative load of 90 percent like 
you have in the cluster.
Finally, during a cluster set, peak power, force, and velocity are better main­
tained from rep to rep, which makes for more quality reps and better motor 
learning. For all these reasons, clusters are my favorite strength-building method. 
This method builds as much muscle mass as regular sets of 8 to 12 repetitions 
because of the number of maximally effective reps. Clusters train the nervous 
system as well as the max effort method, maybe even better because of the higher 
number of reps.
The most popular cluster recommendations, which were popularized by 
Charles Poliquin, are actually not optimal for most people. Strong individu­
als or people with a high ratio of fast-twitch fibers will have trouble with the 
parameters, especially the 15 to 20 seconds between reps recommended by 
Poliquin. The inability to recover between reps and sets means it will be difficult 
to be able to use more weight than you would for a normal set of that number 
of reps.
That’s why I prefer to use one of the original versions, developed by interna­
tional weightlifting coach Carl Miller. The Miller accumulation cluster uses 87.5 
to 92 percent of your maximum for a target of 4 to 6 repetitions, but instead of 
the 15 to 20 seconds of rest recommended by Poliquin, it uses 30 to 45 seconds 
between repetitions. The Miller intensification cluster uses up to 92.5 to 97.5 
percent and shoots for 2 to 3 repetitions per set, with 40 to 60 seconds of rest 
between reps. I personally recommend doing 2 to 3 sets of clusters, with the last 
one being an all-out effort (getting as many reps as possible, even if that means 
going above the prescribed number); the second set is hard, but you should still 
dominate each rep, and the first work set is about an 8 on a 10-point rating of 
perceived exertion (RPE) scale. In this system, a lot of the work sets for the full-
range main lifts are done either as clusters, waves, or pyramids.
Accentuated Eccentrics
Most competitive athletes are weaker eccentrically in comparison to their con­
centric strength. This is because, in the training of athletes, the eccentric phase 
of the movement is rarely focused on (same for isometric actions) and the var­
ious types of muscle action have different recruitment patterns. As such, it is 
possible to greatly increase concentric strength while only gaining a moderate 
improvement in eccentric strength.
Ideally, we would want maximum eccentric strength (the maximum amount 
of weight you can lower under control and with solid technique) that is at least 
40 percent higher than your maximum concentric strength. For example, an 
athlete who can squat 400 pounds (181 pounds) should be able to lower 560 
pounds (254 kilograms) under control (controlling the weight all the way to the 
low position) either by using weight releasers or doing pure eccentrics lowered 
to the safety pins of a power rack.
An athlete who can bench press 315 pounds (143 kilograms) should be able 
to lower 440 pounds (200 kilograms) to their chest, controlling it the whole way. 

33
Science and Application of the Overload System
Few athletes have that level of eccentric strength. Yet some elite strength ath­
letes who have used eccentric training methods—shot-putter Werner Gunthor, 
for example—have reached an eccentric-to-concentric ratio as high as 2:1 (200 
percent)! Gunthor, who had a body weight of 290 pounds (132 kilograms) on a 
6 ft 7 in. frame, looked like a hurdler of 175 pounds (79 kilograms) when doing 
plyometric drills. (Note: Gunthor’s coach Jean-Pierre Egger has been my greatest 
influence on how I work with athletes.)
In reality, the higher your eccentric-to-concentric ratio is, the greater your 
potential to further increase strength. I like to see eccentric strength as strength 
reserve. If you can lower 560 pounds (254 kilograms) under control, it means that 
your muscles are physically capable of producing enough force for the muscles 
to handle that weight.
It also means that your GTOs, the protective mechanisms that prevent you from 
using all your muscle strength potential, are permissive enough to allow your 
body to lift 560 pounds (254 pounds). I have already spoken about the importance 
of GTOs when it comes to maximal strength development, so I won’t bore you 
by going into detail on this again. But this is one of the main reasons why most 
elite weightlifters aren’t more muscular than lower-class lifters.
Other benefits of training eccentrically are that the eccentric muscle action 
tends to stimulate muscle growth mostly in the distal portions of your muscles; 
the parts of the muscles closer to the tendons will receive more growth stimu­
lus and the tendons themselves will also be strengthened more. This has three 
positive effects:
	
• It reduces the occurrence of musculoskeletal injuries. In fact, the higher 
your eccentric-to-concentric strength ratio is, the less likely you are to tear 
a muscle.
	
• By thickening the tendons, you can store more elastic energy during explosive 
actions; that elastic, or potential, energy can be used in subsequent concen­
tric action to produce more force (making you stronger and more powerful).
	
• Thicker tendons allow you to produce more force without inhibition.
It is my belief and experience that emphasizing the eccentric is the nuclear 
weapon of strength gains and performance improvement. It leads to very rapid 
changes in force production, and as such, it should be included in the training 
of every athlete.
One of the reasons that emphasizing the eccentric is so effective is that the 
fast-twitch fibers are preferentially recruited during an eccentric action (especially 
an eccentric overload). During an intense eccentric action, fewer muscle fibers 
are recruited, even though you are stronger, but it is mostly fast-twitch fibers 
that are recruited. As such, these fibers are under a greater load. The amount of 
force required to control the weight is divided over fewer total fibers; therefore, 
each recruited fiber has to produce more force. This represents a very strong 
stimulus for both growth and strength improvement.
When it comes to concentric strength (e.g., regular lifting strength), lifting 
heavier weights is more effective than lifting light loads. The same applies to 
eccentric training. Lowering maximal loads under control is more effective at 
building strength than lowering moderate loads more slowly or for more reps. 
However, maximal lowering, just like maximal lifting, requires preparation work; 
you cannot simply jump right into it. If your muscles, tendons, and nervous system 

34
The Overload System for Strength
or your technical efficiency is not up to par, you risk injuries and you won’t be 
able to fully benefit from the heavy methods.
Even though the maximal (eccentrics with 90 to 100 percent of your maximum 
concentric strength) and supramaximal (eccentrics with 105 to 140 percent of 
your max concentric strength) are the most effective for athletes who require rapid 
and drastic increases in strength, the lighter methods using slow eccentrics for 
more reps are required to prepare the body for the rigors of the heavy methods. 
In this chapter, I will focus on the eccentric overloads. Slow eccentrics, which 
are used in the program too, are simply regular exercises performed with a slow 
eccentric or lowering phase (5 to 6 seconds normally).
For these methods, the average intensity is the average of the eccentric and 
concentric load used. For example, if you use 100 percent of your concentric 
maximum on the eccentric and 70 percent on the concentric, the average inten­
sity would be 85 percent. I see no reason to load more than 120 percent of your 
concentric 1RM on the eccentric. The risks outweigh the potential benefit. If you 
developed great eccentric strength and if 2 reps with 120 percent on the eccen­
tric, lowering the bar in 3 seconds, is no longer challenging, then slow down 
the eccentric to 4 to 5 seconds per rep. If 2 reps with 120 percent done in 4 to 5 
seconds becomes too easy, then increase the reps to 3 or 4.
Near-Maximal Eccentrics (Average Intensity 80 to 85 Percent)
With this method, we use either weight releasers or a power rack. We want to 
use 90 percent of your concentric maximum during the eccentric phase and 70 
percent on the concentric phase. If you are using weight releasers, it is pretty 
straightforward: Put 70 percent on the bar and an extra 10 percent per releaser. 
If you are using the power rack, you lower the bar to the safety pins and your 
partners remove some weight. To make it simple, load the bar with 70 percent, 
put collars on, then add 10 percent per side outside the collars. In both cases, 
we need to use a cluster approach (resting 15 to 20 seconds between reps to 
allow the partners to either put the weight or releasers back on). Rack the bar 
between reps. Perform 4 to 6 reps per set (RPE of 8 to 8.5). The eccentric phase 
is performed under control (3 to 4 seconds) for the whole range of motion. You 
lift with as much speed as you can.
Maximal Eccentrics (Average Intensity 85 to 90 Percent)
This is exactly like the preceding method in application, only the loading differs. 
You use an eccentric load of 100 percent of your maximum concentric strength 
(your 1RM on a lift) and 75 to 80 percent on the concentric. If you are using 
releasers, you load the bar with 75 to 80 percent and add an extra 10 to 12.5 
percent per releaser. If you are doing the set in a power rack, you load 75 to 80 
percent, put collars on, and add an extra 10 to 12.5 percent per side outside the 
collars. The eccentric is done under control (3 to 4 seconds) for the whole range 
of motion, and you perform 3 to 4 reps per set.
Supramaximal Eccentrics (Average Intensity 90 to 95 Percent)
Again, this is the same application as the previous two methods, only the loading 
is now 105 to 110 percent on the eccentric and 75 to 80 percent on the concentric. 
(There is no need to go heavier than 80 percent on the concentric for any eccen­
tric method since that is not what we are trying to emphasize.) The eccentric is 
done a bit faster (2 to 3 seconds) compared to the other methods, but it is still 
under control all the way, and 1 to 2 reps are done per set.

35
Science and Application of the Overload System
Advanced Supramaximal Eccentrics (Average Intensity 95 to 100 
Percent)
Same approach still, but now the eccentric load is 115 to 120 percent (the con­
centric stays at 75 to 80 percent). This is obviously a very advanced approach 
and should only be used when the athlete has already built significant eccentric 
strength. The eccentric duration is 2 to 3 seconds under control the whole way, 
and 1 to 2 reps are done.
TRAINING PARAMETERS
ACCENTUATED ECCENTRICS
Obviously, this varies depending on the method that you use. The more intense 
methods will obviously require the use of less overall volume. Since all of these 
methods use a cluster approach, I program them in essentially the same man­
ner that I would clusters. I use the average intensity (i.e., the average of eccen­
tric load and concentric) as the loading parameter. The only difference is that I 
lower the volume a little to take into account the extra neurological stress of the 
heavier eccentric (and also the instability added by the weight releasers if you 
are using them). If you go back to the earlier section on clusters, you can use the 
Miller cluster methods as a good guide.
Stato-Dynamic Method (Paused Lifting)
Stato-dynamic refers to combining static and dynamic work within a set. In 
plain terms, it means including pauses somewhere in your reps or set. There are 
multiple possible applications of the stato-dynamic method.
Pre-Fatigue Stato-Dynamic
Here you start your set with an isometric hold in a key position of the lift. It is 
normally at the position of highest tension. On movements like a bench press, 
military press, squat, and deadlift, it is usually performed at the mid-range point 
of the lift; in exercises like rows and pull-ups, the peak contraction position is 
preferred. This is held for 10 to 30 seconds (depending on the goal), and the 
normal reps are immediately done after the hold. This method is used mostly 
to improve lifting technique by better programming a key position in the lift 
or to improve mind-muscle connection. It uses the lightest weights of all the 
stato-dynamic methods (60 to 70 percent of maximum). This method is useful 
for preparing the body to lift heavy weights safely rather than to directly build 
strength as such, and 4 to 8 reps can be done after the hold.
Intra-Rep Stato-Dynamic
In this version, you include 1 to 3 holds on each repetition. The duration of each 
hold depends on the number of holds:
	
• 1 hold per rep = 4 to 6 seconds
	
• 2 holds per rep = 3 to 4 seconds
	
• 3 holds per rep = 2 to 3 seconds

36
The Overload System for Strength
The holds can be performed during the concentric or eccentric phase as follows:
	
• Holds during the concentric: This method is best used with only one hold just 
above or below the weak point of the lift to strengthen it by forcing your 
muscles to do the job without relying on momentum. You must overcome 
inertia, thus improving your capacity to contract your muscles at that part 
of the range of motion.
	
• Holds during the eccentric: This method is best used with 2 to 3 holds 
throughout the range of motion to improve your capacity to maintain 
posture and tension throughout. It is effective for lifters who lose either 
posture/positioning or tension when lifting heavy.
The number of reps will vary depending on why you are using the method:
	
• For strength: 2 to 5 reps
	
• For hypertrophy: 4 to 8 reps
Post-Fatigue Stato-Dynamic
Here you perform your regular set, and at the end of your set, you hold a certain 
position for as long as possible. This is effective to both increase hypertrophy 
stimulation and to strengthen a key position in the lift. I like to use either the 
position of highest tension or the stretched position (when it’s doable and there is 
still tension in that position). The former will be better for strength development; 
the latter is a bit more effective for hypertrophy. The biggest benefit, though, is 
improving active mobility and preventing injury (see the upcoming section on 
loaded stretching).
Stato-dynamic methods can be used on the main lift or on the main assistance 
exercise. They are most effective in lifters who have problems maintaining tension 
and posture throughout a lift or someone who has an inconsistent lifting tech­
nique. A stato-dynamic method can also be a good way for strong lifters to give 
their body a break because it forces them to use less weight on the bar compared 
to their regular lifts while still providing a strong stimulation.
Very High Repetitions
In the book Science of Sport Training, Thomas Kurz wrote about the benefits of 
very high repetitions per set (20 to 30 or even up to 50+) on developing the ten­
dons. I personally first learned about very high repetitions from Louie Simmons 
and Westside Barbell. I then learned (and this detail attaches this method to the 
underlying theme of the book) that Eugene Sandow used the approach quite a 
bit in the 1800s.
As we saw earlier, having thick and resilient tendons is a prerequisite for devel­
oping superstrength. It is also very important to minimize the risk of injury from 
constant heavy lifting. While heavy lifting and supramaximal work are effective 
at downregulating the tendons’ protective mechanisms, it’s lighter work with very 
high reps that is best suited to thickening the tendons. This is probably because 
tendons receive less blood flow than muscles and require a lot more mechanical 
work to be stimulated to develop. High reps are used for remedial exercises. 
These are mostly isolation movements focusing on the development of one main 
muscle working around one joint.

37
Science and Application of the Overload System
To get the best results possible both for the development of the muscles and 
tendons, we also want to use exercises where the muscle can be worked over the 
fullest range of motion possible while still being under tension in that stretched 
position. Stretching the tendons and muscles is a big key to development through 
mechanical stress.
Just because your main goal might be to get brutally strong doesn’t mean 
that everything you do should be done heavy for low reps! In this system, we 
already have a lot of heavy work. And not just heavy, supramaximal heavy! 
The nervous system and muscles already receive all they need (and more) to 
develop superstrength with the main lift work, the partials, holds, and func­
tional isometrics. Not to mention that the main assistance work is done with 
fairly low reps and heavy weight too (typically 5 to 8 reps per set). There is 
no sense and very limited benefit to continuing to pound the body with heavy 
loads on the remedial exercises. These remedial exercises are here to develop 
specific muscles and your tendons, and higher reps with a concentrated effort 
are better for that purpose.
You may also think that you can’t build muscle with 20 to 30 reps per set, but 
you can.
Using very high reps is straightforward and doesn’t require much explana­
tion. You want a continuous effort (so no rest, myo-reps, or muscle-rounds) to 
achieve the target number. One thing we can do, however, is finish a set with 
partial repetitions (in the portion where the muscle is lengthened the most) if 
you can’t get to the prescribed number because of muscle fatigue or excessive 
burning (hydrogen ions and lactate accumulation). If these partials are done 
under control (not yanked) and in the portion when the muscle and tendons are 
lengthened, it will work for our purpose.
The repetition style is important, too. Think of contracting then stretching 
the muscle instead of lifting the weight. And focus on maintaining a good 
mind-muscle connection and quality muscle tension throughout the whole 
range of motion.
TRAINING PARAMETERS
VERY HIGH REPETITIONS
•	Load: Around 50 percent of your 1RM.
•	Reps: 20 to 30, using partial repetitions if necessary.
•	Sets: 3, typically.
•	Effort level: You want to reach failure but without resorting to compensation or 
momentum to get the reps in.
•	Frequency: 1 exercise usually, for one or two of the main muscle groups in­
volved in the pattern of the day.
Loaded Stretching
I hate stretching . . . hate it! It has always felt like a total waste of gym time and 
is as boring as hell, yet neglecting it can lead to big problems down the road. 
This is why I love loaded stretching: It doesn’t feel like a waste of time because 

38
The Overload System for Strength
I’m simultaneously building muscle and getting an amazing pump from it. Want 
to learn about this amazing method that will help you add new muscle to your 
body while also making you bulletproof? Then read on!
First, a little history. The concept of stretching a muscle while simultaneously 
contracting it to build muscle is nothing new. Chuck Sipes was hanging from 
a chin-up bar with a weight attached to his waist as his primary lat builder 
back in the early 1960s. John Parrillo was intensely pushing fascial stretches to 
build muscle as early as the 1980s. He used 28 different loaded stretches to help 
build muscle. Dante Trudel, inventor of the popular DC training bodybuilding 
method, became an early proponent of loaded stretching for bodybuilding and 
was the first to popularize the use of heavy weights to load stretches. Success­
ful bodybuilding experts like John Meadows and Dr. Scott Stevenson are also 
big proponents of loaded stretching for maximum growth. In the performance 
world, Jay Schroedder became a huge advocate of long-lasting loaded stretches 
not only to build muscle but also to work on proper muscle recruitment pat­
terns. At about the same time, Tony Schwartz wrote a chapter on this type 
of training in my book Theory and Application of Modern Strength and Power 
Methods. All that being said, we must not forget that this type of training actu­
ally originates from the training of gymnasts and likely dates back more than 
60 years.
The concept is simple: Put a muscle (or several muscles) in a stretched position 
while also contracting it hard. Basically, you are stretching a tensed muscle. This 
type of training can increase size, strength, and performance and help prevent 
injuries. Plus, it gives very rapid results!
Loaded stretching works with any exercise in which the target muscle reaches 
an elongated position at the end of the eccentric portion: flies, dips, push-ups, 
hands-on blocks, split squats (feet on blocks), overhead dumbbell triceps exten­
sions, overhead squats, Romanian deadlifts, chin-ups, and so on. The concept 
is simple: Slowly go down to the end of the eccentric portion of the movement 
(where the target muscle is stretched) and try to hold that position as long as 
tolerable. As you fatigue, your range of motion will increase because you cannot 
hold the position anymore (owing to muscle fiber fatigue), but you still try to 
maintain the position. It then becomes a really slow eccentric. You stop the set 
when the burn is unbearable.
Loaded stretching is so effective because it stimulates several different path­
ways to elicit a positive response through many mechanisms. Here, I will address 
each of these pathways and how they help us reach our goal of being as strong 
and jacked as possible.
Loaded Stretching and Hypertrophy
Loaded, or tensed, stretching is effective at stimulating muscle growth. Here are 
the reasons why it works.
mTor Activation
First, you need to understand what mTor is (a protein/enzyme) and what it does 
(plays a key role in regulating cellular proliferation). It works basically like a 
switch, whereas protein synthesis (muscle building) is the light. To be even more 
precise, mTor is like a light switch with intensity settings; the more you turn it on, 
the more light is being produced. Same thing with protein synthesis; the more 
you turn on mTor, the more muscle you will build.

39
Science and Application of the Overload System
Loaded stretching significantly activates mTor because it combines the two 
types of contractions that have the greatest impact on mTor: accentuated eccen­
trics and placing the muscle under load in the stretched position. However, to 
make these types of muscle actions effective at activating mTor, you need to use 
a significant external load. A general guideline is that if you can hold a position 
for longer than a minute, the load is insufficient
Occlusion Effect
When a muscle is contracting hard, blood flow to that muscle is restricted. The 
same thing happens when a muscle is stretched. So loaded stretching, which 
combines both conditions, significantly restricts blood flow to the muscle. This 
has two effects: First, it prevents the disposal of metabolites (e.g., lactate and 
hydrogen ions), and second, it deprives the muscle of oxygen. Both of these 
conditions lead to the release of local growth factors that can help with hyper­
trophy—specifically, IGF-1 and its splice variant MGF, which are the most ana­
bolic hormones in the body involved in cellular growth and muscle cell growth, 
respectively.
Reactive Hyperemia
When the body senses that the working muscles lack oxygen and can’t get rid of 
the accumulating metabolites (because blood to the muscles is restricted), it will 
try to divert more blood flow to the working muscles to increase cardiac output. 
If you maintain the stretch and contraction, blood flow continues to be restricted. 
When you finally release the muscle tension, there is a hyper-compensation in 
terms of the amount of blood that flows to the muscles. If that blood is loaded 
with nutrients (pre-workout nutrition), then you can shuttle more nutrients to 
that muscle, which can also contribute to protein synthesis. Furthermore, when 
loaded stretching is performed at the end of the workout, you can get more 
growth out of the heavier work you performed before the stretch, and you will 
also recover faster from your session.
Fiber Recruitment and Fatigue
If you use the proper load, you will reach full muscle fiber recruitment very early 
in the set, and this is amplified by the lack of oxygen (due to blood flow restric­
tion). The body will naturally turn to the glycolytic fast-twitch fibers when blood 
flow is restricted to a muscle, since these fibers do not require as much oxygen 
to do the job. As such, you will recruit the growth-prone fast-twitch fibers early 
in the set, and you will also be able to fatigue them to a significant degree. Even 
though the fatigue was not imposed by a dynamic exercise, it still represents a 
mechanical stimulus for growth.
Note that you reach this level of fatigue while using up a lot less glycogen, 
which means a lower cortisol response than with regular training or a less sig­
nificant increase in cortisol production over what you previously released during 
the workout.
IGF-1 Receptor Sensitivity
Loaded stretching also has a powerful impact on the sensitivity and responsiveness 
of the IGF-1 receptors. This basically means that not only does it increase IGF-1 
release, but it also makes your receptors more sensitive to it. It is a biochemical 
hypertrophy bomb!

40
The Overload System for Strength
TRAINING PARAMETERS
LOADED STRETCHING FOR HYPERTROPHY
•	Timing: Either at the end of the workout for the muscles that were trained or 
after you are done training a muscle.
•	Duration: 45 to 60 seconds per set. If you can hold for longer than that, the 
load is insufficient for maximum growth.
•	Exercise selection: Isolation for the targeted muscle or muscles.
•	Sets: For maximum hypertrophy, we are shooting for a total time under loaded 
stretch of 2 to 3 minutes for a muscle. This means anywhere between 2 and 4 
sets of 45 to 60 seconds.
•	Rest period: The goal is incomplete recovery between sets. We want to still have 
some residual fatigue as well as some metabolites still present in the muscle 
when we initiate the next set. I recommend starting with a work-to-rest ratio of 
2:1. So, if your set lasted 60 seconds, rest for 30 seconds before the next one.
•	Advanced variation: Those with experience performing loaded stretching can 
use a more advanced version done at the end of a lifting set. Here, you perform 
a lifting set for the target muscle (this needs to be a lift where the target is placed 
in a stretched position under load), and then at the end of the set, you perform 
a loaded stretch for max time. It is more difficult to do load stretching this way 
because you are in a greater state of fatigue (both from a muscular and postur­
al standpoint), but this is also what can make training this method so effective.
Loaded Stretching and Performance
This type of training is not only effective at building muscle, but it is also a great 
tool to make you a better athlete, either by improving eccentric and isometric 
strength or by improving muscle recruitment.
More Efficient Changes of Direction
In sports, the eccentric and isometric strength actions are very important yet 
undertrained. If you lack eccentric strength, your absorption phase (when chang­
ing direction or sprinting) is longer, and a lot of the potential energy dissipates 
(strength leaks). This makes the switch from eccentric to concentric a lot slower, 
and you lose a significant amount of power. If your isometric strength is lacking, 
there is a delay between the end of the absorption phase and the switch to the 
concentric phase, once again making the switch slower and less efficient.
Loaded stretching increases rigidity during the eccentric and isometric actions; 
in addition, it teaches the body not to rely exclusively on the stretch reflex to 
perform a change of direction. This makes the movement faster and more effi­
cient. Even though it is an isometric action (the slowest of all muscle actions), 
it actually has a significant impact on explosiveness.
Fast-Twitch Fibers Recruitment
Loaded stretching increases your capacity to recruit fast-twitch fibers. I know it 
sounds weird since we are talking about exercises devoid of movement (so much 
less speed), but it actually greatly helps explosive movements! When the body 
is deprived of oxygen (put in a hypoxic state), it tends to rely on the fast-twitch 
fibers. So, using loaded isometrics, which are hypoxic in nature, forces an ear­

41
Science and Application of the Overload System
lier recruitment of the fast-twitch fibers and keeps them turned on for longer. It 
basically becomes a motor-learning session for fast-twitch activation and work.
Muscle Recruitment Programming
Another element of loaded stretching (or any other long-duration isometrics) is 
that you can focus on a specific muscle recruitment pattern. For example, you 
can hold the bottom position of a DB press by creating a co-contraction of the 
upper back and pressing muscles; the pressing muscles will be turned on auto­
matically by the load, but you can focus on firing the upper back. Since there is 
no movement to coordinate, it is much easier to focus on the muscle contraction, 
and because it will be maintained for a long time, the programming is fairly rapid.
TRAINING PARAMETERS
LOADED STRETCHING FOR PERFORMANCE
•	Timing: At the end of the workout to avoid fatigue that could affect dynamic 
performance.
•	Duration: 30 to 45 seconds per set if the focus is on eccentric or isometric 
strength; 75 to 90 seconds for motor programming.
•	Exercise selection: Multijoint exercises to focus on position and proper recruit­
ment pattern.
•	Sets: A total of 90 to 120 seconds for strength and 3 to 4 minutes for motor pro­
gramming. So, 2 to 4 sets.
•	Rest: Complete rest if strength is the goal, so a 1:1.5 or 1:2 work-to-rest ratio. For 
motor programming, a 1:1 ratio.
•	Advanced variation: Another advanced method that those with experience 
with loaded stretching could use is pairing a loaded stretching mini-set with 
explosive movements. For example, iso-dynamic contrast: 15 second loaded 
stretch/1 explosive movement/15 second loaded stretch/1 explosive move­
ment/15 second loaded strength/1 explosive movement. This is a very ad­
vanced method that requires the athlete to have excellent positional strength 
and movement quality because performing explosive movements in a fa­
tigued state can be hazardous otherwise.
Loaded Stretching and Injury Prevention
Of course, as a stretching method, this training does work great to improve 
mobility. More importantly, it improves mobility while the muscles are contracted, 
which is what you need for most sports. This is important both for performance 
improvement and for injury prevention. Here’s why.
Strengthening the Muscles in Their Elongated State
The body will always look for the most economical way to do things. As such, 
it has learned to use the stretch reflex whenever a muscle has to produce force 
from an elongated state. This is good, and we need that protective mechanism. 
However, it also makes the muscles more prone to injuries because over time, the 
nervous system becomes less efficient at producing actual contractile force in a 
stretched position. Let’s say you are playing a sport and suddenly and forcefully 

42
The Overload System for Strength
stretch a muscle, but your muscle is weak in the stretched position. The reflex 
alone will not hold you up, and you are at greater risk of tearing that muscle. If 
you focus on keeping the target muscle tensed, loaded stretching programs your 
nervous system to become efficient at contracting a muscle when it is elongated. 
This has a positive effect on both performance and injury prevention.
Making Tendons Thicker and Stronger
Loaded stretching will increase tendon thickness and resiliency as well as create 
distal muscle hypertrophy, both of which make the muscle and tendons less likely to 
tear. From a performance standpoint, thicker tendons allow you to store more elas­
tic energy, and stronger tendons allow you to make better use of that stored elastic 
energy during subsequent concentric actions. So, thickening the tendons will not 
only make you less prone to serious injuries but also stronger and more explosive.
Increasing Dynamic Mobility
In sports, active (when the stretched muscle is tensed and contracted) and 
dynamic (when you are moving) mobility are key, and they are not well correlated 
with passive stretching. Loaded stretching increases elasticity of the muscles 
while they are being maximally contracted, which will translate to an increase 
in active and dynamic mobility. This increased mobility will then transfer to 
better technical execution of many skills, as well as an important reduction in 
the risk of injuries. It also leads to a very rapid increase in range of motion in 
many movement patterns.
TRAINING PARAMETERS
LOADED STRETCHING FOR INJURY PREVENTION
•	Timing: Can be done at the beginning of a session to improve mobility on a 
lift when you have limitations. Otherwise, it is best done in its own session or, if 
time is an issue, at the end of a session.
•	Duration: Shoot for a total of 3 minutes under load and get there in as little total 
time as possible. So, start with a load you can hold for about 90 seconds at first.
•	Exercise selection: Multijoint exercises or isolation exercises, depending on 
what needs to be fixed.
•	Sets: Get to 3 total minutes in as little total time as possible (so short rest intervals).
•	Rest: See above; short rest intervals.
•	Advanced variation: For advanced loaded stretching for injury prevention, 
perform contrast sets where you do loaded stretch (75 to 90 seconds) with a 
set of lifting. For example, split squat EQI (loaded stretched), followed by back 
squat, push-up EQI, followed by bench press. You would rest 2 to 3 minutes 
between each exercise and perform 3 sets. This is an advanced method be­
cause the initial loaded stretch will help you to use a larger range of motion 
on the following exercise and place the target muscle under a greater degree 
of stretch while under load. This loading in an even more stretched position 
is fantastic for injury prevention (e.g., to prevent tears), but if done too early it 
can actually increase injury risk. The target tissues need to be prepared appro­
priately, and the athlete needs to have good enough movement control and 
technique to load the joint and muscle optimally in the stretched position.

43
Science and Application of the Overload System
So there we have it, all the supercool methods of the overload system laid out 
in all their glory. Hopefully, you now have a better understanding of not only 
why these methods have been chosen for this system but also how they are going 
to improve your performance. In chapter 3, we are going to start looking into 
the main exercises that form the foundation of the overload system before we 
then address each of them individually in depth from a technique and execution 
standpoint.

This page intentionally left blank

45
The Overload System 
Foundational Exercises
Exercise selection is possibly the most important factor when it comes to design­
ing an effective training program. Lifters have gotten results using all forms of 
set and reps, training splits, or loading schemes, but when it comes to building 
strength, the big barbell lifts are basically a constant among those who have built 
impressive levels of strength (this is especially true in the pre-steroid era). That’s 
why it is so important that we cover these exercises in detail. Performing them 
correctly is going to be imperative to get the desired results from the overload 
system. Over the next few chapters, we will cover why we have chosen to focus 
on these specific exercises and cover each of them in detail to ensure that you 
are able to perform them effectively.
The Overload System and Old-School 
Progression Models
All the legendary lifters mentioned so far in this book built their physique and 
strength without the use of exercise machines or even pulley stations. They relied 
on a barbell, a power rack, a bench, and dumbbells. The core of their programs 
CHAPTER 
3

46
The Overload System for Strength
was big, multijoint movements: the deadlift, overhead press, bench press (starting 
in the 1950s), and squats. A lot of them also did explosive movements like the 
power clean or high pull (even the power snatch) since before the 1960s, weight­
lifting (as in Olympic lifting) was a strong influence on the training of most lifters.
Some lifters did include more isolated movements, especially for arms, but they 
were just the icing on the cake. Getting stronger on these big basic lifts was the 
main training principle they abided by. Even beginners were often advised to do 
sets of 5 to 10 reps; none of that 12 to 20 reps to get started safely that we often 
see today (on machines, most of the time).
A popular system for beginners in the 1930s was the Milo course: Lifters would 
start a movement doing 5 reps per set for their first workout, then add 1 rep per 
workout with the same weight (three whole-body workouts per week) until they 
reached 10 reps per set. Then they would increase the weight, drop back down 
to 5 reps per set, and build back up. This was the original “double progression 
model.”
Unsurprisingly, the overload system relies on the same approach. It is the 
approach that helped both of us (Christian and Tom) to get strong and less 
puny in the first place. Christian started out training for football and early on 
was mentored by a strength coach who had him do workouts that consisted of 
back squats, deadlifts, bench presses, military presses, power cleans, and barbell 
rows. The plan typically used three phases. In phase 1, 3 to 4 sets of 8 to 10 reps 
were performed (5 for power cleans). In phase 2, we switched to 3 to 4 sets of 5 
reps (3 on power cleans); and in phase 3, we would use complex training, which 
consisted of combining a strength and a power movement in a compound set, 
as in this example:
Jump squats with 20 percent of the max squat × 5; 2 minutes rest; back squat × 3
Power clean × 3; 2 minutes of rest; deadlift × 3
Medicine ball throw overhead × 5; 2 minutes of rest; push press × 3
Medicine ball slam × 5; 2 minutes of rest; barbell row × 5
There were some variations, but that’s what Christian did for the last four 
years that he was playing football. Immediately afterward, Christian moved on 
to Olympic lifting, which, as you can imagine, included even more work on the 
big basics. That went on for six years. Then it was a mix of powerlifting-type and 
bodybuilding training, but his size and strength were mostly built during those 
first 10 years of basic work.
As for Tom, he got in to lifting as a 114-pound (52-kilogram) 16-year-old 
(which at 5 ft 10 in. is what we class as excessively puny) with a background 
in long-distance running (forgive him for the sins of his previous life). His first 
three or four years of training revolved primarily around typical “bro”-style 
training—chest, back, arms, shoulders, and legs—with lots of exercise variation, 
high volume, and over time, lots of intensifying techniques (drop sets, forced 
reps, etc.). There was no real progressive overload or a huge amount of time 
spent under a heavy barbell. It should be no surprise, then, that these years 
didn’t bring tremendous progress in terms of getting jacked or strong. To stay 
motivated, Tom decided to channel his lifting toward some type of competitive 
endeavor. Unhappy with the subjectivity of bodybuilding (and the necessity of 
wearing a thong), he decided to work toward competing in powerlifting. Need­
less to say, his training became far more streamlined around the “big three” and 

47
The Overload System Foundational Exercises
Christian’s Best Lifts
My own training has always been slanted toward strength, except for brief 
bodybuilding periods thrown in there every year. While I never was a world-class 
strength athlete, I reached a decent level. Here are some of my best lifts; pretty 
much all were done at a body weight of around 205 to 215 pounds (93 to 97.5 
kilograms) at 5 ft 9 in.
Back squat: 550 pounds (250 kilograms) × 5; 600 pounds (272 kilograms) × 1
Front squat: 485 pounds (220 kilograms) × 1
Frankenstein squat from pins: 405 pounds (184 kilograms) × 1
Zercher squat: 500 pounds (227 kilograms) × 1
Snatch: 315 pounds (143 kilograms, but only did 285 pounds [130 kilograms] in 
competition)
Power snatch: 264 pounds (120 kilograms) × 5 (blocks); 280 pounds (127 kilo­
grams) × 1
Clean and jerk: 374 pounds (170 kilograms) × 1 (only did 352 pounds [160 kilo­
grams] in competition)
Power clean: 330 pounds (150 kilograms) × 5 (hang); 341 pounds (155 kilo­
grams) × 1
One-arm power snatch (with bar): 185 pounds (84 kilograms) × 1
Bench press: 415 pounds x 5 (188 kilograms); 425 pounds (193 kilograms) × 3; 
445 pounds (202 kilograms) × 1 (done at a body weight of 225 to 228 pounds 
[102 to 103 kilograms])
Bench press from pins (bottom position): 425 pounds (193 kilograms) × 1 (also 
done at a body weight of 225 to 228 pounds [102 to 103 kilograms])
Military press: 235 pounds (107 kilograms) × 5; 275 pounds (125 kilograms) × 1
Push press: 315 pounds (143 kilograms) × 5; 345 pounds (156 kilograms) × 1
Shoulder press from pins starting just above head: 345 pounds (156 kilograms) × 1
Snatch-grip high pulls (to mid/upper chest level): 398 pounds (181 kilograms) × 1
Power shrug: 765 pounds (347 kilograms) × 3
Rack pull from just above knees: 1,000 pounds (454 kilograms) × 1 (gym); 845 
pounds (383 kilograms) × 1 (Strongman competition; in this case, I was down to 
187 pounds [85 kilograms] to qualify for a lower-weight class in a weightlifting 
competition)
Deadlift: not worth mentioning
their accessory movements. This lower volume, lower rep approach started to 
bring Tom meaningful progress in his strength levels and physique. Tom has 
since gone on to be a successful competitor (including Junior World Records, 
Open European champion, and several British Championship wins) and a coach 
in the sport of powerlifting.

48
The Overload System for Strength
Tom’s Best Lifts
I won’t go into detail, but I got into training out of necessity. So it was a case of 
finding what motivated me within the realm of training. Bodybuilding training and 
body part splits never did it for me; any form of training where the main premise 
was focusing on how you look just didn’t sit well with me mentally.
Then came strength training. Being strong was something that really did appeal 
to me. It was objective, and it had a clear progression system and metric of suc­
cess—things I can get on-board with. So, from here on in, this became my focus 
for my training. Although I still compete, competing has never been something 
I particularly cared about. I care far more about my own standards. I’m just as 
happy hitting a lift in the gym as I am on the platform, which certainly helps 
explains why, like Chris, I’m a terrible competitor. These are some of my notable 
lifts to date:
Back squat: 260 kilograms (573 pounds)
Front squat: 200 kilograms (441 pounds)
Bench press (raw): 205 kilograms (452 pounds)
Bench press (equipped, using a 3-ply bench shirt): 365 kilograms (805 pounds)
Deadlift: 310 kilograms (683 pounds)
Push press: 140 kilograms (309 pounds)
Snatch-grip high pull: 170 kilograms (375 pounds)
Pendlay row: 170 kilograms (375 pounds)
The Foundational Exercises
It is thus with good reason that the cornerstone of the overload system is doing 
big, multijoint, heavy compound movements. While science points out that 
you can build muscle with light weights and isolated exercises, the reality is 
a bit different. The most impressive physiques and the strongest people got 
there in large part by focusing on getting strong on the big basic lifts. I’m not 
necessarily talking about focusing on 1 to 4 reps strength work, but certainly 
I mean trying hard to add weight to the barbell whenever you can on the rep 
ranges you selected.
Except for genetic freaks and people who use lots of performance-enhanc­
ing drugs, I don’t know many people who got jacked by only doing isolated or 
machine-based exercises. I am not saying that these exercises are without value. 
They are useful to fix specific weaknesses, but by their nature (only hitting a small 
part of the body), they carry some disadvantages that make it hard to maximize 
your muscle growth and strength gains if they are the focus of your training.
	
• Since they hit so little muscle mass, you need a lot of exercises and a lot of 
volume to get the same overall stimulation as you would from a few basic 
barbell exercises. This can both increase your training time and volume 
significantly and make it harder to recover from your training. It is my 
experience that one of the main reasons why “natural” people (those not 
assisted by PEDs) do not progress is that they do too much overall volume 

49
The Overload System Foundational Exercises
relative to their capacity to recover. If your training is centered more on 
minor movements, this will almost be a given.
	
• Isolated and so-called easy exercises provide a much smaller challenge 
to the nervous system, limiting how much it can improve. Making your 
nervous system better at recruiting fibers, making them twitch faster, and 
improving how coordinated they are is the key to getting stronger, but it’s 
also very important for growth. Getting stronger allows you to use more 
weight even on your minor exercises, increasing muscle tension and thus 
mechanical stress and growth stimulus as a result. A main reason beginner 
and intermediate lifters fail to grow is that they are too weak to benefit from 
the minor exercises (because they won’t be able to produce enough tension 
in their muscles), and these minor exercises are the focus of their training. 
The stronger you are, the more beneficial isolated work will become. First, 
consider that you will be strong enough and neurologically efficient enough 
to place a sufficient mechanical tension to promote growth. In addition, 
these smaller movements will allow you to get enough volume without 
overloading the central nervous system (which strong lifters already tax 
with their heavy work).
The foundations of this system are big compound lifts that recruit a lot of 
muscle mass at the same time, provide a strong neurological stimulus, and place 
the whole body under a high level of tension. Our main movements (or variations 
thereof) will be these:
	
• Deadlift
	
• Squat (or front squat)
	
• Military press
	
• Bench press
	
• Pendlay row
	
• Explosive pulls (power shrugs, high pulls, power clean)
Because of the methods we use, such as the progressive range of motion method 
and heavy partials, we will also do plenty of heavy partial range of motion work 
on these patterns.
In the next several chapters, we will take a closer look at how to perform these 
exercises properly. After all, and this is important, doing an exercise is not enough: 
You must do the exercise with the best possible technique to properly load the 
muscles, maximize your lifting performance, and reduce the risk of injuries.

This page intentionally left blank

51
Deadlift
For a long time, how much weight one could lift from the floor was the most 
important feat of strength. As a result, the deadlift (in all varieties) became a 
central focus in strength training. For many, the deadlift is still regarded as the 
“king of the lifts” and rightly so. There is just something satisfying on a basic 
and guttural level about lifting a heavy load from the floor.
The deadlift is mostly a hip hinge movement. Where the squat pattern teaches 
us how to move primarily through the knee, the deadlift teaches us to move 
primarily through the hip. Although as we’ll see, it is not entirely a hip-driven 
movement because the quads play a key role in the lift also.
The real key to a good deadlift is torso stiffness and rigidity. A properly exe­
cuted deadlift will test the core musculature (i.e., abs and obliques, lats, upper 
and lower back muscles, among others) like few other exercises. If you can lock 
in your torso, then the lift itself is essentially a leg press, except in this scenario 
you are pushing the floor away as opposed to what happens in the leg press 
platform. In theory, it is that simple, if you can get the setup executed properly.
Lastly, even though the deadlift is often referred to as a “pull,” do not think of 
it as a pulling exercise. That will only encourage a back-dominant, stiff-legged 
style of lift. The deadlift is a push exercise, as in push the floor away. The only 
pulling you should be focusing on is pulling the slack out of the bar (more on 
that later).
CHAPTER 
4

52
The Overload System for Strength
Setup
In this section, setup guidelines are included for the conventional, or proper, 
version of the deadlift (see figure 4.1a) as well as its heinous long-lost brother, 
the sumo deadlift (see figure 4.1b), where relevant.
a
b
FIGURE 4.1  Setup for the deadlift: (a) conventional and (b) sumo.
Width of Stance
The foot placement for the conventional and sumo deadlifts is as follows:
Conventional
The simplest way to find your foot placement is to put your feet in the same 
position you would for a vertical jump. Subconsciously, you know this is the 
position in which you can create the most upward force. You may need to adjust 
slightly either way, but this is a good starting point. The other factor to take into 
account is the size of your torso. Those with bigger waistlines will benefit from 
having a wider stance so that there is enough space between their legs to fit their 
torso into with proper positioning. Those with slimmer waistlines can get away 
with a hip-width (or slightly narrower) stance. In terms of foot angle, the vast 
majority will be perfectly fine with a toe angle of 5 to 10 degrees. See figure 4.2a 
for an example of the foot position for a conventional deadlift.
Sumo
For anyone other than very advanced lifters, I like to go with the widest stance 
that allows you to have your knees vertically stacked over your ankles in the start 
position. This will vary because of a person’s limb proportions, hip mobility, and 

53
Deadlift
other factors. Some lifters will benefit long term by going wider again to reduce 
the ROM, but for 90 percent (or more) of lifters, these guidelines will give you 
the optimal setup. Foot angle is relatively easy to work out; you want to angle 
your feet so that in the start position your toes point in the same direction as 
your kneecap. This simply means that your feet, knees, and hips are in optimal 
alignment at the start of the lift. See figure 4.2b for an example of the foot posi­
tion for a sumo deadlift.
FIGURE 4.2  Foot placement for the deadlift: (a) conventional and (b) sumo. These are good starting placements 
for the majority of lifters.
a
b
Bar Placement
Regardless of stance, when setting up, the bar must be centered over the midfoot. 
The bar will start closer to the shin in a sumo deadlift simply because the feet 
are rotated outward more (minimizing the horizontal distance from the shin to 
the midfoot), but the principle remains the same.
Hip Height
If the foot placement is set correctly, then the correct hip height is easy to find. 
With your feet set in place, bend through the knee until your shin is against the 
bar (do not let the bar move). From this position, push your hips back and hinge 
down to the bar while twisting your knees away from each other. Once you have 
hip hinged enough to be able to grip the bar properly, then you have your hips 
in the correct position. Where your hips will be in vertical space, however, will 
differ between conventional and sumo as the levers are different. At the end of 
the day, the main advantage (for some) of sumo is that it reduces the hip exten­
sion demands by getting them closer to the bar. Here’s what we are looking for 
in each stance.
Conventional
For a powerlifting-style deadlift, the hips should be set in the highest possible 
position while maintaining two criteria: the shin staying against the bar (and 
the bar not moving during set up) and the hips being lower than the shoulders. 
This position allows for the most hip-dominant movement that can move more 
load. It differs from a clean deadlift in which the hips are set purposely low to 

54
The Overload System for Strength
achieve a more upright position. The clean-style deadlift is less efficient for moving 
maximal loads, which doesn’t matter for Olympic lifting because you’ll never be 
performing a clean with a load anywhere near a max deadlift. See figure 4.3a for 
an example of proper hip height for the conventional deadlift.
Sumo
The most common mistake in a sumo deadlift is setting the hips too low and 
trying to squat the lift too much. The main benefit of the sumo is that it lessens 
the horizontal distance between your hips and the bar, lessening the demand on 
the hip extensors. If you squat too low when setting up, then your hips will sit 
back further from the bar and defeat the purpose of the stance. So, when setting 
up, focus on getting the front of the hip bone as close to the bar (in horizontal 
space) as possible, using the guidelines presented at the beginning of this section. 
See figure 4.3b for an example of proper hip height for a sumo deadlift.
FIGURE 4.3  Proper hip height for the (a) conventional and (b) sumo deadlift.
a
b
KEY POINT
Many people are under the impression that you should try to set up so that your 
shoulders are behind the bar when deadlifting. This is incorrect and would mean 
you are essentially doing a stiff-legged deadlift from the floor. A better way to look 
at it is that your armpits should be directly over or slightly in front of the bar in the 
start position. Which setup is correct for you will depend on your proportions and 
choice of stance. As a general rule, though, we would expect to see the following:
	
• Long limbs and short torso—shoulders in front of bar, arms angled back
	
• Short limbs and long torso—shoulders directly over bar, arms vertical
Note that the sumo stance allows a more upright torso, in turn causing the 
shoulders to be slightly further back compared to a conventional stance.

55
Deadlift
Grip
Where you should grip the bar is going to be determined in large part by your 
choice of stance. The goal with our grip placement is always to reduce the range 
of motion as much as possible by having the arms as long as possible in vertical 
space. Think about how much further you need to reach if you do something 
like a snatch-grip deadlift; we don’t want that.
Grip Placement
While it may seem simple, where you grip the bar is important. Let’s walk through 
the grip placement for the conventional and sumo deadlift.
Conventional
Your grip needs to be as narrow as possible while still allowing enough room 
for your forearms to get past your knees when you set up. When in the start 
position, your forearms will be partially behind your knees. If your grip is 
too narrow, you won’t be able to get your knees past your elbows, meaning 
you won’t be able to get the bar against your shins. Going too wide will mean 
increasing ROM. See figure 4.4a for an example of proper grip on the bar for 
a conventional deadlift.
Sumo
Easy. Let your arms hang directly down. This is your grip width. You want your 
arms as long as possible, meaning we want a perfectly vertical line down from 
the shoulders to the hands on the bar. See figure 4.4b for an example of proper 
grip on the bar for a sumo deadlift.
FIGURE 4.4  Deadlift grip: (a) conventional and (b) sumo.
a
b
Type of Grip
There are two options regarding the type of grip you can use for truly heavy or 
maximal deadlifts. Unfortunately, a regular (double overhand) grip simply isn’t 
strong enough for when we are doing maximal lifts, so we need to change strategy. 
The vast majority of lifters use an under-over grip, mainly out of convenience. 
But as we will see, it isn’t necessarily optimal.

56
The Overload System for Strength
Under-Over Grip
An under-over or mixed grip (one hand pronated, one hand supinated) is the most 
commonly used grip when deadlifting heavy. With good reason, the mixed grip stops 
the bar from rolling in your hands, making it much more secure. The downside, 
however, is that you then end up deadlifting crooked. Look at the length of your 
arms when pronated compared to supinated; the supinated arm is effectively longer 
because of how it is oriented in the shoulder joint. Over time, this crooked deadlifting 
can lead to an imbalance in which one hip will sit higher than the other. To avoid 
this, make sure you alternate your mixed grip (i.e., change which hand is pronated 
or supinated). You will always have a dominant mixed grip and a weaker mixed 
grip, so if you want to use mixed grip a lot, I suggest at least doing all warm-ups in 
your weaker mixed grip, then swapping over for your work sets. This should help 
avoid developing an imbalance. See figure 4.5a for an example of under-over grip.
Hook Grip
The hook grip, in which the thumb is wrapped around the bar and then is gripped 
by the fingers, is much more common in Olympic lifting circles. That’s because 
it is a stronger grip that doesn’t involve having to supinate one arm (which 
wouldn’t work too well for clean and snatch). The hook grip is very strong and 
even gives you a mechanical advantage because it makes the bar sit lower in the 
hand (meaning you can start slightly higher, with less ROM). The downside: The 
hook grip hurts worse than standing on a plug. You need to hook grip regularly to 
keep the nerves in the thumb desensitized, otherwise you just go back to square 
one. Technically speaking, everyone would be better off using the hook grip 
for deadlifting; it gives you a mechanical advantage in the lift, it is potentially 
a stronger grip than the mixed, and it doesn’t involve the risk of developing an 
imbalance like the mixed grip. This tends to be easiest to implement when you 
are a novice and the loads are light(er).
Sumo pullers especially can benefit from the hook grip because it makes the 
lockout smoother. Sumo pullers can miss deadlifts at lockout because the hands 
have to drag over the quads to finish the lift. This is then exacerbated by the 
thumb of the pronated hand (if using mixed grip) protruding and catching even 
more so. The hook grip effectively makes the hands smaller when they are being 
clenched more and removes the protruding thumb, as the grip is set over it. See 
figure 4.5b for an example of hook grip.
FIGURE 4.5  Types of grips for the deadlift: (a) under-over and (b) hook.
a
b

57
Deadlift
It is also worth mentioning that some people (especially women) with smaller 
hands may struggle to get an advantage from the hook grip as their hands are 
too small to wrap around the bar enough. If this is you, then you may be stuck 
with the mixed grip, I’m afraid.
Setting the Upper Back
Creating adequate tension in the upper back and lats is an absolutely crucial stage 
of the setup and a big determining factor in whether the lift will be successful. 
This part of the setup, along with adequate bracing, is what will maintain your 
spinal alignment throughout the lift. The vast majority of deadlifts are missed 
due to a power leak somewhere in the torso; think about how much you can leg 
press compared to deadlift.
Lats
The lats play a huge role in torso rigidity, as well keeping the bar against the 
legs during the lift, especially for lifters with a short torso who start with their 
shoulders in front of the bar (think about the moment arm around the shoulder). 
When the lats are set correctly, they will help stabilize nearly the entire length 
of the spine as well as stop the bar drifting forward from your center of gravity.
There are two mechanisms that will ensure the lats are engaged properly 
during the lift.
The first is externally rotating your arm, which is a smart way of saying that once 
you have gripped the bar, twist your elbows back as hard as you can. Imagine you 
are desperately trying to snap the bar between your hands (causing more pressure 
on the pinkie finger side of your hands); this should result in your biceps facing 
forward more and your elbows being pointed behind you. You will also see the 
shoulders depress (pull down) into the body when you do this (see figure 4.6a).
The second mechanism is actively pulling the bar back in to the shins (see 
figure 4.6b). This is akin to doing a cable straight-arm pull-down; in fact, I like to 
a
b
FIGURE 4.6  Setup (a) without lat tension and external rotation and (b) with external rota­
tion and lat tension. Note in the second photo the elbow is more angled backwards and 
shoulders are set further back.

58
The Overload System for Strength
use these movements (with hips bent and a pause at the bottom) as a warm-up 
for the deadlift to get the lats firing the way we want. This pulling back motion 
needs to be consistent throughout the entire lift. If these two things are done 
correctly, the lats will be contributing what we need them to throughout the lift.
Upper Back
When I say upper back, I am referring primarily to the traps, rhomboids, and rear 
delts, the muscles responsible for shoulder retraction. The upper back muscles 
are used to stabilize and fix the thoracic spine in place. The downward force of 
the barbell will be pulling the shoulders forward into protraction, and it is the 
job of the upper back to stop that from happening.
The upper back is also responsible for pulling the slack out of the bar, which 
is a crucial part of the setup. If the slack is not pulled out of the bar, then when 
you go to initiate the lift, you are lifting only the weight of the bar until the plates 
catch, then the rest of the load hits you suddenly. This causes a very jerky start 
to the lift, often resulting in a loss of positioning.
Once you have done all the previous steps, you pull the slack out of the bar 
simply by contracting through the traps, rhomboids, and rear delts in a shrug­
ging back motion. There will be some minor shoulder retraction through this 
process, but the main movement should be the bar flexing upward (how much 
will depend on the bar used and the amount of weight on the bar). Please note 
this is a purely shrugging back motion (not up); the shoulders should stay pulled 
down into the body through the action of the lats (see figure 4.7a).
A common flaw seen here is actually over-shrugging (see figure 4.7b) We only 
want enough retraction to pull the flex from the bar; that is, the goal is not to 
achieve a large retraction movement. Most of the work done here is isometric in 
nature. Shrugging the shoulders too far back does two things:
a
b
FIGURE 4.7  Setting the upper back with (a) the correct degree of retraction versus (b) the 
common mistake of over-retracting.

59
Deadlift
	
• Effectively shortens the arms, meaning you have to reach down further to 
the bar, increasing ROM.
	
• Puts the shoulder girdle and upper back muscles in a weaker position. A 
fully retracted shoulder position puts the upper back muscles far away from 
a neutral or resting length, which in turn is a position that is more difficult 
to maintain. Our postural muscles are strongest when held in positions 
around neutral, which is what we are aiming for here. If you start in an over-
shrugged position, as soon as you initiate the lift, the postural muscles will 
get pulled forward out of retraction and often past neutral to a protracted 
position, provided there is any form of appreciable load on the bar, of course.
Head and Neck Position
The most common mistake you see with deadlifting is how the head is positioned. 
How often have you seen someone set up like a fishing rod for a deadlift and then 
hear someone else shout “Chest up.” And what is the response? You probably 
would crane your head up toward the ceiling while keeping the same lousy spinal 
alignment (no cookie for you).
Listen, the spine is almost always at its strongest when it is neutral, and when 
I last checked, my spine went all the way up into my neck and my head. So, try 
this: Stand tall and look straight forward with your chin slightly tucked (neutral) 
(see figure 4.8a). Now hip hinge until your torso is at the same angle it would be 
at the start of a deadlift (see figure 4.8b). Make sure your neck and head move 
in tandem with the rest of your spine. Where are you looking now? At the floor 
just in front of your feet? Right, this is the position your head should be in when 
you start your deadlift.
a
b
FIGURE 4.8  Deadlift setup with (a) correct neck and head position versus (b) an over-
arched neck position.

60
The Overload System for Strength
Bar Path and Movement Pattern
A properly executed deadlift will have a vertical bar path, starting over the mid­
foot and staying aligned over it until it is locked out (see figure 4.9 for the full 
movement of a conventional deadlift and figure 4.10 for the full movement of a 
sumo deadlift). Any deviation from this path is simply costing you energy and 
a
b
c
FIGURE 4.9  The segments of the conventional deadlift: (a) start position, (b) end of phase I, and (c) 
end of phase II.
a
b
c
FIGURE 4.10  The segments of the sumo deadlift: (a) start position, (b) end of phase I, and 
(c) end of phase II.

61
Deadlift
leading you to be less likely to succeed in the lift. That’s basic physics. This is 
achieved through two different phases of movement.
Phase I: Floor to Knee: Knee Dominant
Those keen observers in the audience will have pieced it together: “If the knees 
start over the bar, how can the bar move in a perfectly vertical path without 
hitting them?”
Well done; have a cookie. That’s what phase I of the lift achieves: It gets the 
knees back out of the way of the bar. In summary, phase I gets the bar to the 
bottom of the kneecap, give or take, via the knee joint, while maintaining the 
torso angle (relative to the floor).
The quads primarily drive phase I of the lift; meanwhile the glutes, hamstrings, 
and lower back work in an isometric fashion to maintain the torso angle. To say 
it in smart language, during phase I, the bar is lifted by knee extension without 
concurrent extension through the hip. There, see how smart I can sound if I 
wanted to bore you to death? You’re welcome.
The best way to monitor this movement is to watch a video of yourself deadlift­
ing. If you perform phase I correctly, your hips and shoulders will rise in tandem 
until the bar gets to the knee. The shoulders will stay in front of, or directly over, 
the bar (depending on where they were in the start position) and you should 
find yourself in a position that looks suspiciously like the bottom of a Romanian 
deadlift. If you did that, then well done, have another cookie. That position is 
the exact position we want to put ourselves in for phase II.
Here’s a quick recap on how to perform phase I correctly:
1.	 Set up perfectly (obviously, as outlined previously).
2.	 Initiate the movement by pressing down into the floor through the legs. 
Focus especially on driving your big toe into the floor and pushing your 
knees back out of the way of the bar, which will help you utilize your 
quads more.
3.	 Don’t allow your hips to creep forward. Focus on using the quads and 
allow your chest and shoulders to stay over the bar throughout this phase.
KEY POINT
I can’t stress this enough: Using the hips to move the bar from the floor is a 
great way to set yourself up for failure. It’s essentially trying to do a supramax­
imal good morning from the bottom up. It is inefficient at best and, at worst, a 
recipe for disaster when one of your vertebrae decides to emigrate to the other 
side of the room, rather violently. Trying to extend through the hip from the floor 
only puts more shear stress on the spine while taking the load away from the 
muscles best situated to lift the load from that position—namely, the quads.
Phase II: Knee to Lockout: Hip Dominant
If you have made it this far, then you’ve successfully completed half of an accept­
able deadlift. At this point, if you were to stop, it should literally feel like the load 
is hanging from your glutes and hamstrings.

62
The Overload System for Strength
Now, in phase II, the hips really take over the lift. Phase II of the deadlift is 
very simply the concentric portion of a Romanian deadlift, except you have some 
momentum at the beginning of the lift. This is why I like to use the Romanian 
deadlift as a gateway to the full deadlift. If you can’t do a proper Romanian 
deadlift, then you cannot do a proper deadlift.
Phase II is all about bringing the hips and the bar together. During this phase, 
the torso angle relative to the floor does change as the hips extend forward, in turn 
making the torso more upright. As well as driving forward through the hip, it is also 
very important to forcibly pull the bar back toward the hip at this juncture, as the 
bar is often lost forward when going over the kneecap. In essence, we attack the 
gap between the bar and the hips from both sides; the hips drive forward toward 
the bar and the lats pull the bar back toward the hips. Doing both of these moves 
effectively locks the bar out as early as possible in the movement. When this isn’t 
initiated correctly, the bar often drifts forward away from the legs, or the lifter is 
shifted slightly forward onto the toes, or both. Either way, the lift is often then lost.
Here’s a quick recap on how to perform phase II correctly:
1.	 As soon as the bar reaches just below the knee (or ideally just before, taking 
into account processing time), aggressively drive the hips forward through 
the glutes and hamstrings toward the bar.
2.	 Simultaneously, use the lats to drag the bar back over the kneecap and the 
quads back toward the hip (imagine trying to pull the bar back through 
your thighs).
3.	 Upon completion, stand as tall as possible with your knee and hip joint 
locked out.
Lockout
Despite being the easiest part of the lift from a lever­
age point of view, it is still quite common to see lift­
ers performing the lockout inefficiently. They might 
have a muscular weakness in some circumstances, or 
there may be other factors, like poor grip (grip starts 
to give way toward the end of the lift). Some lifters 
may partially “switch off” because they believe they’ve 
completed the hardest part of the lift and think the lift 
is now a given to be successful. Let’s look at the two 
most common faults with regard to finishing the lift.
Leaning Back
It is common to see lifters lock out a deadlift by 
leaning back at the top of the movement (see figure 
4.11). This is often due to a lack of hip strength or 
simply poor body awareness. In the locked-out posi­
tion, you should be as tall and upright as possible; 
think about pushing your head up to the ceiling with 
your posture. Leaning back simply puts unnecessary 
strain through the lower back and indicates poor 
lifting mechanics.
FIGURE 4.11  Incorrect lockout tech­
nique: leaning back. 

63
Deadlift
Hitching
Hitching refers to the act of partly or fully supporting 
the weight of the bar on the legs (see figure 4.12). It 
is usually accomplished by re-bending the knee joint 
to give the bar a platform to rest on. While hitching 
is permitted in Strongman competitions, this is not 
a technique I would recommend for general lifters 
because it is not properly training the hip extension 
element of the deadlift. Even athletes on the com­
petitive Strongman circuit ideally wouldn’t deadlift 
this way all the time, as it would leave them with a 
strength deficit through their hip extension capabili­
ties. Needing to hitch a lift simply illustrates that you 
are lifting a load that is too heavy or that you don’t 
know how to use your hip properly to lock out the lift.
FIGURE 4.12  Incorrect lockout tech­
nique: hitching.

This page intentionally left blank

65
Squat
Just to be clear, when I use the word “squat,” I am referring to the back squat. 
The back squat is the squat, and all others are derivatives of it. So, in my opinion, 
the term “back squat” is irrelevant in the same way the term “squat clean” is.
No exercise divides opinions in lifting circles quite like the squat. It is the 
most avoided exercise in gyms worldwide while simultaneously having a cultlike 
following and devotion from other lifters. Listen, I’m (Tom) not going to lie. I’m 
not a lover of squats. However, it is an unavoidable fact that the squat is a key 
movement pattern and lift for anyone who wants to be impressively strong.
The squat is often overcomplicated, in my opinion. The squat teaches us to 
move primarily through the knee joint to move the hip vertically through space. 
Contrast this to the deadlift, which primarily has us move through the hip joint; it 
is about moving the hip horizontally through space. Once you get this distinction 
clear in your head, it becomes easier to stop making your squat look like a dead­
lift (or good morning) and your deadlift like a squat. In my opinion, the squat is 
possibly the best teacher (and test) of full-body tension. While the deadlift may 
be “the king” in some people’s eyes, we have all seen plenty of heavy deadlifts 
that were completed with less than perfect mechanics. You will be much harder 
pressed to find any truly heavy squats that were completed with similarly faulty 
mechanics; it is simply less forgiving. It could be said that the deadlift has a little 
more room for a brute-strength approach while the squat in turn more heavily 
favors technical precision.
CHAPTER 
5

66
The Overload System for Strength
Setup
Since a beautiful squat requires good alignment and stability from the feet right 
up to the head and neck, that is how we will address the setup procedure. See 
figure 5.1 for the proper setup for the squat.
FIGURE 5.1  Setup for the squat.
Width of Stance
Width of stance can heavily come down to personal preference, but since this 
book is all about moving maximal poundage, that is the viewpoint I will address 
it from. Remember, we are also talking about the squat in the context of a real 
squat, one that is done to a depth in which the hip crease passes below the level 
of the top of the knee.
Assuming mobility isn’t an issue, which it shouldn’t be for any respectable 
lifter, then the stance width is going to depend on two main variables:
	
• Your limb proportions: All else being equal, the proportionally longer your 
legs are (specifically your femurs), the narrower a stance you will require. 
This is because long-legged, short-torso lifters require more forward knee 
travel to get to depth because of the extra hip flexion they will need to keep 
the bar over the midfoot.
	
• Hip morphology: The more outward-facing your hip sockets are (there are 
ways to test this), the wider a stance you can get away with. It means you 
can keep your femur centrated (fancy word, huh?) in the hip socket even 
with a wider stance.

67
Squat
With that being said, your strongest squat stance will be the widest stance that 
satisfies these two criteria:
1.	 The ability to achieve proper depth (hip crease below superior part of knee) 
without a significant change in spinal alignment (i.e., butt wink): I am 
not going to be one of those 
people who tells you that your 
squat is awful because you 
have a tiny bit of butt wink, 
but a large amount has a 
huge negative impact on your 
ability to brace effectively and 
is simply inefficient in terms 
of muscular alignment and 
recruitment.
2.	 Being able to keep the knee 
joint at least stacked vertically 
directly over the ankle, or 
slightly outside, all the way 
through the movement: In 
general, performing a loaded 
squat (or any squat really) 
with your knee joint inside 
your ankle joint is not a good 
idea. Yes, some elite, experi­
enced lifters squat big num­
bers with a knee-inside-an­
kle stance (although in raw 
lifting, they are few and far 
between), but they have spent 
years learning exactly how 
much wiggle room they have 
and conditioning their soft 
tissues to the rigors of it.
See figure 5.2 for an example of 
an optimal squat stance compared 
to stances that are too wide or too 
narrow.
FIGURE 5.2  Comparison of squat stance widths: (a) optimal 
with knees stacked over ankles, (b) too wide where the knees 
are inside the ankles, and (c) too narrow where the knees 
are outside the ankles.
a
b
c

68
The Overload System for Strength
KEY POINT
A lot of people end up making life incredibly difficult with lousy walkouts. It lit­
erally burns my eyes when I watch someone walk out a heavy squat and then 
spend 2 minutes tap dancing around to try and find their stance. Listen, a walk­
out should consist of one step with each leg and then a slight readjustment of 
your feet, if needed. The simplest way to achieve this is to simply set up under 
the bar in your squat stance. Then all you have to do is step directly backward 
and voilà, you’re good to go. Sound stupidly simple? Maybe. But then why do 
so many people get it wrong?
Foot Angle
Yes, I know we are technically working back down the chain here, but your foot 
angle will depend on your stance width, not the other way around. Your foot 
angle is simply the angle that allows your knees to track in the same direction 
as your toes throughout the lift.
This is easy. Set up and perform a squat and pause at the bottom. Ensure you 
are twisting your knees out through your glutes just like you would for a heavy 
squat. If your kneecaps and toes are pointing in the same direction, as shown in 
figure 5.3, then congrats, you have found your foot angle.
FIGURE 5.3  Proper foot position for the squat.
Hip Alignment
To set up and brace effectively for a squat, you must be standing in a position that 
allows your rib cage to be stacked directly over your pelvis (i.e., you must be stand­
ing tall and upright). This is the position in which the diaphragm and pelvic floor 
muscles are aligned in a manner that allows the highest degree of intra-abdominal 
pressure to be created. Once the brace is achieved in the stacked position, then the 
rib cage and hip alignment should be maintained throughout the entire movement 
(see figure 5.4). Any change in spinal alignment at this point is simply a power leak.

69
Squat
KEY POINT
You will often see lifters using a low bar position who start the movement with 
the hips already partially flexed. In theory, this isn’t a big deal, but you will 
sacrifice your ability to brace 100 percent maximally if you are trying to set your 
brace in this position. So, if this is you, either your bar position is too low or you 
need to grow some bigger rear delts. At the end of the day, if for some reason 
your squat setup doesn’t allow you to stand tall and upright when the bar is on 
your back, then something is definitely off.
Bar Placement
Since I touched on this previously, I may as well address it now. A huge amount 
of attention is given to the difference between high bar and low bar positions. Yes, 
it does change the balance point and the leverages of the lift, but let’s be realistic 
here: The difference in terms of bar position for most people between a high and 
low bar position is going to be about 1 to 2 inches (2.5 to 5 centimeters). This 
doesn’t change things that much, so they do not need to be treated as two differ­
ent lifts. Yes, most will be able to move more weight (I will outline why below) 
with a lower bar position, but in reality, it should come down to whichever one 
beats you up less and personal preference. Let’s take a look.
a
b
FIGURE 5.4  Stacked ribcage and hip position throughout the squat: (a) start, (b) midpoint, and (c) bottom.
c

70
The Overload System for Strength
High Bar Position
The high bar position is when the bar is resting anywhere from the mid to upper 
traps. This bar position requires less shoulder mobility and allows you to main­
tain a more upright torso position throughout the lift and leads to more loading 
through the anterior chain. The higher bar position also means there is a greater 
workload on the thoracic extensors to stop the chest and shoulders from being 
“caved in” by the weight. It is generally best suited for lifters with a long torso 
and short femurs (aka people who are built for squats) because it will shift the 
load toward what is often their strongest muscle group, the quads, and away 
from the posterior chain (often a weak point). See figure 5.5a for an example of 
the high bar position for the squat.
Low Bar Position
The low bar position is when the bar is resting on the rear delts. This bar position 
requires greater shoulder mobility because you have to reach back and down 
further to get your hands on the bar. As such, a low bar position will usually bring 
with it a wider grip width, which can make it more difficult to maintain shoulder 
retraction and back tightness. The lower bar position requires more hip flexion 
to keep the load centered over the midfoot and therefore leads to more loading 
through the posterior chain.
By reducing the amount of knee flexion and therefore forward knee travel, you 
“hit depth” in a higher position in a low bar squat as the knee sits higher relative 
to the floor in the bottom position—meaning less vertical distance traveled. This 
along with more recruitment of the 
posterior chain and a lesser demand 
on the thoracic extensors (as the load 
is sitting lower on the thoracic spine) 
is why most lifters can lift more load 
with a low bar position. Those with a 
more deadlift-friendly body structure 
(short torso, long legs) will generally get 
a greater benefit from low bar because 
it will shift the load to their naturally 
stronger posterior chain. However, 
some lifters with this build may in turn 
struggle to hit depth if it requires too 
high of a degree of hip flexion to keep 
the bar over the midfoot.
Since the context of this book is 
about moving maximal weights, I 
would suggest lifters use a low bar 
position. Provided you can hit depth 
while maintaining proper alignment, 
the low bar position doesn’t beat up 
your elbows and wrists (more on this 
in a second), and it doesn’t feel unnat­
ural for you to do so. See figure 5.5b 
for an example of the low bar position 
for the squat.
FIGURE 5.5  Bar position for the squat: (a) high bar 
and (b) low bar.
a
b

71
Squat
KEY POINT
Do not make the mistake of thinking there are only two options, high and low 
bar, when it comes to bar placement. Bar placement is a spectrum. The bar 
can effectively rest on any part of the upper back between the upper traps 
and rear delts. So, make sure you experiment with it. Most lifters, in fact, do end 
up settling on a sort of mid-bar position over time.
Grip Width
Correct grip is key to achieving a stable setup with the bar. It is also very important 
for keeping your wrist and elbow joints happy since incorrect hand placement 
can easily lead to tendonitis.
If hand placement for the grip is too narrow, then much of the weight of the bar 
will rest in your hands rather than on your back, effectively because the height of 
your hands is higher than the height of your back where the bar is resting. This 
gives a much worse connection with the bar. It also makes it likely the bar will 
roll up your back (as your hands are push­
ing up into the bar, due to being wedged 
in place). Tendonitis will often develop 
in this circumstance as the weight of the 
bar is sitting on the wrist and elbow joint 
rather than on the upper back. Too wide 
of a grip will simply make it harder to 
achieve proper back tightness. The wider 
the hands go relative to the shoulders, 
the harder it becomes to fully retract the 
shoulder blades and maximally contract 
all the muscles associated with that action 
(which is why using a wider grip on bench 
requires more upper back stability).
We want the grip width to be as narrow 
as possible while allowing the wrist to 
be straight and the weight of the bar to 
rest fully on the upper back (not in the 
hand). This will give us the best trade-off 
between maximal upper back tightness 
while having the bar resting properly on 
the back with no undue pressure on the 
joints. A cocked back wrist position can 
easily rock back and forth (leading to 
movement of the bar) and put excessive 
pressure through the wrist joint. A straight 
wrist alignment is inherently more stable 
and will therefore allow you in turn to 
keep the bar more stable on your back. 
See figure 5.6 for proper grip position on 
the bar for the squat compared to a grip 
that is too wide or too narrow.
a
b
c
FIGURE 5.6  Comparison of grip position on the bar for 
the squat: (a) optimal, (b) too wide, and (c) too narrow.

72
The Overload System for Strength
As a final note on grip, those who use a low bar position, even with a solid 
setup, can still develop tendonitis over time, especially if they are squatting and 
benching frequently. I have found that in many of these cases, using a falcon grip 
(see figure 5.7), where the little finger is not put over the bar, can almost entirely 
eradicate this issue. In my experience, it doesn’t negatively affect the stability 
or effectiveness of the setup, and it also sounds really cool. So, it’s a win-win all 
round if this is an issue.
FIGURE 5.7  Falcon grip.
Setting the Upper Back
Once the bar and grip are set, the 
next step is to give the bar the most 
stable platform possible to rest on (see 
figure 5.8). Once the bar is in posi­
tion, I like to use these three steps to 
set the upper back (regardless of bar 
position):
1.	 Start by squeezing the shoulder 
blades back and together as 
hard as possible to get maximal 
retraction.
2.	 Drive the elbows even further 
back and together by squeezing 
your triceps into your lats. This 
will further retract the shoulder 
blades and contract the traps.
3.	 Pull the bar directly down, into 
the back through the lats. When 
done correctly the elbows will 
only drop slightly as the shoul­
ders depress into the body. If the 
elbows drop or move forward 
FIGURE 5.8  Comparison of the upper back in the (a) neutral 
and (b) set position.
a
b

73
Squat
significantly, then all you have done is rotate your shoulder. There is a huge 
difference between pulling the bar (and shoulders) down into the body 
through the lats and just rotating the elbows down and forward through 
the shoulder joint. Setting the lats here is massively important for main­
taining torso rigidity and spinal alignment (as discussed with the deadlift).
Elbow Position
Once the upper back is set, there should be no change in elbow position through­
out the lift. A change in elbow position shows the shoulders and upper back have 
changed alignment throughout the lift; it also likely means the bar has rolled in 
some direction, which is not a recipe for a successful squat. Throughout the squat, 
simply continue to cue yourself to squeeze your triceps into your lats because 
this will maintain elbow alignment and upper back tightness.
The elbows rotating down during the descent is often a sign that the lats are 
being overused during the squat. This upper arm movement also then leads to 
the chest and lumbar spine arching up. This results in a loss of bracing strength 
and an anterior tilting of the pelvis, which makes it more difficult to hit depth. 
Remember, once the shoulders have been maximally depressed, the job of the 
lats is done; they should only be contracting isometrically at that point.
Be aware that bar positioning alters elbow positioning. For example, when 
squatting high bar, one can get away with having the elbows very low or even 
directly under the bar (see figure 
5.9a). This can even be beneficial 
because it gives a more direct 
line to pull down on the bar into 
the traps through the lats. With 
low bar, however, this is not the 
case. A higher elbow position 
is necessary with low bar as it 
“props up” the rear delts to make 
them an effective shelf for the 
bar to rest on (see figure 5.9b). If 
the elbows drop too low, the rear 
delts will not protrude out far 
enough from the body for the bar 
to rest on fully (unless you have 
enormous rear delts). This is why 
elbow movement (as addressed 
in the point above) is even more 
hazardous when using a low bar 
position. So, when using a low 
bar position, the elbows will be 
pushed up to maintain the shelf; 
just make sure you don’t push 
them up too high because this 
will result in the thoracic spine 
and shoulder girdle rounding 
forward.
a
b
FIGURE 5.9  Elbow position for (a) high bar and (b) low bar.

74
The Overload System for Strength
Head Position
We want a neutral alignment once again through the entire spine here. So, just as 
with deadlift, we want the chin slightly tucked and the crown of the head as tall to 
the sky as possible. We want this alignment to be maintained throughout the lift—so 
yes, this will mean at the bottom of the squat, your head should be at a downward 
angle. See figure 5.10 for an example of proper head position during a squat.
a
b
FIGURE 5.10  Correct head position for the squat at the (a) start and (b) bottom position. 
KEY POINT
Many coaches teach lifters to look up and arch the head up during the squat 
(as well as deadlift), which they justify by saying that it will help you to “keep the 
chest up” or that “the body goes where the head goes.” However, if you have 
proper functioning of your thoracic and cervical spine, then arching your head up 
should not bring the chest up with it. Last I checked, the neck is meant to be able 
to move independently of other segments of the spine. Furthermore, yes, arching 
the head up can in fact increase neural drive to the traps and thoracic extensors 
and posterior chain (which could in turn help you keep your chest up, perhaps), 
but this comes at the expense of reduced neural drive to the abdominals and 
anterior chain. So that is not a trade-off worth making. As we’ve said already, spinal 
alignment is at its strongest when neutral, so let’s respect that principle.

75
Squat
Bar Path and Movement Pattern
The desired bar path of the squat is incredibly simple. The bar should stay directly 
over the midfoot at all times, meaning the bar path should be perfectly vertical 
during both the eccentric and concentric portions of the exercise. In fact, any 
deviation from this vertical bar path indicates a technical fault. It could come 
down to mobility, muscle imbalance, or simply technical skill. Regardless, any 
deviation that causes the bar to not be directly over the midfoot is inefficient 
and should be corrected.
Assessing your bar path is easy. Simply film yourself performing a set of 
squats (from the side) so that you can see your entire body from head to toe 
(ideally using around 30 to 40 percent of your 1RM). I can’t explain why, but 
often the leverages and balance points just don’t seem to work as well with 
very low loads, or people just don’t put the effort in to squat those lower loads 
correctly. Watch the end of the barbell: Does it stay directly over your midfoot 
and move vertically? Here are two improper bar paths that we commonly see 
and how to fix them.
Bar Drifts Forward Over the Toes
If this happens, it is because there is too much hip flexion compared to knee 
flexion, leading to the torso being pitched too far forward. If this occurs on the 
descent, it is most often due to poor ankle mobility inhibiting the knees from 
traveling far enough forward. When the knees hit a brick wall and can’t move for­
ward, the body will simply bend from the hip more instead to get lower. However, 
this often sadly doesn’t result in the hip actually moving downward at all, even 
if the bar is. So, it is not leading to any further depth being achieved; instead, 
you are being folded in half like a human accordion. If this occurs on the ascent, 
then this is your typical squat good morning, where the knees extend without the 
hips, leading to the hips rising up but the shoulders (and therefore the bar along 
with them) staying still. This is most commonly caused by a weak anterior chain 
(mainly quads), so the body shifts the weight on to the stronger posterior chain. 
In theory, this makes sense, but in reality, it puts us in such a weak position that 
it means the lift will rarely be successful. It also places a much greater amount 
of shear stress through the spine. Even if you can be successful with this squat­
ting pattern in the short term, it is very inefficient and simply shows you have a 
weakness that is going to hold you back in the long term.
Bar Drifts Backward Toward the Heels
This is pretty rare, but it happens because there’s too much knee flexion relative 
to hip flexion. On the descent, this is usually caused by people thinking they 
need to squat perfectly upright; in essence, they are trying to front squat their 
back squat. You must lean forward in a squat to keep the bar centered over the 
midfoot; by how much, exactly, will depend on bar position and your leverages. 
If you are guilty of this, you need to encourage your hips to flex more on the 
descent. Thinking about pointing your chest toward the floor on the descent and 
looking down a little more will help. It is particularly rare to see the bar shift 
back toward the heels on the upward phase of a squat. If you see this, it will be 
in Olympic-style squatters who are very quad dominant. Here, the knees stay 
forward for too long to keep the quads loaded while the torso becomes more 
upright as the hips extend, which is an incredibly difficult position to salvage.

76
The Overload System for Strength
To this point, we have identified the bar path that we want to achieve through­
out our lift. Now, let’s break down the lift to its constituent segments and see how 
we achieve that. See figure 5.11 for the full movement of a squat.
FIGURE 5.11  The segments of the squat: (a) start, (b) midpoint (end of eccentric phase I), (c) bottom (end of eccentric 
phase II), (d) midpoint (end of concentric phase I), and (e) finish (end of concentric phase II).
a
b
c
d
e

77
Squat
Eccentric Portion
Your goals during the eccentric portion of the squat are as follows:
	
• Keep the bar directly over the midfoot.
	
• Maintain bar position and upper back tightness by pulling the bar down 
into the bar through the lats and squeezing the triceps in toward the lats.
	
• Maintain hip, knee, and foot alignment by moderately externally rotating the 
knees. This is best done by gripping the floor through the feet and twisting 
as if you were trying to rip the floor apart. The kneecap and toes should 
be oriented in the same direction at all times. Note that so much is made 
out of “driving the knees out” and “engaging the glutes” that a lot of people 
actually end up externally rotating the knees out too much, so the knees 
end up wider than the ankles. This leaves us having further to travel to hit 
depth (non-vertical shins mean the knee is lower to the ground) as well as 
placing more pressure on the outside of the foot, leaving the adductors, 
among other muscles, in a poor position to contribute to the lift. Yes, the 
glutes are important, and yes, they are a prime mover, but it’s not all about 
the glutes here. It’s about balance and aligning yourself in a manner that 
allows all muscle groups to work optimally.
	
• Stabilize the spine through proper bracing mechanics. This is best rep­
resented by the ability to keep the gap between your sternum and belly 
button (or lowest rib and hip bone) constant throughout the lift. If this gap 
increases, it means you have extended through the thoracic and lumbar 
spine. If it decreases, it means you have been “folded in” by the weight 
through thoracic and lumbar flexion.
	
• Don’t die. This makes the concentric phase very difficult to complete. I 
struggle with this bit.
KEY POINT
One of the most common issues I see with the squat is an overextension of the 
spine. We have had “chest up” or “back arched” drilled into us so much that we 
end up thinking we know we have to be way overextended through the lumbar 
and thoracic spine to perform a loaded squat. Again, it is about balance here. 
An overextended spine simply puts your abdominals in a disadvantaged position 
to create pressure and stability. Likewise, it pre-stretches the glutes, putting them in 
a worse position to contribute to hip extension. Trust your abs and anterior chain 
with more of the load, and get your whole body working the way it should.
Just like the deadlift, there are two phases to the movement, which can be 
distinguished by what happens to the inclination of the torso. In phase I (top 
half), we have a change in torso angle, relative to the floor, throughout. Whereas 
in phase II (bottom half), the torso angle stays stable.
Phase I
Once you are set up correctly, the descent should be initiated by breaking from 
the knee and the hip simultaneously. Doing so will mean you spread the load 

78
The Overload System for Strength
in a balanced fashion. The knee and the hip have to flex in tandem to keep the 
load balanced over the midfoot. During the top half of the movement, the knees 
will be traveling forward over the toes and the hips backward. If you do this 
correctly, by the time you have reached the midpoint of the descent (give or 
take), the knees will be as far forward as they are going to be. The torso, too, will 
be angled as far forward now as it will be at any point in the lift, unless some 
technical fault occurs. Please note that how far your knees travel forward here 
is completely determined by leverages, stance width, and bar placement. Those 
with proportionally longer legs, narrower stances, or a higher bar placement 
will require more forward knee travel to keep the system in balance. If your 
knee pass over your toes, that is perfectly fine, provided the bar is maintained 
in alignment over the midfoot.
KEY POINT
You will often hear that you should break from the knee or hip first to recruit the 
quad or hip more. While it can work to a degree, it really only works because 
you are not recruiting those muscles or moving in a manner that loads them 
correctly in the first place. Also, it can often lead you to squatting in a manner 
that then favors that joint or muscle group. If you don’t let your knees move 
forward enough (for example) in your squat unless you break from the knee 
joint first, then this is an issue you need to address. Don’t stick a Band-Aid over 
it. Address the faulty movement pattern.
Phase II
Since the knees are already as far forward as they are going to go, and the torso 
angle is set, then phase II simply consists of the hips sitting straight down until 
the bottom position is achieved. During this phase, the shoulders and hips should 
move in tandem to maintain the torso angle relative to the floor, and the knees 
should not move further forward.
In the bottom position, you have two options: Relax a little to emphasize the 
stretch reflex or rebound, or focus on maintaining rigidity and reverse the move­
ment in a more controlled manner. There are several factors, on top of personal 
preference, that will dictate which will suit you best. Here are the guidelines that 
generally I go with:
	
• Favoring the stretch reflex: Stable technique (and an experienced lifter); a 
strong stretch reflex (naturally explosive, good performance in jumping or 
plyometric-based exercises); proportionally short legs with upright squat­
ting posture; proportionally strong eccentric strength (can control eccentric 
loads of 110 to 120 percent of 1RM)
	
• The “staying tight” approach: Unreliable technique; naturally slow or a 
grinding lifting style; proportionally long legs with lots of forward lean; 
poor eccentric strength; under-developed ligament or tendon strength
Generally, the most important factor I tend to find is the lower body propor­
tions. Those with long legs have longer levers, which always brings with it greater 
stability demands. So, the idea of partially relaxing and speeding up at the bottom 

79
Squat
of the squat (the position with the highest stability demands) simply isn’t a good 
one here. The benefit of a stronger muscle contraction out of the bottom position 
simply doesn’t outweigh the negative of reduced stability where the demands are 
highest. However, a short-legged lifter with short levers to stabilize can likely get 
away with it and reap the benefits of the stretch reflex.
If you are not choosing to use the stretch reflex in your squat, then your mindset 
here should be to progressively build up more and more full-body tension as you 
approach the bottom position. At the bottom of a heavy squat, it should feel like 
your head is about to explode from the pressure built up. When I coach, I like to 
say it is as if you were attempting to do a pause squat; you should have enough 
tension (throughout the whole descent ideally) that you could pause at any time 
if required. Then, when it comes to reversing the movement, you will be in the 
best position in terms of stability and muscular tension to do so.
If you are using the stretch reflex, then I still like to coach the descent in the 
same manner, with one exception: You will relax slightly as you approach the 
bottom of the lift. If you are efficient with the stretch reflex, then you shouldn’t 
need to free-fall for half of the lift to use it—plus, that leaves too much oppor­
tunity for losing positioning. As a general rule, I like to have lifters “relax” just 
above parallel to allow them enough distance to speed up and catch the bounce 
without sacrificing control for too long.
Just to be clear, when we say “relax” here, we are talking relatively. There should 
be a 10 to 20 percent relaxation of the prime movers (quads, hamstrings, glutes) 
of the lift and nothing else. This is done just enough to allow a stretching of 
these muscle groups at the bottom without sacrificing positioning (knees stacked 
directly over ankles, no extra forward movement of the knee). The upper back 
and abs that are holding your torso position absolutely should not relax at all.
KEY POINT
You will often see the knees move forward at the bottom of the squat when 
someone is using the stretch reflex or if someone has a very knee dominant or 
upright squat style. As discussed, the knees should be as far forward as they 
are going to be by the end of phase I. Forward knee travel at the bottom is usu­
ally a subconscious mechanism to work around a weakness: to get a greater 
stretch reflex (poor strength or stability in the bottom position) or to excessively 
load the quads (lacking posterior chain strength). It is also likely to cause a for­
ward shift off balance onto the toes in the bottom, which will negatively affect 
your positioning. The only time this can be beneficial is if you are squatting in 
knee wraps, which provide a lot of stretch and rebound. In this case, the extra 
stretching of the wrap at the bottom can exaggerate the effect of the wraps, 
but even then, you must be careful to make sure it doesn’t cause a forward 
balance shift.
Concentric Portion
Great job. You got to the bottom of the squat—hooray for gravity. Now it’s time 
for the difficult bit. For the upward phase, we go through the same two phases 
that we did in the downward phase with a few minor differences.

80
The Overload System for Strength
Phase I
During phase I of the concentric portion, the hips and shoulders should rise 
together (just like in the first phase of the deadlift); that is, the torso angle rela­
tive to the floor should stay stable. Unlike on the downward movement, however, 
the knees do move during this phase. The knees will move back marginally to 
facilitate a stronger quad drive out of the hole, which means, in turn, that the 
hips will also shift backward slightly. As this occurs, you should encourage your 
knees to stay stacked wide, directly over the ankle joint. Allowing them to buckle 
in out of the hole will reduce your hip and glute strength and more likely lead to 
a squat good morning–style lift.
It is important during this phase to remember to not only push up into the bar 
but also back into the bar to avoid the hips moving backward too far. Likewise, 
you cannot allow the knees to move too far back as it will mean the quads become 
unloaded and cannot contribute to the next phase of the lift. I like to cue lifters 
to try to keep their knees over their toes, if they are guilty of letting them shift 
back too much out of the bottom.
Lifters can fail the lift for a multitude of reasons, but the most common causes 
are the following:
	
• Glute strength, if a lifter stays upright. Glutes are recruited most in the 
bottom position where they are most stretched. So, the lifter is lacking in 
hip extension strength that could be remedied through the good morning 
and Romanian deadlift variations, along with some wider-stance squat work.
	
• Quad strength, if a lifter’s hips shift back and up (the typical squat good 
morning). This occurs as the load is being shifted back onto the posterior 
chain because the quads cannot produce enough force. This also results 
in more shear stress through the spine. Strengthening the anterior chain 
through front-loaded squat variations would be advised here.
	
• Torso or core stability, if a lifter folds over or collapses. Quite simply, the 
lifter is unable to maintain enough core rigidity to maintain the spine in 
alignment under the load, resulting in the bar flexing the spine forward. 
This can be aided by front-loaded squat variations because of their high 
demand on core rigidity. But loaded carries would work well here, along 
with working on your breathing patterning.
How you fail the lift can indicate what you need to work on and improve 
because it illustrates where your weak point is. In reality, often weaknesses will 
show up well before you fail a lift, and they will present through bar path or body 
position changes. This is why it is important to analyze your own lifting regularly.
Phase II
In theory, phase II is the easy bit. The leverages are much more favorable. It is 
during phase II of the ascent that the torso angle shifts from being forward to 
being vertical. This is achieved through hip extension, driving the hips forward 
underneath the bar. While there is knee extension here (and, in fact, top-half-
only squats load the quads very effectively), the hip joint goes through a lot more 
movement in this phase.
During this phase, it is important to remember to keep driving up and back 
into the bar to encourage knee and hip extension together. Encourage the hips 
to wedge forward aggressively underneath the bar to lock out the lift as early as 

81
Squat
possible. The knee and hip joint should lock out simultaneously at the top of the 
lift. During this phase, the knees will drift inward, inside the knees, as the knee 
joint extends and the legs straighten. At the top, you should once again be able to 
stand tall with the bar on your back; if not, then something has shifted in terms 
of your setup during the rep.
During phase I, lifters will generally fail for one of the following reasons:
	
• Weak upper back and postural strength, often represented by the chest 
and shoulders caving forward. Again. Front-loaded squat variations and 
additional upper back work would be recommended here.
	
• Weak vastus medialis oblique (VMO), illustrated by poor knee stability and 
an inability to complete knee extension. Split squat variations are your go-to 
here if this your issue. I prefer performing them with the front-foot elevated.
	
• Poor stability. Although this is not generally an issue until weights get truly 
heavy, it is reasonably common to see truly heavy squats missed at the top 
because of a loss of balance. Single leg work can often address this situa­
tion if the issue is from the hip. Front-sided squat variations can be of use 
if the issue is torso rigidity. My favorite method, however, is the hanging 
band technique (HBT).
	
• Lack of intent. The lifter partially relaxes once they are out of the bottom 
position, thinking the hard work is done.
Again, these signs can guide you in determining what you need to work on to 
keep your squat improving by showing you what is the weakest link in the chain.
KEY POINT
The upper back collapsing in the top half of the lift is often preceded by the 
bar rolling up the back (increasing the workload on the thoracic extensors 
and changing the balance point). This often occurs because the lifter is sub­
consciously pushing up into the bar through the arms to help lift the weight. 
You should be pulling down on the bar, through the lats, at all times. Don’t try to 
shoulder-press your 1RM squat!

This page intentionally left blank

83
Military Press
For decades, the military press was referred to as “the press” because it was the 
only press of perceived importance. There were no benches in gyms during these 
times, and anyway, why would you go to a gym to lie down? The main pressing 
exercises were overhead presses (press, push press, jerk, etc.), dips, and push-
ups. How much weight you could put over your head was seen as a top priority, 
along with how much weight you could lift from the floor. The best example is 
Arthur Saxon, who holds the world record in the bent press of 371 pounds (168 
kilograms)—look up the bent press to see exactly how impressive that is. Then 
the world changed, and everyone started bench-pressing, taking selfies in the 
gym, and posting on TikTok (if that’s not devolution, then I don’t know what is). 
It’s time to make overhead pressing great again, people.
Just to clarify, we are talking about the military press here, not the arched-back 
Olympic press. The Olympic clean and press was removed in 1972 because it 
essentially became a standing incline bench press and a test of which lifter had 
the most flexible and resilient spine. A military press (hereafter referred to as 
press) is performed with upright (military-like) posture and very little movement 
through the torso throughout the lift.
So why has the press fallen in popularity? Because it’s hard. The press chal­
lenges you far beyond the ability of the pressing muscles to produce force. It 
requires a great deal of stability, coordination, and postural strength (you know, 
all the stuff most people are terrible at). It also doesn’t massage the ego like the 
CHAPTER 
6

84
The Overload System for Strength
bench press can because the loads lifted will be smaller; also, there are fewer 
ways to cheat a few extra kilos on to the bar (e.g., bouncing off the chest, driving 
hips up off the bench). Because of the smaller loads lifted, it also requires a lot of 
patience since progress will seem slow. Adding 5 percent to a lift is great progress; 
but when that 5 percent only equates to 2 to 3 kilograms (4 to 7 pounds) then it 
can test even the most determined lifters patience, which is something we seem 
to be painfully short of as a species now.
Setup
I am going to address setup as if you were 
performing your presses with the bar in 
a rack. You could argue a true old-time 
press would be done without a rack, but 
then I would have to write a whole extra 
section on how to power clean it up to 
position (and by this point, you are likely 
already half asleep). See figure 6.1 for 
proper setup for the military press.
Stance
Stance width will affect your overall sta­
bility throughout the lift. If the stance is 
too narrow, your base will be too small to 
provide enough stability. If the stance is 
too wide, it will almost provide too much 
stability and allow you to get away with 
too much back bend.
Between hip width and shoulder width 
is a very good starting point for most 
lifters. Personally, I favor a narrower hip-
width stance during the press. It empha­
sizes the core stability element of the lift 
by being less forgiving when it comes to 
back bend and leaning back, which, in my 
opinion, is one of the greatest benefits of the press. Note that you will see some 
individuals adopt a split stance during the press. This is just a way of cheating 
to get more support. The back leg can be used to allow a greater degree of back­
ward lean during the lift. This is generally done because of a lack of stability, 
core strength, or skill. Do it properly or not at all. See figure 6.1 for an example 
of proper foot position for the military press.
Grip Width
The first step to setting up for a successful press is getting the correct grip width. 
Most people end up gripping too wide to subconsciously cheat by reducing the 
range of motion and also recruiting the pecs more once they inevitably lean back.
The grip width should be the widest grip that allows you to achieve the proper 
alignment in the starting position (addressed below). For 90 percent or more of 
FIGURE 6.1  Setup for the military press.

85
Military Press
lifters, this means a grip width just outside your shoulders. This may vary a little 
depending on your proportions, but setting your grip so that your index fingers 
are just outside the width of your shoulders in the bottom position will put most 
people very close to, if not in, the optimal start position. See figure 6.2 for grip 
position for the military press.
Adopting a grip narrower than this is generally inefficient because it will 
lead to your arms and shoulders being 
internally rotated at the bottom posi­
tion. It will also lead to your hands 
being partially inhibited by your own 
shoulders as you press out of the 
bottom position. Likewise, a wider 
grip may reduce the range of motion 
but will lead to the arm and shoulder 
being too externally rotated in the 
bottom position. This will stop you 
from getting your elbow directly under 
your wrist (more on this shortly) and 
reduce your starting strength. Also, it’s 
worth noting that the optimal grip for 
your press will be different from that 
of your push press or jerk, so don’t use 
your grip on one of these exercises to 
determine the other.
As well as grip width, you have a 
few options regarding how to actually 
grip the bar. Of course, you could just 
use a regular grip (see figure 6.3a), 
but many lifters struggle to achieve 
proper alignment with this grip. Over 
time, this can lead to discomfort or 
potentially tendonitis. So many lifters 
benefit from adopting a false grip, 
where the thumb is pressed into the 
underside of the bar (see figure 6.3b), 
or a suicide grip, where the thumb is 
not around the bar (see figure 6.3c). 
You won’t drop the bar, and these 
grips actually allow you to achieve a 
more neutral wrist position, putting 
less pressure on the elbow joint. This 
actually makes it a more joint-friendly 
option as well as potentially stronger, 
due to the improved alignment. Note 
that pressing using fat or axle bars can 
achieve a similar outcome.
a
b
c
FIGURE 6.2  Comparison of grip position on the bar 
for the military press: (a) optimal, (b) too wide, and 
(c) too narrow.

86
The Overload System for Strength
Wrist and Elbow Position
Once the correct grip width is set, we now need to set up the upper arms and 
shoulders around it. A common mistake with the press is setting up with the bar 
too low relative to the body. This results in the elbow joint sitting behind the bar 
and outside the wrists. Where the bar will start relative to your body is simply a 
by-product of your arm proportions. If your forearm is considerably longer than 
your upper arm, then the bar will sit relatively higher compared to your body. 
The start position of the press, as shown in figure 6.4, is the lowest position in 
which you can accomplish the following:
	
• Align the elbow joint directly underneath or, ideally, slightly in front of, 
the bar.
	
• Align the elbow joint directly under the wrist joint in terms of lateral space 
(i.e., when viewed from the front).
This is the most efficient start posi­
tion and gives us the best alignment to 
apply force vertically into the bar. In this 
start position, the bar will be slightly in 
front of your center of gravity, which will 
necessitate a very slight backward lean 
to keep the system in balance.
If you struggle to achieve the start 
position outlined here, then your mobil­
ity needs work. The most likely culprits 
are going to be the pec minor and lats, 
so start hammering those areas with 
soft tissue work and stretching. Yes, it’s 
boring and time-consuming, but not as 
boring and time-consuming as being 
injured (or weak).
a
b
c
FIGURE 6.3  Types of grips for the military press: (a) regular, (b) false, and (c) suicide.
FIGURE 6.4  Correct alignment for the start 
of the military press.

87
Military Press
KEY POINT
While the start position outlined for the military press is optimal for this exercise, 
note that it is not the best start position for the push press or the jerk. The push 
press and jerk rely heavily on the transfer of force from the legs into the bar 
and so benefit from starting in the front rack position, in contact with the delts. 
This allows a much greater transfer of force from the legs into the bar. The push 
press can be done reasonably well from the same starting position as the 
press (and is employed often by lifters who lack the mobility to achieve proper 
front rack positioning—just look at World’s Strongest Man competitors), but it 
does result in less efficient force transfer. The press can be done from a front 
rack position, but it doesn’t really carry any benefit. Likewise, achieving a prop­
er front rack position requires a lot more mobility, which many lifters lack.
Upper Back Position
As in many lifts, it is common to see lifters overextended through the lumbar 
spine and over-retracted through the shoulder blades when performing the press. 
Because the average person now has the upper back posture of a Neanderthal, 
we are constantly drilled to “pull your shoulders back!”—to the point where 
those with half-decent posture end up performing their lifts with overly retracted 
shoulders.
The upper back should be set in slight retraction while maintaining a neutral 
thoracic spine and centrated shoulders. What this means in plain language is to 
slightly retract your shoulders while keeping your shoulders as wide as possible 
(imagine trying to keep your collarbone as wide as possible). This positioning 
allows the shoulders to be centrated properly and the scapulae to be in the best 
position to stabilize them throughout the movement (see figure 6.5). Having the 
shoulders overly retracted impinges on the scapulae’s ability to glide properly, 
therefore reducing shoulder stability.
FIGURE 6.5  Comparison of the upper back in a (a) relaxed and (b) retracted position.
a
b

88
The Overload System for Strength
KEY POINT
Overhead pressing is a brilliant tool for teaching correct scapular control and 
movement, which is massively important for performing well in the press (and 
bench press). Unlike the bench press, however, the press allows the scapulae 
to glide uninhibited during the movement, which in turn allows a more natural 
relationship with the upper arm. Also, since the arm moves through a greater 
range of motion compared to a horizontal press, so do the scapulae. This fact, 
combined with the greater stability demands required by overhead press­
ing, make it far more demanding when it comes to glenohumeral control. An 
overhead press performed standing is also a fantastic way of improving core 
strength and stability because of the high demands of stabilizing a load that is 
so far away from your center of gravity.
Torso and Hip Position
One of the many reasons the press is such a great exercise is because it chal­
lenges your torso rigidity probably better than any other exercise. As the arms 
extend overhead, the lats lengthen and begin to pull upward on the rib cage. 
This upward pull needs to be counteracted by a downward pull by the abdom­
inals. The further the arm 
extends, the harder it is to 
resist this upward pull. Add to 
that the fact that you have a 
(hopefully, for your sake) heavy 
barbell moving overhead, pro­
gressively further from your 
center of gravity, which makes 
it even more challenging. That 
the barbell goes from starting 
slightly in front of your center 
of gravity to being in line with 
it also compounds this effect.
Just like in the squat and 
deadlift, we are looking for neu­
tral spinal alignment through­
out (see figure 6.6 for an 
example of neutral alignment 
for the military press com­
pared to the commonly-seen 
over-arched position). This 
means chin slightly tucked, 
ribs pulled down, and pelvis 
directly underneath them, with 
one slight difference: a small 
degree of backward lean in the 
start position. In the start posi­
tion, the torso will have a slight 
a
b
FIGURE 6.6  Comparison of a (a) neutral alignment 
of the spine for the military press and (b) an over-
arched posture.

89
Military Press
backward lean to account for the load being in front of you or your center of 
gravity. This is necessary to keep the system in balance. This backward lean will 
remain until the bar can move back over the head and realign with your center 
of gravity. In the top position, the bar and arm should be in a vertical alignment 
over your center of gravity.
Note that at the start of the lift, it is very common to see individuals lean back 
and arch through the lumbar spine to initiate the lift. This happens for several 
reasons:
	
• To gain leverage to recruit the upper pecs more (more pressing power)—not 
necessarily a bad thing
	
• Pressing the bar forward away from the body—wrong
	
• Losing spinal alignment because of improper bracing or start position—
even more wrong
A small amount of backward lean and lumbar extension during the press isn’t 
a bad thing. In fact, it is required for moving maximal weights overhead. How­
ever, the point is that it cannot be achieved at the cost of losing your brace and 
alignment. When we talk about neutral spinal alignment, we are not talking about 
one very specific position; there is a degree of leeway in both directions. And 
that is what we want to focus on—staying within neutral range. I would define 
neutral range as the range in which you can keep your rib cage and diaphragm 
stacked directly over your hips and pelvic floor muscles. So, basically, if the gap 
between your sternum and your belly button increases (in the case of lumbar 
extension) or decreases (in the case of lumbar flexion), then you are now outside 
the neutral range, and I am very disappointed in you. This can be easy to tell if 
you are wearing a belt because you will feel that you lose contact with the belt 
somewhere around your midsection, depending on whether you have fallen into 
extension or flexion.
In summary, yes, a small amount of extension or backward lean is fine at the 
beginning of the lift, but this must be corrected after phase I is complete (see 
the next section on Bar Path and Movement Pattern), and it cannot be done at 
the expense of losing neutral alignment and bracing. In my experience, most 
people will always tend to lean back too far, so you are better off focusing on 
minimizing the backward lean as much as possible; in turn, you will generally 
keep it to a reasonable degree, unless you are attempting a weight you have no 
right lifting.
Bar Path and Movement Pattern
As mentioned previously, the press represents an extra challenge in terms of sta­
bility and balance, and unlike the squat and deadlift, it doesn’t follow a vertical 
bar path. Because most humans tend to have a head, the bar has to start out in 
front of the body and then finish directly over the center of gravity in the top 
position. So, the bar path of the press will curve backward to achieve this. And 
again, unlike the squat and deadlift, we spend some of this movement with the 
bar not over our center of gravity. Our goal is to navigate the bar back in line 
with that point as efficiently as possible. See figure 6.7 for the full movement of 
a military press.

90
The Overload System for Strength
FIGURE 6.7  The segments of a military press: (a) start, (b) midpoint (end of concentric phase I), 
(c) top (end of concentric phase II), (d) midpoint (end of eccentric phase I), and (e) finish (end of 
eccentric phase II).
a
b
c
d
e

91
Military Press
Concentric Portion
Once again, our movement is split into two phases. First, we have a phase where 
we must press the bar while it is in front of our center of gravity (due to our head 
being in the way). Then we have a second phase where the bar moves backward 
over our head to be aligned with our center of gravity, and the lift can be completed.
Phase I
Phase I of the press starts in the bottom position and finishes once the bar is just 
above forehead height. During phase I, the bar is in front of the body (unless you 
want to try pressing the bar through your face), and the elbows and forearms 
stay in the same alignment, stacked vertically under the bar, in front of you. The 
bar path for this phase should be vertical or with an extremely slight backward 
curve. As mentioned previously, there will usually be a slight backward lean during 
this phase to gain leverage and to allow the bar to stay as close to the center of 
gravity as possible without hitting the face.
Initiating, phase I is done by actively rotating the scapulae upward. In fact, 
you can essentially “steal” the first inch or two of movement just from this action 
if you are wired in well to your scapulae without any real active pressing, as it 
were. If you are not, the press is the perfect tool to teach you to feel out the nat­
ural glide of your scapulae and learn to control it. So, the scapulae initiate the 
movement by rotating upward, and then the front delts and the clavicular portion 
of the pecs (to a smaller degree) take over the main pressing work. During this 
phase, the shoulders stay in position; any rising or shrugging of the shoulders 
at this point will take the front delt and pecs out of optimal alignment, meaning 
they can contribute less.
KEY POINT
Shrugging the shoulders during phase I is not optimal for force production, 
so why do we so commonly see it? Generally speaking, it comes down to the 
compounding effect of several factors:
	
• Poor postural awareness or control: The lifter doesn’t know how to keep the 
shoulders depressed while the arms move overhead. Temporarily swapping 
to less demanding variations of the press (such as the landmine press) 
can allow this to be improved on.
	
• Strong or overactive upper traps: Generally, this occurs in lifters with poor 
posture or poor programming. When the bar is being pressed overhead, we 
need even pull on the scapulae from above (upper traps) and below (lower 
traps, lats), but the upper traps end up dominating, resulting in the scapulae 
elevating. Strengthening the lats and lower traps can correct this imbalance.
	
• Poor starting strength: The lifter struggles during the early phase of the lift 
and shrugs up to create extra momentum. This works to a degree, but then 
because of suboptimal shoulder alignment, it ends up moving the sticking 
point to further on in the lift (often around forehead height). This is commonly 
seen in lifters who like to use the stretch reflex out of the bottom position (not 
performing reps from a dead-stop), leaving them short of practice at creat­
ing force from a dead-stop at that point. Pin presses can be your friend here.

92
The Overload System for Strength
Phase II
Phase II begins around or just above forehead level and finishes with the bar 
locked out directly overhead. During phase II, the bar drifts backward to align 
with the center of gravity, and the elbows will externally rotate to stay under 
the wrists. As the bar passes the forehead, it should start to drift backward in a 
gradual manner. The bar should end up aligned over the midfoot about halfway 
through this phase. At this point, the elbows will also be fully externally rotated 
so that they are pointing directly sideways out from the body. Any earlier will 
take the delts out of the equation too early and leave you doing a really terrible 
triceps extension with a bar that is floating a couple of inches over your head.
Once the bar is roughly halfway through phase II, the triceps are in a mechani­
cally advantageous enough position to finish the lift. If this backward movement is 
done too late, then you leave yourself with the bar out in front of the body (usually 
accompanied with an exaggerated lumbar arch) and with no leverage to finish 
the lift. At the finish point of the lift, the arm should be locked and completely 
vertical, with the wrist, elbow, and shoulder joint stacked directly under the bar. 
There should be a vertical line down from the bar, through the arm, all the way 
to the midfoot. The simplest test for this is to see whether you can hold a heavy 
press over your head at the top of the lift for at least a few seconds. If not, then 
your finish position probably needs to improve. If you are in a properly stacked 
position, this shouldn’t be an issue, even with a near maximal load.
KEY POINT
A loss of positioning at the top of the press is most often caused by tight lats 
or by poor bracing ability (often they go hand in hand). As the arm extends 
overhead, the lat muscle stretches, due to the attachment point being on the 
upper arm. If the lat is too tight, then it won’t allow the arm to fully extend over­
head. To compensate, the ribs will flare up and the lumbar spine will extend, 
shortening the lat from the origin end, in turn allowing enough room for the 
arm to fully extend.
Even with ample mobility, poor bracing strength can still cause a loss of posi­
tioning. As the arm extends overhead, the upward pull on the rib cage from the 
lat increases in magnitude. If this upward pull cannot be matched by a down­
ward pull on the ribs by the abdominals, then the result will also be that the rib 
cage flares up. Now, the tighter the lat is, the stronger that upward pull is, which 
explains why these issues are often interlinked. You then have the compound­
ing factor of the further the bar moves overhead, the harder you must work to 
stabilize it (due to longer levers).
In these cases, practicing movements such as the Savickas press and in­
cluding more core dominant work in your training would be a good call. Plus 
stretching your lats couldn’t hurt, either.
Eccentric Portion
Simply speaking, the downward phase of the lift should be a mirror image of the 
upward phase. So, the descent will begin with a short (vertical) downward phase 
before the elbows begin internally rotating and bringing the bar forward. Once 

93
Military Press
the bar is roughly at forehead level (depending on lever length), the elbows will 
be directly under the wrists and also either directly under, or slightly in front of, 
the barbell. The bar then travels directly down in front of the head to return to 
the original start position.
The most common fault seen on the descent generally is keeping the elbows 
flared out for too long so that they end up being outside the wrists (see figure 
6.8). This is done because it keeps the bar directly over the center of gravity for 
longer. To be blunt, this is purely the result of laziness. On the descent, lifters 
can’t be bothered to keep their bracing and alignment up, so instead of bringing 
the bar down properly by tucking through the elbows (which puts the bar in front 
of the center of gravity, which equals more core work), they keep them flared. 
Then they get the bar to just above their skull with their elbows all over the place 
and have to tuck them in really fast to get the bar in front of their head. This 
descent path is bad for your elbows and for your shoulders, and it also means 
you’re lazy—don’t do it.
If you struggle with this, then do all your presses with slow eccentrics until 
you can nail it every time. Or keep the same bar path until you get it wrong and 
end up with an impinged shoulder or the bar crushes your skull. But don’t say 
I didn’t tell you so.
FIGURE 6.8  Incorrect technique on the eccentric portion of the military press: (a) start, (b) midpoint, and (c) finish.
a
b
c

This page intentionally left blank

95
Bench Press
I (Tom) often get very bemused looks when I tell people, including coaches, that 
I think the bench press is the most technical of the big lifts. I mean, how com­
plicated can it be to lie down and push something away from you? As a result, 
I find that lifters tend to be overly confident in the quality of their bench press. 
The reality is that your bench press probably needs just as much work as your 
other lifts; you just aren’t consciously aware of your incompetence.
Where the bench press differs from the other lifts is that there are a lot more 
individual nuances and preferences that come in to play. With the other lifts, 
you can give pretty solid guidelines for 80 to 90 percent of the mechanics based 
purely on physics and levers, for instance. But with the bench press, not so much. 
Many people can end up strongest using setups (e.g., grip width, foot position) 
that are in theory suboptimal, and then there is the difference between what is 
optimal for men and women. Owing to that variation, this chapter is a bit of a 
beast, but it is purely about the complexity of the lift.
When performed correctly, the bench press is just as much of a full body lift 
as any of the others that we have covered so far. Louie Simmons, the founder of 
Westside Barbell, used to talk about all the lifters he had observed over the years 
who blew out their quads while benching. Similarly, when I was competing at 
the European Championships in 2017, I tore my quad while squatting (as if I 
needed another reason to hate squats). Nothing major, but it was enough to make 
CHAPTER 
7

96
The Overload System for Strength
walking around a bit of a pain. I lost about 15 to 20 percent off my bench press 
purely from not being able to use my right leg properly during the lift. A solid 
bench press setup requires tension through the entire body, from the hands on 
the bar down to the feet. Any weak link in that chain is going to cost you power 
and stability.
Setup
In this section, I want to address a setup with flat feet and on the tiptoes. My 
preferred setup is with flat feet, so I’ll spend the most time covering this setup 
in the same order that I teach it and have people set up in person.
Setting Up with Flat Feet
This is the setup process for those who want to bench with their feet flat on 
the floor (see figure 7.1 for an example of the proper flat feet setup for the 
bench press). This setup is covered first because it is what I find works best 
for the majority of people (who aren’t competitive powerlifters, at least), but 
also because some lifting federations will only allow you to set up this way. If 
you want to bench on your tiptoes, don’t worry, we have you covered. But the 
process is different.
FIGURE 7.1  Setup for the bench press: flat feet.

97
Bench Press
Grip Width
Where you grip the bar is going to be determined by your wingspan to a large 
degree. So, when finding your optimal grip placement, you can’t really depend 
on arbitrary measures such as “little fingers on the rings,” as an example. It is 
common to see 1.5 times shoulder width suggested as your grip width, and to be 
honest, this isn’t a bad suggestion. But we are here to move maximal poundage, 
so we need to find what is optimal rather than settle for OK.
For beginner and intermediate lifters, you want to start with the widest possible 
grip width that allows you to keep the elbow stacked directly under the wrist in 
the bottom position of the lift (see figure 7.2). This is going to depend on your 
upper and lower arm length as well as the size of your arch. To test this, film 
your bench press looking up your body and then look specifically at your forearm 
positioning when the bar is on your chest, and simply keep working the grip out 
until you can no longer achieve a vertical forearm. This gives us the best mix 
of a shortened range of motion, stacked joints, and a lower demand on upper 
back stability (compared to a wider grip). Essentially, this gives us a pretty safe 
setup in which injury risk is low (the pecs aren’t in an overly stretched position, 
the upper back stability is reasonably easy to maintain) and achieving correct 
alignment isn’t too difficult because the elbow can stay directly under the wrist 
throughout the entire lift.
FIGURE 7.2  The widest grip that allows the lifter to maintain a stacked forearm during the bench press 
is the best starting point.
As you become more proficient at the bench press, you can move your grip 
wider (see figure 7.3), although that doesn’t mean everyone should. This comes 
with the benefits of a reduced range of motion and increased pec recruitment (not 
universally a good thing), but it has the downsides of increased upper back and 
stability demands, because keeping your shoulders pinned back is harder with 
a wider grip. It will also mean that you do not have a vertically stacked forearm 

98
The Overload System for Strength
throughout the lift (inherently less stable). Generally, you are going to benefit 
from a wider grip if you fall into one of these categories:
	
• Have long arms or a wingspan that is an inch (3cm or more) greater than 
your height. You will be a pec dominant presser, so emphasizing the pecs 
will benefit you. Plus, since you will have a large range of motion, you have 
more to gain from shortening it.
	
• Have good leg drive. A wider grip places the pecs under a greater stretch 
at the bottom of the lift, meaning your sticking point is more likely to be 
toward the bottom end of the lift compared to a narrow grip. Leg drive can 
help you navigate around this mechanical disadvantage.
	
• Are female. If you are female, then you will generally benefit from a wider 
grip because you will have less potential for upper body muscle relative to 
a male. So, you have more to gain from improving leverages and shorten­
ing range of motion as you have less raw pressing power to rely on. If you 
can’t produce as much force, reduce the amount of force you must create 
to complete the lift—simple. Also, women will have more lumbar spine 
flexibility (to help accommodate for the postural shift during pregnancy), 
which means they can achieve a larger arch generally than men.
It’s important to remember that when using a wider grip, you will not achieve 
a stacked or vertical forearm throughout the lift, but what is important is that 
the outward angle of the forearm should be constant throughout the lift. So, 
for example, if your forearms are angled out at 15 degrees when the bar is on 
the chest, then the forearms should be at this 15-degree angle throughout the 
whole lift.
FIGURE 7.3  A wider grip means that the wrist joint will be outside the elbow at the bottom of the lift, 
resulting in a non-vertical forearm.

99
Bench Press
Finally, is there such a thing as too wide? Yes. At some point, the advantage 
of shortening the range of motion is outweighed by putting the shoulders and 
triceps in a disadvantageous position (so they can contribute less), upper back or 
stability demands being too high, and the upper arm being in such a flared-out 
position that it aggravates the shoulder joint because it cannot track properly. As 
a general rule, I don’t like to see the forearm angled out at more than 30 degrees. 
Any more than this and one ends up running into the disadvantages listed above 
and increasing the risk of injury.
KEY POINT
It is important to remember that once you find your optimal grip width, that 
doesn’t mean that it is going to be your optimal grip forever. For example, if you 
improve your flexibility and get a bigger arch, then you may benefit from going 
wider to take advantage of a higher touch point. Likewise, if you strengthen your 
upper back significantly, you may now have enough stability to use a wider grip. 
Bodyweight fluctuations also affect optimal grip width because weight gain 
brings with it more passive joint stability and maybe a higher chest position, 
which may facilitate a wider grip. The reverse would be true for weight loss. My 
optimal grip is about an inch (3 centimeters) narrower (per side) when I weigh 
around 200 pounds (91 kilograms) compared to 220 pounds (100 kilograms).
Wrist Position
A cocked back wrist position is likely the most common fault seen in bench press. 
This wrist position places the bar back behind the wrist joint so that the bar is 
no longer stacked directly over the elbow joint (see figure 7.4). This is not only 
inefficient but also makes it more likely the bar will be driven too far back over 
the shoulders and head on the concentric portion, leading to a failed lift. Think 
of it like a punch. You wouldn’t punch with a cocked back wrist because it would 
lead to poor force transfer.
FIGURE 7.4  Correct wrist alignment for the bench press.

100
The Overload System for Strength
The most common reason for this fault is in fact elbow positioning. When the 
elbows are flared out too much, they will end up behind the bar (as in closer to 
the head) during the lift. To correct this, the wrists will then cock back to allow 
the bar to move back over the elbows. If this is a fault of yours, then no, you don’t 
need to tie your wrist wraps tighter; instead, you likely need to fix your elbow posi­
tioning. It may also be that you are trying to hold the bar too high in your hand. 
You want the bar to sink as low into your palm as possible. Note, however, that 
there are few high-level bench pressers who use what is an extremely advanced 
technique with a maximum legal (super-wide) grip and a purposely heavily cocked 
back wrist position. This allows them to limit the range of motion massively, and 
the wrist position actually allows them to over-tuck the elbows while touching a 
higher point on the torso. This is an extremely intricate and stressful technique 
used by a very small number of benchers; this is likely not for you.
Setting the Upper Back
The upper back forms the foundation from which we can apply force to the bar. 
As such, a loose upper back is the biggest power leak that you can have in a bench 
press. In fact, you could probably argue that no bench press has really been missed 
because of an inability to create enough force to move the bar (unless attempting 
something way too heavy); rather, it was the inability to provide enough stability 
to channel that force into the bar that caused the lift to fail.
The biggest benefit of a correct thoracic arch during a proper bench press setup 
is in fact the ability to provide more stability for the upper back and shoulder 
joint. Yes, it also has other benefits, such as reducing the range of motion (by 
raising the chest up off the bench) and facilitating a greater use of the pecs in the 
lift (by turning it into a kind of semi-decline bench), but the main benefit is from 
the upper back stability that is gained, which is often overlooked. The injury risk 
of the lift is also reduced by the enhanced stability and by limiting the range of 
motion (once the elbow starts traveling below the level of the shoulder during 
a bench, the shoulder stress increases markedly). A proper thoracic arch also 
facilitates a better transfer of leg drive into the bar (this will be discussed later).
When setting up, begin by lying flat on the bench with your feet on the end of 
the bench (see figure 7.5a). Push yourself back along the bench until the bar is 
roughly level with your upper chest (your head will likely be off the bench at this 
point; see figure 7.5b). From this position, perform a glute bridge by pushing your 
feet into the bench and driving your hips as high as possible (see figure 7.5c). 
Once the hips are set, it is important to keep them as high as possible while we 
set the upper back because it will allow us to get the weight sitting higher up on 
the traps.
With the hips elevated, pull your upper body up off the bench using the bar 
(think inverted row); at this point, only your feet will be on the bench (see figure 
7.5d). While the upper body is elevated off the bench, you are going to set your 
shoulders by rolling them down and back into your body as far as possible (you 
should feel your lats contract when you do so). You are looking to set the shoul­
ders as low into the body as possible (think about making your neck as long as 
possible) and rotating them so that the chest is pulled up.
Once you have done this, you are going to retract the shoulder blades (squeeze 
your shoulder blades together), which will further arch the chest up, before laying 
your upper body back down on the bench (see figure 7.5e). When you do this, it 
is important to have the contact point of your upper body with the bench as high 
.

101
Bench Press
up on your traps as possible. You want it to feel as if your weight is resting almost 
on the base of your neck as opposed to down on your mid-back. Otherwise, you 
haven’t really set up with an arch.
Once you have done this, you should now be in a position where your grip is 
on the bar, your upper back is arched and on the bench with your weight resting 
high up on your traps, and your hips are elevated. With your upper back set, now 
we need to set the hips and feet.
FIGURE 7.5  Setting the arch for the bench press.
a
b
c
d
e

102
The Overload System for Strength
KEY POINT
 Many coaches teach you to retract as much as possible during this part of 
the setup. In theory, it makes perfect sense to have bigger arch, more upper 
back tension, and so on. However, this isn’t strictly true. During the lowering 
phase of the bench press, the shoulder joint goes through extension. As this 
extension occurs, there needs to be some degree of shoulder retraction to 
keep the shoulder joint centrated. If the shoulders start in a maximally retract­
ed position, then you have removed their ability to retract further during the 
eccentric. This will lead to poor joint alignment in the bottom position and a 
higher amount of stress on the shoulder joint and the pecs. During the setup, 
use 80 to 90 percent of your possible shoulder retraction and your shoulder will 
be able to move more efficiently. A good test for this is simply that you should 
be able to feel your shoulder blades pull back and together slightly during 
the descent, which will also result in a very small rise of the sternum, which is a 
good visual cue.
Position on the Bench
Once you have reached this part of the setup, you should have your eye line 
directly under the bar if handing off to yourself (see figure 7.6). This gives the 
best mix of being under the bar enough to make unracking the bar doable but 
also being far enough down the bench that you are not going to be smashing 
into the J-hook uprights on every rep. If you are getting a handout, then you 
can be slightly further down the bench because you will be getting help out of 
the rack.
FIGURE 7.6  Correct body position on the bench relative to the bar.

103
Bench Press
KEY POINT
More flexible lifters can run into the issue of being able to arch too much in 
their setup. As advantageous as an arch can be in the bench press, it is not 
the be-all and end-all. Remember, the main benefit of the arch is to improve 
stability, so an excessive thoracic arch will actually mean that not all of the 
shoulder blade is resting on the bench. If a large part of the shoulder blade is 
not supported by the bench, then your upper back and shoulder stability is go­
ing to decrease dramatically. It is very similar to using a bench that is too nar­
row, if you have ever had that displeasure. If this occurs, then we are detracting 
from the main purpose of the arch. So, as a general rule, you should set up 
using the biggest thoracic arch you can (following the guidelines presented in 
this section) as long as your shoulder blades mostly remain supported on the 
bench. If you are very flexible, then you may have to purposely tone down how 
much you arch.
Hip and Foot Position
Our grip is now set on the bar and our upper back is set on the bench. From 
this position, we now need to set the hips and feet. This can make or break your 
setup because it will determine whether you are able to maintain your upper 
back setup and how much leg drive you can get. If you get this wrong, you 
will also end up with your butt coming off the bench when you drive through 
the legs.
We start the process by placing the feet down on the floor one at a time. If 
you are placing your left leg down first, then you would continue to push hard 
down into the bench through the right leg, as the hip needs to stay as elevated 
as possible while you do this. As the right leg is pushing into the bench, the left 
leg will be lowered down and the left foot will be placed on the floor on tiptoes 
as far back toward the head and as close to the bench (without touching it) as 
possible (see figure 7.7a). Once the left foot is planted on tiptoes, push through 
it as hard as possible to provide stability, and keep the hip elevated while the 
right leg is now lowered and the right foot is planted in the exact same manner 
as the left (see figure 7.7b). With both feet on tiptoes, you will now push the 
hips as far up the bench toward your shoulders as you can get it (see figure 
7.7c). Make sure your butt is firmly planted on the bench in this position and 
not just hovering in contact, or else it will rise off when you drive through 
the legs.
Now to adjust the feet. Currently, your feet should be on tiptoes as far back 
toward our head as possible and close to the bench. The goal is to get them flat 
on the floor starting from a position in which you can only keep the heels on 
the floor through downward pressure from the legs. To achieve this, the feet are 
shuffled forward (down the bench) until you get to a position where you can just 
get your heels down on the floor; it should take at least a 70 to 80 percent effort 
from your legs to keep the heels down on the floor if you get this right (see figure 
7.7d). A good test for this is simply to relax after you have set up; when you relax, 
the heels should instantly pop up off the floor and consequently the chest should 
drop (due to the arch partially collapsing).

104
The Overload System for Strength
Foot Angle
How you have your feet angled (as in pointing forward down the bench or angled 
out to the side) can be quite personal. I generally like to have lifters angle their 
feet out as much as possible without being uncomfortable. Why? Angling the feet 
out rotates the femur out also, which can help to create and maintain tension in 
the glutes and allows the knee to be lower relative to the hip while staying tucked 
further under the body (see figure 7.8). The level of the knee relative to the hip 
is a key determinant of whether the butt will come off the bench, so getting the 
knee lower without sacrificing stability (the more tucked under the body the 
foot is, the more stability it provides) is a big plus. Also, having the feet angled 
further outward provides more grip against the floor when pushing through the 
legs (think about turning skis sideways while skiing to slow down).
If you are benching with your feet angled out (which I would advise that you 
at least try) as opposed to straight forward, follow the steps above, but stop shuf­
a
b
c
d
FIGURE 7.7  Setting the hips and feet.

105
Bench Press
fling your feet forward just short of being able to get your heels down. From this 
position, you then “screw” your feet into the floor as you angle them out until 
you can just get your heels on the floor. Job done.
KEY POINT
Note that the height of the bench you are using will make a difference to your 
setup. A lower bench will mean your knee sits higher relative to your hip, giving 
you more leg drive but also making it more likely that your butt will come off 
the bench. On a higher bench, you may struggle to reach the floor if you are 
vertically challenged, and at a minimum, a high bench will likely reduce leg 
drive and the size of your arch. When using a different height bench, the goal 
is to achieve the same alignment of hip and knee in terms of vertical distance. 
As a simple guide, if using a bench that is higher than your normal bench, 
have your feet narrower and more tucked underneath you. This effectively 
makes your legs longer in terms of vertical distance. The opposite would then 
be true if the bench is lower (feet wider or further away from your head).
If you have gone through this whole setup procedure correctly, then there 
shouldn’t be a relaxed muscle in your body. The bench should not be a place 
where you are comfortable. Yes, you will get used to it over time, but it will simply 
be less uncomfortable as opposed to comfortable. If your bench press setup 
is a position you don’t mind spending a lot of time in, then you are not doing it 
well enough.
FIGURE 7.8  Foot setup for the bench press with additional external rotation.

106
The Overload System for Strength
Unracking the Bar
It is very common to see people set up reasonably well and then ruin half their 
work by unracking the bar atrociously. By this I mean that while unracking the 
bar, they allow their shoulders to protract and elevate while allowing the chest to 
drop. A proper unrack shouldn’t compromise any of these things. Usually, this is 
a sign that someone is trying to make the unrack feel easier (i.e., by being lazy). 
A proper unrack should consist of two different motions:
	
• Extension of the elbow: You should be setting the rack height so that the bar 
sits 1 to 2 inches (2.5 to 5 cm) lower than your outstretched arm.
	
• Shoulder extension: Think straight arm pulldown.
The tricep extends the elbow joint just enough to get the bar over the pin, and 
the lats pull the bar (horizontally relative to the floor) to get the bar directly over 
the shoulder joint to the start position of the press (see figure 7.9). When done 
properly, neither of these actions should cause a deterioration of your setup. If 
you can’t get your head around it, then try doing straight arm pulldowns and 
some bench lockouts (last few inches of the press) in your warm-up for bench, 
as these are the constituent parts of the unrack.
FIGURE 7.9  A correctly executed unrack should not compromise the setup: (a) before the unrack and (b) after 
the unrack.
a
b
Setting Up on Tiptoes
Now we will address the differences when setting up on tiptoes as opposed to 
flat feet. The benefit of benching on tiptoes is an increased arch, which means 
reduced ROM. The downside is less stability and less leg drive, since less of the 
foot is in contact with the floor. As a result, this tends to be more beneficial for 
women than men because usually women benefit more from improving leverages 
(discussed above). They also tend to be more flexible, so they gain more “arch” 
from moving to tiptoes.
When setting up on tiptoes, the feet are set on the floor first and then you set 
the rest of the body around them. It can be tricky to know exactly where to put 
your feet to set up, but the easiest way to at least get very close is to sit on the 

107
Bench Press
bench where your butt would normally be when you are benching. In this posi­
tion, then set your feet on tiptoes as far under your body and as close to the bench 
as possible (see figure 7.10). Make sure, however, that the balls of your feet are 
on the ground. When I say tiptoes here, I don’t literally mean just the ends of 
your toes touching the floor. That is way too unstable.
To set up with the feet tip-toed, you pretty much do the same process as 
described above, only with your feet already on the floor. Drive the toes into the 
floor and pull your hips up and your upper back off the bench (inverted row) to 
set the upper back with your weight as high up on the traps as possible. Then 
place the hips down on the bench as close to your shoulders as possible while 
ensuring there is solid contact. If you have set your feet in the right position, 
then at this point your setup should be done.
FIGURE 7.10  The tip-toe setup: (a) initial foot 
position, (b) performing the inverted row to set the 
upper back, and (c) the final setup.
a
b
c
KEY POINT
If your butt is rising off the bench when you have set up on tiptoes, then it 
means your knee is too high relative to your hip (provided you are doing the 
leg drive correctly). The simplest way to solve this is to set up with your feet in 
the same position down the bench but simply wider, because this will drop the 
knee down. Keep setting up with your feet a little wider until you can maximally 
drive through the legs without your butt coming up.

108
The Overload System for Strength
Bar Path and Movement Pattern
We’ve nailed our setup and managed to unrack the empty bar. At this point, the 
bar should be starting directly over the shoulder joint so that the arm is perfectly 
vertical and the shoulder, elbow, and wrist joint are stacked directly under the 
bar (when viewed from the side). This is where things start to get complicated.
Bar path, in fact, varies somewhat based on a few factors, including limb 
length, grip width, and even experience or skill level (on the upward phase). One 
thing that I want to emphasize is that most of the time the bar path is not verti­
cal. Many coaches, especially those coaching equipped bench press, try to teach 
that the bar path for a bench press is a straight line. It is not, for 95 percent (or 
more) of lifters. The only way you can get a vertical bar path is if you can get the 
contact point of the bar with the chest directly over the shoulder joint. This is a 
wonderful set of leverages to have in the bench press, if you can achieve it, but 
the sad reality is that very few lifters can. Achieving a vertical bar path generally 
involves using a very wide grip (usually max the legal grip width), having a very big 
arch, or having a large rib cage and barrel chest. If you can get a vertical bar path 
then great—you’ll likely hit some huge benches. For the other 99 percent of us, 
we will have a horizontal component to our bar path, meaning it will be a curve, 
to at least some degree. See figure 7.11 for the full movement of a bench press.
Eccentric Portion
The best way to characterize the downward phase is an inverted J shape. Unless 
you are one of the few who can achieve a vertical bar path, then the bar path is 
going to be curved in nature. How curved the bar path is will simply depend on 
how far down the torso your touch point is (the horizontal component of the 
bar path). The size of the horizontal component will depend on these factors:
	
• Size of your arch: bigger arch = less horizontal travel
	
• Size of chest and rib cage: bigger = less horizontal travel
	
• Grip width: wider grip = less horizontal travel
It is important to realize that unlike the squat and deadlift, where the desired 
bar path is always vertical, the bench press bar path will vary, but there are still 
some hard-and-fast rules.
Phase I
The length of phase I will depend on how curved the bar path is. The more hori­
zontal distance you must cover, the longer phase I will last. The vast majority (but 
not quite all) of the horizontal travel is covered during phase I. This is achieved 
by shoulder extension through the lats (think straight arm pulldown, just like the 
unrack) while the elbows flex and tuck inward toward the rib cage. The elbow 
and shoulder joint must bend in unison to keep the forearm stacked under the 
bar as it travels over the body. The longer phase I lasts, the more the elbows will 
have to tuck in toward the body to cover the horizontal distance required.
During this phase, the upper back and shoulder blades will stay pinned in place 
as the shoulder flexes. However, almost all of the downward rotation of the scap­
ulae will occur here because of the inward rotation of the upper arm and elbow 
(adduction). Controlling this scapular rotation is absolutely key to maintaining 
upper back stability during the descent. If you can’t feel your scapulae while you 

109
Bench Press
FIGURE 7.11  Segments of a bench press: (a) start, (b) midpoint (end of eccentric phase I), (c) bottom (end 
of eccentric phase II), (d) midpoint (end of concentric phase I), and (e) finish (end of concentric phase II).
a
b
c
d
e

110
The Overload System for Strength
bench, then this is something you need to address. It is especially important to 
keep the rear delts contracted during this phase (as with the entire descent) to 
help anchor and centrate the shoulder joint while the upper arm adducts.
By the time phase I is complete, the bar will be directly over (or very close to) 
the touch point on the torso, and the elbows will be directly under the bar when 
both viewed from the side and when looking up the bench. That is, unless you 
use a wide grip width, the elbow remains inside the wrist joint. In this case, by 
the time phase I is complete, the elbow joint will be as close to being under the 
wrist as it is going to be in the lift.
During phase I, the hamstrings also have a key role to play. The hamstrings 
actively pull the body down and into the bench (imagine doing a leg curl but with 
your body moving instead of your feet). If the setup is done well, this can be seen 
as a movement of the body down the bench slightly. This essentially sets you up for 
a greater degree of leg drive on the concentric. The pulling-down action into the 
bench can also help plant the body into the bench more, providing more stability.
Phase II
Again, the length of phase II will depend on the factors listed at the start of phase 
I. This phase is characterized by a vertical (or near vertical) downward movement 
of the bar while the elbow joint stays stacked vertical (or as close to vertical as 
it will be) under the bar. During this phase, there is no further tucking of the 
elbow, and the movement is akin to a seated row done with a bench press grip. 
As a result, there is little to no rotation of the scapulae at this point, and the main 
pulling muscles are the rhomboids, traps, and rear delts (as opposed to the lats 
during phase I). At this point, the main role of the lats is to anchor the shoulder 
joint, which is still hugely important because the demands on shoulder stability 
increase the lower the bar is in the movement.
It is during phase II that not setting up with full retraction becomes key. During 
the row-like motion to get the bar to the chest, the shoulders need to be able to 
retract a small amount to keep the shoulder joint centrated and to reduce stress 
on the joint and the pecs. This shoulder retraction during the lower part of the 
descent if often viewable as a small upward movement of the sternum toward 
the bar, which can be a great cue to encourage this movement.
Obviously, during this phase, we are going to bring the bar into contact with the 
chest. The manner in which the bar makes contact with the chest can be a very 
personal thing. There are three different strategies in terms of making contact 
with the chest: light touch, slight sink, and large sink.
Light Touch
The bar is brought down until it is just in contact with the chest (see figure 7.12). 
Here, the focus is on maintaining upper back tightness at all costs. The benefit 
to this method is that you are minimizing the range of motion and limiting the 
likelihood of losing back tightness or alignment as the bar sinks into the chest. 
The downside is that it greatly reduces the amount of leg drive you can get off 
the chest due to the minimal contact with the bar. This tends to work best under 
these conditions:
	
• You have poor leg drive on the bench (especially if you bench on tiptoes).
	
• Your bar path is vertical or near vertical (i.e., wide grip, big arch, short 
arms). This is because leg drive only really contributes to the horizontal 

111
Bench Press
component of the press. So, if your bar path has little to no horizontal 
component, then it isn’t of much use.
	
• Your upper back strength is a weakness. In this case, you won’t be able to 
get away with losing any tightness when you sink it into your chest.
Slight Sink
This is likely the most common technique. The bar should sink slightly down into 
the chest while keeping the forearms vertically stacked under the bar (see figure 
7.13). During this sinking movement, it is important to focus on pulling the elbows 
directly down and trying to further retract the shoulder blades to keep the upper 
back and forearm as set as we would like. This ends up being the best option for 
most lifters because it gives a great middle ground of not adding too much range 
of motion to the lift (meaning joint alignment isn’t compromised) but allowing 
a greater use of leg drive owing to the more solid contact between the bar and 
the body. The important thing to remember here is that the sinking motion of 
the bar into the chest is a controlled “pull” into the chest. It’s a continuation of 
the seated row-like movement in phase II. It is not an excuse to relax and be lazy.
FIGURE 7.12  With a light touch technique, the bar is brought down until it 
barely makes contact with the chest.
FIGURE 7.13  With a slight sink technique, the bar is allowed to slightly sink 
into the ribcage at the bottom of the lift.

112
The Overload System for Strength
Large Sink
This last option is almost like performing a horizontal push press and isn’t that 
commonly seen. Dan Green has used this method very successfully to bench-
press some seriously impressive numbers: 237.5 kilograms (523.6 pounds) while 
competing in the under 110kg/242lb weight category. This method involves an 
exaggerated sinking of the bar into the chest (see figure 7.14). This movement 
will mean the elbows will end up behind the bar in the bottom position due to 
the bar sinking further down the body and the shoulder extending further. This is 
also accompanied by a movement of the whole body down the bench, facilitated 
mainly by the leg curl movement (discussed earlier) but also the weight of the 
bar pushing the body down into the bench.
FIGURE 7.14  With a large sink technique ,the bar is allowed to sink a consid­
erable amount into the chest to the point where the forearm angle is altered.
This is essentially like pulling back on a rubber band. The hamstrings and 
back (along with the weight of the bar) have pulled the body down and into the 
bench. The body can now be driven up the bench through the quads, which will 
be visible as a clear movement of the body up the bench. This means the leg drive 
can contribute a huge amount of force into the bar (horizontally) and make the 
first third to half of the movement much easier due to momentum.
Sounds great, right? The downside here is that you must have an incredibly 
good setup and technique to not have your butt come off the bench during 
the leg drive. Not only that, but the movement of the body up and down the 
bench can make it very easy to lose your upper back setup. Furthermore, you 
have to get the timing of the leg drive and bar path on the concentric perfect 
(especially if you are pausing), or else you will lose control and power (just like 
a push press).
This is an advanced technique that should only be used by lifters who already 
have a very solid technique on the bench press. The people who have the most 
to gain from this technique are lifters who are naturally explosive (relying on 
speed to get through sticking points) or have long arms (meaning they have 
a lot of horizontal distance to travel, which the enhanced leg drive will help 
with).

113
Bench Press
KEY POINT
You will either see lifters keep their head back against the bench throughout 
the descent or bring their head up to watch or follow the bar down to the 
chest. Unless you compete in a federation that doesn’t allow you to move your 
head, then neither of these is inherently bad.
Keeping the head down during the descent makes it easier to keep the 
upper back set and easier to pull the shoulder blades back and together 
during phase II, since the upward head movement will lengthen the cervical 
spine (and therefore, to a lesser degree, the upper thoracic spine). On the 
other hand, allowing the head to raise during the descent allows you to watch 
the bar on the way down and can increase motor control and proprioception. 
This one is pretty much going to be entirely down to personal preference. The 
only time I would say that either option is an issue is when lifters must raise their 
head up off the bench because of restricted mobility (mainly around the pec 
minor and front delts). If this is you, I would strongly suggest working on your 
mobility because you’re a pec tear waiting to happen. Likewise, if raising the 
head off the bench is accompanied with a loss of shoulder retraction and a 
drop in sternum position, then this also needs to be remedied.
Concentric Portion
So, we have successfully negotiated our way into the precarious position of having 
a very heavy barbell on our chest. Now what? The first thing we need to address 
here is the leg drive. The upward phase of the bench press is initiated by the leg 
drive. It is what breaks the inertia and begins the reversal of the bar. The best 
way I can describe it is that the upward phase of the bench press is performed 
like a wave up the body, starting in the feet and legs and working up the body 
to the arms and shoulders. Visualizing it as a lying-down push press also works.
So how do you use leg drive? This will actually vary depending on your foot 
position. If you set up using flat feet, then leg drive is primarily a horizontal drive 
up the bench through the quads and, to a lesser degree, the glutes. Here there 
are two components to the leg drive:
	
• A push through the quads up the bench: Imagine trying to push your body 
up the bench toward the uprights. If you have your feet reasonably straight­
forward, you can also think about trying to push your toes out through the 
front of your shoes.
	
• A contraction of glutes: Squeeze your glutes, hard. If you need me to explain 
how to do it, then you have bigger issues than a weak bench press.
These two actions need to be done simultaneously and with 100 percent effort 
to make the leg drive as effective as possible. Once the leg drive has been initi­
ated, the lower body should not relax at any point throughout the whole upward 
phase, and the legs should be continuing to drive up the bench. Otherwise, you 
risk losing your setup as the legs relax while you are still pressing the bar. Once 
the leg drive has been performed, it’s time to actually press the bar.
If you bench using a tiptoe setup, then things are slightly different. Because 
of the foot position, you have no ability to drive the toes forward into the floor 

114
The Overload System for Strength
through the quads (which is why you get less leg drive). Instead, to get some 
momentum from the quads and glutes, we attempt to stamp the heels down 
toward the floor as hard as possible.
If you have set up correctly, the heels should barely move, no matter how hard 
you push. However, this violent driving down of the heels will cause the glutes and 
quads to contract intensely and allow us to impart some momentum into the bar.
KEY POINT
If the setup is correct, then your butt should stay on the bench during the leg 
drive; in fact, it shouldn’t physically be able to move enough to come off the 
bench. If it does, then you have relaxed your lower body during the descent, 
allowing the hips to sit in a different position and the arch to collapse (relaxing 
your coiled spring, as it were). The other option is that you are performing the 
leg drive incorrectly and pushing your feet down into the floor (which pushes 
the hips up) as opposed to pushing the feet forward horizontally. It’s pretty 
common to see this creep in as weights get close to maximal loads. People 
may subconsciously think they can’t press it, and so they end up driving exces­
sively through the legs and hips to get it off the chest.
As we have already mentioned, the bar path will vary based on several fac­
tors. On the concentric portion of the lift, there are also different styles of bar 
path, usually based on an individual’s proportions and natural strengths and 
weaknesses. Most lifters will use what is called a curved bar path, but a very few 
advanced lifters may use what is called the double-curved bar path. These lifters 
are quite a small minority. Yet, for the sake of clarity, we will address both styles.
Curved Bar Path
The vast majority of lifters will use a curved bar path, essentially matching the 
bar path of the eccentric portion of the lift.
Phase I  We obviously begin phase I of the concentric portion where we left off 
in phase II of the eccentric portion, with the bar in contact with the chest. For 
the vast majority of lifters, the upward bar path will closely mimic the downward 
path. So, in the same way that the amount of curvature on the downward path de­
pends on various factors, the same is true on the upward phase (see figure 7.15).
Phase I on the concentric is primarily driven by the pecs as well as the leg 
drive (unless you use a light touch). During this phase, the bar path is again near 
vertical, and the elbows only rotate externally very slightly, meaning there is little 
to no rotation of the scapulae. As well as driving through the pecs, it is important 
to flex the lats hard during this phase to keep the shoulders packed and provide 
stability for the upper arm while the shoulder is in its most extended position.
It is important during this phase to keep the elbow from flaring too much 
because this will take the pecs out of the equation. Remember, the pec is gener­
ally in the best position to apply force through the upper arm when it is roughly 
45 degrees from the body due to muscle fiber alignment. Flaring early will lead 
to the bar drifting back over the body too early, before the delts and triceps are 
in a good position to finish the lift. This is most commonly seen in lifters who 
either have weak pecs (they subconsciously try to take the load away from the 

115
Bench Press
a
b
c
FIGURE 7.15  Concentric phases of the bench press: (a) start of phase I, (b) end of phase I and start of phase 
II, and (c) end of phase II.
pecs) or those who have weak lats (the lats actively internally rotate the upper 
arm to stop the elbow from flaring).
KEY POINT
If you are someone who tends to under- or over-tuck the elbows during the 
bench, then focusing on your hand pressure can help solve this. If you tend to 
over-tuck your elbows, imagine that you are trying to pull the bar apart (think 
band pull apart) and snap the bar in half in the direction of down the body 
(snap the bar between your hands in a manner that places more pressure on 
the inside index finger side of the palm compared to outside the palm). If you 
under-tuck your elbows, then you need to think about snapping the bar in the 
opposite direction, up the body (imagine snapping the bar in a manner that 
places more pressure on the outside of the palm compared to the inside).

116
The Overload System for Strength
Phase II  As we transition from phase I to phase II, the loading will shift from 
the pecs over to the shoulders and triceps. The pecs are still playing a role 
during phase II, but they are simply doing less of the work proportionally. This 
is why the most common sticking point for the bench press is at 2 to 3 inches 
(5 to 8 centimeters) off the chest, where the loading begins to transition to the 
delts and triceps. This is also generally where the momentum from the leg drive 
begins to die out. So, mastering this transition is key to working through that 
sticking point.
As we begin phase II, the bar is going to start to drift back over the body 
toward the shoulders. To facilitate this, the elbows are going to need to flare out 
to the side to keep the elbows directly under the wrist joint. This means that the 
scapulae also have to rotate upward to allow the upper arm to rotate. This scap­
ular rotation needs to be allowed without sacrificing the upper back setup (i.e., 
not allowing your shoulders to shrug up). The elbows will continue to flare out 
as the arm extends and the bar drifts back to its final position, stacked directly 
over the shoulder joint.
Note that a very common fault seen during phase II of the bench press is 
“overpressing.” This is where the shoulders protract as the arms extend, leaving 
the upper back in a weakened position and the thoracic arch reduced. The best 
way to test this is to see the position at which the bar becomes locked out while 
you are performing a set of multiple reps. If you are guilty of the heinous crime 
of overpressing, then as the reps go on the shoulders will gradually protract, 
leaving the arm effectively longer (and the chest lower). The result will be that 
the bar finishes in a progressively higher position, further away from the body.
If this is the case, then you need to focus on your upper back strength and the 
ability to keep the shoulders retracted while your arms extend. Slow eccentric 
pulling work is great here. Also, you may need to switch your thinking from 
“press the bar away” to “straighten the arms” in order to encourage the shoulders 
to stay back.
Double-Curved Bar Path
This bar path is much more technical and difficult to execute, but this style is 
used by some advanced lifters with great success. It is important to note, though, 
that many lifters will never use this bar path, and it is not always the best option. 
This bar path tends to favor those who are very triceps dominant or have short 
arms, because it shifts the loads over to the triceps considerably earlier in the lift.
During the first phase of this bar path, the bar is pressed up in the same manner 
as in phase I. However, once the bar has moved a few inches, essentially to where 
phase II of the upward phase begins, the elbows are then flared out aggressively. 
This exaggerated outward rotation drifts the bar back over the shoulder joint 
much earlier in the lift. With this bar path, the bar will be over the shoulder joint 
for a large proportion of the concentric, as opposed to right at the end of the lift 
with the regular curved bar path. This then leaves the remainder of the lift to be 
completed as an almost pure triceps extension movement.
The result of this technique is a double-curved bar path in which the bar travels 
vertically off the chest a very small amount before curving back over the shoulder 
joint and finally being pressed in an almost vertical line over the shoulder to lock 
out. As I said, this is an advanced method, which isn’t even necessarily stronger 
for all lifters. But if you are an advanced bench presser with strong triceps, then 
it may worth giving it a go.

117
Bench Press
KEY POINT
It’s very important to remember that the bench press is a whole-body move­
ment, and dismounting the bench is part of that. When dismounting the 
bench, perform a sit-up-like motion before standing up. This sit-up motion 
means you have performed your ab training for the week and now no longer 
need to lie on a mat pretending to enjoy crunches and planks. Train smart, not 
hard, folks.

This page intentionally left blank

119
Pendlay Row
Made popular by American weightlifting coach Glenn Pendlay, the Pendlay row 
is in essence a strict barbell row done with the torso parallel to the ground. This 
is possibly the single best pulling exercise for improving back strength in the 
big lifts. In fact, it probably deserves to be classed as a big lift in and of itself, at 
least if you value balance (which you should if you value long-term strength). 
The Pendlay row has these advantages when it comes to improving the “big lifts”:
	
• Posterior chain loading: The torso being held perpendicular to the floor 
throughout the lift greatly increases the amount of full-body tension 
required to perform the lift. The hamstrings and glutes have to contract 
isometrically to a high degree to hold the hip angle (relative to the floor) 
stable throughout the lift. This is one of the main reasons the Pendlay row 
improves deadlift “starting strength” so well.
	
• Bracing or core stability: Maintaining spinal alignment while rowing a 
heavy load with a torso perpendicular to the floor requires tremendous 
core stability. The abs and spinal erectors need to work very hard to prevent 
lumbar flexion. Yet another reason this is great for improving your deadlift 
bottom-end strength.
	
• Angle of pull: The bar path and torso position combined give this variation a 
different angle of pull to other rowing variations. This bar path mimics the 
CHAPTER 
8

120
The Overload System for Strength
line of pull on the downward phase of the bench press pretty well, which 
means it tends to carry over well to the bench press also. This angle also 
means the Pendlay row is great at stimulating the rhomboids, traps, and 
rear delts, which play a huge role in upper back stability in all the big lifts.
	
• Full-body tension: The Pendlay row teaches you how to use the upper back 
maximally while locking the torso into position against a load, which is 
conveniently how we use the upper back in all the big lifts.
	
• Difficult to cheat: A lot of “bent over” rows just end up becoming a poorly 
executed shrug. The perpendicular torso position makes cheating in this 
manner much more difficult. In fact, if you cheat by dropping the hips down 
to get the torso more vertical (improving your pulling leverages), you will 
simply end up pulling the bar straight into your knees (that’ll teach you). 
We will discuss some approved cheating methods on this lift later, however.
Setup
Setting up for a Pendlay row is very similar to setting up for a deadlift, provided 
you use the moral and upstanding conventional stance, of course. The stance 
width, foot angle, and all the associated cues are going to be the exact same here 
as for the deadlift. How you set your upper back (e.g., retracting, twisting the 
elbows back) and brace is also pretty much the same. The differences in setting 
up for a Pendlay row will be covered in this section. See figure 8.1 for proper 
setup for a Pendlay row.
FIGURE 8.1  Setup for the Pendlay row.

121
Pendlay Row
Grip Width
Your grip width will be wider than the one you use to deadlift. A narrow grip 
would result in a bar path that pulls back toward the hip and targets the lats 
more, which is not the aim here. We want a grip width that allows us to keep the 
elbow and upper arm reasonably flared out and allows the bar to be pulled to the 
lower chest or the upper stomach (depending on your proportions). If you have 
some Olympic lifting experience, then your clean grip is a good place to start (see 
figure 8.2). If not, then going one hand width wider than your regular deadlift 
grip will put the majority of lifters in the right place (see figure 8.3).
FIGURE 8.2  Clean grip for the Pendlay row.
FIGURE 8.3  Grip for the Pendlay row with one hand width wider than a regular deadlift grip.

122
The Overload System for Strength
Hip Height
When setting up for a deadlift, the knees 
are over the bar. This position makes it 
quite difficult to row the bar directly up, if 
you value your kneecaps, that is. So, we get 
around this issue in two ways. First, we are 
going to set the hips slightly higher. This will 
give us an almost vertical shin angle, which 
will help clear the path for the bar during 
the row. Remember that the hips must still 
be lower than the shoulders. See figure 8.4 
for an example of proper hip height for a 
Pendlay row.
Bar Placement
The second way we get around the “I can’t 
row a barbell through my kneecaps” issue 
is by altering the bar position. Here, we are 
going to set the bar in front of the midfoot. 
The bar should be set directly underneath the scapulae. Remember, the shoul­
ders will be set slightly further forward since we are setting the hips higher (see 
figure 8.5).
After all, the scapulae are the anchor for all the muscles that are responsible 
for rowing the bar, so setting up underneath them gives us a very stable starting 
point from which to set tension in all the right places. How far in front of the 
midfoot you need the bar to be will vary depending on your proportions (heck, 
those with very long torsos may still end up with the bar over the midfoot). 
What we are looking for is the armpits being directly over the bar and a slight 
backward angle of the arm.
FIGURE 8.5  Bar placement for the Pendlay row.
FIGURE 8.4  Proper hip height for the Pendlay row.

123
Pendlay Row
Upper Back and Elbow Position
In a deadlift, we externally rotate the upper arm and elbow maximally to get as 
much lat tension as possible. With a Pendlay row, we want to target the rhom­
boids, traps, and rear delts more, so we need to have less external rotation. In 
their natural position, the elbows will be pointing directly out to the side, 90 
degrees to the body. During our setup, we want to use a small amount of external 
rotation to pack the shoulders and give us some lat tension, so we are aiming 
for the elbows and upper arms to be rotated roughly 45 to 60 degrees relative to 
the body (see figure 8.6). Think of it as setting the upper arm at a similar angle 
to your body as it would be at the bottom of your bench press.
Then, unlike the deadlift, we are going to aim for maximal shoulder retraction, 
since we are going to be doing a row, after all. When we perform this retraction, 
imagine that you are going to try to get the bar off the floor purely from the 
motion of shrugging back. When you do this correctly, you should be feeling a 
lot of tension throughout your upper back and around your scapulae.
FIGURE 8.6  External rotation of the elbows and upper arms to create lat tension during the 
setup for the Pendlay row.

124
The Overload System for Strength
Concentric Portion
The actual rowing movement here is very simple, in theory; the difficult part 
of the lift is maintaining the body alignment throughout the lift. As you initiate 
the pull, the most common mistake you can make is to drive through the legs 
to help break the bar off the floor, even if it’s subconscious. The best way to get 
around this is to isometrically contract the hamstrings and hip flexors as you 
begin the pull, as if you were trying to pull yourself down toward the floor or 
the bar. Likewise, it’s important to think about keeping your chest and shoul­
ders over the bar to discourage the hips from extending and changing the torso 
angle.
The pull needs to be initiated aggressively and powerfully through the upper 
back, especially the rear delts, rhomboids, and traps. The Pendlay row is heavily 
dependent on the momentum created during the first half of the pull. This is 
because the pulling muscles are in such a mechanically weak position toward 
the top of the lift (especially with gravity pulling directly against us, unlike 
during a regular bent-over row) that a certain amount of momentum needs 
to be created earlier on in the lift to achieve the finish position. Throughout 
the pull, the elbow angle, relative to the body, should stay the same. It is the 
Bar Path and Movement Pattern
If you have set up correctly, then it should almost feel like the bar is about to 
start floating off the floor just from the tension you have created through your 
whole body, especially the upper back, during the setup. This is the perfect sce­
nario for us to initiate the concentric portion of the lift since the bar is already 
on the verge of moving, just from the body tension alone that we have created. 
See figure 8.7 for the full movement for a Pendlay row.
FIGURE 8.7  Pendlay row.
a
b

125
Pendlay Row
job of the lats to fix the upper arms at this angle during the lift, which is why 
it is important to keep them contracted, even if they are not the prime mover 
of the lift.
KEY POINT
Lifters may cock their wrists in a vain attempt to help achieve the top position, 
the idea being that cocking the wrists will elevate the bar slightly to help get 
contact with the torso. Again, this is usually done because the weight is too 
heavy or simply because of poor pulling mechanics (it is something the lifter 
does during other pulling movements). Keep the wrists stacked throughout the 
whole lift.
The bar should be pulled until it makes contact with the torso, where possible. 
Not all lifters will be able to achieve contact with the torso, depending on their 
proportions. Those with long arms (especially long forearms) or a small rib cage 
may have to compromise their pulling mechanics to achieve contact between the 
bar and torso. In this scenario, the goal is simply to pull the bar as close to the 
body as possible without sacrificing alignment and to make sure that the range 
of motion stays consistent, especially as the loads increase.
For those who can achieve contact between the bar and the torso, the bar will 
make contact somewhere between the lower chest and upper stomach, depending 
on your grip width and proportions. At the top of the lift, the forearm should be 
vertical (wrist directly under the elbow joint). If this is not the case, then your 
grip width needs to be adjusted. For instance, if the wrist is inside the elbow joint 
at the top of the lift, then your grip needs to be wider.
KEY POINT
It is common to see lifters bend their knees during the top half of the pulling 
phase. This is done primarily to get the torso lower to the floor to make the top 
position easier to achieve. This is either done because the weight is too heavy 
to lift to the top position or because the set up didn’t create enough full-body 
tension to maintain positioning, causing a power leak. Set up with more full-
body tension, and make sure you are using appropriate loading.
Eccentric Portion
When training for strength, the Pendlay row is going to be performed with loads 
that make it almost impossible to slow down the eccentric portion of the lift to a 
significant degree—at least during the top half of the lift, due to the poor leverages. 
While you may not be able to significantly slow down the downward phase (with 
maximal loads at least), you should make as much effort as possible to control 
the bar back to the floor. The downside to just letting the bar drop back to the 
floor, except for the lack of any eccentric stimulus, is that it also encourages the 

126
The Overload System for Strength
rest of the body to relax, which can result in poor spinal alignment. And that 
is never a great idea while there is a heavy barbell in your hands. I see this as a 
similar situation to what we see in most lifters when it comes to lowering their 
deadlifts. They pay no attention to the lowering phase and, as a result, have ter­
rible eccentric strength; more often than not, they end up getting injured on the 
lowering phase rather than the actual lifting phase. The goal during the eccentric 
phase is to maintain spinal alignment and torso rigidity along with the elbow 
angle relative to the torso. Your positioning during the downward phase should 
be the exact same as during the upward phase, the only difference being that the 
bar is likely moving quicker on the decent.
On the downward phase, you should be contracting the spinal erectors and 
abdominals maximally to maintain your spinal alignment to avoid being pulled 
into lumbar flexion by the bar. The lats also need to remain tense to hold the 
elbow angle stable while the bar is lowered. Likewise, the traps need to stay 
maximally contracted as the arms extend to stop the shoulders from being pulled 
into protraction by the bar. So, as you can see, just because you can’t control 
the downward movement of the bar fully, that doesn’t mean this phase of the lift 
doesn’t require a lot of effort.
Once the bar is returned to the floor the setup process is then repeated. There 
is no such thing as a touch-and-go Pendlay row. With the nature of the down­
ward phase of the lift, there is simply no way you can have the prerequisite 
positioning and muscular tension to pull the bar in the same manner without 
resetting properly. I would fully expect there to be a short break in between 
reps, as there would be with a heavy set of deadlifts, while the correct setup is 
attained.
KEY POINT
Just like the upward phase, it is also common to see lifters bend the knee on 
the downward phase. Why? Because maintaining a torso position parallel to 
the floor is difficult, and bending the knee allows the torso to be more upright. 
This is straight up a bad idea because it leaves you very likely to have the bar 
smash into your kneecap during the descent. Not only that, but one of the 
biggest benefits of this exercise, aside from getting a jacked upper back, is the 
whole-body postural strength stimulus. By moving away from that horizontal 
torso position, you are short-changing yourself on one of the biggest benefits 
of the lift.
Variations of the Pendlay Row
There are two key variations of the Pendlay row that you are going to also need 
to know. Both variations are essentially specific ways of “cheating” to further 
overload the back. However, just to be clear, these variations are not an excuse to 
get sloppy and not pay attention. They involve using momentum in a very specific 
way to maximize the loading of the back muscles as well as the carryover to the 
other lifts (especially deadlift).

127
Pendlay Row
Cheat Pendlay Row
In this variation, a degree of leg drive is used to create extra momentum in the 
bottom half of the lift. The setup for this variation can mimic your deadlift setup, 
except with the wider grip. The bar is started over the midfoot, and the hip height 
is the same as when setting up for a deadlift. The reason for this is that since we 
are using a leg drive off the floor, the shin and knee will move backward during 
the start of the lift (just like during a deadlift)—meaning we no longer have the 
issue of the bar hitting the knee.
In your deadlift setup, with the exception of a slightly wider grip and a slightly 
different upper back setup (as addressed previously), you will this time initiate 
the lift through a strong quad drive (again, just like a deadlift). As a result, the 
hips and shoulders will rise together, meaning the torso angle remains the same 
as the bar leaves the floor. Once the bar is around mid-shin level, the knee should 
be back far enough to clear a path for the bar to be pulled up. At this point, the 
upper body pull can then be initiated. This upper body pull is exactly the same 
as the strict Pendlay row. See figure 8.8 for a cheat Pendlay row. 	
a
b
FIGURE 8.8  Cheat Pendlay row.
Deadlift Row
The difference here is that the leg drive portion of the lift is continued for longer. 
The setup is the exact same as the cheat Pendlay row variation, but instead the 
bar is deadlifted until it gets to just above knee level. Once the bar is deadlifted 
to knee level, it is instead rowed to the stomach with the elbows and upper arms 
in a less flared position (closer to the sides). More leg drive coupled with the 

128
The Overload System for Strength
slightly more upright torso position and shorter range of pull means that this 
variation can be loaded up considerably heavier than the regular Pendlay row, 
making it fantastic for overloading the upper back.
Since both of these variations allow more load to be used, the points I made 
about the downward phase of the strict Pendlay row are even more important. 
Maintaining good spinal alignment and bracing during the downward phase are 
absolutely paramount here to keep the injury risk low and get the most out of 
these variations. See figure 8.9 for a deadlift row.
FIGURE 8.9  Deadlift row.
a
b
KEY POINT
With the higher load and higher dependency on leg drive in the first half of the 
lift in a deadlift row, it is even more common to see lifters try to gain leverage 
in the top half of the lift by bending the knee and rounding through the back. 
Once again, if this is you, stop cheating. You are either using too much weight, 
lacking in full-body tension, or not creating enough momentum with the leg 
drive at the start of the lift.

129
Explosive Pulls
Up until the mid-1950s, explosive pulling was a huge part of the training of most 
strong lifters. Back then, weightlifting (Olympic lifting) dominated among lift­
ing sports (there was no powerlifting yet, and bodybuilding competitions were 
in their infancy), and the original strongmen and lifting contests pretty much 
always included explosive movements. They were known as “the quick lifts,” and 
they normally included lifts such as the one- or two-hand snatch or the one- or 
two-hand clean and jerk. In fact, the first official weightlifting competitions (that 
would go on to become Olympic lifting) included five contested lifts:
	
• One-hand snatch
	
• One-hand clean and jerk
	
• Two-hands clean and press
	
• Two-hands snatch
	
• Two-hands clean and jerk
When the one-hand lifts were dropped from competition in 1928 (contests 
were way too long), only three competition lifts remained: the clean and press, 
the snatch, and the clean and jerk.
These competitions were maintained from 1928 through the 1972 Olympic 
Games, after which the clean and press was dropped from competition, mostly 
because the judging had become too permissive. Lifters turned the traditional strict 
CHAPTER 
9

130
The Overload System for Strength
military press into a form of overhead lift with a huge degree of back bend to get 
under the bar and press much heavier loads. I mention all this only to point out that 
in the 1950s and before, the quick lifts were part of most serious training programs. 
Even the courses sold with barbell sets (e.g., the York barbell courses or the Milo 
course) usually included high pulls and power cleans, sometimes even snatches.
I (Christian) am a big believer in explosive lifting. Of course, I am biased because 
my origins lie in weightlifting. But I started doing them even before that. I started 
doing them at around 14 years of age, and as a strength coach, I’ve pretty much 
always included explosive pulls in the training of the athletes I work with. Personally, 
I find that no other exercises are as effective as the high pull to build the traps. For 
that reason alone, they have their place in this system. While working up to accom­
plish a power clean is a cool target to shoot for, it is not necessary if your main goal 
is simply to look jacked and become strong and powerful. The scaled versions of 
explosive pulling—such as the power shrug, low pulls, and high pulls—are enough 
for those goals. Usually, I like to have someone progress from power shrugs to low 
pulls and finally high pulls, and if they have the mobility, coordination, and desire 
to learn, we can move on to power cleans or even power snatches.
Explosive pulls come in a great many variations. The three main differentiat­
ing factors are:
	
• Pulling height: This refers to how high you pull the barbell. For example, in a 
power shrug, the bar will normally reach a position close to the navel. In a low 
pull, you reach a height between your navel and the high part of the abdomen. 
In a high pull, you should reach your chest or even collarbone. In a clean, 
you actually bring the bar to the shoulders, and in the snatch, straight to the 
overhead position. I find that the longer the pull is (except for the snatch), 
the more the natural tendency will be to overuse the arms, which can make 
the exercise less effective and more dangerous. That’s why I like to start with 
shorter-range pulls to really program the bias toward producing power through 
the hips, traps, and calves and not early arm pull. Of course, the shorter-range 
pulls also allow you to use more weight, which makes them worth utilizing 
even if you are technically solid with the longer-range variations.
	
• Starting position: You can start your exercise from the floor, from blocks 
(above or below knees), or from the hang (above or below knees). Lifts 
from above the knees (block or hang) are much easier to learn, and if all 
you want is strength, power, and size, they are your best choice. “From the 
hang” lends itself better to hypertrophy, and I prefer to use lifts from the 
blocks or pins for maximum strength and power development.
	
• Grip width: There are three main grip widths you can use: clean grip (slightly 
wider than shoulders), snatch grip (wide grip), and hybrid (between clean 
and snatch grip). The width of the grip influences how likely you are to 
rely more on your arms. A narrower grip will favor using the arms to pull, 
whereas wider makes it more mechanically efficient to hit the traps.
Setup
The most important position to master, whether you perform your explosive pulls 
from the floor, hang, or blocks (which we will cover next in this section), is what I 
call “the power position.” Essentially, when the bar is just above the knees (lower 
third of the thigh), this is when you violently stand up to impart momentum to 

131
Explosive Pulls
the bar. Unsurprisingly, this position mimics the optimal jumping position. To 
set up in the power position, the feet are about hip-width apart (some will be 
better with a tad wider or narrower stance, as discussed in chapter 4, on the 
deadlift). The hips are set back, and the knees are bent at around a 100-degree 
angle, roughly level with the midfoot. The shoulders are in line with the toes (so 
forward of the knees). The elbows are turned out, and the lats are engaged (again, 
see chapter 4 on the deadlift for more detail on how to do this) to keep the bar 
close. Because the lats are engaged, the bar will be inside the shoulders. Even 
when you explode, the longer the bar can stay inside the shoulders, the better 
leverage you’ll have at the end of the explosion.
Your choice of start position will alter how much work you need to do to get to 
the power position. But remember, regardless of where you choose to start your lift, 
the end goal is the same. Get your body and the bar aligned in the power position 
so that you can properly explode upward and impart momentum into the bar.
	
• If you start from the floor, the first pull (from the floor to above the knees) 
is only there to get you into that power position properly, not to create 
momentum. A big mistake people make with explosive pulls from the floor 
is accelerating from the floor. See figure 9.1 for an example for a power 
clean and figure 9.2 for an example for a power snatch.
	
• If you start from the hang (standing up as in the finish position of a deadlift), 
you get to the power position by lowering the bar down to above the knees, 
as if you were doing a Romanian deadlift. See figure 9.3 for an example for 
a power clean and figure 9.4 for an example for a power snatch.
	
• If you start from blocks, you can simply set yourself up in the proper position 
right way. See figure 9.5 for an example for a power clean.
FIGURE 9.1  Getting into the power position from the floor for a power clean.
a
b

132
The Overload System for Strength
FIGURE 9.2  Getting into the power position from the floor for a power snatch.
a
b
FIGURE 9.3  Getting into the power position from the hang for a power clean.
a
b

133
Explosive Pulls
FIGURE 9.4  Getting into the power position from the hang for a power snatch.
a
b
FIGURE 9.5  Getting into the power position from the blocks for a power clean.
a
b

134
The Overload System for Strength
As such, explosive pulls from the blocks are the easiest, technique-wise. Lifts 
from the hang are second easiest, and lifts from the floor are the most complex. 
Typically, even elite lifters will do 3 to 6 percent more from blocks than from the 
floor or hang.
Bar Path and Movement Pattern
Explosive pulls come in many varieties based on grip, pull height, start position, and 
so on, but they do share some key similarities. The main driving force is a powerful 
triple extension of the lower body (ankle, knee, and hip joint); this provides the 
bar with the majority of its upward momentum. Once the bar is already moving 
upward, the goal is then to pull aggressively with the traps and upper back to get 
the bar to rise higher. Regardless of grip used, the goal of the pull is for the elbows 
to rise as close to directly upward as possible to keep the bar close to the body.
The initial momentum imparted into the bar by the lower body allows us to 
perform these exercises with much more load than would be possible if we were 
simply using the muscles of the upper back. This overload is what can make 
them such an effective tool for building the upper back, along with the obvious 
benefits of improving lower-body strength and power.
Concentric Portion: The Motor
This is what I would call the “motor” of the lift common to all the explosive pulls—
the explosive upward action of the legs, hips, calves, and traps. At this point, we 
are not going to talk about pulling with the arms because in a proper pull, this 
only happens once momentum has already been created by the motor of the lift. 
Early arm pull will lead to lower power production and an increased risk of injury. 
When people get shoulder pain from high pulls and cleans, it is usually because 
they arm-pull too much or too early. The pain in their shoulder is actually inflam­
mation of the biceps tendon where it attaches to the humerus. That’s why I like 
to start teaching explosive pulls with the power shrug. By nature, it is devoid of 
any arm pull and focuses on being as explosive as possible with the legs and traps.
So, how do you execute the motor of the explosive pull? It is very simple, but 
people make it a lot more complex than it needs to be. The key technique cue is 
simply stand up fast. Really.
It will get a bit more complex when you move on to the longer pulls, like high 
pulls and power clean and power snatches, but as far as the motor is concerned, 
it’s just “stand up fast.” Well, it is a bit more than that. It’s actually stand up vio­
lently fast, with as much force as humanly possible. You want to stand up so fast 
from the power position that the bar would move up to the navel even without 
the use of the traps, just from the momentum created by standing up fast. The 
hip should move forward so fast from the power position that it should look like 
someone stabbed your butt with a cattle prod (this suggestion also works as an 
effective teaching tool, not talking from experience, of course). You can even do 
explosive partial Romanian deadlifts before getting into explosive pulls. If you 
can’t stand up violently fast on this movement, you will always tend to rely more 
on arm pulling to compensate.
Once you are capable of standing up violently fast, you add to the motor the 
“finish”: a fast shrug and calf action. Both happen almost at the same time. 
Technically, the calves fire a bit before the traps, but don’t think about that. On 

135
Explosive Pulls
complex movements, especially if they are explosive, you should never focus 
on the action of a specific muscle. Never use internal cues. Always focus on a 
movement. Stand up violently fast and finish by trying to punch your ears with 
your shoulders!
FIGURE 9.6  Motor portion of the power clean: During the motor portion of the lift, momentum is imparted into the 
bar through the lower body via knee and hip extension. This is where the majority of the momentum is created 
that is necessary for a successful lift.
a
b
c
d

136
The Overload System for Strength
There should be no arm pull at all occurring in this motor pattern (this is the 
power shrug). If you do it right, there might be some arm bend. That happens 
not because you are pulling with your arms but because you are producing so 
much upward acceleration that the arms have to bend to let the bar move up on 
its own momentum.
FIGURE 9.7  Motor portion of the power snatch: During the motor portion of the lift, momentum is imparted into 
the bar through the lower body via knee and hip extension. This is where the majority of the momentum is created 
that is necessary for a successful lift.
a
b
c
d

137
Explosive Pulls
Concentric Portion: Arm Pull
Once you have mastered the motor and can create a good amount of upward 
momentum using your legs, traps, and calves, creating more height in your pull 
is only a matter of finishing the pull with the arms. There are two key consider­
ations, though:
	
• You have to time the arm pull so that it comes when momentum has been 
imparted into the bar. If you arm-pull too early, you will lose a lot of power 
and increase the risk of injury; but if you wait too long and momentum 
dies down, you will have the same issue. As soon as you have performed 
the powerful calves and traps action, you pull with the arms. The proper 
timing will leave the bar much lighter so that you need a lot less force to 
further accelerate a moving load than to get it moving in the first place.
	
• The higher the pulling target is, the less weight you can use, even if you 
properly time the arm pull. Having the bar cover a greater distance requires 
more force application. Don’t expect to do the same weight on low pulls as 
you did on high pulls just because you throw the arms in there. For exam­
ple, when I could do a 180-kilogram (397-pound) high pull, I could do a 
low pull with 200 to 210 kilograms (441 to 463 pounds) and a power shrug 
with 240 to 250 kilograms (530 to 550 pounds), and I was very efficient 
technically. Don’t be surprised if your high pull is only 50 to 60 percent of 
your power shrug at first.
FIGURE 9.8  Arm pull portion of the power clean: During the arm pull portion of the lift, the upper back is used 
to pull and redirect the bar toward the catch position. This arm pull does impart further momentum into the bar, 
but not to the same degree as the lower body in the previous motor portion.
a
b
c

138
The Overload System for Strength
Eccentric Portion
Let’s not kid ourselves: There is no way that you will lower a high pull (or even 
low pull) under control. At least not once you are capable of using even remotely 
decent weights. You will have to let the bar “drop down” (although you don’t let 
go of the bar like you do after a clean or snatch). However, it is not a free fall all 
the way down, and you certainly don’t just let it go anywhere. The worst mistakes 
to avoid are:
	
• Letting the bar free-fall from the top and “catching” it with straight legs
	
• Letting the bar drop down too far away from your body
	
• Letting the bar pull you forward when you catch
While there are a few ways to properly lower a high pull, clean, or snatch 
(also applicable to a low pull or even a power shrug), they all have three things 
in common:
1.	 Keep the bar as close to your body as possible.
2.	 Catch it with bent legs. In fact, I personally almost mimic the “hang” posi­
tion when lowering the bar.
3.	 Absorb the impact of the bar to some extent with the upper thighs. While 
the traps and arms break the fall of the bar, the bar lands on the upper 
third of my thighs, dramatically reducing the tug on the traps and arms. 
However, don’t let the bar free-fall on your legs, either. Make sure you 
lower it toward the upper portion of the leg and not lower, where it might 
be too close to the knees.
a
b
c
FIGURE 9.9  Arm pull portion of the power snatch: During the arm pull portion of the lift, the upper back is used 
to pull and redirect the bar toward the catch position. This arm pull does impart further momentum into the bar, 
but not to the same degree as the lower body in the previous motor portion.

139
Explosive Pulls
KEY POINT
All explosive pulls can develop size, strength, and explosiveness. But you can 
bias your results slightly toward a specific goal, depending on the movement 
you use (provided that you are equally as efficient in all of them).
	
• High pulls are the best to develop muscle mass (especially if done from the 
hang).
	
• Low pulls are the best to develop strength (especially if done from blocks).
	
• Power shrugs are best suited to emphasize trap development. They can be 
done from the hang for sets of 5 to 8 to build maximum size or from blocks 
for sets of 2 to 5 to build maximum strength in the traps.

This page intentionally left blank

141
Assistance Exercises
This chapter covers several effective assistance exercises for each foundational 
exercise (main lift). This is by no means an exhaustive list, but we have purposely 
listed exercises that have worked well historically with a broad spectrum of clients. 
As you learned in chapter 1, assistance exercises are exercises that will directly 
improve a main lift because they are structurally close to those main lifts. There 
are five components that make an assistance exercise structurally similar to a 
main lift. An assistance exercise does not have to combine all five components, 
but the more it has, the more effective it will be at directly improving the main 
lift. These components are:
	
• Same joints involved, moving in a similar way
	
• Same muscles involved, doing the same function
	
• Same range of motion
	
• Same contraction types
	
• Same rhythm
These assistance exercises will not be explained in as much detail as we covered 
the main lifts in chapters 4 to 9, but we will give you the key coaching points and 
explain how and why they are useful. There are, of course, many other effective 
assistance exercises, so if you have found some that worked great for you in the 
past and fit the criteria of a proper assistance exercise, feel free to use them.
CHAPTER 
10

142
The Overload System for Strength
Note that in the overload system, explosive pulls are used to not only build 
explosive power but also to stimulate and strengthen the upper back and lower 
body. So, they are in essence an accessory movement, but one that carries over 
to all the main lifts. As such, we do not add assistance work for these movements 
into this program.
DEADLIFT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Romanian Deadlift
For the Romanian deadlift, you simply perform only phase II of the deadlift 
(see chapter 4). This is the hip and posterior chain dominant portion of the lift. 
The bar is lowered from the top position just as would be done in a full deadlift, 
except the lowering phase is stopped between the bottom of the knee and mid-shin 
(depending on mobility). For maximal carryover to the full lift, I like to include 
a small pause in the bottom position to help eliminate the stretch reflex. After 
all, you don’t get that on the full lift.
The hips are then driven forward toward the bar to get back to the locked-out 
position. The same cues and rules apply as during the deadlift: Maintain torso 
rigidity, bar path, and so on. The Romanian deadlift is very good for strengthen­
ing the posterior chain, especially toward the end of the range of motion. If your 
sticking point on deadlift is just below the knee, this is a good choice.
a
b

143
Assistance Exercises
DEADLIFT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Romanian Deadlift 
with Band Around Waist
A Romanian deadlift is performed with a resistance band pulling backward on the 
hips. As the hips drive forward during the concentric, the band tension increases, 
which increases the difficulty of the lockout. This exercise works well with a pause 
at the locked-out position as your hips are still under load from the band. This 
is a great way of adding work for the hip extensors without adding more spinal 
loading. It is especially effective if your lockout is slow or weak.
a
b

144
The Overload System for Strength
DEADLIFT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Romanian Deadlift 
with Front of Feet Elevated
A Romanian deadlift is performed with the front of the feet elevated, which pre-
stretches the calves and hamstrings. A muscle that is stretched more during a 
lift is recruited and worked more, making this exercise a little more effective for 
targeting the hamstrings (and calves, to a lesser extent). Note, however, that you 
should not be doing this variation unless you have ample mobility to perform 
a standard Romanian deadlift to at least mid-shin level. Otherwise, you will be 
sacrificing position due to lack of mobility.
a
b

145
Assistance Exercises
DEADLIFT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Good Morning Variations
Good morning variations are another way of targeting the posterior chain and 
hip-dominant portion of the deadlift. In principle, it is the same movement pattern 
as the Romanian deadlift, a pure hip hinge pattern. But by placing the bar on 
the upper back rather than in the hands, you increase the loading on the spinal 
erectors and thoracic extensors (as the load is placed on a long lever from these 
muscles). So, this exercise can be a great variation for those who are lacking in 
these areas. Because of the long levers involved, good morning variations will 
also have higher stability demands than Romanian deadlift variations (except the 
seated variation). While the exercise can be performed with a straight bar, the 
tendency for it to roll or move throughout the lift can make it awkward. As such, 
the use of a safety-squat bar, spider bar, cambered bar, or similar is preferable.
Arched-Back Good Morning
When we say “arched back,” we actually mean neutral (the same alignment 
we squat and deadlift with), but this is to distinguish this variation from the 
often-performed “rounded back” good morning variation, which we rarely use as 
we find the risks often outweigh the benefits. These exercises are most effective 
when performed to a torso angle that matches the torso angle at the start of your 
deadlift. They have a very good carryover to the deadlift because the back angle 
and alignment matches that of the full lift.
a
b

146
The Overload System for Strength
Pin Good Morning
This is my favorite variation of the good morning for several reasons. First, by 
setting the bar on a pin, you ensure that you are going to the correct torso angle 
on each rep. By beginning each rep from a dead-stop on the pin, you are also 
eliminating stretch reflex and developing better starting strength for this sec­
tion of the lift. You are also eliminating the tendency of the spinal alignment to 
change during the reversal of the movement (often seen with heavy good morn­
ings). Lastly, by starting each rep from the pin, you are able to ensure that you 
perform each rep with the correct alignment because you have the opportunity 
to fully reset each time.
a
b
Seated Good Morning
This variation is very good for targeting the spinal erectors, the core, and the 
adductors to a greater degree because the hips are being fixed in place, meaning 
the prime movers can contribute less and provide less stability. This will mean 
that this variation can be loaded less than others, but this can be partly worked 
around by attaching forward bands to the bar to provide more resistance without 
increasing spinal loading and helping reduce the “dead zone” of little tension at 
the top of the lift.
DEADLIFT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES

147
Assistance Exercises
Zercher Good Morning
This is a great variation to start with if you are new to good mornings. The bar 
position means there is less shear stress on the spine, and it is much easier to dump 
the bar if you feel a rep going south. The lower loading also can make it more 
approachable. Zercher good mornings are not easy, however. The Zercher position 
brings with it a lot more loading on the abs and core and upper back; it also hin­
ders your ability to breath (which is overrated anyway). Prepare to be humbled.
a
b
a
b
DEADLIFT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES

148
The Overload System for Strength
DEADLIFT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Floating Deadlift
The floating deadlift is performed by standing on something to elevate you an 
inch or two off the floor (as if you were doing a deficit deadlift), and the bar is 
then lifted to the top position. This is your start position. From here, the bar is 
lowered in the same manner as a normal deadlift until it is one to two inches from 
the floor (i.e., where the floor would be if you weren’t standing on something). 
You then pause briefly before lifting back to the top.
The reason this is such a great deadlift builder is because it teaches you how 
to create maximal full-body tension in the start position of the lift. When done 
correctly, the bottom position of a floating deadlift is your start position for the 
full deadlift, meaning you learn to create enough tension to support the load of 
the bar where you normally don’t have to (as the floor is kindly supporting the 
weight for you). This variation is fantastic for fixing all sticking points during 
phase I of the deadlift or just for someone who struggles maintaining correct 
positioning during phase I.
a
b

149
Assistance Exercises
DEADLIFT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Shrugs
When done correctly, shrugs are a very effective way of strengthening the upper 
back’s ability to maintain alignment during the deadlift. To correctly perform 
shrugs so that they carry over to your deadlift, perform them with a barbell to 
mimic the shoulder positioning of the deadlift and with the hips pushed back. 
From here, you want to start each rep from a stretched position, where you allow 
the bar to pull your shoulders forward as if you were pulled out of position by 
a heavy deadlift. Hold this stretched position for a second or two (to eliminate 
the stretch reflex) before shrugging up and backward to regain correct shoulder 
positioning. The goal here is not to shrug the shoulders up to the ears as high 
as possible but rather to regain the desired position for the deadlift (or perhaps 
a slightly over-retracted position). Remember, effective shrugs are all about 
retraction, not elevation, especially when you are looking for a carryover to the 
deadlift. Don’t forget to hold the top position for a couple of seconds to increase 
time under tension before slowly lowering back down to the stretched position.
The thing to remember here is that the range of motion of shrugs is so small 
that if you don’t perform them in this type of controlled manner and allow 
momentum to aid the lift, you won’t accumulate enough time under tension to 
have a training effect. Plus, you are then training the upper back muscles in a 
manner that does not translate to the deadlift.
a
b

150
The Overload System for Strength
SQUAT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Front Squat
The front squat is performed with the bar held on the front side of the body 
(yes, I know, revolutionary) supported on the front delts. The front squat shifts 
the loading more to the anterior chain (quads, abs) as well as the upper back 
(because of the bar positioning). During a front squat, the torso will stay more 
upright due to a greater degree of knee flexion (and forward knee travel) and a 
lesser degree of hip flexion. The same ground rules still apply here as with the 
back squat, however. The bar should move in a vertical bar path directly over 
the midfoot at all times.
The front squat is the best leg strength builder for long-legged individuals 
and is a great choice for anyone whose leg strength is holding them back in the 
squat. It is also very useful for anyone who finds themselves getting “folded over” 
by heavier loads on the back squat due to the emphasis on upper back and ab 
strength created by the front rack position of the bar.
The front squat is ideally performed using a barbell in the front-rack position. If 
you struggle to achieve this positioning, then first try stretching your pec minors, 
lats, and forearms. If you still struggle to achieve a good elbow and upper arm 
position, then you can remove your little finger (or even little and ring finger) 
from underneath the bar to facilitate extra internal rotation. Failing that, the 
front squat can also be performed using a safety-squat bar held backward or 
using a front squat harness.
a
b

151
Assistance Exercises
SQUAT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Zercher Squat
The Zercher squat provides similar benefits to the front squat because of the 
front-loaded nature of the lift. The Zercher squat, however, places more emphasis 
on the abdominals and upper back due to the bar positioning. Generally, most 
people Zercher squat less than they front squat, so it targets the legs a little less 
effectively (although this isn’t the case for everyone). The Zercher squat is also 
more approachable for a lot of people because the bar position does not have the 
same mobility requirements as a front squat. The Zercher squat tends to punish 
you harder for tipping forward since the bar drifts away from the body and is 
very hard to rescue. So, this can be a very good option if you often find yourself 
turning your squat in to a good-morning (hips shooting up out of the bottom 
of the squat). The Zercher squat also provides a good stimulus for the biceps, 
making it the single most important squat variation in the universe.
The Zercher squat can be done with two different grips: hands apart or hands 
clenched together. The hands apart option makes the arms less stable and requires 
more work from the upper back to keep the bar pulled into the body. Hands 
together makes the bar position more stable, allowing more load to be used, 
meaning the legs and abs are worked harder.
a
b

152
The Overload System for Strength
SQUAT ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Squat or Front Squat with Heels Elevated
Elevating the heels is a great test of whether ankle mobility is holding back a 
lifter’s squat. If a lifter tends to fold forward from the hip toward the bottom 
of the squat (usually struggling to hit depth in the process), it is often because 
the calves are restricting the required forward knee travel. If elevating the heels 
helps, then ankle mobility needs to be improved.
Elevating the heels will lead to a higher degree of forward knee travel, which, 
as discussed previously, will mean less hip flexion and more anterior loading. 
This can be a great tool for increasing the quad loading of your squat without 
altering the mechanics of the lift too much.
Elevating the heels can also allow lifters to achieve a greater depth in the squat, 
so it can be useful for improving strength out of the hole and confidence with 
regards to going to depth. The heels can be elevated by wearing Olympic-style 
lifting shoes, using a form of squat wedge or ramp, or using the good old method 
of sticking some (stable and flat) plates on the floor to put your heels on.
a
b

153
Assistance Exercises
DEADLIFT AND SQUAT ASSISTANCE 
EXERCISES
In theory, most assistance exercises that help you squat will be somewhat helpful 
in improving your deadlift, and vice versa.
Of course, exercises like good mornings and Romanian deadlifts (as examples) 
will be helpful for both the squat and deadlift, especially if you use a low-bar 
powerlifting style of squatting. However, there are exercises that will be equally 
as effective for the squat as for the deadlift. These are heavy loaded carries, and 
they are the best movements to improve your capacity to stay tight under a heavy 
load and are especially effective at strengthening the core, which is so important 
on the squat and deadlift.
When it comes to loaded carries, I like to use the formula 10 meters (33 feet) 
= 1 repetition. If you are using them to build strength, 10 to 50 meters (33 to 164 
feet) are best (1 to 5 reps); for size, 60 to 100 meters (197 to 328 feet) are recom­
mended (6 to 10 reps); and for endurance, you can go up to 200 meters (656 feet).
Farmer’s Walk
The farmer’s walk is likely the first weight-training exercise ever invented. After 
all, people were carrying stuff thousands of years before the first gym even existed! 
This primitive form of resistance training is also one of the best and most useful 
exercises you can do: It dramatically strengthens your core and your capacity to 
keep your body tensed, preventing strength leaks. It does wonders for your grip 
strength. It is also very effective to build the traps and even the deltoids, believe 
it or not (the delts are used to fight the tendency of the weights to move around). 
It also has some effects on the calves, upper arms, and lower body.
a
b
c

154
The Overload System for Strength
You can do the farmer’s walk with several implements: specific farmer’s walk 
handles, dumbbells, a pair of regular bars, kettlebells, a wheelbarrow, or a trap 
bar. Generally speaking, the more unstable an implement is, the more the deltoids 
and core will get worked, and the more stable they are, the greater the impact on 
the traps, grip, and lower body (because you can use more weight). In order of 
stability, from the least to the most stable, you can use two regular bars, farmer’s 
walk handles, a wheelbarrow, kettlebells, dumbbells, and a trap bar.
When using the farmer’s walk as a training exercise, it is important to focus 
on maintaining a solid body position and good overall tightness. It is best to use 
a regular walking speed instead of trying to cover the distance fast. Strongmen 
who compete in that movement will obviously make modifications to go as fast 
as possible. In a way, it’s like a strict pull-up versus a kipping pull-up: the latter is 
more effective to get better numbers, but the former is more effective at building 
muscle strength and size.
Zercher Carries
This is a second form of loaded carry that is highly effective to improve any lift 
requiring a high level of overall tightness. This exercise consists of carrying an 
implement in the crooks of the elbows. It could be a bar, a dumbbell (placed 
sideways), a heavy bag, a strongman log, or really any object that you can carry 
in your arms. It might actually be superior to the farmer’s walk for core work 
and also involves the upper arm to a greater extent.
The key for the Zercher carry to be optimally productive is to avoid leaning 
back when you do it. This will decrease core work and could lead to lower back 
issues. Stay as upright as possible.
c
b
a
DEADLIFT AND SQUAT ASSISTANCE 
EXERCISES

155
Assistance Exercises
BENCH PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Floor Press
For the best carryover, the floor press should be performed with the same grip 
and the same thoracic arch and upper back setup that you would use for the 
bench press. The overall arch will be less pronounced when lying on the floor, 
but you can still get extra stability from the legs by setting up with the knees at 
90 degrees and the feet flat on the floor (as opposed to out straight). The bar path 
and joint alignment should be the same as your bench press until the back of 
the arms come into contact with the floor. At this point, pause on the floor for a 
second to avoid bouncing the arm off the floor, which is (a) bad for your elbows 
and (b) likely to throw off your bar path.
The part of the lift the floor press targets will depend to a degree on the lifter. 
Those with very short forearms and big rib cages can sometimes still get the bar 
to the chest during a floor press, whereas longer-armed lifters may only come 
down to around the midpoint. Therefore, whatever sticking point the floor press 
will target will depend on your own levers. Regardless, this exercise is a great 
pressing movement for improving raw pressing power because it removes the 
aid of leg drive as well as the ability to bounce the bar off the chest.
a
b

156
The Overload System for Strength
BENCH PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Close-Grip Bench Press
Setting up for a close-grip bench press should be the exact same as your regular 
bench press with the only change being the grip width. You should bring your 
grip in anywhere from a half to one full hand width on each side. Anything less 
than this and the change in motor recruitment isn’t significant enough to improve 
anything. Any more than this and you can take the movement pattern too far away 
from the main lift for it to effectively carry over. Generally, the more experienced 
the lifter and the more stable their technique, the bigger the difference they can 
have between their grips and still get a carryover.
The closer grip will mean the bar touches lower down on the torso with the 
elbows in closer to the sides of the body. This increases the horizontal and vertical 
travel distance of the bar and the degree of flexion in the elbow and the shoulder. 
The main result is an increase in tricep loading, but this grip also increases the 
work required from the front delts. As such, the close-grip bench is a good option 
for improving the midrange and top end of the bench press.
a
b

157
Assistance Exercises
BENCH PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Spoto Press
This is another great option for building raw pressing strength. In a Spoto press, 
everything should be the same as your regular bench press (e.g., grip, setup, bar 
path); the only difference will be that the bar stops one-half to one inch above 
the chest. Briefly pause in this position before driving back, again in the same 
manner as you would for a regular bench press.
The Spoto press improves just about all elements of the bottom end of the 
bench press. Just like the floor press, the Spoto press removes the leg drive and 
any potential bouncing and stretch reflex element of the lift. The pause just off 
the chest improves upper back stability and positioning (it’s common to see lifters 
lose eccentric control of the lift close to the chest). Pressing from a dead-stop 
just above the chest also improves starting strength and fiber recruitment in the 
bottom range of the press, similar to a pin press. So, the Spoto press is one of 
the best options for improving the bottom range of the bench press, especially 
in lifters who are overly reliant on leg drive and momentum.
a
b

158
The Overload System for Strength
BENCH PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Incline Bench Press
In terms of front delt loading and recruitment, the incline bench press is pretty 
much the king. It involves just as much front delt recruitment as a military press 
but can be loaded significantly heavier, resulting in greater stimulation. This 
exercise is best used for strengthening the midrange of the bench press, which 
is a common sticking point due to the prime mover transitioning from being the 
pecs to the front delts and triceps.
For improving the bench press, you want to use an incline of 15 to 30 degrees. 
Any more than this and you will make it too shoulder-dominant and change the 
recruitment pattern to a degree that it will not carry over as well. You should set 
up using the same thoracic arch as you do on the regular bench. If you set your 
feet in the same manner, you can still get decent leg drive on an incline bench. 
During an incline bench exercise, there is a greater degree of shoulder flexion 
owing to the torso angle (hence the front delt recruitment), and the bar will touch 
higher up the torso compared with a regular bench press (around or above the 
nipple line for most lifters).
The bar path on an incline bench has less horizontal travel, so it is more of 
a vertical line of travel. There is still a horizontal component, but it is reduced 
because the bar is touching higher up the torso. So, there should be a slight curve 
to the bar path on the eccentric and concentric but notably less than that of a 
regular bench press.
a
b

159
Assistance Exercises
BENCH PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Decline Bench Press
The decline bench press is all about strengthening the pecs and, in turn, the 
bottom range of the bench press. Once again, the upper back and grip should 
be set the same as your regular bench press. The decline torso angle means the 
bar will touch lower down on the torso (often around the lower ribs and upper 
stomach), and the bar path will be closer to vertical. This more vertical bar path, 
along with the mechanically advantageous position the pecs are placed in, means 
that you can (generally) move more load on a decline bench press even though 
the front delts are able to contribute less to the lift.
For that reason, the decline bench press can also work as a nice overload tool 
for the bench press as well as strengthening the bottom portion of the lift. Yes, 
mechanically speaking, the lift is quite different from the bench press, but the 
act of having the heavier loading in your hands is still going to have a positive 
impact on the nervous system, desensitizing the Golgi tendon organs (GTOs) 
and increasing confidence.
a
b

160
The Overload System for Strength
BENCH PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Dips
This exercise is the original chest builder. Dips were regarded for a long time as 
the chest exercise. Dips are, in essence, an extreme decline press when you look 
at the arm angle relative to the torso. However, because of the plane of motion 
of the upper arm relative to the body, dips are actually a better front delt exercise 
than a pec exercise. Do they recruit the pecs? Yes, and in a stretched position 
also, which is great. But the workload is actually higher on the front delts than 
pecs. As a result, dips are decent for improving the bottom end strength of the 
bench press (due to the loading of the pecs in a stretched position), but they are 
even better for strengthening the midrange.
Setting up for dips is often done completely wrong. First, the body should be 
set with a slight forward lean at the hips and with the legs also placed slightly in 
front of the body while locked straight (imagine setting your body in a banana 
shape). This slight forward torso lean better places the emphasis on the pecs; 
more importantly, it puts the shoulders in a much better position to move freely 
throughout the lift. The shoulders should be set in a slightly shrugged and 
retracted position, which will best centrate the shoulder joint. The upper arm 
and elbows should be set 30 to 45 degrees away from the torso.
During the lift, the torso angle, relative to the floor, should remain constant. 
Throughout the lowering phase, the shoulders will retract and shrug up slightly 
(which is why it is 
important to not start 
in a fully retracted 
position) toward the 
bottom position, 
which would ideally 
be with the shoulder 
joint parallel with, or 
below, the elbow joint.
a
b

161
Assistance Exercises
MILITARY PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Overhead Press Variations
These three variations are all aimed at improving core and postural strength. All 
three postures will place emphasis on maintaining proper bracing and alignment 
during the lift and will reduce the ability to lean back throughout the lift. By 
stopping you from leaning back, these variations can also improve your shoulder 
and starting strength. In terms of the pressing mechanics, however, everything 
else should remain the same as your normal press.
In ascending order, in terms of emphasis on core and postural strength, they 
would be arranged: Tall-kneeling > Z-press > Half-kneeling. Likewise, the ability 
to load these movements would increase throughout that sequence. So, which 
posture you would choose would simply depend on how weak your core is or 
how much you need to improve your postural strength. These variations are good 
choices if you struggle with the bottom portion of the lift, especially if you lean 
back excessively when initiating the movement.
Tall-Kneeling Overhead Press
Tall-kneeling posture refers to you kneeling down on both knees with your hips 
stacked under your rib cage. Basically, think about being as tall as you can, but 
while on your knees. This posture is in fact more difficult than sitting on the floor 
because the bar (and your center of gravity) is higher from the floor, making it 
more unstable.
a
b

162
The Overload System for Strength
MILITARY PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Z-Press
A Z-press, or Savickas press, on the other hand, is performed while you sit on the 
floor with your legs out straight in front of you. It is important that the legs are 
straight and that your feet are not placed against anything for artificial support. 
Just like the tall-kneeling press, this movement is great at placing demands on 
the core by reducing your ability to compensate through body movement. If you 
go into lumbar extension and lean backward, then you get punished by losing 
your balance backward. So, this movement teaches the lifter to stay neutral and 
to keep weight on their abs.
a
b

163
Assistance Exercises
Half-Kneeling Overhead Press
The half-kneeling posture refers to being on your knees but having one leg out 
in front and one behind (almost like you got to the bottom of a split squat but 
then rested on the floor). Because of the larger base of support, this is the most 
stable of the three overhead press variations, which makes it a good choice for 
someone new to these exercises. It is also a good choice for those inexperienced 
with these variations because the half-kneeling posture in fact makes it quite 
difficult to go into extension (due to the hip position caused by having one leg 
in front and one behind). So, it actually helps lifters to stay in neutral when they 
may normally fall into extension.
a
b
MILITARY PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES

164
The Overload System for Strength
MILITARY PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Push Press
The push press is simply a press in which you dip through the hip and knee joint 
and drive through the legs to initiate the lift. This leg drive gives a lot of momentum 
during the (more difficult) bottom half of the lift. This allows more load to be used 
and places a large workload on the triceps to lock out the lift once the momentum 
from the leg drive has run out. As such, the push press offers many potential benefits 
when it comes to improving the press: It acts as an overload exercise (e.g., improving 
nervous system firing, desensitizing GTOs), increases demand on the triceps (e.g., 
improving lockout strength in the press), and also places great stability demand 
on the upper back and core because of the greater load. What’s not to like, right?
You can either set up for the push press using the same grip and rack position 
as your press (less to think about, closer to press mechanics), or you can use a full 
clean and front-rack position, which allows a much better transfer of force from 
the lower body. Whenever possible, I favor the proper front-rack position because 
it allows more load to be used, which amplifies all the benefits of this exercise. 
Other than this, the pressing mechanics are the same as for the regular press.
The dip for the push press should be just that—a dip, not a squat. Think as if 
you were going to do a max effort vertical jump on the spot. This is the height you 
dip to since it is the height that allows you to maximize upward momentum. If you 
perform your press with a very narrow stance, then you may want to widen it for the 
push press so that you do not tip forward onto your toes during the dip. The jump 
phase should involve proper triple extension, with the heels being slammed back 
down to the floor as soon as this is achieved to regain balance as quickly as possible.
a
b

165
Assistance Exercises
MILITARY PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
High-Incline Bench Press
I have already discussed the benefits of incline pressing in the section on bench 
press assistance exercises. Yet, when trying to improve the press, we use an even 
higher incline (45 to 60 degrees) to further increase front delt recruitment and 
better mimic the bar path of the press (a 60-degree incline press has an almost 
vertical bar path). Improving front delt strength (especially at high angles of 
shoulder extension) is a great way of improving bottom half strength in the press. 
In addition, here the incline press also acts as an overload exercise because of 
the greater loads being used.
Unlike with shallower incline presses, when using inclines of 45 to 60 degrees, 
I recommend you stop short of going to the chest. In fact, since we are talking 
about improving the press here, I like to see the bar lowered so that it is level with 
the same part of the body that the bar is at the bottom of your press. To further 
increase the carryover to the press, it is beneficial to use the same grip as your 
press. Yes, a wider grip would facilitate more load, but if it doesn’t carry over to 
the main lift, then it defeats the purpose of being used as an assistance exercise.
a
b

166
The Overload System for Strength
MILITARY PRESS ASSISTANCE EXERCISES
Bradford Press
This is an old-school shoulder builder that was really popular until behind-the-
neck presses started being touted as the work of the devil that will tear your 
rotator cuff instantly. During a Bradford press, the bar is pressed up to just above 
forehead level (think back to phase I of the military press; see chapter 6); at this 
point, the elbows flare and the bar is moved backward over the head and then 
lowered behind the head. This movement is then reversed to end up back at the 
same start position that you use for your regular press.
What this movement does (other than illustrating you have acceptable shoul­
der mobility) is target the entire shoulder (not just the front delts) and keeps it 
under constant tension throughout the lift. From a hypertrophy perspective, this 
gives the Bradford press an advantage over the military press since the tension 
is significantly reduced after phase I is completed. So, this is a great shoulder 
builder all round, and bigger, stronger delts are going to lead to a bigger press. 
Furthermore, by targeting the lateral and rear heads of the shoulder, the Bedford 
press can help keep your shoulders balanced and healthy (yes, it can improve 
shoulder health rather than destroy it, believe it or not).
a
b
c

167
The Overload System 
Programming
As you have seen throughout the previous chapters, there are a lot of methods that 
you can use to build an old-school overload program. It might be overwhelming 
at the moment, but our objective is not to give you a handout. If we were doing 
that, we would simply sell you a program, not write a whole book! If you bought 
this book, it is because you want to learn how to program using these methods 
or at least learn to integrate some of them in your own plans. We will therefore 
look at how to build a program and training strategy (linking several programs 
together) using this system of training.
Training Frequency and Split
The first thing to discuss is training frequency as well as schedule. I (Christian) 
have been all over the board when it comes to frequency in the past. Mostly 
because I just love to train and eventually became more addicted to the training 
itself than to getting results. That’s why I tried (and was able) to find justifica­
tions to train 6 days a week. This led to stagnation, feeling run down, and getting 
injured.
CHAPTER 
11

168
The Overload System for Strength
Most of my clients, even pro athletes, have always lifted 3 or 4 days a week. It 
turns out that 3 or 4 workouts a week is what is ideal for most lifters, especially 
with the intensity of the work involved with this system. Let me be clear: You 
absolutely can train 5 or 6 days a week if the overall stress of the sessions is low 
enough. This normally equates to a very low volume of work. For example, I wrote 
a series of articles on “The Best Damn Workout for Natural Lifters” that used 6 
training days a week, but the overall volume was extremely low: 4 to 5 total work 
sets per workout (not per exercise). I have also produced some plans based on a 
very high frequency of submaximal work, where you would go heavy-ish but keep 
3 or more reps in reserve (e.g., sets of 3 reps at 80 to 85 percent of your max). 
However, a plan where you train brutally hard and do even a moderate amount 
of work will yield better results at 3 or 4 weekly workouts than 5 or 6 workouts. 
The harder you train, the less you can train. It should actually be pretty obvious 
to anyone who has actually trained. Just look at some examples:
	
• Before the 1960s, most lifters trained 3 days a week (Mon-Wed-Fri or Mon-
Wed-Sat). That included strength legends like John Grimek, Steve Stanko, 
and the legends who came before them.
	
• Ed Coan, the greatest powerlifter of all time, trained 4 days a week.
	
• The Westside Barbell guys (if you don’t know them, you don’t know 
strength!) train 4 days a week.
	
• The Metal Militia lifters (who, for a while, were among the best pressers in 
the world) train 4 days a week.
	
• Hafthor Bjornsson (one of the best strongmen in the world) lifts 3 days a 
week and has one event day per week.
	
• Bill Kazmeir (strongman legend and possibly the best strongman ever) 
trained 4 days a week.
	
• Brian Shaw (one of the best strongmen in the world) trains 4 days a week.
Now, many of these men take anabolic steroids. Steroids help you recover faster. 
Yet they only train (or trained) 4 days a week. Why would someone without that 
advantage train hard 5 or 6 days a week? Granted, there are exceptions. There 
are guys who did train hard and often. However, you will find that the norm is 
4 days a week, not more. Try not to look at what the exceptions can handle but 
what most lifters can do.
Before you tell me about Olympic lifters training 6 days a week, sometimes 
twice a day, I want to remind you that, first, most of their workouts are skill 
workouts and they don’t push the sets hard, and second, they are essentially 
professional athletes who have nothing to do but train and recover. So, what I 
recommend with this system is hard workouts 3 days a week, on nonconsecutive 
days. With the possibility of adding a fourth, smaller workout to work on weak 
points. I call this lower stress workout a gap workout. My traditional schedule 
looks like this:
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Whole body 1
Off
Whole body 2
Off
Whole body 3
Gap workout
Off

169
The Overload System Programming
I also sometimes use a 1-on/1-off schedule without a gap workout. In other 
words, some weeks you train 3 days a week; other weeks you train 4 days a week. 
For example, the schedule might look like this:
WEEK 1
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Whole 
body 1
Off
Whole 
body 2
Off
Whole 
body 3
Off
Whole 
body 1
WEEK 2
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Off
Whole 
body 2
Off
Whole 
body 3
Off
Whole 
body 1
Off
Or, I will use a 1-on/1-off schedule with a gap workout, which might look like this:
WEEK 1
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Whole 
body 1
Off
Whole 
body 2
Off
Whole 
body 3
Off
Gap 
workout
WEEK 2
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Off
Whole 
body 1
Off
Whole 
body 2
Off
Whole 
body 3
Off
I use the traditional schedule with 90 percent of the people I work with. The 
1-on/1-off without a gap workout works well for people with a bit more stress in 
their life. The 1-on/1-off with a gap workout is the option that I use with people 
who have the most stress or a physical job.
Note that some people don’t like whole-body workouts, so I do use an upper-
lower split or a whole-body, upper body, and lower body split from time to time. 
Another option that I really like with this system is the lift-specific approach, 
which is also a form of upper-lower body split. A lot of people prefer that approach 
because it allows them to focus on one single goal per workout (improving one lift), 
and it also works very well with the overload system because it allows us to use 
several methods for each lift in the same workout (partials, functional isometrics, 
and holds seem to work better if they are done in the same workout as full-range 
exercises). In this lift-specific split, you select four lifts you want to focus on and 
that cover the whole body. For example, the schedule could look like this:
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Squat and 
squat assis­
tance exer­
cises
Off
Bench press 
and bench 
press assis­
tance exer­
cises
Off
Deadlift and 
deadlift 
assistance 
exercises
Overhead 
press and 
overhead 
press assis­
tance exer­
cises
Off

170
The Overload System for Strength
You can also use a 1-on/1-off schedule instead of the set-in-stone 4 days a 
week plan:
WEEK 1
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Squat and 
squat assis­
tance exer­
cises
Off
Bench press 
and bench 
press assis­
tance exer­
cises
Off
Deadlift and 
deadlift 
assistance 
exercise
Off
Overhead 
press and 
overhead 
press 
assistance 
exercises
WEEK 2
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Off
Squat and 
squat 
assis­
tance 
exercises
Off
Bench 
press and 
bench 
press 
assis­
tance 
exercises
Off
Deadlift and 
deadlift 
assistance 
exercises
Off
While there are six main lifts in this system (deadlift, squat, bench press, 
military press, row, explosive pull), and each will have an important impact on 
your physique and strength, there is another important point I want to make:
	
• They don’t all have to be used in every program. You can rotate them.
	
• They don’t all have to be treated as primary lifts. For example, the row or 
high pull can be a secondary movement on one of the training days.
Just because you are doing whole-body sessions doesn’t mean you have to hit 
four or six main lifts in one workout. You could do two main lifts per day (e.g., 
overhead press and squat on day 1; bench press and deadlift on day 2; and power 
cleans and rows on day 3). This would allow you to use two methods and one 
assistance exercise per lift in each workout, or three methods. It can be a very 
interesting use of whole-body training. It would essentially be a cross between 
a whole-body and a lift-specific approach.
There really is more than one way to skin a cat. And no, I’m not saying this to 
take the easy way out. I always said that the split you use is just about the least 
important training decision you make. If you pick from one of these, it will work:
Three whole-body workouts (plus an optional gap workout)
Lift-specific split
Lift-specific and whole-body hybrid (one upper and one lower body main lift)
By now, you might be happy to know there are various ways of making this 
system work, but you may be confused about which split to use. I’ll help you 
make up your mind!
First, let me say that I learned the hard way that it is always better to recover 
too much than barely enough (let alone not enough). If you train brutally hard 
on the methods presented in this book, there is pretty much no way to undertrain 
with this approach. The other training split options are mostly to fit a certain type 

171
The Overload System Programming
of personality. Do not neglect the importance that liking the way you train can 
have on the gains you get. The more you like your training, the more motivated 
you will be in the gym and the better you can perform, leading to more gains. 
So, I’ll be up front and tell you that the two approaches that I like best are the 
traditional schedule (whole-body workout 3 days a week split with the possibility 
of adding a gap workout) and the lift-specific split. Which split you choose may 
depend on your recovery capacities. You can go either with the static 4 days a 
week schedule (e.g., Mon-Wed-Fri-Sat or Sun-Tue-Thu-Fri)—that’s if you have 
good recovery capacities—or a 1-on/1-off schedule if you need more recovery 
time. Table 11.1 provides a brief look at the pros and cons of these two types of 
schedules.
TABLE 11.1  Pros and Cons of Lift Schedules: Traditional Versus Lift-Specific Split
Pros
Cons
Traditional (3 
whole-body 
with possible 
gap workout)
•	Can hit a lift or muscle 3 days a week, 
faster neurological improvements
•	A day focused on fixing weaknesses
•	Easy to plan by using one main method 
per session
•	Less chance of under-stimulation if 
you have to miss a workout (you still hit 
everything twice in the week)
•	Greater myostatin inhibition (a positive 
for muscle growth)
•	Generally, burns more “fuel” (greater 
caloric expenditure)
•	Harder to combine several methods for 
a lift in one session
•	More draining than more concentrated 
sessions, even at an equal volume
•	Lifts performed later tend to suffer more 
than with another approach
•	Workouts tend to be longer (you need 
to warm up for every lift because they 
hit different muscles)
Lift-specific split
•	Allows you to really focus on a lift
•	Easier to structure several methods for 
a lift
•	Greater strength transfer from partials, 
isometrics, and holds to the main move­
ment because they are done in the 
same period
•	More motivational for many people 
because of the singleness of purpose 
of each workout and the feeling that 
everything is done to accomplish one 
specific goal
•	Workouts tend to be shorter because 
you don’t need to warm up extensively 
for all exercises
•	Can lead to slower progression in lifters 
who are less technically efficient and 
still building their neurological efficiency 
and technique
•	A higher frequency of practice of a lift 
leads to more rapid strength gains, at 
least for a 3- to 5-week period
•	Can affect your motivation mentally 
(i.e., when using a 1-on/1-off schedule 
you can have the impression of under­
working a movement because you 
might not do it every week; in reality, this 
is a moot point because you do each 
lift every 8 days instead of every 7 days, 
which is not significant)
Number of Exercises
While the previous section on training split was a bit more complex (because 
there are several variations you can use and I wanted to explain how to make 
your decision), the number of exercises to use is a lot more straightforward.
First, let’s make it clear that when it comes to programming, we will define an 
“exercise” as a movement with a specific method or loading scheme. For example, 
if you do 5 sets of 5 on the bench press and 3 sets of 5 on top half bench press 

172
The Overload System for Strength
from pins, that would be two exercises. We use three to six exercises in a work­
out. This refers to either the main lifts, special methods on the main lifts, or the 
primary assistance work. Remedial exercises (mentioned in chapter 1) can be 
added, but usually only one or two and only if absolutely necessary. When you 
hit the main lifts hard (especially with the high-impact methods described in 
this book), there is no need to do isolation work for all the major muscle groups. 
Only use a remedial exercise to fix a weak link in the chain.
There is still a lot of play between a half dozen or fewer exercises. In reality, 
most lifters should use four to six exercises per workout. You would go down to 
three exercises (even to two, in extreme cases) for three main reasons:
	
• You want to do more sets for each exercise you do. For example, if you want 
to do 3-2-1 wave loading for all of your movements, you can go up to 9 to 
12 work sets for an exercise. Doing that on 4 to 6 lifts will be too much for 
most people. The same goes if you want to use the tried-and-true 10 × 3 
method. Doing that on more than 3 lifts per workout is going to be way 
too much.
	
• Your recovery capacity is low. This could be because of genetic factors, life­
style, work, or overall stressful period. For example, I have worked with 
many elite athletes in my time. One athlete, at a bodyweight of 181 pounds 
(82 kilograms), could bench 425 pounds (193 kilograms), squat 550 pounds 
(249 kilograms), power clean 335 pounds (152 kilograms), jump 40 inches 
(102 centimeters), and run 40 yards (37 meters) in under 4.3 seconds. 
Another athlete, at a bodyweight of 187 pounds (85 kilograms), could squat 
575 pounds (261 kilograms), power clean 355 pounds (161 kilograms), front 
squat 475 pounds (215 kilograms), jump 38 inches (97 centimeters), and run 
40 yards (37 meters) in 4.35 seconds. But these athletes could not perform 
more than 6 to 9 total work sets per workout, otherwise they would crash 
the next day! The most we could do was 3 work sets on three exercises or 
4 to 5 work sets on two movements. Not being able to recover from a lot of 
work doesn’t mean that you are at the bottom of the genetic pool.
	
• You don’t have much time to train. When you have limited time to train, you 
need to be smarter about how you allocate your training time and volume. 
In this case, you want to put as much of your energy into the main lifts as 
possible and do less exercises per workout (so you don’t spend half your 
workout warming up for five different exercises).
So, the question is: How many exercises should I do? The answer is this: four to 
six per workout, with the possibility of going even lower in certain circumstances.
Workout Structure
There are a few ways to organize how the exercises are structured in a workout. 
Let’s take a look.
	
• Horizontal: You perform all the sets of an exercise before moving on to the 
next.
	
• Vertical: You perform one set of each exercise (with rest) before coming 
back to the first one and starting over again until you have done all your 
sets (called a “circuit” or circuit training).

173
The Overload System Programming
	
• Alternated: Also known as the “A1/A2 method” and popularized by Charles 
Poliquin, you perform a set of one exercise, rest, perform a set of the second 
exercise, rest, then go back to the first one and start over until all your sets 
are done. Traditionally, this is either done with antagonistic movements or 
an upper and a lower movement.
	
• Hybrid: You use combinations of the first three approaches. For example, 
you might do the first two exercises as stand-alone (horizontal) then the 
last four exercises paired using the alternated approach.
I have used all of them at some point in my career and still do, because depend­
ing on the situation and training approach selected, they all can be the best tool 
for the job. However, when it comes to very heavy work, horizontal is the way to 
go. Pretty much all of the strongest lifters who ever lived have done all their sets 
on an exercise before moving on to the next. Except maybe when they did lighter 
work. The reason is that when you are training with near-maximal, maximal, and 
supramaximal weights, you want your mind to stay focused on that one task. Also, 
going from one motor pattern to the other makes you lose some of the repeated 
bout effect that makes you more neurologically efficient on a movement with 
every set you do. In my experience, when you do very heavy work and alternate 
two compound movements, one of the two will always suffer.
Coach Poliquin was a strong believer in alternating work, even for heavy 
lifting. He believed that doing so provided you with a “neurological advantage,” 
although he never actually said what it was. In reality, it is easy to understand, 
and the advantage can quite easily become a huge drawback. What happens is 
that the harder the brain needs to work, the more adrenaline you release. That’s 
because adrenaline is needed to speed up the neurons to give you the necessary 
“brain power.” Adrenaline will also increase muscle contraction strength when 
binding to the beta-adrenergic receptors in the muscles. Thus, in a way, Poliquin 
was not wrong, at least theoretically. However, heavy lifting by itself will have 
the same impact on adrenaline, and too much adrenaline can lead to three main 
issues in this situation:
	
• Increased risk of burning out: Burning out is when you overload the beta-ad­
renergic receptors with too much adrenaline. As a result, they downregulate 
(become less sensitive), so they respond less to your own adrenaline, and 
you lose strength, speed, coordination, motivation, endurance, drive, and 
mental acuity.
	
• Loss of coordination: While adrenaline will make you stronger and faster, 
too much of it will negatively affect movement precision and control (that’s 
the main reason athletes choke in competition). This could actually decrease 
performance by making your technique less efficient.
	
• Increased risk of injury: The more adrenaline is present, the higher your 
muscle tone becomes. This is useful to produce more force and speed, but 
if it becomes excessive, it will lead to muscle tightness instead of muscle 
readiness. Lifting maximal weights with tight muscles is more conducive 
to injuries.
Even in the best circumstances, the extra adrenaline from the alternating 
exercises rarely compensates for the lower efficiency increase you get from doing 
several sets in a row of the same motor task. While the A1/A2 method is fine when 

174
The Overload System for Strength
training for hypertrophy (or when strapped for time), I would avoid it as much as 
possible when training for strength and performance. The only time you will see 
an alternating set format in programs using the approach detailed in this book 
is when low-stress and high-rep isolation work is done. To save time on these 
low-impact movements, we might join two or even three together. Otherwise, 
stick to horizontal sets programming. Another exception, used with advanced 
programming, is using alternating contrasts on the same movement. For example:
A1. Top half bench press from pins × 5.
Rest 3 minutes.
A2. Bench press × 3.
Rest 3 to 4 minutes.
Alternating exercises creates a potentiation effect, and because both exercises 
use the same basic movement pattern, you still get a learning effect from set to 
set, and the motor pattern still gains efficiency.
Rest Between Sets
Sometimes your worst enemy is the one that you would never suspect. I’m a 
hard worker, and I’m not saying that to give myself a pat on the back or to look 
hardcore. I’ve done my fair share of completely crazy things in the gym. I once 
did 100 sets of bench press in a workout (okay, all sets were between 1 and 5 
reps, but all were heavy). For five months, I would drive for hours (two hours 
to get there, two hours to come back) so that I could train for two hours in the 
morning and two hours in the afternoon at the national training center.
You will not be surprised to learn that I would often run myself down into 
the ground until I finally knew better (this took some time). I was passionate, 
I wanted—no, I needed—to be respected for my strength and was willing to do 
anything to get stronger. But even when I learned more about proper training 
and started doing a sane amount of volume, I would still hit the wall. This was 
despite the fact that the training parameters were all logical and worked for my 
clients. It took me a long while to realize that the source of my burning out was 
the thing I least suspected: my rest intervals!
Why would I have thought about that causing my crashes? Too much volume? 
Sure. Excessive frequency? I could see it. Going too heavy, too often? Possible. 
But rest intervals? Surely not.
See, I’m someone who instinctively likes to train fast. That’s my default mode. 
Why? Probably because training faster keeps my adrenaline up, which makes 
me feel better during the workout. But remember what I said about adrenaline 
earlier: too much of it can downregulate the beta-adrenergic receptors, and when 
that happens, you crash.
Several variables can increase adrenaline. A high training density (short rest 
intervals) is just one of those variables, and it is far from being the most impactful 
one. However, if you add short rest intervals to using big compound movements, 
done with heavy weights, pushing each set hard and doing a decent amount of 
volume, the extra adrenaline from the short rest periods could be the straw that 
breaks the camel’s back. Plus, when it comes to building strength and even muscle 
(with fairly heavy work), short rest intervals are the only adrenaline-promoting 
training variable that does not help make you stronger.

175
The Overload System Programming
Studies are finding that you can use a greater average load and gain more 
strength with long versus short rest periods. When it comes to hypertrophy, it 
is less unanimous. While most studies find more size gains from rest periods of 
around 3 minutes than a minute or less, you do have some studies finding similar 
results with short rest intervals. However, this is mostly in beginners. The point 
is, except for making you feel like you are training harder, short rest periods will 
not work as well as longer rest periods to get you stronger and bigger. Short rests 
can help with conditioning and fat loss, but these are not our main goals here.
Exactly how long of a rest period are we talking about? While it can vary 
from movement to movement (e.g., a deadlift might require a longer rest time 
than a bench press, and the difference is even greater with minor movements) 
and how hard you push each set, there are some elements to consider that give 
us a pretty universal rest period range when using heavy work on the big basic 
lifts. For aesthetic purposes, short rest periods are often used, and there are cer­
tain advantages as far as metabolism, energy, and hormonal considerations go. 
However, when you train for strength and performance, the goal is to perform 
optimally during each set.
The level of performance depends largely on the interaction between two 
factors: potentiation and fatigue. Post-tetanic potentiation is a phenomenon 
by which the strength production potential of a muscle is increased for a brief 
period following a high level of force production. In other words, when you do 
a heavy set, your strength production potential increases slightly for some time. 
Potentiation normally peaks at around 2 minutes after the effort and gradually 
comes back down. Around 5 minutes after your effort, potentiation becomes a 
nonfactor.
Fatigue is caused by the set. It can affect the muscles or the nervous system 
and leads to a decrease in performance. Note that the level of fatigue depends 
on the amount of work performed in the set as well as how close to failure you 
went. So, take this recovery curve with a grain of salt. I took the data with the 
longest rest intervals to be safe. After a hard set, you still have a lot of fatigue 
at the 2-minute mark. After 3 to 4 minutes, fatigue is down to very low levels, 
and 5 minutes after your set, there is almost none left (there is still a cumulative 
build-up, however, over the whole workout from central fatigue, which is a dif­
ferent mechanism).
The key is finding the rest period that will allow you to still get some potenti­
ation while minimizing fatigue.
	
• 90 to 120 seconds of rest: Excellent post-tetanic potentiation but insufficient 
recovery (especially neural and phosphagens). Note that for hypertrophy 
workouts (isolation, machine, pulley using light weights), rest periods of 
90 to 120 seconds are fine.
	
• 2 to 3 minutes of rest: Excellent potentiation, with some residual fatigue. 
However, you should see an improvement in performance potential from 
set to set, especially with less demanding lifts.
	
• 3 to 4 minutes of rest: You lose some potentiation, but fatigue is minimal 
(better neural and phosphagens recovery). The rest period will allow 
increase in performance.
	
• 4 to 5 minutes of rest: You will experience very little or no residual fatigue, 
but potentiation is minimal. Within this range, strength potential will not 

176
The Overload System for Strength
increase from set to set, but this rest period significantly reduces the impact 
on the nervous system and should be useful during deload or peaking.
As you can see, 3 to 4 minutes of rest between work sets on the big basic lifts 
is the zone that will pretty much work for everyone, on any lift. Some can use as 
little as 2 minutes on the least demanding lifts, but I feel that it’s safer to stick to 
3 to 4 minutes unless you don’t have much time to train.
Number of Sets per Exercise
The previous training parameters were all fairly easy to explain because, even 
though there will always be some individual differences, the recommendations 
work for pretty much everyone. However, when it comes to selecting the number 
of sets per exercise, there are tons of factors that can influence how many to use.
First, let’s look at the total workload you should do in a session because before 
allocating sets to your exercises, you need to know roughly how many work sets 
overall you can do in your workout. In my coaching career, I have trained suc­
cessful athletes who could only do 6 to 9 total work sets per workout (allocated 
between two or three exercises). Then there were others who could do 30 work 
sets (spread over four to six exercises, that’s an average of 5 to 7 sets per exer­
cise). Let’s look at some factors that can affect how much work someone can do 
in a workout.
Work Capacity
People vary in how much work they can do without quality of execution and 
performance dropping off. There is a difference between work capacity and 
recovery capacity. Recovery capacity refers to being able to recover from the 
workout you just did and have positive adaptations before your next workout. 
Work capacity solely refers to how much work you can do before you start to 
tank within your session. This is dependent on many factors, including the ratio 
of fast-twitch fibers (the more fast-twitch fibers you have, the less capacity you’ll 
have), how long your central nervous system can sustain sending an intense 
neural drive, how fast you clear adrenaline once released, your nutritional status, 
and your general fatigue level. There is no sense in continuing to pound the 
body with more sets when performance starts to drop, at least when strength 
and performance are the goal.
Recovery Capacity
Being able to “do the work” is one thing. Recovering and positively adapting to 
the work is another. It is quite possible to train so much that you cause excessive 
damage to the body because it doesn’t have time to repair and rebuild everything 
before the next stimulation. Protein synthesis in the worked muscles remains 
elevated for 24 to 36 hours after your workout. If you have not repaired the 
muscle by that time, it becomes very unlikely that you will once protein synthesis 
and protein degradation become balanced again. If you cause so much muscle 
damage that after 24 to 36 hours you haven’t repaired the damage, you will not 
progress from your session. In fact, you could even lose muscle.
There is also the fact that doing too much work can lead to systemic fatigue or 
what I call a “training burnout” (others call it overtraining). This happens when 
you produce too much cortisol and adrenaline, and so you downregulate your 

177
The Overload System Programming
beta-adrenergic receptors. Your muscles, nervous system, and heart respond 
almost half as much as usual to adrenaline. This leads to a drop in physical and 
mental performance, less strength and speed, a drop in endurance, and mental 
apathy and loss of motivation.
I’ll give you an example of excessive training. A few years ago, I was getting 
back into Olympic lifting, and because I had trained as a bro for a few years, 
I knew that I needed to regain my leg strength to be able to perform at a high 
level. Not being a patient person by nature, I opted for the nuclear weapon: I did 
a workout that consisted of a complex of three exercises, done as a circuit with 
around 2 minutes of rest, and I completed 10 sets:
A1. Back squat with an eccentric overload using weight releasers (80 percent 
on the bar with an extra 30 percent from releasers): 3 to 5 cluster reps
A2. Barbell jump squat: 5 reps with 135 pounds (61 kilograms)
A3. Depth jumps from a 40-inch (102-centimeter) box: 5 reps
I felt great afterward, convinced that I had done a great session that would 
bring my leg strength back up by quite a bit. What actually happened is that my 
legs were extremely sore for 10 days, and they were still sore enough to affect 
performance 14 days later. It took me 21 days to get back to being able to squat 
the weight I was using before that session! This is the perfect example of being 
able to do the work but not being able to positively adapt to the work. It is an 
extreme example, of course, but it’s something that happens on a smaller scale 
all the time.
Intensiveness
There is a distinction to make between intensity and intensiveness. In strength 
training, intensity refers to the weight used relative to your maximum. If your max 
on a lift is 500 pounds (227 kilograms) and you use 400 pounds (181 kilograms) 
for your sets, you have an intensity level of 80 percent, regardless of how hard 
the sets actually are. The term can be a misnomer because it has very little to do 
with how intense a set is. A set with 85 percent can be very easy (e.g., doing 1 to 
2 reps with 85 percent) while a set with 50 percent can be brutally hard (if you 
take it to failure). I use the term “intensiveness” when talking about how hard 
you push your set, often using the rate of perceived effort (RPE) scale. Taking a 
set to failure is more intensive than leaving 3 reps in the tank, regardless of the 
load used. Intensity (weight used) doesn’t have a huge impact in and of itself on 
how many sets you should do; rather, it’s how hard you push your sets that play 
a big role. The closer you go to failure on your sets, the less sets you can do. To 
paraphrase an old-school training adage: You can train hard or you can train 
long, but not both.
Exercises Performed
Bigger, multijoint lifts are more demanding than smaller isolated exercises. 
Big shock! A squat is going to take more out of you than leg presses, which are 
themselves more demanding than leg extensions. Bigger movements involve 
more muscle mass. You are causing microtrauma to more muscles, which will 
require a lot more resources to repair. The multijoint movements are also more 
complex to control (especially when done with free weights) and thus require 
more brain power. This means more adrenaline, which increases the risk of 

178
The Overload System for Strength
downregulating the beta-adrenergic receptors. It also means a greater likelihood 
of central nervous system fatigue.
Take these two workouts, for example:
Workout A
Squat
Romanian deadlift
Farmer’s walk
Heavy prowler pushing
Workout B
Leg press
Back extension
Leg extension
Standing calf raise
Anybody who has been in a gym more than a few weeks will know that even 
though both have the same number of exercises and hit roughly the same muscle 
groups, workout A is going to be a lot more demanding at an equal effort level. 
Ask someone to do 5 hard sets of each exercise. Most will be able to do workout 
B and feel like they had a good session, but they won’t feel drained. Most will 
not be able to do that with workout A without feeling completely trashed, and 
a lot just won’t be able to finish it. They might be able to do 3 hard sets. That’s 
why exercise selection matters when planning the number of sets. If all you do 
is isolated work or machine exercises, you can absolutely handle more volume 
than if you do mostly big, basic barbell lifts.
So, how many sets should you do, then? As you can see, it’s not simple to 
answer that question. I cannot give you a universal answer that will apply to all 
programs and training approaches. But I can give you one when it comes to the 
type of training promoted in this book. Let’s look at the nature of the training 
recommended here:
	
• The training uses almost exclusively multijoint movements.
	
• Almost all of the work is done with free weights.
	
• The objective is to train hard, but not to failure. The work sets range from 
an RPE of 7 to 9. Where there is an RPE of 9, it’s usually only on the last 
set of an exercise.
	
• There is sufficient rest time between sessions (often using a 1-on/1-off 
schedule).
	
• There are fairly long rest intervals.
Some of these factors decrease how many sets you should do, and some allow 
you to do more (with lots of rest days, never doing hard workouts on consecutive 
days, and long rest intervals). Considering those factors, my recommendation 
for most is to do between 12 and 24 work sets per workout, and most should be 
around 16 to 20 sets. Again, understand that there will be individual differences. 
Some people will be able to do slightly more sets than what I recommend while 
others will need less.

179
The Overload System Programming
Another rule is that not all of these sets are maximal effort. I have always been 
a proponent of ramping the weight from set to set, at least for the main lifts. This 
means that you might do 5 work sets on an exercise but only the last two are 
hard and the last one is close to or at your limit. To me, anything at an RPE of 
7 or more is a work set because it will provide a training effect. So, even though 
out of 5 sets the first two are fairly easy, they still count as work sets. That’s how 
old-school lifters did their workouts when using something like a 5 × 5 scheme.
The intensiveness level of each set would look something like this for 5, 4, and 
3 work sets:
5 work sets
4 work sets
3 work sets
Set 1: RPE 7
(3 solid reps in the tank)
Set 2: RPE 8
(2 solid reps in reserve)
Set 3: RPE 8.5
(1, maybe 2 reps in the tank, 
but second would be a big 
grind)
Set 4: RPE 9
(1 grinded rep in the tank)
Set 5: RPE 9.5-10
(can’t do another rep, maybe 
could have used a bit more 
weight)
Set 1: RPE 7
(3 solid reps in the tank)
Set 2: RPE 8
(2 solid reps in reserve)
Set 3: RPE 8.5
(1, maybe 2 reps in the tank, 
but second would be a big 
grind)
Set 4: RPE 9
(1 grinded rep in the tank)
Set 1: RPE 7
(3 solid reps in the tank)
Set 2: RPE 8.5
(1, maybe 2 reps in the tank, 
but second would be a big 
grind)
Set 3: RPE 9.5-10
(can’t do another rep, maybe 
could have used a bit more 
weight)
This is the basic approach for the loading schemes we use. We also use special 
loading schemes like waves, plateau loading, or ratchet loading that are a bit 
different. There are other special loading schemes that we use, but these are just 
examples to show load progression. Let’s take a look:
Wave loading
Plateau loading
Ratchet loading
Set 1: 5 reps RPE 8
Set 2: 3 reps RPE 8
Set 3: 1 rep RPE 8
Set 4: 5 reps RPE 9
Set 5: 3 reps RPE 9
Set 6: 1 rep RPE 9
Set 1: 6 reps RPE 7.5
Set 2: 6 reps RPE 8.5
Set 3: 4 reps RPE 7.5
Set 4: 4 reps RPE 8.5
Set 5: 2 reps RPE 7.5
Set 6: 2 reps RPE 8.5
Set 1: 1 rep RPE 6
Set 2: 3 reps RPE 8 (same weight as set 1)
Set 3: 1 rep RPE 7
Set 4: 3 reps RPE 9 (same weight as set 3)
Set 5: 1 rep RPE 8
Set 6: 3 reps RPE 10 (same weight as set 5)
So, let’s return to the question: How many sets per exercise? You have several 
options here. The easiest is to take the total number of sets you decide to do as 
well as the exercises you decide to use and spread the sets pretty much equally 
across the exercises. For example, if you picked four exercises and 20 sets, that 
gives you 5 work sets per movement. You can also decide to give more sets to 
exercises you want to emphasize more. In the above example of 20 sets for four 
exercises, you might want to put more emphasis on two main movements and 
have two assistance exercises or methods. In this case, you might attribute 3 

180
The Overload System for Strength
work sets to the assistance movements, which leaves you 14 sets for the two 
main movements, so 7 work sets each. This is often used in the lift-specific and 
whole-body hybrid setup where you have two main lifts. You could even decide to 
have a lot of work for one lift, for example, in a lift-specific program. You might 
decide to do 9 work sets for the main lift (e.g., three 3-2-1 waves), which would 
leave you 11 sets for three movements. You could have 4 sets for two exercises 
and 3 sets for the last one.
Usually, I don’t like doing fewer than 3 sets per exercise with this training 
approach, and up to 9 sets can be done. As long as the total set number for the 
workout falls in the proper range, it will work. Heck, I’ve done workouts with 
one lift done for 15 sets of 3 reps. Because this system uses mostly big compound 
movements that have a very similar systemic impact on the body, it doesn’t really 
matter, from a recovery perspective, how you distribute your sets. It becomes a 
matter of what you want to accomplish with your session.
Exercise Variation
Changing exercises is the easiest way to include variation in your plan, and it’s 
seductive because it also gives you the illusion of progress. But what does that 
mean? Well, if you haven’t done a lift in a while, or at all, the first 2 to 4 weeks 
you do it you will have rapid strength gains simply because your intramuscular 
and intermuscular coordination as well as technical efficiency improves. That’s 
why I put strength in quotation marks; you aren’t so much getting stronger than 
you are getting more efficient at doing the exercise. It is not unusual to be able 
to add 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) per week for 4 weeks when you start using a 
new movement or one you haven’t done in a while. Certainly, adding 5 pounds 
(2.3 kilograms) per week will be very easy. If you have been stuck and stagnating 
on your lifts for weeks, this can feel like gaining 100 pounds (45 kilograms)! I’m 
getting stronger again! It works! Yeah, but not really.
A lot of people change their main exercises every 4 weeks, and they always 
have the illusion of getting stronger. And they are, to some extent. After all, if you 
train hard on big basic lifts, you will get stronger. It’s not just about being more 
technically efficient, but it’s not working as well as you think it is.
Now, you may be thinking, Yeah, but the Westside Barbell guys change their main 
lift every week, and they are superstrong! While that’s true, you have to understand 
the whole story.
	
• They keep practicing their main lift year-round (speed squats and bench 
are done year-round, and many do the same with speed deadlifts).
	
• The variations of the main lifts are not huge variations. They will do rack 
pulls from various heights (a deadlift with a shortened range of motion), 
squats with different bars (mechanically still the same as a competition 
squat but with the load in a slightly different position), squats to different 
box heights (a squat but with a shortened range of motion), bench press 
to blocks of different thickness (still a bench press but with a shortened 
range of motion), or bench press with different bars (same movement 
pattern as the bench). Basically, they rarely change the movement pattern; 
they just reduce or increase the range of motion or use a slightly differ­
ent load position. They actually keep using the same mechanics as their 
competition lifts, which means that they do not have the rapid gains due 

181
The Overload System Programming
to technical improvements or neurological adaptations. It’s not like going 
from a bench press to an incline dumbbell press or from a squat to a hack 
squat machine, for example.
	
• They are extremely advanced lifters who are already efficient neurologically 
and technically on all the exercises they rotate in. They don’t have rapid 
strength gains from motor learning because they don’t have much motor 
learning left to do.
Varying the main lifts certainly does have benefits, but there are also draw­
backs, as we will discuss in more detail here.
Benefits of Exercise Variation
It can make you stronger overall by making you efficient at applying strength in 
different movements. It can lead to fewer weak points, and it can keep training 
fresher and more motivating (for some). Exercise variation gives you more adren­
aline when you train (which is also a drawback), and it’s easier to add weight to 
the bar. Let’s briefly look at these points individually.
Makes You Stronger Overall
Doing a lift gives you two types of strength. All the muscles involved get stronger, 
and you become better at applying force in that movement. With the first type of 
strength, you will have some carryover from one exercise to a related one. For 
example, if your squat goes up, your front squat should also go up (but not to the 
same extent). The closer in coordination structure an exercise is to the one you 
trained, the more of the strength will be transferred, but the transfer is never one 
for one. If you add 50 pounds (23 kilograms) to your squat, your front squat will 
not automatically go up by the same amount, too. Maybe 25 to 30 pounds (11 to 14 
kilograms). The more you practice a movement, the better you become at applying 
force in that movement. One of the benefits of rotating your main lifts is that you 
get to practice more movements, and as such, you improve more on each than if 
you didn’t train them. However, this could also mean that you improve less on a 
movement than if you trained it more often (more on that in the drawbacks section).
Good illustrations of this are strongmen, powerlifters, and Olympic lifters. 
They are all strong, but usually their strength is mostly seen in their movement of 
choice. Olympic lifters will use a much narrower range of “strong lifts” because 
of the highly technical nature of their sport (meaning they must spend a lot 
more time and volume on their competition lifts). For example, I’ve trained an 
Olympic lifter who could jerk 200 kilograms (440 pounds) but barely bench-press 
102 kilograms (225 pounds)! Heck, a friend of mine who competed at the world 
championships in 1982 could clean and jerk 192.5 kilograms (424 pounds) but 
barely get 85 kilograms (187 pounds) on the strict overhead press. Ask an Olympic 
lifter, even an elite one, to curl or bench-press, and their strength level will not 
be anywhere near elite (except for some of the freaks or those who actually do 
these exercises in their training, which is rare).
Powerlifters will have strength over a broader range of exercises because their 
competition lifts are more varied (you need to be strong in every single muscle 
because you don’t rely on momentum created by the lower body to make the 
lift). In addition, they normally use more assistance exercise variations than 
Olympic lifters. You will rarely have a high-level powerlifter weak in any barbell 
or dumbbell exercises (except the Olympic lifts).

182
The Overload System for Strength
Strongmen will have the broadest range of strong movements. Top-level strong­
men will be strong on pretty much anything you can ask them to do. They can do 
any barbell lift, even including the Olympic lifts (it might not be pretty, but they 
will be able to lift a lot). My friend Jean-Francois Caron, top 5 strongman in the 
world, can power clean 445 pounds (202 kilograms) without efficient technique. 
Top-level strongmen will be strong in carries, and they can throw far. You name 
it, they can do it. That’s because the demands of their sport have them training 
on the widest variety of exercises out of all the strength athletes. A side effect is 
that even though strongman competitors are stronger than the elite powerlifters, 
the powerlifters are still likely to beat them in a powerlifting meet (if both lifters 
are of the same level, of course). The strongman will be equal or even stronger 
on the deadlift because it’s the foundation of strongman training, but bench and 
squat will favor the powerlifter.
What I’m getting at is that the more you focus on a few lifts, the stronger you 
will be on those lifts, but the more lifts you train, the better you will be at being 
pretty strong on everything.
Leads to Fewer Weak Points
Even moderate changes to a movement can bias toward certain muscle groups or 
sections of a muscle. For example, a wider stance in your squat will hit the glutes 
and adductor muscles a bit more than a narrower squat. Elevating the heels on 
a squat will shift more stress to the quadriceps. A narrower grip on bench press 
will make the triceps a bit more dominant, while a wider grip makes the pecs 
do more of the work. Variation can thus lead you to stimulate a wider range of 
different muscles.
Even using different bars can bias certain muscles. For example, using a safety 
bar for squats will favor the quads and have the core work harder than in a regular 
squat. I actually like those smaller exercise changes. I personally don’t see them as 
true exercise changes, though: the basic motor pattern remains the same, so you 
don’t have any of the drawbacks (which we will see shortly) of exercises changes.
Keeps Your Training Fresher and More Interesting
Some people (not all) need novelty in their training to stay motivated. These 
people tend to jump on a new training bandwagon as soon as they read an 
exciting article about a training method or system or see some cool videos on 
YouTube. If there is some variation built into the program through a rotation in 
the main lifts, which also gives them freedom to try new lifts, it can curb their 
need to completely drop their program to do something else. It’s the lesser of 
two evils, if you will.
Gives You More Adrenaline When You Train
I briefly mentioned this before, but when you need more brain power (i.e., require 
a higher neurological activation), you produce more adrenaline to speed up your 
neurons. When you switch to a new exercise, especially one that you have not 
mastered yet, you need more brain power to execute, learn, and program the 
movement pattern. This means more adrenaline. In fact, it’s one of the reasons 
why changing exercises around feels exciting to some people and can create 
anxiety in others. (Anxiety is nothing more than your brain going too fast and 
making you feel like you are losing control. Individuals who already have a high 
adrenaline level can thus be made anxious by major exercise changes.) This 
adrenaline will not solely affect your brain. It also binds to the muscle and heart 

183
The Overload System Programming
and will thus increase strength, speed, and endurance. Exercise variation can 
therefore increase excitement, energy, and performance. This will obviously be less 
pronounced in very advanced lifters who have mastered most exercise variations.
Makes It Easier to Add Weight to the Bar
As I mentioned before, when you switch to a movement that you haven’t done in 
a while (or ever), it is easy to add weight to the bar because of the rapid motor 
learning and technical efficiency improvements. While a lot of that is an illusion 
of gained strength, some of it is real. But more important, it is motivating. The 
more motivated you are, the harder you’ll train. The harder you train, the more 
you gain. So again, while it can start out as illusory gains, the end result can 
become real gains.
Drawbacks of Exercise Variation
There are also some drawbacks to frequent changes in the main lift. It can be the 
enemy of technical mastery which can, in turn, limit progress in a specific lift, 
can increase the risk of training burnout, may make it harder to assess true pro­
gression, and can become excessive. Let’s briefly look at these points individually.
The Enemy of Technical Mastery
If you want to maximize performance on an exercise, you must practice that exer­
cise. Related movements can also improve performance on the main lift, and the 
closer they are in structure, the greater the positive impact will be. For example, 
a front squat will improve the back squat more than a leg extension. However, 
the best way to improve performance on a lift is to practice that lift often and for 
a long time. That’s why competitive Olympic lifters never stray away from the 
snatch, clean and jerk, and the squat, and it’s why a lot of powerlifters (from the 
East European countries mostly) rely heavily on their competition lifts, year-round.
Some people are genetically more gifted than others to transfer strength gains 
from one movement to a related one. Others can’t do it efficiently. This is highly 
dependent on acetylcholine levels. Generally speaking, though, if you stick to the 
same big compound movements for a long time rather than change them every 
3 to 6 weeks, you will get better, faster on those movements.
This is because with more practice comes better intramuscular and intermus­
cular coordination. Basically, your nervous system fine-tunes the motor pattern 
it uses to do the movement. The various muscles involved in the lift are better 
coordinated, and the muscle fibers within these muscles work better together to 
maximize force production. I’m not talking about technique. Someone could have 
perfect technique but poor intramuscular and intermuscular coordination, and 
performance wouldn’t be good. Similarly, someone with seemingly poor technique 
can have a great performance because their intra- and intermuscular coordination 
is so good that their body can still use a high percentage of its potential.
If you constantly change your main lifts, it might lead to overall progress on 
more movements but slower progress on any given lift when compared to if you 
focused on that movement instead of constantly changing. It’s really a matter of 
what is more important to you.
Potentially Increases the Risk of Training Burnout
As I explained in the benefits section, exercise variation can increase adrenaline 
levels, which can lead to more excitement and even better performance. While 

184
The Overload System for Strength
adrenaline is necessary to perform, getting too much of it is like taking out a 
loan at the bank. It’s cool in the short term because you have more money to 
spend, and you feel great, but eventually you will need to pay back the loan, with 
interest, and that can hurt. When it comes to adrenaline, the issue when you 
produce too much of it, too often, or for too long, is that you can downregulate 
and desensitize the beta-adrenergic receptors. Essentially, you make yourself 
resistant to your own adrenaline.
When that happens, it becomes harder and harder for adrenaline to activate 
the various tissues. From the perspective of the brain and central nervous system, 
it means less motivation, lower drive, less competitiveness and belief in yourself, 
laziness, less focus and concentration, slower learning, and impaired coordina­
tion. At the muscular level, it means a decrease in muscle tone and lower strength 
and speed production.
It also affects your cardiovascular capacity by decreasing heart contraction 
strength and rate, delivering less oxygen to the muscle during an effort, and 
making it harder to clear out metabolites like lactate and hydrogen ions. So, 
endurance and work capacity also go down. What we call overtraining really is, 
most of the time, a downregulation of the beta-adrenergic receptors. That’s why 
I personally call it “training burnout,” and it can happen quickly—in as little as 
one workout. We’ve all had an experience where we did a monster workout one 
day only to wake up feeling run down, almost depressed, the very next day. That’s 
a downregulation of the beta-adrenergic receptors.
All that diatribe is to show you that one of the potential effects of variation, 
especially when it means variation in big complex movements, is to spike adren­
aline, which could contribute to downregulating your beta-adrenergic receptors, 
especially if other variables that increase adrenaline and cortisol are elevated 
(e.g., volume, intensiveness, psychological stress, short rest periods, high neu­
rological demands). In most people, the variation itself is unlikely to present a 
big risk. But people who have a high level of stress in their lives or those who 
train excessively will certainly be more at risk of burning out by adding too much 
variation too often.
Makes It Harder to Assess True Progression
It’s cool to see the weight on the bar go up, which happens more easily when you 
constantly change exercises. But, at one point, you need to assess whether you 
are truly getting stronger or if it’s just gains from becoming better at lifts you 
were inefficient in before. One reason why I like to keep some lifts for longer in 
the program is to assess whether the program is working and making me stron­
ger. If my squat keeps going up, I know that my training strategy is working. If 
it isn’t or if it’s going down, I know I need to change something in the program.
If you don’t know when you are truly progressing, then it’s hard to know if 
the program is working or if you need to change it. Relying on muscle growth 
is hard to do because muscle growth is really slow (it can take 6 to 8 weeks in 
a non-beginner to make a significant, noticeable gain in muscle). For many, it’s 
hard to really know if the gains are purely muscle or muscle and fat or even 
mostly fat. If you can’t assess progress, you might stay with a training strategy 
that just isn’t really working, even though you think it is. I’ve seen lifters gain 30 
pounds (14 kilograms) on the front squat in 3 weeks, then 30 pounds on their 
box squat in 3 weeks only to get back to the squat and find they are doing the 
exact same weight, or less, than before those 6 weeks. They sure thought they 
were progressing, but were they really?

185
The Overload System Programming
Becomes Excessive (and Sometimes Illogical)
I’ve seen a lot of Westside Barbell wannabes put max effort exercise variation 
above everything else in their training. It becomes so important to them that 
they try to never do the same lift twice, and they come up with all kinds of crazy 
exercises—exercises that will have a very low carryover to the competition lifts—
just to avoid repeating one they already did. I personally like conjugate training, 
but with a limited rotation of exercises (two to four) selected for their value and 
effectiveness to increase the corresponding main lift. Changing to an ineffective 
exercise just for the sake of variation is stupid, yet it is something I see all the time.
I like exercise variation and believe that it is a valuable tool for lifters who have 
already mastered technique on the big basics (squat, bench, deadlift, military 
press, row). But it is my opinion that a narrower variation (rotating the same 
two to four exercises) and sticking with them for at least 3 weeks is a better 
approach for most lifters.
That having been said, it is also my opinion that you should stick to the big 
basics (squat, bench, deadlift, military press, row) until you are at a high level 
of efficiency on those movements. This takes a lot longer than what most people 
believe (or want to believe). You can never go wrong by sticking to the big basics 
for longer. You can always have variation in the assistance work and the training 
methods used on the main lifts.
Program Variation
First, let’s make it clear that when I say “program,” I mean using the same exercises 
used with the same methods for a similar intensity zone. Note that there can be 
minor changes without it being considered a change in program. For example:
	
• You can change the reps slightly (e.g., going from 5 to 3 reps per set).
	
• You can add or remove sets to your exercises from week to week.
	
• You can substitute an assistance exercise if you feel that it’s not working 
for you.
	
• You can rotate the minor remedial exercise if you use one.
	
• You can add an intensification technique on some weeks (e.g., doing regular 
sets for 2 weeks, then rest for the third week).
However, when you make major changes to the content of the program, we 
are talking about changing your program. This kind of change and variation is 
important for continuous progression, but also be aware that this doesn’t mean 
that you have to change every variable in your new program. For example, let’s 
say that you use the progressive range of motion (PRM) method on the bench 
press, squat, and deadlift. After the completion of your program, you are not yet 
to the point of starting from the lowest position on deadlift. In the first phase (3 
weeks in this case) of your new program, you could then continue with the PRM 
method for deadlift while you change the other elements of the program, thereby 
giving you 3 more weeks. You can also keep several exercises in the plan while 
you change the program (e.g., by using different methods or loading schemes 
with those exercises).
Just like exercise variation, how often you should change your program will 
depend on several factors, such as experience level and personality type. But some 

186
The Overload System for Strength
variation is needed to keep you progressing. In other words, stimulus variation 
is very important.
Your body adapts to the training stress you place on it. That’s mostly good 
because that’s what allows you to get bigger and stronger, but there is some 
negative to it. Why? The better adapted you are to a certain type of stimulus, 
the harder it is to keep forcing your body to adapt. It’s like drinking coffee and 
the effect of caffeine. If you’ve never had coffee before, then the caffeine “hit” 
you get from it is huge: You’re full of energy for hours, and you feel awesome, 
so you start drinking a cup of coffee every morning. But disappointingly, after a 
few weeks, it doesn’t have any pronounced effect. Then you become a two cups 
of coffee a day person, and so on, until you’re remortgaging your house to pay 
for your Starbucks tab. You get diminishing returns as your body adapts, so you 
need to drink progressively more coffee to get the same effect.
It’s similar with training, but the difference with training is that you can build 
muscle and gain strength through many different stimuli. As your body adapts to 
a certain type of stimulus, you can change it to prevent full adaptation and give 
the body a new type to adapt to. That’s why you have to change your program 
from time to time. People will immediately think of changing exercises, but that 
is not necessarily the most effective way to do things. If you keep training the 
same way (i.e., methods, intensity zone, type of contraction), then going from a 
squat to a front squat is not a huge change in stimulus. It’s still the same type.
I prefer to include variation in the form of training methods, loading schemes, 
and contraction types; ask the body to work differently, not the same but on differ­
ent exercises. Don’t get me wrong. Changing exercise does provide some changes 
to the training stress and should be used, even if only to prevent boredom and 
keep you motivated (as we discussed in the previous section). However, by itself, 
it is not sufficient with intermediate and advanced lifters to keep progressing 
once you near full adaptation.
Also, people vary quite a bit in their need for training variation. Some people 
require a new taste in their mouth quite often while others are more comfortable 
sticking to the same thing for a long time and hate changing their program around. 
With the former, you have to restrain their urge to change program too often; with 
the latter, you have a lot of convincing to do to get them to change their program 
when they stagnate. I’m a strong believer that if you lose motivation in your 
training, it will be hard to get maximal results from your program. Sure, you can 
force yourself to train hard for a few sessions even if you start losing motivation 
or interest in your plan, but very few people can keep giving a maximal effort on a 
plan that doesn’t get their juices flowing anymore. I’m not saying to only pick stuff 
that you like doing and to avoid tough lifts like the squat and deadlift. What I’m 
saying is that if you start to lose interest in your program, if you are less and less 
excited about doing your workout, results will start to go down. This is certainly 
a factor to consider when deciding when to change programs.
The more advanced you are, the more often you should change your plan. 
That’s because advanced lifters are better adapted to training and also adapt more 
rapidly. They therefore need more frequent stimulus changes. Depending on the 
individual’s level, I like to use this length of time for “programs”:
	
• Beginners: 6 to 8 weeks block
	
• Intermediates: 4 to 6 weeks block
	
• Advanced: 3 to 4 weeks block

187
The Overload System Programming
Again, within those blocks, you can have small planned changes (e.g., increases 
or decreases in volume or load) or small unplanned changes (e.g., changing an 
exercise that doesn’t work for the individual).
Deloading
Deloads are misunderstood, probably because we don’t really talk about them 
much, nor do we study the best way to do them. This is probably because we like 
to train, so talking about training less or not training as hard for a week isn’t really 
interesting to us, even if that means greater gains along the way. Deloading comes 
from the world of performance training and was originally used for two purposes:
1.	 Peaking for a competition or a test.
Even in the 1950s, coaches working with competitive athletes in Olympic 
sports (in which an athlete trains several months to compete on a single 
day or two) understood that if they wanted the athlete to perform optimally 
in competition, they needed to dramatically reduce the training load for 7 
to 14 days before the competition.
At first, the extent of their understanding was merely that a well-rested 
athlete performed better. Eventually, the super-compensation theory came 
to be (by reducing the training workload and increasing carb intake, you 
could store more muscle glycogen, giving you better performance). This 
theory is mostly true, especially in sports that are dependent on glycogen 
stores (e.g., endurance and moderate distance events). But the theory isn’t 
entirely applicable to strength and power sports. Still, deloading worked 
for these athletes, too (more on why it works in a minute).
2.	 Transitioning between two training cycles.
This was common in competitive sports where you had two or three major 
competitions that were normally several months apart. For example, in track 
and field, you could have the national championships, indoor world champi­
onships, and outdoor world championships. For each, a training cycle of 10 
to 16 weeks (sometimes more) was designed, ending in a peak for the compe­
tition. Then the preparation for the next competition would begin. However, 
understanding the stress of competition, you would include 1 to 3 weeks of 
easy training between a competition and the start of the next training cycle.
Through experimentation, coaches found that if, preceding a competition, they 
adopted a period of gradually harder training, followed by a “taper” (deloading) 
period of 7 to 14 days, it led to better results after the deload than before. It didn’t 
take long until this started to be applied to regular training blocks, not just for 
competition peaking. Coaches started building blocks of 4 to 8 weeks of gradu­
ally more demanding training in which the last week was a “mini-peak,” or what 
could be called a taper or a deload (often they included a mock competition at 
the end of that peak). Then they would start a new block, gradually ramping up 
the training demands again and peaking once again at the end of the cycle. In 
fact, that is still how I see a deload: it really is a peak to either test yourself at the 
end or to be in a peak condition to start the new training block.
I believe that words and concepts have power. “Deloading” is demotivating 
for a hard training athlete who always wants to do more, but “peaking” sounds 

188
The Overload System for Strength
a lot better. Rest for a week, then test yourself to see how effective the last block 
was. That’s how I prefer to use planned deloads.
Of course, I also use true deloads (which is the same thing minus the test at 
the end of the week), especially when an athlete is showing early signs of training 
burnout. If you start to have several of these symptoms and keep pushing pedal 
to the metal, you are digging yourself into a bigger and bigger hole:
Decrease in performance
Drop in motivation
Lower level of energy
Mood swings
Sudden weight loss
Sleep issues
Decrease in muscle tone
Decreased appetite
Anhedonia (no pleasure)
Drop in libido
Apathy
Concentration and focus problems
How often you should deload really depends on the individual. I know it’s an 
underwhelming answer, but it’s the truth. Someone who trains obsessively will 
need more frequent deloads than someone who trains with less intensity. In fact, 
95 percent of the people you see training in commercial gyms will never need a 
deload, at least not from their training. They simply don’t work hard enough. If 
you train 5 to 6 days a week, you will need to deload more often than someone 
who trains 3 to 4 days a week. Someone who eats a caloric surplus will not need 
to deload as often as someone who is in a caloric deficit. You get the point. Some 
factors that affect deloading frequency are shown in table 11.2.
TABLE 11.2  Factors That Affect Deloading Frequency
Reduces the need for frequent deloads
Increases the need for frequent deloads
Training within your zone of comfort
Training hard
Having low life stress
Having high life stress
Having a job that is easy physically and mentally
Having a physical job
Being younger
Being older (40+)
Being a female
Being a male
Being at beginner strength levels
Being very strong
Having equal or more rest than training days
Having more training days than rest days
Being in a caloric surplus
Being in a caloric deficit
Getting 8-10 hours of sleep a night
Getting less than 8 hours of sleep a night
Taking a daily nap
Always being on the go throughout the day
Good immune system (never gets sick)
Poor immune system (gets sick easily)
Good gut health
Poor gut health 

189
The Overload System Programming
Now, you don’t have to use some form of meticulous calculation to find out 
that you need to deload exactly every 4.35 weeks, but if you look at the table and 
think you tend to be more on one side than the other (or if there is a balance 
between the two), it gives you an idea of roughly how often you should deload. 
Use these guidelines (most of you will be in the first two categories):
	
• If more factors that apply to you are from the right column, you should 
deload every third or fourth week.
	
• If the factors that apply to you are balanced between both columns, you 
should deload every fifth or sixth week.
	
• If more factors that apply to you are from the left column, you could deload 
every seventh or eighth week, but you might not even need to deload.
To understand how to properly deload or peak, you must understand how it 
actually works for a lifter (as opposed to endurance athletes). As I explained ear­
lier, in endurance or moderate distance events, a lot of the performance increase 
that comes from the deloading and peaking process comes from an increase in 
glycogen storage. This can also contribute slightly to lifting performance with 
better leverages as well as more pressure around the joints, increasing stability. 
However, the main effect that deloading has on strength sports (and other sports 
as well) is to re-sensitize the beta-adrenergic receptors. That’s also why deloading 
is effective at reducing the risk of training burnout and overtraining.
We saw earlier that if you produce too much adrenaline for too long or too 
often, you can downregulate and desensitize the beta-adrenergic receptors. When 
this happens your muscles, heart, and nervous system don’t respond as well to 
your own adrenaline, which decreases strength, speed, coordination, endurance, 
motivation, drive, and well-being. Yet the opposite is also true: if you produce 
less adrenaline, less often, you will re-sensitize your receptors and will therefore 
respond better to your own adrenaline, increasing strength, speed, coordination, 
endurance, motivation, drive, and well-being.
That’s what a deload and peak does. Adrenaline is connected to cortisol. Cor­
tisol leads to an increase in adrenaline because cortisol increases the conversion 
of noradrenaline into adrenaline. The more cortisol you produce, the more 
adrenaline you’ll have too. That’s why, for example, when you are stressed out, 
it’s hard to sleep. The cortisol from the stress leads to a high adrenaline level, 
which speeds your brain up, making it hard to get to sleep. When you reduce 
training, you also lower cortisol and adrenaline. The result is that you can make 
your adrenergic receptors sensitive again. Yes, you can super-compensate glyco­
gen and intramuscular fatty acid stores, but more of the increase in performance 
comes from the fact that you once again respond optimally to adrenaline and are 
able to show your full performance potential. When you train really hard for a 
good period of time, to use a car analogy, it’s as if you removed the fifth gear on 
your car by overusing the transmission, and when you deload you get that back.
To get back to our question: How should I deload? The answer is that it really 
is a matter of decreasing cortisol and adrenaline. There are six main training 
variables that can increase cortisol release (see table 11.3). The variables are 
ranked in order from the largest to the smallest impact on cortisol and adrena­
line levels. For example, if you significantly lower one of the first two variables 
(volume or intensiveness) enough, you might not have to lower anything else. 
In fact, these are the two most common ways to deload (cutting sets by around 

190
The Overload System for Strength
50 percent or pushing your sets at an RPE of 6 to 7 instead of 8 to 9). Another 
common way to deload is to decrease psychological stress. In lifting sports, we 
are talking about lowering the weights used. This is, for example, the approach 
used by Jim Wendler’s 5-3-1 system.
Reducing volume, intensiveness, or psychological stress are the three most 
popular and effective ways of deloading. Decreasing the weight is often not 
enough, especially if the athlete is showing signs of fatigue. You might want to 
decrease another variable slightly (e.g., reducing volume by 25 percent). The 
three other variables—neurological demands, density, and competitiveness—are 
rarely enough by themselves to have a successful deload, but you can manipulate 
them along with one of the first three variables to produce an even more effective 
deload. Table 11.3 also shows the strategies used to deload each variable.
TABLE 11.3  Training Variables That Can Increase Cortisol and Deload Strategies 
for Each 
Variable
Description
Deload strategy
Volume
The amount of work being done 
(exercises × sets × reps)
Decrease the number of sets by 
around 50% (either by cutting exer­
cises or reducing the sets per exer­
cise)
Intensiveness
How hard you are pushing your sets
Reduce the RPE of your work sets to 
no more than 6-7
Psychological stress
Mild anxiousness or the need to 
psych yourself up (often associated 
with heavy weights or painful condi­
tioning work) 
Reduce the weights used for your sets 
by 15-30%
Neurological 
demands
More complex movements, combin­
ing exercises, learning new move­
ments, more explosive work
Switch to less demanding movements 
(e.g., machine exercises)
Density
The length of the rest intervals (short 
rest = high density)
Rest longer between sets
Competitiveness
Turning each training session into a 
competition (against your logbook 
or a partner)
Try to have fun and chill during your 
session (basically train like an aver­
age commercial gym trainee)

191
The Overload System Programming
So, which strategy is more effective? Honestly, I’ve never seen any significant 
difference between using one of the three main variables to deload. My recom­
mendation is to use one of the first three variables to deload and one from the 
bottom three. Since the name of our sport is strength, an example to simply 
illustrate the concept would be:
EXAMPLE OF DELOADING BY VOLUME
Regular session
Deloading session
Squat 4 × 5 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Half squat from pins 3 × 5 at 505 lb (229 kg)
Farmer’s walk 3 × 20 m (22 yd) at 150 lb (68 kg)/
hand
Back extension 4 × 10 at 50 lb (23 kg)
Squat 2 × 5 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Half squat from pins 1 × 5 at 505 lb (229 kg)
Farmer’s walk 1 × 20 m (22 yd) at 150 lb (68 kg)/
hand
Back extension 3 × 10 at 50 lb (23 kg)
EXAMPLE OF DELOADING BY INTENSIVENESS
Regular session
Deloading session
Squat 4 × 5 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Half squat from pins 3 × 5 at 505 lb (229 kg)
Farmer’s walk 3 × 20 m (22 yd) at 150 lb (58 kg)/
hand
Back extension 4 × 10 at 50 lb (23 kg)
Squat 4 × 2 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Half squat from pins 3 × 2 at 505 lb (229 kg)
Farmer’s walk 3 × 10 m (11 yd) at 150 lb (58 kg)/
hand
Back extension 3 × 6 at 50 lb (23 kg)
EXAMPLE OF DELOADING BY PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS
Regular session
Deloading session
Squat 4 × 5 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Half squat from pins 3 × 5 at 505 lb (229 kg)
Farmer’s walk 3 × 20 m (22 yd) at 150 lb (58 kg)/
hand
Back extension 4 × 10 at 50 lb (23 kg)
Squat 5 × 5 at 325 lb (147 kg)
Half squat from pins 3 × 5 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Farmer’s walk 3 × 20 m (22 yd) at 120 lb (54 kg)/
hand
Back extension 4 × 10 at 40 lb (18 kg)
Note: To one of those strategies, you could lengthen the rest between sets by a minute or switch out some of the more 
demanding exercises, like the half squat from pins or farmer’s walk.

192
The Overload System for Strength
These three strategies (plus a secondary one from the following table) are 
perfectly fine for a range of normal situations, from not showing any signs of 
chronic fatigue to exhibiting normal signs of fatigue accumulated from a hard 
training block. However, sometimes you will have an individual showing deeper 
signs of fatigue, even the beginning of a training burnout. This could be related to 
excessive training or other sources of stress. In that case, you will have to either 
lower volume and psychological stress (weights) or volume and intensiveness, 
as well as one or more from the previous table, to properly deload. Here is an 
example to simply illustrate this concept:
EXAMPLE OF DELOADING BY VOLUME AND PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS
Regular session
Deloading session
Squat 4 × 5 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Half squat from pins 3 × 5 at 505 lb (229 kg)
Farmer’s walk 3 × 20 m (22 yd) at 150 lb (68 kg)/
hand
Back extension 4 × 10 at 50 lb (23 kg)
Squat 2 × 5 at 325 lb (147 kg)
Half squat from pins 1 × 5 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Farmer’s walk 1 × 20 m (22 yd) at 120 lb (54 kg)/
hand
Back extension 3 × 10 at 40 lb (18 kg)
EXAMPLE OF DELOADING BY VOLUME AND INTENSIVENESS
Regular session
Deloading session
Squat 4 × 5 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Half squat from pins 3 × 5 at 505 lb (229 kg)
Farmer’s walk 3 × 20 m (22 yd) at 150 lb (68 kg)/
hand
Back extension 4 × 10 at 50 lb (23 kg)
Squat 2 × 3 at 405 lb (184 kg)
Half squat from pins 1 × 3 at 505 lb (229 kg)
Farmer’s walk 1 × 10 m (11 yd) at 150 lb (68 kg)/
hand
Back extension 3 × 6 at 50 lb (23 kg)
Note: You could also either increase rest periods between sets by around one minute or substitute some of the harder 
exercises if you needed to further reduce training stress.
Normally, burnout should never happen because you should see it coming 
and do a deload before it gets too bad. Those who get there are usually people 
who coach themselves and are stubborn and refuse to slow down, even if their 
dashboard is lit up like a Christmas tree! If it ever happens to you, then you will 
have to dramatically reduce training stress. This means pretty much reducing 
every variable as well as training frequency (down to one or two sessions in the 
week). Some people might even need to take the week off completely.

193
Training Program 
Design
Now that we have covered the important facets of the overload system—exer­
cise selection, training methods and their parameters, and the broad strokes of 
effective programming—we can start piecing everything together. The goal of 
this chapter is to help you design plans that make the most out of this “modern 
old-school” training approach.
Training Splits
This section presents three programs, each using a different training split, that are 
the simplest to plan and also the most effective in my experience. I would use one of 
these approaches for close to 90 percent of the people who want to use the overload 
system. I would use different options if someone wanted to focus on bringing up 
one or two specific lifts. But that’s a whole other book! Let’s master the basics first.
Lift-Specific Training Split
We will start with the easiest split to program for: the lift-specific training split 
(which we covered in chapter 11). In this training split, each day focuses on one 
CHAPTER 
12

194
The Overload System for Strength
main lift. The assistance exercises (chapter 10) are selected to strengthen and 
support that lift. Remember, even though we presented the squat, deadlift, bench 
press, military press, barbell row, and explosive pulls as the primary lifts, it is 
perfectly fine to use variations of these movements as your main lifts. For example, 
you might decide to use the Zercher squat or front squat as your main lift if these 
are better suited to your body type than squats. You can use an incline bench 
press instead of a bench press, a sumo deadlift, or a hybrid deadlift (narrower 
stance sumo) instead of a deadlift, a push press instead of a military press, or a 
chin-up instead of a barbell row. Just please don’t use a leg press, machine bench, 
leg curl, or machine shoulder press as your main movements! Non-free-weight 
exercises simply don’t have the same training effect (which we discussed earlier).
In this split, there are four training days in a training week, or what is also 
commonly called a microcycle. I call it a training week because if you use a 
1-on/1-off approach, it will take you eight days to complete a full rotation. To 
begin, the first thing to do is to select four main lifts. Normally, even though it 
is a great exercise, the Pendlay row is not one of the main four lifts, but it is 
used as an assistance movement in at least one session a week (we use it in two 
or three sessions). It can be the same thing with the explosive pull. If it is a pull 
(power shrug, low pull, high pull), it is normally used as one of the assistance 
lifts; if it is a full Olympic lift (power clean, power snatch), it is best used as 
a main movement. Assuming that most people will stick to a pull and not an 
Olympic lift, what I like to do is put a row variation on two of the training days 
(bench press and squat days, usually) and the explosive pull on the two other days 
(deadlift and overhead lift days). The Pendlay row and explosive pulls are great 
exercises, but they don’t function well as main lifts in this system since many of 
the methods we use for the main lift (e.g., progressive range of motion, partial 
lifts) don’t work with these movements.
Considering all of this, a sample typical four-day training week would look 
like this:
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Squat
Off
Bench press
Off
Deadlift
Overhead 
lift
Off
Or, if you use the 1-on/1-off approach, your training week would look like this:
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Squat
Off
Bench 
press
Off
Deadlift
Off
Overhead 
lift
Off
A typical workout session for the lift-specific split would look like this:
Lift-Specific Training Split: 
Sample Typical Four-Day Workout Session
1.	 Main lift (deadlift, squat, overhead lift, bench press).

195
Training Program Design
2.	 Overload system method for main lift (supramaximal partials, accentuated 
eccentrics, functional isometrics, isometronics; the progressive range of 
motion method, which is not included in this scenario, is discussed later 
in this section)
3.	 Assistance exercise to address weak point in main lift
4.	 Pulling movement (explosive pull or Pendlay row)
5.	 Remedial exercise 1 (optional)
6.	 Remedial exercise 2 (optional)
The lift-specific training split is where most people will start. It is super easy 
to structure and will work every single time in terms of getting you stronger on 
your chosen lifts. Remember, the optional remedial exercises are isolation exer­
cises targeting either a lagging muscle group (ideally related to the main lift) or 
a muscle you want to emphasize, or they are used for injury prevention. Whether 
you do them will usually depend on how fatiguing you find the main workload. 
If you are struggling to recover, then it’s often best to leave them out.
An advanced workout session, for those who are experienced with these meth­
ods and performing at a high level, adds an activation exercise at the beginning 
of the session with the purpose of priming the nervous system as well as getting 
you ready to lift heavy weights on the main lift of the day. To allow the use of that 
activation movement, we also remove one remedial exercise (we don’t usually 
want to use more than six exercises per session). An advanced workout session 
for the lift-specific split would look like this:
Lift-Specific Training Split: 
Sample Advanced Workout Session
1.	 Activation exercise: non-fatiguing overload (supramaximal hold or over­
coming isometrics)
2.	 Main lift (deadlift, squat, overhead, bench press)
3.	 Overload system method for main lift (supramax partials, accentuated 
eccentrics, functional isometrics, isometronics; the progressive range of 
motion method, not included in this scenario, will be discussed later)
4.	 Assistance exercise to address weak point in main lift
5.	 Pulling movement (explosive pull or Pendlay row)
6.	 Remedial exercise 1 (optional)
Note that the activation exercise is either a supramaximal hold (which we 
covered earlier) or an overcoming isometric, where you are pushing or pulling 
against an immovable resistance (normally the safety pins in a power rack). Its 
best uses are either to strengthen a weak point in the range of motion (by posi­
tioning the pins just above your sticking point) or as an activation tool (normally 
positioning the pins slightly higher than the position used to address the weak 
point, as you will produce more force). To use an activation exercise to strengthen 
a weak point, position the bar just above the sticking point and push as hard as 
you can for 6 to 9 seconds. Do 3 to 4 sets. Or, for activation purposes, position 
the bar a few inches above the position you would use for strengthening the weak 
point and push as hard as you can for 3 seconds. Do 2 to 3 sets.

196
The Overload System for Strength
As you saw in the previous examples of the lift-specific split sessions, we noted 
that the progressive range of motion (PRM) method is not used. If you decide 
to use the PRM method, it becomes the main lift since it will eventually become 
the full-range lift. We also do not want to do both the regular full-range lift and 
the PRM method in the same training block. Performing the PRM sets as well as 
heavy work sets using full range of motion for the same lift is simply too taxing. 
Your performance would suffer in whichever exercise you did second, and you 
would likely end up burned out (especially if you were doing this for all your 
sessions). A PRM workout session for the lift-specific split would look like this:
Lift-Specific Training Split: Sample PRM Workout Session
1.	 PRM for the main lift (deadlift, squat, overhead lift, bench press)
2.	 Variation of the main lift that is not the main lift
3.	 Bottom partial technique (functional isometrics, overcoming isometrics, 
isometronics, regular partial reps) or accentuated eccentrics
4.	 Pulling movement (explosive pull or Pendlay row)
5.	 Remedial exercise 1 (optional)
6.	 Remedial exercise 2 (optional)
On exercise 2, you pick an exercise that is similar to the main lift but is not 
the main lift. Here are some options you can use:
Main lift
Variations of the main lift
Deadlift
Sumo deadlift, hybrid deadlift, deficit deadlift, Romanian deadlift, 
barbell hack squat (behind-the-back deadlift)
Squat
Zercher squat, front squat, low box squat, safety bar squat, camber 
bar squat, heels-elevated squat, wide-stance squat, Frankenstein 
squat
Military press
Bradford press, behind-the-neck press, high-incline bench press, 
dumbbell shoulder press (note: I don’t recommend the push 
press because it does not stimulate the low portion of the range 
of motion), wide-grip shoulder press, reverse-grip shoulder press
Bench press
Incline bench press, decline bench press, close-grip bench press, 
wide-grip bench press, reverse-grip bench press, floor press
On exercise 3, you want to pick an exercise or method that will allow you to 
strengthen the bottom of the range of motion on the main lift. That’s because for 
most of a PRM cycle, you don’t train that part of the range in the main movement 
itself. While using a full-range movement that is similar to the main lift for your 
second exercise, it might not be enough to fully strengthen that part of the range 
on the main lift itself.
You can use functional isometrics or isometronics in the lower third of the 
range; use overcoming isometrics (which we just covered) somewhere in the 
lower third (it doesn’t have to be at the lowest point) or simply use the main lift 
(squat, bench, deadlift, overhead); and then do bottom half or bottom third reps 

197
Training Program Design
(e.g., doing deadlifts going from floor to knees). Another option (best for very 
advanced individuals) is to do eccentric sets. Here we don’t want too much of 
an overload. Go with the same weight you used for your PRM and perform 3 to 
4 sets of 1 rep, doing the eccentric phase only, as slowly as humanly possible for 
the whole range of motion.
Whole-Body Training Split
Let’s now look at our second training split option: three whole-body workouts and 
a possible fourth session that is a gap workout (where all the remedial work is 
done). This option opens up a ton of possibilities, and you can play around with 
different workout compositions, but I’ll present the simplest and most effective 
way to use it, in my experience. A sample typical four-day training week would 
look like this:
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Whole-body 1
Off
Whole-body 2
Off
Whole-body 3
Gap
Off
Or, if you use the 1-on/1-off approach, your training week would look like this:
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Whole-
body 1
Off
Whole-
body 2
Off
Whole-
body 3
Off
Gap
Off
Without a gap workout, here are two options for how your 1-on/1-off training 
week would look like this:
OPTION 1
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Whole-body 1
Off
Whole-body 2
Off
Whole-body 3
Off
Off
OPTION 2
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Whole-body 1
Off
Whole-body 2
Off
Off 
Whole-body 3
Off
For the whole-body sessions involved in this structure, I like to use an approach 
in which we use a different method on every workout and we apply that method 
to all the lifts (i.e., eccentric focused methods in workout 1; isometric methods 
in workout 2; and normal or concentric methods in workout 3). Also, since a 
gap workout is included in this training week, you will not do any remedial work 
(you can do grip work) on the whole-body workout days. Sample whole-body 
and gap workout sessions for a typical four-day whole-body training week would 
look like this:

198
The Overload System for Strength
Whole-Body Training Split: 
Sample Typical Workout Sessions
Whole-Body 1
Note: The PRM method is not included in this scenario (more on this later).
1.	 Overload method for squat (partial overloads, functional isometrics, 
isometronics, accentuated eccentrics)
2.	 Overload method for bench press (partial overloads, functional isometrics, 
isometronics, accentuated eccentrics)
3.	 Overload method for deadlift (partial overloads, functional isometrics, 
isometronics, accentuated eccentrics)
4.	 Overload method for overhead lifts (partial overloads, functional isomet­
rics, isometronics, accentuated eccentrics)
Whole-Body 2
1.	 Assistance exercise for squat
2.	 Assistance exercise for bench press
3.	 Assistance exercise for deadlift
4.	 Assistance exercise for overhead lifts
Whole-Body 3
1.	 Squat
2.	 Bench press
3.	 Deadlift
4.	 Military press
Gap Workout
1.	 Explosive pull
2.	 Pendlay row
3.	 Remedial exercise for squat and bench press
4.	 Remedial exercise for bench press and military press
5.	 Grip exercise (optional)
6.	 Abs exercise (optional)
In the previous whole-body 1 session, we noted that the PRM method is not 
used in this scenario because it alters the training split you would use (which I 
address below). If you decide to use the PRM method, it becomes the main lift 
because it will eventually become the full-range lift. We also do not want to do 
both the regular lift (performed over the full ROM) and the PRM method in the 
same training block. A PRM workout session for the whole-body split would 
look like this:

199
Training Program Design
Whole-Body Training Split: Sample PRM Workout Sessions
Whole-Body 1
1.	 PRM for squat
2.	 PRM for bench press
3.	 PRM for deadlift
4.	 PRM for overhead lifts
Whole-Body 2
1.	 Assistance exercise for squat
2.	 Assistance exercise for bench press
3.	 Assistance exercise for deadlift
4.	 Assistance exercise for overhead lifts
Whole-Body 3
Note: You’ll notice that we have two PRM sessions per week. The goal should be 
to get more reps in the second session than the first one. Usually, we use 3 work 
sets for the PRM method. This is what is always done on day 1. If on day 3 you 
can beat your best set (more reps) from day 1 on your first set, then you only do 
that one set and ramp up to the heaviest single you can do from the position you 
are at. If you get the same number of reps as on your best set of day 1 (or less), 
you do your 3 work sets and don’t do the heavy singles.
1.	 PRM for squat with possible ramp up
2.	 PRM for bench press with possible ramp up
3.	 PRM for deadlift with possible ramp up
4.	 PRM for overhead lifts with possible ramp up
Gap Workout
1.	 Explosive pull
2.	 Pendlay row
3.	 Remedial exercise for squat and bench press
4.	 Remedial exercise for bench press and military press
5.	 Grip exercise (optional)
6.	 Abs exercise (optional)
Lift-Specific and Whole-Body Hybrid Split
Our final training split option is the lift-specific and whole-body hybrid. With 
this option, you pair one upper body main lift with one lower body main lift 
(e.g., squat or bench and deadlift or military press). There will be two workouts 
for each pair. This option works best with a 1-on/1-off approach because it will 
allow you to have a rest day after each session, which is especially relevant since 
we are training the whole body at each session. If you can’t do that, then the 
second-best option is to do the following:

200
The Overload System for Strength
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Squat/bench 
press 1 (or what­
ever lifts you 
choose)
Off
Deadlift/military 
press 1 (or 
whatever lifts 
you choose)
Off
Squat/bench 
press 2 (or 
whatever lifts 
you choose)
Deadlift/military 
press 2 (or 
whatever lifts 
you choose)
Off
In this setup, the first two sessions are more neurologically demanding due 
to the overload work done on two lifts; therefore, we need to make sure those 
sessions have a rest day before and after them. The secondary sessions for each 
lift pairing are slightly less intense, so we can get away with doing them on con­
secutive days. I must stress, however, that this is less than ideal. Whatever lifts 
are done on the second day will most likely suffer because of fatigue from the 
previous day’s workout.
Lift-Specific and Whole-Body Hybrid Split: 
Sample Typical Training Sessions
Squat or Bench Press 1
1.	 Overload method for squat
2.	 Overload method for bench press
3.	 Assistance exercise for squat
4.	 Assistance exercise for bench press
5.	 Remedial exercise for squat (optional)
6.	 Remedial exercise for bench press (optional)
Deadlift or Military Press 1
1.	 Overload method for deadlift
2.	 Overload method for military press
3.	 Assistance exercise for deadlift
4.	 Assistance exercise for military press
5.	 Remedial exercise for deadlift (optional)
6.	 Remedial exercise for military press (optional)
Squat or Bench Press 2
Note: The PRM method is not included in this scenario (more on this later in 
this section).
1.	 Non-fatiguing overload for squat (supramaximal hold or overcoming 
isometrics)
2.	 Squat (or the variation that suits you best)
3.	 Non-fatiguing overload for bench (supramaximal hold or overcoming 
isometrics)
4.	 Bench press (or the variation that suits you best)
5.	 Explosive pull
6.	 Remedial exercise for squat or bench press (optional)

201
Training Program Design
Deadlift or Military Press 2
Note: The PRM method is not included in this scenario (more on this later).
1.	 Non-fatiguing overload for deadlift (supramaximal hold or overcoming 
isometrics)
2.	 Deadlift (or the variation that suits you best)
3.	 Non-fatiguing overload for military press (supramaximal hold or over­
coming isometrics)
4.	 Military press (or the variation that suits you best)
5.	 Pendlay row
6.	 Remedial exercise for deadlift or military press (optional)
As noted previously, the PRM method is not used in the scenarios for the squat 
or bench press 2 and deadlift or military press 2 sessions. Once again, it means 
that we need to set up the split in a slightly different manner to compensate for 
the fact that we are not performing the full-range lift each week. If you decide to 
use the PRM method, it becomes the main lift because it will eventually become 
the full-range lift. We also do not want to do both the regular full-range lift and 
the PRM method in the same training block. A PRM workout session for the 
lift-specific and whole-body hybrid split would look like this:
Lift-Specific and Whole-Body Hybrid Training Split: 
Sample PRM Workout Sessions
Squat or Bench Press 1
1.	 PRM for squat
2.	 PRM for bench press
3.	 Assistance exercise for squat
4.	 Assistance exercise for bench press
5.	 Remedial exercise for squat (optional)
6.	 Remedial exercise for bench press (optional)
Deadlift or Military Press 1
1.	 PRM for deadlift
2.	 PRM for military press
3.	 Assistance exercise for deadlift
4.	 Assistance exercise for military press
5.	 Remedial exercise for deadlift (optional)
6.	 Remedial exercise for military press (optional)
Squat or Bench Press 2
1.	 PRM for squat
2.	 PRM for bench press
3.	 Bottom partial technique for squat (functional isometric, overcoming 
isometrics, isometronics, regular partial reps) or accentuated eccentrics
4.	 Bottom partial technique for bench (functional isometric, overcoming 
isometrics, isometronics, regular partial reps) or accentuated eccentrics

202
The Overload System for Strength
5.	 Explosive pull
6.	 Remedial exercise for squat or bench press (optional)
Deadlift or Military Press 2
1.	 PRM for deadlift
2.	 PRM for military press
3.	 Bottom partial technique for deadlift (functional isometric, overcoming 
isometrics, isometronics, regular partial reps) or accentuated eccentrics
4.	 Bottom partial technique for military press (functional isometric, overcom­
ing isometrics, isometronics, regular partial reps) or accentuated eccentrics
5.	 Pendlay row
6.	 Remedial exercise for deadlift or military press (optional)
Loading Schemes
Old-school lifting was all about getting stronger, and while you certainly can get 
stronger by training with slightly higher repetitions (provided that you gradually 
add weight to the bar over time), training with lower reps with a higher propor­
tion of your maximum is the most effective way to boost strength. That doesn’t 
necessarily mean 1 to 2 sets or even 3 reps, though (which would be called the 
maximum effort method when using weights at or above 90 percent of your 
maximum), but it certainly means using weights at or above 80 percent of your 
maximum.
A lot of recent research shows that muscle gained from high reps and muscle 
gained from low reps is the same. However, the research shows that training 
with heavier weights leads to significantly more strength gains than when using 
lighter loads, even if muscle growth is the same. This is unsurprising because 
your capacity to produce force does not depend solely on the amount of muscle 
that you have. Neurological factors are at least as important as well as protective 
mechanisms like the Golgi tendon organs (GTOs).
Training with heavier weights has a greater impact on the neurological factors 
than using lighter loads. Basically, you need to lift heavy to gain as much strength 
as possible. This is in accordance with the specificity principle, which states that 
you improve the most in the type of work that you train. Or as Charles Poliquin 
said: “You become stronger in the rep range(s) that you train.”
While doing sets of 1 to 2 reps will certainly make you stronger, it is not actually 
the best way to build strength by itself. Sets of 1 to 2 reps (92.5 to 100 percent 
of your max) are the best at improving your capacity to demonstrate the muscle 
strength potential that you have. It is the zone that has the greatest impact on 
fast-twitch fiber recruitment, firing rate, and intramuscular coordination. It is 
also where you have the most effect on reducing the protective force inhibition 
by the GTOs, but it’s not the zone that is the most effective at increasing your 
strength potential. The reason is that, in most cases, it is not conducive to stim­
ulating muscle growth. That’s because there is not enough mechanical work per 
set, and if you do enough sets to get a proper amount of mechanical work, it will 
lead to neurological fatigue pretty quickly (it would require a good 15 sets of 1 
rep or 8 sets of 2 reps with maximal weights).

203
Training Program Design
The best zone to develop strength is the range of 3 to 6 reps (80 to 90 percent 
of your max). That’s where you have enough load to have a significant impact 
on the neurological factors involved in force production and have sufficient 
mechanical work to trigger muscle growth. Sets of 8 to 12 reps (60 to 75 percent) 
provide more mechanical work per set and can thus lead to slightly more muscle 
growth, but the effects on the neurological factors are much lower.
That’s why in this system we favor loads in the 80 to 90 percent range (for full-
range movements), with occasional sets or phases in the 90 to 100 percent range.
For remedial work (targeted or isolated exercises), higher reps are to be done 
since they are only used to build muscle and improve tendon resilience. We 
actually want to minimize the neurological stress on these exercises. That’s why 
sets of 8 to 12, as well as much higher rep work (up to 50 reps per set), are used 
for these movements.
For the multijoint movements (main lifts and assistance work), we want most 
of our sets to use 3 to 6 reps, with the occasional inclusion of sets of 1 to 2 reps 
(if you want to focus more on strength) or 7 to 8 reps (to focus on hypertrophy 
while still gaining some maximal strength). Usually, sets closer to 8 reps are only 
done on assistance exercises.
Here are some of the loading schemes that I find to be the most effective with 
this system of training:
Ramping Straight Sets
You perform 3 to 6 sets with a designated number of repetitions. You start more 
conservatively and add weight from set to set until you reach your top weight.
Wave Loading
Each wave consists of 3 sets (with a normal rest between sets), and each set within 
a wave uses more weight but less reps. The first wave is more conservative; the 
rate of perceived effort (RPE) is around 8. The second wave is slightly heavier 
than the first wave (RPE 9). Usually, I do a warm-up wave before the work waves 
(same 3 set progression as the work wave but with an RPE of 6 to 7). Waves work 
best with low to moderate reps. For example: 7-5-3 wave, 6-4-2 wave, 5-4-3 wave, 
5-3-1 wave, 3-2-1 wave.
Single-Set Pyramid
Here you use a 3 to 6 set progression where you add weight from set to set but 
reduce the reps to keep the RPE stable (RPE 8 or 9). The more sets in a pyramid, 
the lower the RPE should be. For example, if a pyramid has 3 or 4 sets, you can 
use an RPE of 8.5 to 9, but if you have 5 to 6 sets, it is better to keep RPE at 7.5 
to 8. My favorite variation of this method is the 5-4-3-2-1 countdown, but you 
can use pretty much any variation where you reduce the number of reps per set 
by 1 from set to set. You can even use a 2 rep decrease if you use less sets—for 
example, 6-4-2; 5-3-1; 7-5-3; or 8-6-4.
Double-Set Pyramid
Here you perform 4 to 8 work sets for an exercise, adding weight on every set but 
only decreasing the reps every 2 sets. The first set with a weight is easier (RPE 
7 or 8) while the second is harder (8 or 9). You can do something like this: 8-8-
6-6; 6-6-4-4; 5-5-3-3; 3-3-1-1; 8-8-6-6-4-4; 6-6-4-4-2-2; 5-5-3-3-1-1; or 4-4-2-2-1-1.

204
The Overload System for Strength
Double Pyramid
This is very similar to wave loading. In the ascending portion of the pyramid, you 
add weight while decreasing reps; then, in the descending portion of the pyramid, 
you do the opposite. Normally, the ascending portion is considered easier (RPE 8), 
and the descending portion uses a bit more weight (RPE 9). Here is an example:
	
• 3-sets double pyramid: 8-6-8; 7-5-7; 6-4-6; 4-2-4; 3-1-3
	
• 4-sets double pyramid: 8-6-6-8; 7-5-5-7; 6-4-4-6; 5-3-3-5; 4-2-2-4; 3-1-1-3
	
• 5-sets double pyramid: 8-6-4-6-8; 7-5-3-5-7; 6-4-2-4-6; 5-3-1-3-5; 3-2-1-2-3
	
• 6-sets double pyramid: 8-8-6-6-8-8; 7-7-5-5-7-7; 6-6-4-4-6-6; 5-5-3-3-5-5; 4-4-
2-2-4-4, 3-3-1-1-3-3
Clusters
These were already explained in-depth in chapter 1, but as a reminder, clusters 
are sets of 3 to 6 reps where you perform each repetition as a single and have 20 
to 60 seconds of rest between repetitions. Typically, we do only 1 to 2 work sets 
when using clusters.
Rest and Pause
I really love heavy rests and pauses to develop strength while getting more hyper­
trophy than with regular low-rep sets. You start by doing a normal set, then rest 
anywhere between 10 and 30 seconds (depending on the movement), and you 
get as many solid additional reps as you can with the same load. This counts as 
one set. While for pure hypertrophy plans you can start with 8 to 12 reps then do 
your additional reps, in the scope of this program, the initial portion of your set 
should use 4 to 6 reps, after which you shoot for an additional 2 to 3 reps. The 
initial portion of the set should be challenging, but you shouldn’t reach failure 
or the point where you have to significantly grind the weight (RPE of around 
8.5); on the second part of the set, you get as many solid reps as you can (RPE 9 
or 9.5). Just like clusters, I prefer to do only 1 to 2 sets like this for an exercise, 
but you can do 1 to 2 normal sets before your rest and pause set.
Contrast Sets
In this method, you perform 2 to 3 pairs of sets. The first set in a pair is done for 
1 or 2 reps with a heavy but not maximal load (RPE of around 8); the second set 
is done for moderate reps (for us), or 3 to 7 reps. Three rules apply when using 
this method:
1.	 The first set of the pair (1 to 2 reps at roughly 87.5 to 92.5 percent) remains 
the same for all the pairs.
2.	 The second set of the pair should get heavier from wave to wave.
3.	 Rest 2 minutes between the sets in a pair and 3 to 4 minutes between pairs.
Good examples would be 1-6; 1-5; 1-4; 1-3; 2-8; 2-7; 2-6; and 2-5 pairs.
These are examples of my preferred loading schemes. Feel free to use different 
ones as long as they fall in the proper rep range and you don’t exceed your overall 
set allocation for the day.

205
Specialization Training
Specialization training—defined as focusing on one to two body parts or one lift 
by using a concentrated training approach for a brief period—was a lot more 
common among old-school lifters than it is today. It’s a shame, really, because 
specialization training is one of the most powerful and effective ways to train. 
If done right.
Specialization used to be one of the main strategies in the 1930s up to the 1960s. 
People were doing “arm courses,” “chest courses,” or focusing on maximizing 
a single lift. I can personally attest to how effective that approach is. I got my 
biggest bench press improvements—working up to a max of 445 pounds (202 
kilograms)—by specializing on the bench press. I also increased my snatch-grip 
high pull by 132 pounds (60 kilograms)—that’s not a typo—in around 4 weeks 
by training almost exclusively on it. Recently, I got back to a squat of more than 
500 pounds (227 kilograms) for the first time in 20 years by specializing on my 
squat for 7 weeks. I took it from 425 to 505 pounds (193 to 229 kilograms) at 44 
years of age.
It is my honest belief that specialization training is the best way for an advanced 
lifter to keep progressing, and it is also a very effective approach for fairly qual­
ified intermediate lifters. It can even be turned into a whole training system by 
rotating the specialization focus every 4 to 6 weeks. I find specialization to be the 
fastest way to boost your performance on a lift and to bring up a lagging muscle 
group—provided that you do it properly.
CHAPTER 
13

206
The Overload System for Strength
Most people understand and like the basic premise of specialization training: 
You increase the frequency and amount of work performed on a lift or for one or 
two muscles. Most of us love to train and doing more (too much) is often in our 
nature. The problem is that most of us are not as much on board with the second 
part of the specialization equation: You need to reduce the amount of work for 
the lifts or muscles you are not specializing on. Specialization training will not 
work if you don’t do both. The more work you add for the specialized work, the 
more you must decrease it for everything else. That’s because training has both 
local and systemic effects that lead to targeted and overall fatigue:
Local Fatigue Effects
Muscle damage to the trained muscles
Glycogen depletion
ATP-CP depletion
Loss of intramuscular triglycerides
Local inflammation
Desensitization of the neuromuscular junction
Decreased firing rate of muscle spindles, leading to decreased motoneurons 
firing
Systemic Fatigue Effects
Decreased excitatory drive from the motor cortex
Downregulation of the beta-adrenergic receptors
Changes in neurotransmitter levels, leading to central fatigue
Increased demands on the immune system
Increased cortisol, which affects whole-body protein synthesis
Increased brain glutamate levels, decreasing one’s pain threshold (you feel 
pain more easily)
Essentially, the muscles themselves have a limit in terms of the stress and 
damage that they can recover from. Your whole body also has a limited amount 
of overall work that it can withstand and positively adapt to in order to maintain 
an optimal performance level and state of well-being. That is why it’s important 
to maintain pretty much the same overall training volume when you do a spe­
cialization routine as when you do your normal training. For example, suppose 
that in a training week, you do 4 sessions with 5 exercises each for a total of 
20 work sets per workout. That gives you 80 total work sets per week. Usually, 
those 80 work sets might be divided pretty much equally among the main lifts 
and their assistance work, but during a specialization routine, you might decide 
to invest 40 of those sets to the bench press and its assistance work. That would 
leave you 40 work sets to spend on deadlifts, squats, rowing, and overhead 
work (and their assistance exercises) during the week. Your volume distribution 
might now look like this (this is not a specific recommendation but is meant to 
illustrate that you must decrease volume for the nonspecialized work during a 
specialization phase):

207
Specialization Training
Once you get your head around the fact that you need to keep the overall 
training volume the same, planning a specialization phase is not that compli­
cated. Likewise, once you can do that, then it is quite easy to plan out a whole 
specialization cycle where you line up several different specialization phases, 
focusing on different lifts, to create a whole training system.
Frequency
When you use a specialized approach, it is important to increase the frequency 
of training for the lift or muscle(s) you are focusing on. This is crucial for several 
reasons:
	
• Doing all the extra volume in one session is not going to be productive. At 
least half of the work will be of poor quality because of fatigue, and you 
will have a hard time recovering after the session.
	
• A higher frequency leads to a faster neurological improvement, which is 
critical for strength and skill development.
	
• Each session stimulates protein synthesis in the trained muscle. The more 
often you can hit a muscle, the more bouts of increased protein synthesis 
you get, the more growth you are likely to stimulate.
	
• Spreading the volume for the specialized lift or muscle(s) over more ses­
sions allows you to be able to recover from more overall volume for that 
lift or muscle(s).
I find that it is best to spread the weekly volume for the specialization lift or 
muscle(s) over three workouts and put the rest of the work either on a fourth 
workout or put a small amount in each of the three weekly workouts. In our 
example on page 169, I would put the small amount of overhead work on one 
of the bench press workouts, spread the rowing work over the three bench 
sessions, and do the squat and deadlift work on their own day so that it looks 
like this (again, this is not a specific recommendation, just an illustration of a 
weekly schedule):
Bench press
20-25 sets per week
Bench press assistance exercise
20-25 sets per week
Squat
3-5 sets per week
Deadlift
3-5 sets per week
Squat and deadlift assistance 
exercise
8-10 total sets per week (ideally, pick exer­
cises that improve both)
Military press
3-5 sets per week
Military press assistance exercise
None (there is already a lot of pressing 
volume in this phase)
Rowing
10-15 sets per week

208
The Overload System for Strength
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Bench press 
and assis­
tance exer­
cise: 20 total 
sets
Rowing: 5 
sets
Off
Bench press 
and assis­
tance exer­
cise: 20 total 
sets
Rowing: 5 
sets
Off
Squat: 3-5 
sets
Deadlift: 3-5 
sets
Squat and 
deadlift 
assistance 
exercise: 
8-10 sets
Bench press 
and assis­
tance exer­
cise: 10 total 
sets
Military press: 
3-5 sets
Rowing: 2-3 
sets
Off
Structure
There are several ways of setting up specialization work. We will start with the 
premise that we include work for the specialized lift or muscle(s) 3 days a week. 
There are quite a few options, and you can even combine more than one approach. 
In reality, they will all work pretty well, but which one is optimal depends on the 
person you are using the specialization program with as well as the main goal. 
Here are some guidelines you can use to choose your loading scheme:
Uniform Loading
Essentially, you perform the same type of work (exercises, methods, intensity 
zone) and similar volume on all three of the workouts. Beginners should use 
this scheme because it has the least variation. They need to focus on mastering 
the main lifts and using their body properly. The more variation you have, the 
harder it will be to accomplish those goals. Not to mention that, at their level, 
they do not need to vary the stimulus to keep progressing.
Daily Undulating Periodization
In this approach, you keep using the same exercises and methods, but you vary 
the loading schemes. You could have one very heavy day (sets of 1 to 3 reps), a 
volume day (sets of 8 to 12 reps), and a mixed strength and hypertrophy day (sets 
of 4 to 6 reps). This is a suitable approach for intermediate lifters, once they have 
a better foundation of technique on their main lift(s) because it introduces a little 
variation without changing too many variables. Daily undulating periodization 
is also a good approach when someone wants to build strength but also needs 
or wants to add a significant amount of muscle mass.
Exercise Variation
Here you use different exercises on each day. This could mean doing one workout 
where you do mostly work on the specialized lift itself and assistance movements 
on the two other days. Exercise variation works better for someone who has a lot 
of experience and is already very technically efficient on the main lifts. The more 
stable and efficient your technique is, the more exercise variation you can use.
Method Variation
You can also use different training methods on each training day. This could 
mean full-range on one day, partial overloads or eccentric overloads on another, 
and isometronics and functional isometrics on the third (or other methods). The 
method variation is the approach that best uses the full teachings contained in 

209
Specialization Training
this book. I personally prefer to use variation in the form of methods than exer­
cises. It is more effective for most individuals.
Physical Capacity Variation
This is similar to the daily undulating periodization, but we not only change the 
intensity zone but also the way the sets and reps are performed. For example, we 
could have a limit-strength day (sets of 1 to 3 reps in the 90 to 100 percent range), 
a strength-speed day (sets of 3-5 reps with 60-70 percent done explosively), and 
a strength-skill day (where we do a high number of sets of 2-3 reps with 80-85 
percent). Physical capacity variation is best suited for athletes who not only need 
to be strong but also explosive and have good endurance (e.g., you could use 
strength, strength-speed, and resistance and endurance days).
Contraction Type Variation
This is the approach used in my OCTS programming (Omni-Contraction Training 
System). Day 1 uses eccentric-emphasis methods (slow eccentrics or eccentric 
overloads); day 2 uses isometric methods (stato-dynamic, functional isometrics, 
isometronics); and day 3 uses concentric methods (regular lifting, partials). 
Contraction type variation is very similar to the method variation approach. 
I’ve used this as a full system with a variety of clients, ranging from beginners to 
elite athletes, and it never fails to deliver great results, mostly because the vast 
majority of people undertrain eccentric and isometric actions and when you start 
focusing on them, you have rapid gains. Of course, with beginners, you stay with 
the lower stress methods like slow eccentrics and stato-dynamic sets instead of 
the overload methods.
Duration
It can be tempting to stay on a specialization phase for a long time because it 
works! When done properly, it works very well. Chances are that when you decide 
to specialize on a certain lift or muscle(s), it is either because it is lagging or not 
progressing as rapidly as you would like, or it is because it is a lift or muscle 
that you really love to emphasize. In other words, seeing significant progress 
somewhere you haven’t been able to make progress on before (or on something 
you put a high value on) can become addictive.
The reality is that the longer you stay on a specialization routine, the less you 
will progress. But that’s not the bad thing. The worst thing is that by staying 
on a specialization phase for a long time, you reduce the responsiveness of the 
muscle(s) you are focusing on. Getting stronger or adding muscle is part of a 
process called adaptation. Your body makes structural and functional changes in 
response to a physiological or physical (or psychological) stress so that it will be 
better suited to face that stress if it comes back again. The stronger the stress is, 
the greater and faster the adaptations will be. That’s the whole premise behind 
specialization training: increasing the magnitude to the stress imposed on certain 
muscles so that they have a greater amount and rate of adaptation.
However, this also means that your muscles rapidly become well adapted 
(habituated) to the stress presented. When a muscle is well adapted to a stress, it 
becomes very hard to force further changes because they are not seen as needed. 
In previous chapters, I gave suntanning and coffee drinking as analogies; at some 
point your body desensitizes to the stimulus, and you are doing a bunch of extra 
work for no benefit.

210
The Overload System for Strength
Building muscle and strength, however, is a little more complex. For one thing, 
there are several mechanisms and pathways that allow you to gain size or strength, 
but the basic premise still largely applies: doing a high-stress specialization for 
a lift or muscle(s) for too long will make it more complicated to keep the lift or 
muscle(s) progressing when you go back to regular training.
However, ironically, doing a shorter specialization phase can make regular 
training more effective. That’s because more frequent stimulation of a muscle 
improves your capacity to recruit and contract that muscle. This makes your 
future training for that muscle group more effective.
If you can do that without reaching a point where the muscle(s) you are focused 
on become habituated (desensitized to training), you will get faster gains when 
you go back to regular training. However, if you keep up the specialization for too 
long, it can backfire—although there are strategies you can use to keep a muscle 
responsive after a longer specialization phase (see table 13.1).
TABLE 13.1  Risk of Habituation with Specialization and Strategies to 
Avoid Issues
Duration
Risk of habituation
Strategy to use
2-3 weeks
Beginners: low
Intermediate: low
Advanced: low
None needed, but you might want to do 
an overall deload week.
4-6 weeks
Beginners: low
Intermediate: moderate
Advanced: moderate
Intermediate and advanced lifters should 
dramatically reduce the amount of 
volume for the lift or muscle(s) they spe­
cialized on for 2-4 weeks to resensitize.
7 weeks +
Beginners: moderate
Intermediate: high
Advanced: high
Beginners should dramatically reduce the 
amount of work for the lift or muscle they 
specialized on (maintenance level) for 
2-4 weeks. Intermediate and advanced 
lifters should try to avoid stimulating the 
lift or muscle(s) they specialized on com­
pletely for 2-4 weeks to resensitize.
Rotation
Due to the fact that we need to reestablish sensitivity to training stress, an effective 
approach, especially for advanced lifters, is to use a specialization rotation as 
your baseline training philosophy. Basically, all you do is specialization training 
(except for maintenance and deload phases), and you rotate the lift or muscle(s) 
you are specializing on every 3-4 weeks (advanced) or 4-6 weeks (intermediate).
Why is it effective? Because when you reach a certain stage of development and 
training experience, your body is well adapted to regular training stress, so you 
need a much higher level of training stress to keep progressing at a significant 
rate. However, as we saw, the body has a limited capacity to adapt to training 
stress, so you can’t just do more of everything and expect to progress. Especially 
since, as you get stronger, the same relative intensity of work (percent of your 
maximum) becomes more stressful to your body. Consider that squatting 500 
pounds (227 kilograms) is more stressful on your body than squatting 250 pounds 
(113 kilograms), even if both represent 80 percent of your maximum.

211
Specialization Training
Specialization rotation can become a viable and effective strategy to provide 
a strong growth stimulus for certain muscles without exceeding your capacity 
to recover. Sure, it means that you’ll get rapid progress only on one lift or one 
or two muscles at a time while the rest are maintained, but isn’t that better than 
getting excruciatingly slow progress everywhere? Here are some guidelines to 
make specialization rotation work optimally:
Do not specialize on two related lifts or muscles in a row.
For example, when you do pectoral work, the deltoids and triceps will also be 
involved in many of the exercises you use. Same thing with the bench and over­
head press or deadlift and squat; they will hit similar muscles. If you specialize 
on pectorals (or bench) for 4 weeks, then on triceps and delts (or overhead press) 
for 4 weeks, the pressing muscles (pectorals, deltoids, triceps) are essentially 
being trained at specialization levels for 8 weeks, and you will run into trouble.
In the phase directly following a specialization for a lift or muscle(s), 
reduce direct work for that lift or muscle(s) as much as possible.
You can bring it back up in the second phase after the specialization phase, but in 
the phase immediately following a specialization, reduce it as much as you are com­
fortable doing. This is both to quickly resensitize the muscle(s) involved and to get 
a rebound growth effect (a lot of time you get the most growth in the lift or muscle 
you specialized in the 1-2 weeks after the cessation of the specialization phase).
Gradually ramp up the training stress over 3 weeks.
Going from normal (or maintenance) volume to maximum specialization volume 
right from the start might be too much for the body to positively adapt to. It is 
best to gradually increase the amount of work for the specific lift or muscle(s) 
over the first 3 weeks of the block. Week 3 should be the highest sustainable train­
ing stress, and then do a deload for week 4. In this situation, the deload should 
simply be going back to the amount of work you did in week 1. It’s not really a 
deload in the purest sense of the word, but a reduction in stress relative to week 
3. This allows you to go all in on that third week (the shock week).
Avoid special overload methods when you are not specializing 
on a lift or muscle(s).
It is tempting to keep using powerful methods like partial overloads, progressive 
range of motion, eccentrics overload, or clusters (as examples) when you stop 
specializing on a lift. I might reason that since my volume will be much lower, I 
might as well use the most powerful methods to get as much progress as I can from 
the minimal volume I’m doing. That’s missing the whole point of the system! This 
will just make it harder to keep the involved muscles maximally responsive and 
will reduce the gains you will get from your next specialization phase for that lift 
or muscle(s). When you are not specializing on a lift or muscle(s), you still want to 
train hard on the sets you are doing, but use regular lifting, not special methods.
Personally, specialization rotation as a training system is my favorite approach 
with advanced lifters. It is unconventional and even a bit scary because of the 
dramatic reduction in volume when you are not specializing on a lift or mus­
cle(s). That worry is the reason people fail on this approach: They just do too 
much for the nonspecialized lift or muscle(s), and they both burn out and fail to 
reestablish the sensitivity of their muscles. But if you do it right, it is one of the 
most powerful approaches you can use.

This page intentionally left blank

213
EPILOGUE
We hope you enjoyed this book and, more importantly, took away a few ideas 
that will make your own training or, if you are a coach, the training of your 
clients better.
It’s true that in our world of pump and tone for the ’gram (I fantasize that 
people reading this book in 20 years will have absolutely no idea what Instagram 
is), the ideas promoted in this book might actually sound like heresy.
Lift uncomfortably heavy weights only on barbell exercises? What kind of nonsense 
is that? What about isolating my medial deltoid and the long head of my biceps?
Sadly, we see more and more people content to be a 2005 Honda Civic with a 
$30,000 body kit and the same 105-horsepower engine: all show and no go. But 
if you bought this book (thank you, by the way, because you are contributing 
toward that Porsche that Christian has been waiting to get), it is because you are 
attracted to hard, effective training and value developing the capacity to perform 
as much as look good.
Thank you for being part of the same dying breed as we are. Now, go out and 
show them what it means to be a hard worker.
Be less bad tomorrow.

This page intentionally left blank

215
APPENDIX:
STRENGTH STANDARDS
With the increasing popularity of strength training and strength sports, the 
upper limit seems to be getting pushed higher at a fast rate. World records are 
climbing, and more freaks are appearing every year. This makes it hard for us to 
decipher what constitutes “strong” for us mortals. Luckily, we can use strength 
standards as our guide. We have laid out some fair standards for most of the 
population to shoot for in the main lifts used in this system. And depending on 
where your numbers are within those standards, you will fall into one of the 
following categories:
Gold standard—This is considered the beginning of the very strong or freak 
zone.
Killin’ it—You are among the strongest in most regular gyms.
Good—Respectable. You’ve done good, kid.
Less bad—Keep working at it.
Seek help—Do it now.
Bench Press
Gold standard—2.0 × bodyweight (male); 1.5 × bodyweight (female)
Killin’ it—Over 1.5 × bodyweight (male); over 1.0 × bodyweight (female)
Good—1.25 to 1.5 × bodyweight (male); 0.75 to 1.0 × bodyweight (female)
Less bad—1.0 to 1.25 × bodyweight (male); 0.5 to 0.75 × bodyweight (female)
Seek help—1.0 × bodyweight or less (male); 0.5 × bodyweight or less (female)
Squat and Deadlift
Since people are usually built for one or the other, go with your strongest method.
Gold standard—3.0 × bodyweight
Killin’ it—Over 2.5 × bodyweight
Good—2.0 to 2.5 × bodyweight
Less bad—1.5 to 2.0 × bodyweight
Seek help—Less than 1.5 × bodyweight
Military Press
Gold standard—1.5 × bodyweight (male); 1.25 × bodyweight (female)
Killin’ it—Over 1.0 × bodyweight (male); over 0.75 × bodyweight (female)
Good—0.75 to 1.0 × bodyweight (male); 0.5 to 0.75 × bodyweight (female)
Less bad—0.5 to 0.75 × bodyweight (male); 0.35 to 0.5 × bodyweight (female)
Seek help—0.5 × bodyweight or less (male); 0.35 × bodyweight or less (female)

216
Appendix: Strength Standards
Importantly, these are standards to help evaluate where you are at in your 
strength development and which lift you might want to focus more efforts on. 
Many of you will already be above the killin’ it category in some lifts, but that 
doesn’t mean that you should be content with your level of strength. Far from 
it. We are just providing an objective measure to evaluate your strength, weak­
nesses, and progression. With enough proper work, most fully functional, unin­
jured adults of a normal body-fat level can hope to achieve the killin’ it category 
(although, if you are 65 and just starting training, it might not be in the cards). 
That would make you stronger than 90 percent of the gym population of the world.

217
INDEX
Note: The italicized f and t following page numbers refer to figures and tables, 
respectively.
A
accentuated eccentrics  32-35
active stability  16-17, 20
adaptation  186, 209
adrenaline  173-174, 182-183
adrenergic sensitivity  18-19
advanced supramaximal eccentrics  
34
Ahrens, Chuck  8
alternated workout structure  173-
174
Anderson, Paul  2, 8, 14
antagonist muscles, recruitment of  
25
arched-back good morning  145
Archuleta, Adam  6
assessment of progression  184
assistance exercises  141-142
	 bench press  155-160
	 deadlift  142-149
	 as main lifts  194
	 military press  161-166
	 squat  150-154
B
bench press  95-96
	 bar path and movement pattern  
108-117
	 concentric portion  113-117, 115f
	 curved bar path  115-116
	 double-curved bar path  116
	 eccentric portion  108-113, 109f, 
111f, 112f
	 elbow tuck  115
	 foot angle  104-105, 105f
	 grip width  97-99, 97f, 98f
	 head movement  113
	 hip and foot position  103, 104f
	 large sink technique  112, 112f
	 light touch technique  110-111, 
111f
	 position on bench  102-103, 102f
	 setup  96-107
	 setup on tiptoes  106-107
	 setup with flat feet  96-106
	 slight sink technique  111, 111f
	 and training volume  207
	 unracking the bar  106, 106f
	 upper back set  100-102, 101f
	 wrist position  99-100, 99f
bench press assistance exercises
	 close-grip bench press  156
	 decline bench press  159
	 dips  160
	 floor press  155
	 incline bench press  158
	 Spoto press  157
	 and training volume  207
beta-adrenergic receptors  18

218
Index
Bjornsson, Hafthor  168
body types  13-14, 66
bracing strength  92
Bradford press  166
burnout  173, 174, 183-184
C
cardiovascular capacity  184
Caron, Jean-Francois  182
carries, loaded  7-8
cheat Pendlay row  127, 127f
circuit training  172-174
close-grip bench press  156
clusters  5, 29-32, 31t, 204
clutches  6-7
Coan, Ed  168
contraction type variation  209
contrast sets  204
conventional setup (deadlift)
	 foot placement  52, 52f, 53f
	 grip  55, 55f
	 hip height  53-54, 54f
core strength  8
Cyr, Louis  14
D
daily undulating periodization  208
bar path and movement pattern  
60-62
	 bar placement  53
	 floor to knee movement  61
	 grip  55-57, 55f, 56f
	 head and neck position  59, 59f
	 hip height  53-54, 54f
	 hitching  63, 63f
	 knee to lockout movement  61-62
	 lats  57-58, 57f
	 leaning back  62, 62f
	 lockout  62-63
	 setup  52-59
	 and training volume  207
	 upper back  58-59, 58f
	 upper back setting  57-59
	 width of stance  52-53, 52f, 53f
deadlift assistance exercises
	 arched-back good morning  145
	 farmer’s walk  153-154
	 floating deadlift  148
	 good morning variations  146-147
	 pin good morning  146
	 Romanian deadlift  142
	 Romanian deadlift with band 
around waist  143
	 Romanian deadlift with front of 
feet elevated  144
	 seated good morning  146-147
	 shrugs  149
	 and training volume  207
	 Zercher carries  154
	 Zercher good morning  147
dead-start lifts  5-6
decline bench press  159
deloading
	 adrenergic sensitivity and  18-19
	 cortisol increase strategies  190t
	 factors that affect frequency  188t
	 programming  187-192
Dianabol  4
dips  160
Ditillo, Anthony  2, 14
Ditillo pin press-pull method  22-23
double progression model  46
double pyramid  203-204
double-set pyramid  203
duration of specialized training  209-
210, 210t

219
Index
dynamic mobility  42
E
eccentric overloads  2, 4-5
	 accentuated eccentrics  32-35
	 advanced supramaximal eccentrics  
34
	 maximal eccentrics  34
	 near-maximal eccentrics  34
	 stability and  17
	 supramaximal eccentrics  34
ectomorph body type  14
Egger, Jean-Pierre  4, 5, 33
exercise
	 number  171-172
	 number of sets per  176-180
	 variation  180-185
exercise variation  208
explosive pulls  129-130
	 bar path and movement pattern  
134-139
	 concentric portion  134-137, 135f, 
136f, 137f, 138f
	 differentiating factors  130
	 eccentric portion  138
	 setup  130-134
F
factory analogy of muscles  15
failure, supramaximal partials  24
false grip  85, 86f
farmer’s walk  153-154
fast-twitch fiber firing rate  15, 19, 
25
fast-twitch fiber recruitment  28, 
40-41
fatigue  31t, 175
fat loss  7-8, 16
fiber recruitment and fatigue  39
floating deadlift  148
floor press  155
foundational exercises  48-49
free partials  22
frequency of training  167-171, 171t, 
207-208
front squat  150
front squat with heels elevated  152
functional isometrics  3-4, 24, 25-27
G
Golgi tendon organs (GTOs)  2, 3, 
17, 19, 33
good morning variations  146-147
Görner, Hermann  14
Grimek, John  14, 168
GTOs (Golgi tendon organs)  2, 3, 
17, 19, 33
Gunthor, Werner  4, 32
H
habituation  210, 210t
Hackenschmidt, George  14
half-kneeling overhead press  163
Hatfield, Fred II  28
Hatfield method  28
heavy partials  3
Hepburn, Doug  14
high-incline bench press  165
high pulls  139
Hoffman, Bob  2, 4
hook grip (deadlift)  56, 56f
horizontal workout structure  172-
174
hybrid splits  199-202
hybrid workout structure  173-174
hypertrophy, loaded stretching and  
38-40

220
Index
I
IGF-1 receptor sensitivity  39
incline bench press  158
injury prevention  41-42
intensiveness of sets  177-180, 190, 
191, 192
intermuscular coordination  15
intra-rep stato-dynamic method  
35-36
isolated exercises  48-49
isometrics
	 active stability and  16
	 functional  3-4
	 overcoming isometrics  4, 25-26
	 yielding isometrics  25
isometronics  27
J
jerk  87
joint stability  16-17
K
Kazmeir, Bill  168
Kurz, Thomas  36
L
lats  92
lift-specific splits  193-197
loaded carries  7-8
loaded stretching  6, 38-43
	 benefits  38
	 and hypertrophy  38-40
	 and injury prevention  41-42
	 and performance  40-41
load habituation  19-20
loading schemes  179, 202-204
local fatigue effects  206
low pulls  139
M
March, Bill  4
maximal eccentrics  34
Meadows, John  38
mesomorph body type  14
Metal Militia lifters  168
method variation  208-209
microcycles  194
military press  83-84
	 bar path and movement  89-93, 90f
	 concentric portion  91-92
	 eccentric portion  92-93, 93f
	 grip width and types  84-85, 85f, 
86f
	 setup  84-89
	 stance  84, 84f
	 torso and hip position  88-89, 88f
	 and training volume  207
	 upper back position  87-88, 87f
	 wrist and elbow position  86-87, 
86f
military press assistance exercises
	 Bradford press  166
	 half-kneeling overhead press  163
	 high-incline bench press  165
	 overhead press variations  161-163
	 push press  164
	 tall-kneeling overhead press  161
	 and training volume  207
	 Z-press  162
Miller, Carl  6
Miller accumulation cluster  32
Milo course  46
mobility, dynamic  42
motivation  182, 183
m/Tor  38-39
muscle fiber firing rate  15, 19, 25

221
Index
muscle fiber recruitment  25, 30
muscle fiber recruitment and fatigue  
39
muscle growth  184
muscle mass  14
muscle recruitment programming  
41
N
near-maximal eccentrics  34
neurological carryover training  2-3. 
See also progressive range of 
motion
neurological demands
	 accentuated eccentrics  35
	 adrenergic sensitivity  18
	 and deload strategies  190t
	 loading schemes  202-203
	 remedial exercises  10
	 very high repetitions  7, 37
neurological efficiency  14-15, 171t, 
173, 181
O
occlusion effect  39
OCTS (Omni-Contraction Training 
System)  209
old-school progression models  
45-48
Olympic lifters  181
Omni-Contraction Training System 
(OCTS)  209
one-hand clean and jerk  129
one-hand snatch  129
overcoming isometrics  25-26
overhead press variations  161-163
overloads, eccentric  4-5
overload system
	 defined  1-2
	 and old-school progression models  
45-48
overload system exercises
	 assistance exercises  10
	 implementation  10-11
	 main lifts  9
	 remedial exercises  10
overload system methods
	 clutches  6-7
	 dead-start lifts  5-6
	 eccentric overloads  4-5
	 functional isometrics  3-4
	 heavy partials  3
	 loaded carries  7-8
	 loaded stretching  6
	 progressive range of motion  2-3
	 specialized training  8-9
	 very high repetitions  7
overload system programming
	 deloading  187-192, 188t, 190t
	 exercise variation  180-185
	 number of exercises  171-172
	 number of sets per exercise  176-
180
	 program variation  185-187
	 rest between sets  174-176
	 training frequency and split  167-
171, 171t
	 workout structure  172-174
overtraining  167
P
Paoli, Carl  23-24
Parillo, John  38
Paschall, Harry  2
passive stability  16
Patterson, Tim  9

222
Index
peaking, adrenergic sensitivity and  
18-19
Pendlay row  119-120
	 bar path and movement pattern  
124-126
	 bar placement  122, 122f
	 cheat Pendlay row  127, 127f
	 concentric portion  124-125, 124f
	 deadlift row  127-128, 128f
	 eccentric portion  125-126
	 grip width  121, 121f
	 hip height  122, 122f
	 setup  120-123
	 upper back and elbow position  
123, 123f
	 variations on  126-128
Peoples, Bob  2, 8, 14
performance, loaded stretching and  
40-41
physical capacity variation  209
pin good morning  146
plateau loading  179
Poliquin, Charles  5, 32, 173
post-fatigue stato-dynamic method  
36
powerlifters  181
power shrugs  139
pre-fatigue stato-dynamic method  
35
programming. See overload system 
programming
program variation  185-187
progressive range of motion  2-3
	 benefits  19-20
	 process  20-22
	 and training splits  196
protective mechanisms  15-16
psychological stress, deloading  190, 
191, 192
push press  87, 164
R
ramping straight sets  203
range of motion. See also progressive 
range of motion
	 heavy partials  3
	 neurological carryover training  
2-3
ratchet loading  179
reactive hyperemia  39
recovery capacity  172, 176-177
relative load and fatigue  31t
repetitions  7, 36-37, 202-203. See 
also loading schemes
rest and pause  204
rest between sets  174-176
Riecke, Louie  4
Romanian deadlift  142
Romanian deadlift with band 
around waist  143
Romanian deadlift with front of feet 
elevated  144
rotation, specialized training  210-
211
rowing  207
Roy, Pierre  4, 5
S
scapular control and movement  88
schedule, training  167-171, 171t
Schroedder, Jay  6, 38
Schwartz, Tony  38
Science of Sport Training (Kurz)  36
seated good morning  146-147
sensitivity to training stress  210
sets
	 intensiveness of  177-180
	 loading schemes  179

223
Index
	 number per exercise  176-180
Shaw, Brian  168
Sheppard, Tom  46, 48
shrugging shoulders  91
shrugs  149
Simmons, Louie  7, 95
single-set pyramid  203
Sipes, Chuck  22, 38
Sipes method  28
sled dragging  7
snatch-grip high pulls  9
specialized training  8-9, 205-207
	 duration  209-210, 210t
	 frequency  207-208
	 habituation  210, 210t
	 local fatigue effects  206
	 rotation  210-211
	 structure  208-209
	 systemic fatigue effects  206
splits, training  167-171, 171t
	 hybrid  199-202
	 lift-specific  193-197
	 whole-body  197-199
split stance  84
Spoto press  157
squat  65
	 bar path and movement pattern  
75-81, 76f
	 bar placement  69-71, 70f
	 concentric portion  79-81
	 eccentric portion  77-79
	 elbow position  73, 73f
	 foot angle  68, 68f
	 grip width  71-72, 71f, 72f
	 head position  74, 74f
	 high bar position  70, 70f
	 hip alignment  68-69, 69f
	 low bar position  70-71, 70f
	 setup  66-74
	 and training volume  207
	 upper back setting  72-73, 72f
	 width of stance  66-68, 66f, 67f
squat assistance exercises
	 farmer’s walk  153-154
	 front squat  150
	 squat or front squat with heels ele­
vated  152
	 and training volume  207
	 Zercher carries  154
	 Zercher squat  151
squat with heels elevated  152
stability  16-17
standards for strength  215-216
Stanko, Steve  14, 168
starting point  3
stato-dynamic method (paused lift­
ing)  35-36
Stevenson, Scott  6, 38
sticking point  3, 26
strength increasing  13-14
	 adrenergic sensitivity  18-19
	 muscle mass  14
	 neurological efficiency  14-15
	 protective mechanisms  15-16
	 stability  16-17
	 tendon thickness and resilience  
17-18
strength leaks  28
strength potential  14, 15, 28
stretching, loaded  6, 38-43
	 benefits  38
	 and hypertrophy  38-40
	 and injury prevention  41-42
	 and performance  40-41
strict military press  5

224
Index
Strongman training  7
strongmen  182
structure of specialized training  
208-209
suicide grip  85, 86f
sumo setup (deadlift)
	 foot placement  52-53, 52f, 53f
	 grip  55, 55f
	 hip height  54, 54f
supramaximal eccentrics  34
supramaximal holds  28-29
supramaximal partial lifts  2, 22-24
synergistic muscles, recruitment of  
25
systemic fatigue effects  206
T
tall-kneeling overhead press  161
tapering. See deloading
technique  20, 23, 183
tempo, eccentric overloads  5
tendinitis  71
tendons
	 thickness and resilience  17-18, 42
	 very high repetitions and  7
Theory and Application of Modern 
Strength and Power Methods 
(Thibaudeau)  6, 38
Thibaudeau, Christian  46, 47
touch-and-go method  5
training burnout  173, 174, 183-184
training density  174-176
training frequency and split  167-
171, 171t
training program design
	 hybrid splits  199-202
	 lift-specific splits  193-197
	 loading schemes  202-204
	 whole-body splits  197-199
training stress  210-211
training week  194
Trudel, Dante  6
two-hands clean and jerk  129
two-hands clean and press  129
two-hands snatch  129
U
under-over grip (deadlift)  56, 56f
uniform loading  208
V
variation  208-209
variation of exercises  181-185
vertical workout structure  172-174
very high repetitions  7, 36-37
volume, deloading by  190, 191, 192
W
wave loading  179, 203
weak points  182
wedging technique  20
weight loss  7-8
Westside Barbell Conjugate System  
22, 23
Westside Barbell lifters  168, 180-181
whole-body splits  197-199
women
	 bench press grip  98
	 bench press setup  106
	 deloading frequency factors  188t
	 hook grip  57
work capacity  176
workout structure  172-174
Y
yielding isometrics  25

225
Index
York Barbell  4
Z
Zercher carries  154
Zercher good morning  147
Zercher squat  151
Ziegler, John  4
Z-press  162

This page intentionally left blank

227
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Christian Thibaudeau is a strength and conditioning coach with 
over 22 years of experience. He has taught seminars in over 20 
different countries and has worked with athletes in 28 sports at 
all levels—high school to professional and Olympic athletes—
as well as the everyday lifter. His training has also led him 
to work with competitors in the CrossFit Games and the Mr. 
Olympia bodybuilding competition. An athlete himself, com­
peting in football, rugby, golf, weightlifting, and bodybuilding, 
Thibaudeau is the author of several strength and conditioning 
books, including The Black Book of Training Secrets, Theory and Application of 
Modern Strength and Power Methods, High Threshold Muscle Building, and The 
Maximum Muscle Bible, in addition to multiple training DVDs. He earned his 
bachelor of science degree in exercise science from Quebec University, where 
he also worked as a research assistant before moving on to full-time coaching.
Tom Sheppard is head coach at Thibarmy and works with a 
wide variety of high-level athletes from all backgrounds. His 
philosophy is based on learning how to use the body as one 
integrated unit and optimizing athletes’ lifting mechanics based 
on their body type. This approach has brought him particular 
success in the sport of powerlifting, where he has produced 
countless British, European, and world champions and record 
holders. In addition to his role at Thibarmy, he also works 
closely with EliteFTS, creating educational material, working 
with high-level lifters to improve their performance, and delivering seminars on 
the international stage, including the 2022 SWIS Symposium.

EARN CONTINUING EDUCATION 
CREDITS/UNITS
Find your CE exam here: 
US & International: US.HumanKinetics.com/collections/Continuing-Education
Canada: Canada.HumanKinetics.com/collections/Continuing-Education
Subscribe to our newsletters today!
Canada
US
Now that you’ve 
read the book, 
complete the 
companion exam 
to earn continuing 
education credit!
Get exclusive offers 
and stay apprised 
of CE opportunities. 

