

Hershey  • London • Melbourne • Singapore • Beijing
IDEA GROUP PUBLISHING
The Economic and Social
Impacts of E-Commerce
Sam Lubbe
Cape Technikon, South Africa
Johanna Maria van Heerden
JS Consultants, South Africa

Acquisition Editor:
Mehdi Khosrow-Pour
Senior Managing Editor:
Jan Travers
Managing Editor:
Amanda Appicello
Development Editor:
Michele Rossi
Copy Editor:
Terry Heffelfinger
Typesetter:
Amanda Lutz
Cover Design:
Kory Gongloff
Printed at:
Integrated Book Technology
Published in the United States of America by
Idea Group Publishing (an imprint of Idea Group Inc.)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661
E-mail: cust@idea-group.com
Web site: http://www.idea-group.com
and in the United Kingdom by
Idea Group Publishing (an imprint of Idea Group Inc.)
3 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden
London WC2E 8LU
Tel: 44 20 7240 0856
Fax:  44 20 7379 3313
Web site: http://www.eurospan.co.uk
Copyright © 2003 by Idea Group Inc.  All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy-
ing, without written permission from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lubbe, Sam, 1952-
    The economic and social impacts of e-commerce / Sam Lubbe.
            p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p.  ) and index.
    ISBN 1-59140-043-0 (hard cover) -- ISBN 1-59140-077-5 (ebook)
  1.  Electronic commerce. 2.  Electronic commerce--South Africa.  I.
Title.
    HF5548.32.L82 2003
    381'.1--dc21
  2002156242
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.

NEW from  Idea Group Publishing
•  Digital Bridges: Developing Countries in the Knowledge Economy, John Senyo Afele/ ISBN:1-59140-039-2;
eISBN 1-59140-067-8,  © 2003
•  Integrative Document & Content Management: Strategies for Exploiting  Enterprise Knowledge, Len Asprey
and Michael Middleton/ ISBN: 1-59140-055-4; eISBN 1-59140-068-6,  © 2003
•  Critical Reflections on Information Systems: A Systemic Approach, Jeimy Cano/ ISBN: 1-59140-040-6; eISBN
1-59140-069-4,  © 2003
•  Web-Enabled Systems Integration: Practices and Challenges, Ajantha Dahanayake and Waltraud Gerhardt
    ISBN: 1-59140-041-4; eISBN 1-59140-070-8,  © 2003
•  Public Information Technology: Policy and Management Issues, G. David Garson/ ISBN: 1-59140-060-0;
eISBN 1-59140-071-6,  © 2003
•  Knowledge and Information Technology Management: Human and Social Perspectives, Angappa Gunasekaran,
Omar Khalil and Syed Mahbubur Rahman/ ISBN: 1-59140-032-5; eISBN 1-59140-072-4,  © 2003
•  Building Knowledge Economies: Opportunities and Challenges, Liaquat Hossain and Virginia Gibson/ ISBN:
1-59140-059-7; eISBN 1-59140-073-2,  © 2003
•  Knowledge and Business Process Management, Vlatka Hlupic/ISBN: 1-59140-036-8; eISBN 1-59140-074-0,  ©
2003
•  IT-Based Management: Challenges and Solutions, Luiz Antonio Joia/ISBN: 1-59140-033-3; eISBN 1-59140-
075-9,  © 2003
•  Geographic Information Systems and Health Applications, Omar Khan/ ISBN: 1-59140-042-2; eISBN 1-59140-
076-7,  © 2003
•  The Economic and Social Impacts of E-Commerce, Sam Lubbe/ ISBN: 1-59140-043-0; eISBN 1-59140-077-5,
© 2003
•  Computational Intelligence in Control, Masoud Mohammadian, Ruhul Amin Sarker and Xin Yao/ISBN: 1-59140-
037-6; eISBN 1-59140-079-1,  © 2003
• Decision-Making Support Systems: Achievements and Challenges for the New Decade, M.C. Manuel Mora,
Guisseppi Forgionne and Jatinder N.D. Gupta/ISBN: 1-59140-045-7; eISBN 1-59140-080-5,  © 2003
•  Architectural Issues of Web-Enabled Electronic Business, Nansi Shi and V.K. Murthy/ ISBN: 1-59140-049-X;
eISBN 1-59140-081-3,  © 2003
•  Adaptive Evolutionary Information Systems, Nandish V. Patel/ISBN: 1-59140-034-1; eISBN 1-59140-082-1,  ©
2003
• Managing Data Mining Technologies in Organizations: Techniques and Applications,    Parag Pendharkar/
   ISBN: 1-59140-057-0; eISBN 1-59140-083-X,  © 2003
•  Intelligent Agent Software Engineering, Valentina Plekhanova/ ISBN: 1-59140-046-5; eISBN 1-59140-084-8,  ©
2003
•  Advances in Software Maintenance Management: Technologies and Solutions, Macario Polo, Mario Piattini and
Francisco Ruiz/ ISBN: 1-59140-047-3; eISBN 1-59140-085-6,  © 2003
• Multidimensional Databases: Problems and Solutions, Maurizio Rafanelli/ISBN: 1-59140-053-8; eISBN 1-
59140-086-4,  © 2003
• Information Technology Enabled Global Customer Service, Tapio Reponen/ISBN: 1-59140-048-1; eISBN 1-
59140-087-2,  © 2003
• Creating Business Value with Information Technology: Challenges and Solutions, Namchul Shin/ISBN: 1-
59140-038-4; eISBN 1-59140-088-0,  © 2003
• Advances in Mobile Commerce Technologies, Ee-Peng Lim and Keng Siau/ ISBN: 1-59140-052-X; eISBN 1-
59140-089-9,  © 2003
•  Mobile Commerce: Technology, Theory and Applications, Brian Mennecke and Troy Strader/ ISBN: 1-59140-
044-9; eISBN 1-59140-090-2,  © 2003
•  Managing Multimedia-Enabled Technologies in Organizations, S.R. Subramanya/ISBN: 1-59140-054-6; eISBN
1-59140-091-0,  © 2003
•  Web-Powered Databases, David Taniar and Johanna Wenny Rahayu/ISBN: 1-59140-035-X; eISBN 1-59140-092-
9,  © 2003
•  E-Commerce and Cultural Values, Theerasak Thanasankit/ISBN: 1-59140-056-2; eISBN 1-59140-093-7,  ©
2003
•  Information Modeling for Internet Applications, Patrick van Bommel/ISBN: 1-59140-050-3; eISBN 1-59140-
094-5,  © 2003
•  Data Mining: Opportunities and Challenges, John Wang/ISBN: 1-59140-051-1; eISBN 1-59140-095-3,  © 2003
•  Annals of Cases on Information Technology – vol 5, Mehdi Khosrowpour/ ISBN: 1-59140-061-9; eISBN 1-
59140-096-1,  © 2003
•  Advanced Topics in Database Research – vol 2, Keng Siau/ISBN: 1-59140-063-5; eISBN 1-59140-098-8,  ©
2003
•  Advanced Topics in End User Computing – vol 2, Mo Adam Mahmood/ISBN: 1-59140-065-1; eISBN 1-59140-
100-3,  © 2003
•  Advanced Topics in Global Information Management – vol 2, Felix Tan/  ISBN: 1-59140-064-3; eISBN 1-
59140-101-1,  © 2003
•  Advanced Topics in Information Resources Management – vol 2, Mehdi Khosrowpour/ ISBN: 1-59140-062-7;
eISBN 1-59140-099-6,  © 2003
Excellent additions to your institution’s library! Recommend these titles to your Librarian!
To receive a copy of the Idea Group Publishing catalog, please contact (toll free) 1/800-345-4332,
fax 1/717-533-8661,or visit the IGP Online Bookstore at:
[http://www.idea-group.com]!
Note: All IGP books are also available as ebooks on netlibrary.com as well as other ebook sources.
Contact Ms. Carrie Skovrinskie at [cskovrinskie@idea-group.com] to receive a complete list of sources
where you can obtain ebook information or IGP titles.

The Economic and Social
Impacts of e-Commerce
Table of Contents
Preface .................................................................................................. vi
Chapter I. TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix .................... 1
Paul Taylor, University of Leeds, UK
Chapter II. The Economic and Social Impact of Electronic Commerce in
Developing Countries .......................................................................... 22
Roberto Vinaja, University of Texas, Pan America, USA
Chapter III. Adverse Effects of E-Commerce ................................... 33
Sushil K. Sharma, Ball State University, USA
Jatinder N. D. Gupta, University of Alabama in Huntsville, USA
Chapter IV. The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice
(ECAP) ................................................................................................. 50
G. Erwin, Cape Technikon, South Africa
S. Singh, University of South Africa, South Africa
Chapter V. The Theory Behind the Economic Role of Managing the
Strategic Alignment of Organizations while Creating
New Markets ....................................................................................... 69
Sam Lubbe, Cape Technikon, South Africa
Chapter VI. Online Customer Service................................................ 95
Rick Gibson, American University, USA
Chapter VII. E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems:
A Managerial Perspective ................................................................ 103
G. Erwin, Cape Technikon, South Africa
Udo Averweg, University of Natal, South Africa

Chapter VIII. SMEs in South Africa: Acceptance and Adoption of
E-Commerce ...................................................................................... 121
Eric Cloete, University of Cape Town, South Africa
Chapter IX. Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce:
A South African Study ....................................................................... 135
Sam Lubbe, Cape Technikon, South Africa
Shaun Pather, Cape Technikon, South Africa
Chapter X. E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary
Institutions ......................................................................................... 154
Marlon Parker, Cape Technikon, South Africa
Chapter XI. Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User
Resistance.......................................................................................... 184
Michael Mullany, Northland Polytechnic, New Zealand
Peter Lay, Northland Polytechnic, New Zealand
Chapter XII. Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy: The Impact of
Privacy Concerns on Electronic Commerce Use and Regulatory
Preferences ........................................................................................ 213
Sandra C. Henderson, Auburn University, USA
Charles A. Snyder, Auburn University, USA
Terry Anthony Byrd, Auburn University, USA
Chapter XIII. Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce:
A Process View .................................................................................. 239
Paul A. Pavlou, University of Southern California, USA
About the Authors.............................................................................. 258
Index................................................................................................... 263

vi
E-commerce is not new, though the interest shown in it is of relatively recent
origin. Academics have applied their skill in seeking to maintain or improve busi-
ness efficiency for years past, but they have concerned themselves mainly with
obtaining facts of a historical nature – that is, by analyzing past papers, they have
sought to regulate future policies. Until more recently they have been chiefly occu-
pied with matters of a domestic or internal nature, and although they have not been
able to ignore affairs outside, such as the influence exerted by customers, never-
theless they have not sought to extend the field of their activities. They have con-
centrated their endeavors on seeking to establish an efficiently run business, leav-
ing those engaged on the various executive activities of the organization to pro-
nounce on their own particular fields of interest.
Modern business activities and the increasing complexity of present-day e-
commerce have necessitated a broadening of the views, knowledge and influence
of the consultant, and while greater specialization has taken place within the pro-
fession itself, a new branch of IT has evolved, namely, that of e-commerce.
“E-Commerce” may be defined broadly as that aspect of IT that is con-
cerned with the efficient management of a business through the presentation to
management of such information as will facilitate efficient and opportune planning
and control.
The managerial aspect of his work is the management consultant’s prime
concern. Having satisfied himself as to the efficiency of the organization of the
business – covering such matters as the regulation of activities – he may justifiably
expect to be concerned with the day-to-day running of affairs. His attention should
be directed more particularly towards the extraction of information from records
and the compilation and preparation of statements that will enable management to
function with the minimum of effort and with the maximum of efficiency.
The term e-commerce has been used carefully for the title of this book,
because it covers a broader view than “e-commerce.”  To carry out his duties
effectively, the manager is now required to extend his knowledge and research
Preface

into related but distinct fields of activity covering disparate areas such as taxation,
manufacturing processes, electronic data processing, stock exchange activities,
economic influences and statistical research.
The consultant needs not to be (for example) a qualified production engineer
to be able to concern himself with the efficiency of e-commerce processes, but he
must nevertheless have some knowledge of the organization’s workflow to be
able to assess what costing, statistical or other records are necessary to ensure
effective control. His training and experience must enable him to comprehend and
deal with these allied activities.
The essential characteristics of information required for e-commerce man-
agement are that (a) it must be relevant, and (b) it must be timely. To meet the first
requirement, the e-consultant needs to have a detailed understanding of the busi-
ness concerned. They must also have the ability to present such information in a
way that enables management to concentrate on essential matters.  The ideal e-
consultant presents information to management without wasting time on routine
activities that were previously assessed and concurred. It is here that “manage-
ment by exception” should be operated. At the same time, if capital projects,
expansion or proposed mergers are under consideration, it will be the manager’s
duty to grasp the underlying essentials of the situation and to present them in a way
that will enable management to reach a decision based on all relevant facts.
In the second instance, the e-commerce manager must realize that informa-
tion, to be useful, should be received in enough time to enable the executive to act
effectively. To be informed after events have reached a stage that precludes their
regulation or adjustment merely causes frustration and may lead to wrong deci-
sions, aggravating an already difficult situation. It is here that factors of planning
and control manifest themselves as essential to sound management. In analyzing
the functions of the accountant regarding his presentation of information to man-
agement, his duties may be sub-divided as to:
1.
The presentation of forecasts and budgets of a forward-looking nature, fa-
cilitating planning.
2.
The supplying of such current information will ensure efficient control of
activities during the fulfillment of the plans formulated.
3.
Ensuring that internal control within the business is such that relevant infor-
mation is automatically prepared and summarized in such a way as provides
an easy, rapid analysis and compilation for submission to management.
The application of control, particularly flexible control, presupposes the
availability of sufficient information being at hand for budgeting. An efficient office
routine is essential, as mentioned previously, but – and here the wider aspects of
vii

the e-commerce’s experience must be applied – relevant information must also be
made available from the web floor, the warehouse and the sales department. Part
of such information should arise in the routine order of work, for example, the
preparation of requisitions and their subsequent analysis or of efficient stock re-
cording. Other information would have to be prepared specially, as for example,
sales budgets and market analysis. In any case, the accountant should know what
kind of information is likely to be useful and should ensure it will be received in
time for analysis, interpretation and presentation to management.
Nevertheless, the broader aspects of planning will no doubt require the prepa-
ration of statistics and the amassing of information in those wider aspects of the e-
commerce manager’s field of experience. Where projects are to be undertaken,
not only will a recommendation as to an adequate return on capital invested be
required, but also the most suitable method of raising the necessary finance will
have to be indicated. Likewise, if any take-over project or investment in a subsid-
iary company or other concern is contemplated, e-commerce will be expected to
be able to express an opinion based upon the ability to interpret accounts, to
assess future trading prospects, etc.
The importance of information being received in time for effective action has
already been stressed. In this respect, the submission of information covering stan-
dards and variances from those standards during the course of actual activities will
facilitate management by exception and effective action while control may still be
exercised.
The necessity for the efficient recording of essential information has already
been dealt with. This assumes efficient internal control and the suitable allocation
of duties within the e-commerce’s department so information may be rapidly com-
piled in an orderly manner, especially in the event of some urgent business arising,
ensuring that no dislocation occurs.
Being in the nature of an introduction to the field of e-commerce, this brief
exposition has sought only to illuminate some of the main aspects of the subject
and to emphasize the duties falling to the management consultant; the more de-
tailed aspects are dealt with in the pages of this book.
In the first chapter, Dr. Paul Taylor describes from a ‘Devil’s Advocate’
stance the cultural context to the rise of various online activities that oppose the
general values of e-Business. In the new digital times, capitalism’s iconoclastic
qualities have been enthusiastically re-appropriated by business gurus on the op-
posite side of the political spectrum.
In the second chapter, Roberto Vinaja addresses the potential benefits of
Electronic Commerce to developing countries. Electronic commerce has many
potential benefits for developing countries (DC). In his chapter, he describes the
viii

potential benefits of Electronic Commerce for developing nations and he provides
case examples that illustrate this trend. The widespread adoption of electronic
commerce is especially important for developing countries.
Jatinder Gupta describes in the third chapter the various adverse effects that
have accompanied the advent of the Internet and e-commerce revolution. The
Internet has become an incredibly powerful tool for conducting business elec-
tronically. Companies have taken the proactive approach and are jumping on the
new way to conduct business. E-commerce greatly enables organizational change
and helps organizations to conduct business with improved efficiencies and pro-
ductivity.  E-commerce is credited with empowering employees and knowledge
workers in particular, by giving them easy access to virtually unlimited information.
E-commerce technologies have helped nations to accelerate their economic growth
and to provide more opportunities for the businesses to grow. Meanwhile, it has
also created many challenges and adverse effects, such as concerns over privacy,
consumer protection, security of credit card purchases, displacement of workers
(especially low-status ones) and a negative quality of work life.
In the fourth chapter, Geoff Erwin shows that with the proliferation of the
Internet and constant technological advancements, e-commerce will reshape the
business world. Government organizations, large co-operations, medium and small
business will have to organize their information and information systems in an ac-
countable, well-structured way. He also asks “How do we document electronic
businesses activities?”
In the fifth chapter, Sam Lubbe notes that the economic impact on e-com-
merce is and how this could be used to create new markets and to improve the
strategic alignment of the organization. Over the past couple of years, the Internet
has taken off and organizations will soon reap economic benefits on it.  E-com-
merce will therefore hopefully emerge as an efficient yet effective mode of creating
new markets, although most managers still doubt the economic impact and profit-
ability it has. Enabled by global telecommunication networks and the convergence
of computing, telecom, entertainment and publishing industries, e-commerce is
supplanting (maybe replacing) traditional commerce. In the process, it is creating
new economic opportunities for today’s businesses, creating new market struc-
tures. Managers of tomorrow must therefore understand what e-commerce is;
how the approach to this concept will be; and how it will affect the economic
position of the organization. These questions could therefore be asked: What is
the return on investment (ROI) on e-commerce? What is the effect of e-com-
merce on the strategic alignment of the organization? What is the economic effect
of the strategic alignment on the organization?
ix

In the sixth chapter, Rick Gibson looks into an effective online customer
service strategy. Although the effectiveness of the online customer service will
vary and depend on the type of business the company is involved in, the usage of
different types of tools in this arena have proven to be more useful than others.
Effectiveness in this work will be used in the sense that the more effective strategy
will lead to more satisfied customers, a higher customer retention rate and higher
revenue for the business.
In the seventh chapter, Geoff Erwin relates to the fact that Executive Infor-
mation Systems (EIS) are designed to serve the needs of executive users in stra-
tegic planning and decision-making and for making both strategic and tactical
decisions.  The accessibility, navigation and management of data and information
for improved executive decision-making are becoming critical in the new global
business environment.
In the eighth chapter, Eric Cloete addresses how these small businesses in a
developing country perceive the potential benefits of e-commerce and look at
their consequent adoption of e-commerce activities in their own organizations.
Comparisons are made between studies conducted in first world countries, par-
ticularly regarding the role of government initiatives.
In the ninth chapter, Shaun Pather and Sam Lubbe address the fact that the
world of Internet commerce has been rapidly evolving since its advent in the 1990s..
This has had implications on research directions in the field of Electronic Com-
merce (e-commerce). No longer is it sufficient to study the formation of electronic
markets in e-commerce. It is also necessary to have insight into the electronic
markets’ innermost workings.
In chapter ten, Marlon Parker states that tertiary education institutions aim to
be recognized for social, knowledge and economic contributions in South Africa.
There has also been an increase in the different uses (including e-learning) of the
Internet. This increase has contributed to the electronic learning revolution and
some South African tertiary institutions are making the technology-based para-
digm shift for this reason.
In the eleventh chapter, Michael Mullany and Peter Lay investigated the
relationships between user resistance to new information systems (such as e-com-
merce) and the differences in cognitive problem-solving styles between systems
developers (analysts) and users.
In chapter twelve, Sandra Henderson, Charles Snyder and Terry Byrd present
a study examining the relationships between consumer privacy concerns, actual e-
commerce activity, the importance of privacy policies and regulatory preference.
In the final chapter, Paul Pavlou addresses the issue of “impersonal trust” in
establishing successful B2B relationships–the type of trust that is created by struc-
tural arrangements, rather than from repeated interaction and familiarity.
x

Acknowledgments
E-commerce has made significant progress even in the short space of time
before this book was published, and the importance of information for manage-
ment purposes has become more widely appreciated.  In this edition, therefore,
we have incorporated illustrations of the types of research areas likely to facilitate
the formulation of economic and social management policies.  The section on
social statements and economic impact has been given extensive treatment and
matters covering e-commerce valuation and the understanding of the aspects of
finance have been brought up to date.
A special project of a practical nature has been introduced to demonstrate
the compilation and application of economic principles to emphasize the essential
role to co-ordinate all the e-functions of the business.  Greater recognition of the
usefulness of sources, properly applied, warrants fuller treatment of this subject,
while the opportunity has been taken to include the latest recommendations of e-
commerce researchers.
This book follows the recommendations of the various e-Initiative bodies
and of the bodies responsible for further research.
Acknowledgments are due to those who have written offering chapters, their
appreciation and suggestions for improvement.
Sam Lubbe
June 2002
xi


TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    1
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter I
TrickE-Business:
Malcontents in the Matrix
Paul A. Taylor
University of Leeds, UK
ABSTRACT
This chapter explores the phenomenon of hacktivism in the context of
globalization debates and the evolving nature of new social movements. It
explores the historical trend by which capitalism has become increasingly
more immaterial in its appearance but powerful in its effects. Using examples
of specific hacktivist groups, hacktivism is shown to be an inventive response
to this trend and represents an imaginative re-appropriation of the Web for
spider-like anti-capitalist protest. The paper concludes with a summary of the
hacktivist philosophy that seeks to reassert the origins of the marketplace as
an agora for the people rather than just big business. Hacktivism is shown to
represent a rationale diametrically opposed to e-commerce.
INTRODUCTION -
ALL  THAT  IS  SOLID  MELTS  INTO  AIR…
Constant revolutionizing of production, uninterrupted disturbance
of all social relations, everlasting uncertainty and agitation, distin-
guish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier times. All fixed, fast-
frozen relationships, with their train of venerable ideas and opin-
ions, are swept away, all new-formed ones become obsolete before
they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is

2   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
profaned. (Marx & Engels – The Manifesto of the Communist Party1)
The Robespierre of this revolution is finance capital … As the
Jacobins learned during the French Revolution, it is the most
zealous, principled advocates of new values who are ultimately
most at risk in a revolutionary environment. (Greider, 1997: 25, 26)
The purpose of this chapter is to describe from a ‘Devil’s Advocate’ stance
the cultural context to the rise of various online activities that oppose the general
values of e-business. In the new digital times, Marx’s description of capitalism’s
iconoclastic qualities has been enthusiastically re-appropriated by business gurus
on the opposite side of the political spectrum. His criticism of disorienting change
has been swamped by a tsunami of techno-enthusiasm. The perennial pertinence of
Marx’s poetically-charged analysis of the socially transformative power of
capitalism’s increasingly immaterial form is illustrated in a spate of such recently
evocative titles as: Living on Thin Air,’ The Empty Raincoat,’ Being Digital; and
The Weightless World. Such New Economy tracts can even make Marx’s florid
language seem relatively understated - to the extent that it has been described as the
‘deranged optimism’ and ‘corporate salivating’ of ‘business pornography’ (Tho-
mas Frank 2001). In this atmosphere of revolutionary rhetoric, however, Greider’s
above quotation hints at the dangers that can await those at the vanguard of change.
We will see later in this chapter that just as Marx argued that capitalism contained
its own fatal internal contradictions, so various writers are beginning to argue that
the technological infrastructure of e-commerce may provide the fertile grounds for
oppositional forces.
The dot.com revolution has produced dot.communists, and in addition to the
recent slowdown in the revolution’s own internal momentum, the information
superhighway now has speed bumps in the form of online political activists known
as hacktivists. Together, hacktivists and anti-corporate theorists are creating a
groundswell of opinion that may mitigate future growth in e-commerce and the
dream of abstract friction-free capitalism.
THE  MANIFEST  DESTINY  OF  FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
Now capital has wings – (New York financier Robert A. Johnson)2.

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    3
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
For how many eons had insurmountable geography impeded
man’s business? Now the new American race had burst those
shackles. Now it could couple its energies in one overarching
corporation, one integrated instrument of production whose bounty
might grow beyond thwarting. (Powers 1998: 91)
According to Brown (1998), The phrase manifest destiny was coined by
John L. O’Sullivan, the editor of the United States Magazine and Demographic
Review (July-August 1845), when he said that opposition to the U.S. takeover of
Texas from Mexico interfered with “the fulfilment of our manifest destiny to
overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our
yearly multiplying millions” (Brown 1998: 2). It has subsequently been used for
many years to encapsulate the expansive mentality of U.S. foreign policy. In a post-
Cold War international environment where U.S. economic dominance has increas-
ingly supplanted overt military force as its primary source of global influence,
manifest destiny is a freshly evocative concept that encapsulates the expansionary
and evangelical nature of a global economic order driven by American values:
One memorable incident, at a meeting of economic policy-makers from
the largest industrialized countries that was held in Denver in June 1997,
signalled the new mood. President Clinton and Larry Summers, then
deputy secretary of the treasury, seized the occasion to tell the world
about the miraculous new American way. They handed out pairs of
cowboy boots and proceeded to entertain the foreigners with what the
Financial Times called a steady diet of “effusive self-praise” spiced with
occasional “harsh words … for the rigidities of French and European
markets.” Don your boots and down with France! (Frank 2001:7)
The above account neatly conflates how the Wild West acts as trope for U.S.
attitudes regarding globalization and the accompanying distaste that a gung-ho
frontier attitude implies for those with less expansive attitudes more protective of
cultural factors. Implied in this outlook is a world economic order viewed as virgin
territory to be pioneered with a minimum of regulatory brakes.  The key significance
of the Wild West motif is the way that the decontextualized abstract space of the
frontier replaces the messy contingencies of specific locales. The ‘friction-free’
capitalism that globalization is predicated upon replaces local concerns with more
general, immaterial imperatives in a manner remarkably unchanged since it was
described so forcefully in the Manifesto of the Communist Party:
… the world-market  [has] given a cosmopolitan character to produc-

4   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
tion and consumption in every country … it has drawn from under the
feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. Industries … no
longer work up indigenous raw material, but raw material drawn from
the remotest zones; industries whose products are consumed, not only
at home, but in every quarter of the globe … And as in material
production, so also in intellectual production. The intellectual creations
of individual nations become common property. National one-sidedness
and narrow-mindedness become more and more impossible, and from
the numerous national and local literatures, there arises a world
literature. (Marx & Engels in Tucker 1978: 476-477)
The smooth, almost virus-like expansionary nature of globalized, de-localized
capitalism is perhaps best illustrated by the notion of the franchise. The homogenous
urban geography across the globe is testament to the ease with which commodities
transcend cultural contexts, taking the golden arches of McDonalds to Moscow in
a “three-ring binder” process as satirized in the cyberpunk novel Snowcrash:
The franchise and the virus work in the same principle; what thrives in
one place will thrive in another. You just have to find a sufficiently
virulent business plan, condense it into a three-ring binder – its DNA –
Xerox it, and embed it in the fertile lining of a well-travelled highway,
preferably one with a left-turn lane. Then the growth will expand until
it runs up against its property lines (Stephenson 1992: 178).
Concern at the virulence with which the commodity form spreads into other
cultures stems from its inherently abstract, context-free logic. There is a deeply
embedded, cultural alignment between laissez-faire ideology and its heavily
technologically mediated consumer products such as computing, Hollywood films,
and fast-food franchises. The emblematic role of the latter has led to the adoption
of the phrase ‘the McDonaldization of …’ to describe the application of corporate
values to areas of life, such as the education sector, previously based upon a public
service rather than commodity ethos. Freed from a grounded basis in a particular
cultural context, the spread of corporate values assumes its own amoral expansion-
ary raison d’être and a brutal end in itself, to the extent that Ray A. Kroc, the founder
of McDonald’s once said of his business rivals, “If they were drowning to death,
I would put a hose in their mouth.” (Schlosser 2001: 41) While this may be seen as
an extreme, unrepresentative example of the corporate ethos, there is strong
evidence to suggest that, at the very least, new technologies and expansionary
business values have a tendency to align themselves to create a high degree of
insensitivity to local context. Thus the McDonald’s corporation has become one of

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    5
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the world’s leading purchasers of satellite imagery, using a software program called
Quintillion to automate its site-selection process and the curator of the Holocaust
museum at Dachau in southern Germany complained that the company distributed
leaflets in the camp’s car park: ‘ “Welcome to Dachau,” said the leaflets, “and
welcome to McDonalds.” ’(Schlosser 2001: 233).
The conjunction of a product’s essentially homogenous nature, allied with such
aggressively expansionist marketing techniques, and a disregard for local sensitivi-
ties is perhaps best captured by the ‘clustering’ strategy employed by Starbucks.
Naomi Klein describes it in the following terms:
Starbucks’ policy is to drop “clusters” of outlets already dotted with
cafes and espresso bars …Instead of opening a few stores in every city
in the world, or even in North America, Starbucks waits until it can blitz
an entire area and spread, to quote Globe and Mail columnist John
Barber, like head lice through a kindergarten”. (Klein 2000: 136)
This branding strategy is underpinned by a commitment to homogeneity that
is succinctly captured in Theodore Levitt’s (1983) essay, The Globalization of
Markets, in which he advocated that: ‘The global corporation operates with
resolute constancy – at low relative cost – as if the entire world (or major regions
of it) were a single entity; it sells the same things in the same way everywhere
…Ancient differences in national tastes or modes of doing business disappear’
(Levitt, 1983, cited in Klein 2000: 116). Moreover, homogenization extends
beyond the heavily branded products of the global corporations. As franchises such
as McDonald’s and Starbucks spread throughout the world’s cities, eliminating
independent stores and smaller chains, there is an increased sense of ‘sameness’
about not only the content of the product, but also the urban environment within
which it is provided. In other words, friction-free capitalism, encourages not only
the standardization of product, but also the standardization of its surrounding
environment, through the formation of what Deleuze (1989) refers to as espace
quelconque or ‘any-space-whatever’.
The departicularized, abstract spaces and flows upon which new information
technologies and the e-boom are premised are particularly well-suited to this
homogenizing quality of contemporary capitalism. Computer code utilizes abstract,
digital representations of information to create generic models of reality to the extent
that the words of Ellen Ullman, a U.S. computer programmer closely echo
Deleuze’s: “I begin to wonder if there isn’t something in computer systems that is
like a surburban development. Both take places - real, particular places - and turn
them into anyplace.” (Ullman 1997: 80) This generic, anyplace quality of computer
code’s binary digits is a specific technological manifestation of a more pervasively

6   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
experienced and commercially-induced aesthetic within society at large. Ullman,
complains of the lack of rootedness and materiality of contemporary businesses to
the extent that she thinks of: “The postmodern company as PC - a shell, a plastic
cabinet. Let the people come and go; plug them in, then pull them out. (Ullman,
1997: 129) The rise in the profile of e-business, has taken place in this wider cultural
climate of a generalized desire to abandon the particularities of the local and
community ties for the abstractions Ullman describes. Klein (2001) refers to this
process as a race towards weightlessness and it is the social consequences of such
a race that we now address.
E-COMMERCE  AS  EMPIRE  &  NEW  SOCIAL
MOVEMENTS
Along with the global market and global circuits of production has
emerged a global order, a new logic and structure of rule – in short,
a new form of sovereignty. Empire is the political subject that
effectively regulates these global exchanges, the sovereign power
that governs the world. (Hardt & Negri 2000: xi)
From a critical perspective, the transnational imperatives of global capitalism
have spilled over from the world of business into the social realm. This has occurred
in wide range of contexts. In the U.K., for example, Manchester United, the
World’s biggest football team has achieved that status by replacing its previous
working class fan-base to become a global brand. Disengagement from historical
social ties has culminated in the large recent “commercial tie-up” deal with the New
York Yankees baseball team3. Meanwhile, in the field of politics, a similar loss of
community-based activity is reflected in the Labour Party’s Operation Turnout4
for the UK’s national election of 2001. This initiative takes the marketing ethos that
created the soap-powder-sounding New Labour to its own logical branding
conclusion by offering constituents a thirty-second doorstep chat with their MP,
thereby inadvertently creating a pre-election version of the Daz Doorstep Chal-
lenge5. More generally, corporate values are now insinuated in areas of society
previously protectively ring-fenced (even within neo-classical economics) by the
concept of the ‘public good’. Schools, universities, and hospitals, all now face
centrally-imposed matrices of business-plans and statistical interrogations of
performance.
In the eyes of capitalism’s critics, new information technologies threaten to
further engulf culture with corporate values: ‘In the postmodernization of the global

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    7
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
economy, the creation of wealth tends ever more toward what we call biopolitical
production, the production of social life itself, in which the economic, the political,
and the cultural increasingly, overlap and invest one another.’ (Hardt & Negri,
2000: xiii) The perception is that a corporate social environment has merged with
a facilitative technical infrastructure to produce a culturally and technologically
aligned informational matrix with abstract imperatives but very real effects. From
league-tables to modularized, ‘customer-orientated’ university courses, the con-
temporary pervasiveness of corporate values is inextricably linked to new informa-
tion technologies in a Microsoft Office-mentality that privileges the computer-
mediated logic of efficiently specified means over normative discussions about
desirable ends.
In the face of such global biopolitical forces, Hardt and Negri describe how
a new form of social activism has arisen from a “paradox of incommunicability” (ibid:
54) and is characterized by two main properties:
1)
Each struggle starts at the local level, but jumps vertically to global attention.
2)
Struggles can increasingly be defined as “bio-political” because they blur the
distinctions previously made between economics and politics and add the
cultural to the new mix.
The paradox stems from the fact that despite living in a much heralded
communication age, the local particularities of political struggles have become
increasingly difficult to communicate between groups as the basis for any interna-
tional chain of political action. Instead, such horizontal communication risks being
supplanted by the increasing advent of “vertical events” such as the Tiananmen
Square protests that jump into the global consciousness through the world’s media.
Notwithstanding, Hardt and Negri’s identification of the “vertical jump”,
increasing theoretical attention is being given to the ways in which the breaking of
traditional “chains” of political protest have has created new horizontal modes of
communication that seek to re-appropriate the ease with which global capital
circulates its commodities and their values. Thus, Lash argues that: “With the
dominance of communication there is a politics of struggle around not accumulation
but circulation. Manufacturing capitalism privileges production and accumulation,
the network society privileges communication and circulation.” (Lash 2002: 112)
Dyer-Witheford sees new contested sites of circulation: “the cyberspatial realm …
increasingly provides a medium both for capitalist control and for the “circulation
of struggles”. (Dyer-Witheford, 1999: 13) Interesting questions are thus raised by
the advent of new social movements that utilize a sophisticated a priori sense of
circulation’s importance.  Within Weberian analysis the terms Gesellschaft and

8   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Gemeinschaft are used to distinguish between feelings of belonging to an abstract
society and a more intimate community respectively. New Web-based social
movements have arguably produced a hybrid combination of both affinities. Their
sense of belonging is abstract in the sense that it often refers to a sense of solidarity
stretched by global distances, yet group solidarity is also nurtured by those same
global communications that serve to reinforce awareness of the particularities of
local struggles.
Social movements have become exactly that – movements - but often of
socially relevant information rather than actual physical bodies of people (although
the two categories may be combined in Web-facilitated protest events such as
World Trade Organization demonstrations). Such new groups may be usefully
understood as the affective groups Maffesoli (1996) describes as neo-tribes. In
contrast to capitalism’s “iron cage of rationality,” new affective relationships are
built upon a non-logical emotional basis, and in a more proactive version of
Baudrillard’s inertly fatal masses of postmodernity. For Maffesoli, such neo-tribes
have a certain “underground puissance”: ‘The rational era is built on the principle
of individuation and of separation, whereas the empathetic period is marked by the
lack of differentiation, the “loss” in a collective subject: in other words, what I shall
call neo-tribalism.’ (Maffesoli 1996: 11) The new neo-tribes do not fit easily into
the classificatory categories of the system that would absorb them: ‘Their outlines
are ill-defined: sex, appearance, lifestyles – even ideology – are increasingly
qualified in terms (“trans”, “meta”) that go beyond the logic of identity and/or binary
logic.’ (ibid: 11) These new social movements ironically use the binary-based
circulation systems of capitalism for their own non-binary purposes that in another
semantic irony can perhaps be understood best in terms of a web.
FROM  NETWORKS  TO  WEBS
The terminals of the network society are static. The bonding, on the
other hand, of web weavers with machines is nomadic. They form
communities with machines, navigate in cultural worlds attached
to machines. These spiders weave not networks, but webs, perhaps
electronic webs, undermining and undercutting the networks.
Networks need walls. Webs go around the walls, up the walls, hide
in the nooks and crannies and corners of where the walls meet …
Networks are shiny, new, flawless. Spiders’ webs in contrast,
attach to abandoned rooms, to disused objects, to the ruins, the
disused and discarded objects of capitalist production. Networks
are cast more or less in stone; webs are weak, easily destroyed.

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    9
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Networks connect by a utilitarian logic, a logic of instrumental
rationality. Webs are tactile, experiential rather than calculating,
their reach more ontological than utilitarian. (Lash 2002: 127)
In his Practices of Everyday Life, Michel de Certeau (1988) criticizes the
expansionary nature of various systems of production that produce a society
dominated by commodity value. He argues that resistance to such disciplining
forces can be found in the various day-to-day subversions people carry out as they
consume the products of such a dominant order. He uses the example of the
indigenous Indians of South America who, although they superficially accepted the
framework of the Catholic Church imposed upon them by the Spanish colonizers,
in fact managed to develop various practices that kept their traditional values alive
beneath the veneer of such acceptance and assimilation. In a similar fashion, he
advocates the development of various strategies to resist the uniform, disciplinary
effects of capitalism upon social life including the reappropriation of otherwise
ordered urban environments in preference for more dynamic, liberated expressions
of local particularities and interactions. De Certeau thus seeks escape routes from
the circumscribing effects of the sorts of productive and organizational matrices
previously described:
We witness the advent of number. It comes with democracy, the large
city, administrations, and cybernetics. It is a flexible and continuous
mass, woven tight like a fabric with neither rips nor darned patches, a
multitude of quantified heroes who lose names and faces as they become
the ciphered river of the streets, a mobile language of computations and
rationalities that belong to no one. (De Certeau, 1988: v)
De Certeau’s identification of the tightly woven nature of fabric that accom-
panies “the advent of number” provides an earlier analysis of the subsequent focus
upon capitalist networks such as that provided in the above quotation from Lash.
Where De Certeau describes a cybernetic ‘fabric with neither rips nor darned
patches’, Lash similarly talks of the ‘flawless’ nature of a utilitarian network. Lash
proceeds to contrast the inherently disciplinary nature of such networks with the
more organically libratory potential image of webs. He adopts Lefebvre’s (1991)
association of spiders’ web making with the creation of autonomous spaces to
make parallels with the potentially empowering web-forming activities of the new
informational order’s technoculture workers. In a very similar vein, Klein concep-
tualizes anti-corporate opposition as web-using spiders:
… the image strikes me as a fitting one for this Web-age global activism.
Logos, by the force of ubiquity, have become the closest thing we have

10   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
to an international language, recognized and understood in many more
places than English. Activists are now free to swing off this web of logos
like spy/spiders – trading information about labor practices, chemical
spills, animal cruelty and unethical marketing around the world. (Klein
2001: xx)
Klein’s conceptualization of activists as spiders on a global web provides the
beginnings of a practical strategy with which to approach the confusing immateriality
of modern capitalism. It is in keeping with Dyer-Witheford’s call for oppositional
groups to match the nomadic flows enjoyed by corporations due to their own
‘global-webs’ of capital (Dyer-Witheford 1999: 143). The need for a counter-
colonization of the global web is now an increasingly common call amongst radical
thinkers. To those previously cited can be added Hardt and Negri (2000) whose
basic premise of the need for opposition to a new global corporate Empire, relies
heavily upon the belief that its web of capital flows and commodity circulation needs
counter-populating with flows of struggle from different communities within “the
global multitude” (Hardt & Negri, 2000: 46). It is interesting to note the similarity
of their language with the previously cited fictional comparison of the spread of
corporate values with biological viruses: ‘Rather than thinking of the struggles as
relating to one another like links in a chain, it might be better to conceive of them
as communicating like a virus that modulates its form to find in each context an
adequate host.’ (Hardt & Negri, 2000: 51). Their call for the “counter-populating”
of “the global multitude” has been answered by various groups of hacktivists
seeking to develop new Web-based tactics to better confront the new online forms
of capital.
SEMIOLOGICAL  GUERILLA  WARFARE
In times of constant effervescence, certain stimulating imperti-
nences are required. (Maffesoli 1996: 7)
In technological forms of life, not just resistance but also power is
non-linear. Power itself is no longer primarily pedagogical or
narrative but instead, itself performative. ‘Nation’ now works less
through ‘narrative’ or ‘pedagogy’ but through the performativity
of information and communication. Power works less through the
linearity and the reflective argument of discourse or ideology than
through the immediacy of information, of communications. (Lash
2002: 25)

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    11
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
According to Lash, the performativity of information is the dominant factor in
the spread of global communication systems. Put in simpler terms, Lash’s argument
can be seen as a variation upon McLuhan’s aphorism: the medium is the message.
The ubiquitous immanence of information and communication technologies means
that all social meaning becomes disproportionately mediated through the prism of
immediate, functional data rather than the nuanced and less time-obsessed nature
of more reflective and analytical thought. In a much earlier analysis of mass
communication systems, Eco (1967) reinforces this analysis by arguing that there
is little room for an optimistic reinterpretation of the innately deterministic implication
of McLuhan’s famous phrase. Eco recognizes that the meanings derived from
communicated messages are filtered through the social codes we bring to them, but
then argues such room for reinterpretation of the dominant code behind mass
communication systems is extremely limited:
There exists an extremely powerful instrument that none of us will ever
manage to regulate; there exist means of communication that, unlike
means of production, are not controllable either by private will or by the
community. In confronting them, all of us from the head of CBS to the
president of the United States, from Martin Heidegger to the poorest
fellah of the Nile delta, all of us are the proletariat. (Eco, 1967: 141)
Confronted by this situation, Eco distinguishes between a strategic and tactical
approach. The former aims to fill the existing channels of communication with
radically like-minded people who can seek to fill those channels with liberating
opinions and information. As the above quotation illustrates, however, the likeli-
hood of success is limited because as Eco puts it, the “means of communication …
are not controllable by private will or by the community”. He suggests that such an
approach may achieve good short term political or economic results: ‘but I begin
to fear it produces very skimpy results for anyone hoping to restore to human beings
a certain freedom in the face of the total phenomenon of Communication.’ (Eco
1967: 142)
New online activist groups have taken Eco at his word and developed various
tactical semiological performances and events designed to shock people from the
passivity of total communication’s regime in ways that belatedly promise to fulfill his
call for a new form of “semiological guerilla warfare”.
Illustration is provided by the way in which traditional forms of civil disobedi-
ence such as peaceful sit-ins have been transformed, in cyberspace, into new forms
of electronic civil disobedience. In 1998, for example, the hacktivist group the
Electronic Disturbance Theatre (EDT) coordinated a series of Web sit-ins in
support of the Mexican anti-government group, the Zapatistas. This incident was
perhaps most noticeable for its use of an automated piece of software revealingly

12   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
called Flood Net. Once downloaded on to an individual’s computer automatically,
this piece of software connects the surfer to a pre-selected Web site. Every seven
seconds the selected site’s reload button is automatically activated. If thousands of
people use Flood Net on the same day, the combined effect of such a large number
of activists will disrupt the operations of a particular site. Similar techniques were
used by another group, ®TMark, in the e-toy campaign of 1999. This was a
hacktivist response to a commercial company’s attempt to use the courts to remove
an art collective’s Web site domain name because they felt it was too similar to their
own6. In what was described as the “Brent Spar of e-commerce”7, a combination
of Internet and media public relations stunts were used to force an eventual volte-
face by the company, greatly aided by the 70 percent decline in the company’s
NASDAQ stock value that coincided with these actions.
®TMARK  AND  THE  REVERSE  ENGINEERING
OF  THE  CORPORATE  MODEL
… a future communications guerilla warfare – a manifestation
complementary to the manifestations of Technological Communi-
cation, the constant correction of perspectives, the checking of
codes, the ever renewed interpretations of mass messages. The
universe of Technological Communication would then be patrolled
by groups of communications guerillas, who would restore a
critical dimension to passive reception. The threat that the “the
medium is the message” could then become, for both medium and
message, the return to individual responsibility. To the anonymous
divinity of Technological Communication our answer could be:
“Not Thy, but our will be done.” (Eco 1967: 144)
To oppose “the total phenomenon of Communication”, and because of
capitalism’s ability to co-opt and submerge oppositional forces premised upon
more strategic approaches. Eco proposes the above general outline of a tactical
approach which as proved to be an extremely prescient description of what we shall
now see are the actual tactics adopted by such new radical online groups as ®TMark.
This is an on-line activist group that provides some of the best examples of such a
political cause being translated into practical action in the form of ®TMark projects.
These are based upon the four “keys” of worker, sponsor, product, and idea:
‘®TMark is a system of workers, ideas, and money whose function is to encourage
the intelligent sabotage of mass-produced items …®TMark is essentially a match-

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    13
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
maker and bank, helping groups or individuals fund sabotage projects’ (“A System
for Change” ®TMark Undated Website paper)
The Group’s web site provides numerous examples of past and present
projects that it has supported in a form deliberately modelled upon that of the
financial mutual fund system. Notable examples include the setting up of a Web site
entitled Voteauction.com that aimed and succeeded in attracting press attention
for the way in which it purported to buy votes from people. The project successfully
provoked a series of media reports that felt obliged to comment upon the
widespread perception that democracy had already been more substantially
compromised by the way in which large corporations already effectively “buy”
votes through their lobbying power. Other projects involved the setting up of a fake
W.T.O. site in order to satirize the organization and its G.A.T.T. agreements. A final
example is provided by the Barbie Liberation Organisation who, as a mixed
group of activists and military veterans switched the voice boxes in 300 Talking
Barbie dolls and Talking G.I. Joe dolls during the 1989 Christmas period with the
goal of highlighting and correcting the problem of gender-based stereotyping in
children’s toys.
Their imitative modus operandi mimics the capitalist investment process in
order to better subvert it. They act as a perverse form of commercial clearing and
investment house for projects they think will provide a “good return” in terms of
human capital. Their close satirical imitation of capitalist structures and practices fits
well with Eco’s desire to see “a manifestation complementary to the manifestations
of Technological Communication whilst their rationale is expressed in terms
resonant of Eco’s previously cited call “to restore to human beings a certain freedom
in the face of the total phenomenon of Communication”: ‘®TMark  … is an ark for
our humanness through the deluge of ® and TM … an attempt to make our
environment more palatable, more reflective of us, and generally more human.’
(Ibid, 1997)
To help conceptualize this pursuit of more humane aims, the group borrows the
term “curation” from the world of art. Artists are seen as an important cultural
reservoir of non-commodified values and the aim is to spread such values out into
the broader society.  “Curates” is used as a synonym for “influences” and describes,
in a fashion very much in keeping with Hardt and Negri’s (2000) notion of
biopolitics, the way in which daily life becomes inseparable from the formative
influence of advertisements or consumer brands. Thus in ®TMark’s view, citizens are
only valued as “input mechanisms” for consumer values and all the objects one
confronts in social life have been “curated” to facilitate this input: ‘Even those
curated objects which seem to encourage creation only encourage such creation as
leads without delay to consumption, either one’s own (games, art technologies,

14   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
etc.) or that of others (work).’ (®TMark Curation Website paper 1998) In keeping
with hacktivism’s general philosophy of reverse engineering (originally inherited
from hacking [see Taylor in Wall 2001]), ®TMark sets itself up in direct opposition
to this tendency to define people solely as consumerist input mechanisms: it appeals
to citizens as creative output mechanisms. It is here that the performance element
of hacktivist activities comes to the fore. ®TMark recognizes the combined narcotic
effects of both the media and the pervasive social environment of consumption that
it reinforces. The group thus seeks to use various media performances targeted at
citizens-as-consumers in order to jolt them out of their uncritical contentment based
upon the unthinking consumption of commodities:
It was once the case that advertising appealed to our insecurities and
miseries, and tried to exacerbate existential troubles in order to offer
costly solutions … but these methods have been swallowed by the very
fear they generated.  Just as repression has wisely given way to
choicelessness, exacerbation has given way to anaesthetic. Content-
ment, though more expensive than terror, is in the long run cheaper, since
the price for contentment can be set: as consumption. Ultimately,
contentment pays for itself. (®TMark Globalization and Global resistance
Website paper)
®TMark sees a wellspring of potential subversion within growing levels of social
discontent. Their projects seek to build upon rising levels of disaffection where
people are becoming much more irrational, unpredictable and creative. ®TMark
reappropriates the imminent communicational and informational performance
previously identified by Lash (2002) and translates it into a superficially similar but
fundamentally subversive format. The Electronic Disturbance Theatre (EDT) to
which we now turn adopts the tactic of performance in an even more radical and
semiologically upsetting politics of magic realism.
THE  ELECTRONIC  DISTURBANCE  THEATRE
The Zapatistas use the politics of a magical realism that allows
them to create these spaces of invention, intervention, and to allow
the worldwide networks to witness the struggle they face on daily.
It was the acceptance of digital space by the Zapatistas in 12 days
that created the very heart of this magical realism as information
war. It was this extraordinary understanding of electronic culture
that allowed the Zapatistas on 1 January, 1994, one minute after
midnight just as  a Free Trade Agreement between Canada, U.S.A,

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    15
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
and Mexico (NAFTA) went into effect - to jump into the electronic
fabric, so to speak, faster than the speed of light. Within minutes,
people around the world had received e-mails from the first
declaration from the Lacandona Jungle. The next day the autono-
mous Zapatista zones appeared all over the Internet. The New York
Times considered it the first post-modern revolution. The Ameri-
can intelligence community called it the first act of social net war.
Remember, that this social net war was based on the simple use of
e-mail and nothing more … gestures can be very simple and yet
create deep changes in the structures of the command and control
societies that neo-liberalism agenda, like NAFTA, represent.
(Ricardo Dominguez of the EDT in Fusco, 1999)
The Electronic Disturbance Theatre has been at the forefront of developing
both specific semiological guerilla tactics and an over-arching tactical ethos. The
specific tactics have so far taken the form of mass online actions reinforced by the
use of symbolic/performative semantics to create the groundswell of online empathy
required to maintain the neo-tribe. In the particular example of Flood Net, the web-
site of Mexico’s President Zedillo was overwhelmed by the coordinated efforts of
physically disparate activists. The failure of his site due to such collected action
begins to hint at the immaterial forms public space in cyberspace can assume. The
Flood Net action vividly illustrates the effectiveness of mass political participation
in the virtual realm. The lack of physical space in which to meet is compensated for
by the binding empathy created by the positive fall-out from the disturbance effects
of online actions: ‘The FloodNet gesture allows the social flow of command and
control to be seen directly – the communities themselves can see the flow of power
in a highly transparent manner.’ (Dominguez in Fusco, 1999) The questioning of this
flow of power to provide greater transparency is complemented by actions
designed to make an additional political point through such artistic expressions as
the creative use of 404 files. These files are the standard Web page replies that a
user receives when information they have sought is not available from the server:
We ask President Zedillo’s server or the Pentagon’s web server
‘Where is human rights in your server?” The server then responds
“Human rights not found on this server” … This use of the “not found”
system … is a well-known gesture among the net art communities. EDT
just re-focused the 404 function towards a political gesture. (Dominguez
in Fusco, 1999)

16   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
404 file art and the above description by Dominguez of digital zapatismo
vividly illustrates how Maffesoli’s (1996) “empathetic” and effectual neo-tribes are
manifested in practice. Despite the essentially immaterial nature of the effectual
environment, the “extraordinary understanding of electronic culture” facilitated the
emergence of a global neo-tribe of like-minded radicals. This empathy is both a
cause and a consequence of specific mass online actions. It also somewhat
complicates Hardt and Negri’s (2000) assertion that horizontal chains of political
action have been supplanted in the era of global communication by “vertical media
events”. The experience of digital zapatismo implies that global awareness of site-
specific struggles results from the pre-existence of horizontally nurtured links that
then spring vertically upwards into the gaze of the global media. The circulation of
struggle thus occurs:
via a strange chaos moving horizontally, non-linearly, and over many
sub-networks. Rather than operating through a central command
structure in which information filters down from the top in vertical and
linear manner information about Zapatistas on the Internet has moved
laterally from node to node. (Dominguez in Fusco, 1999)
It is perhaps inevitable that the media tends to privilege the technical vehicles
of the protests over their political and social content, but for Dominguez, the actual
form the protests take is the least important aspect of a larger and more significant
three-act performance. The first act involves stating what is going to happen and its
political purpose, the second is the act itself, and the third is the subsequent dialogue
and discussion that creates what Dominguez calls a “social drama”: ‘A virtual plaza,
a digital situation, is thus generated in which we all gather and have an encounter,
or an Encuentro, as the Zapatistas would say – about the nature of neo-liberalism
in the real world and in cyberspace.’ (Dominguez in Fusco, 1999) Digital
zapatismo has added an additional element to such social drama by using periods
of tactical silence where, literally in Mexico and metaphorically elsewhere, the
activists retreat back into the jungle for a period of calm reflection - the effect of
which is heightened by its contrast with the media’s need for the constant noise of
news.
A  DOT.COMMUNIST  MANIFESTO -
RECLAIMING  THE  AGORA
In this chapter’s discussion of hacktivism, we have concentrated predomi-
nantly upon the “ism” part of the word, which refers to political activism that

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    17
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
motivates acts and events. However, the “hack” part of the word relates to the
earlier practice of hacking. In my previous detailed exploration of this phenomenon
(Taylor, 1999) a fundamental aspect of the true “hack” was its innate desire to re-
engineer or reverse the original and primary purpose of an artifact or system.
Hacktivism has kept faith with this quality; see Dominguez’s over-arching rationale
below for not only the performance element of hacktivism, but also its tactic of re-
appropriating and re-colonizing the space that e-commerce has so far claimed as
its own:
The idea of a virtual republic in Western Civilization can be traced back
to Plato, and is connected to the functions of public space. The Republic
incorporated the central concept of the Agora. The Agora was the area
for those who were entitled to engage in rational discourse of Logos, and
to articulate social policy as the Law, and thus contribute to the evolution
of Athenian democracy. Of course those who did speak were, for the
most part, male, slave-owning and ship-owning merchants, those that
represented the base of Athenian power. We can call them Dromos:
those who belong to the societies of speed. Speed and the Virtual
Republic are the primary nodes of Athenian democracy – not much
different than today. The Agora was constantly being disturbed by
Demos, what we would call those who demonstrate or who move into
the Agora and make gestures. Later on, with the rise of Catholicism –
Demos would be transposed into Demons, those representatives of the
lower depths. Demos did not necessarily use the rational speech of the
Agora, they did not have access to it; instead, they used symbolic speech
or a somatic poesis - Nomos. In the Agora, rational speech is known
as Logos. The Demos gesture is Nomos, the metaphorical language that
points to invisibility, that points to the gaps in the Agora. The Agora is
thus disturbed; the rational processes of its codes are disrupted, the
power of speed was blocked. EDT alludes to this history of Demos as
it intervenes with Nomos. The Zapatista FloodNet injects bodies as
Nomos into digital space, a critical mass of gestures as blockage. What
we also add to the equation is the power of speed is now leveraged by
Demos via the networks. Thus Demos_qua_Dromos create the space
for a new type of social drama to take place. Remember in Ancient
Greece, those who were in power and who had slaves and commerce,
were the ones who had the fastest ships. EDT utilizes these elements to
create drama and movement by empowering contemporary groups of
Demos with the speed of Dromos – without asking societies of
command and control for the right to do so. We enter the Agora with

18   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the metaphorical gestures of Nomos and squat on high-speed lanes of
the new Virtual Republic – this creates a digital platform or situation for
a techno-political drama that reflects the real condition of the world
beyond code. This disturbs the Virtual Republic that is accustomed to
the properties of Logos, the ownership of property, copyright, and all
the different strategies in which they are attempting enclosure of the
Internet. (Dominguez in Fusco, 1999)
Dominguez’s imaginative reinterpretation of the demos is empowered by the
speed of the system that hacktivist groups seek to redirect. The new social dramas
that result are thus given additional bite, because they achieve their effects from
within the system rather than from a “pure” intellectual distance. The danger of
replicating through online actions the abstract rationalism that is being protested
against is avoided because hacktivists remain mindful of “the real condition of the
world beyond code”. In keeping with the central role of performance and social
dramas to the anti-Globalization tactics of indigenous groups such as the Zapatistas,
hacktivists have reinvented Nomos for the agora of the 21st century. Through their
hands-on activism, they have reclaimed the spirit of magic realism from its
imprisonment in university literature departments and they confront head-on Logos
in its new guise of the logo.
CONCLUSION
She drives past Clare’s Agricultural Division headquarters at least
three times a week. The town cannot hold a corn boil without its
corporate sponsor. The company cuts every other check, writes the
headlines, and sings the school fight song. It plays the organ at
every wedding and packs the rice that rains down on the departing
honeymooners. It staffs the hospital and funds the ultrasound
sweep of uterine seas where Lacewood’s next of kin lie grey and
ghostly, asleep in the deep. (Power 1998: 6)
We should be done once and for all with the search for an outside,
a standpoint that imagines a purity for our politics. It is better both
theoretically and practically to enter the terrain of Empire and
confront its homogenizing and heterogenizing flows in all their
complexity, grounding our analysis in the power of the global
multitude. (Hardt & Negri, 2000: 46)

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    19
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Gain (1998) is a novel about the history of a multinational, Clare Soap and
Chemical Company. In the above excerpt, the protagonist is suffering from a cancer
caused by the ubiquitous firm’s pollution in her local community. The author uses
her individual predicament to represent the wider social impact of increased blurring
that has taken place between commerce and society, a blurring that is likely to
increase in the age of e-commerce. Thus the key significance of the easily-
reinsertable, decontextualized quality of e-commerce previously described by
Ullman (1997) is the resultant ease with which commodity values have both
pervasive and invasively destructive effects upon the cultural fabric: in Hardt and
Negri’s (2000) terms, they exert a biopolitical power. Their subsequent call to
“enter the terrain of Empire” has been met by online groups who, while maintaining
their groundedness in physical social reality, have nevertheless, enthusiastically
sought to build new immaterial social spaces square in the middle of the Empire’s
territory.
To oppose the Empire, the EDT reverse-engineer the functional performativity
of the binary-based global communication regime. It does this by refocusing its
instrumental emphasis upon immediacy with spontaneous Web-based actions, and
also by problematizing it through the explicit contrast created by the satirical, magic
realist quality of those actions. The events it creates resonate beyond their
immediate disturbance to provoke the viewer/reader into deeper reflection about
their significance. They throw into sharp relief the dominant logic that, as we have
seen throughout this chapter, relies upon the immanent immediacy of rapidly
circulating communication. I have previously pointed out that this reflective process
is reinforced by the creative silences that Digital Zapatismo in particular has utilized
immediately after several high profile events. In the reflective moment afforded by
a conclusion, perhaps the issue to contemplate is the extent to which, after the
widely-perceived failure of International Socialism, there may be a new force ready
and willing to confront the smooth advance of friction-free e-capital. As quoted near
the beginning of this chapter, Marx claimed that as a by-product of capitalism’s
global reach, “there arises a world literature.” Magic realism may yet prove to be
that literature, to paraphrase Marx: ‘A spectre is haunting the globe – the spectre
of hacktivism’.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My initial co-operation with Ricardo Dominguez was made possible by
funding from the UK’s Economic & Social Research Council (ESRC) and its
seminar series on Living in the Matrix: Immateriality in theory and practice.
Quotations cited as (Fusco, 1999) were taken from an interview entitled,
“Performance Art in a Digital Age: A Conversation with Ricardo Dominguez” that

20   Taylor
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
took place on Thursday 25 November 1999, at the Institute of International Visual
Arts. The interview was heavily edited by Coco Fusco and transcribed by InIVA
staff. It was republished in Centrodearte.com and Latinarte.com.
REFERENCES
Berman, M. (1983). All that is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of
Modernity. London: Verso.
De Certeau, M. (1988). The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Deleuze, G. (1989). Cinema 2: The Time-Image. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Dyer-Witheford, N. (1999). Cyber-Marx: Cycles and Circuits of Struggle in
High-Technology Capitalism. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Eco, U. (1987). Travels in Hyperreality. London: Picador.
Frank, T. (2001). One Market Under God: Extreme Capitalism, Market
Populism and the End of Economic Democracy. London: Secker and
Warburg.
Fusco, C. (1999) Performance Art in a Digital Age: A Conversation with
Ricardo Dominguez. Unpublished paper.
Greider, W. (1997) One World, Ready or Not. New York: Touchstone.
Grether, R. (2000). How the e-toy campaign was won. Telepolis (Jan 2000).
Available at: http://www.heise.de/tp/english/inhalt/te/5843/1.html.
Hardt, M. & Negri, A. (2000). Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Klein, N. (2001). No Logo. London: Flamingo.
Lash, S. (2002). Critique of Information. London: Sage.
Lasn, K. (2000) Culture Jam: How To Reverse America’s Suicidal Consumer
Binge – and Why We Must. New York: HarperCollins.
Leadbetter, C. (2000). Living on Thin Air: The New Economy. London: Penguin
Books.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Levitt, T. (1983) The globalization of markets. Harvard Business Review, May-
June, cited in Klein, 2000.
Maffesoli, M. (1996) The Time of the Tribes: The Decline of Individualism in
Mass Society. Sage: London.
Marx & Engels in Tucker (ed.) (1978) The Marx-Engels Reader. New York:
W.W. Norton.

TrickE-Business: Malcontents in the Matrix    21
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Powers, R. (1998) Gain. London: William Heinemann.
Schlosser, E. (2001). Fast Food Nation: What the All-American Meal is doing
to the World. London: Penguin Books.
Stephenson, N. (1992) Snowcrash. New York: Bantam Spectre.
Taylor, P.A. (1999) Hackers: Crime in the Digital Sublime. London: Routledge.
Taylor, P.A. (2001) Hacktivists: in search of lost ethics? In Wall, D. (ed.) 2001:
Crime and the Internet. London: Routledge.
Ullman, E. (1997). Close to the Machine: Technophilia and its Discontents.
San Francisco: City Lights Books.
Web-based sources (checked June 2002)
RTMark papers
“A System for Change”
“Curation”
“Globalization and global resistance”
All the above RTMark papers can be found at their Web site: http://www.rtmark.com.
ENDNOTES
1
The historical and perennial significance of this analysis by Marx is explored
in detail in Marshall Berman’s All That is Solid Melts Into Air (1983).
2
Cited in Greider, 1997: 24.
3
The Guardian, Feb 7 , 2001.
4
Ibid., August 2, 2001.
5
The Daz-Doorstep challenge refers to a soap-powder advertisement on
British TV, whereby a celebrity challenges a series of housewives, on their
doorsteps, to use the Daz product.
6
For a full account. see Grether (2000).
7
See the RTMark press release, available at: http://www.rtmark.com/
etoyprtriumph.html.

22   Vinaja
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter II
The Economic and Social
Impact of Electronic
Commerce in
Developing Countries
Roberto Vinaja
University of Texas, Pan American, USA
ABSTRACT
The chapter addresses the potential benefits of Electronic Commerce to
developing countries. Electronic commerce has many potential benefits for
developing countries (DC). In this chapter, the author describes the potential
benefits of Electronic Commerce for developing nations and he provides case
examples that illustrate this trend. The widespread adoption of electronic
commerce is especially important for developing countries.

The Economic and Social Impact of Electronic Commerce    23
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
INTRODUCTION
Electronic commerce has many potential benefits for developing countries
(DC). In this chapter we will describe the potential benefits of Electronic Commerce
for developing nations and provide case examples that illustrate this trend. The
widespread adoption of electronic commerce is especially important for developing
countries. The benefits for developing countries range from social to economic.
Some of the benefits include: improvement of international coordination, an open
economy promoting competitions and diffusion of key technologies, efficient social
and infrastructure services, a competitive communication sector, and increased
buyer productivity.
The impacts of electronic commerce in a developing country can be helpful
rather than detrimental. Electronic commerce has the potential to tie developing
countries into the rest of the world so they are no longer considered outsiders. For
example, electronic commerce can enable more people to access products and
services that once were not available. Another benefit is that electronic commerce
stores are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. As the infrastructure for
electronic commerce keeps growing, services that were not offered in the past
become available. Many of these benefits have not been proven yet, but the
technology is now available, and developing countries are looking forward to these
benefits. The high cost of technology may still be detrimental in many developing
countries; however, the constant innovation of software and hardware will hopefully
reduce these costs.
Consumers in developing countries can benefit from electronic commerce
because they can buy products that could only be found in major cosmopolitan
cities. Electronic commerce is closing the gap between those countries that have
wide availability of products and those with limited availability. The basic purpose
of electronic commerce is to provide goods and services to consumers who do not
live close to the physical location of the product or service and would otherwise
have a hard time acquiring these products and services.
Society and consumers alike have only begun to enjoy the benefits of electronic
commerce. Since new developments are made on a continuous basis, it will
eventually affect every individual. Some of the benefits enjoyed by society and
consumers, for example, are ease of transaction, comparability of products, quick
delivery and the ability to make any type of transaction at any given time of day.
Electronic commerce facilitates delivery of public and social services, such as
healthcare, education, and distribution of government social services at a reduced
cost, improving the quality of care and living in these communities. For example,
health care services can reach patients in rural areas (Turban et al., 2000).

24   Vinaja
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Another benefits is the fast dissemination of information, information is
distributed in a matter of seconds, instead of several months. Electronic commerce
can help people become better educated and better informed. Many educational
opportunities are becoming available to developing countries. For example, the
availability of virtual universities provides the opportunity to learn and earn college
degrees. In addition, many developing-country universities are focusing on curricula
that might contribute more directly to economic growth, and network connections
for administrators, professors, and students will be increasingly important.
The communications and information delivery capability of the Internet can
benefit all sectors of society. The areas of education, health, social policy,
commerce and trade, government, agriculture, communications, and science and
technology could benefit from the improved access to information provided by the
Internet (Sadwosky, 1996).
Access to information affects political democratization efforts at the global
level as well as within nations. There seems to be a connection between the free flow
of information and movement toward democratization. This fact has been observed
in a number of countries recently (Hay et al., 2000).
NEW  DEVELOPMENTS
Several organizations such as the ITU (International Telecommunication
Union), the GII (Global Information Infrastructure), the NII (National Information
Infrastructure), the OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment), and the EU (European Union), are striving to develop standards and policies
to promote global Electronic commerce. (Hay et al., 2000). The ITU is a worldwide
organization, where 189 member states and some 570 sector members represent-
ing public and private companies and organizations with an interest in telecommu-
nications cooperate for the development of telecommunications and the harmoni-
zation of national telecommunication policies.
In 1998, the International Telecommunications Union, in conjunction with The
World Trade Center in Geneva and the World Internet Service Key launched the
“Electronic Commerce for Developing Countries” (EC-DC) project (Ntoko,
1999). The project Electronic Commerce for Developing Countries (EC-DC) is an
activity of the ITU Telecommunication Development Bureau (BDT). EC-DC
assists developing countries in the use of electronic commerce by addressing the
technology, policies and strategy issues related to electronic commerce. It provides
a framework for neutral and non-exclusive partnerships with industry thereby
creating the environment for cost-effective solutions to the benefit of developing

The Economic and Social Impact of Electronic Commerce    25
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
countries. It aims at enabling developing countries to use existing infrastructures and
services to participate in electronic commerce. It also seeks to facilitate the transfer
of electronic commerce technology, increase public awareness and stimulate the
planning and deployment of the telecommunication infrastructure (Ntoko, 2000).
The purpose of this project is to expand electronic commerce in developing
countries and to help in the construction of electronic commerce infrastructure and
implementation of electronic commerce solutions (Goh, 2001). The EC-DC
project will assist the ITU in expanding electronic commerce in the Developing
Countries by using the World Trade Center network and its global resources of
more than 300 centers in more than 100 countries. The International Telecommu-
nication Union’s web project “Electronic Commerce for Developing Countries” is
being deployed in more than 100 countries. It is a massive project under which
participating countries can benefit from first-class security, trust and services for e-
business transactions under affordable conditions.
The EC-DC project addresses some of the challenges and opportunities faced
by developing countries in the application of new technologies. The ITU is assisting
developing countries to acquire and benefit from electronic commerce technologies
through a program focused on concrete deliverables. The EC-DC project has
identified the key benefits of electronic commerce for developing countries:
•
Economic Development: “micro and small businesses can begin to trade at
internationally acceptable price levels and bypass the system of exploitation
of their products for minimal return” (Ochienghs, 1998). The companies are
able to trade at internationally acceptable price levels and among and across
many borders. Benefits in the tourism, travel, arts, sale of locally produced
goods, service industry and the banking sector are greatly seen because of the
ability of EC to reduce the cost of processing orders and payments in the
global marketplace. This in turn contributes to an “economic upliftment” (ITU,
2001a).
•
Infrastructure Development: EC will stimulate demand for Internet connec-
tion infrastructure and encourage the creation of commerce (Gagné, 2001).
As a result, policies in the banking and information and communication
technology sectors will bring together public and private “communities” to
support infrastructure development. In order to provide immediate benefits
and increase the chances of sustainability of the project, the initial focus of the
EC-DC project has been on businesses that already have an export market.
The project also enables the transfer of electronic commerce technologies
through the development of human resources necessary for providing elec-
tronic commerce services and maintaining the infrastructure (Gagné, 2001).
•
Regional and multi-national cooperation: The improvements in the infra-

26   Vinaja
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
structure will facilitate communication between business and consumers
(Ochienghs, 1998). EC “increases the collaboration between the various
sectors of government, banking, business and information technology of the
country” (ITU, 2001b). One of the social benefits that electronic commerce
provides to developing countries is the partnership among different countries.
More jobs are created as demands for products rise due to the large exposure
electronic commerce has allowed.
CASES
Panama
Panama has implemented many initiatives for EC (National Law Center,
2000). Panama’s tourism has benefit from this by putting information of the best
places to visit in their country on the web.
Travel agencies provide information at their web sites that are virtually
available to any person in the world interested in visiting Panama. There are plenty
of benefits for organizations, such as saving on the cost of brochures, advertising in
international newspapers or magazines, and on methods of payments that they have
to do through their bank (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2000).
Tunisia
For example, today electronic commerce is a reality in Tunisia, with pilot
projects selling Tunisian products in all countries of the world and a bill for electronic
exchanges and commerce that was presented to the Chamber of Deputies. The
object of the year 2000 was to generalize the use of this new mode of commerce
in Tunisia and create public and private online services allowing Tunisian citizens to
take full advantage of electronic commerce (ISOC, 2001).
Malaysia
In 1997, government officials in Malaysia noticed that the rapid diffusion of the
Internet throughout the world had accelerated the introduction of electronic
commerce. The government envisioned a profound structural change in the
economy of the country and a significant impact on international trade. Malaysia’s
electronic commerce expansion is also partially credited to the growth in PC
purchase and use in that nation, the actual hardware and is somewhat the backbone
of electronic commerce. The growth of PCs in the nation provides another source
of electronic commerce, C2B and C2C. The new electronic commerce markets are

The Economic and Social Impact of Electronic Commerce    27
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
giving Malaysia more opportunities from within the country and not just from foreign
nations. The significance of PC growth, in relation to electronic commerce, is that
Malaysian citizens will also have access to the global markets to be able to buy
products and services at a much cheaper cost. So, electronic commerce is more
than just Malaysia’s ability to supply global, potential buyers with products; it is an
overall impact on Malaysia’s economy, thanks to the various implementations of
electronic commerce (Cordelia, 1999). In conclusion, Malaysia has benefited from
implementing electronic commerce into their society but they must aspire to
improving much more. “It is about transforming our current economy, which is
dependent on commodities and contract manufacturing, into a different economy
that uses Information and Communications Technology (ICT) to improve manufac-
turing processes, reduce manpower needs, lower costs of production, find better
and more profitable uses for commodities and eventually improve the quality of life
of Malaysians.” (Sivapalan, 2001)
Africa
An example how the electronic commerce has provided a lot of different
benefits for a developing country like Africa. “The African continent has the least
developed telecommunication network in the world” (Coeur, 1997). One of those
benefits is for consumers. Because of the size of Africa, electronic commerce
provides most of its citizens with availability to countless products from the Internet.
Without the Internet, many of Africa’s citizens would have a very hard time finding
things that are not available in their small town stores. Even if they were to find the
items that they were looking for, they would have to travel very long distances to
get them.
The Prime Minister of Mozambique, H.E. Mr. Pascoal Mocumbi, inaugurated
the first telemedicine link of Mozambique in 1999.  It is one of the firsts in Africa.
The central hospitals of Beira and Maputo are able to making use of standard low-
cost teleradiology equipment which provides support for the exchange and
visualization of images including radiographs as well as for transmitting laboratory
results or for communication (verbal or written messages). This example shows
how telemedicine can help overcome some of the serious shortages in health care
services in developing countries (Androuchko, 1998).
Nicaragua
Some electronic stores sell handcrafted goods from developing countries,
buyers get beautiful, unique, hand-crafted goods, and their purchase preserves
native arts, lets villagers stay at home rather than migrating to city factories, and

28   Vinaja
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
reduces poverty. Money from selling their wares has given villagers the means to
build new houses and workshops (Richman, 1999).
Mexico
For Mexico and other Latin American countries, tourism is of great economi-
cal impact; therefore, a large number of web sites are dedicated to support,
promote national and international tourism. For any developing country electronic
commerce is a great way to enter into foreign markets and compete in the rapidly
growing global economy. In the case of Mexico, the recent implementation of
NAFTA has led them to acquire some of the technological advancements from the
U.S. and Canada. This includes electronic commerce applications. According to
John F. Smith, the Chief Executive Officer and President of General Motors
Corporation, global communication links also make transportation faster and less
expensive than anybody would have imagined just a few years ago, which makes
it much simpler to conduct business. The benefits that electronic commerce brings
to Mexico are much the same as those in other countries, but since Mexico is a
developing country, it provides them even greater benefits. Electronic commerce
reduces inventory and overhead. In addition, distributors are able to customize the
products and services to better fit the needs of consumers, suppliers, and
employees.  Mexican consumers are also enjoying access to services and products
manufactured in foreign countries that were not accessible to them before. Many
Mexican nationals are now earning college credits from foreign universities who
offer on-line courses while at the comfort of their homes. Countries like Mexico are
coming along quickly and taking advantage of the benefits of electronic commerce.
Sri Lanka
Electronic commerce has opened many doors for the society in Sri Lanka; one
of the most important is an increase of their productivity and competitiveness in
international trade. Sri Lanka’s economy is based on exports of tea, textiles,
agricultural produce, graphite and manufacturing goods. At the beginning of 1997
and 1998, when Sri Lanka started to develop IT, “the electronic commerce trend
was about scoring hits at websites and selling products at very low prices, not taking
into consideration that selling at a loss doesn’t translate into profits” (Sri Lanka
Telecom, 2001a). Also to develop a better communication within the supply chain,
Sri Lanka formed a National EDI Committee in 1995 to provide network services
so businesses can improve computer-to-computer direct transfer of standard
business documents. A great example of this technology innovation is the Commer-
cial Bank. The strategy of this bank is to expand their retail presence by offering
ATMs and anywhere, anytime banking”. The major benefit from this initiative is that

The Economic and Social Impact of Electronic Commerce    29
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
they “offer a customized solution, which would suit each individual need (B2B or
B2C)” (Ariyadasa, 2000).
The benefits have not only reflected in the increment of their productivity, but
also in the implementation of education. The National Institute of Education
conducted a real time distance education program in Sri Lanka. This program is
carrying out on ISDN using video telephones. The director of the General
Education Institute mentioned “this effort will definitely take Sri Lanka to a new era
of education, a borderless education program” (Sri Lanka Telecomm 2001b). Also
the Lanka Experimental Academic and Research Network has provided email
facilities to more than 50 sites including universities and research institutions via dial
up lines (providing oversees connectivity).
FUTURE  TRENDS
Rapid expansion of the Internet holds substantial promise for developing
nations. They can benefit greatly from the Internet’s communication and information
delivery capabilities to help meet these needs. (Hay et al., 2000) Developing
countries have much to gain from that revolution in communication and information
access.
Electronic commerce will give developing countries an ‘increase in jobs,
wealth and health. With the creation of new jobs the economy improves. EC will
also provide help, services and jobs, the reduction of unemployment and the growth
of GDP, this will also result in an improvement of the living conditions of the
population.’ (African Development Forum, 2000)
EC will have potential economic advantages in travel, tourism, sale of locally
produced goods, and the banking industry, because it lowers the cost of processing
orders and payments and is accessible to the global market. Electronic commerce
allows small businesses to sell their products from anywhere in the world. At the long
run, producers will be able to provide better customer service and will enable
people in Third World Countries and rural areas to enjoy products and services that
otherwise are not available to them (Turban et al., 2000).
CONCLUSION
Many governments across the regions have recognized the tremendous
opportunities that the Internet offers, “priority of governments to support the
development of internet-access infrastructure, to stimulate growth and encourage
businesses and individuals to go on-line (Hillebrand, 1999). The changes electronic

30   Vinaja
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
commerce will bring are far-reaching. They require new frameworks for doing
business and a re-examination of government policies relating to commerce and
skills. Governments of the developing countries have finally realized that it is time
to increase wealth in their communities and for their people and are open to the ideas
of electronic commerce and the opportunities that are tied in to it (OECD, 2000).
It is essential, that developing countries increase their access to the Internet and
to electronic commerce for their ability to perform in the constant growing global
market. The expansion of electronic commerce to developing countries will
automatically enable their overall economy.
The acceptance of electronic commerce all over the world is giving everyone
the opportunities for advancement in all levels of society. The most important goal
is giving developing countries the chance for better living conditions, increasing job
opportunities, making services available, and providing better education and
greater economy wealth.
REFERENCES
African Development Forum (1999). Electronic commerce in Africa. 26, section
5.5.
Androuchko, L. (1998). Mozambique unveils leading edge telemedicine facility.
International Telecommunications Union, Report ITU/98-1, 30 January
1998 Available online at: http://www.itu.int/newsarchive/press/releases/1998/
98-01.html.
Ariyadasa, C. (2000). Sampath bank makes surprise move into stockbroking. The
Sunday Times, Sri Lanka, 12 November 2000. Available online at: http://
www.lacnet.org/suntimes/001112/busm.html.
Coeur de Roy, O. (1997). The African challenge: Internet, networking and
connectivity    activities in a developing environment. Third World Quarterly.
18(5),  883-898.
Cordelia, L. (1999). What’s holding back electronic commerce in Malaysia?. New
Straits Times- Management Times. August.
Gagné, P. (1998). A special ITU development initiative. International Telecom-
munications Union Bureau for Telecommunications Development, article for
ITU News, No. 3/98.
Goh, K. (1999). ITU teams up to push e-biz in developing world. IDG News
Service, Boston Bureau, September 29.
Hay, P., Jackson, S., & Case McMahon, C. (2000). Developing countries could
see fastest growth in over a decade but are hurt by trade barriers in rich

The Economic and Social Impact of Electronic Commerce    31
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
nations, Worldbank News Release No: 2001/126/S. Available online at:
http://wbln0018.worldbank.org/news/pressrelease.nsf/673fa6c5a2d
50a67852565e2006.
Hillebrand, M. (1999). Asian electronic commerce set to go. Electronic com-
merce Times, May 6.
International Telecommunications Union (1999). Electronic commerce for devel-
oping countries. Report on the electronic commerce survey conducted in the
framework of World Telecommunication Day 1999. Available online at: http:/
/www.itu.int/newsarchive/wtd/1999/report.html.
National Law Center for Inter-American Free Trade (2000). Panama: proposed
regulation of electronic commerce. Available online at: http://www.natlaw.com/
ecommerce/docs/stpnec1.htm.
Ntoko, A. (1999). ITU to team up with world trade center and world internet
secure key to expand electronic commerce in developing countries. Telecom-
munication Development Bureau. Report ITU/99-12, 17 September.
Available online at: http://www.itu.int/newsarchive/press/releases/1999/
12.html.
Ntoko, A. (2000). E-business infrastructure being deployed in more than 80
countries under ITU’s electronic commerce for developing countries (EC-
DC) project. Telecommunication Development Bureau, 14 July 2000.
Available online at: http://www.itu.int/newsarchive/press/releases/2000/
15.html.
Ochiengs, C. & Amey, C.F. (1998). Electronic commerce for developing coun-
tries (EC-DC): a special ITU development initiative. International Telecom-
munications Union. Available online at: www.itu.int.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2000). The
Economic and Social Impacts of Electronic Commerce: Preliminary
Findings and Research Agenda, ISBN 9264169725. Available online at
http://oecdpublications.gfi-nb.com/cgi-bin/OECDBookShop.storefront/EN/
product/931999011P1.
Richman, D. (1999). Advocates hope for fair trade electronic commerce: devel-
oping countries’ restrictions a concern. Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Novem-
ber 26. Available online at: http://seattlep-i.nwsource.com/business/
ecom26.shtml.
Sadwosky, G. (1996). The internet society in developing countries. Nov/Dec
1996. Available online at: www.isoc.org/oti/articles/196/sadwosky.html.
Sivapalan, V. (2001). Need to rethink business. New Straits Times- Manage-
ment Times. May 2001.

32   Vinaja
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Sri Lanka Telecom (2001a). SLT sponsors National Institute of Education’s
pioneering effort in borderless education. 8 January, Available online at: http:/
/www.slt.lk/inpages/newshiglights/26_sltsponsers.htm.
Sri Lanka Telecom (2001b). SLT Conducts A Seminar On Electronic commerce,
26th April 2001, http://www.slt.lk/inpages/newshiglights/39_sltconducts.htm
Turban, E., Lee, J., King, D. & Chung, H. M. (2000). Electronic Commerce: A
Managerial Perspective. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
U. S. Department of Commerce - National Trade Data Bank. (1999). Panama
Marketing U. S. Products And Services. Available online at: http://
www.tradeport.org/ts/countries/panama/market.html.

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    33
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter III
Adverse Effects of
E-Commerce
Sushil K. Sharma
Ball State University, USA
Jatinder N.D. Gupta
University of Alabama in Huntsville, USA
ABSTRACT
E-commerce is the fastest growing industry worldwide and is one of the most
rapidly evolving areas of national and international trade. The Internet has
become an incredibly powerful tool for conducting business electronically.
Companies have taken the proactive approach and are jumping on the new
way to conduct business. E-commerce enables organizational change and
helps organizations to conduct business with improved efficiencies and
productivity. E-commerce is credited with empowering employees and
knowledge workers, by giving them easy access to virtually unlimited
information. E-commerce technologies have helped nations to accelerate
their economic growth and to provide more opportunities for the businesses
to grow. Meanwhile, it has also created many challenges and adverse effects,
such as concerns over privacy, consumer protection, and security of credit
card purchases, displacement of workers (especially low-status ones), and is
charged with having a negative impact on quality of work life. This chapter
describes the various adverse effects that have accompanied the advent of the
Internet and e-commerce revolution.

34   Sharma and Gupta
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet heralds an unprecedented evolution in the transformation of all
business and communication. In 1991, the Internet had less than 3 million users
around the world and its application to electronic commerce (e-commerce) was
non-existent.  By 1999, an estimated 250 million users accessed the Internet and
made purchases online worth approximately $110 billion (Anonymous, 2000).  E-
commerce is defined as buying and selling of information, products, and services via
computer networks or Internet (Anonymous, 2000, Sharma & Gupta, 2001).
Electronic commerce promises to be the momentum behind a new wave of
economic growth (Mariotti & Sgobbi, 2001). Internet and electronic commerce
technologies are transforming the entire economy and changing business models,
revenue streams, customer bases, and supply chains (Green, 2001).  New business
models are emerging in every industry of the New Economy. In these emerging
models, intangible assets such as relationships, knowledge, people, brands, and
systems are taking center stage (Boulton et al., 2000; McGarvey, 2001).
The relationship and interaction of customers, suppliers, strategic partners,
agents, or distributors has been entirely changed. E-commerce has already changed
the way traditional business transactions are conducted. It has improved business
value by fundamentally changing the ways products are conceived, marketed,
delivered, and supported. Companies are using the Internet as a medium to improve
the quality of their customer relationships, whether by delivering better service
through an e-mail bulletin board, or by lowering costs through the network enables
just-in-time inventory control. According to the Forrester Research Group, in
1997, U.S. Internet commerce accounted for $8 billion goods and services. By
2002, Internet commerce is projected to rise to $327 billion (Penbera, 1999).
The Internet’s growth and e-commerce has begun to create fundamental
change to government, societies, and economies with social, economic and political
implications. While the Internet revolution has created enormous upheaval for
business by offering e-commerce solutions, it has also created plenty of opportu-
nities for individuals and businesses in the new economy. On the positive side, e-
commerce offers an opportunity for organizations to conduct business through a
variety of new business models that help businesses to sell their products and
services on line to consumers. E-commerce is helping organizations to reduce
transaction, sales, marketing, and advertising costs. E-commerce is also helping
businesses to reach global markets at low costs to conduct business 24 hours per
day, 7 days per week, 365 days per year. The value of e-commerce was estimated
at around $650 billion worldwide in 2000 (Bassols & Vickery, 2001). According
to Frank Gens, senior vice president of Internet Research at Analyst Company
IDC, the e-commerce market will be worth $900 billion by the year 2003. Gens

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    35
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
predicts that customers will spend about $2 million a minute on the Internet (Town,
1999).
The impact of e-commerce is realized in many different ways both positive and
adverse. Many of the benefits come from improved consumer convenience,
expanded choices and lower prices. E-commerce has provided opportunity for
better interactions with partners, suppliers, and targeted customers for service and
relationships. E-commerce can improve product promotion through mass-
customization and one-to-one marketing.  It offers a new direct channel for selling
existing products, reduces the cost of some processes (e.g., information distribu-
tion), and reduces the time to market.  E-commerce also improves customer service
through automated services and round-the-clock operation, providing the custom-
ers with choice, information, convenience, time, and savings with improvements that
add value to their shopping. E-commerce can also be used as an interactive medium
that fosters social interaction. Many consumers and sellers use the Internet not only
as a tool for information gathering and e-commerce, but also view the Web as a
means to keep in touch and interact with each other. People often prefer web surfing
to watching TV because it is a more interactive medium for entertainment on the
Internet.
Although e-commerce has provided a number of opportunities and benefits to
customers and businesses, concerns have surfaced about privacy, security, frauds,
consumer protection, and abuse of personal information. Many equate the loss of
privacy with loss of personal freedom (Borck, 2001).  On the other hand, e-
commerce also affects such areas as composition of trade, labor markets, taxation,
and prices.  Some of these effects of e-commerce are unintentional and create
adverse business and personal conditions that could have societal consequences.
This chapter describes the various adverse effects or problems created by the
advent of the Internet and e-commerce revolution.  While the adverse effects of e-
commerce and the Internet do not fit into mutually exclusive categories, we
categorize them into three hierarchical levels: societal and economic, business, and
individual and focus discussion on the adverse affects each of these levels.
ADVERSE  SOCIETAL  AND
 ECONOMIC  EFFECTS
As e-commerce continues to grow rapidly, it could have significant effects on
the structure and functioning of a society at an aggregate level. The impacts of these
changes are diverse and likely to widen the digital divide among nations, alter the
composition of trade, disrupt labor markets, and change taxation (Anonymous,

36   Sharma and Gupta
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
2000).  In this section, we briefly discuss some major adverse societal impacts of
e-commerce.
Widening Digital Divide
The term Digital divide means a lack of equal access to computer technolo-
gies and the Internet in particular, creating a gap between those who have and those
who have not. One dimension of the digital gap follows demographics of gender,
race, and social class.  Another dimension follows the economic gap between
wealthy and poor countries. Millions of technologically disenfranchised have-nots,
who cannot afford the cost of that technology and training, are walled off from
potentially life-changing tools and knowledge.  Therefore, they feel isolated in the
virtual world. For example, although growth has been very strong in Europe,
particularly in Sweden and Finland, the United States still accounts for more than
three-quarters of all e-commerce transactions. Despite the promise of “borderless”
trade, most e-commerce is still national or within the continents (Bassols & Vickery,
2001).
The digital divide gap between the technology haves and have-nots presum-
ably is also across white, wealthy, and urban Americans with computers and
Internet access on the one hand and minority, poor, and rural Americans who lack
computers and Web access on the other (Quay, 2001). Today the real digital divide
is the chasm between those who use Internet technologies to improve their lives and
those who do not. Another digital divide is based on geography. Disparities in the
location and quality of Internet infrastructure, even the quality of phone lines, have
created gaps in access (Quay, 2001). Hindered by poverty and a poor telecom-
munications infrastructure, Internet penetration rates in the developing regions
range from less than 1 percent to 3 percent, which is far below the 25 percent to
50 percent penetration rates seen in many wealthy and developed nations (Rombel,
2000).  E-commerce and access to the Internet create an enormous disparity in
wealth and a great need to spread and disperse this wealth and connectedness for
a socially sustainable benefit.
A Threat of Information Warfare
In information warfare, hackers, by controlling an organization’s computer
systems, obtain a significant advantage by changing the flow of information, altering
information, or shutting down a system completely.  A computer system may not
only be shut down, but also could be destroyed by infiltration and distribution of
various computer viruses.  The breakdown of major information systems such as
banking networks or electricity grids could be a devastating event, altering the
economy of a nation and the daily life of its population.  While the online

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    37
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
environments such as e-commerce are good for offering online products and
services, these environments pose a threat to governments. Online environments
are vulnerable to attacks from inside and outside the companies. Many of the recent
virus attacks triggered by hackers targeting specific sites indicate how hackers can
affect businesses. A country where almost all the systems such as electricity, water,
transportation, and businesses are automated becomes a major target for informa-
tion warfare.
Many experts fear that abuse of online environments may become a weapon
to overthrow governments. Information warfare is definitely a concern of most
nations as can be seen by the large number of nations researching and developing
offensive information warfare systems.  This increased awareness of the potential
damage cyber attacks can inflict has caused most nations to research defensive
information warfare tactics (Sharma & Gupta, 2001).
Abuse of Power
Computer matching is a technique employed to verify personal information by
cross-referencing it with a separate, unrelated database. The dangers of computer
matching include the abuse of power, the existence of outdated data and the
possibility of information leaks. In 1988, the United States Congress passed the
Computer Matching Privacy and Protection Act. The legislation permitted govern-
ment agencies to compare information from two or more sources to detect
anomalies. If information stored in different databases varies, people may be denied
certain privileges based on wrong records or outdated data. Some fear that the
results of computer matching are as effective as door-to-door searches and can
indict them for mistakes of others if wrong data is used. It again leads to invasion
of privacy (Shattuck, 1996).
Customers may give false personal information while shopping or surfing on the
net to avoid being profiled by marketing companies. Due to privacy concerns,
people may intentionally provide incorrect information about themselves, creating
problems by having wrong information recorded in some databases. Incorrect
information can create misery when used and exchanged by various agencies with
banks, and health organizations. Incorrect information can cost a job, opportunity
or the denial of a bank loan or mortgage. Data can be misconstrued in a variety of
strange ways. If information is not verified properly, it can lead to drastic results. The
verification of information by cross-referencing can also lead to positive conse-
quences for both individuals and organizations. Therefore, its negative impact must
be minimized so that individuals and organizations can benefit from its positive
results.

38   Sharma and Gupta
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Impact on Children
The interactive and multimedia nature of e-commerce technologies provides
tremendous opportunities for children to access resources to attain educational
goals. At the same time, it presents unique challenges for protecting the privacy of
young children. Since the Internet allows children to buy items online, it exposes
them (children) to messages that are more commercial. Children may be required
to fill out questionnaires in order to enter sites, join clubs, play games, move to
“special” portions of a Web site. They may be invited to give personal information
in the course of participating in a chat room. During their online buying, children may
innocently provide information that can lead to receiving undesired material
(pornography) or junk mail. This adds another burden for parents to monitor their
children’ surfing on the net.
Impact on Economic Performance
A number of studies have attempted to quantify the impact of e-commerce at
the macroeconomic level. Some studies credit e-commerce for an increase in the
level of GDP by 2 to 5 percent (Penbara, 1999, Anonymous, 2000). These studies,
however, are based on a number of quite restrictive assumptions and their results
cannot be interpreted as a positive indication. In assessing the implications for
macroeconomic policy, it should be borne in mind that the Internet also boosts
aggregate demand.
Friedman (1999) has argued that Internet related technologies could increase
the speed of financial operations, which raises the issue as to how interest rates
should be set and whether the short end of interest setting needs to become shorter,
i.e., time units smaller than a day. Some economists have even envisaged a world
where technological developments emasculate altogether the monetary controls of
central banks (King, 1999). This could occur if new technologies (and regulators)
permitted real time pricing and exchange of goods across the Internet without the
intercession of an independent monetary system administered by a central bank. In
such an environment, the government earns no seignorage and would no longer be
able to provide liquidity support by printing money.
In the event that electronic monies do gain a sizeable share of payment systems,
their close substitutability with other payment instruments raises issues about the
definition of monetary aggregates, their stability and the ability for central banks to
control money supply. Moreover, seigniorage revenues accruing to central banks
could fall. Another concern with electronic monies is the possibility that they will be
used for money laundering (Anonymous, 2000).

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    39
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Encouragement of Monopoly Practices
Despite signs that monopolistic practices are increasing, including the more
obvious vertical integration of firms within the information industry as a whole, there
has been strong countervailing pressure against government intervention in Internet
activities. Others believe that a government-inspired monopoly in e-commerce
would be less onerous than a natural monopoly under the assumption that
government-protected monopolies are easier to unwind. Of course, experience
demonstrates that although monopolies aided by government are less obvious to the
public, they still promote inefficiencies and are very difficult to eliminate (Penbera,
1999).
Impact on Tax, Trade and Regulatory Policies
E-commerce has a strong impact on taxation and tax policy. Concerns have
been expressed that e-commerce could result in the erosion of tax bases.
Consumption taxes are levied on the principle of taxation at the place of consump-
tion and according to rates set in individual countries, or in individual states in the
case of federal nations. E-commerce, however, has the potential to undermine the
application of domestic and national tax rules. Tax planning for an e-business differs
from tax planning for a traditional bricks-and-mortar company. Historically, the
generation of income depended on the physical presence of assets and activities.
This physical presence, or permanent establishment, generally determined which
jurisdiction had the primary right to tax the income generated. Because of the growth
of electronic commerce, new e-business models (including digital marketplaces,
on-line catalogs, virtual communities, subscription-based information services, on-
line auctions, and portals) have emerged. Each allows taxpayers to conduct
business and generate income in a country with little or no physical presence in that
country. The separation of assets and activities from the source of the income
represents a significant departure from historic business models. This change
creates new tax planning challenges and opportunities (Olin, 2001; Anonymous,
2000).
A Few European countries suggest implementation of a tax called “bit tax”
(i.e., a tax on the “bits” of information zooming around computer networks). These
countries support such a tax, partly because Europe (with high rates of VAT) stands
to lose the most from untaxed electronic sales. In America, which does not have a
federal sales tax, the idea has not found much favor, and the present US
administration rejects the idea of any new taxes on the Internet.
The basic problem with a ‘bit tax’ is that it is indiscriminate: it taxes not just on-
line transactions, but all digital communications. In addition, the question of

40   Sharma and Gupta
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
valuation would be difficult to determine. More importantly, it is argued that duties
will crush the development of e-commerce and stunt its growth. If implemented in
some countries, it would simply drive business offshore and on-line transactions
would simply take place in a state or country where there is no such tax. Since trade
policy - like tax policy - is based on such distinctions, governments may find it
difficult to determine jurisdiction and tariff revenue rights. Moreover, the laws and
regulations that a consumer relies on for protection at home may not apply in the
merchant’s country. Indeed, in some quarters, there are concerns that the scope for
the Internet to transcend national boundaries could emasculate the ability of
regulatory bodies to fulfil their objectives. Thus, there is a need to update regulatory
frameworks and strengthen co-operation between regulatory bodies to achieve the
goals of economic regulations without jeopardizing the efficiencies likely to be
associated with the growth of e-commerce (Penbera, 1999; Anonymous, 2000).
Impact on Employment and Labor Policy
The growth of e-commerce is likely to have both direct and indirect impacts
on labor markets as well as the composition of employment. Since e-commerce
may create more knowledge-based products, it is likely to drive widespread
changes in the labor market, shifting the composition of workers required to
produce and deliver a product or service (Anonymous, 2000). There would be shift
in kind of skills needed. Faster rates of innovation and diffusion may also be
associated with a higher turnover of jobs. This may create more turbulence, as
workers would need a skill upgrade from time to time. This may result into change
in swift labor policies for reallocation of labor to the changing needs of the economy
(Anonymous, 2000).
ADVERSE  BUSINESS  EFFECTS
While e-commerce has enhanced business effectiveness and efficiency, it
has created some adverse effects as well. This section discusses major adverse
business effects of e-commerce.
Emerging Monopolistic Trends
Since e-commerce transcends geographical boundaries, many big firms with
known brands may not only expand their markets, but may also enter into new
business activities across the broad spectrum of business activities. This may help
to reduce the costs and prices, but it would have a greater danger of creating a
monopoly of e-commerce by a few corporations or networks of corporations.

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    41
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Many firms may use a low price strategy to grab the market and eliminate the
competition. Several mergers and alliances, in which two or more firms combine to
achieve a large market share and have large economies of scale, can result in
eliminating meaningful competition (Penbera, 1999).
Impact on Competition Policy
E-commerce offers the ability to expand markets. By expanding the size of the
market, the e-commerce could create opportunities to dominate markets. Persis-
tence of price dispersion across Internet markets and the absence of noticeable
price reductions has led to concerns that the cost structure of some Internet
markets, which could ultimately result in a less competitive industry (Anonymous,
2000).
The scope for noncompetitive behavior is perhaps strongest among “digital”
and knowledge intensive products. For such products, once the first copy is
produced (like a software application), the cost of a second copy is close to zero.
Due to the large marketing capital needed to develop visibility and a brand name,
start-up companies are finding it difficult to enter the market. Low contestability is
resulting in highly concentrated scenarios where one big brand takes it all and this
has made an impact on competition policy (Penbera, 1999; Anonymous, 2000).
Impact on Labor Costs and Employment
E-commerce is facilitating the shift from the mass labor paradigm to a
knowledge-worker paradigm. Productivity enhancements and labor cost savings
are major driving forces behind e-commerce activities. E-commerce efficiencies
have displaced thousands of clerical personnel in manufacturing and service sectors
and created large gains in unemployment among less-skilled workers. This shift has
enormous economic implications for more populated countries that have relatively
cheap mass labor available and use cheap labor as strategy to improve their
competitiveness and overall growth. The shift from mass to knowledge labor has
already created a shortage of knowledge workers in several countries where the
education system and technology infrastructure have not been very strong (Penbera,
1999).
Impact on Prices
Electronic commerce is widely expected to improve efficiency due to reduced
transaction and search costs, increased competition and more streamlined business
processes. Lower search costs may also lead to Internet consumers being more
sensitive to price changes. By reducing search costs and increasing the flow of
information, e-commerce might effectively shift power from producers to consum-

42   Sharma and Gupta
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
ers and make it harder for firms to maintain higher prices (Bakos, 1997). However,
empirical evidence does not support this claim in all cases. Brynjolfsson and Smith
(1999) found that average prices on certain items in a particular industry sold
through the Internet were lower than their equivalent purchased through traditional
retailers. However, in certain cases prices of goods sold through the Internet were
higher than those charged by traditional retailers. Brynjolfsson and Smith (1999)
justified this phenomenon by arguing that certain reductions in cost are offset by
higher overhead costs elsewhere. They also indicate that increases or decreases in
price depend on the size of the market.
Cyber Slacking
Businesses worldwide are clamoring to get their hands into the ‘e-world’ and
all its benefits. Most companies today view the Internet as an essential tool for their
employees. The Internet is not just regarded as a method of keeping up-to-date,
but as a method of disseminating company wide information and flattening the
corporate structure. Many companies are also turning to e-mail and networked
conferences as a method of keeping their global divisions coordinated and current.
These technologies are implemented in the hope of seeing productivity rise and
quality increase but companies have not seen corresponding productivity increases.
Employees use the Internet for entertainment and other personal uses. This activity
has been coined as cyber slacking. In the new-wired world, cyber slacking is an
important social and economic issue. Its effects are seen in debates about computer
productivity, Internet censorship, computer monitoring, legal considerations and
managerial challenges.
Companies equip their employees with access to the Internet to increase
productivity. Therefore, cyber slacking is especially troublesome to these compa-
nies as the tools that were bought to increase productivity can often be found to
lessen it. Companies must often police Internet use, which has resulted in some
publicized firings of involved employees. This has increasing societal implications on
companies. As companies crack down on inappropriate use of the Internet, more
people feel threatened at work. Thus, an environment of tension, paranoia and
“shoulder-looking” easily arises. This affects the way employees feel at work and
about going to work (Gupta & Sharma, 2002).
Direct Mail Marketing
Most people have experienced the menace of direct mail when they receive
undesired mail from unknown persons or companies. When people make online
purchases, companies may ask them to disclose personal information and prefer-
ences through surveys that are available online. Business web sites ask visitors to

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    43
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
supply personal data, particularly when information, services or merchandise are
requested. Companies store information on consumers and profile them in order to
market items that may be of interest to them.
Some organizations sell collected information as a good or service to other
potential marketers (Ackerman et al, 1996).  Companies may also mine data from
public records like phone books, automobile registrations, driver’s licenses or
home ownership documents located in city halls. This information is garnered by
companies and in a database for marketing purposes (Hatch, 1996). This practice
can lead to the endless junk mail that was never requested. Direct mail marketing
is a form of privacy invasion. Junk e-mail is becoming very pervasive, with one bulk
e-mailer, Cyber Promotions, boasting that it sends 1.5 million messages a day
(Zaret & Sawyer, 2000).
ADVERSE  INDIVIDUAL  EFFECTS
E-commerce can significantly affect individual freedom and living conditions.
The adverse effects of e-commerce and Internet on the individual include social
isolation, loss of security and privacy and loss of individuality. In this section, we
briefly discuss these adverse individual impacts of e-commerce.
Social Isolation
E-commerce has far reaching implications in a social context. On one hand, it
provides all the comfort of shopping from home; on the other hand, it removes old-
fashioned human interactions for social needs. Take for instance the case of
telecommuting that is becoming a reality. Today many organizations allow their
employees to work from their homes. It is predicted that by 2010, the separation
between work and home will have blurred, and areas once zoned for commercial
use will be converted into live-work condominiums. The primary motivator for
worker participation in telework programs is the desire to increase overall
productivity through autonomy. Employees are able to choose their work hours in
which they feel they are most efficient and can reduce the number of interruptions
by co-workers and the stress of daily commuting. Therefore, they have an increased
desire to work. In addition, individuals generally have more free time and are able
to work overtime, without spending long hours away from their families.
There are some positive aspects of telecommuting to organizations and
society. With increased employee autonomy, organizations are able to retain their
employees by providing more flexibility in their work schedule.  Organizations
benefit from fewer costs in recruiting, training, and disability costs.  Organizations
are also able to locate satellite offices in less densely populated areas. Environmen-

44   Sharma and Gupta
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
tal issues decrease with the elimination of carbon dioxide from commuting cars.
Quality of life in general increases where parents are able to spend more time with
their children and can play a more dominant role in their community. Nevertheless,
the negative aspect of telecommuting should not be ignored. The chief problem
appears to be the fear of losing touch.
The stimulation of interacting with colleagues may be lost and the resultant
gradual, social isolation may affect opportunities for promotion and the selection of
career-advancing assignments. Improved conditions and working from home will
be limited to those wearing white collars. The working classes will probably remain
9-to-5ers in hands-on, site-specific jobs. Therefore telecommuting can increase the
gap between social classes. Telecommuting could be seen as a different social class
with a different set of rules. The fact that traditional workers could be seen as failures
in such a society further increases rifts between social classes.
As the country’s young people age, and gain employment, they will increas-
ingly use e-commerce to purchase many consumer goods. This will serve to limit
the need for new regional shopping malls and strip-commercial centers. There will
be increased pressure for warehousing and distribution centers to meet the new
demand created by e-commerce (Kemp, 2001).
Loss of Security
E-commerce offerings not only provide new opportunities for customers and
businesses but also open companies up to security vulnerabilities. Privacy and
security concerns in e-commerce are under intense pressure from consumers,
lawmakers and regulators to provide foolproof security safeguards and policies to
protect their systems and customer privacy (Miyazaki & Fernandez, 2000).
Security refers to the integrity of the data storage, processing and transmitting
systems and includes concerns about the reliability of hardware and software, the
protection against intrusion, or infiltration by unauthorized users. While buying
online, people naively believe that their communication is private and secure.
Unfortunately, in many cases, that is not true and messages are insecure and
vulnerable to hackers. Any message sent on the Internet typically travels through
many computers. At each computer, it may be intercepted, read and even changed.
Skilled hackers may tap into communication particularly if it is financial in nature and
can benefit them. In spite of a number of security technologies used to protect
communication, expert hackers can still access sensitive data.
A variety of security breaches commonly take place in today’s world and often
are not reported by organizations. In the 2001 Computer Crime and Security
Survey (Computer Security Institute/Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2001), 91
percent of respondents said they had experienced a security breach, but only 36

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    45
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
percent reported the incident to law enforcement. The 1997 Computer Security
Institute/Federal Bureau of Investigation survey on computer crime and security
revealed that 75 percent of respondents had reported financial losses due to various
computer security breaches. These breaches ranged from financial fraud, theft of
proprietary information, sabotage and computer viruses on the high end to Internet
abuse and laptop theft on the low end (Rapalus, 1997; Morgan, 2001). Reports
indicate that hackers have penetrated the security systems of many companies
including America Online, the world’s biggest online service provider. Forrester
Research estimates that $12.2 billion in e-commerce revenue was lost to privacy
concerns in 2000 after $2.8 billion was lost in 1999 (Rombel, 2001).
Several bankrupt online retailers in Europe and other companies were
reportedly selling customer lists for much needed cash despite earlier promises in
privacy statements never to do so (Rombel, 2001). Many network vulnerability
scanners and intrusion detection systems have been developed and implemented
but systems still seem to be vulnerable.
Loss of Privacy
Privacy is defined as an individual’s right to be left alone, free from interference
or surveillance from other parties. On one hand, the Internet has provided
opportunity for conducting business online in the form of e-commerce, but on the
other hand, organizations may be secretly profiling and collecting information about
customers. Spamming, which is the practice of sending out unsolicited e-mail, is
growing because it costs so little to send out millions of messages or advertisements
electronically. Many prominent high-technology companies have already been
caught attempting to quietly collect information about their customers via the
Internet (Gupta & Sharma, 2002).
Privacy has become a key issue in the digital age. Technological advances
make it easy for companies to obtain personal information and to monitor online
activities, thus creating a major potential for abuse. There are three areas of concern
in the privacy debate: employers monitoring employee computers and Internet use
in the workplace, advertising and market research companies collecting and selling
personally identifiable information based on consumers’ online activities, and
information brokers selling readily available personal information from public-
record databases online (Blotzer, 2000).
Most companies collect information about the visitors who visit a company’s
site. Files such as “cookies” are planted on a computer by the web sites that are
surfed so that they track down the surfing details of users. Most users are blissfully
unaware of the electronic footprint they leave when they surf web sites. Cookies are
short pieces of data used by web servers to help identify web users. Cookies are

46   Sharma and Gupta
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
used to identify a web user and to track their browsing habits. Cookies help
companies to prepare marketing databases that enable companies to better sell
their products and services to consumer demands. By performing statistical analysis
of database information on consumers, companies prepare direct mailer lists.
Companies collect information about customers’ buying habits and preferences so
they can customize their products and services. At times, customers blame
companies for infringing on their privacy by collecting the information through
cookies. While cookies may be desirable from a company’s point of view,
customers feel that organizations collect too much private information and may
attempt to sell it to a third party of potential marketers. The ability of marketers to
track surfing and buying patterns can and does lead to abuses.
E-Mail Monitoring
The use of e-mail in the workplace produces many conflicting opinions in terms
of its use and abuse both by the user (i.e., the employee), and the service provider
(i.e., the employer). This causes confusion with the legal and ethical guidelines that
must be followed with this communication medium in order to maintain both the
rights of the user (i.e., privacy) and the rights of the employer (i.e., monitoring). The
primary goal of a corporation in monitoring its employee’s e-mails is to prevent
those that are either vulgar, offensive, or those that compromise the company’s best
interests (i.e., breach of confidentiality). However, providing managers with the
means to monitor their employees can result in an abuse of power. It creates
confusion among employees and corporations as to where their loyalties lie
(Ambrose & Gelb, 2001).
Loss of Individuality
Maintaining a customer base has become very important asset in today’s
economy for the organizations to gain competitive advantage. Therefore, organiza-
tions use sophisticated tools to reach customers and get their personal data
recorded into their databases. This helps organizations to customize the products
and services as per the needs of the customers. In the coming years, organizations
will continue to seek personal information about their employees and customers
since it is a source of power. Many organizations use cookies or other technological
tools to collect information about their customers, their preferences and items they
wish to buy. Organizations use data-intensive techniques like profiling and data
mining to aid in precision marketing or to customize products for one-to-one
marketing. This information could also aid in connecting people of similar interests
effectively forming various new world wide social clubs and hobby groups.

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    47
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Companies can sell their customer information as a good or service much as if a
magazine publisher would sell its mailing lists.
Many believe that e-commerce technology is eroding personal privacy
because consumers have no control over their personal data that merchants have
collected during their shopping experience. In addition, personal record-keeping
systems of merchants are not regulated or restricted. People fear that if the trend
of collecting information continues, they may lose their individuality since they would
have no control over the information about them (Kling & Linowes, 1996).
CONCLUSIONS
E-commerce involves buying and selling on the Internet among businesses and
consumers. E-commerce has provided opportunity for better interactions with
partners, suppliers, and targeted customers for service and relationships. E-
commerce provides the customers with choice, information, convenience, time, and
savings with improvements that add value to their shopping. However, loss of
privacy with e-commerce, security issues, increasingly sophisticated frauds, abuse
of personal information, and impact on prices have aroused as the main concerns.
Companies increasingly rely on the collection and use of information about
consumers for many purposes, including targeted advertising and marketing,
maximizing the convenience of electronic commerce, and personalizing customer
service and support. In many ways, the creation and maintenance of databases
containing information about consumers and their activities can provide a “win-win”
situation for both private companies and individuals. It enables companies to
operate more efficiently, lower costs, and streamline marketing and promotion
efforts while simultaneously giving consumers access to “customized” information
about products and services that correlates to their personal preferences. The
collection and use of personally identifiable information has, however, raised
significant concerns from lawmakers, regulators, and private litigants, especially
when it involves sensitive information such as financial or medical information and
information related to children.
The e-commerce revolution, affordability, technology and the skill to use has
been restricted to the world’s information haves. E-commerce infrastructure is still
not available in many countries and even if available in some countries, it is limited
to a few cities. Much of the world’s population is part of the information have-nots
— those who lack the technology and training of the technologically privileged. E-
commerce promoters must also be challenged to try to bridge the gap between
these “have and have-nots” in order to form a singular society and not a society
separated by a digital divide.

48   Sharma and Gupta
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The e-commerce and Internet revolution could adversely affect the ability of
a society, business or an individual in various ways. As e-commerce and Internet
use becomes a common household and business phenomenon, strategies for
minimizing the adverse effects of such impacts must be developed and implemented.
It is only then that we can realize the full potential of these emerging powerful
technologies and philosophies.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, M. S, Allen, J. P. & Kling, R. (Eds.) (1996). Information
Entrepreneurialism and Controversy (2nd ed.), San Diego: Academic
Press.
Ambrose, Jr., S.F. & Gelb, J.W. (2001). Consumer privacy regulation and
litigation. The Business Lawyer, 56 (3), pp. 1157-1178, Chicago.
Anonymous (2000). E-commerce: Impacts and policy challenges. Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development. OECD Economic Outlook,
(67), 193-213.
Bakos, J.Y. (1997). Reducing buyer search costs: Implications for electronic
marketplaces. Management Science, 43, (12), pp. 1676-1692.
Bassols, V.L. & Vickery, G. (2001). E-commerce: The truth behind the web.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. The OECD
Observer, 24, pp. 17-19.
Borck, J.R. (2001). Currency conversion, fraud prevention are hurdles to success-
ful global commerce, InfoWorld, 23 (6), p. 55.
Boulton, R.E.S., Libert, B.D. & Samek, S.M. (2000). A business model for the
new economy. The Journal of Business Strategy , 21 (4), pp. 29-35.
Computer Security Institute/Federal Bureau of Investigation (2001). Computer
crime and security survey. Computer Security Issues & Trends, 7 (1).
Green, P.L. (2001). E-finance business models evolve, Global Finance, 15 (3),
pp. 30-35, New York.
Gupta, J.N.D & Sharma, S.K. (2001). Cyber shopping and privacy. In A.
Gangopadhyay (Ed.), Managing Business with Electronic Commerce:
Issues and Trends, Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing, pp. 235-249.
Hatch, D. (1996). Privacy: How much data do direct marketers really need. In R.
Kling (Ed.), Computerization and Controversy (2nd ed.), San Diego:
Academic Press.
Kemp, R.L. (2001). Cities in the 21st century: The forces of change. Economic
Development Review, 17 (3), pp. 56-62.

Adverse Effects of E-Commerce    49
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Kling, R. (1996). Information technologies and the shifting balance between
privacy and social control. In R. Kling (Ed.), Computerization and Contro-
versy: Value Conflicts and Social Choices, (2nd ed.), San Diego, CA:
Academic Press, pp. 614-636.
Linowes, D. F. (1996). Your personal information has gone public. In R. Kling
(Ed.), Computerization and Controversy: Value Conflicts and Social
Choices, (2nd ed.), San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 637-642.
Mariotti, S. & Sgobbi, F. (2001). Alternative paths for the growth of e-commerce.
Futures, 33 (2), pp. 109-125, Kidlington.
McGarvey, R. (2001). New corporate ethics for the new economy, World Trade,
14 (3), p. 43.
Miyazaki, A.D. & Fernandez, A. (2000). Internet privacy and security: An
examination of online retailer disclosures. Journal of Public Policy &
Marketing, 19 (1), pp. 54-61.
Morgan, L. (2001). Be afraid...be very afraid — Malicious attacks are on the rise,
and trends are harder to predict-step one is admitting your company is
vulnerable. Internetweek, 843, pp. 37-38.
Penbera, J.J. (1999). E-commerce: Economics and regulation. S.A.M. Advanced
Management Journal, 64 (4),  pp. 39-47.
Olin, J. (2001). Reducing international e-commerce taxes. World Trade, 14 (3),
64-67, Troy.
Quay, R. (2001). Bridging the digital divide. Planning, 67 (7), pp. 12-17,
Chicago.
Rapalus, P. (1997). Security measures for protecting confidential information on
the Internet and intranets. Employment Relations Today, 24, pp. 49-58.
Rombel, A. (2000). The global digital divide. Global Finance, 14 (12), p. 47.
Sharma, S.K. & Gupta, J.N.D (2001). E-commerce opportunities and challenges.
In M. Singh and T. Teo (Eds.), E-Commerce Diffusion: Strategies and
Challenges, Australia: Heidelberg Press, pp. 21-42.
Shattuck, J. (1996). Computer matching is a serious threat to individual rights. In
R. Kling (Ed.), Computerization and Controversy (2nd ed.), San Deigo,
CA: Academic Press.
Town, B. (1999). E-commerce - tomorrow’s marketplace, Online & CD - ROM
Review, 23 (2), pp. 107-109.
Zaret,-E. & Sawyer, S. (2000). Protect yourself online. Macworld, 17 (7), pp. 64-
69.

50   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter IV
The Emerging Need for
E-Commerce Accepted
Practice (ECAP)
G. Erwin
Cape Technikon, South Africa
S. Singh
University of South Africa, South Africa
ABSTRACT
With the rapid expansion of the Internet and constant technological advances,
it is clear that e-commerce will reshape methods of the business world.
Government, large corporations, medium and small business now have to
conduct their electronic activities in an accountable, transparent and well-
structured way. Unlike traditional business recording, such as accounting,
with Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (GAAP), no guidelines or
frameworks exist that recognize e-commerce issues.

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    51
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
INTRODUCTION
“The newest innovations, which we label information technolo-
gies, have begun to alter the manner in which we do business and
create value, often in ways not readily foreseeable even five years
ago. ”
Alan Greenspan
Chair, Federal Reserve Board
May 6, 1999
A large multinational corporation once attempted to sell baby food in an
African nation by using packaging designed for its home country market. The
company’s regular label showed a picture of a baby with a caption describing the
kind of baby food contained in the jar. African consumers took one look at the
product and were horrified. They interpreted the label to mean that the jar contained
ground-up babies (Ricks, 1993)!
This example serves to illustrate that the design of effective e-commerce sites
requires careful planning and sensitivity to cultural issues. For example, South Africa
is a low to middle-income, developing country with an abundant supply of
resources, well-developed financial, legal, communications, energy and transport
sectors, a stock exchange that ranks among the ten largest in the world, and a
modern infrastructure supporting an efficient distribution of goods to major centers
throughout the region. However, growth has not been strong enough to reduce the
prevailing 30 percent unemployment figure. Daunting economic problems remain
from the apartheid era, especially poverty and lack of educational and economic
empowerment among disadvantaged groups. At the end of  2000, President Mbeki
vowed to promote economic growth and foreign investment, and to reduce poverty
by relaxing restrictive labour laws, stepping up the pace of privatisation, and cutting
unneeded governmental spending. Eleven official languages and cultural diversity
further complicate all these challenges.  E-commerce cannot target specific
audiences, so South Africa illustrates how difficult it is to appeal to customers.
The evolution of Web-based business activity has resulted in the term e-
Business referring to three categories of business activity:
•
Business-to-Employee (B2E):  Intranet-based applications internal to a
company.
•
Business-to-Consumer (B2C):  Internet-based applications for a company’s
customers and
•
Business-to-Business (B2B):  Extranet-based applications for a company’s
business partners.  (An IOS:  Inter Organisational System).

52   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
[The term e-Commerce often refers only to B2B (McNurlin & Sprague, 2002)]
BACKGROUND
The use of information technology (IT) - computers and telecommunications
- has been growing at an increasing rate ever since the invention of the modern
computer in the 1950s. Now, with the widespread development of the Internet and
the World Wide Web (WWW, ‘the Web’), change has accelerated even more
(McNurlin & Sprague, 2002). Computer-based information systems (CBIS) are
information systems that require hardware, software, databases, telecommunica-
tions, procedures and people to accomplish their goals (Stair, 1992).
As a preliminary investigation into good Web practice, the authors conducted
research on technological features that affect Web-based services (Erwin & Singh,
2001).
Some comments by respondents to a survey on Web-based service features
were:
•
‘I consider it important that in addition to Web sites with all the “bells and
whistles”, a “text-only” version should be made available for fast load times
and for learners who do not have fast links and the latest browsers.’
•
‘Tools need to support doing the basic functions quickly and easily rather than
doing lots of fancy stuff.’
•
‘I (and most colleagues) hate frames, therefore tend to avoid them.’
•
‘Often “help” isn’t helpful!’
These quotations indicate resistance to new technologies (methods) and
propensity to use a relatively small subset of available features.
Tools supporting e-commerce often have older technologies such as tele-
phones, faxes and help desks. However, there is an emerging mix of technologies
specific to the Web (Erwin & Singh, 2001). These technologies now introduce a
new set of complexities for an auditor of this electronic environment.
TECHNOLOGICAL  TRENDS  IN  INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
Technological changes are having enormous impact on the capabilities of
organizational systems (Turban, et al., 2001). Table 1 outlines some general
information technology trends affecting organizational systems.

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    53
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Every item shown in Table 1 is a potential source of attributes of a legacy
system. E-commerce is a composite of the trends in Table 1.
THE  WORLD  WIDE  WEB (WWW) – THE  WEB
The WWW as a vehicle for the implementation of trade and commerce has
attracted the attention of business and government. There are many applications of
the WWW, such as commerce, entertainment, leisure and information resources.
Table 1:  Source: Turban et al. (2001)
Trend 
What It Is 
Benefits 
Data warehousing 
Gigantic computer 
‘warehouses’ (storage) of 
large amounts of data. 
Data warehouses organize 
data for easy access by end 
users of the data. When 
integrated with the Internet, 
they can be accessed from 
any location at any time. 
Data mining 
A sophisticated analysis 
technique that automatically 
discovers previously 
undetected relationships 
among data.  
Enables managers to see 
relationships and dynamics 
in data elements that they 
had not foreseen (e.g., how 
the sales of one product 
might drive the sales of 
another product). 
Intelligent systems and 
agents 
Automated rules that 
execute preprogrammed 
decisions or tasks when 
encountering specified 
conditions in data.  
Increase productivity and 
ease the execution of 
complex tasks. Intelligent 
agents help users navigate 
the Internet, access 
databases and conduct 
electronic commerce.  
Electronic commerce 
Business done online; the 
exchange of products, 
services and money with the 
support of computers and 
computer networks.   
Can provide a competitive 
edge and could change 
organizational structure, 
processes, procedures, 
culture and management. 
Electronic document 
management  
A technique that converts 
paper-based documents to 
digital electronic form via 
scanning and related 
technologies. 
Greatly reduces storage 
requirements and allows the 
documents to be organized 
and manipulated like any 
other type of electronic 
data. 

54   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The first e-commerce applications were started in the early 1970s. The original
applications were in the form of electronic fund transfers (EFT). These applications
were limited to larger corporations and financial institutions (Turban et al., 2000).
This type of transaction later included electronic data interchange (EDI). There is
a marked difference between EDI and e-commerce in that e-commerce involves
Table 2: Definitions of E-Commerce
Author 
Definition/Approach/Description 
Mclaren and Mclaren, 
2000 
Any electronic business transaction or exchange of information 
to conduct business. 
Greenstein and 
Feinman, 2000 
E-commerce is the exchange of products and services that 
require transportation, via some form of telecommunication 
medium from one location to another. Electronic business is 
defined as the exchange of information and customer support. 
The activities supporting, for example, the exchange of 
information and provision of customer support are not strictly 
speaking ‘commerce’ activities, but can be referred to as 
‘business’ activities. 
Ford and Baum, 1997 
See e-commerce as an umbrella term that includes automated 
business transactions, online purchases, electronic forms and 
industrial inventory control transactions. They conclude the e-
commerce represents a broad range of technologies, is socially 
accepted and is expected to be used.   
Turban et al., 2001 
Business done online; the exchange of products, services and 
money with the support of computers and computer networks 
Whitten et al., 2001 
Involves conducting both internal and external business over the 
Internet, intranet and extranets. Electronic commerce includes 
the buying and selling of goods and services, the transfer of 
funds and the simplification of day-to-day business processes -
all through digital communication. 
U.S. Department of 
Commerce, 1999  
Business processes which shift transactions to the Internet or 
some other non-proprietary, Web-based system. 
Turban et al, 2000 
Electronic commerce is an emerging concept that describes the 
process of buying and selling or exchanging products, services 
and information via computer networks, including the Internet. 
 

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    55
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
much more than EDI (Greenstein & Feinman, 2000). There is no standard definition
for e-commerce. Table 2 presents some definitions of e-commerce.
In principle, however, most authors agree that e-commerce uses some form
of transmission medium through which an exchange of information takes place in
order to conduct business (Barnard & Wesson, 2000).
E-commerce can be classified in different ways. Turban et al. (2000) provide
the following classifications (see Table 3).
The authors suggest that, because of the different types of e-commerce, that
a different set of accounting systems methods should be used to disclose the nature
of the use of technology in the organization.
AUDITABLE
This is the process of independently examining, evaluating and advising on
systems and their control so that, firstly, the information stored or output produced
Table 3: Classifications of E-Commerce
Source: Adapted from Turban et al. (2000)
Classification 
Description 
Business-to-Business (B2B) 
This includes inter-organizational 
information systems and electronic 
transactions between organizations.  
Business-to-Consumer (B2C) 
B2C transactions are mostly retailing 
transactions with individual customers or 
consumers. 
Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) 
C2C involves consumers selling directly to 
other consumers. This type of application 
includes auction sites and advertising 
personal services on the Internet. It can also 
include intranets and other organizational 
networks to advertise items and services.  
Consumer-to-Business (C2B) 
In this category, one will find consumers 
who sell to organizations. It also includes 
individuals who seek sellers with whom 
they may interact in order to conclude a 
transaction.  
Non-business E-Commerce 
Many institutions or organizations also use 
e-commerce to improve their operation and 
their customer services. 
Intrabusiness (organizational) E-Commerce All internal organizational activities 
involving exchange of goods, services or 
information usually performed on intranets 
are included in this category.  

56   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
shall conform to some externally required specification and secondly, that its
continued integrity and reliability is assured (British Computer Society, 1980).
An auditor should be able to retrieve a set of records associated with a given
entity and determine that those records contain the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth. There should be a reasonable probability that any attempt to
record incorrect, incomplete or extra information will be detected. Thus, even
though many transactions will never be scrutinized, the falsification of records is
discouraged. This section categorizes the many ways in which records can be
falsified.
Entity X has a transaction with an arbitrary number of other parties. Each
should then record the agreed-upon transaction T in their records. Records can lose
integrity as follows:
•
X does not record transaction T.
1.
All parties in the transaction agree not to record transaction T.
2.
X does not record the transaction, but one party, Y, does. X and Y’s
records are in conflict.
3.
X used a false identity in the transaction T so that its records would not
directly contradict those of Y.
•
X inserts an incorrect transaction record T in its records at the time of the
transaction instead of T.
4.
All parties in the transaction agree to record the false transaction T.
5.
X records false information T, but some parties record T.
•
X invents and records a transaction that did not occur.
6.
All parties in the alleged transaction agree to support X’s falsification.
7.
X records the false transaction without support from all other parties.
•
X inserts incorrect information into the records after the fact. (This option is
often particularly beneficial to perpetrators.)
8.
X alters transaction T after it has been recorded.
9.
X removes a prior transaction T from the records.
10. At the time of transaction T, X records multiple versions. X later
selectively forgets all versions but one.
11. All parties agree to delay recording a transaction. They subsequently
select false information to record, or decide not to record the transaction
at all.
12. X retroactively records a transaction that never occurred.
Of the 12 approaches described above, three require all parties involved in a
transaction (or alleged transaction) to conspire to falsify records at the time of the
transaction (1, 4, and 6). No system can possibly detect such a conspiracy, whether

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    57
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the transaction takes place over a telecommunications network or in person. For
example, if a storeowner and a customer agree to enter an incorrect price on a cash
register, records will show no signs of falsification. However, in every other case
listed above, an inconsistency can potentially be observed. A system for electronic
transactions should be as auditable as transactions in the physical world. Thus, in
an auditable system, every other case should be detected, and it should be possible
to identify the guilty parties. This should be possible even if the parties in a
transaction and operators of the system itself cooperate to falsify records.
(Peha, 1999)
SOUTH  AFRICAN  REVENUE  SERVICES (SARS)
In an effort to streamline the tax collection process, the SARS has introduced
e-filing.
E-filing will be facilitated through service providers, external companies with
the necessary infrastructure to provide electronic submission services. Taxpayers
who wish to file and pay electronically will register with the Service Provider of their
choice, conclude an agreement and receive a private access code and password
to access the available services. The private access code and password will only
be issued once the service provider has authenticated the taxpayer. The service
provider will forward the necessary details of the taxpayer to SARS in order for the
taxpayer to be activated as an e-filer on the SARS systems. When returns are to
be issued, SARS will issue the electronic returns to the Service Provider with whom
the taxpayer is registered. The Service Provider will in turn issue a reminder to the
taxpayer, either by SMS or e-mail, informing him/her of the returns that have been
received from SARS. The taxpayer will utilize his private access code and
password to access the return. The Web-based application will automatically
display the return information as received from SARS. The taxpayer will then
complete the return on the Web. When the taxpayer electronically completes the
return, the details entered onto the return are validated thoroughly and all
calculations are performed by the system in order to eliminate any potential
of transmitting incorrect information. The taxpayer also has the option to make
a payment when submitting a return and can make the payment any time before the
due date (SARS, 2002).
This three-way communication (between taxpayer, service provider and
SARS) could be fraught with all types of technical and non-technical problems. For
example, who is responsible for the accuracy and integrity of the data? Who is
responsible for the accuracy and integrity of the data warehouse, and how would
you data mine seemingly different sets of data?

58   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
LEGACY
Turban et al. (1999) define legacy systems as older, usually mature, informa-
tion systems. Some have been around for up to 30 or 40 years. Some are less than
ten years old. They are often mainframe or distributed systems in which PCs act as
smart terminals. Legacy systems may include LANs and even some relatively recent
client/server implementations.
Moore’s Law (1965) suggests that the processing power of computers
doubles every 18 months. Moore has also applied this law to the Web and E-
commerce, immediately introducing the concept of legacy in such systems.
The rapid advances in hardware and the expansion of the WWW have now
added a new dimension to legacy applications. An entire CBIS may join the ranks
of a legacy application within one to one-and-a half years of its development. This
poses a special problem for computer auditing. Somehow, an internal auditor has
to ‘freeze’ the state of the technology at the time that the business processes were
in operation, retaining knowledge of how the particular activities were dealt with by
technologies that were useful at some time in the past but are no longer applicable.
The business organization may need to preserve both the data and the processing
methods for post-facto inspection by an internal auditor.
POSSIBLE PROBLEMS
Many organizations in South Africa now offer many services on the Internet,
such as credit-card purchasing, electronic bill-payment services and digital cash.
The emergence of digital cash has transformed the ‘accounting/auditing equation’
and introduced many new aspects of security and integrity. Computer security
involves the maintenance of three characteristics: confidentiality, integrity and
availability.
Table 4: Adapted from Pfleeger, 1997
Security Goal 
Description 
Confidentiality 
Means that the assets of a computing system are accessible only by 
authorized parties. This type of access is read-type access: reading, viewing, 
printing or even just knowing about the existence of an object.  
Integrity 
Means that assets can be modified only by authorized parties or only in 
authorized ways. In this context, modification includes writing, changing, 
changing status, deleting and creating.  
Availability 
Means that assets are accessible to authorized parties. An authorized party 
should not be prevented from accessing objects to which they have legitimate 
access.  
 

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    59
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Wilkinson (1989) identifies three major approaches to audits of computer-
based systems. These are auditing around the computer, auditing through the
computer and auditing with the computer. The first two approaches are mainly used
for tests of controls; they involve such techniques as traces of selected transactions,
test data, integrated test facilities, parallel simulations and embedded audit modules.
The auditing with the computer approach uses the Generalised Audit Software
(GAS) technique. These audits are now performed in a rapidly changing techno-
logical environment, and the emergence of the WWW and the e-phenomenon
necessitate a modification of the audit procedure for electronic transactions to suit
that environment.
The Internet creates many more possibilities for improving life. For example,
classified ads bring in a large percentage of newspaper industry revenues, but ads
can be replaced by a much cheaper and more convenient electronic system. It is
often thought that instead of buying an entire newspaper, readers will pay for the
individual stories in which they are interested. Someone wishing to purchase a VCR
might send an ‘intelligent agent’ into the Internet to collect bids from suppliers for
a unit that meets desired specifications, and then selects the best choice. While such
scenarios are technically feasible, some industries may not allow software agents to
collect their prices (Odlyzko, 1997).
Many artificial barriers could be introduced into this digital economy. For
example, in 1990, IBM introduced the LaserPrinter E, a lower cost version of its
LaserPrinter. The two versions were identical, except that the E version printed five
pages per minute instead of ten for the regular one. This was achieved (as was found
by independent testers, and was not advertised by IBM) through the addition of
additional chips to the E version that did nothing but slow down processing. Thus,
the E model cost more to produce, sold for less and was less useful. Consumers who
do not need to print much, and are not willing to pay for the more expensive version,
obtained this laser printer. Consumers who do need high capacity obtain a lower
price than they might otherwise have to pay, since the manufacturer’s fixed costs
are spread over more units (Odlyzko, 1997). Another artificial barrier that could
possibly lead to legacy is the bundling of software. Bundling consists of several
software goods packaged together, such as a word processor, a spreadsheet and
a presentation program in one software suite (such as Microsoft Office) (Odlyzko,
1997). Because of this marketing strategy, some of these products become the de
facto standard and even when there is a move away from these products, we still
have people using them.

60   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
E-CAP
The Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) Securities Exchange has signed an
agreement with the London Stock Exchange that will result in local stocks being
traded electronically via London. This will encourage South African companies to
keep their primary listing in SA, by allowing them to have dual primary listing in both
countries (Ebersöhn, 2001). Such trading methods would naturally need and use
government and legal regulations governing these transactions.
In a broad sense, accounting has the following hierarchy, with the inclusion of
e-commerce into this hierarchy suggested by the authors, as shown in Figure 1.
There are obvious overlaps between these areas.
Under e-commerce, the authors present the following subdivision with their
related activities; see Figure 2 and Figure 3. Each subdivision would have a
particular set of guidelines that aid the auditor.
Auditing
Management Accounting
Taxation
Financial Accounting
e-Commerce
Accouniting
Figure 1
Figure 2
Legacy Hardware
Current Hardware
Hardware
Operating Systems
Legacy Software
Oracle
MS Access
Database Systems
Software
LAN
Intranet
WWW
Internet
Networks
Telecommunications
Policies
Technical Accounting
Cost/Financial Accounting
e-Commerce
Figure 3
Analysis
Design
Programming
Testing
Implemenation
Informantion Systems Development (ISD)
Domain Name
Goodwill
Hardware
Software
Maintance
Hardware
Software
Upgrades
Cost/Financal Accounting

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    61
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The traditional accounting methods do not deal with the unique complexities
that e-commerce introduces into the business. Accounting standards do not
specifically deal with the financial reporting standards for Internet firms, often giving
these firms abundant freedom in their financial reporting. For example, the
development cost of Web sites should be amortized evenly over their useful
economic lives. Costs related to the development of a web site from planning,
design, implementation and maintenance should be accounted for differently, e.g.
infrastructure and initial set-up are to be capitalized. How do auditors measure the
useful economic lives of Web sites, domain names, subscribers and goodwill
(Coppin, 2001)?
As a sign of increasing usage of the Internet for business KPMG (2001)
reports the following:
•
Several companies highlighted the use of the Internet in core insurance
operations, within their financial statements.
•
Companies are disclosing legal issues related to e-commerce on their financial
statements.
•
Some companies have integrated their comments on e-commerce into the
Chairman’s/Chief Executive’s statement in order to emphasize that e-com-
merce is an integral part of their business activities rather than just a distribution
tool.
•
A number of insurers are using Internet technology to support their interme-
diaries.
•
A major international assurance company offers its customers the ability to
apply for mortgages and pensions on-line and to obtain valuations of their
pensions and unit trusts.
•
A major insurer has developed an Internet concept for retail consumers, which
gives quotes for motor insurance after six questions. It selects the most
competitive quote from a panel of insurers. It has also developed Internet joint
ventures with a car manufacturer.
To approach some of these control issues above the authors propose the
development of a framework called e-CAP (Electronic Commerce Accepted
Practice). E-CAP’s purpose is providing guidelines for systematically and properly
dealing with the processing of electronic transactions.
Table 6 contains examples of some issues affecting electronic commerce.
The impact of the connectivity age is vast. Though it is early days for e-
commerce, there is an urgent need for professional people (IT professionals,

62   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 5: Adapted from Turban, et al., 2001
Current Limitations 
E-CAP guideline/policy statement 
There is a lack of universally accepted standards 
for security and reliability. 
E-CAP would provide advice relating to e-Commerce, 
networked environments (e.g., virtual private networks) 
without giving away trade secrets. 
Software development tools are still evolving. 
For example, cookies (W1, 2002): A message given to 
a Web browser by a Web server. The browser stores 
the message in a text file. The message is then sent 
back to the server each time the browser requests a 
page from the server.  
 
The purpose of cookies is to identify users and possibly 
prepare customized Web pages for them. When you 
enter a Web site using cookies, you may be asked to fill 
out a form providing such information as your name 
and interests. This information is packaged into a 
cookie and sent to your Web browser, which stores it 
for later use. The next time you go to the same Web 
site, your browser will send the cookie to the Web 
server. The server can use this information to present 
you with custom Web pages. Therefore, for example, 
instead of seeing just a generic welcome page you 
might see a welcome page with your name on it. 
Content of cookies will need to be scrutinized by a 
verification authority. 
There are difficulties in integrating the Internet 
and e-commerce software with existing 
(especially legacy) applications and databases.  
E-CAP would provide levels of disclosure of the state 
of a company’s technology without revealing trade 
secrets, whilst maintaining investor/stakeholder 
confidence. 
Many legal issues are yet unresolved. 
E-CAP would provide some prudent rules for auditors 
to deal with legal anomalies, such as digital signatures. 
Web page risk profile 
A defined series of icons that indicate the type of risk 
related to that industry, such that at one glance, 
auditors and final users can estimate the related risk. 
 Who is responsible for the authenticity, 
fidelity and accuracy of information? 
 How to ensure that information will be 
processed properly and presented 
accurately to users? 
 How to ensure that errors are accidental 
in databases, data transmissions and data 
processing and not intentional? 
 Who is to be held accountable for errors 
in information? How should the injured 
party be compensated? How is this 
accounted for in financial statements?  
E-CAP would provide a guideline that would outline 
how to assess an online backup and recovery process, 
how to deal with sensitive data in log files, cache 
servers, and archives that collect cookies.  
 

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    63
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
accountants, auditors, government regulators, stakeholders and lawyers) to discuss
and document the effect of e-commerce and provide preliminary documents for e-
commerce transactions. Prudent accounting practices have to be adopted to avoid
devious and/or inaccurate disclosures.
Electronic Communications and Transactions Bill (Electronic Communica-
tions and Transactions Bill 2002)
The Electronic Communications and Transactions Bill is an attempt by the
Republic of South Africa to provide for the facilitation and regulation of electronic
communications and transactions. It intends to provide for the development of a
national e-strategy for the Republic; to promote universal access to electronic
communications and transactions and the use of electronic transactions by Small,
Medium and Micro enterprises (SMMEs). It also intends to provide for human
resource development in electronic transactions, to prevent abuse of information
systems, to encourage the use of e-government services; and to provide for matters
connected therewith.
Some of the objects of the Act are to enable and facilitate electronic
communications and transactions in the public interest, and for that purpose to—
(a)
recognize the importance of the information economy for the economic and
social prosperity of the Republic;
(b)
promote universal access primarily in underserviced areas;
(c)
promote the understanding and, acceptance of and growth in the number of
electronic transactions in the Republic;
(d)
remove and prevent barriers to electronic communications and transactions
in the Republic;
(e)
promote legal certainty and confidence in respect of electronic communica-
tions and transactions;
(f)
promote technology neutrality in the application of legislation to electronic
communications and transactions;
(g)
promote e-government services and electronic communications and transac-
tions with public and private bodies, institutions and citizens;
(h)
ensure that electronic transactions in the Republic conform to the highest
international standards;
(i)
encourage investment and innovation in respect of electronic transactions in
the Republic;
(j)
develop a safe, secure and effective environment for the consumer, business
and the Government to conduct and use electronic transactions;
(k)
promote the development of electronic transactions services which are

64   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
responsive to the needs of users and consumers;
(l)
ensure that, in relation to the provision of electronic transactions services, the
special needs of particular communities and, areas and the disabled are duly
taken into account;
(m) ensure compliance with accepted International technical standards in the
provision and development of electronic communications and transactions;
(n)
promote the stability of electronic transactions in the Republic;
(o)
promote the development of human resources in the electronic transactions
environment;
(p)
promote SMMEs within the electronic transactions environment;
(q)
ensure efficient use and management of the .za domain name space; and
(r)
ensure that the national interest of the Republic is not compromised through
the use of electronic communications.
These are the first steps in developing a manageable framework for the
sustainable development of electronic commerce in South Africa. Such a mammoth
task requires a well- strategized, thoroughly planned and carefully coordinated
approach to electronic commerce. Partnerships between Government and industry
will be required, not only to develop the actual strategies, but also to become
involved in the integration of the existing, future and newly created digital world
entities. Without a cohesive outlook and attitude to such a challenge, the expected
benefits may not accrue.
E-CAP’S ABCD FRAMEWORK
The letters ABCD symbolize the grass roots approach: Starting at the
beginning and not assuming anything about the audience.
•
A stands for atmosphere: the organization should understand the atmosphere
in the particular environment that it is operating in, e.g., socio-political, law,
local customs, and the local languages spoken.
•
B stands for build-up: an electronic entity has to build-up a culture of trust
between itself and customers, who are in any part of the world.
•
C stands for communication: the build up of good communication lines
between customers, suppliers and the organization. Being at a distance from
the community has the effect of dehumanizing the relationship.
•
D stands for discipline: work within the rules and regulations of the commu-
nity.

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    65
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The ABCD approach is a simple approach that assists the company in
assessing its social environment.
FURTHER ISSUES TO CONSIDER
E-commerce will only be encouraged if the infrastructure supports the
technology. An online customer may not feel adequately protected, choose to
research a product then buy off-line. There may arise a “digital divide” in the
business world: the larger, well-established companies effectively use the technol-
ogy forcing small and medium businesses to adapt or die. Governmental regulation
and legal issues would affect e-commerce, e.g., the question of when is a digital
contact concluded? In June 2000, the President of the United States signed the
Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-Sign). This
provides equal legal status between electronic and traditional signatures, given
mutual consent between the parties to use E-Sign. Many countries will need to
follow this path awaiting international standards (McNurlin & Spragne, 2002).
Wang (1999) reports that ‘medium and small business often do not fully understand
the concept of information systems and its ability to facilitate electronic commerce.
Small/Medium Business
each with a different
core competency
 
Game 
Software 
Books 
Clothing 
Music 
Videos 
Digital Intermediaries 
Customer 
Customer 
Customer 
•
authentication
•
quality assurance
•
cataloging services
•
open standards enforced
•
research collaboration
Customized product bundles
Figure 4: Source: Wang, 1999

66   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Small firms are at times intimidated by the technology, are frequently concerned
about the ability of outsiders to tap into the workings of a small firm via computers,
and often lack time or resources to develop an understanding of how information
systems help them’.
Technology alliances (Wang, 1999) may be formed between different busi-
ness organizations as well as companies using Digital Intermediaries, e.g., see
Figure 4.
All these issues affect the way an audit will be conducted. Crisis management
should be avoided. Guidelines for dealing with e-commerce in a realistic and
standard accounting approach are needed.
REFERENCES
Barnard, L. & Wesson, J. (2000). E-Commerce: An Investigation into Usability
Issues, in Proceedings of the 2000 South Africa Institute of Computer
Science and Information Technologists (SAICSIT). South Africa, Cape
Town, November 1-3. Available at:  http://www.cs.wits.ac.za/~philip/
SAICSIT/SAICSIT-2000/programme/papers.html.
Bishop, D., Bishop, C. & Bishop, O. (1996).  An introduction to the World Wide
Web for PC and Mac users, London, England: Bernard Babani Ltd.
British Computer Society, (1980). Control and Audit of Minicomputer Systems,
London, England: Heyden & Son Ltd.
Business 2.0 (2000). Business 2.0: 10 Driving Principles of the New Economy.
MB Worksoft, Intelligence Supplement.
Coppin, G. (2001). Financial reporting by Internet firms. Accounting SA,
April.
Ebersöhn F. (2001). JSE launches London crossing, Business Report, April 3.
Electronic Communications and Transactions Bill 8 of 2002, Republic of South
Africa
Erwin, G.J & Singh, S  (2001). The Legacy of the Web, in Proceedings of the
2001 Information Resources Management Association International
Conference (IRMA). Toronto, Ontario, Canada. May 20-23.
Ford, W. & Baum, S.M. (1997). Secure Electronic Commerce. New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall.
Gilfillan, M. (2000). Turing E-business into Business-As-Usual, in Business 2.0:
10 Driving Principles of the New Economy. MB Worksoft, Intelligence
Supplement.
Greenstein, M. & Feinman, T.M. (2000). Electronic Commerce: Security, Risk
Management and Control. Boston, MA: Irwin McGraw-Hill.

The Emerging Need for E-Commerce Accepted Practice (ECAP)    67
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
KPMG (2001). Principles and Presentation – Insurance, Survey of UK
insurers’ 1999 financial statements. Available at: http://www.kpmg.co.uk/
kpmg/uk/services/finsect/publics/ppins/ppins10.pdf.
McNurlin, C.B. & Sprague, R.H. (2002). Information Systems Management in
Practice, 5th ed., New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
McLaren, C.H & McLaren, B.J (2000). E-Commerce Business on the Internet.
South-Western Educational Publishing, Cincinnati.
Moore, G.E. (1965). Moore’s Law. [Online] Available at: http://www.intel.com/
research/silicon/mooreslaw.htm.
Odlyzko, A. (1997). The Bumpy Road of Electronic Commerce, in Proceedings
of ED-MEDIA 97 & ED-TELECOM 97, June 14-19, in Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.
Peha, J.M., (1999). Electronic Commerce with Verifiable Audit Trails, in Pro-
ceedings of the 9th Annual Conference of the Internet Society. Available
at: http://www.comms.uab.es/inet99/1h/1h_1.htm.
Pfleeger, P.C (1997). Security in Computers, 2nd ed. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Ricks, D.A. (1993). Blunders in International Business. Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell.
SARS. (2002). File PAYE and Skills Development Levies Online! File VAT and
Diesel Refunds Online! Available at: http://www.sars.gov.za/commerce/.
Stair, M.R. (1992). Principles of Information Systems: A Managerial Ap-
proach, Boston: Boyd and Fraser.
Turban, E., Rainer, R.K & Potter, R.E. (2001). Introduction to Information
Technology, NY: Wiley.
Turban, E., Lee, J., King, D. & Chung, M.H. (2000). Electronic Commerce: A
Managerial Perspective. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Turban, E., McLean, E.  & Westherbe, J. (1999). Information Technology for
Management: Making Connections for Strategic Advantage, 2nd ed. NY:
Wiley.
U.S. Department of Commerce (1999). The Emerging Digital Economy II.
Available at: http://www.ecommerce.gov/ede/chapter1.html.
Whitten, J.L., Bentley, L.D. & Dittman, K.C. (2001). Systems Analysis and
Design Methods. Boston: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Wang, Y. (1999). A General Analysis of the Impact of Electronic Commerce on
Small Businesses and Entrepreneurships in the U.S. in Proceedings of the
1999 South Africa Institute of Computer Science and Information
Technologists (SAICSIT). South Africa, Johannesburg, November 17-19.
Available at: http://www.cs.wits.ac.za/~philip/SAICSIT/SAICSIT-99/elec-
tronic/exp/Wang.pdf.

68   Erwin and Singh
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Wilkinson, W.J. (1989). Accounting Information Systems: Essential Concepts
and Applications, Wiley, USA.
W1 (2002). Cookies, in Webopedia, Available at: http://www.webopedia.com/
TERM/c/cookie.html.

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    69
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter V
The Theory Behind the
Economic Role of
Managing the Strategic
Alignment of Organizations
While Creating New
Markets
Sam Lubbe
Cape Technikon, South Africa
ABSTRACT
Over the past couple of years, the Internet has taken off and organizations will
soon reap economic benefits on it. E-commerce will therefore hopefully
emerge as an efficient yet effective mode of creating new markets although
most managers still doubt the economic impact and profitability it has.
Enabled by global telecommunication networks and the convergence of
computing, telecom, entertainment and publishing industries, e-commerce is
supplanting (maybe replacing) traditional commerce. In the process, it is
creating new economic opportunities for today’s businesses, creating new
market structures. Managers of tomorrow must therefore understand what
e-commerce is; how the approach to this concept will be; and how it will affect
the economic position of the organization.

70   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
INTRODUCTION
Over the past couple of years, the Internet has grown a lot and it is possible
that organizations will soon reap economic benefits from using it. E-commerce, as
one of the ‘products’ of the Internet will therefore hopefully emerge as an efficient
yet effective mode of conducting global commerce although most managers still
doubt the economic impact and profitability it has. Enabled by global telecommu-
nication networks and the convergence of computing, telecom, entertainment and
publishing industries, e-commerce is supplanting (and maybe replacing) traditional
commerce. In the process, it is creating new economic opportunities and challenges
for today’s businesses, creating new market structures, and changing the alignment
of the organization. All organizations increasingingly must focus on their delivery
speed while facing an increasing degree of uncertainty. How do organizations keep
economic growth up while still delivering business value?
The establishment of linkage between business and IT objectives has also
consistently been reported as one of the key concerns of IS managers (Reich &
Benbasat, 1996). They argued that there is firstly a need to clarify the nature of the
linkage construct (socially and intellectually) and secondly to report on a project that
was developed to test the social dimension of this linkage. It is important that all
executives are involved during the establishment of the economic and social linkage
because it creates a better understanding of each other’s long-term visions and their
self-reported rating of the linkage and alignment. Based on the data they collected,
Reich & Benbasat argued that understanding of current objectives and shared
vision for the utilization of IT are proposed as promising potential measures for
short- and long-term economic aspects of the reported social dimension of linkage
and alignment.
Traditional processes and management concepts that focus on optimisation,
efficiency, predictability, control, rigor and process improvement are not flexible
enough to create the applications and infrastructure organizations need to achieve
economic success in these competitive times. The organization needs to be
adaptable and needs to focus less on what traditional e-commerce developers says
These questions are asked: What is the return on investment (ROI) on
e-commerce? What is the effect of e-commerce on the strategic alignment of
the organization? In addition, what is the economic effect of the strategic
alignment on the organization? This paper explains the economic impact of
e-commerce and how it can be used to create new markets and to improve the
strategic alignment of the organization.

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    71
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
it ‘ought’ to do and more on what is actually working in the aggressive e-commerce-
driven environment. Managers of tomorrow must therefore understand what e-
commerce is; how the approach to this concept will be; and how it will affect the
economic and social aspects of the organization. This chapter will therefore address
the importance of economics on the strategic alignment of organizations. The
chapter will firstly look at the strategic dimension of e-commerce in the organization.
Next, the article will address the issue of e-commerce forecasting, IT alignment and
e-commerce, the economic effect and the measurement of alignment while keeping
the effect of e-commerce in mind. The summary of the chapter will be last.
APPROACH TO THIS CHAPTER
This chapter will use the interpretive approach to research as an alternative to
the more traditional positivist approach. By using the interpretive approach, this
chapter refers to such procedures as those associated with inferential statistics,
hermeneutics and phenomenology. The framework proposed is to formulate a
specific goal (economics, e-commerce and social aspects), subject to certain
constraints. This approach will call for the active role of people in strengthening a
truly collaborative research effort to maintain a peaceful co-existence between all
the boundaries. Behaviours such as pointlessness, absurdness or confusion can play
a role during the alignment of the strategies in the organization. The phenomenologi-
cal approach will therefore help with the validity of the interpretation that this article
will conduct.
THE STRATEGIC DIMENSION OF THE
ORGANIZATION
Being competitive in the next couple of years will depend on the effective
application of e-commerce. Organizations need to take a strategic perspective to
ensure that investment in e-commerce is contributing to the organization’s business
strategy. Increasingly, e-commerce is therefore being used by innovative organiza-
tions to facilitate the economic force of technology strategies now that re-
engineering has lost some of its lustre. Strategic alignment could also be defined as
the extent to which the e-commerce strategy supports, and is supported by the
business strategy.
Economic advantage should be based on the capabilities of the organization.
Organizational learning processes produce economic advantages (Sohn, 1999).
The organizational 1earning processes obtain knowledge from e-commerce,

72   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
interpret, distribute to the organization and memorize the knowledge. In order to
have economic advantage, most organizations should have unique resources and
capabilities. These resources and capabilities could help with the alignment of the
strategies of the organization. Organizational learning, therefore, provides the
opportunities to improve the existing e-commerce and eventually help with better
alignment of the strategies.
Whenever a positive social culture exists, employees are encouraged to learn
and be ready to accept new information or strategies and this could eventually also
help with better alignment of strategies. Ulrich and Lake (1990) as cited by Sohn
noted that organizational capabilities have four components, that is shared mindset,
management and human social resources practices, capacity for change and
leadership. These capabilities have all the ability to affect alignment; they should be
kept in mind when alignment is discussed. Sohn argues that e-commerce influences
organizational learning and that each process of organizational learning is affected
and adjusted by e-commerce. These adjustments would affect the alignment of all
strategies; the executives should keep them in mind.
Organizations should also use a set of measurements that could be used for
measuring key business goals like economic impact; the results should be used to
quantify its performance and emphasize its role in orchestrating alignment with all
the strategies. In an age when economics, cost-cutting, social responsibly and
adding competitive value lie more squarely on the shoulders of the organization it
is no longer enough to successfully deploy systems - they should also be part of the
alignment of all the strategies. Using metrics enables e-commerce to spotlight its
value to get additional funding for future technology projects and ensure that
everything aligns. There had been many questions on whether e-commerce
contributes economically to the business and how efficient the organization is in
aligning all strategies. No one had been able to effectively answer these questions.
The tricky part of this question is how to align all strategies or measuring the
contribution e-commerce makes to the organization. The use of e-commerce in
organizations is subject to various kinds of risk and this is part of the alignment of
the strategies (Bandyopadhyay et al., 1999). As spending on e-commerce rises
steeply, organizations become increasingly technology-dependent and conse-
quently become economically highly vulnerable to the risks of e-commerce failure
and eventual failure of the organization because there would be no alignment of
strategies. Risk management of e-commerce is therefore one of the important issues
facing executives today. There is a framework, as discussed by Bandyopadhyay,
et al. that concentrates on the sequential linkage of the four components of risk
management which composes its entire.

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    73
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
According to them, this approach is an improvement because it enables
managers to move smoothly from one component to another by identifying and
understanding the possible courses of action in the different steps. What these
managers should keep in mind is that the four steps could affect the alignment of e-
commerce, although some of the external threats such as social impact and disasters
are difficult to control. Managers should acknowledge that these could affect
alignment of the strategies. Therefore, one should expect risk-reducing measures
will eventually enforce an alignment of strategies. The key to understanding strategic
risks is dependent on the organization’s ability to foresee long-term benefits from
a new system, assess the resources and capabilities of its potential competitors,
assess its own financial strength, and align its e-commerce strategy with its overall
business strategy (Bandyopadhyay et al., 1999).
Organizational strategy provides the vision of where any organization needs to
go. The problem is that many organizations focus too much on tactics and
operations, while the real value of e-commerce is to open new opportunities such
as economics and to enter new markets such as e-commerce to induce potential
customers to use the organization’s products. Organizations could directly derive
e-commerce and operational objectives from the overall objectives, ensuring
alignment of e-commerce and business strategies. One of the problems every
organization faces is that objectives and strategies can change according to market
dynamics such as economics and social changes.
At the strategic level, senior managers need a clear vision of the competitive
impact of e-commerce and how it will affect the alignment of e-commerce. Business
strategy provides the vision of where the organization wants to go. Most organiza-
tions therefore focus on e-commerce (new revenue opportunities) to help the
organization becomes competitive and enter new markets. It should be possible to
ensure that technology objectives and operational objectives are directly derived
from the organization’s corporate objectives, ensuring that business and e-
commerce organizations are focused on the goals and that they are aligned.
Managers must keep in mind that a life cycle will provide a perspective of the
formulation of these strategies because each phase of the life cycle has distinct
characteristics that affect the operation of the business. Each one of these phases
could ‘experience’ a gap and managers should ensure that economic advantage
does not make these gaps bigger during any of these phases. These performance
gaps need managing; the organization should determine its overall market posture
considering its relative position in the industry.
To forecast the incremental advantage effect likely to result from implementing
alternative alignment planning, organizations should structure profile measures
concentrating on industry market potential, relevant industry sales and real market

74   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
share. This is where e-commerce should ensure that everyone who might use the
product is using it as fully and as often as possible. The problem, however, is that
visitor’s numbers as claimed by Internet Service Providers (ISP) cannot be verified
and until that can be done, will CEOs surely look at the economic and social impact
as things that cannot be reconciled.
These gaps, as mentioned before, can contribute positively or negatively
towards the economic strategy of the organization and it can affect the actual
performance of the organization on the e-commerce strategy of the organization.
These gaps are:
•
Product line gap: Introducing improved or new products should ensure that
the organization could compete on the Internet.
•
Distribution gap: This is where e-commerce can help to expand the
coverage, intensity and exposure of distribution. This can help to better align
the IT strategy and that of the organization.
•
Usage gap: The Internet should help to induce current users to try the product
and encourage users to increase their usage.
•
Competitive gap: This is where e-commerce and the economic and social
impact approach of the organization can make inroads into the market position
of competitors as well as product substitutes.
The future marketing approach can be used as an advantage by the organiza-
tion and can be increased. The alignment of the organization’s strategies can also
be improved by increasing the organization’s industry economic potential, which
can be done by increasing relevant industry sales while maintaining the present
market share or by improving the organization’s real market share.
IMPLICATIONS FOR IT BUSINESS VALUE
DURING THE ALIGNMENT OF IS AND BUSINESS
STRATEGY
Tallon and Kraemer (1998) noted the argument that organizations’ inability to
realize sufficient economic value from their e-commerce investment is because of
an absence of strategic alignment. They cited Child (1992), who argued that the
content of alignment should be a series on intersecting and mutually consistent
choices across domains such as economic factors, business strategy, e-commerce
strategy, organizational infrastructure and processes and e-commerce infrastruc-
ture and economic processes. Other authors noted that these domains do not allow
considerations of strategic alignment as a continuous process, nor does it consider

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    75
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
management practices used in moving an organization towards alignment. There are
tools available to oversee and manage the content and process of alignment.
According to Tallon and Kramer (1998), there are a number of benefits
associated with process-level measures of strategic alignment. Process level
measures are likely to yield greater insights into where the organization is misaligned,
helping to isolate bottlenecks and other impediments to economic business value
within the organization. If strategic alignment were measured at the organization
level, e-commerce and business managers might simply know that their organization
was misaligned. However, they would not have sufficient information to isolate the
source of the misalignment. It would be somehow different if the organization
adopted a process-level economic and social perspective and the strategy pre-
sented as a series of activities within each business process. Strategy is a series of
intersecting activities, meaning that it fits neatly with the definition of any processes
as a sequence or ordered set of activities. This would indicate that the organization
should avoid having to force-fit strategy into one of the established generic strategy
types and this force-fit strategy could have a similar effect on the economic strategy
that organizations have to adopt. Measuring e-commerce and business strategy at
the process-level allows organizations to take a closer look at key activities within
each process configuration and to look at the e-commerce that support those
activities.
Opportunities for strategic alignment will arise if technological resources are
used for maintenance, improvement and creation of capabilities that underlie the
business strategy. Therefore, resources and capabilities need to have a link between
them. Strategic alignment is not an event, but a process of continuous adaptation and
change. Therefore, the assignment of e-commerce resources to capabilities must be
continuously re-evaluated to prevent the organization slipping into a state of
misalignment. Organizations should also keep in mind that the ever-increasing pace
of industrial, social, political, economic and environmental change underscores the
importance of strategic alignment. E-commerce resources should thus be used to
the maximum, ensuring effective use of e-commerce. This is a challenge that
managers should keep in mind.
Tallon et al. (1999), find a relationship between economic value and strategic
alignment in a sense that an absence of strategic alignment can lead to reduced
payoffs from e-commerce investment. Their analysis also found that the e-
commerce segment plays a key role in enabling an organization to convert strategic
alignment into higher levels of e-commerce economic value. As organizations focus
their efforts on achieving intangible impacts in areas such as innovation (for example,
e-commerce) and customer relations (social impacts), evaluating these impacts
should become a priority.

76   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL INFORMATION AND
THE INTERNET’S INFLUENCE ON ALIGNMENT
Companies incessantly produce and use economic and social information in
part because they perceive the information as a source of development . Industries
and organizations need accurate and up-to-date economic and social information
about companies and their financial performance. They also need reports on
political, economic, social and market trends embracing environments such as
manufacturing, wholesale and retail, government. Many people in different organi-
zations can use this economic and social information. The information is important
for things such as the operation of the organization and alignment of strategies. It is
important to note that people should have adequate sources of information
(internally as well as external information). In times of economic stringency,
information services are regarded as the least essential arm of the organization. It
should be remembered that the magnitude and complexity of the business market
is largely unknown to the average customer and very few businesses have the
machinery to collect and coordinate information from a variety of sources and to
apply it towards improving organizational decision making and the alignment of
strategies.
THE IMPORTANCE OF DECISIONS AND
DECISION FRAMEWORKS ON STRATEGIC
ALIGNMENT
A decision is a position, an opinion or a judgement reached after consideration,
according to the dictionary (Oxford Dictionary and Thesaurus, 1996). It is of
importance to note that the definition does not state anything about logical or illogical
economic and social analysis (that some organizations do while making decisions
about alignment) or about good or bad results. Decisions are either good or bad until
put within the context of an economic and social decision framework on strategic
alignment (Cutter, 1999).
The framework on strategic alignment should be an organized sequence of
decisions that managers must make. Every decision should have a demarcation of
the technical terms that could help outline the economic and social decision and
managers should weigh organizational and technical issues (in other words, issues
that affect alignment) and make choices about products, e-commerce investment,
economic processes and resources and social issues. Without a context, decisions
are meaningless - for example, to invest in newer models of hardware means nothing

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    77
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
without understanding the framework within which the alignment decision was
made. To understand the decision framework for strategic alignment is a prereq-
uisite to delivering successful alignment. The decision making process would affect
successful alignment of strategies and would have to include answers to questions
such as (Highsmith, 1999):
•
What types of economic decisions need to be made?
•
Who (person or group) makes each type of decision and how does it affect
the social issues involved?
•
How does the organization create sustainable economic decisions?
The decision framework for strategic alignment should consist of contents,
context and process and should be followed closely. The content part is the
information and knowledge while the context part is the circumstances such as e-
commerce, economic and social impact and other events. Process defines how
participants during the strategic alignment process arrive at the decision of
approaching the alignment. The decision to purchase a software product with
known defects is an event that could affect strategic alignment. The circumstances
(all e-commerce investment plans such as quality goals and competition) provide
the context that shapes the decision to approach the alignment of all strategies.
IT FORECASTING PLANS FOR ECONOMIC AND
SOCIAL OBSOLESCENCE
It is hard to make honest forecasts without offending both those who prepare
them and those who receive them. The same is true about the alignment of the
strategies of the organization. As the organization approach a wave of alignment,
its time for honest estimates about the economic returns that organizations can get
from different uses of scarce resources - financially and human - in the next decade.
Short-term alignments might work out because it is easy to suppress the knowledge
that people affect the marketing of goods on the Internet. On the other hand, when
organizations align these strategies on the longer term, organizations tend to under-
predict the rate and extent of economic change because of the gap that exists.
Surrounded by in-place e-commerce assets that represent gruelling effort and
sizeable investment and endless sleepless nights to align the strategies, few of the
organizations are daring enough to say that the pioneering alignment of strategies
today could be tomorrow’s obsolete trash and the cycle will have to start all over
again.

78   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Bloodgood and Salisbury (1999) claim that organizations may need to change
the manner in which they operate. A change could eventually affect alignment.
According to Bloodgood and Salisbury, there are two characteristics of the degree
of knowledge creation, transfer and protection and the degree of tacitness of the
organization’s knowledge. These factors are considered the most influential in
determining success of e-commerce in facilitating strategic change. Remember that
any change in strategy will also facilitate a change in the alignment of the
organization’s strategy. Any changes in the strategy for e-commerce should keep
corporate strategy in mind.
Organizations that use a knowledge creation strategy focus on economic
creativity and experimentation to construct new knowledge for developing new
products and services. New services such as the social impact of the Internet can
and will affect the alignment of the strategies and should help with competitive
advantage. Bloodgood and Salisbury state that to understand tacit knowledge is
important to understand how strategic change may be accomplished and supported
by e-commerce. They claim that reconfiguring with new resources combines both
tacit and explicit knowledge in an effort to create something new and somewhat
difficult to imitate. This new and difficult-to-imitate creation would have to be in
alignment; this is what managers have to keep this in mind while planning the
knowledge creation.
Long-range economic alignment and forecasts need unbiased evaluation of the
use of technologies in actions such as e-commerce, but users must remember that
everything will change drastically during the next three years. If organizations do not
align their strategies, the alternative is to go bust. The question that they must ask
before they align the strategies is, “What would they do if they were starting from
scratch?” Competitors might be doing just that and they can compare at the same
time what influence the e-commerce aspect of business could have on the
organization.
When it comes to putting in new business computing systems and applications
such as e-commerce, “progress” is not measurable in terms of distance from where
the organization started. This measurement would also measure how far the
organization has gone along the economic road to align the strategies unless the
organization cannot see where they are going. This ‘blind’ travelling could be
because the organization did not align all their economic and social strategies. Well-
planned journeys (alignment) make provisions for measuring how aligned the
strategies are and how far the organization could economically go before the
alignment is unsound and the resources would have to be monitored, measuring the
effect of e-commerce. This measurement could be difficult because nothing is sure
about Internet traffic.

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    79
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The developments ahead include many opportunities for organizations and as
such create chances for development managers to deliver unprecedented economic
value to the organizations. There are new social practices world wide that
organizations could embrace in a number of ways. Tools such as Lean Development
and Leadership-Collaboration Management could be used. These all should
challenge the manager to question traditional ways and ensure that the manager
create an e-commerce environment in which the organization can thrive.
BPR has lost some of the impetus and therefore e-commerce and organiza-
tional executives are again concentrating on aligning strategies (technology, eco-
nomic, social and corporate). Organization still struggle to align these - especially
to match them all and it seems most of the times as if the two are on opposite ends
of the string. The e-commerce budget is like a hole, but in no way is it ever going
to be filled and also getting the right people for the e-commerce initiative is a
problem. People are always flying off pointing fingers at the e-commerce segment
and this could affect the alignment and planning of the e-commerce strategies and
business strategies. Most of the time, this could cause obsolescence because
participating organizations do not always realize that achieving alignment involves
personal dynamics and some physical dynamics.
ORGANIZATION - E-COMMERCE ALIGNMENT
AND ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL IMPACTS
Aligning business and e-commerce strategies continues to be an important
management issue. The problem is that, according to the Cutter Consortium
(1999), 65 percent of organizations have no e-commerce strategy, while 25
percent of organizations have not yet developed an overall e-commerce strategy.
Only 4.2 percent of the organizations contacted do have an e-commerce strategy.
It is obvious from their figures that most organizations do not take e-commerce
seriously. Once the effect has hit these organizations, it would affect their alignment
decisions. The Cutter Consortium claimed that many organizations have, however,
noted that the role that the Internet can play, but they have not taken the steps
necessary to fully realize its economic potential and again this would affect the
alignment of their strategies should they try to realize these effects. E-commerce will
affect the alignment of the organization and that people do not know what the initial
and eventual affect will be. Technologies, however, affects all organizations - even
the smallest ones. While being able to pose an opportunity, e-commerce also pose
a threat to the organizations and managers need to recognize all the factors (e.g.,
economic and social impacts) that affect e-commerce and e-commerce alignment.

80   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
There is however, no framework for organizations to align strategies while
conducting e-commerce. Some of the impediments on this alignment are: download
delays, limitations in the interface, inadequate measurements of Internet traffic and
successes, economic planning, security weaknesses and lack of standards on the
Internet. On the other hand, the results for the organization could be positive in the
fact that the organization experiences improved usage of the effectiveness of the
organization’s economic resources and improved return on the economic invest-
ment in data, software applications, technology and IT staff - in other words,
improved quality.
The Internet is promoted as the essential way of doing business lately, but it is
still a retail medium (Whiteley, 1999). Organizations that establish successful
Internet economic operations will need effective alignment and good logistics on the
supply side of their operations. Organizations should remember that e-commerce
is commerce enabled by the Internet-era technologies. These technologies are:
-
Electronic markets
-
Electronic data interchange
-
Internet commerce and analogous public ICT systems
In theory, the use of the Internet should give the consumer the opportunity to
bypass the intermediary and, with appropriate interfaces directly affect alignment.
Any of the e-commerce operations should affect the alignment of all strategies and
the organization or the people working in the organization should not resist them.
Organizations trading on the Internet, if they are able to build up a substantial
business operation and align their strategies, will need to be slick in all economic and
social aspects of their business. Organizations with wide ambitions would also have
to plan carefully in order to align all their strategies. Internet commerce, however,
is the great economic leveller, as the size of the organization would not affect their
e-commerce operations. Therefore, if the organization grows, they will have to
remember to use a good decision framework as a backup to ensure fast and efficient
alignment of the strategies that should be a long-term economic investment.
On the other hand, many development teams work hard on projects, only to
hear from their customers that it is not enough, priorities are incorrect or the
economic results were wrong; these reactions could affect alignment. Technology
changes and developments have been extraordinary in the last couple of years and
all of these could affect alignment. The problem with this is that there seems to be
less emphasis on business trends and solutions and more on technology and this
could affect alignment. Highsmith (1999) argues that in the next decade, economic
and social development strategies will be among the important strategy any

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    81
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
corporation will make. He also noted that sometime in the 1990s, software made
the transition from an enabler of business processes to a driver of business economic
strategies and thus would be helpful with alignment of e-commerce strategies.
According to Highsmith, software is the new economy, yet the author reckons that
all e-commerce should be taken into account when aligning all strategies.
Alignment should be taken with the appropriate decision and framework that
suit the organization in the specific environment. As e-commerce capability evolves,
it should enable processes, products and opportunities never considered (like
economic and social ones). The first couple of months of the new millennium would
take on frightening changes in the e-commerce environment, as we have never seen.
To be able to handle this and to ensure that all technology and business matters can
handle this, organizations should ensure better partnerships with their employees
and the decisions frameworks they have designed.
To achieve the goal of being an aligned organization that ensures its proper
alignment and stays aligned, they need to answer the following key questions:
•
What business trends do e-commerce drive or with which it is co-evolving?
•
What are the evolving key economic and social business and e-commerce
strategies?  How does the organization take advantage of them?
•
What critical skills and capabilities assist the transition to the new economy?
•
What necessary organization, infrastructure and management changes assist
implementation of e-commerce and other strategies? How does the organi-
zation ensure their current and future alignment?
•
How does management assemble a decision framework for the alignment of
all e-commerce strategies? How do they communicate it to all the relevant
people?
If the Internet (and this includes e-commerce) is a strategic business driver,
how does the organization gives direction to this and what does the organization do
to keep the economic advantage? Business alignment is about innovative ideas and
putting these ideas into action more effectively than the same competitors. E-
commerce should take a leadership role, but it depends on the organization and its
culture and the types of strategic plans. Business trends such as market fragmen-
tation, information capacity to treat customers on the Internet, shrinking product
lifetimes and convergence of physical products and services are important ones and
the organization need to concentrate more on these forces that are co-evolving with
the e-commerce capability and opportunities that spring up.
Some strategies can help with alignment because they are highly involved with
economic and social initiatives; e-commerce is knowledge creation and sharing,

82   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
collaboration, and agility. These are all overlapping and supportive of each other.
Knowledge creation and sharing (as stated in this article) is the ability to create new
knowledge from available information to help with alignment, while collaboration is
the process of shared creation to draw on the expertise of participants and to be
able to create alignment from this collaboration. Agility is the ability of the
organization to use new knowledge to adapt to external stimulus and use this to
better or ensure total alignment of all strategies. All of these would work better if
the staff motivations were good enough and should be encouraged to ensure that
there would be no atrophy.
Alignment is hard to see, but managers would know it. The combination of all
these mentioned in the paragraphs above should ensure that alignment exists.
Knowledge should also be there to ensure that there is alignment. The organization
should also be sure to take all economic trends into account when aligning strategies.
The question to ask is what skills will be necessary to align e-commerce and
organizational strategies. However, if managers really understand what the organi-
zation is trying to deliver, then they should be able to align strategies. Systems
thinking would therefore help with alignment, because it would ensure that the
alignment and view of the entire organization as an economic and social unit.
On the other hand, reporting on user statistics on Internet sites is far below the
required standards. These statistics could affect the alignment of strategies since no
one can plan around uncertainty. That is why many CEOs have lost faith in the
Internet as communication and business medium of the future. Many ISPs cannot
tell you why the people have ended up on their site and how long they have stayed.
The tracking technologies should solve the problem but nobody can guarantee
anything - it is like TV - it is a guessing game and although the developers of tracking
technology is aware of these problems, they had not found a solution to combat the
problems. The problem is to discover what people do when they arrive on the site
and if they ever return. This information is invaluable to managers and carries a lot
of credibility. User tracking on the Internet therefore needs to mature and start to
provide useful economic and social information those marketers and specialists and
executives can use to align all the strategies of the corporation. The problem is that
ISP’s can include internal activities in their traffic or they can tamper with log files
while the electronic counters are susceptible to server and network congestion and
downtime. These facts would obviously affect Internet marketing and alignment of
strategies.
Aligning the IS strategy with the organizations goals is also appropriate for
those organizations in which there is a vision for items such as e-commerce. E-
commerce is part of the actual choice any organization should have. This is where
the E-commerce Department can play a major role - their primary responsibility

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    83
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
should be to create business opportunities (via e-commerce) and not merely to
ensure that e-commerce exists for the whole organization. Their role would thus be
to ensure that e-commerce strategy and organizational strategy align all of the time,
while creating new opportunities.
White & Manning (1998) argued that the percentage of individuals on the
Internet using the medium for shopping had increased by about 70 percent between
1995 and 1996. It is important to note that users expect to get something of value
free and this type of marketing could affect the alignment of e-commerce strategy
with the corporate strategy. Personal opinion should affect the alignment of the
strategies. Gender appears to be important in e-commerce, which would have to
be kept in mind during alignment of strategies. Consumer demographics on the
Internet could differ from normal demographics (if ever); this deserves further
research. The likelihood of purchasing from an online storefront would help with
alignment on a new frontier and should be something that executives should keep
in mind.
Everybody should row along, otherwise the technology would not be used to
the best economic advantage of the organization. Everybody should thus use and
learn about economic goals and this would make the alignment of corporate
strategies easier. They would all sing along if everybody understands core business
concerns. Everybody should also learn all topics or at least read about it - think
about BPR, TQM, etc. The explosion of the Internet as an economic resource for
business for business information in all countries have taken off and has made
business people aware of how easily data can be stored in different locations and
in different formats that all these topics can use. All this can cause growth and can
affect strategic alignment. Some of the pitfalls are the following aspects:
•
Cost can be very high, and unaffordable to organizations
•
Capacity development lacks strategic capacities
•
Visibility and security use other providers?
•
Inconsistency of telecommunications access a problem in some areas
since the Internet is not always available.
Executives should communicate the mission of e-commerce to the consumers,
employees and other managers - this could win half their battle during alignment. It
is also important to show other people how the E-commerce department operates
so they understand problem handling. They can get feedback on the e-commerce
economic role and services they render. They can check on end-users from time
to time - even if they have no problems - just to make sure that everybody knows
that your department exists. It is important that usable communication channels
exist. The inclusion of users during and when a big project starts is also important.

84   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Pay special attention to users with special needs and make sure that everybody
receives the same amount of help. Make sure that the e-commerce department
understand what applications people are using and why do they prefer to install their
own software. All of these help with better alignment and overall functionality.
Gibson et al. (1998) note that with the onset of the 1990s came an unstable
economic environment and businesses started to realize that the strategic vision of
the business required a dramatic change in their economic and social environment
in order to at least maintain their competitive advantage. This meant that everyone
had to realign their strategies to stay competitive. According to them, the companies
they investigated exhibited a change in strategic vision, but these changes were
unreflected in their e-commerce. This could create a problem, because if e-
commerce cannot reflect the changes in the economic strategic vision, it would
affect the alignment of instruments that could be used to determine if the organization’s
strategies are aligned. It could be because certain economic and social changes
could prevent the advent of developments such as e-commerce. Therefore, a gap
exists which could create a misalignment between the organization’s strategic vision
and the route it follows. . Business and e-commerce create the gap, in this instance.
Many of the organizations they investigated acknowledged that e-commerce was
not a good fit for their organization. The companies that they investigated used a
variety of approaches to realign the economic model and e-commerce with their
strategic vision. Gibson et al. (1998) argued that these approaches have gone
beyond technical solutions. Although they would eliminate the technical problems,
they would probably not address the business issues, so realignment would not
occur. New technology such as ERP software, combined with business process
creates the need to realign the business model and e-commerce with their strategic
vision.
The aim of management should be to try to provide insights into identifying
areas that help or hinder the alignment of the strategy for the organization with the
e-commerce. Alignment focuses on the activities that management performs to
achieve cohesive goals across the organization. Certain activities can also assist in
the achievement of the alignment while others are clearly barriers. Achieving this
alignment is a dynamic and evolutionary process. The alignment requires strong
support from management at all levels, good relationships within the organization,
strong leadership.  These points must be emphasized, heeded, and communicated
well, so that all people understand the organization’s business environment, at the
same time ensuring a successful alignment. All enablers and inhibitors should be
focused on ensuring successful alignment and therefore all inhibitors should be
minimized.

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    85
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
THE EFFECT OF ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
IMPLICATIONS DURING THE ALIGNMENT OF
STRATEGIES
Organizations have to assume that there are some basic definitions that ensure
that all terminology is clearly understood: There are two types of implications that
managers can use: economic and social; there is a connection to these factors. Some
basic definitions that can be used are:
•
Asset structure - Assets the organization wants to finance or funds that they
want to use to expand during e-commerce.
•
Financial structure - Available funds or possible financing available to the
organization.
•
Financial leverage -The ratio of funds from outside the organization to the
total assets of the organization. The act of borrowing is said to create financial
leverage.
•
Operating leverage - Refers to the extent to which total operating costs vary
with changes in the operating revenues and these revenues could be affected
with e-commerce.
•
Business risk - Financial leverage increases risk because it makes the return
realized by the investor more sensitive to any event affecting the performance
or the asset purchased.
This chapter looks at the possible economic and social impact on alignment
during e-commerce investment and expansion of the e-commerce operation. IT
assets and the finance of the IT assets as demonstrated could be financed by the use
of equity and of foreign economic financing. Leverage is a ratio that is calculated and
shows any possible investor or manager (especially the e-commerce manager or e-
commerce director) how a possible opportunity to obtain funds can have any effect
of the organization and on alignment as the decision would be a strategy that would
affect any other strategy.
Financial leverage affects analysis of interest and liquidity because of fixed
commitments due to economics of funds from outside the organization. If the return
on assets were higher than the cost of the debt, management may find that leverage
has a positive effect. Leverage can increase the return on owner’s equity but there
is a risk factor that managers have to keep in mind. Financial leverage involves the
use of funds obtained at a fixed cost in the hope of increasing the return to the owners
of the organization. If funds are thus being obtained to help with e-commerce,
managers have to keep in mind that a successful project could increase the return

86   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
on the funds while a negative project will reduce the return on the funds and this
would affect alignment.
Business leverage has to do with the ratio between fixed costs and variable
costs. This would have an affect on the economics of the organization. Fixed costs
should always be recovered and assets with a fixed base cost should be used in the
hope that more profit could be generated. It would be wise for the organization to
use financial leverage if profit is stable, otherwise if fixed cost represents the majority
of the expenses, managers would find that profit is not stable. Obviously, if customer
numbers cannot be guaranteed in e-commerce projects, managers would find that
profit would not be stable. Organizations are warned not to use financial leverage
if business leverage plays a role in organizational strategies. Managers should also
remember that certain assets could affect fixed costs negatively. Also that both these
leverages could be combined, for example, an economic risk could be combined
with low financial risks and the other way around. The total risk of the organization
could entail a swap between total risk and the expected return on any investment.
There are some economic ratios that could help with leverage:
•
Total debt to total assets. This displays the percentage total funds supplied
by other people such as creditors. They prefer a low ratio, while the owners
prefer a big ratio to increase turnover and to keep control of the organization.
•
Total interest earned. This ratio tells the organization how much turnover
could be lowered without affecting the payment of these interest amounts. This
ratio is calculated by dividing gross profit by interest.
•
Fixed cost coverage. This ratio shows how the organization can pay fixed
costs (interest added to long-term debt). The ratio is planned by calculating
a total for profit before tax and tax and rent and this total is then divided
by the total for interest and rent.
•
Breakeven point is that mark where the total for fixed costs and variable
costs is equal to that of the total turnover.
•
The degree of financial leverage is calculated by dividing earnings before
interest and taxes by earnings before tax minus interest.
There are other ratios that could affect financial or business leverage but are
too many to mention and would not be dealt with during the course of this chapter.
It would be difficult with e-commerce to calculate the break-even amount of sales
that the organization needs because nobody can state for sure what the fixed and
variable costs would be. This will affect leverage and one can safely note that e-
commerce would affect the alignment of the organization.
Breakeven analysis could be used in three ways, to modernize a program or
if the organization wants to use a new market such as e-commerce, to study the

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    87
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
effect of extensive build-up of the firm such as globalization and new product
decisions.
Of importance for the organization is the effect of e-commerce on the
economic and social impact and on the alignment of the organization. The cost to
appear in the global market on the Internet could be affected as follows:
•
The Internet market is perfect and all ‘clickers’ could get the correct
information, these shoppers and browsers act rationally and that no costs per
transaction completed exists.
•
Personal and manufactured leverages are perfect substitutes and they would
affect alignment in equal amounts.
•
Corporations and individuals can borrow money at the same rate.
•
All organizations on the Internet can be placed in the same risk class so that
all classes are homogenous.
•
Since it will be difficult to control tax on the Internet it should be assumed that
no tax would be levied.
•
The average income of any organization can be represented by a variable that
could be picked statistically.
These arguments could be the following:
•
The total economic value of any organization on the Internet should rise with
the use of leverage
•
The turnover ratio on the economic book value of owner’s equity should rise
with the advent of leverage but should not affect debt of the organization on
the Internet
•
Leverage should not affect debt unless the organization uses debt to finance
the e-commerce.
Certain conditions could be analysed with the help of leverage - such as
economics. Because the capital-market is not complete, will it also affect the capital
structure? If organizations make the wrong decisions about leverage and alignment,
then the following could happen:
•
Possible incorrect application of financing
•
Possible loss of qualified staff
•
Loss of suppliers
•
Loss of sales and the liquidation of the organization
•
Economic and financial problems
•
Loss of market share
•
Formal liquidation procedures.

88   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Managers should keep leverage in mind while aligning of the strategies takes
place because it could adversely affect the organization.
ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION
VISUALIZATION - THE USE OF THE DIFFERENT
INSTRUMENTS TO MEASURE ALIGNMENT
Customers of the e-commerce have recognized that e-commerce and align-
ment of strategies are synonymous terms. These could affect measurement of
alignment or value derived from the applications support process and eventual
alignment. Historically, there have been a number of challenges in aligning corporate
strategies and creating an objective measurement of alignment improvement over
time. It is important that measurement focuses on business objectives, end-user
participation and satisfaction, reaching and sustaining alignment, tracking and
measuring factors (such as economic and social responsibility) that affect alignment
and communicate on alignment improvement. While remaining focused on these
reported items, the alignment team must also be able to measure and report on their
accomplishments.
They should be able to meet the challenges of being able to objectively measure
alignment as performed by the management team and at the same time facilitate a
process of continuous improvement of the alignment of the strategies; in other
words, there should be a process to measure the alignment. Managers need to have
a metric available that allows them to measure value in terms of business output and
the following is required:
•
Good metrics of past and anticipated future Internet strategies
•
Sound management
•
Detailed and disciplined tracking
•
An agreed approach for management
•
Good internal communication to all role players.
Measurement should be adaptable to both traditional application support and
to enterprise resource planning on alignments. For the alignment team, the
measurement approach should provide a focus on the end product - alignment of
all strategies (deliverables that provide value to the organization) rather than simply
tracking the alignment of strategies. It also ensures management visibility, in that
communications show results in terms of accomplishments and milestones met. It
should also provide an effective measurement capability that should be objective
and reflects measurement capacity and alignment tracking.

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    89
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Kiani (1998) argues that the current decade has witnessed evolution in the
media environment and indicated that e-commerce could grow in importance. The
opportunities offered by this new environment are still unknown and it is this fact that
organizations should keep in mind while aligning all strategies. Kiani suggests new
concepts and models for marketers to be kept in mind while aligning strategies.
Organizations should keep in mind that they all compete in two worlds - a physical
world that people can see and a virtual world made of information. It is thus clear
that information should play a role while alignment of strategies takes place. The
two-way communication channel between consumer and corporation, Kiani
suggests, should be incorporated during the alignment process. This communication
should be more in the way of dialogue.
The methodology could be to create a database of economic transaction
histories and this database should be incorporated during the alignment process by
management. This database would be moving all the time and it would mean that
the alignment process would be more difficult and moving all the time to keep track
of factors that could affect alignment. The unit of measurement could be the value
of each Internet customer to the organization. Marketing strategy will be measured
by changes in the asset value of the customer’s base over time. Alignment of the
strategies should be more flexible as niches too small to be served profitability could
become viable as marketing strategies improves.
Opportunities on the WWW are equal for all players - regardless of size and
this would be affected by the information available to the consumers. Customers
could thus help with the alignment of strategies and become a ‘partner’ of the
organization. Organizations have earned the right to the digital relationship and they
have to shift their alignment if they continuously enhance the value they offer
consumers. Alignment of strategies should keep in mind that strategies on Internet
marketing and e-commerce would be how to attract users, engage the users’
interest and participation, learn about the preferences of consumers and ensure that
there is interaction.
With the flood of data produced by today, organizational decision makers
must do something to allow players to extract the correct knowledge from the
available information. Recent advances on the Internet and visualization technolo-
gies provide many organizations the capability to start using human visual/spatial
capabilities to solve abstract problems found in business and as such the e-
commerce aspect of the Internet. This could allow the decision maker to separate
the rubbish from the best that there is. To achieve this, organizations must use e-
commerce well and increase the value provided to normal and Internet customers.
The Internet will force organizations to evaluate how and when they should start to
use the Internet to create additional business value to their organization. Some

90   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
organizations could rely on strategic use of enterprise-wide e-commerce to
enhance its competitive position as an established supplier of the goods they are
marketing normally and on the Internet.
Consultants provide many measurement services. The statement that could be
made is, “if you cannot measure it, you cannot align it.” Once the organization
establishes some objectives and goals, e-commerce can facilitate them through a
set of technology initiatives and once organizations have that strategic sense,
managers can identify criteria as to how this project creates value to the organization
and how it can be used to help with alignment.
Many organizations employ the balanced scorecard technique to measure the
e-commerce overall success in an ongoing process. This scorecard gauges things
such as internal stakeholders’ satisfaction, measures the system and economic
values, rates the value and quality of that work and uses social responsibility that
measure and help with the alignment of the organization’s strategies. The report card
is broken into three categories: responsiveness, value and quality. The users rate
things such as deliverables, establishment of timelines, accurately identified timelines
and whether the solutions meet the expected ROI. This scorecard gives employees
the opportunity for dialogue with business users if results fall short. The balanced
scorecard report card can be used to link the alignment of the strategies, regardless
of the investment that was done. Things such as the business outcomes and
organization desires, ensuring that key business holders are involved and the issues
around change management would affect alignment. It is therefore about setting
realistic, tangible and clearly communicated goals, ensuring that the entire team is
speaking the same language and this could help with alignment.
To understand the success better organizations can use the balance scorecard
to develop a model of organizational performance that could emphasize the
contribution of e-commerce and the Internet to different dimensions of the
performance. Some organizations would be able to prove that e-commerce, when
properly aligned with the strategies can contribute to the organizations overall
success and market leadership. Computer Simulation and Human Thought could
help because strategic advantage could be obtained through effective use of the
natural strengths each has to offer to improve the quality of the decision-making on
outcomes such as e-commerce.
Instruments that could be used to determine if the
Organization’s Strategies are aligned
The important thing to remember is to determine if the organization has aligned
the strategies; one of their tools could be a questionnaire. The questionnaire could

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    91
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
be scored as follows. Count each category and determine what the people think of
the alignment of strategies. If there are more Not Sures or Disagrees than Agrees,
then there might be a problem. The steps to be taken would ensure open
communication lines. The next table can help determine this.
The questionnaire available could be used in conjunction with the balanced
scorecard approach. The balanced scorecard should keep enterprises such as e-
commerce in mind and could be as follows: There should be different categories,
combining it closely with the questionnaire, such as customer perspective, innova-
tion and learning perspective, internal business processes perspective and the
financial perspective. All of these categories should be discussed or be part of a
decision framework where the different topics could include the goals for each
perspective, the measurement of each perspective, the metrics being used, the
targets and the actual that could be measured. For customer perspective, organi-
zations need to remember that this could help with better alignment but should not
carry as much weight as the internal metrics.
The innovation and learning perspective should be important as this is where
new stuff such as e-commerce would be added and this would affect the alignment
of all strategies. All new innovations and possible innovations should be added here.
The internal business perspective should be used, as we need to ensure that
employees have kept track of all the perspectives and that they need to know how
to work with data, information and knowledge. The financial perspective should
concentrate on increased efficiency, effectiveness and transformation and invest-
ment. As different measurement issues exist for these, they should be placed and
used as and where needed.
SUMMARY
E-commerce will develop over the next couple of years on the Internet and it
is possible that organizations will reap economic benefits from using it.  As one of
the ‘products’ of the Internet, e-commerce will therefore emerge as an efficient yet
effective mode of conducting global commerce. The problem is, as mentioned in this
article, that managers still doubt the economic impact and profitability it has. In the
process it is creating new opportunities and challenges for today’s businesses,
creating new market structures, and changing the alignment of the organization. An
increasing focus on delivery speed and an increasing degree of uncertainty
challenges all organizations. The question: How do organizations keep up while still
delivering business value was answered.
This article has addressed the importance of economics on the strategic
alignment of organizations. The article also looked at the strategic dimension of e-

92   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
commerce in the organization and addressed the issue of e-commerce forecasting,
e-commerce alignment and e-commerce, the leverage effect and the measurement
of alignment while keeping the effect of economics in mind.
Organizations that survive and thrive in the new economy and use all to ensure
that their strategies are aligned are those with better ideas than the rest. These
organizations normally produce better products, novel interpretations of the market
(e-commerce in this instance), innovative management strategies and the ability to
create a unified strategic alignment where pools of talent, both inside and outside
the organization, ensure that all stays on track and as the organization moves, the
alignment moves to ensure that everything is in ‘harmony’.
Table 1: A Sample Questionnaire that can help determine the Level of
Strategic Alignment
Questions 
Agree 
Disagree 
Not 
Sure 
1. 
Executive management is involved in all strategic information 
 
decisions and reference the formal business and information 
 
strategic plans. 
 
 
 
2. 
Customers, users and industry are regularly  surveyed 
 
regarding the information needs and problems related to doing 
 
business with the  organization. 
 
 
 
3. 
Technology is invested into only after establishing a business 
 
use for the decisions. 
 
 
 
4. 
The decision-making and operational roles of executives, 
 
managers and users are overlapping. 
 
 
 
5. 
Executives, managers and users understand and practice the 
 
concepts of managing data at all levels.  
 
 
 
6. 
Executives, managers and users understand and practice the 
 
concepts of changing information into knowledge at all levels.  
 
 
 
7. 
Information Services uses graphical, easy to  understand 
 
methods of explaining how knowledge supports the 
 
organization's strategy.  
 
 
 
8. 
IT can help explain to you how the organization uses 
 
frameworks to align all strategies 
 
 
 
9. 
More than half the IT projects are under budget and on time. 
 
 
 
10. 
You know exactly how many IT projects are currently being 
 
conducted. 
 
 
 
11. 
You know exactly why and how to use all information and 
 
knowledge available 
 
 
 
12. 
You know how to apply the decision framework (if available) 
 
that will be used for strategic alignment.  
 
 
 
 

Managing the Strategic Alignment of Organizations    93
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
REFERENCES
Bandyopadhyay K., Mykytyn P. & Mykytyn M. (1999). A framework for
integrated risk management in information technology, Management Deci-
sion 37 (/5).
Bloodgood J.M & Salisbury W.D. (1998). If the IT strategy fits wear it: Matching
strategic change efforts with IT efforts, Proceedings of 1998 Americas
Conference, Baltimore, Maryland, August 14-16
Child. (1992) cited by 1998 in A Process-oriented Assessment of the Alignment
of Information Systems and Business Strategy: Implications for Business
Value, Proceedings of 1998 Americas Conference, Baltimore, Maryland,
August 14-16
Cutter Consortium. (1999). Weekly e-mail service for IT professionals - Using IT
work units (dated 14/09/99) and E-business software practices (dated 01/
09/99).
Gibson N., Holland C. & Light B. (1998). Identwing Misalignment between
Strategic Vision and Legacy Information Systems in Organizations, Proceed-
ings of 1998 Americas Conference, Baltimore, Maryland, August 14-16
Highsmith J. (1999). Thriving in Turbulent Times, White paper by Cutter
Consortium
Kiani G.R. (1998). Marketing opportunities in the digital world, Internet Re-
search: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, 8 (2).
Lubbe S. (1999). Leverage effect, Working paper - Department of Computer
Science and Information Systems, Vista University, Bloemfontein
Oxford University Press. (1996). Oxford Dictionary and Thesaurus.
Reich B.H. & Benbasat L. (1996). Measuring the Linkage between Business
and Information Technology Objectives, MIS Quarterly 20(1)
Sohn C. (1998). How Information Systems provide competitive advantage: An
Organizational learning perspective, Proceedings of 1998 Americas Con-
ference, Baltimore, Maryland, August 14-16
Tallon P. T. & Kraemer K.L. (1998). A Process-oriented Assessment of the
Alignment of Information Systems and Business Strategy: Implications for
Business Value, Proceedings of 1998 Americas Conference, Baltimore,
Maryland, August 14-16
Tallon P.P, Kraemer K.L. & Gurbaxani V. (1999). Fact or Fiction: The reality
behind Executive Perceptions of IT Business Value, Research paper July 29,
1999
Ulrich & Lake (1990) cited by Sohn C. 1998 in How Information Systems provide
competitive advantage: An Organizational learning perspective, Proceedings

94   Lubbe
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
of 1998 Americas Conference, Baltimore, Maryland, August 14- 16
Whiteley D. (1999) Merging Electronic Commerce Technologies for Competitive
advantage, Proceedings of 1998 Americas Conference, Baltimore, Mary-
land, August 14-16
White G.K. & Manning B.J. (1998). Commercial WWW site appeal: How does
it affect online food and drink consumers’ purchasing behaviour? Internet
Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, 8 (1).

Online Customer Service    95
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter VI
Online Customer Service
Rick Gibson
American University, USA
ABSTRACT
The purpose of this study is to find an effective online customer service
strategy. Although the effectiveness of the online customer service will vary
and depend on the type of business the company is involved in, the usage of
different types of tools in this arena have proven to be more useful than others.
Effectiveness in this work will be used, in the sense that the more effective
strategy will lead to more satisfied customers, a higher customer retention
rate and higher revenue for the business.

96   Gibson
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
ONLINE CUSTOMER SERVICE
Why does online customer service have to be researched? Online customer
service has become an integral part of success for companies conducting business
on the Web. The Internet is changing the way firms interact with customers.
However, according to the research that has been done on the subject, it is found
that most companies are not fully utilizing the Internet fully for online customer
service. For example, almost 70 percent of shoppers abandon their shopping carts
before making a purchase, primarily due to the lack of online customer service
(Bernett, 2000).
This finding is very engaging since it points out that many web businesses lose
business because of the ineffectiveness of online customer service. Moreover,
unlike in the off-line world, the customer can easily switch from one business to
another with a click of a mouse (Motti, 2000). Another interesting fact is that more
than 50 percent of e-commerce websites do not have any type of customer service
that guides the customer to the web page where he/she can get help (Trott, 2000).
In addition, it is estimated that $1.6 billion was lost in sales in 1999 due to the lack
of online customer service (Lucent Technologies).
Web businesses have found out that customer service is as important in the
virtual store as it is in the traditional “brick and mortar” store (Bernett, 2000). In
addition, the purposes of providing quality customer service is the same as in the
web as in the “brick and mortar” stores, which are attracting and retaining target
customers in order to increase sales and profits (Boone & Kurtz, 1995). However,
the methods of conducting customer service off-line and online differ greatly. The
businesses that are not online usually use call centers where customer service agents
assist the customers via telephone. On the contrary, online businesses rely on
several methods in supporting their customers. An interesting study conducted by
Forrester Research indicated that in 1997, 97 percent of customer interactions
regarding customer service were via telephone. The remaining 3 percent were via
e-mail (2%) and the Internet (1%). However, it is estimated that in 2003, 56 percent
of customer interaction with the customer service department will be via the web.
Thirty percent will be via e-mail; nine percent will be via cross-channels (with the
usage of multiple means), and only five percent will be via telephone (Cincom).
Most traditional retailers view customer service as a problem solving action
after the; sale. The businesses that want to assist their customers online effectively
will have to disagree with the statement above. In e-commerce, customer service
begins the moment that a visitor enters the website. The customers have to be
assisted during shopping in case they have product questions and/or product
locations. They have to be able to find help during the purchasing process in case

Online Customer Service    97
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
they have questions regarding the billing issues, receipts and the checkout process.
Moreover, after ordering the products, they have to be able to learn about the status
of order. In addition, after the customers receive the product, they have to be
provided with the information regarding the product setup and product returns
(Bernett, 2000).
Several tools are currently used in assisting customers online. These are: E-
Mail, Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ), Co-Browsing (Escorted Browsing),
Application Sharing, Text-Based Chat, Video-Conferencing, Voice Over the
Internet Protocol (VOIP), and online customer service agents (Lucent Technolo-
gies).
E-mail is the most common and the easiest form of communication on the web
at present. This method is usually preferred since the customer does not need a
special hardware to send and receive e-mails. Web-based mail applications let the
user to send and receive e-mails without using special software. . There are more
advantages on the customer side with regard to using e-mail. First, the customer can
send e-mail anytime. Another advantage is that it is much more convenient writing
a quick e-mail than going through a telephone queue and being transferred among
customer service agents.
Because of these factors of convenience, websites begin to receive thousands
of e-mails everyday. However, dealing with a big load of e-mail has been
problematic for most of the websites. A study by Jupiter Communications reviewed
125 leading web sites. It sent them relevant consumer questions by e-mail to see
the response time of the websites. Forty-two percent of the sites never responded
to the e-mail, took more than five days in responding or simply they did not have
an e-mail address on their site for customer service purposes (Romeo, 1999).
There are a number of technologies used to sort out the e-mails in order to achieve
a higher response time and these will be discussed later in the study.
Frequently asked questions are the questions that are routinely asked by
customers on a specific site. These questions can be handled in three possible ways.
The first one is to place a frequently asked questions and answers area on the
website so that a customer can look at that web page before contacting the
customer service. The second way is to e-mail a preconfigured template document
to the customer. The third way is to use an auto responder. These methods are
effective, however it makes it hard to follow-up with the customers to see if they
were satisfied with the service (Hunter, 1998).
Co-Browsing (Escorted Browsing), Application Sharing, Text-Based Chat,
Voice Over the Internet Protocol (VOIP), Video-Conferencing, and online
customer service agents all use live help in order to assist the customers. Co-

98   Gibson
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Browsing enables the agent and the customer to co-navigate an Internet site which
means that they see the same web-page at the same time. This takes advantage of
the push technology where the customer service representative can push pages to
the customer (Lucent Technologies). This tool also allows the customer service
representative to up-sell and cross-sell (Schefter, 2000).
Microsoft Net Meeting, and Netscape Collabra are the two leading off-the-
shelf communication applications that are used in this technology. In addition, Java
applets or ActiveX control can also be used by the website if the customer does not
have a communication application that is capable of co-browsing (Genesys).
Application Sharing is different from co-browsing since in this case, an
application can be viewed and controlled at the same time by the customer and the
agent. For example, if an agent wants to show a drawing to the customer, they can
both use a graphics application. The downside of application sharing is that it
requires more bandwidth as well as an installed software in both the customer’s and
the agent’s computer (Genesys).
Text-Based chat (text conferencing) is an older technology than application
sharing where two or more people communicate by sending messages to each
other. There are numerous advantages in this technology. The users do not have to
have a PC with multimedia capabilities. In addition, firewall issues do not affect text-
based chat. Some canned responses can be used by the agent to save time.
Moreover, it can be used to supplement Voice Over IP applications where a word
or a phrase that is used by one of the parties cannot be understood. In that case,
the party who spoke can type what he/she said (Lucent, 2000). Chat technology
can be used with different applications. It can be in an HTML form, a Java applet,
a browser plug-in, or a stand-alone application such as ICQ or Mirc (Genesys).
Voice Over the Internet Protocol is one of the most useful tools that are used
in the online customer service arena. This tool allows voice calls to be sent over the
Internet. This is advantageous for the customer since he/she does not need to use
an additional line to talk to the agent. It is beneficial for the agent because they can
look up information while assisting the customer (Bennett, 2000). However, both
parties have to have some hardware and software that allows Voice over IP. A
VoIP-enabled application, a speaker and a microphone have to be installed in both
parties’ computers. In addition, the quality of the communication can be low
depending on the traffic of the network and the voice compression. The 56k
modems allow Voice Over IP. However, with such a modem, it is difficult to
navigate the web and talk at the same time; one of the applications will suffer due
to the lack of bandwidth. Most VOIP applications use the H.323 protocol.
Microsoft Net meeting and Netscape Collabra are compliant with this protocol
(Cincom).

Online Customer Service    99
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Video conferencing over the net is uncommon at present in the customer
service arena for a number of reasons. First, a video camera in both parties is
necessary. Second, a quality video conferencing session requires a high bandwidth
with powerful computers. Third, many Internet users may not want to show their
faces to the agent. However, this can be solved by one-way conferencing where
the customer can see the agent but the agent cannot see the customer. This approach
eliminates the need for a video camera on the customer side. The protocol that
supports Voice over IP (H.323) also supports videoconferencing. However, a
H.323 compliant application such as Net Meeting is necessary to run a
videoconferencing session (Genesys).
Online customer service agent is software that tries to assist the Internet
customers in a timely and a more human way. This software (also called a bot) acts
like a human customer service agent and tries to anticipate the customer’s needs,
based on their click trail on a website. Moreover, it is customizable and it uses facial
expressions to add a human element to the interaction. Although this technology is
in its infancy, it narrows down the problem for the human representative, thus cutting
down the costs. The average call to a live customer service representative costs
about $4, whereas an automated interaction costs about a quarter (Trott, 2000).
Artificial intelligence plays a crucial role on the effectiveness of a bot. The most
advanced bots are capable of learning as they interact. In addition, these bots also
can remember the actions users took and the preferences that they made. It is also
suggested that these bots should have scripts ready for predictable questions asked
in their websites. This can be done by the help of a database. However, the same
question can be asked in many different ways and this should not be overlooked
(Zhivago, 2000)
Some tools that enable the interaction between the customer and the agent are
front-end tools. There are other tools that are used by the agents to assist their
customers better and that are invisible to the customers. The tools of “Customer
Relationship Management” are essential to an effective web-based customer
service. Customer Relationship Management is defined as’’ a strategy reflecting the
business’ processes and technology that can be combined to optimize revenue,
profitability, and customer loyalty (Microsoft). CRM is about creating relationships
with customers on an individual basis in order to transform the information collected
into a useful tool to treat each customer differently. This customer-focused
approach is a key element in creating an effective online customer service. This
approach creates customer loyalty, which. is extremely important since it is much
harder to gain new customers than retaining the existing ones. Some statistics
indicate the importance of customer loyalty. The top 20 percent of the customers

100   Gibson
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
delivers 80 percent of the revenues. This is called the “80/20 Pareto Principle.” In
addition, the top 20 percent of the customers deliver most of the profits. Moreover,
the existing customers deliver up to 90 percent of revenues. All of these figures show
that customer satisfaction and loyalty should be of utmost importance to every
business (Curry, 2000).
The database technology enables the online customer agents to acquire
information about their customers in order to provide them a better and personal-
ized service. Any type of information gathering whether it is from a simple shopping
list for a collection of customer information is considered a customer database as
long as it is computerized. This technology stores the information about the
customers such as their transactions, interactions, profiles and purchase histories in
order to provide them personalized customer service on the net. Data Warehousing
and Data Mining are the two major technologies that are used in Customer
Relationship Management that enable the online customer service agents to provide
a better service to their customers (Coronel, 2000).
Data Warehouses were developed as data storage facilities. These data
warehouses receive data from the operational databases as well as other sources
in order to provide a comprehensive data pool from which information can be
selected. The most crucial aspect of data warehouses is that the data that is stored
in structures is able to generate specific information (Gardner, 1998).
Data mining is the process where the marketer tries to find trends and patterns
in huge amounts of data. The goal of this process is to search through large quantities
of data and discover new information that can be useful for the company. “The
benefit of data mining is to turn this newfound knowledge into actionable results,
such as increasing a customer’s likelihood to buy” (Groth, 2000). Data mining also
enables the company access to detailed knowledge of customer profiles, and the
ability to analyze customer satisfaction.
There are also some essential components of online customer service that have
to be in place regardless of the business. The website has to provide simple
navigation, fast image download times, and fast access to information. The human
aspect should also be of utmost importance such as quick e-mail responses, and
toll-free phone numbers for customer service. Furthermore, the product informa-
tion has to be detailed on the website, such as the descriptions, specifications,
pricing, FAQs, smart shopping carts, and cross-purchasing suggestions. Another
crucia1 component is the issue of incentives such as gift-wrapping, promotions,
money-back and on-time delivery guarantees, and offers of free shipping and
handling. Moreover, a trust has to be built between the site and the customer. This
can be achieved by placing the explanations regarding the secure transactions, and

Online Customer Service    101
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the information regarding privacy of data collected. Lastly, a follow-up mechanism
has to be in place at the website such as confirming the e-mails, an automated
shipping/tracking system, prompt delivery, and e-mail satisfaction surveys (LeClaire
& Picozzi, 2000).
As it can be seen, the online customer service arena is a very important
component of achieving customer satisfaction and retaining customers. Many tools
and strategies can be used to achieve an effective online customer service. The
question is how effective are these tools and where they have to be used. Each tool
has advantages and disadvantages. An online business has to evaluate the pros and
the cons of each tool and then decide the most appropriate tools for its website.
REFERENCES
Bernett, H. (2000). E-Commerce, Customer Service, and the Web-Enabled Call
Center. Presentation at American University.
Boone, L. E. & Kurtz, D. L. (1995). Contemporary Marketing Plus. Forth
Worth, TX: The Dryden Press. .
Cincom. Transforming Your Call Center Into a Multimedia Contact Center.
Available at: http://www.crmxchange.com/whitecacers/cincom3.html.
Coronel, R. (2000). Database Systems: Design. Implementation and Manage-
ment. Cambridge, MA: Course Technology.
Curry, J. (2000). The Customer Marketing Method: How to Implement and
Profit from Customer Relationship Management. New York, NY: The
Free Press.
Gardner, S.  (1999). E Building the data warehouse. Communications of the
ACM. 41 (9), 52-60.
Genesys. Customer Service on the Internet; Redefining The Call Center. Available
at:  http://www.telemkt.com/whitepapers/genesys-redefining.html.
Groth, R. Data Mining: Building Competitive Advantage. Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Hunter, S. (1999). Improving Your Online Customer Service: Seven Common
Mistakes Businesses Make With E-Mail That Can Cost You Sales. Available
at:  [On-Line].
LeClaire, J. & Pirozzi, L. (2000). Understand Online Customer Service. Available
at:  http://w-vvw.workz.com/html/404.html.
Lucent Technologies. (2002). Web-Enabled Customer Contact Centers. Avail-
able at: http://www.crmxchange.com/whitepapers/lucent.htmi.
Microsoft Corporation (Year). Overview of Customer Relationship Management.

102   Gibson
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Available at: http://www.microsoft.com/business/crm/resources/overview.asp.
Mottl, J. (2000). Customer Service Is E- Tailer’s Costly Challenge. Available at:.
http://www.intemetweek.com.
Romeo, J. (1999). Online customer service comes of age. Available at: http://
www.ecommercetimes.com/printer.
Schefter, P. (2000). E-loyalty. your secret weapon on the web. Harvard Business
Review,  105.
Trott, B. (2000). Online ‘agents’ evolve for customer service. Infoworld. 31.
Zhivago, K. (2000). To bot or not to bot? Business 2.0. 54.

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    103
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter VII
E-Commerce and Executive
Information Systems:
A Managerial Perspective
Geoff Erwin
Cape Technikon, South Africa
Udo Averweg
University of Natal, South Africa
ABSTRACT
The rapid spread of connectivity via the World Wide Web has dramatically
altered the ways in which organizations deal with customers and the methods
that executives adopt to be informed about business operations. This chapter
reviews Executive Information Systems (EIS) and the way in which EIS
interacts with e-commerce applications.
INTRODUCTION
The emergence of e-commerce as a business transactions mechanism has
introduced new considerations into strategic decision-making and the design of
decision support information systems. Information Systems (IS) at strategic
decision-making levels are commonly characterized as being ‘executive’. The
impact of such decisions, by definition, will be significant (Turban, 2001). IS for

104   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
executives therefore require careful planning in their features and applicability to
organizational situations. Executive Information Systems (EIS) are designed to
serve the needs of executive users in strategic planning and decision-making
(Srivihok, 1998) and for making strategic and tactical decisions (Salmeron et al.,
2001).
The technology for EIS is evolving rapidly and future systems are likely to be
different (Sprague & Watson, 1996). EIS is now clearly in a state of flux. Turban
(2001) concurs: “EIS is going through a major change”. Emerging (Web-based)
technologies can redefine the utility, desirability and economic viability of EIS
technology (Volonino et al., 1995). These technologies may need to be applied to
resolve one of the most challenging and critical components of an EIS - data
accessibility - which often incurs the greatest time, expense and delay in EIS
implementation. The accessibility, navigation and management of data and informa-
tion for improved executive decision-making are becoming critical in the new
global business environment (Averweg & Erwin, 2000).
The evolution of Web-based business activity has resulted in the term e-
Business being used to refer to three categories of business activity:
•
Business-to-Employee (B2E):  Intranet-based applications internal to a
company;
•
Business-to-Consumer (B2C):  Internet-based applications for a company’s
customers; and
•
Business-to-Business (B2B):  Extranet-based applications for a company’s
business partners. (An IOS:  Inter Organizational System).
The term e-commerce often refers only to B2B (Mc Nurlin & Sprague, 2002).
However, in this Chapter the term e-commerce is used to refer to all three
categories. EIS, specifically in the e-commerce environment, is the focus of this
chapter.
BACKGROUND
Concern about Information Technology (IT) impact on society, organizations
and people is not new. Some 170 years ago, British intellectuals expressed
philosophical arguments about the effects of the Industrial Revolution on society
(Turban et al., 1999). While there are philosophical, technological, social and other
differences between that society and our own, there are people nowadays who
believe that mankind is threatened by the evolution of technology. However, our
society has not rejected technology and we recognize that computers and technol-
ogy are essential to maintaining and supporting our culture. IT has become the major

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    105
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
facilitator of business activities in the world today. It is assumed that members of an
organization will reap the fruits of new technologies and that computers have no
negative impact on society, organizations and people.
IS are technology-based innovations created and used by individuals, orga-
nizations and societies (Allen, 2000). Technological advances have allowed
organizations to utilize IT applications in all aspects of organizational management
(Khosrowpour, 1998). IS to support senior executives have been available for well
over a decade (Poon & Wagner, 2001). EIS grew out of the development of IS
to be used directly by executives and used to augment the supply of information by
subordinates (Srivihok, 1998). EIS is a technology that is continually emerging in
response to managers’ specific decision-making needs (Turban et al., 1999).
The ubiquitous nature of the Internet and its universal connectivity/networked
capability are dramatically revolutionizing the manner in which organizations and
individuals access and share information (Anandarajan & Simmers, 2001). Many
organizations hope to achieve general distributed computing across large networks
or even across organizational boundaries (PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 2000). The
adoption of networks in day-to-day and critical organizational operations has made
them indispensable for co-operative work (Theoharakis & Serpanos, 2002).
Advances in computer technologies combined with telecommunication tech-
nologies have lead to the development of the Internet and its most popular
application, the World Wide Web (‘the Web’) (Khosrowpour, 2000). A new set
of challenges has arizen as organizations integrate IT into all functions and activities
of the modern organization (Khosrowpour & Liebowitz, 1997).
As the usage of IT increases, Web-enabled information technologies can
provide the means for greater access to information from disparate computer
applications and other information resources (Eder, 2000). Many organizations
have benefited from the technologies of the Web (Khosrowpour, 1998). These
technologies include: intranet, Internet, extranet, e-commerce, Wireless Applica-
tion Protocol (WAP) and other mobile technologies. E-commerce and its impact
on EIS implementation and usage is the focus of this chapter. There exists a high
degree of similarity between the characteristics of a ‘good EIS’ and Web-based
technologies (Tang et al., 1997).
Executives deal mostly with ill-structured decision-making (Lee & Chen,
1997). Definitions of e-commerce and e-business are varied (see, for example,
Rockart & DeLong, 1998; Carlsson & Widmeyer, 1990; Watson et al., 1991;
Westland & Walls, 1991; Whymark, 1991; Millet & Mawhinney, 1992; Rainer et
al., 1992). All definitions identify the need for information that supports decisions
about the business as the most important reason for the existence of EIS (Khan,
1996). Executives use EIS to extract, filter, compress and track critical data (Butler,

106   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
1992). EIS also allow executives seamless access to complex multi-dimensional
models so that they can see their business at a glance (Harris, 2000). EIS
applications support executive information needs and decision-making activities
(Gillan & McPherson, 1993). An effective way to evaluate the success of an EIS
is to obtain opinions from the executive users (Monash University, 1996). In this
chapter, EIS is defined as “a computerized system that provides executives with…
access to internal and external information that is relevant to their critical success
factors” (Watson et al., 1997). While a definition is useful, describing the capabili-
ties and characteristics of EIS provides a richer understanding.
Earlier studies described EIS capabilities that are focused on providing
information that serves executive needs. Srivihok (1998) reports that these
capabilities are concerned with both the quality of the system (e.g., user friendliness)
and information quality (e.g., relevance). Sprague and Watson (1996) identify the
following capabilities or characteristics of EIS:
•
tailored to individual executive users;
•
extract, filter, compress and track critical data;
•
provide online status access, trend analysis, exception reporting and
‘drill down’;
•
access and integrate a broad range of internal and external data;
•
user-friendly and require little or no training to use;
•
used directly by executives without intermediaries; and
•
present graphical, tabular and/or textual information.
Other researchers suggest additional capabilities and characteristics of EIS:
•
flexible and adaptable (Carlsson & Widmeyer, 1990);
•
should contain tactical or strategic information that executives do not currently
receive (Burkan, 1991);
•
facilitate executives’ activities in management such as scanning, communica-
tion and delegating (Westland & Walls, 1991);
•
make executive work more effective and efficient (Friend, 1992);
•
assist upper management to make more effective decisions (Warmouth &
Yen, 1992);
•
incorporate an historical ‘data cube’ and ‘soft’ information (Mallach, 1994)
(‘datacube’ is a structure in which data is organized at the core of a multi-
dimensional online analytical processing (OLAP) system (Ross, 2001) and
‘soft’ information includes opinions, ideas, predictions, attitudes, and plans);
•
provide support for electronic communications (Rainer & Watson, 1995a);
and

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    107
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
enhanced relational and multi-dimensional analysis and presentation, friendly
data access, user-friendly graphical interfaces, imaging, hypertext, intranet
access, Internet access and modelling (Turban et al., 1999).
The terms ‘Executive Information Systems’ and ‘Executive Support Systems
(ESS)’ are sometimes used interchangeably (Turban et al., 1999). However, ESS
usually refers to a system with a more extensive set of capabilities than an EIS
(Mallach, 1994). Rainer and Watson (1995a) and Watson et al. (1991) report that
these capabilities include the provision of data analysis capabilities (eg., spread-
sheets, query languages and DSS) and the provision of organizational tools (eg.,
electronic calendars, personal information filing and management) (Beheshti,
1995). Kuo  (1998) proposes an ecological model of managerial intuition for the
purpose of developing effective ESS. Turban et al. (1999) define ESS as ‘a
comprehensive support system that goes beyond EIS to include analysis support,
communications, office automation, and intelligence’.
Other titles for EIS are ‘Everyone’s Information System’ (Wheeler et al.,
1993), ‘everyone information system’ (Frolick & Robichaux, 1995), ‘enterprise-
wide’ EIS (Frolick & Robichaux, 1995) and ‘Enterprise Information Systems’
(Post & Anderson, 1997; O’Brien, 1999). O’Brien (1999) states that (the
evolution of various) names reflect the fact that more features, such as Web
browsing, electronic mail and groupware tools, are being added to many systems
to make them more useful to executive managers. Turban et al. (1999) report that
sometimes where EIS applications embrace a range of products targeted to support
professional decision-makers throughout the organization, the term ‘Everybody’s
Information System’ is used. For the purposes of this chapter, the acronym EIS shall
mean “ExecutiveInformation Systems.”
ISSUES FOR E-COMMERCE AND EIS
Clearly, the Internet offers a wealth of new opportunities for e-commerce, but
also presents executives with a series of new challenges (Laudon & Laudon, 2000).
These challenges stem from the fact that Internet technology and its business
functions are relatively new.
It is commonly argued that IT affects the organization structure and strategy
and has a profound effect on management (Drucker, 1988; Leavitt & Whistler,
1988). It alters the nature of work in the workplace (Igbaria et al., 1994). The
Internet has fundamentally changed the ways in which much of the world commu-
nicates and does business (Hardaker, 2001). EIS can help managers keep
information of relevance to the organization’s success within easy access (Beheshti,

108   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
1995). For organizations to succeed in the current business environment, it is
important to develop policies to create an environment conducive to technological
innovation (Basu et al., 2000). This entails the need to prioritize available resources
to facilitate the development of implementation of new ideas and technologies (Lai
et al., 1993). The continued challenge remains in terms of ensuring adaptability and
flexibility of information interfaces - both internally and externally - required for
coping with dynamically changing business and competitive environments (Malhotra,
2001). As Mintzberg (1973) noted three decades ago, a manager performs several
roles in which the exchange and access to information is a critical aspect. Executives
(as most people) nowadays have an increased computing literacy and can
confidently locate online information due to extensive personal use of the Web - a
knowledge that is transferred to their business setting (Basu et al., 2000).
In research by Basu et al. (2000), traditional EIS saw limited diffusion within
the organization from the late 1980s to early or mid-1990s. In some instances, only
a few executives actually used the system. In other instances, more users were
logged but only on a small percentage of the system’s functions. The primary
reasons cited were that the system was too hard to use or had little added value for
the executive. Actual benefits were not aligned with high development costs.
During this period, globalization was increasing the expanse of business along
with the need for more collaboration and communication. Concurrent with these
conditions, Internet technologies began to emerge. Once the infrastructure for
Internet access existed, it was a small step to apply the technology to internal
applications. Nowadays, executives can confidently locate online information due
to extensive personal use of the Web. Furthermore vendors of decision support
software see a larger market for products that provide OLAP, spreadsheet-type
capabilities and Web-based solutions (Gray & Watson, 1998).
With the demise of early EIS, in the early to mid-1990s some organizations
surveyed (Basu et al., 2000) consciously discontinued these systems after conduct-
ing some level of value-based analysis. Other organizations gradually migrated to
intranet applications such as groupware, database querying, electronic calendars
and scheduling. All organizations have browser-based intranets. The Web browser
has become ‘an almost universal interface’ for end-user access (Gray & Watson,
1998). In summary, the catalysts of change away from traditional EIS implemen-
tations were as follows:
•
systems difficult to use;
•
high costs compared to value added;
•
lack of needed information;
•
dissatisfied executives;

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    109
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
globalization; and
•
better technological alternatives were becoming universally known.
Some studies suggest that others should access EIS besides executive users
(see Hasan, 1995; Volonino et al., 1995; Rai & Bajwa, 1997). These researchers
suggest that EIS should be viewed as technology to be used to solve major business
problems arising from global competitive and recessionary forces. Salmeron
(2001) notes EIS as the technology for information delivery for all business end
users. Kennedy (1995), and Messina and Sanjay (1995) report that EIS have
spread throughout organizations. The non-executive users or data providers
include personnel from functional areas that include treasurers, accounting manag-
ers and controllers. It is evident that EIS requires continuous input from three
different stakeholder groups (known as constituencies):
•
EIS executives and business end-users;
•
EIS providers (ie. persons responsible for developing and maintaining the
EIS); and
•
EIS vendors or consultants.
This multiple constituency approach has been used to investigate other types
of IS (see, for example, Hamilton & Chervany, 1981; Alavi, 1982; Hogue &
Watson, 1985; Watson et al., 1987). Rainer and Watson (1995b) suggest that
these three EIS stakeholder groups may have different ideas on factors affecting
successful EIS development and operation.
EIS flexibility should be considered in the development of an EIS in an
organization (Srivihok, 1998). Salmeron (2001) reports that if this were not so, EIS
would soon become a useless tool that would only deal with outdated problems and
would therefore not contribute to decision-making. EIS should be flexible to
support different classes of business data (e.g., external, internal, structured and
unstructured) and different levels of users (e.g., executives and non-executive
users). Turban et al. (1999) report that two types of EIS can be distinguished:
(1)
The one designed especially to support top executives; and
(2)
The EIS that is intended to serve a wider community of users.
Realizing the benefits from EIS, these users become the driving force behind
EIS development and implementation (Messina & Sanjay, 1995). With the
emergence of global IT, existing paradigms are being altered which are spawning
new considerations for successful IT implementation (Averweg & Erwin, 2000).
Web-based technologies, especially e-commerce, are causing a revisit to existing
IT implementation models, including EIS. The Web is ‘a perfect medium’ for

110   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
deploying decision support and EIS capabilities on a global basis (Turban et al.,
1999).
IT is a catalyst for fundamental changes in the structure, operations and
management of organizations (Dertouzos, 1997). Wreden (1997) reports that IT
capabilities support five business objectives: improving productivity (in 51% of
organizations), reducing cost (39%), improving decision-making (36%), enhancing
customer relationships (33%) and developing new strategic applications (33%).
Elliott (1992) notes that EIS use enables more analysis in decision-making, faster
problem identification and faster decision-making. Executives who use EIS most
frequently should notice the greatest increase in their decision-making speed
(Leidner & Elam, 1993). Leidner and Elam (1993) report that frequency of EIS use
and length of time of use are both significantly associated with an executive’s
decision-making process.
With the evolution of distributed computer technology, paved by the rapid
adoption of Web technology, there is a growing need for improved decision-
making at any time, anywhere and with any participants. Digital communication
requires a new business paradigm: being able to join and use any type of business
system any time, anywhere (Worthington-Smith, 2000). This is a real business
problem and is especially relevant to EIS. Palvia et al. (1996) argue that organiza-
tions need to incorporate a global dimension in the design of their EIS. These
researchers suggest that such global EIS will incorporate international information
that will be critical to executives of multinational and global organizations in order
for them to conduct business and compete globally.
E-commerce is changing the manner in which business is done, especially when
facilitated by appropriate support systems (Turban & Aronson, 1998). Turban and
Aronson (1998) note that the decision support of groups whose members are at
different locations has become an increasingly important topic because of the
increased emphasis on workgroups and teams. The computing environment is
rapidly changing to a global network and the Internet (World Wide Web) is the
enabling link of accessing information anywhere and at any time.
There is an increasing use of teams and teamwork in organizations (see, for
example, Navarro, 1992; Roberts, 1995). The major feature of networked
decision support is the use of several computers and databases connected by
networks  (Turban & Aronson, 1998). When people are working in teams
(especially when the members are in different locations and may be working at
different times), they need to communicate, collaborate and access a diverse set of
information sources in multiple forms (e.g., text, video, graphics and voice). Turban
and Aronson (1998) indicate that the major information architecture that supports
this distributed decision support environment consists of the Internet and intranets.

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    111
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The Internet is used to support interorganizational decision-making and provides
access to information outside the organization. Intraorganizational networked
decision support is achieved by the use of an intranet that allows people within an
organization to work with Internet tools and procedures. Many software and
hardware computing tools can be used to provide networked decision support.
These software tools are often known as groupware.
Networked computing allows organizations to conduct business electronically
among business partners. E-commerce is the execution of business via computer
networks. E-commerce means more than just another way to reach the market
since it also gives businesses the ability to share and manage knowledge, the most
valuable business commodity (Emery, 2001).
The Internet, intranets and extranets provide many benefits.  The Internet’s
global connectivity, ease of use, low cost and multimedia capabilities can be used
to create interactive applications, products and services (Laudon & Laudon,
2000).
There is a popular misconception that e-commerce is merely having a Web
site. However, this is not the case. There are many e-commerce applications (e.g.,
banking, shopping in online stores, malls, finding a job, conducting an auction,
collaborating electronically on research and development projects) and in order to
execute these applications, it is necessary to have supporting information, organi-
zational infrastructure and systems. Applications of e-commerce may be divided
into three categories: (1) buying and selling goods and services. These are
commonly referred to as electronic markets; (2) facilitating inter- and
intraorganizational flow of information, communication and collaboration. These
are sometimes referred to as interorganizational systems (IOS); and (3) providing
customer service. Attention is now focused on IOS.
An IOS involves information flow between two or more organizations (Turban
et al., 2000). Its major objective is efficient transaction processing (e.g., transmitting
orders, invoices and payments) using electronic data interchange (EDI) or extranets
(Senn, 1996). An IOS is a unified system encompassing several business partners.
A typical IOS will include an organization and its suppliers and/or customers. The
most prominent types of IOS are:
•
Electronic data interchange (EDI), which provides a secured B2B connection
over value-added networks (VANs). Before the introduction of the Internet,
e-commerce took the form of EDI over private networks (Mougayar, 1998);
•
Extranets which provide secured B2B connection over the Internet;
•
Electronic funds transfer (EFT);
•
Integrated messaging - delivery of e-mail and fax documents through a single
electronic transmission system that can combine EDI, electronic mail and

112   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
electronic forms;
•
Shared databases - information stored in repositories is shared between
trading partners and is accessible to all parties. The sharing is primarily done
over extranets; and
•
Supply chain management (SCM) - co-operation between an organization
and its suppliers and/or customers regarding demand forecasting, inventory
management and orders fulfillment can reduce inventories, speed shipments
and enable just-in-time manufacturing.
Better information leads to better decisions. Information from outside the
organization should be included in EIS (Chiusolo & Kleiner, 1995). Chiusolo and
Kleiner (1995) note the need for current and accurate information about the
organization and the world in general is common among all executives.
The global nature of e-commerce technology, its interactivity, resourcefulness
and rapid growth of supporting infrastructures (especially the Web) result in many
potential benefits to organizations (Turban et al., 2000) (e.g., expanding the
marketplace and reducing inventories). There are, however, limitations of e-
commerce. These can be grouped into technical and non-technical categories.
Some of the technical limitations of e-commerce for EIS are:
•
Insufficient telecommunication bandwidth;
•
Limited search facilities for filtering Web information;
•
Lack of system , reliability, standards and some communication protocols;
•
Continued evolution and rapid change of software development tools; and
•
Integration difficulty between the Internet and e-commerce software and
some existing applications and databases.
FUTURE TRENDS
E-commerce could become a significant global economic element during the
twenty-first century (Clinton & Gore, 1997). The infrastructure for e-commerce is
networked computing which is emerging as the standard computing environment
in business, government and home (Turban et al., 2000). Networked computing
connects several computers and other electronic devices by telecommunications
networks. This facilitates users accessing information stored in several places and
to communicate and collaborate with others. This new breed of computing is helping
many organizations (private and public) not only to excel but also frequently to
survive. Since the technologies required for networked computing are often
immature, organizations are only beginning to develop systems that are large steps
toward achieving an ideal that can probably only be approximated

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    113
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
(PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 2000). Clearly this new networked computing envi-
ronment has impacted existing IS and in turn impacts an organization’s EIS.
Turban et al. (2000) predict that e-commerce limitations will lessen or be
overcome. Appropriate planning can minimize their impact. These researchers
report that rapid progress in e-commerce is taking place. As technology improves
and experience accumulates, the ratio of e-commerce benefits to costs will increase
resulting in a greater rate of e-commerce adoption. [For a discussion of e-
commerce in developing countries, see Worthington-Smith (2001).]
Watson et al. (1997) suggest the following trends in EIS:
•
EIS are becoming more enterprise-wide with greater decision support
capabilities;
•
EIS are becoming used or integrated with software not specifically designed
for it, e.g., the World Wide Web technology; and
•
EIS are gaining in intelligence through the use of intelligent software agents.
Executives place substantial requirements on EIS (Turban & Aronson, 1998).
First, they often ask questions which require complex, real-time analysis for their
answers. Hence, many EIS are being linked to data warehouses and are built using
real time OLAP in separate multi-dimensional databases along with organizational
DSS. There are also efforts to use data warehouse and OLAP engines to perform
data mining (Han, 1998). Secondly, executives require systems that are easy to use,
easy to learn and easy to navigate. Turban and Aronson (1998) report that current
EIS generally possess these qualities. Thirdly, executives tend to have highly
individual work styles. While the current generation of EIS can be moulded to the
needs of the executive, it is difficult to alter the look and feel of the system or to alter
the way in which the user interacts with the system. Fourthly, any IS is essentially
a social system. The researchers note that one of the key elements of an EIS is the
electronic mail capability it provides for members of the executive team. Nowa-
days, the electronic mailing of multimedia documents is becoming critical. Given this
scenario, the EIS of the future will look significantly different from today’s systems.
As organizations become more global in nature, providing information about
international locations around the world is becoming critical to organizations’
success. The accuracy and timeliness of information for decision-making become
critical. The challenge has become to find ways to integrate information across the
enterprize (Ba et al., 1997). The transparency of the integration of the information
process is what makes Web technology so effective. Palvia et al. (1996) investi-
gated the types of data that executives require in two scenarios: (1) introducing a
new service or product into other countries; and (2) distribution channel expansion
into other countries. Most of the executive information requirements include

114   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
demographic and marketing data from public sources and ‘soft’ information from
personal contacts. Palvia et al. (1996) indicate that EIS can be used to provide the
‘soft’ information.
Basu et al. (2000) note that traditional EIS are ‘a thing of the past’ and most
organizations have moved to other types of systems, such as WIIS. However,
Salmeron (2001) reports ‘a trend towards direct use of EIS by Spanish executives’.
Lederer et al. (1998) report that organizations adopting WIIS indicate that the most
important benefit of being on the Web is to ‘enhance competitiveness or create
strategic advantage’. Given the Web’s ease of use in multiple environments and
positive user perceptions, Basu et al. (2000) suggest that WIIS will be more widely
adopted and diffused among organizations. They caution, however, that whether
WIIS actually meet the information requirements of executives will de determined
over the next five years as more organizations implement and experience these
systems. Users will continue to pull and receive pushed information from the Web
(Kendall & Kendall, 1999). The research by Basu et al. (2000) clearly shows that
the advent of the Internet Age and resultant Web-based technologies have
significantly impacted traditional EIS in organizations in the USA. Whether such a
similar EIS situation exists in organizations in South Africa is currently the focus of
a research project.
CONCLUSION
It is important to recognize the role of the Web in decision support (Gray and
Watson, 1998). Web-based technologies affect how all applications are devel-
oped and used. Gray and Watson (1998) note that many organizations are building
decision support applications that have a multi-tier architecture consisting of a
browser, Webserver and database. Recognizing this shift, vendors of decision
support software (e.g., EIS) are making their products Web-enabled. Applications
can now be accessed by browsers but still provide the capabilities long associated
with decision support software (Gray & Watson, 1998).
Nowadays there is a need for organizations to adapt to constantly changing
business conditions. IT can enable the fast adaptation necessary to accommodate
these constant and rapid changes in the business environment (Keen, 1991). It is
argued by the authors that EIS, particularly those that incorporate emerging Web-
based technologies such as e-commerce, can increase an organization’s ability to
react to changing circumstances, quickly and flexibly. Organizations are evolving
into virtual enterprises using integrated computer and communications technologies
and linking hundreds, thousands, even tens of thousands of people together
(Bleecker, 1994). Executives are now able to process queries that provide up to

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    115
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
minute information in situations where timeliness and completeness are of equal
value (Volonino et al., 1995). Clearly the 1990s ‘face’ of EIS has changed and the
next generation of EIS is on the doorstep of the e-commerce environment.
REFERENCES
Alavi, M. (1982). An assessment of the concept of decision support systems as
viewed by senior level executives. MIS Quarterly, 6 (4), 1-8.
Allen, J.P. (2000). Information systems as technological innovation. Technology
& People, 13 (3), 210-221.
Anandarajan, M. & Simmers, C.A., (2001). Managing Web Usage in the
Workplace: A Social, Ethical and Legal Perspective. Hershey, PA: Idea
Group Publishing.
Averweg, U.R.F. & Erwin, G.J., (2000). Executive Information Systems In South
Africa: A Research Synthesis For The Future. Proceedings of the South
African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists
Conference (SAICSIT-2000), Cape Town, South Africa, 1-3 November.
Ba, S., Lang, K.R. & Whinston, A.B. (1997). Enterprise decision support using
Intranet technology. Decision Support Systems, 20 (2), 99-134.
Basu, C., Poindexter, S., Drosen, J. & Addo, T. (2000). Diffusion of executive
information systems in organisations and the shift to Web technologies.
Industrial Management & Data Systems, 100 (6), 271-276.
Beheshti, H.M. (1995). Downsizing with executive information systems. Indus-
trial Management & Data Systems, 95 (5), 18-22.
Bleecker, S.E. (1994). The Virtual Organization. Futurist, 28 (2), 9-14, March/
April.
Burkan, W.C. (1991). Executive Information Systems From Proposal Through
Implementation, Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Butler, J. (1992). Executive essay. Mortgage Banking, 72-74.
Carlsson, S.A. & Widmeyer, G.R. (1990). Towards a theory of executive
information systems. Proceedings of the Twenty-third Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-23), Hawaii, USA,
195-201.
Chiusolo, E. & Kleiner, B.H. (1995). The most useful software for executives.
Industrial Management & Data Systems, 95 (10), 25-28.
Clinton, W.J. & Gore, A., Jr., (1997). A Framework for Global Electronic
Commerce. Available at: http://www.iitf.nist.gov/eleccomm/ecomm.htm.

116   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Dertouzos, M. (1997). What Will Be: How the New World of Information Will
Change Our Lives. San Francisco, USA: Harper Edge.
Drucker, P.F. (1988). The coming of the new organization. Harvard Business
Review, 66 (1), 45-53.
Eder, L.B. (2000). Managing Healthcare Information Systems with Web-
Enabled Technologies. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
Elliott, D.G. (1992). Executive information systems: their impact on executive
decision making. Unpublished thesis, The University of Texas at Austin, USA.
Emery, S. (2001). Trade World. Extending the boundaries for local business.
Global Trade, Executive Vision for International Business, Production
Unique, Cape Town, South Africa, 81-82.
Friend, D. (1992). Building an EIS your CFO will really use. Chief Information
Officer Journal, 19 (1), 32-36.
Frolick, M.N. & Robichaux, B.P. (1995). EIS information requirements determi-
nation: Using a group support system to enhance the strategic business
objectives method. Decision Support Systems, 14 (2), 157-170.
Gillan, C. & McPherson, K. (1993). Getting a clear picture of your business.
Computer Mail, November.
Gray, P. & Watson, H.J. (1998). Decision Support in the Data Warehouse. V,
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Hamilton, S. & Chervany, N.L. (1981). Evaluating Information System Effective-
ness-Part II: Comparing Evaluator Viewpoints. MIS Quarterly, 5 (4), 79-86.
Han, J. (1998). Towards On-Line Analytical Mining in Large Databases. SIGMOD
Record, 27 (1), 97-107.
Hardaker, M. (2001). Dot Bomb. SA Computer Magazine, 9 (3), 48-52, April.
Harris, L. (ed.) (2000). Rand Water derives Bottom-Line benefits from EIS. E-
Business or Out of Business, an Advertising Supplement compiled and
published by Computing S.A., TML Business Publishing, Pinegowrie, South
Africa, 28-29.
Hasan, H. (1995). Organizational issues and implementations of EIS. Proceed-
ings of the Sixth Australasian Conference on Information Systems,
Perth, Australia, 1, 207-217.
Hogue, J.T. & Watson, H.J. (1985). Management’s Role in the Approval and
Administration of Decision Support Systems. Information & Management,
8 (4), 205-212.
Igbaria, M., Parasuraman, S. & Badawy, M.K. (1994). Work experiences, job
involvement and quality of work life among information systems personnel.
MIS Quarterly, 18 (2), xi-xii.

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    117
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Keen, P.G.W. (1991). Shaping the Future. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
School Press.
Kendall, J.E. & Kendall, K.E. (1999). Information delivery systems: An explora-
tion of web pull and push technologies. Communications of the AIS, 1 (14),
1-43.
Kennedy, D.H. (1995). Everybody’s information systems? Management Ac-
counting London, 73 (5), 4.
Khan, S.J. (1996). The Benefits and Capabilities of Executive Information
Systems. MBA dissertation, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg,
South Africa.
Khosrowpour, M. (1998). Effective Utilisation and Management of Emerging
Information Technologies. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
Khosrowpour, M. (2000). Web-enabled technologies assessment and manage-
ment: Critical issues. Managing Web-Enabled Technologies in Organiza-
tions: A Global Perspective, Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
Khosrowpour, M. & Liebowitz, J. (1997). Cases on Information Technology In
Modern Organizations. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
Kuo, F.Y. (1998). Managerial intuition and the development of executive support
systems. Decision Support Systems, 24 (2), 89-103.
Lai, V., Guynes, J.L. & Bardoloi, B. (1993). ISDN: Adoption and diffusion issues.
Information Systems Management, 10 (4), 46-52.
Laudon, K.C. & Laudon, J.P. (2000). Management Information Systems. 6th
edition, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Leavitt, H. H. & Whistler, T. I. (1988). Management in the 1980s. Harvard
Business Review, 36 (6), 41-48.
Lederer, A.L., Mirchandandi, D.A. & Sims, K. (1998). Using WISs to Enhance
Competitiveness. Communications of the ACM, 41 (7), 94-95.
Lee, S.M. & Chen, J.Q. (1997). A conceptual model for executive support
systems. Logistics Information Management, 10 (4), 154-159.
Leidner, D.E. & Elam, J. (1993). Executive information systems: Their impact on
executive decision making. Journal of Information Systems, 10 (3), 139-
155.
Malhotra, Y. (2001). Knowledge Management and Business Model Innova-
tion. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
Mallach, E.G. (1994). Understanding Decision Support Systems and Expert
Systems. Boston, MA: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Mc Nurlin, B. & Sprague, R. (2002). Information Systems Management in
Practice, 5th ed., New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

118   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Messina, F.M. & Sanjay, S. (1995). Executive information systems: Not just for
executives anymore! Management Accounting, 77 (1), 60-63.
Millet, I. & Mawhinney, C.H. (1992). Executive information systems, a critical
perspective. Information & Management, 23 (2), 83-92.
Mintzberg, H. (1973). The Nature of Managerial Work. New York: Harper &
Row.
Monash University. (1996). EIS Development Guidelines. Technical Report 1/
96, Department of Information Systems, Faculty of Computing & Information
Technology, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.
Mougayar, W. (1998). Opening Digital Markets, Battle Plans and Business
Strategies for Internet Commerce. 2nd ed., New York: McGraw Hill.
Navarro, J.J. (1992). Computer supported self-managing teams. Journal of
Organizational Computing, 4 (3).
O’Brien, J.A. (1999). Management Information Systems: Managing Informa-
tion Technology in the Internetworked Enterprize. 4th edition, Boston,
MA: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Palvia, P., Kumar, A., Kumar, N. & Hendon, R. (1996). Information requirements
of a global EIS: An exploratory macro assessment. Decision Support
Systems, 16 (2), 169-179.
Poon, P. & Wagner, C. (2001). Critical success factors revisited: Success and
failure cases of information systems for senior executives. Decision Support
Systems, 30 (4), 393-418.
Post, G. V. & Anderson, D.L. (1997). Management Information Systems.
Solving Business Problems with Information Technology. Boston, MA:
McGraw-Hill, 386-392.
PriceWaterhouseCoopers. (2000). Technology Forecast: 2000. California,
USA.
Rai, A. & Bajwa, D. (1997). An empirical investigation into factors relating to the
adoption of EIS: An analysis for collaboration and decision support. Decision
Sciences, 18 (1), 939-974.
Rainer, R.K., Snider, C.A. & Watson, H.J. (1992). The evolution of executive
information system software. Decision Support Systems, 8 (4), 333-241.
Rainer, R.K., Jr. & Watson, H.J. (1995a). The keys to executive information
system success. Journal of Management Information Systems, 12 (2), 83-
98.
Rainer, R. K., Jr. & Watson, H. J. (1995b). What does it take for successful
executive information systems? Decision Support Systems, 14 (2), 147-
156.
Roberts, B. (1995). Just team work. PCWeek, 4 Sept.

E-Commerce and Executive Information Systems    119
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Rockart, J.F. & DeLong, D.W. (1988). Executive Support Systems the Emer-
gence of Top Management Computer Use. Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-
Irwin.
Ross, S.S. (2001). Get smart. PC Magazine, 20 (14), 129-144, August.
Salmeron, J.L. (2001). EIS evolution in large Spanish businesses. Information &
Management, 1968, 1-10.
Salmeron, J.L., Luna, P. & Martinez, F. J. (2001). Executive information systems
in major companies: Spanish case study. Computer Standards & Inter-
faces, 23, 195-207.
Senn, J.A. (1996). Capitalization on electronic commerce. Information Systems
Management, Summer.
Sprague, R. H., Jr. & Watson, H. J. (1996). Decision Support for Management.
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Srivihok, A. (1998). Effective Management of Executive Information Systems
Implementations: A Framework and a Model of Successful EIS Implemen-
tation. Ph.D. dissertation. Central University, Rockhampton, Australia.
Tang, H., Lee, S. & Yen, D. (1997). An investigation on developing Web-based
EIS. Journal of CIS, 38 (2), 49-54.
Theoharakis, V. & Serpanos, D. M. (2002). Enterprise Networking: Multilayer
Switching and Applications. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
Turban, E. (2001). California State University, Long Beach and City University of
Hong Kong, USA. Personal Communication, 7 October.
Turban, E. & Aronson, J. (1998). Decision Support Systems and Intelligent
Systems. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Turban, E., McLean, E. & Wetherbe, J. (1999). Information Technology for
Management. Chichester, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Turban, E., Lee, J., King, D. & Chung, H.M. (2000). Electronic Commerce: A
Managerial Perspective. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,
Inc.
Volonino, L., Watson, H.J. & Robinson, S. (1995). Using EIS to respond to
dynamic business conditions. Decision Support Systems, 14 (2), 105-116.
Warmouth, M.T. & Yen, D. (1992). A detailed analysis of Executive Information
Systems. International Journal of Information Management, 12 (2),
192-208.
Watson, H. J., Boyd-Wilson, T. & Magal, S. R. (1987). The Evaluation of DSS
Groups.  Information & Management, 12 (2), 79-86.
Watson, H.J., Rainer, R.K. & Koh, C.E. (1991). Executive Information Systems:
A Framework for development and a Survey of Current Practices. MIS
Quarterly, 15 (1), 13-30.

120   Erwin and Averweg
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Watson, H.J., Houdeshel, G. & Rainer, R.K. Jr. (1997). Building Executive
Information Systems and other Decision Support Applications. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Westland, J.C. & Walls, J.G. (1991). Theoretical foundations for the design of
Executive Systems in equivocal environments. Proceedings of the Twenty-
Fourth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS-24), Hawaii, USA, 135-144.
Wheeler, F.P., Chang, S.H. & Thomas, R.J. (1993). Moving from an executive
information system to everyone’s information system: Lessons from a case
study. Journal of Information Technology, 8, 177-183.
Whymark, G. (1991). Success in the implementation of an executive information
system. Proceedings of the Academy of International Business Southeast
Asia Conference, Singapore, 156_162.
Wreden, N. (1997). Business Boosting Technologies. Beyond Computing,
November/December.
Worthington-Smith, R. (ed.) (2000). The e-Commerce Handbook 2000. Your
Guide to the Internet revolution and the future of business. Trialogue,
Cape Town, South Africa.
Worthington-Smith, R. (ed.) (2001). The e-Business Handbook 2001. The 2001
Review of How South African Companies are Making the Internet work.
Trialogue, Cape Town, South Africa.

SMEs in South Africa    121
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter VIII
SMEs in South Africa:
Acceptance and Adoption of
E-Commerce
Eric Cloete
University of Cape Town, South Africa
ABSTRACT
The chapter reports on research that was done in information systems at the
University of Cape Town on the benefits of Internet utilisation and the
barriers to its adoption amongst small businesses in South Africa. It addresses
how these small businesses in a developing country perceive the potential
benefits of e-commerce and look at their consequent adoption of e-commerce
activities in their own organizations. Comparisons are made between studies
conducted in first world countries, particularly regarding the role of
government initiatives. A secondary aim of this research was to determine the
current level of e-commerce adoption by small businesses in South Africa.
This was achieved by circulating a questionnaire to test the perception of e-
commerce benefits and e-commerce adoption levels amongst small businesses
from various sectors in South Africa. If the global usage of the Internet for
electronic commerce by small businesses is compared to the South African
situation, this research clearly indicates that the available technologies are
not adopted to the extent that is necessary for survival in a rapidly changing
environment.

122   Cloete
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
INTRODUCTION
This chapter reports on research that was done in Information Systems at the
University of Cape Town on the benefits of Internet utilization and the barriers to
its adoption amongst small businesses in South Africa. It addresses how these small
businesses in a developing country perceive the potential benefits of e-commerce
and look at their consequent adoption of e-commerce activities in their own
organizations. Comparisons are made between studies conducted in first world
countries, particularly regarding the role of government initiatives.
A secondary aim of this research was to determine the current level of e-
commerce adoption by small businesses in South Africa. This was achieved by
circulating a questionnaire to test the perception of e-commerce benefits and e-
commerce adoption levels amongst small businesses from various sectors in South
Africa.
If the global usage of the Internet for electronic commerce by small businesses
is compared to the South African situation, this research clearly indicates that the
available technologies are not adopted to the extent that is necessary for survival in
a rapidly changing environment.
One of the most important features of using the World Wide Web is definitely
the ability to conduct business over the Internet. The evolution of the Internet from
a military tool to one that is available to organizations and individuals has opened
many ways of doing e-commerce for SMEs (Small to Medium Enterprises). With
the benefit of using the Internet to cut costs, improving efficiency and reach a much
wider market, productivity and profit margins can be improved dramatically.
Unfortunately, many South African SMEs are not utilizing the Internet adequately
and therefore numerous excellent and unique business opportunities are never
discovered or exploited for commercial gain (Courtney & Finch, 2001).
Although the classification of enterprises is normally based on size, turnover
and number of employees, the definition of an SME differs in the literature;
therefore, no fixed definition exists. An SME for the purposes of this research will
be one that complies with the requirements of the South African National Small
Business Act, No.102 of 1996.
E-commerce can be defined as the buying and selling of information, products
and services with the assistance of computer technology and the Internet (Greenstein
et al., 2000). This basically involves the exchange of electronic information between
parties, normally followed by the exchange of goods and payment transactions. In
the conduct of commerce, many differing activities might occur, such as marketing,
interaction with clients and suppliers, interaction with government and acquisition
products and the sales forthcoming of these events. Akkeren and Cavaye (1999)
state that e-commerce improves an SMEs ability to compete with larger organiza-

SMEs in South Africa    123
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
tions and operate on an international scale. They also see e-commerce as a tool for
providing cost effective ways for SMEs to market their business, launch new
products, improve communications, gather information and identify potential
business partners.
South Africa, as a developing country, faces many problems such as high
unemployment, low levels of working skills, poverty and rampant crime. The
encouragement of the development of SMEs might help to elevate these problems
and improve the levels of skills in the country. This should contribute towards
economic growth and assist in reducing poverty and unemployment levels in
general. Information and communication skills have been proposed as means of
increasing the productivity levels of SME’s (Harrison et al., 1997). Yet the
perception, implementation and the utilization of the Internet by South African
SMEs is still relatively unknown (Cloete, 1999).
Electronic business, as an area of research, is still evolving with many
researchers disagreeing to the benefits or boundaries. Many benefits from the
utilization of e-commerce for SMEs are suggested (Davies, 2002), however its
adoption seems to be low for a variety of reasons that are reported in this paper.
Research performed on SMEs since the dotcom crash in 2000, indicates that
perceptions and attitudes towards e-commerce have changed to quite an extent and
people often look at potential benefits in a more pessimistic manner (Courtney &
Finch, 2001).
The Internet and SMEs
Many SMEs are forced into using electronic business due to their dominant
clients forcing them to adopt or depart when the client implements an electronic
purchasing system. The result is that SMEs that do not keep up with the e-evolution
are in danger of being left out of tenders, particularly where larger corporations have
electronic tender processes that might be attractive to SMEs.
Poon and Swatman (1997) identified short-term and long-term benefits for
companies using e-commerce. Short-term benefits should be realized within
months whereas long-term benefits may take longer and are normally fairly
unpredictable. Their research showed that SMEs are not reaping significant short-
term benefits from e-commerce and for those that did, the benefits were marginal
and inconsistent. They identified long-term benefits as being the key motive for
ongoing Internet activities.
Chan and Swatman (2001) found that the Internet as an e-commerce medium
for EDI transactions is cheaper than traditional EDI, even after all the costs of
implementing an Internet EDI solution was taken into account. They suggest the
following Internet based B2B application as alternatives to traditional EDI:

124   Cloete
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
EDI formatted documents over the Internet (the use of FTP or e-mail
applications to place the EDI messages into formatted documents and
transmit them to the intended recipients)
•
XML EDI or XML document exchange (the latest development in EDI
translation, which aims to lower the barriers to e-business for SMEs).
•
Web-based EDI (use of a web based form or intelligent interactive form to
exchange business over the Internet).
Due to the ownership and decision making power of SMEs being held by one
or two people, adoption of e-commerce into their organization is heavily reliant on
these people’s acceptance of the technology. The following factors are primary to
the acceptance of e-commerce (Perry et al., 2001):
•
Usefulness - The individual must be convinced of the relevant advantage of
using e-commerce. Embracing e-commerce should be perceived as easier,
faster, and cheaper than the current manual processes of doing business. E-
commerce would need to be understood and considered to be useful by the
individual.
•
Intention - The individual must intend embracing e-commerce. They must
have a positive attitude towards it.  A person that views e-commerce as a tool
that has no potential role in what they are doing is unlikely to accept the
potential of e-commerce.
•
Ease of Use - The individual must be comfortable with the use of technology.
A person that is frightened to embrace technology will not be willing to accept
e-commerce as a trading tool.  If the appropriate skills and understanding of
the technology are in place, then the use of e-commerce will be easier, thus
making its acceptance more likely.
•
External Variables - These are the factors affecting a person’s acceptance
of the technology that is beyond the control of the individual.
It is important to recognize that e-commerce activities range from entry-level
activities such as having web browsers, web sites, and email, to sophisticated
activities such as online payments, making purchases online, customer services and
video conferencing.  Akkeren and Cavaye (1999) state that the adoption of e-
commerce practices is a progression and sophisticated technologies are unlikely to
be adopted before those at the entry level have been successfully adopted. These
entry-level activities provide the necessary technological infrastructure from which
more sophisticated e-commerce activities can be developed.
According to the predictions of the Gartner Group, average European SMEs
with ICT budgets of the order of $150,000 per annum would be unable to afford

SMEs in South Africa    125
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
an e-business application. According to Mandel (1999), SMEs in the USA are
more likely to utilize Internet business strategies than their counterparts in Europe,
due to the large homogeneous U.S. market. A ‘static’, advertising Internet website,
for an SME in South Africa can start at the order of £10, 000 (Trialogue, 2000).
This cost covers essentially marketing presence, with prices increasing as function-
ality is built in.
As an organization progresses up the ladder it must undergo change and
become more sophisticated in its use of technology. While business implements
these new changes, it is ultimately able to improve business efficiencies. The five
progressive e-steps that a business may potentially advance through are summa-
rized by Courtney and Finch (2001) as follows:
1.
E-mail: This is defined as the use of e-mail to send messages, either to provide
internal communication between staff, or to allow communication between
businesses and their suppliers and customers. In e-commerce, the focus is on
the external use of e-mail. Some elements of Electronic Data Interchange
(EDI) can also be regarded as messaging, such as sending a request for a
quotation.
2.
Website: This is the establishment by a business of a website or e-mail list to
publish information about products and services, so that their customers can
access this information online. It gives the business an opportunity to create
a greater awareness of its products to its customers and it places the business
into a worldwide market.  The website can publish marketing information,
prices, and stock levels. In relation to supply-side activities, this is the use of
other businesses’ websites to identify suppliers and to acquire information on
products and services.  Checking the availability of products and services can
also be done online; 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
3.
E-commerce: This is the online interaction between a business and its
customers, or a business and its suppliers, for the placement of an order.
Online activities include issuing or receiving an invoice and an electronic
payment.
4.
E-business: This is the use of e-commerce to support the business relation-
ship between a customer and a supplier, for example through the provision of
interactive order progress tracking or online support.  An integration of the
supply chain links suppliers, manufacturing, and delivery, thus improving
efficiencies and minimizing waste.
5.
Transformed Organizations: The final outcome is the integration of all these
activities with the internal processes of a business. The focus is customer
service.

126   Cloete
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Factors that Affect E-Commerce Adoption
The factors that affect e-commerce adoption are useful in determining the
reason why an SME is at a certain level. These adoption factors are a result of the
owner’s business outlook as well as the organization’s characteristics. Courtney
and Fintz (2001) summarizes as follows:
•
Owner’s Characteristics
Adoption of e-commerce is heavily reliant on the acceptance of e-
commerce technology by the business owner. If the owner does not
perceive the technology to be useful, nor understand its potential, then
he/she will be reluctant to adopt it. The level of computer literacy of the
owner and a lack of knowledge on how to use the technology will result
in the business being less likely to adopt e-commerce (Kirby & Turner,
1993).  If the owner is subjective and refers to the opinions of
experienced people who recommend the adoption of e-commerce into
the organization, then he is also more likely to accept their opinions
(Harrison et al., 1997). SME owners are also concerned with return on
investment. The pressure to show a return often leads to small firms
being more concerned with medium-term survival rather than long-term
viability (Akkeren & Cavaye, 1999). As a result, owners are often
hesitant to make substantial investments when short-term returns are not
guaranteed.
•
Organization’s Characteristics
The amount of technology currently in use in the organization, such as
PCs with modems and the use of email can make adoption easier
(Iacovau et al., 1995).  Businesses might adopt the use of e-commerce
as a result of their competitors using it, so as not to lose their competitive
advantage. If an organization has large amounts of data and transactions
it is likely to influence its decision to adopt IT as this can help streamline
operations and offer process efficiencies within the organization (Thong
& Yap, 1995).
In their research on small businesses, Akkeren and Cavaye (1999)
found two factors affecting IT adoption that had previously not been
recognized. The first was mistrust of the IT industry as some owners
perceived the IT industry to be ‘over-selling’ the benefits of technologies
and misinforming them. The second factor was a lack of time to get
acquainted with the opportunities and challenges of the Internet due to
its quick evolution rate.

SMEs in South Africa    127
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Contextual characteristics
The economic benefits of moving business transactions from fax,
telephone and post to the Internet are well documented in many
publications (Davies, 2002). Wilde and Swatman (2000) also noted
that the forces of economic rationalism and globalism have enhanced the
market as the final arbiter of price and service with the balance of power
tilting from the manufacturer towards the consumer. Given this erosion
of margins, companies need to reduce costs, both in production and
transaction, in order to make their products and services more competi-
tive. This again points to the Internet as a vehicle to reduce costs and to
assist in obtaining a competitive advantage in the short term.
The traditional value chain has become virtualized to a great extent due
to the fact that users of the Internet are able to order products and
services online, without intervention of the purchasing department, while
payment is made electronically using electronic funds or purchase cards.
The primary activities in the Porter Value Chain, namely incoming
logistics, outgoing logistics, marketing and sales, are being redefined in
terms of how they are carried out and interact with each other, as
technology provides for more sophisticated methods of business inter-
actions (Walton & Miller, 1995; Porter, 1985).
These chains have become virtualized as the Internet was increasingly
used as a ‘binding agent’ (Davies, 2002). John Dobbs of Cambridge
Technology partners describes ‘value chain integration’ as a process
of collaboration that optimizes all internal and external activities involved
in delivering greater perceived value to the ultimate consumer (Econo-
mist, 1999). In the process, whole portions of the previous chain are
being removed, redefined or disintermediated.
It is, however, necessary to note that the integration of value chains does
not solve all problems. JIT (Just in Time) production is a methodology
of reducing inventory stock that has been used for many years and
serves as an example to prove this point. Critics of this method have
pointed out that it merely forces the lower level manufacturer to hold
stock and deliver to the client as needed. This method does however
reduce stock holding costs throughout the higher levels of the value
chain. It is also interesting to note that the Internet plays an increasingly
important role with JIT ordering due to the ease of ordering at short
notice.

128   Cloete
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Researchers have further identified a number of additional issues that impact
the adoption of e-commerce. These are summarized by Courtney and Fintz, 2001:
•
Low use of e-commerce by Customers and Suppliers. This means that there
is little incentive for SME’s to engage e-commerce until their customers and
suppliers are also using it.
•
Concerns about security aspects.
•
Concerns about legal and liability aspects.
•
High costs of development and computer and networking technologies
commerce.
•
Limited knowledge of e-commerce models and methodologies.
•
Unconvinced of benefits to the company.
The South African SME business sector in 1996 was estimated to number in
the order of 800,000 (Darrol, 1996). Viviers and Sootinis (1999) suggest that this
group accounts for approximately 46 percent of the total South African economic
activity.
Survey Results
The study by Davies (2002) concentrated on trade, manufacturing and
construction sectors, mainly in the Johannesburg-Pretoria area, while the study by
Courtney and Fintz (2001) was aimed at the manufacturing sector in the Western
Cape.
Both surveys encountered low response rates, mostly due to resistance and to
a certain extent unhelpfulness by potential survey companies. While both surveys
supported the findings of the other, only the study by Davies will be commented on
in this paper.
•
ICT usage
Two hundred and fifty three SMEs were targeted from the Gaffney’s Business
Directory, Gaffney (2001), with a response rate of 19.4 percent. The first part of
the survey, questions one to four, determined the economic sector and ICT
utilization. In the response, 80 percent of the organizations that returned survey
forms (39) claimed their PCs were connected to the Internet and 35 servers were
utilized, with ten connected to the Internet. Only five mainframes were used, of
which one was connected to the Internet. One company used a total of six stand-
alone Point of Sale devices, with no Internet connection. Six notebooks were listed
by the 49 organizations, with only two of these connected to the Internet. Two
companies claimed to have no Internet access and one possessed no computer
facilities. A total of 20 organizations had websites, with a mere five utilizing EDI.

SMEs in South Africa    129
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Level of Internet usage
Questions five to seven attempted to discover the level of Internet usage. The
49 organizations’ perception of Internet usage is shown in Table 1.
Question seven determined the type of Internet usage by the respondents:
Table 1: Perception of Industry Participant’s Utilization of the Internet
Competitors 
Clients 
Partners 
Suppliers 
71% 
78% 
31% 
61% 
 
Table 2: Responses to Question 7 of Questionnaire
Percentage of 
respondents 
Q7: What does the organization utilize the Internet for? 
71% 
Electronic mail 
69% 
Document transferring 
69% 
Financial: paying bills, salaries, invoicing, etc. 
57% 
B2B transactions 
49% 
Marketing 
41% 
Submitting tenders to customers 
37% 
Purchasing raw materials, office supplies, etc. 
35% 
Making order information available to customers 
29% 
Order placement by customers 
27% 
B2C transactions 
16% 
Interaction with government 
16% 
Link into outside computerized systems to perform orders 
10% 
B2Gov transactions 
4% 
Voice/Audio communication (VOIP) 
0% 
Video conferencing 
•
Perceptions of the Internet
Questions 8 to 20 were focused on the effect of the Internet and the
perceptions of the Internet. The values 1-4 were divided into four options: strongly
disagree (1-1.6), disagree (1.61-2.2), neutral (2.21-2.8), agree (2.81-3.4) and
strongly agree (3.41-4). A similar grading method was used for values on the 1-5
scale.
•
Reasons for not using the Internet
Question 21 was aimed to identify the top ten barriers for non-Internet usage.

130   Cloete
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 3: Responses to Questions 8-15, 17-20
Question No. 
Q 21: Barriers for non-Internet usage 
 Response 
8 
The I can assist: making my organization more 
efficient/reduce costs 
Agree 
9 
The I is adequately used by my organization for our bus 
functions 
Neutral 
10 
The I is able to assist in the type of business my 
organization operates with 
Agree 
11 
More usage of I could help make my organization more 
competitive. 
Agree 
12 
Our knowledge of the I is sufficient for our business 
Neutral 
13 
Our supplier/customers do not require I interaction from us 
Disagree 
14 
My customers are using the I to order products/services in 
our industry 
Neutral 
15 
My competitors are using the I to improve their 
competitiveness 
Agree 
17 
The I enables us to manage our business more effectively 
Neutral 
18 
The I has altered the way in which we do business 
Agree 
19 
The I enables us to improve our customer service 
Neutral 
20 
The I enables us to improve our supplier relationships 
Neutral 
 
Table 4: Top 10 Barriers Discouraging Internet Usage
Ranking 
Q 21: Barriers for non-Internet usage 
1 
Lack of time to investigate options 
2 
Lack of knowledgeable/qualified staff 
3 
Lack of information on options 
4 
Not enough business partners use it 
5 
No real business need/no benefit 
6 
Lack of HR & skills 
7 
Poor telecommunications infrastructure 
8 
Lack of training on e-commerce 
9 
Poor security on the Internet/fraud 
10 
Costs too high 
 

SMEs in South Africa    131
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Problems experienced by those using the Internet
Question 22 attempted to identify the problems experienced by those who
claimed to be using the Internet for e-commerce:
Table 5: Problems Experienced by Those Using the Internet
Ranking 
Q 22: Problems experienced by those who used the Internet 
1 
Insufficient cheap bandwidth 
2 
Not enough companies use it 
3 
Technical barriers 
4 
Expensive hardware 
5 
Lack of e-commerce information 
6 
Immature e-commerce technologies 
7 
Lack of online guarantees 
8 
Lack of knowledgeable/qualified staff 
9 
Lack of import/export information 
10 
Legal issues 
 
•
Benefits experienced by those using the Internet
Question 23 asked for the top ten benefits experienced as a result of Internet
usage.
Table 6: Benefits of Internet Usage
Ranking 
Q 23: Benefits of Internet usage 
1 
Financial reasons; such as online banking 
2 
Speed of communication/response rates 
3 
Reduction of communication costs 
4 
Research/gathering of information 
5 
Improve productivity/competitiveness 
6 
Global reach 
7 
Improve CRM  
8 
Transfer documents 
9 
Saves time 
10 
Marketing/advertising 
 

132   Cloete
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
CONCLUSION
The findings of this survey indicate that many issues from overseas research are
both pertinent and valid for the South African environment. Information on the
benefits of e-commerce utilization and the barriers to its adoption from this survey
and the survey from Courtney and Fintz (2001) show some correlation to one
another, as well as to the results obtained by overseas surveys. The Internet has
been shown to be a disruptive technology that has influenced the business
environment. Although respondents indicated that greater usage of the Internet
would improve their businesses’ competitiveness, costs of implementing and
running e-commerce business are perceived to be strong barriers to greater
adoption by South African SMEs.
In summary, it can be said that the following objectives were achieved by this
research:
•
A good indication of the level of e-commerce adoption by SMEs in South
Africa has been perceived.
•
The barriers to the adoption, implementation and utilization of e-commerce by
South African SMEs have been highlighted.
•
The benefits of e-commerce adoption by South African SMEs have been
pointed out.
The role of the government in the greater adoption of electronic commerce
cannot be understated. The introduction of a competitor to Telkom is a very
important factor if greater competition can reduce communication costs. If the new
bill for e-commerce is to further introduce barriers to Internet usage, the South
African government will need to reassess their policy towards e-commerce for
South Africa to be competitive in the global market.
REFERENCES
Akkeren, J. & Cavaye, A. (1999). Factors Affecting the Adoption of E-
commerce Technologies by Small Business in Australia – An Empirical
Study. Retrieved October 1999 from the World Wide Web: www.acs.org.au/
act/events/io1999/akkern.html.
Chan, C. & Swatman, P. (2001). Management and Business Issues for B2B e-
Commerce Implementation. Deakin University, Australia. Retrieved May
12, 2001 from the World Wide Web: http://mis.deakin.edu.au/research/
working_papers_2001/2001_09_chanc.pdf.
Cloete, E. (2001) E-commerce: A Contemporary View. Pardus Publishing.

SMEs in South Africa    133
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Cloete, H. (1999). How Does Information Technology Influence Small Busi-
ness Growth? Technical Report to the Department of Information Systems,
University of Cape Town.
Courtney, S. & Fintz J. (2001). Small Businesses’ Acceptance and Adoption of
E-commerce in the Western-Cape Province of South-Africa.  Empirical
Research Project, Department of Information Systems, UCT.
Darrol, S. (1996). A new era for small business? Prodeer Newsletter, 8 (1), 4-
17.
Davies, S. (2002). South African SME’s and Internet Based Electronic Business.
Empirical Research Project, Department of Information Systems, UCT.
Economist (1999). You’ll never walk alone. The Economist Newspaper, Survey
on business and the Internet, 26 June 1999.
Gaffney, P. (2001). Gaffney’s Business Contacts 2001. The Chamber of
Commerce and Industry Yearbook, The Gaffney Group, Johannesburg,
South Africa, ISBN 0-9583821-2-3.
Greenstein, M. & Feinman, T.M. (2000). Electronic Commerce. Irwin/McGraw
Hill.
Harrison, D.A. Mykytyn, P.P. & Rienenschneider, C.K. (1997). Executive
decisions about it adoption in small business: theory and empirical tests.
Information Systems Research, A Journal of the Institute of Manage-
ment Sciences, 8 (2) 171-195.
Iacovou, C.L., Benbasat, I., & Dexter A.A. (1995). Electronic data interchange
and small organizations: Adoption and impact of technology. MIS Quarterly,
19 (4), 465-485.
Kirby D. &  Turner  M. (1993).  IT and the Small Retail Business. International
Journal of Retail and Distribution Management, 21 (7), 20-27.
Mandel M.J. (1999). The Internet economy: The world’s next growth engine.
Business Week Magazine, New York: McGraw-Hill, Oct., 44-49.
Perry, G. P. & Schneider, J.T. (2001). Electronic Commerce. Thomson Publish-
ing.
Poon S. & Swatman P. (1999). An exploratory study of small business Internet
commerce issues.  Information and Management, 35 (9-18).
Porter  M. (1985). Competitive Advantage. Free Press.
Thong, J. & Yap, C. S. (1995) CEO characteristics, organizational characteristics,
and information technology adoption in small business. Omega, August, 23
(4), 429-442.
Trialogue, (2000). The E-commerce Handbook. Trialogue Publications, Cape
Town.

134   Cloete
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Viviers, W. & Sootinis, W. (1999). South African SMEs: Obstacles to Export to
the SADC, Potchefstroom University. Retrieved June 20, 1999 from the
World Wide Web: http://www.sbaeur.uca.edu/DOCS/98icsb/j011.htm.
Walton, L.W. & Miller, L.G. (1995). Moving toward is theory development: A
framework of technology adoption within channels, Journal of Business
Logistics, 16 (2), 117-135.
Wilde, W.D. & Swatman, P.A. (2000). Studying Telecommunications En-
hanced Communities: An Economic Lens. Deakin School of Management
Systems, Victoria, Australia. Retrieved July 2001 from the World Wide Web:
http://mis.deakin.edu.au/research/working_papers_2000/
2000_07_wilde.pdf.

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    135
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter IX
Key Indicators for
Successful Internet
Commerce: A South
African Study
Sam Lubbe
Cape Technikon, South Africa
Shaun Pather
Cape Technikon, South Africa
ABSTRACT
The advent of e-commerce has brought about new implications on research
directions in the business arena. Is it not sufficient to just study the formation
of electronic markets in e-commerce. It is also necessary to have insight into
the electronic markets’ innermost workings. This chapter, therefore, highlights
the factors that give these new organizational forms (e-commerce enterprises)
sustainable competitive advantages. The chapter is present in three main
sections: A study of variety of reports of practitioners and researchers from
the international arena, provide a background of prior knowledge in the filed.
The analysis of this knowledge base is conceptualized into a framework of key
factors affecting e-commerce success. Finally, the results of an empirical
study of South African e-businesses are reported on.  The authors provide
some insight on the application of the conceptual framework as applied in the
South African situation.

136   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
INTRODUCTION
The world of Internet commerce has been rapidly evolving since its advent in
the 1990s. This has had implications on research directions in the field of electronic
commerce (e-commerce). No longer is it sufficient to study the formation of
electronic markets in e-commerce. It is also necessary to have insight into the
electronic markets’ innermost workings. This chapter, therefore, highlights the
factors that give these new organizational forms (e-commerce enterprises) sustain-
able competitive advantage, thus allowing them to create value in the Internet
marketplace, and increase their ability to maximize profits.
The following sections review various factors relating to e-commerce suc-
cesses and failures. The analysis of these factors provides, enabling directions in
successful adaptations and new interpretations of long-standing issues that senior
managers face with new directions of Internet commerce.
The chapter is presented in three main sections. First, a study of a variety of
reports of practitioners and researchers from the international arena, provide a
background of prior knowledge in the field. Then the analysis of this knowledge
base is conceptualized into a framework of key factors affecting e-commerce
success. Finally, the results of an empirical study of South African e-businesses are
reported. The authors provide some insight on the application of the conceptual
framework as applied in the South African situation.
Figure 1: Types of E-Commerce
Source: Adapted from Chan et al., 2001
                          Commerce 
 
 
Electronic 
Commerce 
 
Physical or Traditional 
Commerce (Brick & 
Mortar) 
 
 
Internet 
Commerce 
 
 
e-Commerce utilising non-
Internet technologies e.g. ATMs 
 
 
Business focused 
e-Commerce 
Consumer focused 
e-Commerce 
??? 

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    137
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Placing the Study in Perspective
The term e-commerce conjures various interpretations. Figure 1 clarifies the
context in which e-commerce is referred to in this chapter.
A Review of Issues Affecting E-Commerce Adoption and
Implementation
The following section reviews various reports of e-commerce in practice. The
list of issues is not exhaustive, but rather an attempt to bring to the fore a varied
number of issues that warrant attention.
Adopting E-commerce: Business Benefits
A large number of reports comment on the benefits of moving a business to an
e-commerce setup. Auger and Gallaugher (1997) noted the following benefits
affecting the adoption of an internet-based sales presence for small businesses:
First, it gives the business access to an affluent customer base and provides lower
information dissemination costs. Secondly, transaction costs could be lower while
a broader market can be reached. Thirdly, the e-commerce site should also help
with additional channels for customer feedback, while at the same time it should
enable consumer and market research.
Kalakota and Marcia (1999, cited in O’Brien: 2002) provide a good overview
of why companies are building e-commerce web-sites: generation of new revenue
from online sales; reduced costs through online sales and customer support;
attracting new customers via Web marketing and advertising; increased loyalty of
existing customers via improved Web customer service and support; developing
new Web-based markets and distribution channels for existing products; and
development of new information-based products accessible on the Web.
There may be many other reasons why companies are adopting e-commerce.
However, whatever the reasons are, it is important to recognize factors that
influence both success and failure.
Problems Faced with E-commerce Adoption
In addition to the benefits highlighted above, many reports also provide insight
to the problems that accompany e-commerce enterprises.
Wilson (2001) argued that many organizations fail because their venture
capital firm got cold feet. He also noted that about one dot-com organization fails
per day and many more are in trouble (failures like Pets.com and Garden.com are
cited). Some mistakes that these organizations have made were: Too many
competitors, short-term mentality, undisciplined growth, unrealistic revenue pro-

138   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
jections, inexperienced management, underestimating the costs of establishing a
national brand and a lack of customer-centered focus.
Wilder (1998) noted that web commerce is changing the way a lot of
organizations do business, but that it is not everything that has been hoped for. The
e-commerce concept had been hyped and valuations of these company’s shares
had been high – all because of exaggeration and oversimplification of the real issues.
Wilder (1998) provides a succinct list of e-commerce myths. The first misconcep-
tion, highlighted by Wilder (1998), is that everybody thinks that it is easy (a.k.a.,
the barriers have never been lower). It is easy to put up a web site, but add words
such as effective, scalable, successful, and it gets a lot harder. Web infrastructure
could also be a risk for older organizations. The second myth is that it is cheap.
Perhaps e-commerce is cheap when compared with a full-blown enterprise
resource planning implementation. The third myth is that everybody is doing it.
Wilder (1998) argues that there are successful companies on the sideline of e-
commerce that include chains Best Buy and Fry’s Electronics.
The fourth myth highlighted by Wilder (1998) is that it is lucrative. However,
there are still several examples of businesses that do better at traditional retailing,
e.g., The Burlington Coat Factory has a lower sale output through its Internet
presence compared to the output from its 250 stores. The next myth is that the Web
levels the playing field (a.k.a., startups can instantly compete on the same footing
as long-established companies). Wilder argues that companies that want to be
successful at web commerce need the marketing clout, brand identity, and scale to
do back-end fulfillment and customer service – and the capital. This could be a
possible reason why big-physical-world competitors had bought many start-ups.
Some interesting lessons came from an article in Business Inc. (2001) on the
100 dumbest moments in e-commerce history. They discussed the demise of firms
such as Boo.Com, Beyond.com, etc. They also noted that Internet companies
make thousands of mistakes every week. It was argued that adopters of e-
commerce enterprises do not learn from these mistakes. Many of these organiza-
tions did not startup addressing the correct market or they incorrectly spent the
money that was invested in them.
Auger and Gallaugher (1997) comment specifically on the problems faced by
small businesses: difficulty monitoring the site use; security concerns; analyzing and
promoting the site; and lack of access to expertise.
Being a player in the e-commerce domain means that the organization must
become more responsive. It should have an agility in responding to environmental
forces, which play themselves out much quicker than in brick and mortar setups.
ITQuadrant (2001) refers to being able to execute e-commerce strategies rapidly.
Organizations must be able to respond quickly to market changes, emerging

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    139
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
opportunities, and competitive threats. This implies that the e-commerce enterprise
should be able to implement new business solutions quickly. This impacts on the
implementation of applications, and, ITQuadrant (2001) asserts that this requires
an adaptive application architecture that maximizes reuse.
Kandiah et al. (2000) in an exploratory study identified some key variables that
contribute to IS project failure. Some of them are poorly communicated goals, lack
of corporate leadership, inadequate skills, poor project management, deviation
from timetable and budget, data collection strategies, sampling approach and
principal component analysis. They argued that IS projects such as e-commerce
often fall short of expectations.
Systems Development
Methodologies for developing information systems (IS) have matured consid-
erably over time. Years of experience have culminated into various packages of
good practice, and these are evidenced in a multitude of software engineering
literature. There are, however, many common do’s and don’ts advocated for
sensible development of information systems. There is no reason that this should be
thrown out of the window when developing information systems that use e-
commerce as the primary driver. Bragg (in Highsmith et al., 2001) argues that worst
practices in developing the e-commerce software itself vary widely, and many of
them are no different from worst practices in developing other kinds of software.
For example, carefully defining the business problem and scoping the system is
advocated by many analysis and design authors (see Whitten et al., 2001; Satzinger
et al., 2001). It is therefore not a new problem, because recent reports of e-
commerce implementation problems have pointed to similar issues. Additionally,
sticking to a sound methodology rooted in the systems development life cycle
(SDLC) is one aspect that really should not be neglected. There are, however,
alternate points of view. For example, Highsmith et al. (2001) claim that even though
these new practices often fly in the face of conventional wisdom, they survive
because they are better adapted to the new reality. They propose three essentials
for e-commerce success: adaptive enterprises, adaptive software, and agile IT
professionals.
When incorporating e-commerce platforms into existing business practices,
various strategies could be used. For example, e-business reengineering is finally
leading companies to consider the deep, radical redesigns that Hammer and other
BPR gurus first advocated in the early 1990s (Harmon, 2002). What was radical
then is now necessary for survival. He (Harmon, 2002) argued that a company
cannot transition to an e-commerce strategy without creating a new company
software architecture and an extensive new suite of software applications. To

140   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
succeed in e-commerce, these new software applications will be required to
integrate the organization’s existing databases, legacy applications, and business
processes more extensively than anything ever attempted.
It is also important that proper information gathering techniques are employed
to ensure that the requirements on the e-commerce system are carefully defined.
Hayes (2002) noted that comprehensive requirements that drive bottom-up project
plans resulting in reasonable, feasible schedules are rarely being achieved. Most of
the schedules she has scanned are unrealistic. It is suggested that the reason for this
shambles is that software is being used as a competitive weapon and is driven by
the need for e-commerce. She noted that back office to frontline meant something
for the managers. Organizations realized that software systems could differentiate
them in the marketplace. This meant new functionality because a new product could
be created within days. There is no manual alternative, and delays might mean
missing market share.
Planning the E-Commerce Venture
Good advice is provided by Abels (2002), who argues that the first step
toward success in e-commerce is to throw aside the baggage of the industrial age
and adopt a born on the Web business model and an Internet mindset.
Pickering (2001) noted in an article on a survey of the e-commerce and IT
practices that the right reasons should be picked when starting out. They caution,
however, that these reasons might not be the right ones at the beginning. Wilson
(2001) provides other advice pertinent to the planning phase, suggesting that
businesses should select online target markets with clearly unfilled or under-filled
niches. While it is advocated that the short-term goals had to be clearly defined,
plans should also focus on the mid- to long term.
Financial feasibility is another traditional planning practice that also deserves
attention. Wilson (2001) advises dot-com startups to set realistic revenue and
margin projections. He suggests that many dot-com “dreamers” set high and
unrealistic projections – they should instead re-evaluate the information and
services they are giving away for free.
Wilson (2001) provides insight into two further lessons learned from analyzing
e-commerce failures. Those businesses that lack sufficient experience and expertise
in an e-commerce setup are encouraged to obtain expert advice as inexperience
sometimes results in serious planning and execution errors, e.g., trying to patch
traditional structures onto a new type of company.  Secondly, planning should not
obviate the customer’s important role. An unremitting customer focus is demanded.
Many of the dot-coms’ ideas are unrelated to real customer demand.

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    141
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Testing and Training
Furthermore, because e-commerce incorporates more than one discipline, a
variety of consultants are used - and they do not solve everything (James, 1997).
Most of the time, there are no contingency plans and systems are not tested. Many
people do not train their staff and organizations, then enter the denial stage.
Involvement of Stakeholders (Top Management)
Involvement of a range of stakeholders, from the end-user right through to top
management is one of the key issues in systems development. In fact, the Standish
group report stated (see Johnson, 1995) that lack of users’ involvement was a key
problem contributing to IS failures. As already suggested, e-commerce develop-
ment, should be rooted in sound methodology. James (1997) provides an example
of a departure from this. He suggests that one of the big problems with the
development of e-commerce sites is that top management is clueless, especially
when business goals are fuzzy.
One non-negotiable role of involvement of the top management is alignment of
e-commerce projects with organizational objectives (Abels, 2002). This strategic
function bears an important relevance on steering transition in the right direction.
Furthermore, it should be the role of top managers to allocate responsibility for the
development of the site. The responsibility for the development of the site,
according to Auger and Gallaugher (1997), should come from inside the organiza-
tion. However, Abels (2002) suggests that the e-commerce project team should be
created separately from the organization’s IT department, and should include
marketing strategists form the beginning.
ITQuadrant (2001) reaffirms the importance of senior management’s role.
They noted that senior management must be heavily involved in the development of
the company’s e-commerce direction right from the start. The e-commerce strategy
must be tied to the business plan. E-commerce initiatives must also be well
integrated with the overall business strategy.
Consideration to the needs of end-users should also not be neglected.
Traditional thinking is too rigid and internally focused and fails to take into account
the goals of the user, according to Abels (2002). James (1997) in reporting on
various e-commerce “fiascoes” that prevail also refers to end-users’ involvement.
One of several issues commented on is that the people that use the site (end-users)
do not participate in the development. Projects can fail if they do not meet user
needs. Once again, this points to e-business’s neglect of well-researched and tested
systems development methodology.
Abel (2002) asserts that users want fast, friendly, easy-to-use solutions.
Developers should learn users’ goals. The site should be structured for Web users

142   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
or the organization will not win. He also mentions that failing to test early, often,
realistically and outside the organizational intranet is an expensive mistake. Lastly,
Abel (2002) suggests that attention must be paid to format of the content.
Organizations should remember that readers normally scan for certain key words.
People most of the times visit a site for reasons not anticipated.
Marketing and Choice of Products
The marketing function is one aspect that has been misinterpreted by e-
commerce businesses. Highsmith et al. (2001) suggest that the most profound of
recent changes are not in technology but in the relationship between the business and
its external markets and customers.
Wilder (1998) reports that one of the myths perpetuated by the advent of e-
commerce is that it means the end of mass marketing. The Web is the first
communications channel that enables cost-effective one-to-one marketing on a
huge scale. Brand names are a key issue. Mass marketing is therefore a necessity
for the leaders of the online industry.
Another lesson is to plan an aggressive marketing budget with realistic goals.
One of the chief errors committed by failed dot-coms was based on the belief that
they could buy a national brand. This only takes place over time and demands
excellence in customer service, product fulfillment, and product quality (Wilson,
2001).
When strategizing e-commerce concepts, a business seeking new grounds
should consider the appropriateness of the product for the Web (Auger &
Gallaugher, 1997). Wilder (1998) in writing about e-commerce myths, claims that
business believes that it leads to product commodization. Price is not the number
one selling point for most companies online. Customers also want brands and
service they can trust.
Adopting a New Culture of Doing Business
The move from a traditional brick and mortar setup to an e-commerce
enterprise can be a test of the organizations ability to adapt to a new way of business.
One of the important factors in such a transition is the development and cultivation
of an e-commerce culture (ITQuadrant, 2001). Many organizations have reported
that cultural change is one of the top challenges in moving to an e-commerce
enterprise. Perhaps an assessment of the cultural feasibility of the project would
assist in this regard (see Satzinger et al., 2001). In this transitional period, the e-
commerce organization should note the various stages of human and organizational
assimilation of new technologies (Erwin & Blewitt, 1998).

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    143
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Keeping the E-Business Operational
InterOPS Management Solutions (2001) asserts that the key factor for e-
commerce operations management is that e-commerce operations require its own
protection plan. Relocated operations must also continue to be monitored and
managed to ensure that they are fulfilling all functional requirements. The last key
factor they mentioned is that e-commerce continuity procedures must be testable
to verify their readiness.
According to them, there are some benefits to a smart e-commerce operations
management strategy. These benefits are highly cost-efficient risk mitigation,
additional value during normal operations and third shift management (ensuring 24
hour/7 day coverage). The last benefit is that there could be customer and partner
risk reduction.
Supply Chain Management
Oakes (2002) noted that the current vision of Chief Information Officers is to
forge ahead without the full picture of what supply chain management (SCM) can
do. He identified some myths; the first one was implementing SCM solutions always
creates benefits. He notes that only realistic and diligent Return on Investment (ROI)
can ensure this. The second myth is that the Internet has dramatically reduced
supply-chain cycle times. These times could still be further reduced when third-
party providers start using SCM technology.
Another myth according to Oakes (2002) is that SCM portals are just another
short-term fad. The problem is that the word portal has been overused to the point
of it becoming meaningless. The argument is that smaller communities could belong
to multiple supply-chain communities. The fourth myth is that everything inside the
four walls works just fine. There is no synchronization across departments or with
trading partners. The fifth myth cited is that investing in SCM applications will
always result in a rapid return. The promises of application vendors can only be
realized through focus on delivery, quality and time targets. Promises should not be
brought into the equation above, but should be realized through focus on delivery,
quality and time targets.
Steps to Launching the Business
Wilson (1999) noted that there are several steps necessary to start a successful
new online business. The first step is to develop the concept as clearly as possible.
Another step is to prepare a unique selling proposition – refine your concept down.
A clear unique selling position is an essential component for a prosperous e-
commerce venture. The next step is to obtain a secure domain name. Ensure that
the name is not too difficult to spell and that people would be able to remember it.

144   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The next step is to secure funding for the project; sometimes this can forestall
going any further. A gradual approach to start-up is called for most of the time. The
next step would be to construct the website and e-mail systems. The last step would
be to execute marketing strategies.
Research Methodology
The foregoing sections have highlighted various factors that impact implemen-
tation and adoption of e-commerce. Several issues, both positive and negative,
were examined. In this section, the research methodology that will be applied in
analyzing the literature is discussed.
Aims of the Research
The aims of the research are:
•
to identify, study and evaluate e-commerce success factors;
•
to develop a preliminary theory of good practice in the field of e-commerce;
•
to test this theory or theoretical conjecture by reference to South African
organizations and practitioners; and thereby,
•
develop the theory into managerial guidelines.
Research Options
The research has a theoretical underpinning from the literature review. This
was the result of the study of the research area through the writings of others and
through discourse with learned or informed individuals. The theory produced a list
of success factors through content analysis (See Fig. 2) and these would be tested
in practice. These factors would also be tested using a questionnaire based on
ranking and on preference using a seven-point Likert scale.
Analysis of Theoretical Evidence
The main approach to the analysis of evidence obtained from the literature was
to use content analysis in the pilot study as described by Huberman & Miles (1994).
Because content analysis was used, a positivist approach was followed by a realist
and interpretive approach to discuss the results and interprets in order to apply the
conclusions. These techniques require the researcher to carefully comb through the
evidence collected from the literature in order to find patterns that display general
principles applying to e-commerce. Because of detailed work, empirical generali-
zations and a theory could be developed.

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    145
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Data Collection
South African Background
A brief background to the South African situation is presented, as the
theoretical conjecture described through content analysis will be tested during
phase two of this study, with e-commerce organizations based in this country.
South Africa is a medium-sized country, an area of 471,000 square miles at
the southern tip of the African continent, with a population of some 44 million
people. It is relatively industrialized in comparison with the rest of Africa. South
Africa is a wealthy country from an industrial and agricultural point of view and
computers have been actively in use in South African business and industry since
the early 1960s when both IBM and ICL opened offices in Johannesburg. Today,
South Africa employs computers in every aspect of industry, business and
government as well as having a relatively high percentage of home computers among
the middle and upper class. All the major vendors are present and there is
considerable interest in the use of Internet technologies to support business.
The Development of the Theory
After summarizing the theory, it became necessary to analyze the data that had
been collected in order to see what general principles relate to the assessment of
success factors. The main process that was used was content analysis. Content
analysis may be defined as the process of determining the fuller, detailed meaning
of a document, manuscript, speech or any type of communication in a way that is
both reliable and replicable. A formal definition of content analysis is supplied by
Berelson (1952) as a research technique for the objective, systematic and
quantitative description of the manifest content of communications. To perform
content analysis, one must investigate the frequency and intensity of which concepts
are addressed in the text. It is a simple but laborious process, since one must closely
examine the documentation for concepts, particularly those that are repeated often.
Berelson (1952) noted that content analysis might be used with different units of
analysis including words, themes, characters, items and space-time measurements.
The results of the content analysis were summarized into a main set of factors
that could be regarded as success factors for e-commerce. Frequency tables
showing the number of occasions in the discussion of the main themes that occurred
during the analysis of the articles were drawn up. In this study, only themes that were
raised by informants more than three times were included in the frequency table.
In Figure 3, a list of the themes raised by the theory and their frequency are
shown. The frequency table is based on the analysis as described in the previous
section. The nature of the drivers is different as some of the drivers originate from
the upper echelons of management (e.g., alignment of the goals) while some

146   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
originate from the bottom of the business chain (e.g., feedback). It should also be
mentioned that the authors specifically named each group. It must also be stressed
that the literature review is by no means exhaustive and can easily be extended.
Figure 3 shows that in the theory there were 17 major references to the
importance of conducting research and development during the conversion to an e-
commerce business and 15 references to financial planning of e-commerce as well
as 15 references to feedback from staff and customers as a condition to ensure e-
commerce success, etc. These success factors are described in the following
section.
Discussion of Themes Identified
Research, Development and Skilling of the e-commerce site: This theme
could be described as the impact of doing proper research on what is required of
an e-commerce site. Proper research can ensure that the organization can keep its
market share by employing the key attributes of e-commerce. An e-commerce
team that is not part of the IT department should do the development of the site. The
team should maximize the flow of ideas and educate people about new processes,
systems and business practice.
Capitalization: The informants viewed this as important. Organizations
should keep as close as possible to the budget and ensure that they do not
overspend or run short of money. E-commerce enterprises should set realistic
revenue and margin projections. The budget should ensure that there is enough
Figure 2: Content Analysis Showing Relative Frequencies and Percentages
for E-Commerce Success Factors
 
Themes 
 
Total 
% 
Accum 
% 
1 
Research, Development and skilling of the 
site 
RD 
17 
15 
15 
2 
Capitalisation 
FA 
15 
12 
27 
3 
Feedback 
FB 
15 
12 
39 
4 
Management 
MM 
14 
11 
50 
5 
Marketing 
MG 
13 
10 
60 
6 
People (staff and customer) 
SC 
12 
10 
70 
7 
Alignment of Goals 
AG 
12 
10 
80 
8 
Items not suitable for the Internet 
IN 
11 
9 
89 
9 
Parameters 
PM 
8 
8 
97 
10 
Security 
SC 
4 
3 
100 
 
Total 
 
121 
 
 
 

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    147
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
money to do proper development of the e-commerce shop. Transaction costs
should also be low. The problem, however, is still to attract venture capital to ensure
a stable financial environment.
Feedback: According to the theory, feedback is important in order that e-
commerce entrepreneurs can assess if they are on the right track, their service is
correct and their customers are happy and will visit their e-commerce shop again.
It also means communicating the e-commerce vision inside and outside the
organization.
Management: The problem that the authors stated in the theory is that top
management should be fully committed to successful development of an e-
commerce site. If top management does not commit them to it, then the project and
e-commerce is doomed to failure. Roles for the team should be defined and
responsibilities should be allocated.
Marketing: It is important to note the number of advertisements with URLs
on them during visits to sport stadiums. Having a brilliant e-commerce site is no use
without marketing and the authors have pointed out that successful e-commerce
sites spend more money on advertising. It also pays to have a well-known brand
in your stable, as this would ensure that people do visit the e-commerce shop.
Changes should be marketed to partners, suppliers and customers.
People (staff and customer): The theory noted that well trained staff and
customer care would ensure that the site is successful. Without customers, there
would be no e-commerce and no survival. There should be input from end-users
as well (from both sides). Individuals should be educated about new processes,
systems and business practices.
Alignment of goals: The theory noted that the alignment of goals was a theme
that successful organizations should keep in mind while conducting e-commerce.
The responsibility rests with the e-commerce team to ensure that the e-commerce
goal and the organization’s goal should be aligned. The authors also noted that the
e-commerce team should not be part of the IT department or should be separated
once they had been picked.
Items not suited for sale over the Internet: the theory argued that many items
are not suitable for sales over the Internet, like funerals, perfume, etc. Organizations

148   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
should spend some time building a brand name (it does not come overnight) and
ensure that they also stock and advertise the items that will sell over the Internet.
Parameters: the parameters should be set for the e-commerce so that any
variance to the original plan is noted immediately and that corrections are made on
time. This would help to manage the vertical tension of centralization versus de-
centralization and of separation versus integration of the e-commerce organization.
Security: Successful e-commerce sites ensure that their site is secure in terms
of freedom from hackers and secondly that transactions cannot be copied. Many
customers do not trust the Internet and a secure environment would ensure that
everybody feels happy.
The purpose of developing the theory was to explain how e-commerce
managers go about the business to assess its success factors. If a satisfactory
explanation can be developed, it could provide a basis for evaluation of e-
commerce management. This will allow an understanding as to the likely success of
an e-commerce organization, and whether or not management complies with the
factors expressed in the theory.
It can be deduced that the first four factors are important drivers (50%) that
can ensure successful e-commerce start-ups. These four factors should be included
when developing and running an e-commerce organization. The other factors are
also important in ensuring a successful e-commerce. However, in the case of e-
commerce, it is suggested that these could be of higher importance.
Surveying the South African E-Commerce Practitioners
The framework developed (See Figure 2) was used as a basis to formulate a
questionnaire. There were 50 organizations that were identified from a list of
contacts supplied by the e-Business Centre of the Cape Technikon. The Web
directory of TELKOM S.A. was also used extensively. A total of 120 question-
naires were e-mailed and posted out. This was distributed to 50 e-commerce
organizations. Of these 27 were returned giving a 54% rate of return. The size of
each of the participating organizations differed (from a giant financial organization
to some smaller firms). A range of responses was obtained. Some organizations
showed a high level of enthusiasm in the survey whereas indicated an indifference
to the importance of the research. For example one big website run by a big
shopping complex indicated that they could not complete the questionnaire and that
they could not force their participants to complete the questionnaire.

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    149
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Empirical Findings
The factors listed in Figure 3, were listed alphabetically and these were
required by the respondents to be ranked from 1 to 10 (1 being the most important
and 10 the least important). On the second page, these factors were again listed
alphabetically, and incorporated in statements. The respondents were required to
mark a preference based on a Likert-type scale (1= strongly disagree to 7=strongly
agree). The data was collated on an Excel spreadsheet and the average for the two
columns were calculated. (See Table 3).
The rating in Figure 3 is the average of the total number of completed
questionnaires. The ranking in the Column 2 was done based on the rating in column
1. Responses to the Likert scale were also ranked; they are presented in Figure 3.
These ratings were entered onto a grid using SPSS for Windows and the Spearman
correlation factors were calculated using the program (see Appendix).
Discussion of Findings
The calculations of the Spearman correlation coefficient has shown that there
was little correlation between the ranking of the critical success factors identified in
the literature (overseas) and the ranking of their practicing South African counter-
Figure 3: Rankings of Key Factors by Practitioners
 
Theme 
Rating 
Ranking 
“Likert” 
rating 
Content 
analysis 
ranking 
1 
Alignment of Goals 
4.5 
7.5 
4 
7 
2 
Capitalization 
5.6 
3.5 
9 
2 
3 
Feedback 
6.3 
1 
6.5 
3 
4 
Items suitable for 
selling 
4.3 
9.5 
1 
8 
5 
Management 
5.6 
3.5 
3 
4 
6 
Marketing 
4.5 
9.5 
6.5 
5 
7 
Parameters 
6 
2 
8 
9 
8 
People 
5.2 
6 
2 
6 
9 
Research and 
Development 
4.3 
7.5 
10 
1 
10 
Security 
5.3 
5 
5 
10 
 

150   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
parts (only –0.046). The Spearman factor for the correlation between the literature
ranked factors and the ranking based on a Likert scale was negative (-0.405). This
suggested that there was a better correlation between the literature-induced factors
and the personal ‘flashes of commercial insight’ factors – although not the highest
form of correlation.
The ranking between the Likert-type ranking and the literature was 0.218. This
was also not high and possible reasons for this could be that the e-commerce
revolution is in its infant stage in South Africa, and that local businesses are still
figuring out how to handle a new business paradigm. There is a clear indication that
more research is needed to support and lead the South African e-commerce
organizations.
Some supporting documentation that was added by the respondents was
used. They added that the factors in Figure 2 are all key factors. They are not sure
that any e-commerce organization can get away without any of these elements in
their business and they would not like to have a business plan without any of these
aspects. Other important aspects they noted was that the customer has to perceive
the site is secure, that information supplied is confidential and that it is a reputable
company. Part of this would be to have a good product or service and an efficient
fulfillment process (a key element according to some respondents). The biggest
problem in South Africa is to get the completed product in the hands of the
customer. One respondent noted that when a poor business and a great team come
together, the poor business tends to win most of the time. They also noted that
security depends on the needs of the customer. Some want the site be more efficient,
but could not describe the parameters for this. Others wanted to ensure that the
information is a factor, but customers will not know how if the information is
complete or not.
Other significant comments made was that management needs to be part of the
process and alignment is a key process. The plan will not get off the ground if
management is not supporting it. The e-commerce site must be functional, simple
and responsive. An idea could be to conduct some research in terms of function
points and how these agree with customer’s preferences. They all noted that people
would come for the product; therefore, a slow, complicated site is not required. The
advice was: “Get rid of all those graphics and allow your clients to get where they
want to go.” A satisfied customer is your best advertisement.
CONCLUSION
Generally, a great deal of interest has been shown in the subject of e-commerce
and its implementation. All the authors that this study had consulted were unanimous

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    151
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
in their opinion that many factors could affect e-commerce; these factors could vary
from day-to-day. It appears from the pilot research that there is a trend towards
combining the issues of formulation and implementation of e-commerce success
factors. This is reflected in a generally higher level of awareness of organizations
concerning the importance of applying success factors to form a successful e-
commerce. The poor correlation between the conceptual factors derived form the
literature and the survey, reinforce the fact that e-commerce activity is in a different
level of development (infant stage) as compared to international counterparts.
However, what is clear is that there are a number of lessons that can be learned from
the experiences (success and failures) of others. South African e-commerce
managers therefore should lean heavily on this in order to improve the effectiveness
of their own Internet-based initiatives.
REFERENCES
Abel, S. (2002) Planning Business-to-Business Web sites: Avoiding the
Common Mistakes, Nims Associates, white paper.
Berelson, cited in Kroppendorf, K. (1980). Content Analysis, Sage Publications.
Business 2.0, Inc. (2002). Boo! And the other 100 dumbest moments in e-
business history, white paper.
Chan, H., Lee, R., Dillon, T., & Chang, E. (2001). E-commerce Fundamentals
and Applications. New York: Wiley.
Erwin, G.J. & Blewett, C. (1998). Business Computing – An African Perspec-
tive. Juta: Cape Town.
Harmon, P. (2002). Reengineering your corporate e-business strategy, Cutter
Consortium,available at:  http://www.cutter.com/itgroup/reports/
reengineer.html.
Hayes, Linda G. (2002). The (Questionable) Need for Speed, Earthweb IT
Management, available at:  http://www.itmanagement.earthweb.com.
Highsmith, J., Yourdon, E., Bach, J., Becker, S.A., Berkemeyer, A.H., Bragg. T.,
McDonald, M., Scott, J. & Zou, B. (2001). Best practices for e-project
management, Cutter Consortium, white paper.
Huberman, A.M. & Miles, M.B. in Handbook of Qualitative Research, Denzin
N.K. & Lincoln Y.S., (eds.) (1994), London: Sage.
InterOPS Management Solutions (2001). Protecting the brain: Ensuring e-
business continuity for financial services, white paper, available at:  http:/
/www.interops.com.
ITQuadrant. 10 Critical Factors behind Successful e-Business Implementa-
tions, available at:  http://www.ebizQ.net.

152   Lubbe and Pather
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
James, G. 1997. IT Fiascoes and how to avoid them, Datamation, available at:
http://www.datamation.com/cio/11disas.html.
Johnson, J. (1995). CHAOS - the dollar drain of IT project failures, Application
Developments Trends, January.
Kandiah, V., Mohd, S.H., Nasirin, S., Oz, E. & Sosik, J.J. (2000). Information
(IS) project failure: New evidence from Malaysia. Working paper.
Kalakota, R. & Marcia, R. 1999. E-Business: Roadmap for Success. Reading:
Addison-Wesley.
Lubbe, S.I. (1997). Ph.D. Thesis submitted to the University of the Witwatersrand,
The Assessment of the effectiveness of IT investment in South African
organisations.
Morell, J. & Swiecki, B.F. (2001). E-readiness of the automative supply chain:
Just how wired is the Supplier Sector?, Erim, Available at: http://
www.supplysolution.com.
Oakes, P. (2002). The five myths of supply chain management, TechRepublic,
available at: http://www.techrepublic.com
O’Brien, J.A. (2002). Management Information Systems (5th ed.). Boston:
McGraw Hill.
Pickering, C. (2001). Survey of e-Business and IT practices, Systems Develop-
ment, Inc. Available at:  http://www.cutter.com/itgroup/reports/survey.html.
Wilder, C. (1998). Myths and Realities, Informationweek.com, available at:  http:/
/www.informationweek.com/712/12iumyt.htm.
Wilson, R.F. (1999). Dot.Com Countdown: 7 Steps to e-Business Launch,
Web Marketing Today; Wilson Internet.
Wilson, R.F. (2001). How to achieve Dot-Success in an era of Dot-Bust, Web
Marketing Today; Wilson Internet.

Key Indicators for Successful Internet Commerce    153
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
APPENDIX
 
 
 VAR00001 VAR00002VAR00003 
Kendall's
tau_b 
VAR00
001 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
1.000 
-.046
.163 
 
 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
. 
.856
.525 
 
 
N 
10 
10
10 
 VAR00
002 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
-.046 
1.000
-.405 
 
 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
.856 
.
.106 
 
 
N 
10 
10
10 
 VAR00
003 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
.163 
-.405
1.000 
 
 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
.525 
.106
. 
 
 
N 
10 
10
10 
Spearman's
rho 
VAR00
001 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
1.000 
-.012
.218 
 
 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
. 
.973
.546 
 
 
N 
10 
10
10 
 VAR00
002 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
-.012 
1.000
-.492 
 
 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
.973 
.
.148 
 
 
N 
10 
10
10 
 VAR00
003 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
.218 
-.492
1.000 
 
 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
.546 
.148
. 
 
 
N 
10 
10
10 
 
Correlations

154   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter X
E-Learning is a Social Tool
for E-Commerce at
Tertiary Institutions
Marlon Parker
Cape Technikon, South Africa
ABSTRACT
This chapter sets out to inform the reader about the background of e-
Learning. It starts with a brief introduction to the concept of e-Learning,
presenting a compelling case why institutions implement e-Learning and
describes the difference between technology-delivered e-Learning and
technology-enhanced e-Learning. The discussion includes some advantages
and disadvantages of technology-enhanced e-Learning and then examines
some learner, facilitator and technology aspects of technology-enhanced  e-
Learning. It continues with a brief discussion on technology-enhanced e-
Learning at the Cape Technikon.
This project further assesses the perceptions of learners using an online
survey to address the issues and concerns that learners experienced with
regard to technology-enhanced e-Learning. This chapter also inspects the
efficiency usage of e-Learning tools within a technology-enhanced e-Learning
environment and concludes with some significant findings of the survey,
which includes the importance of computer literacy, interaction and
communication in the technology-enhanced e-Learning environment.

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    155
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
INTRODUCTION
Tertiary education institutions aim to be recognized for social, knowledge and
economic contributions in South Africa. There has also been an increase in the
different uses of the Internet (e.g., online banking, online shopping, learning and
teaching within tertiary educational institutions.) This increase has contributed to the
electronic learning revolution and some South African tertiary institutions are
making a technology-based paradigm shift for this reason.
The changes in delivery methods of Information Systems subjects are a
suggestion of the technological changes in our society as a whole. There are some
issues that are of concern to learners studying in a technology-enhanced e-learning
environment. This study used an electronic survey to assess student perceptions of
the technology-enhanced e-learning environment.
Institution of Study
In 1920, HRH Prince Arthur of Connought laid the foundation stone of
Longmarket Street Building of the then Cape Technical College. The establishment
of the college followed more than ten years of representations by the community for
the consolidation of the technical courses, which had been offered in various venues
in town. In 1923, the official opening of Longmarket Street Building took place. The
building soon proved to be too small; extensions were added in 1926 and 1949.
The Cape Technikon is an institution that has taken on the e-learning initiative.
BACKGROUND
Traditional delivery of learning methods generally required only the instructor,
a textbook and support materials according to (Taylor, 2002). Traditional learning
environments are defined in terms of time (the timing of instruction), place (the
physical location of instruction) and space (collection of materials and resources
available to the learner) (Piccoli et al., 2001).
The acceptance of the Internet and use of World Wide Web (WWW)
technology in tertiary institutions have resulted in the surfacing of an endless amount
of resources for students (Sheard et al., 2000). The Internet had an overwhelming
impact on a number of industries (Evans & Wurster, 1997) and the growth in
Internet usage created much interest in Web-based learning (Fong & Hui, 2002).
(Tian, 2001; Fong & Hui, 2002) argued that students can access resources globally
through the Internet to assist them in their learning and that it has become an
attractive alternative to traditional modes of communication.

156   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Piccoli et al. (2001) reported that technology courses were among the early
offerings on the web and motivation for e-learning in tertiary institutions, particularly
in Information Systems education, arises from the search for efficient delivery
vehicle for course content.
LITERATURE STUDY
Introduction
Information technology is important to modern societies and their educational
systems according to Carter & Boyle (2002). Hansen et al. (1999) reported that
the increasing acceptance and availability of access to the Web, various web-based
teaching initiatives, are either being developed or being adopted by educational
institutions.
Serdiukov (2001) therefore suggested three new models of learning on the
web, supporting Carter & Boyle. The models are:
•
Teacher-Student
This is a traditional model for education with a dyad between student and
teacher.
•
Teacher-Computer-Student
The Teacher-Student model has been transformed into the Teacher-Com-
puter-Student model, which has more advantages because it allows for
Student-Computer, Student-Teacher and Teacher-Computer interaction.
Technology qualitatively changes the relationship between people and knowl-
edge according to Eisenstadt (1995).
•
Computer-Student
This model terminates live human presence, which mean there is no Teacher-
Student contact time.
There is an interaction of teaching, learning and enabling elements on the World
Wide Web that facilitate cognitive change in learners (Rogers, 2001). However, no
matter what kind of learning environment an institution uses, these institutions will
be sensitive to these elements. These elements are elements of convenience,
interactivity, flexibility, access and availability of suitable and supportive technolo-
gies, and quality assurance (Rogers, 2001).

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    157
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chin et al. (2000) reported that the online learning environment is potentially
an arena in which new practices and new relationships can make significant
contributions towards learning. However, Jones et al. (2000) identified the Internet
as an ideal vehicle for delivering of course material and providing students with
flexibility, reliability and freedom of choice.  Slay (1997) agreed that there is a
current trend towards the delivery of courseware via the World Wide Web. Wells
(1999) expanded that the Internet is primarily a delivery vehicle for information,
which assists with the facilitation of the teaching and learning process.
The above-mentioned authors agreed that the Internet has an important role
to play within education. The Internet being used, as only a delivery vehicle might
not be the most effective usage of the tool, as the literature will discuss in further
sections, but as an interactive tool, it will contribute towards the learning process
as reported by Rogers (2001).
Education and Technology
Zepke (1998) argued that technology enthusiasts declared a marriage be-
tween the Internet and education. Robson (2000) also agreed that visionary
educators have seen computers as tools to assist in educating students. Schulze
(2000) added that the quality of higher learning should be improved and teaching-
learning programs should be technology-based.
Rogers (2001) suggested that educators are concerned with the value of the
education in distance learning environments. Learners expect the learning outcome
to be of high quality, convenient, personal and interactive according to Rogers
(2001). Sutliff and Baldwin (2001) agreed that if material is presented without
personalizing it and without student interaction, students would experience difficulty
understanding the course content.
Sherson (1999) noted that the advances of the digital revolution would
encourage teachers to make effective use of digital resources and support them in
the relationship between information and education. Jones et al. (2000) agreed with
Sherson that the Internet is an ideal delivery vehicle of course material and providing
students with flexibility, reliability and freedom of choice.
According to Serdiukov (2001), modern Educational Technology (ET) is
based on computer and telecommunication technologies. Besides the huge data-
bases that are available on the World Wide Web (WWW or Web), it also allows
for the concatenation of educational forces.  Education is a complete, dynamic
system that develops and transforms from one condition to another under the
influence of external factors further as suggested by Serdiukov (2001):

158   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
“One particular factor is the growing sophistication of human
activity under the impact of the new Information Technologies and
the resulting need for continuous, lifelong professional develop-
ment. Another factor is the internal urge within the system of
education for improvement to survive in the period of dramatic
external changes”
Marold (2002) argued that the personal computer is the “universal tool” of the
21st century. Ndahi (1999) also noted that technology influences on learning and
teaching are more evident within educational institutions. However, some educators
still continue to rely on traditional content delivery methods and refuse to accept the
technologies available. The reliance on only traditional delivery methods might
therefore have a negative impact on tertiary institutions, which have the responsi-
bility to reach students at any time and any place. Technological innovations in the
telecommunications industry have improved teacher-student interaction (Ndahi,
1999).
Slay and Jones et al. mentioned that educators are evaluating the use of the
Internet in creating an effective learning environment. Tertiary institutions could
maintain effective, current and high quality education if Internet technologies are
embraced (Slay, 1997; Jones et al., 2000).
The web medium has the potential for group and collaborative work with staff
and students both locally and between institutions and it is natural for education
institutions to have adapted personal computers to its educational needs (Marold,
2002).
Cuban (1993) supported the above mentioned and added some goals for the
introduction of computers in education:
•
Keep the education system at the forefront of technological development and
students’ skills up-to-date with those expected in the workforce.
•
Increase efficiency and productivity in teaching and learning.
•
Enable more self-directed learning, with students as active learners assisted
by teachers to construct their own understanding.
The above literature indicates how some authors recommended that technol-
ogy and the Internet be used within tertiary institutions. However the costs involved,
with these technologies, has become a barrier with the full realization of usefulness
of technology within education. Technology also needs to enhance the learning
process rather than becoming another delivery medium. Quality of learning should
also be assured by the introduction of technology within tertiary institutions.

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    159
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The Virtual Classroom
Tiffin & Rajasingham (1995) first used the term “virtual class” to refer to the
learning process enabled solely by telecommunications and distinguishes the
concept of the virtual class from the “virtual classroom “ proposed by Hiltz (1996)
as “…it suggests that the place a virtual class is held is an electronic simulation of
conventional classroom” and further described it as the use of computer-mediated
communications “…to create electronic analogue of the communications forms that
usually occur in a classroom including discussion as well as lectures and tests”.
Uys (1999) agreed with Tiffin & Rajasingham, that the virtual class could be
described as the process that occurs when teacher, learner, problem and knowl-
edge are joined solely through communication and information technologies for the
purpose of learning and teaching. (Piccoli et al. 2001) referred to the virtual class
as virtual learning environments (VLEs) and (Wilson, 1996) defined it as “com-
puter-based environments, allowing interactions and encounters with other partici-
pants”.
 Uys (1999) noted that the virtual class is an educational experience of real
people in a virtual dimension and that in the virtual class the teaching and learning
is performed without the movement of physical objects (e.g., getting students and
lecturers into a physical venue). Dede (1996) argued that the virtual classroom has
a wider spectrum of peers with whom learners can collaborate than any local region
can offer and a broader range of teachers and mentors than any single educational
institution can afford.
The virtual class as defined by Tiffin & Rajasingham (1995) and Uys (1999)
supports the Computer-Student model suggested by Serduikov (2001). The virtual
class can be described as a technology-delivered e-learning environment.
Electronic Learning
The Internet in Tertiary Institutions
There is a steady increase in the use of the Internet and the World Wide Web
for tertiary education according to Chin et al. (2000). Convenience and flexibility
of web-based delivery have attracted many students who are unable to attend
traditional classrooms.
Sherson (1999) argued that there is a growing need for education institutions
to digitize their content and activities. Technology should also be used for
developing curriculum and supporting the teacher. The digital revolution is in
progress and teachers will need to be encouraged make effective use of digital
resources (Sherson, 1999).

160   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Types of E-Learning
Jackson (2001) divided electronic learning into technology-delivered e-
learning and technology-enhanced e-learning.
•
Technology-delivered e-learning
Technology-delivered e-learning is where the learner audience is never in
physical proximity to the instructor and may be delivered via a blend of asynchro-
nous and synchronous technologies. It is also known as “Distance Education,”
“Distributed Education” or “Distance Learning.”
•
Technology-enhanced e-learning
Technology-Enhanced e-learning is where the learner audience has the
opportunity to meet face-to-face with the instructor. It is a supplement to traditional,
on campus learning and replaces materials previously delivered to students as
“shrink-wrap” courses. Typically includes online syllabi, bibliographies (often
hyperlinked), and faculty backgrounds and instructor-led sessions are live, face-to-
face in traditional classrooms. The typical technology-enhanced e-learning asyn-
chronous technologies are implemented through either a web editor or an asynchro-
nous course management system.  Taylor (2002) agreed with Jackson and stated
that e-learning can be used effectively in several different forms.
The Aims and Tool Usage of E-Learning
It can be used as a stand-alone asynchronous program, or as a synchronous
class where all the students are online at the same time, or as an add-on to traditional
classroom presentations. With regard to add-on to classroom presentations, e-
learning could be part of learning delivery systems for most courses; however, not
every course is suited for complete online presentation. In a stand-alone asynchro-
nous program, students can access course materials and lessons at any time and at
any place. Communication between learner and facilitator is via electronic means
and tools such as e-mail and bulletin boards are used. In a synchronous classroom,
students access the lessons at the same time and communication between students
and facilitator are via Internet Relay Chat (IRC) or I Seek You (ICQ) (Taylor,
2002). Alexander (2001) further argued that using technology in both classroom
and distance learning would improve the quality of learning, the access to education
and training, reduce the costs of education and improve the cost-effectiveness of
education.

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    161
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The following aims to incorporate technology into an established program
were suggested by O’ Keefe & McGrath (2000):
•
To enhance students’ development of a range of generic skills.
•
To add to the inventory of teaching and learning methods the use of
technology.
•
Broaden the content of the course.
•
Utilise conference formats and encourage students to work as peer groups.
•
Mass distribution of information avoiding repetitive questions.
•
To provide a flexible learning environment.
•
Greater time flexibility for learners and facilitators
Advantages of E-Learning
Advantages for the Learner
Delivery of Information Technology education is advantageous in several ways
(Marold, 2002). He noted that there is a movement from text to multimedia that
delivers a richer content to the students. The delivery organization is non-linear,
meaning that the content can be hyperlinked in a link by association fashion. This
allows the learner to access this richer content in any order (flexibility) and at a time
that is appropriate. Accessibility is universal and learners can access content when
required. Changes in Information Systems development, hardware and software
releases, project progress and course content are reflected immediately. There is
an ease of content and schedules updates.
The other advantage according to Marold (2002) is that the multimedia
presentations are advancement over the written notes on the blackboard and
handwritten transparencies. Being able to interact and be actively engaged in the
learning process is a real advantage over simply observing the teacher’s demonstra-
tion. The access to course content is also controllable by the facilitator. If there is
no interaction by the learner then no learning can take place in a technology-
enhanced e-learning environment. The learner is therefore essentially responsible
for the success of the learning process. There are many resources available to the
learner to which they have direct access (Jackson, 2001).
Advantages for the Faculty
Taylor (2002) discussed benefits of technology-enhanced e-learning from a
tertiary institution faculty perspective. E-learning offers the instructor the ability to
greatly enhance his or her presentation by adding multimedia features. Students,
who feel intimidated by others in a traditional class, will participate if they can do
so using the keyboard. There is an overall learning curve with regards to technology

162   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
for students as well as facilitators. E-learning improves the distribution of course
materials to students. Course materials can be distributed immediately and the
lengthy turnaround time is eliminated. Online communication through e-learning also
encourages student inter-communication, which gives the students feedback from
their peers as well their facilitators. There are quite a number of classroom
management software programs available, e.g., the Cape Technikon is using
WebCT. Students can receive immediate and meaningful feedback from interactive
questionnaires and quizzes. Updating course materials can be done at ease and
speed.
Hansen, et al. (1999) supported Marold, Jackson, Taylor and O’Keefe &
McGrath’s statements and identified the following promising features of e-learning
which makes it attractive:
•
Global accessibility
•
Inherently multi-media oriented
•
Inherently interactive
•
Allows team and shared work
•
Ability to upload submitted material
•
Team delivery
•
Amalgamation to existing global resources
•
Integration to an organization’s information systems
•
Asynchronous and synchronous communication
E-learning also provides clear accountability for all participants in the learning
process (Gunasekaran et al., 2002).
Disadvantages of E-Learning
Jackson (2001) suggested that the bandwidth and browser limitations might
restrict instructional methodologies and that limited bandwidth means slower
performance. Time required for downloading applications due to the limited
bandwidth are another negative of technology-enhanced e-learning. Student
assessment and feedback is limited and it cannot easily be reordered from its original
state (Marold, 2002). Learning process takes place individually and self-paced,
which means that group discovery that characterizes the ideal classroom situation
is lost and that the emphasis the teacher places on course content might differ from
the student’s individual choice. There are also fixed costs involved with web-based
course delivery.
The above-mentioned authors reported that the advantages needs to be
weighed against the disadvantages and the type of e-learning concept to follow are
important factors with regard to the implementation of e-learning. Ways to satisfy

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    163
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
learners and keep them engaged in the online learning process need to be
discovered as society move forward into the digital age (Hill, 2001).
Three Pillars of Technology-Enhanced E-Learning
Serdiukov (2001) suggested a Teacher-Computer-Student model, which
consists of several components of technology-enhanced e-learning (See Figure 1).
The Learner
Jones et al. (2000) suggested that proficiency in computer-based multimedia
is an important skill to students who use the Internet on a fairly regular basis. (Piccoli
et al. 2001) divided e-learning into the following dimensions:
•
Human dimension
•
Technology dimension
The learner and facilitator form part of the human dimension and technology
form part of the design dimension. Students have found themselves in a comfort
zone within the classroom and are the primary participants in any learning
environment. E-learning has noticeably increased the student use of technology and
has shifted control and responsibility to the learners. E-learning allows a flexible
dimension in terms of any time, place and space, which are very attractive to
students who have difficulty attending lectures. All the participants, learners and
facilitators, interact extensively with ICT. The learners who are comfortable with
technology and have a positive attitude toward it are more likely to succeed within
an e-learning environment.
Rossiter (1999) agreed that computer literacy is being added to the list of
generic capabilities, as an attribute needed by all students who effectively wants to
Figure 1: Teacher-Computer-Student Model of Learning
    Student 
Teacher 
 
 
         Computer 
Source: Serdiukov, 2001

164   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
participate in further studies. Technology literacy is one of the foundation blocks of
technology-enhanced e-learning. When students have inadequate technology
skills, the educator has to either refer students to generic skills course or attempt to
teach the required technology skills themselves. The lack of technological skills
among students’ hampers the learning opportunities offered by teachers and acts
as a barrier to effective learning for students. Nasseh (1996) stated that:
 “The technological skills for utilization and operation of computer
applications and tools are very essential for teachers and students
who participate in computer-based distance education.”
Uys (1999) added that both the learner and facilitator need a sophisticated
level of computer literacy and use. While the online facilitator has the necessary
technological support within the tertiary educational institute the students often may
not have the same advantage. Technological literacy is one of the foundation blocks
of modern-day learning (Uys, 1999). Success in computer-based learning is often
seen as requiring additional skills of students in taking greater responsibility of their
own learning (Akerlind & Trevitt, 1999).
Technological literacy is one of the foundation blocks of modern-day learning
and technology education must prepare students to understand, control and use
technology (Boser et al., 1998). Students tend to focus on the web-based delivery
as an aid to collect information rather than using the system in a more interactive way.
Students appear to be demanding more technology in tertiary education; they are
not demanding technology as a substitute for face-to-face teaching. Students still
require support from their lecturers according to (O’Keefe & McGrath, 2000).
Laurillard (1993) established that interaction between teacher and learner and
feedback from the teacher is a core element of learning, which suggests that
successful communication is interactive, adaptive and reflective. Passerini and
Granger (1999) agreed that learning is a product of interactions in the virtual
classroom. Passerini and Granger (1999) further pointed out that in an online
environment there are several channels of communication (student-content, stu-
dent-to-student, student-to-instructor, student-to-other-hypermedia content and
student-to-other-instructors). Students in the virtual classroom, through an ex-
tended group of online facilitators, can therefore be challenging and also knowl-
edgeable than the conventional student (Uys, 1999).
Retails and Avgeriou (2002) suggested the following roles of the learner in their
web-based Instructional Systems model:
•
Attends lectures
•
Navigates freely within the learning resources
•
Explores information resources

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    165
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Asks questions
•
Collaborates with other classmates in team projects
•
Seeks feedback on discussion topics
•
Interacts with other learners either face-to-face or via e-mail
Technology skills are one of the important aspects that learners need to have
to ensure a high quality of learning within an e-learning environment (Jones et al.,
2000).
The Facilitator
Laurillard (1993) pointed out that the teacher is an important mediator in the
process of constructive academic learning. O’Keefe and McGrath (2000) argued
that it is problematic that not all lecturers have the knowledge and skill of the use
of technology. Pennel (1996) agreed and suggested that teaching will increasingly
make use of Internet technologies allowing students flexible access. Educators have
to learn many new skills in order to maintain their competency as educators, argued
Pennel (1996).
Sherson (1996) further described the role of the facilitator as being essential
and be able to identify the areas where the learner needs motivation and be able to
provide structured and incidental resources, instruction, direction, feedback and
support to assist the learning process. These are essential in any form of programme
delivery including the use of the World Wide Web. Dede (1996) stated that the
facilitator needs to teach the learner how to learn and construct their own
knowledge by making sense of “… massive, incomplete and inconsistent
information sources”.
O’Keefe and McGrath (2000) identified the following three areas of increased
workload for lecturers using online delivery:
•
Additional time to learn the online system’s pedagogical options and technical
features.
•
Time to undertake subject planning, design and material development and set
up on the system.
•
Time taken in on-going monitoring, fine-tuning, technical trouble-shooting and
the increased asynchronous communication.
The facilitators need to alter their role in this new learning environment by
understanding the capabilities of technology to be used and consider the role of
technology in both delivery and curricula development of material (O’Keefe &
McGrath, 2000). Retails and Avgeriou (2002) suggested the following roles of the
facilitator in their Web-Based Instructional Systems model:

166   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Organises content into learning resources
•
Gives lectures either face-to-face or by distance
•
Displays and updates information about the course
•
Brings up discussion topics
•
Provides corrective feedback
•
Advises and tutors students
•
Assesses the students
•
Monitors students’ progress
•
Creates and manages project teams
(Taylor 2002) argued that facilitators are faced with steep learning curves and
that the quality of their online lessons depends heavily on their knowledge of the
required technologies and software. The e-learning environment that is created by
facilitators should be one in which learning can and will take place. (Webster &
Hackley, 1997) agreed and pointed out that an instructor’s positive attitude toward
technology, interactive teaching style and control over technology contributed to
some of the successes of effective learning.
Facilitators need the answers to some fundamental questions according to
(Taylor, 2002):
•
What are the advantages for converting from a traditional to a virtual class?
•
Are there any benefits for the students?
•
Are there benefits for the tertiary institution or organization?
•
Are there any personal benefits?
The facilitator needs to identify potential students and address their learning
needs in an online environment (Simpson, 2000). The prevailing emphasis on
developing deep approaches to learning, facilitators may frustrate legitimate surface
motivation and so inhibit student learning according to Zepke (1998). Zepke
(1998) further stated that lecturers should be able to facilitate students learning by
communicating and empathizing with them, structuring knowledge and arranging a
reasonable workload.
(Piccoli et al., 2001) pointed out that the facilitator needs to be flexible because
of the high time and energy demands. Courses where the facilitator is unable to meet
these demands will most likely not be effective. Facilitator attitudes and actions can
have an important influence on students’ perceptions of e-learning.
E-Learning Technologies
Wells (1999) argued that the delivery of on-line instruction is heavily depen-
dent on network technologies. (Piccoli et al., 2001) agreed and further pointed out

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    167
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
that technology quality and reliability, accessibility is important determinants within
the e-learning environment. Serdiukov (2001) divided technologies into two parts.
The first being computer technology, which offers computer-based courses,
computerized tests, word processors, graphics software, spreadsheets, databases
and presentation software to the learning process. The second part is telecommu-
nications technology, which offers distance courses, distributed educational re-
sources, e-mail, video-conferencing, bulletin boards, whiteboards and chat rooms.
Roderic (2002) agreed and suggested some technologies vital to the technol-
ogy-enhanced e-learning process. Text is likely the most common used media types
on the web. Audio or Video also primary multimedia components assists bringing
about richer course content. Data in the form of quantitative or qualitative aspects
can be a very important aspect of online learning. E-mail and instant messaging are
technologies that are useful within the online technologies architecture. Bulletin
boards or discussion groups and newsgroups are forums, which contains lists of
messages posted by users. Chat is another method of interaction between students
and facilitators or students and students. Shared applications and remote control
software are the technologies that allow users to share applications with selected
users. Simulations are the technology that attempts to model the environment where
learning takes place. Peer-to-Peer or File transfer protocol are technologies that
are used for sharing of files. The same e-learning technologies can be used to
support different learning models according to (Piccoli et al., 2001).
E-learning technologies will increase as a channel of communication between
learner and teacher (Pennel, 1996). Tools such as email, file transfer protocol,
computer conferencing and web browsing demand a serious learning effort from
their users. Not only students as learners but also facilitators as administrators. This
extra learning effort acts as a barrier between learner and facilitator in the learning
process according to Pennel (1996). A partial list of desired communications
includes (see Table 1):
Application of e-learning technologies for the sake of going online will not
improve the learning process. Educators need to be aware that technology should
be used to enhance the learning process, rather than replicating the current practice
(O’Keefe & McGrath, 2000).
E-Learning at the Cape Technikon
The author was involved with the implementation of e-learning in the faculty of
Business Informatics at Cape Technikon. The technology-enhanced e-learning
approach was adopted and the course management software system being used is
WebCT. WebCT, at Cape Technikon, is an adjunct to the traditional lectures. It

168   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
is used in and out of class as the facilitator decides the learning structure of the class.
Cape Technikon currently has 196 registered courses using WebCT.
 WebCT provides a secured environment for the placement of course
materials on the Web. WebCT also uses Web browsers as the interface to produce
the courses and for the course-building environment. It also has a variety of tools
and features that can be added to a course. Students at Cape Technikon can access
their WebCT course materials using a Web browser (Netscape and Internet
Explorer are used at Cape Technikon) from any computer connected to the Internet
or the technikon’s Intranet. Students, too, can place assignments and other
materials in WebCT in courses for which they are registered. It also provides course
management tools, for facilitators, for grading, tracking student interaction and
monitoring class progress.
Summary of the Literature Study
The relationship between the Internet and education are inseparable according
to Zepke (1998) and Rogers (2001) pointed out that the interaction of teaching,
Table 1: Desired Communications (Source: Pennel, 1996)
No. 
Communication 
Typical tools 
1. 
Free-form text messages between lecturer and 
individual students and vice-versa 
Email software, Eudora 
2. 
Messages from lecturer to entire class 
 
Mailing list software 
3. 
Delivery of learning materials and assignments 
to student when, where and as they need them 
Telnet, Fetch or Gopher session, or 
a Web page with links to download 
files to the student’s own machine 
4. 
Response by student to short structured 
questions to allow lecturers and students to 
assess learning achieved 
Forms-based Web pages backed 
with CGI scripting to extract results 
5. 
Text-based commentary between students about 
the learning resources 
IRC Chat session or computer 
conference 
6. 
Transfer of image files between students for 
discussion, together with manipulation of such 
images visible to many students concurrently 
Whiteboard facility included in 
many forms of desktop video 
conferencing 
7. 
Submission 
of 
assignments 
by 
students 
electronically, 
together 
with 
return 
of 
assignments to students by the lecturer 
e-mail with attached documents 
8. 
Synchronous audio communication between a 
student or students and the lecturer 
Audio-conferencing 
equipment. 
Party-line call or Internet Phone 
9. 
Asynchronous audio communication between 
relevant parties 
Answering 
machine 
or 
audio 
download from a Web page 
10. 
Face-to-face visual communication between a 
student or students and the lecturer 
Video-conference, desktop video-
conference  
 

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    169
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
learning and the Internet facilitates a cognitive change in learners. Some authors
(Sheard et al., 2000; Tian, 2001; Fong & Hui, 2002; Sherson, 1999; Jones et al.,
2000) all agreed that the Internet usage provide students with flexibility, reliability
and freedom of choice, has increased within tertiary institutions and are being used
as an ideal delivery vehicle within a web-based learning environment.
This has led to e-learning that Jackson (2001) divided into technology-
delivered and technology-enhanced e-learning. Piccoli et al. (2001) categorized the
learner, facilitator and e-learning technologies into the human and design dimensions
respectively. Serdiukov (2001) suggested a Teacher-Computer-Student model,
which consists of the learner, facilitator and technology.
Some authors (Jones et al., 2000; Rossister, 1999; Nasseh, 1996; Uys, 1999;
Boser et al., 1998) all agreed that computer literacy is an important factor in the e-
learning process. Interaction and communication were the other important factors
that should also be considered when developing an e-learning course (Laurillard,
1993; Sherson, 1996; O’Keefe & McGrath, 2000). The facilitator therefore needs
to understand and use appropriate e-learning technologies to ensure the quality of
the learning experience.
The Basis for Research
A pilot study was done on the topic of issues and concerns of learners using
technology-enhanced e-learning. The main objectives of this pilot study was:
•
To assess the effective use of e-learning tools used at the Cape Technikon.
•
To determine the perceptions of first year Information Students at the Cape
Technikon.
The Research Method
There are currently over 500 first-year students registered for Information
Systems with the faculty of Business Informatics at the Cape Technikon. An online
questionnaire as a survey method was used for the period August 5-9, 2002. The
survey targeted first year Information Systems students at the Cape Technikon and
165 responses were achieved. The questionnaire instrument consisted of the
following parts:
•
Demographic information about the respondents
•
29 statements, using a five-point Likert-scale (Cooper & Emory, 1991), of
which 12 statements were based on e-learning technologies.
All 29 statements were equally weighted. The response to each statement of
each respondent was totaled to obtain total points scored for each respondent. An
item analysis, for each respondent, was carried out to validate the degree of

170   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
discrimination for each statement. Only statements that were good discriminators
(based on t-test) were used in further analysis (Cooper & Emory, 1991). Only
those statements with a t-value of more than and equal to 1.75 were used (Edwards
as cited by Cooper and Emory, 1991). Statements 8, 15 and 17 were excluded
from further study based on that analysis.
Results of the Study
Student Demographics
Of the 165 respondents, 108 were male (65.5%). The majority of the students
were Information Technology students (77%) and about 66 percent of the
respondents were under the age of 21. Only 35 of the respondents had no computer
experience before taking Information Systems as a subject. The majority of the
students said that they use the Internet more than 20 times a month (60%).
Findings
More than 60 percent of the respondents agreed or strongly agreed that online
lectures allow them to look up needed information more conveniently. Majority of
the respondents agreed that learning is more fun with online lectures (47%). Only
13 respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed that they can easily reference any
section of the lecture in an online environment. 117 of the respondents agreed or
strongly agreed that communication between student and facilitator is crucial in the
e-learning process. The same amount of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that
interaction among students is crucial to the e-learning process. Most of the
respondents agreed or strongly agreed that they received sufficient instruction on
the use of the e-learning programs (74%). Only 16 of the respondents disagreed
or strongly disagreed that their computer literacy was adequate for performing the
functions required of the e-learning tools. A majority of the students agreed or
strongly agreed that using e-learning as a platform for Information Systems has
increased their course workload (36%). Most of the respondents agreed or
strongly agreed that e-learning helped them learn the subject content more quickly
(60%). Only about 10 percent of the respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed
that e-learning has helped them develop new computing skills. About half of the
respondents agreed or strongly agreed that they prefer having the subject material
online than using a textbook.
E-learning technology statements retained for further analysis after item
analysis was ranked in descending order of mean score value. The three e-learning
tools identified as most effectively being used (high mean values) were assignment
tool with a mean of 4.14, quiz tool with a mean of 4.12 and downloads tool with

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    171
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
a mean of 4.02 (see Figure 2). The author interprets these tools as being important
to the respondents of this survey.
The three e-learning tools identified as least effectively being used (low mean
values) were the chat room with a mean of 2.72, bulletin board with a mean of 3.04
and e-mail with a mean of 3.21 (see Figure 3).  The remainder of the e-learning tools
is ranked in Table 2.
Figure 2: Most Effectively Used E-Learning Tools
Figure 3: Least Effectively Used E-Learning Tools
Most effective e-Learning Tools
3.95
4
4.05
4.1
4.15
Assignment tool
Quiz tool
Dow nloads tool
e-Learning Tools
Mean Value
Least effective e-Learning Tools
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
Chat room
Bulletin Board
E-mail
e-Learning Tools
Mean Value

172   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Discussion of Findings
This survey has entertained the idea that students perceive interaction and
communication to be factors to be taken in consideration within the e-learning
process. Therefore, within a technology-enhanced e-learning environment the
communication technologies used, need to be evaluated by the facilitator and the
following questions should be asked:
•
Are the learners as well as the facilitator skilled in using communication tools
such as e-mail, chat rooms, bulletin boards, etc.?
•
Is the subject facilitator utilizing the appropriate communication tools?
•
Does students have problems accessing these communication tools?
The findings supported the following perceptions:
•
An increase in course workload which supports statements by authors
(Piccoli et al., 2001) and (Rossiter, 1999).
•
Learners find learning to be more fun and interesting with e-learning and
information are easily accessible and easier memorized. This supports the
author Alexander’s (2001) argument that technology-enhanced e-learning
would improve the quality of learning.
•
There has been an acceptance of the Internet and an increase in World Wide
Web (WWW) technology usage in tertiary institutions. (Sheard et al., 2000).
A majority of the respondents in this study used the Internet 20 or more times
per month.
Table 2: Remainder of E-Learning Tools Ranked by Mean Value
e-Learning Tools 
Mean Value 
Home page tool 
3.78 
My Grades tool 
3.63 
Self-test tool 
3.48 
Search tool 
3.47 
Discussion tool 
3.38 
My progress tool 
3.38 
 

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    173
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Respondents to the questionnaire indicated the most effectively used technol-
ogy-enhanced e-learning tools were the assignment and quiz tools. The following
common attributes between the most effectively used e-learning tools indicated by
respondents are:
•
Assessment
•
Feedback
•
Direct contribution by facilitator
•
Passive interaction
The technology-enhanced e-learning tools ranked as being the least effectively
used were chat rooms, bulletin boards and e-mail. Taylor (2002) pointed out that
the asynchronous and synchronous tools mostly used in technology-delivered e-
learning are chat rooms, bulletin boards and e-mail. The results of this study clearly
show and support Taylor that the tools being effectively used within a technology-
enhanced e-learning environment will differ from those within a technology-
delivered e-learning environment.
A distinct attribute of chat rooms, which were the least effectively being used
from all e-learning tools, are interactive interaction whereas the assignment tool,
which were the most effectively being used from all e-learning tools, have passive
interaction.
CONCLUSION
Most first-year information technology and financial Information Systems
students perceive communication and interaction among themselves and facilitators
to be of importance. Although e-learning contribute to the increase of their
workload, they perceive learning to be more fun and of a better quality within the
technology-enhanced e-learning environment.
Students perceive communication tools such as e-mail, chat rooms and bulletin
boards as not being used effectively within technology-enhanced e-learning
environments. However this study has highlighted that communication and interac-
tion are important to the learning process, therefore the appropriate communication
tools should be used more effectively within a technology-enhanced environment.
This study has also highlighted those passive e-learning technologies (e.g., assign-
ment tools, quizzes and download tools) are being more effectively used than
interactive e-learning technologies (e.g., chat rooms, e-mail and bulletin boards).
Further work is needed to provide a technology-enhanced e-learning environ-
ment that will ensure quality and high performance learning and teaching experi-
ences for both learners and facilitators. To insure that technology-enhanced e-

174   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
learning is being used, implemented and structured effectively. A web-based course
development framework for facilitators or all educators who intend using e-learning
as a teaching medium. A study on technologies used within the e-learning
environment in correlation with multidiscipline subject matter:
•
An investigation of e-learning tools in correlation with multidiscipline subject
matter.
•
A further study with a larger sample size as well as learners of other South
African institutions using technology-enhanced e-learning as a delivery method
could be useful.
•
A study on facilitators’ perceptions on the effectiveness of e-learning tools
used in their course.
Some limitations of this pilot study were:
•
Only Information Technology and Information Systems learners were sur-
veyed.
•
Learners from other subject areas such as engineering and management might
have different perceptions on effectiveness of e-learning tools.
•
The learner, facilitator and technology are not the only pillars in the e-learning
equation. Some of the pillars that were not part of this pilot study are content,
interaction, performance, satisfaction, and learning model (Piccoli et al.,
2001).
REFERENCES
Akerlind, G. & Trevitt, A.C. (1999). Enhancing learning through technology: When
students resist the change. Innovations in Education and Training Inter-
national, 36 (2), 96-105.
Alexander, S. (2001). E-learning developments and experiences.  Education +
Training, 43 (4/5), 240-248.
Boser, R., Palmer, J. & Daugherty, M. (1998). Students’ attitudes toward
technology in selected technology education programs. Journal of Technol-
ogy Education, 10 (1), 6-19.
Carter, J. & Boyle, R. (2002). Teaching delivery issues – Lessons from computer
science. Journal of Information Technology. 1 (2), 77–89.
Chin, K., Chang, V., & Bauer, C. (2000). The use of web-based learning in
culturally diverse learning environments. The sixth Australian World Wide
Web Conference. Retrieved on 17 April 2002 from the World Wide Web:
http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw2k/papers/chin/paper.html.

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    175
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Cooper, D. & Emory, C. (1991). Business Research Methods. Richard D. Irwin,
Inc., USA.
Cuban, L. (1993). Computers meet classroom: Classroom wins. Teachers
College Record, 95 (2), 185-210.
Dede, C. (1996). The evolution of learning devices: smart objects, information
infrastructures, and shared synthetic environments. The Future of Network-
ing Technologies for Learning. [Online]. Retrieved on 12 April 2002 from
the World Wide Web: www.ed.gov/Technology/Futures/dede.html.
Eisenstadt, M. (1995). Overt strategy for global learning. Times Higher Educa-
tion Supplement. Multimedia section: April , 6-8.
Evans. P. & Wurster, T. (1997). Strategy and new economics of information.
Harvard Business Review, 75 (5), 70 – 93.
Fong, A & Hui, S. (2002). An end-to-end solution for Internet lecture delivery.
Campus-Wide Information Systems, 19 (2), 45-51.
Gunasekaran, A., McNeil, R. & Shaul, D. (2002). E-learning: Research and
applications. Industrial and Commercial Training. 34 (2), 44-53.
Hansen, S., Deshpande, Y. & Murugesan, S. (1999). Adoption of Web Delivery
by Staff in Education Institutions. Issues, Stratagems and a Pilot Study.
The Fifth Australian World Wide Web Conference, Southern Cross Univer-
sity. [Online]. Retrieved on 23 May 2002 from the World Wide Web:
www.ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw99/papers/hansen/paper.html.
Hill, J. (2001). Building Community in Web-Based Learning Environments:
Strategies and Techniques. Retrieved on 2 May 2002 from the World Wide
Web: www.ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw01/papers/refereed/hill/paper.html.
Hiltz, S.R. (1996). The virtual classroom: using computer mediated communica-
tions for university teaching. Journal of Communication, 36 (2), 51-53.
Jackson, R.H. (2001).  Defining e-Learning - Different Shades of “Online”.
Web Based Learning Resources Library. [Online]. Retrieved on 2 May 2002
from the World Wide Web: http://www.outreach.utk.edu/weblearning/.
Jones, V., Jo, J. & Crantich, G. (2000). A study of students’ responses to WBI
within a traditional learning environment. The sixth Australian World Wide
Web Conference. [Online]. Retrieved on 17 April 2002 from the World Wide
Web:: http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw2k/papers/jones/paper.html. Accessed:
17 April 2002.
Laurillard, D. (1993). Rethinking University Teaching: A Framework for the
Effective Use of Educational Technology. London: Routledge.
Marold, K. (2002). The 21st century learning model: electronic tutelage realized.
Journal of Information Technology Education, 1 (2), 113 – 123.
Nasseh, B. (1996). A Study of Computer-Based Distance Education in Higher

176   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Education Institutions in Indiana. Retrieved on 24 April 2002 from the World
Wide Web: www.bsu.edu/classes/nasseh/study/research.html.
Ndahi, H. (1999). Utilization of distance learning technology among industrial and
technical teacher education faculty. Journal of Industrial Teacher Educa-
tion, 36 (4).
O’ Keefe, S. & McGrath, D. (2000). On-line delivery in higher education: What
questions should we be asking? ACILITE 2000. [Online]. Retrieved on 24
March 2002 from the World Wide Web:http://www.ascilite.org.au/confer-
ences/coffs00/papers/suzanne_okeefe.pdf.
Passerini, K. & Granger, M. (1999). A developmental model for distant learning
using the Internet. Computers & Education, 34, (1-15).
Pennel, R. (1996).  Managing online learning. The Second Australian World Wide
Web Conference. [Online]. Retrieved on 12 March 2002 from the World
Wide Web: http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw96/educn/pennell/paper.htm.
Piccoli, G., Ahmad, R. & Ives, B. (2001). Web-based virtual learning environ-
ments: A research framework and a preliminary assessment of effectiveness
in basic IT skills training. MIS Quarterly, 25 (4), 401- 426.
Retalis, S. & Avgeriou, P. (2002). Modeling web-based instructional services.
Journal of Information Technology Education, 1 (1), 25–41.
Robson, J. (2000). Evaluating on-line teaching. Open Learning, 15 (2), 153-157.
Roderic, A. (2002). Online learning – Introduction. VNU Business Media.
[Online]. Retrieved on 17 July 2002 from the World Wide Web: http://
www.vnulearning.com/wp/introduction.htm.
Rogers, P. (2001). Traditions to Transformations: The Forced Evolution of Higher
Education. Educational Technology Review. [Online]. Retrieved from the
World Wide Web: www.aace.org/pubs/etr/rogers.cfm.
Rossiter, D. (1999). Building a web-based framework to embed the teaching and
learning of technological literacies. The Fifth Australian World Wide Web
Conference, Southern Cross University. [Online]. Retrieved on 18 April
2002 from the World Wide Web:.http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw99/papers/
rossiter/paper.html.
Schulze, S. (2000).  The online learning environment of students: Educators’
Perspectives. Journal of Education and Training, 21 (1), 25 – 38.
Serdiukov, P. (2001). Models of distance higher education: Fully automated or
partially human? Educational Technology Review. [Online]. Retrieved on
19 February 2002 from the World Wide Web:.ww.aace.org/pubs/etr/
serdiukov.cfm.
Sherson, G. (1996). Teaching using the World Wide Web. Universal College of
Learning. [Online]. Retrieved on 19 February 2002 from the World Wide

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    177
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Web: http://www.ucol.ac.nz/~g.sherson/papers/webdelivery.htm.
Sherson, G. (1999). Education at the digital campus. Universal College of
Learning. Retrieved from the World Wide Web: www.ucol.ac.nz/~g.sherson/
papers/digital.htm.
Simpson, O. (2000). Supporting Students In Open and Distance Learning.
London: Kogan Page.
Slay, J. (1997). The use of the Internet in creating an effective learning environment.
The Third Australian World Wide Web Conference, Southern Cross
University. [Online]. Retrieved on 17 April 2002 from the World Wide Web:
http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw97/papers/slay/paper.htm.
Taylor, R. (2002). Pros and cons of online learning – A faculty perspective.
Journal of European Industrial Training , 26 (1), 24 – 37.
Tian, S. (2001). The World Wide Web: A vehicle to develop interactive learning
and teaching applications. Internet Research: Electronic Networking
Applications and Policy, 11 (1) 74–83.
Tiffin, J. & Rajasingham, L. (1995). In search of the virtual class. London:
Routledge.
Uys, P.M. (1999). Towards the virtual class: Technology issues from fractal
management perspective. “ED-MEDIA 99” Conference in Seattle, USA.
Webster. J. & Hackley, P. (1997). Teaching effectiveness in technology-mediated
distance learning. Academy of Management Review, 40 (6), 1282–1309.
Wells, J. (2000). Effects of an on-line computer-mediated communication course,
prior computer experience and internet knowledge, and learning styles on
students’ internet attitudes computer-mediated technologies and new educa-
tional challenges. Journal of Industrial Teacher Education. [Online].
Retrieved on 19 October 2002 from the World Wide Web: http://
scholar.lib.vt.edu/ejournals/JITE/v37n3/wells.html.
Zepke, N. (1998). Instructional design for distance delivery using hypertext and the
internet: assumptions and applications. Quality in Higher Education, 4 (2),
173-186.
GLOSSARY
Asynchronous – Involves a sequence of operations without a regular
predicate time relationship. Thus operations do not happen at regular timed
intervals, but an operation will begin only after a previous operation is completed.
Computer-based courses – The process of teaching and learning is designed
based on the capabilities of computer and telecommunication, including course
content.

178   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Communication Tools – It can be anything from Internet to electronic mail
that is used as a method of communication between lecturer and student.
Delivery Tools – Used as methods of delivering notes, exams or assignments
(e.g., File Transfer Protocol and bulletin boards).
Distance Education – The process that delivers interactive and responsive
learning opportunities to learners at a time, place, and in the form appropriate and
convenient to learners (Roger Kaufman, 1995).
Electronic Learning (E-learning) – using the Internet environment to
contribute to the learning process.
File Transfer Protocol –In conjunction with the proper local software, FTP
allows computers connected to the Internet to exchange files, regardless of the type
of computer software.
Internet Relay Chat – Synchronous communication tool that allows people
all over the Internet to communicate with one another in real-time
Network – Interconnected system of computers, terminals and communica-
tions channels and devices.
Synchronous – Synchronous data communication requires that each end of
an exchange of communication respond in turn without initiating a new communi-
cation. A typical activity that might use a synchronous protocol would be a
transmission of files from one point to another. As each transmission is received, a
response is returned indicating success or the need to resend. Each successive
transmission of data requires a response to the previous transmission before a new
one can be initiated.
Telecommunications  – The sending of information in any form (e.g., voice,
data, text, images etc.) from one place to another, using electronic media.
Virtual Class – The learning process enabled solely by telecommunications.
World Wide Web (WWW) – It is an information system on the Internet based
on hypertext that offers a great power for an information search and delivery system.
The current feature of WWW includes text, sound, graphics and video.

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    179
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
APPENDIX
Information Systems: NB_Survey_August2002
Question: Q1
Gender:
1.
Male
2. Female
Question: Q2
Age group:
1.
Under 21
2. 21 - 25
3. 26 - 30
4. Older than 30
Question: Q3
Which course are you currently registered for?
1.
Information Technology
2. Financial Information Systems
Question: Q5
Did you have any computer experience before doing the e-learning
subject?
1.
Yes
2. No
Question: Q6
How often do you use the Internet?
1.
1 - 5 times a month
2.
6 - 10 times a month
3.
11 - 20 times a month
4. more than 20 times a month
Question: Q7
In general, you enjoy using a computer
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5.
Strongly Agree
Question: Q8
You prefer traditional (face-to-face) lectures to online lectures
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5.
Strongly Agree
Question: Q9
Online lectures allow you, more conveniently, to look up the information
you need.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree

180   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Question: Q10
Memorising certain types of information is easier in the online environ-
ment.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q11
Learning is more fun with online lectures.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q12
You can easily reference any section of the lecture in an online
environment.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q13
Communication between student and facilitator is crucial in the e-
learning process.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q14
Interaction among students is crucial to the e-learning process.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q15
The fact that I frequently have to find and/or use a computer to
participate in this course is a source of annoyance to me
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q16
I received sufficient instruction on the use of the e-learning programs
(e.g.,WebCT) for this course.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    181
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Question: Q17
The amount of time required for computer use in this course is excessive.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q18
My computer literacy was adequate for performing the functions
required of the e-learning tools. (e.g., chat, bulletin boards)
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q19
Using e-learning as a platform for this subject has increased my course
workload.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q20
E-learning helped me to learn my subject content more quickly.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q21
E-Learning has helped me develop new computing skills.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q22
I prefer having the subject material online than using a textbook.
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q23
The Bulletin Board is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree

182   Parker
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Question: Q24
The Private Mail is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q25
The Chat Room is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q26
The Calendar is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q27
The Downloads tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q28
The Discussions tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q29
The Self-Test tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q30
The Quiz tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q31
The Home Page tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree

E-Learning is a Social Tool for E-Commerce at Tertiary Institutions    183
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Question: Q32
The My Progress tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q33
The My Grades tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q34
The Assignments tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree
Question: Q35
The Search tool is effectively used in this subject
1.
Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neutral
4.
Agree
5. Strongly Agree

184   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter XI
Relating Cognitive
Problem-Solving Style to
User Resistance
Michael Mullany
Northland Polytechnic, New Zealand
Peter Lay
Northland Polytechnic, New Zealand
ABSTRACT
This study investigated the relationships between user resistance to new
information systems and the differences in cognitive problem-solving styles
between systems developers (analysts) and users. In addition, associations
were tested between user resistance and the following: system accuracy,
system reliability, the analyst’s attitude, the analyst-user relationship, analyst-
user dissonance, the user’s age and the user’s length of service with his
current employer.
A significant positive association between user resistance and analyst-
user cognitive style difference was found. A model was then developed which
enables the estimation of user resistance prior to system development with the
aid of the Kirton Adaptive/Innovative Inventory (an instrument which
measures cognitive style). Significant negative associations were found to
exist between user resistance and system accuracy, and user resistance and
system reliability. No relationships between user resistance and either user
age or user length of service were found.

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    185
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
INTRODUCTION
There are conflicting views regarding the influence of cognitive style on user
resistance.  Hirschheim and Newman (1988)1, for example, note that a user may
resist a system because the mode of presentation of that system does not match the
user’s cognitive style. In other words, the system does not follow a problem-solving
sequence that is totally acceptable to the user. Huber (1983), however, deduced
from his own literary survey that cognitive style theory had not, and probably would
never, provide guidelines for system design. Nonetheless, a careful analysis of
Huber’s study reveals that it merely rejects attempts to match a system to a given
user’s cognitive style. It does not reject attempts to match the systems developer
cognitively with a given user. On the contrary, Huber’s study encourages the use
of cognitive style theory for personnel selection and placement purposes. Since little
direct evidence was found in the IS literature of previous attempts to match systems
developers and users cognitively, it was decided to investigate user resistance along
this more novel line.
The purpose of this study, then, was to test relationships between user
resistance to computer-based systems, including those commonly associated with
e-Commerce and cognitive style. This term, or the alternative, cognitive problem-
solving style is used to denote an individual’s approach to problem solving. The
Kirton Adaption-innovation Inventory (KAI) was selected as an instrument to
measure cognitive styles. The KAI, based on Adaption-innovation (A-I) theory,
measures an individual’s preference for either an “adaptive” or “innovative”
approach to problem solving. Adaptive problem-solvers tend to follow prescribed
and traditional methods, whilst innovators seek new and often unexpected solu-
tions. These concepts will be expanded on later.
SUMMARY OF PRIOR RESEARCH
The study covered four areas of prior research. These are: IS user resistance
to new systems; resistance to change in other areas not necessarily related to IS
(e.g., e-commerce); the influence of cognitive problem-solving styles on resistance
to change; and measures of system success and their application. Since e-
commerce success is largely a matter of user opinion, the aspect of user satisfaction
and its measurement is covered under the discussion of the last area. A link is
claimed between user satisfaction (or dissatisfaction) and user resistance, thus the
possibility of using user satisfaction as a converse substitute measure of user
resistance is considered.

186   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
User Resistance - IS Studies and E-Commerce
Only five studies of significance were found in the IS literature: those of Keen
(1981), Hirschheim and Newman (1988), Bruwer (1984), Markus (1983) and De
Brabander and Thiers (1984). The studies of both Keen and Hirschheim and
Newman are literature surveys. The former concludes that new systems that
represent radical change, as opposed to those that cause incremental or evolution-
ary change, will be avoided or resisted. Also, since the redistribution of data caused
by a new information system is a political resource, the interests of certain groups
will be affected. In the latter, the authors define resistance as an adverse reaction
to a proposed change, which may be overt or covert. They suggest that the impact
of user resistance emerging during implementation may take any of the following
forms: low productivity, low effectiveness, high labour turn- over, disputes,
absenteeism, psychological withdrawal, aggression, sabotage of machinery, the
system being blamed for all difficulties experienced (including incorrect data
entries), and lack of management support for the system.
Bruwer (1984) studied resistance to computerization in a single organization,
where 140 computerized systems, used by about 1,200 clerical staff and 114
managers, were investigated. He claims that older managers with longer experi-
ences are more negative towards computerization than are younger ones.
Markus (1983) identified three general theories explaining user resistance
from the IS literature, which she then assessed in the light of a single case study. The
following were identified as causing resistance: internal individual or group factors,
such as a non-analytic cognitive style; factors inherent in the system under
implementation, such as technically deficient systems or systems which are not user-
friendly; and certain interactions between factors inherent in the user and others
intrinsic to the system. In the main, user resistance behaviors took the form of
complaints against the system that were considered unfair. This, it will be noted,
corroborated the behaviors identified by Hirschheim and Newman.
Finally, De Brabander and Thiers (1984) studied certain defective implemen-
tation behaviors in the form of not adhering to plans, which resulted in reduced
efficiency of task-accomplishment amongst users. They concluded that the reason
that their users did not adhere to plans was that they were subject to the sanctioning
powers of the corresponding IS specialists. This effect, they noted, was enhanced
by the presence of a semantic gap that they define as the employment of differing
conceptual definitions for aspects of the same task.
As can be seen from the above, there has been little of a definitive nature in the
IS literature pertaining to user resistance. None of the work described above
attempted to associate user resistance with any aspects of cognitive style. This

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    187
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
prompted an examination of studies that had been conducted on resistance in
related fields.
Resistance to Change in other Areas
Rosen and Jerdee (1976) conducted an enquiry into age stereotypes of
employees, which suggests that increased resistance to change is a generally
believed characteristic of older employees. They found that there was a tendency
for younger persons to be considered more receptive to new ideas, and older
persons, by implication, more resistant to them. After a further intensive literature
survey, however, they found that there was little research evidence to support such
beliefs, and concluded that older employees are the potential victims of unjustified
discrimination. This study, it should be noted, contradicts the findings of Bruwer .
In a study of the impact of manpower-flows on innovation, from which
inferences for resistance to change can be drawn, Ettlie (1985) offers support for
the premises that innovation is aided by: an influx of new employees (if not too
disruptive); the degree to which the organizational structure is decentralized; the
complexity of the organization; and the availability of slack resources. Hence, by
implication, the same factors must ameliorate resistance to innovation.
Cognitive Problem-Solving Styles and Resistance to
Change
The third area of analysis is that of cognitive problem-solving style and its
impact on system success (e.g., e-commerce). If the way in which analysts define
and describe tasks can be implicated in the phenomenon of user resistance, then it
stands to reason that the cognitive approaches, or problem-solving styles of the
analyst and user are also significant. This follows from the fact that definition and
description are basic to cognitive information processing. Hence the implication of
the semantic gap also suggests the role of cognitive differences between the user and
the analyst in user resistance (Zmud, 1983).
There have been numerous studies attempting to categorize problem-solving
style, such as those of Woodruff (1980) and Lusk and Kersnick (1970), but one
of the major research efforts in this area has been performed by Kirton (1976,
1980, 1984, 1985, 1987, 1988) under what he terms Adaption-Innovation theory
(Kirton, 1976). Adaption-Innovation theory, Kirton claims, explains in an empirical
way many of the anomalies surrounding resistance to change in occupational
situations. He proposes that any person can be located on a continuum ranging
between two extreme cognitive styles; from an ability to adapt existing technologies
(an adaptor) to an ability to use new or different technologies (an innovator). This

188   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
proposition, he claims, is relevant to the analysis of organizational change, and offers
new insights into the concept of resistance to change. Kirton’s enquiry into the
blocking of new initiatives in several large corporate institutions offers a fundamental
conclusion regarding resistance to change. In general, a person will exhibit less
resistance to ideas put forward by another of similar cognitive style. He further
discusses the notion of an “agent for change”, and stresses that it is not necessarily
associated with innovation. An agent for change is rather a person “who can
successfully accept, and be accepted into, an environment alien to his own”, or ‘’as
a competent individual who has enough skill to be successful in a particular
environment” (Kirton, 1984).
The Kirton Adaption-innovation Inventory (KAI) instrument provides a
means for measuring individuals’ cognitive problem-solving styles (Kirton, 1987).
These scores are stable, and little variation is reported with time or age. This
instrument rates innovators with higher scores than adaptors. These scores have
relative as well as absolute significance; hence if A’s KAI score is higher than E’s,
it is meaningful to describe A as “more innovative” than E, and B as “more adaptive”
than A.
As a final point, Huber (1983) in a literary survey concludes that the literature
available on cognitive style research in IS does not support a satisfactory basis for
recommendations on IS design. Also, he expresses pessimism that this approach
will ever provide such guidelines. However, he does recommend cognitive style
research in three areas: career counseling, personnel selection and placement, and
coaching and training. The second of these has implications for the placing of the
most suitable analyst with a given user, or vice versa. This, together with the previous
discussion of A-I theory, suggests that the KAI might be used for matching users
and analysts successfully. It was thus obvious to select the KAI as the instrument
to measure cognitive style in this study.
Measures of System Success and User Satisfaction
The final research area to be analyzed was that of system success and the
related area of user satisfaction. Attempts are found in the literature to identify those
attributes of systems that tend to satisfy (and/or dissatisfy) users. In one of the most
comprehensive analyses of user satisfaction instruments, Ives, Olson and Baroudi
(1983) conducted a psychometric analysis of four “User Information Satisfaction”
instruments. These were, Gallagher’s questionnaire, Jenkins and Rickett’s 20-item
measure, Larcker and Lessing’s perceived usefulness instrument, and Pearson’s
39-factor instrument. In conclusion, they favoured Pearson’s instrument as the most
predictive and exhibiting the greatest construct validity. The shortened version of
Pearson’s instrument that they subsequently developed, they considered a prom-

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    189
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
ising advance in the measure of user satisfaction. In their own research, the five of
the thirty-nine factors found to be most significant by Bailey and Pearson (1983)
were: accuracy (correctness of output), reliability (dependability of output),
timeliness (output available at a time suitable for use), relevancy of output, and
confidence in the system.
There have been various other studies of user involvement or user satisfaction
(Eveland, 1977; Olson & Ives, 1981; Robey & Farrow, 1982; Rushinek &
Rushinek, 1986), but the conclusions reached do not corroborate or complement
each other.
DEVELOPMENT AND STATEMENT OF
HYPOTHESES
The studies by Lusk and Kersnick, Kirton, and Hirschheim and Newrnan
suggest the important role of cognitive styles in occupational situations. As was
noted, in general, a person will exhibit less resistance to ideas put forward by
another person of similar cognitive style. This in turn justifies the submission that user
resistance is associated with differences in developer-user cognitive problem-
solving styles. This was the basis of the primary hypothesis of this study. The
research also attempted to build on the work of other IS researchers by using the
instruments of Bailey and Pearson (1983) and Rushinek and Rushinek (1986), and
challenging the conclusions of Bruwer (1984).
In the light of the foregoing discussion, this study poses the following central
questions:
i.
During system development, implementation and maintenance, is there a
relationship between user resistance and cognitive styles (or cognitive style
differences) associated with the analyst-user interface?
ii.
Can cognitive style theory be used to predict certain general aspects and
behaviors of a given analyst-user interface during the development and
implementation of an information system?
iii.
Are there factors related to systems or their manner of implementation that are
associated with user resistance?
iv.
Do the ages and lengths of service of analysts and/or users play a role in user
resistance?
Consequences of the literature-based discussions above lead directly and
indirectly to certain hypotheses regarding the causes of user resistance, which fall
into the above categories. Before such hypotheses could be developed, however,
a reliable instrument to measure user resistance needed to be selected.

190   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The Choice of an Instrument to Measure User Resistance
Had the link between user satisfaction and user resistance been assumed, an
instrument which measures user satisfaction could have been chosen to yield a
converse substitute measure for user resistance. Pearson’s instrument for measur-
ing user satisfaction has been acclaimed as one of the best in the IS literature to date.
However, its length (and even the length of the modified version suggested by Ives,
et al.) must raise criticism. If the respondent were to complete and return the form
on a voluntary basis, then the sample gathered would tend to contain the more
conscientious respondents; namely, those who are prepared to fill in and return
lengthy questionnaire forms. Since conscientiousness is claimed by Kirton (1984)
to be associated with an adaptive cognitive style, the risk of bias is immediately
evident with this questionnaire. An instrument other than a self-report questionnaire
of the above type was thus indicated.
Ives, et al (1983) developed the notion of substitute or “surrogate” measures
for entities not capable of direct measurement themselves. In the light of this and the
reservations just expressed, an alternative instrument was devised, which consti-
tuted a quantified expression of dissatisfaction to a person independent of the user’s
organization. The potential weakness inherent in allowing respondents to complete
and return their own forms was removed by collecting data at personal, confidential
interviews with the users. The user of each system under investigation was asked
to enumerate all the problems that he considered or heard had occurred during the
implementation or early life of the system. He was effectively invited, in confidence,
to make complaints against the system and/ or its manner of development and
implementation. Each complaint was recorded, and then the user was asked to
weight his complaints in terms of severity on a seven-point scale (see Appendix).
The sum of the weights for each complaint was taken as the user’s “resistance
score” or “R-score”.
The validity of the R-score is argued on the basis that user resistance can only
be exhibited in one of four ways: by what the user says or by what the user does
(overt resistance), or by what he doesn’t say or doesn’t do (covert resistance).
Anyone (or any combination) of these four phenomena, if measured and quantified,
would be expected to provide an observable measure of user resistance. Further-
more, as an independent party is not part of the political structure of the organization,
comments made to him about the system are likely to be more objective than hear-
say filtering back to the management.
However, there are two issues that require clarification. Firstly, there is the
question of whether or not overt user dissatisfaction, expressed in the form of
complaints, is a legitimate measure of user resistance. Both the studies by
Hirschheim and Newman (1988) and Markus (1983) suggest a significant associa-

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    191
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
tion between user resistance and user complaint. The former study asserts that
amongst the various types of user resistance, there are: aggression; and the system
being blamed for all problems prevailing during implementation, including incorrect
data entries. This is confirmed in the latter study, where user resistance was
observed mainly to take the form of complaints, many of which Markus considered
unfair. These literary sources thus support a method that quantifies user dissatisfac-
tion as a substitute measure for user resistance.
However, there are types of resistance that cannot easily be proved to be
associated with complaint. Examples of such are psychological withdrawal and
absenteeism, because these are types of covert resistance whilst a complaint is a
case of overt resistance. The answer to the first question, then, is that the study must
be limited to investigating only those forms of resistance that are measurable in terms
of overt expressions of dissatisfaction. Whilst this may at first seem restrictive, it
should be noted that perceived success of the system to management is most likely
to be tied to reports of success from its employee users. In other words, this
measurement technique will appeal to managers whose interests are largely the
warding off of complaints against new systems from their staff.
The second issue is the question of how complete the list of the user’s
complaints would be, or alternatively, what the significance would be if the user
forgot to itemize certain problems. It is argued that this is not a significant issue, since
the R-score method aims to observe the user in the process of complaining. If, as
noted above, users tend to make unfair complaint as a resistance behavior, then
users will tend to invent or exaggerate complaints as an expression of their level of
dissatisfaction. Quite clearly, the issue of whether or not the user remembers all the
real problems that occurred during implementation then becomes less relevant.
The R-score approach does, however, prescribe certain stipulations that were
borne in mind during the research design. Firstly, the users needed to be interviewed
personally by a researcher to obtain their views of systems. This follows immedi-
ately from the need to relieve the respondent of the obligation to complete and return
a form, as discussed above. Secondly, every effort had to be made to convince the
user that all his responses were to be kept confidential; particularly from the
analyst(s), management and potential business rivals. Without this stipulation, the
advantage of having opinions expressed to an independent researcher (as men-
tioned above) would have been lost.
The weighting of the severity of the complaints is based on a model developed
by Wanous and Lawler (1972) for measuring a worker’s job satisfaction.
According to this model, an employee’s overall job satisfaction is the weighted sum
of his satisfaction with all significant facets of the job. This can be expressed
algebraically as:

192   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
          n
S = È si wi,
       i = 1
where:
S = respondent’s overall satisfaction with n significant facets of the job,
si = respondent’s satisfaction with facet i, rated on a seven-point scale, and
wi = the importance of facet i to the respondent, rated on a seven-point scale.
Pearson made use of this model in his 39-factor instrument discussed earlier
(Bailey & Pearson, 1983). However, the R-score method makes three fundamen-
tal departures in its application of the same. Firstly, it assumes that weighted
responses to dissatisfaction with various facets of a system and its manner of
implementation will give a valid measure of overall dissatisfaction. It is difficult to see
why all the arguments which apply to weighted measures of satisfaction cannot also
apply to its antipode, dissatisfaction, hence this variation was assumed valid.
Secondly, the R-score method assumes that overall dissatisfaction gives a valid
measure of its surrogate, user resistance. This stems directly from the discussion
above so long as it is understood that only those forms of resistance variation were
assumed valid. Secondly, the R-score method assumes that overall dissatisfaction
gives a valid measure of its surrogate, user resistance. This stems directly from the
discussion above so long as it is understood that only those forms of resistance
measured by overt expressions of dissatisfaction are intended. Finally, the facets of
dissatisfaction are not pre-specified, but are enumerated by the respondent (that is,
the user) himself. This was justified in terms of Wanous and Lawler’s model by
rating any complaint raised by the user with unit importance (and, of course, those
not raised by the user with zero importance). This meant that the R-score could be
measured simply by summing the user’s dissatisfaction ratings for his own com-
plaints against the system. In mathematical terms, the R-score, R, after the user has
made n complaints in respect of the system and/or its manner of implementation, can
be expressed as:
          n
R = È si,
       i = 1
where si is defined as the severity of complaint i to the user, rated on the
following seven-point scale:
(7)
a totally unsolvable problem
(6)
a very serious problem

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    193
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
(5)
a serious problem
(4)
a rather serious problem
(3)
a significant problem
(2)
a slight problem
(1)
not really a problem
In the light of the previous discussion, the R-score was assumed to be a valid
measure of user resistance, despite its novelty. Of course it can be argued that the
R-score might change with the nature of the researcher conducting the interview.
It was beyond the scope of this study to investigate such a conjecture, but since it
was sufficient to show resistance in the relative sense only (comparing resistance
between systems investigated by the same person), this criticism was not consid-
ered significant.
The Role of Cognitive Problem-Solving Styles
A submission based on A-I theory, made earlier was that user resistance is
associated with differences in developer-user cognitive problem-solving styles.
This can now be stated as the following hypothesis:
HI: The user’s R-score is positively associated with the absolute analyst-
user KAI score difference for a given information system
Further hypotheses were thus formulated for testing. For example, a user
should tend to see an analyst who is more innovative than himself spend surprisingly
little time studying the system requirements. This follows from the tendency of
innovators to not to wed themselves too long to any system, and to seek continued
novelty of activity. Since the user will consider the analyst an “expert” (lacking in the
beginning a frame of reference to consider him anything else), he should also assume
that the analyst has absorbed all the details in this surprisingly short time. The degree
to which a user will see the analyst as more innovative or adaptive than himself is
measurable as the algebraic difference between their KAI scores. Hence the
hypothesis:
H2(a): The analyst-user KAI score difference is positively associated
with the user’s seven- point rating of how quickly the analyst absorbed
(grasped) the system requirements
According to Kirton (1984), innovators tend to pursue a course of action with
more apparent certainty than do adaptors. This leads to the obvious conjecture that

194   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
an innovative analyst, when dealing with an adaptive user, will tend to follow his own
ideas rather than to pay over-much attention to the user. The adaptor, prone to high
self-doubt, would be expected to give in to the analyst’s views. Hence:
H2(b): The analyst-user KAI score difference is positively associated
with the user’s seven-point rating of the extent to which the analyst
followed his own ideas and/or ignored the user’s opinions
Innovators, with the predilection for novelty, would be expected to add to the
system development effort extraneous features, which the more adaptive user
would consider unnecessary and time wasting. This suggested the hypothesis:
H2(c): The analyst-user KAI score difference is positively associated
with the user’s seven-pointrating of the extent to which the analyst
wasted time on peripheral issues
Innovators are often seen as abrasive, creating dissonance. Hence, a measure
of dissonance would be expected to exist between individuals who differ markedly
in cognitive style. In addition, Bailey and Pearson (1983) found that a user’s
relationship with the IS staff, as well as the attitude of the IS staff, influenced user
satisfaction. By “attitude”, Bailey and Pearson were referring to the analyst’s
willingness to assist the user. It is doubtful that a user would report friction between
himself and the analyst, and then describe their relationship as sound, and the analyst
as helpful. Consequently, the user’s ratings of these three factors should be highly
correlated. To test this, the following hypothesis was specified:
H2(d): The absolute analyst-user KAI score difference is negatively
associated with the user’s seven-point rating of his relationship with the
analyst
The key factors thought by Pearson to play a role in user satisfaction were
identified earlier. As it is of interest to see how their approaches compared with that
of this study, a short-list of user-satisfaction factors was drawn up. Negative
associations were then postulated between these factors and the R-score. The
hypotheses tested in respect of the above were thus:
H3(a): There is a negative association between the user’s R-score and his
seven-point rating of the system’s level of accuracy

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    195
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
H3(b): There is a negative association between the user’s R-score and his
seven-point rating of the degree he can rely on the system’s output
information
The Roles of Age and Length of Service
After examination of the study by Bruwer, beliefs were identified that older
and/ or more experienced users in the organization will be most resistant to new
computer systems. These beliefs infer the following hypotheses:
H4(a): A user’s R-score for a given information system is positively
associated with his age
H4(b): A user’s R-score for a given information system is positively
associated with his length of service in his organization
H4(c): A user’s R-score for a given information system is positively
associated with the absolute difference between his age and the analyst’s
age
H4(d): A user’s R-score for a given information system is positively
associated with the absolute difference between his and the analyst’s
length of service in the same organization
THE RESEARCH METHODOLOGY AND DESIGN
Ten organizations in the Cape Town and Johannesburg areas in South Africa
participated. Within these organizations, 34 live (post-implementation) systems
were randomly selected. These systems had all been in operation for between two
and 26 months, and in each case, both a key analyst and key user could be identified.
First the analyst was interviewed, since he could supply details of the user; most
particularly, where the key user could be located. This information was recorded
together with the analyst’s age and length of service. At the end of this interview,
the KAI was administered to the analyst. Every effort was made to ensure that
standard testing conditions prevailed during the administration of the KAI. Follow-
ing this, the user was interviewed, whereupon a System Satisfaction Schedule (see
Appendix) was completed. At the end of the interview, the KAI was administered
to the user. The procedure and circumstances of the user interviews and KAI
administration were similar to those described above for the analysts.

196   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Of significance is the question of whether or not complaints were distinguished
in a consistent manner. With this in mind, notes were carefully taken at each
interview of any unusual occurrences and responses, and how they were handled.
Similar action was thus ensured where similar circumstances arose subsequently.
For example, experience soon showed that responses to seven-point scales
required special handling, because several of the respondents could not remember
all the options at once. Even though the respondent was shown the form, he often
required help in making his assessment. This assistance was given in the form of a
two-tiered approach. First, the respondent was asked to make a crude assessment
out of options 2, 4 and 6, and then he was asked to refine his choice by making a
selection within one of his original choice. For example, if he first chose option 6,
he would then be asked to make a final assessment out of 5, 6 or 7.
The criticism that points of complaint were recorded to correlate with KAI
scores and/or differences was counteracted in the research design as follows: the
user R-score was measured close to the beginning of the interview, before the user’s
KAI score was measured, and before it became possible to make a reliable guess
of the user’s KAI score. Other questions on the System Satisfaction Schedule were
not asked until after the R-score had been measured in the case of a user, once again
to avoid guesses as to the user’s cognitive style.
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
In this study, thirty-four systems were researched, hence the data is divided
into several univariate samples of thirty-four (that is, sample-size n = 34 in all cases).
The levels of significance employed in this study were based on the opinions
found in human science and statistical literature. These opinions are summarized in
Table 1. Based on the opinions of respected experts as recorded in Table 1, the
qualitative ratings listed in Table 2 were assumed for this study. The data was then
stratified into those univariate samples identified in Table 3.
The mean and standard deviation was calculated for each sample, which was
then tested for goodness-of-fit to the normal distribution.
The Randomness of the Data Samples
The means for the analyst and user KAI score samples were respectively,
102.9 and 101.6, while their respective standard deviations are 12.55 and 14.09.
Kirton’s British sample of KAI scores for 562 persons exhibited a normal
distribution with mean 95 and standard deviation 18 (Kirton, 1987). In studies cited
by Kirton, in which the KAI scores for various occupational groups were

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    197
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 1: Ratings of Significant Levels for Non-Parametric Statistics
Table 2: Qualitative Ratings Assumed for Significant Levels

198   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
determined, the means ranged from 78.3 to 114.0, and the standard deviations from
5.8 to 26.8 (Kirton, 1987). The two KAI-score samples obtained in this study thus
exhibit basic statistics that are quite within established limits. These samples also
tested to be approximately normally distributed. In addition, the differences in KAI
scores between users and analysts tested decidedly normal, with p > 0.500. The
above results are consistent with (and hence support) the theory that all three of
these KAI samples are random samples from approximately normal populations.
But for the item referring to speed of comprehension of the system require-
ments, the null hypothesis of normality in each case is rejected at a confidence level
of 5%. Certain possibilities are thus implied. These are either that the populations
from which the samples were drawn are not normal, or that the samples were biased
(that is, not random), or that the measuring technique was not reliable. As to the first
of these possibilities, (that is, non-normal parent populations), no conclusions can
be drawn. The parent populations simply are not available for analysis. As far as
biasing of the samples is concerned, it is difficult to see how the sampling technique
Table 3: The Data Samples

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    199
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
could have allowed this. The only parameter to be measured that the selectors of
the systems in each organization knew of in advance, was that of user resistance.
However, the R-score sample, which is composed of measures of user resistance
by direct observation, tested satisfactorily normal. Bias for covert reasons on the
part of organizational managers was thus considered unlikely. This therefore leaves
the third alternative as a possibility, namely, failure of the seven-interval measuring
technique. Experience with these scales confirmed this reservation. For example,
the respondents at times tried to give intermediate responses, which were discour-
aged by the choice-presentation. Quite clearly, this would have limited tying in the
data, enhancing the credibility of the association statistics.
Fortunately, reliable measures of association were still possible in the case of
most of the non-normal, seven-option samples, where the responses could be
meaningfully regrouped. Some sets of responses, for example, could be redefined
as dichotomies or trichotomies. Somewhat more confidence is thus indicated for
measures where the responses can, on some legitimate criterion, be divided into two
giving approximately 50%, or three giving some 33% of the readings in each class.
Effectively, this means that an approximate maximum of 17 out of 34 readings
should be present for anyone of the options 1 to 7; at least a requirement fulfilled
by all the samples considered below.
The Results
The associations were first computed as Kendall’s rank correlation coeffi-
cients, ta and tb. In order to measure the significance of each association t, the
standard normal statistic for zero association, z(t), was calculated. The significance
of t was then determined from standard normal tables (Huntsberger et al, 1973),
as a tail area. The results of this procedure for each hypothesis have been
summarized in Table 4. Table 5 contains a complete summary of the consequent
findings.
The Role of Cognitive Problem-Solving Styles
Hypothesis HI, which posits a significant positive correlation between the user
R-scores and arithmetic difference in analyst and user KAI scores (I KAI I), tested
as significant at the 0.005 significance level. In other words, there is substantially
more than minimal evidence of a positive association between user resistance and
analyst-user cognitive style differences. The implication is immediately obvious: to
minimize user resistance; match users with analysts of similar cognitive style.
However, some caution is in order. Adaptors and innovators, according to Kirton,
have need of each other in many occupational situations; the adaptor to add stability

200   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
to the innovator’s higher risk operations, and the innovator to motivate potentially
needed changes. To match analysts and users of similar cognitive styles would
deprive the system development effort of this balance. A system developed by two
innovators, for example, would be expected to reach the implementation phase
quickly, but with less groundwork than harder-working adaptors would have done.
Hence debugging after implementation could be extensive. Two adaptors, by
contrast, should take a longer time to implement the system, as they would execute
the analysis and design phases more thoroughly. The debugging effort would thus
be lower. However, a greater enhancing effort would be expected, since certain
novel features which motivated the system’s development are likely to have been
overlooked.
Obviously these conjectures needed testing, and so this study initially at-
tempted to do so. The mean KAI scores for the analyst and user were used to
measure the extent to which the analyst-user dyads were either two-innovator or
two-adaptor. Associations were then sought between this sample and the length of
implementation time, debugging time and enhancing time. Unfortunately, these tests
had to be abandoned because the data were suspect. Almost none of the analysts
could make a clear distinction between enhancing and debugging times. In fact, 14
Table 4: Tests of Hypothesises: Summary of Relevant Statistics

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    201
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
out of 34 declined to offer even the wildest of guesses. Also, only in the case of 20
out of the 34 systems were some estimates of the installation times available, since
the other 14 were under development on an on-going basis. This indicates that there
may well be latent disadvantages in matching users and analysts of similar cognitive
styles, despite this study’s inability to find any.
It is suggested, therefore, that analysts’ and users’ cognitive styles be matched
only where either user resistance is a high-risk, high-penalty overhead, or where any
of the developing, debugging or enhancing efforts is likely to have a limited impact.
Examples of the first of these types of situation were noted during the research,
where radical changes in state policy had forced certain organizations into
corresponding computer system changes. In such cases, failure to develop and
adopt the new system quickly would have meant substantial losses. It is submitted
that it is worth matching analysts and users of similar cognitive styles to minimize user
resistance under such conditions.
Table 5: Summary of Findings

202   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Up to this stage, the association between the user R-scores and the absolute
KAI score differences have only been qualitatively demonstrated. Since this
association tested significant at p = 0.005, a level well below the assumed
permissible maximum of 0.050, an attempt to quantify the result was made. It was
found that the sample statistic In (k/r), where k is the absolute analyst/user KAI
difference and r the R-score, is approximately normally distributed with mean -
0.20503 and standard deviation 0.82417. By assuming these results for the
population of analyst-user dyad, Table 6 could be constructed. This enables
approximate forecasts for user resistance, given the analyst and user KAI score
differences.
For the sake of comparison, the raw and relative frequencies of the ratios r/
k for the 34 systems researched, which fell into each confidence interval, are given
as well. It will be noticed that the relative frequency of the systems in each
confidence interval agrees approximately with the corresponding confidence level.
This provides some heuristic evidence that the method described above for
estimating the ratio r /k is valid.
At first sight, the confidence intervals given in Table 6 appear somewhat large,
particularly for the higher confidences. However, forecasts based on the lower
confidences may certainly be used for decision-making purposes. Additionally,
Table 6: Confidence Intervals for Ration R/K

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    203
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
one-sided forecasts may be preferable on occasion. For example, suppose that
prior to its embarking upon a joint project, an analyst-user dyad exhibits an absolute
KAI score difference of 10. Then any of the following statements, based on the
values given in Table 6, are acceptable:
After implementation of the system,
1)
there is a better than 50% (namely 55%) chance that the user R-score will be
at least 7;
2)
there is an approximately 80% chance that the user R-score will be at least 5;
and
3)
there is an approximately 80% chance that the user R-score will be no more
than 35.
If user resistance constitutes a high-risk, high-penalty overhead, then one-
sided forecasts based on the upper confidence limits give a safe but high “worst
case,” while those based on the lower confidence limits, of course, give the reverse.
A difficulty with which an organization is likely to be faced in the forecasting
of user resistance on this basis is the interpretation of the R-scores. Unlike, for
example, the Centigrade temperature scale, the R-score is not a measure with which
people in general are familiar. Fortunately, this problem can be resolved intuitively
by relating the R-scores to the numbers of complaints made in respect of each of
the systems researched. The Pearson correlation coefficient of the numbers of
complaints versus the corresponding R- scores was found to be 0.9126. This
means that a strong, linear relationship (not merely an association) holds between
these variables. Furthermore, the best-fitting regression line passes through (0, 0),
since zero complaints imply a zero R-score. In other words, the numbers of
complaints and the R-scores are in approximate direct proportion. Based on this
finding, the constant of proportionality was estimated by taking the mean of the
ratios of the R-scores to the numbers of complaints. The mean was found to be
3.913. The R-score is thus approximately four times the number of distinct
complaints that the user will make, in confidence, to an independent consultant, in
respect of the system and/or its manner of implementation.
The strength of the association demonstrated for hypothesis HI not only
facilitates a quantitative forecast of user resistance, but also supports the use of the
R-score as a valid measure of user resistance. Insofar as user satisfaction and user
resistance are related, the R-score is also a potential measure of user satisfaction.
Of course this single study, carried out on one, comparatively small sample of
systems, is insufficient to substantiate the R-score’s general use in a positively

204   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
prescriptive manner. For instance, as previously noted, the sensitivity of the R-score
to the cognitive style of the researcher is left untested in this study.
The Ability of Adaption-Innovation Theory to Predict
Aspects of the Analyst-User Interface
Following the successful testing of hypothesis HI, significant associations
between analyst- user KAI score differences and aspects of the analyst-user
interface were expected. These associations are represented by hypotheses H2(a)
to H2(d). Of these, hypothesis H2(c) tested significant at p = 0.020 in precise
contradiction of the original posit. A tendency was thus demonstrated for a user
not to view an analyst who is more innovative than he is as a person who tends to
waste time on side issues. It initially seems, therefore, that A-I theory failed to
predict this aspect of the analyst-user interface correctly. However, a reconsidera-
tion of hypothesis H2(c) suggests another, which both agree with A-I theory and
the result obtained. That is, that the user, generally being a non-systems expert,
really does not know whether the analyst is wasting time on peripheral issues or not.
What he rather observes in a more innovative analyst is a confident, to-the-point
individual, who does not appear to waste time on peripheral issues. Unfortunately,
it can be argued that this is merely an attempt to explain away an unexpected result,
since the original hypothesis was a fair one, quite as soundly based on A-I theory.
The ultimate conclusion in respect of this matter must then be one of caution when
trying to predict specific behaviors of an analyst-user dyad directly from A-I theory.
Hypothesis H2(a) tested inconclusively significant at p = 0.070, although
stronger support may have been achieved with a better measuring technique. In
other words, there is some evidence that a user will find an analyst who is more
innovative than he is to comprehend system requirements relatively quickly. These
results may prove useful in situations where R-score/KAI testing of the persons
involved is not immediately feasible or possible. In such cases, users who comment
on the quick comprehension, confidence and brevity of the analyst could be
suspected of belonging to analyst-user dyads in which the analyst is the more
innovative. Such observations might also motivate the later administration of KAI
tests or measuring of R-scores, so that a more precise analysis of user resistance
can be made.
On the basis of this study, the hypotheses H2(b) and H2(d) cannot be
considered as providing useful information. However, it is of interest to note a
common feature. They both involved direct questioning of the user regarding his
personal relationship with the analyst, implying potential negative criticism of the
analyst in some way. Although in terms of A-I theory these associations should have

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    205
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
been significant, it is submitted that few of the users responded sufficiently frankly
to give reliable (that is, unbiased) results.
The Roles of System Satisfaction Factors
Hypothesis 3(a) and H3(b) tested significant at p = 0.020. This suggests a
strong negative association between the user’s perception of the accuracy and
reliability of the system, and user resistance. This study thus confirms that accuracy
and reliability are key factors in the issue of user resistance. Insofar as user
resistance and user satisfaction are negatively associated, these results are also in
accordance with the findings of Bailey and Pearson.  The higher significance of the
tests for H3(a) and H3(b), together with the rather low value for the correlation co-
efficients for H2(a) to H2(d), imply that factors other than cognitive style differences
may play some role in user resistance. However, it must be conceded that the
accuracy and the reliability of the systems were recorded as seen from the point of
view of the user. These assessments, it can be argued, were coloured by the
cognitive styles of the user. For example, an adaptive user might well view an
innovative analyst’s system as a non-conservative, higher-risk tool, in line with the
general adaptor’s views of innovators. Consequently, he would view the system as
less accurate and less reliable. The reverse is as plausible. An innovative user might
view an adaptive analyst’s system as too traditional, failing to encompass all the
novel features that the user believes he needs. Hence, once again, the user may view
the system as less accurate and less reliable. In other words, the significant
associations found for H3(a) and H3(b) actually agree with the predictions of AI
theory.
The Roles of Age and Length of Service
The hypotheses H4(a) and H4(b) support the beliefs that the age and lengths
of service of users are associated with user resistance. These hypotheses were both
rejected at p=0.100. Some doubt may be argued over the result for hypothesis
H4(a), since the ages of users in the sample tested somewhat skew, with
0.050>p>0.020. However, this apparent skewness cannot of itself explain away
a low, distribution-independent correlation, unless it can be shown that the sample
was deliberately biased. It is difficult to see how this was possible in the light of the
research design. Each system investigated was selected without reference to the
user’s age or length of service. This study thus rejects the beliefs that older users,
or users of longer service are more resistant than others to new information systems.
Hypotheses H4(c) and H4(d) examine alternative beliefs; namely, that users
who differ substantially from the analyst in terms of age or length of service are more

206   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
resistant than others to the analyst’s new systems. All sets of readings for these
hypotheses tested normal. The results showed no support for these beliefs (at p =
0.100) either, and they are also rejected by this study.
Unfair discrimination of older employees, as suggested by Rosen and Jerdee,
might occur in the IS area to older users. Such discrimination could well be
motivated by studies such as Bruwer’s, which suggest, inter alia, that older and
longer-serving personnel are most resistant to new computer systems. Attention is
drawn to the fact that neither the present study nor A-I theory, nor the literature
survey by Rosen and Jerdee support these beliefs. Unfair discrimination could
certainly cost both individuals and organizations dearly in terms of unnecessary
retrenchment and/ or transfer of experienced staff.
CONCLUSION
Subject to the postulate that the user R-score is a legitimate measure of user
resistance, certain causes and impacts of user resistance have been demonstrated
by this study. It has been shown that matching analysts and users of similar cognitive
styles can minimize user resistance. However, care is suggested in applying such a
policy indiscriminately, since there may be disadvantages in so doing despite this
study’s failure to show any. The high degree of association between user R-scores
and absolute analyst-user KAI score differences permits approximate forecasts of
the former given the latter.
Two phenomena associated with analyst-user dyads where the analyst is the
more innovative, were implied by the results. The first of these is a tendency for the
user to view the analyst as brief and confident, seldom wasting time on side issues.
The second is (less convincingly) that the user may comment on the unexpected
speed with which the analyst comprehends system requirements or specifications.
It is suggested that these features be noted as diagnostic signs of the more innovative
nature of the analyst, especially in situations where formal testing has not or cannot
be conducted. This study finds in favor of the hypotheses that perceived accuracy
and reliability of the system are associated with lower user resistance. Conse-
quently, further insights may be gained into a given user-analyst dyad by questioning
the user on the accuracy and reliability of a system. For example, the less accurate
and less reliable a user considers a system, the more user resistance can be
expected, and consequently (from hypothesis HI), the greater the analyst-user
cognitive style difference is likely to be.
There is no support for the beliefs that the ages and lengths of service of users
are associated with user resistance: or for the alternative beliefs that users who differ

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    207
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
substantially from the analyst in terms of age or length of service are more resistant
than others to new systems. Since neither the present study nor A-I theory, nor the
literature survey by Rosen and Jerdee support these beliefs, organizations should
be alerted to the possibility of unfair discrimination against older and more
experienced users.
While some discussion of user resistance exists in the literature, no direct,
quantitative measure of this phenomenon had previously been attempted. This led
to the development of the R-score, which is a direct measure of resistance in terms
of observable complaints about the system, and which is significantly associated
with the user’s level of resistance to that system.
Prior to this study, neither had Adaption-innovation theory been applied to IS
development, nor had the KAI instrument been replicated in the IS field. With the
aid of these, it has been shown that matching users to analysts of similar cognitive
style can minimize user resistance. Furthermore, by prior administration of the KAI
instrument to analysts and users, approximate forecasts of user resistance are now
possible. In other words, both A-I theory and the KAI instrument have been shown
to be valuable tools in assessing, understanding and forecasting user resistance (see
Table 6).
This study lends some support to the method used by Bailey and Pearson
(1983) to measure user satisfaction and IS success, in that the two most significant
factors found by them to satisfy users, were also found to be negatively associated
with user resistance (measured as R-scores) in this study. These factors were
system accuracy and reliability. This further suggests that low user resistance is
indeed associated with high user satisfaction, confirming that resistance and
satisfaction can be used as inverse, surrogate measures for one another. The user’s
R-score in the post-implementation phase is thus indicated as a possible measure
of system success. However, more research would be required to ensure that it is
not also significantly dependent upon the cognitive style of the investigator: a factor
that would preclude its use as a standard measure. The speed with which the R-
score can be assessed, though an interviewing technique, would make it an
attractive option to the more protracted Pearson-type questionnaire for measuring
system success.
AREAS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
As previously mentioned, there may be a dependence of the R-score on the
cognitive style of the investigator since the R-score is determined as a result of his
interaction with the respondent at an interview. In a further study, the effect of the

208   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
researcher’s cognitive style on R-score evaluation needs to be investigated. Such
a study might involve, for example, the administration of the R-score by several
different persons to the same group of users, to investigate whether or not there
were any significant differences amongst their results. If the R-score were shown
to be insensitive to the nature of the investigator, it would then be usable as a system
success standard as previously noted. If, however, the reverse were shown, then
its use would remain limited to user resistance in the relative sense only. In other
words, between systems be investigated by the same researcher, as in this study.
It remains to be shown to what extent the R-score is associated with all forms
of user resistance. It would thus be of interest to construct other measures of
resistance and test their associations with the R-score. There is some indication
from Markus’s study that complaints from users are a predominant form of user
resistance. Further research that demonstrated this conclusively would make the R-
score a more convincing global measure of user resistance than could be claimed
in this study.
A further area for research is an analysis of the similarities and differences of
the four general cognitive cases of analyst-user dyads, as given below:
1)
Analyst an adaptor, user an adaptor
2)
Analyst an adaptor, user an innovator
3)
Analyst an innovator, user an adaptor, and
4)
Analyst an innovator, user an innovator
Of particular interest are the questions of which of these is most efficient and/
or effective in the short term, and which in the long term. The main hypothesis (HI)
of the current study shows that user resistance will be at a minimum when the analyst
and user are of like cognitive styles. This in turn suggests that dyads I) and 4) above
might be more efficient and effective than the other two in the short term. However,
no reliable inferences could be made regarding the effect of matching persons of
similar or dissimilar cognitive styles in the long term.
REFERENCES
Bailey, J.E. & Pearson, S.W., (1983). Development of a tool for measuring and
analyzing computer user satisfaction.  Management Science, 29 (5).
Bruwer, P. (1984). A descriptive model of success for computer-based informa-
tion systems. Information and Management, 7.
De Brabander, B. & Thiers, G. (1984). Successful information systems develop-
ment in relation to situational factors that affect effective communication
between MIS-users and EDP-specialists. Management Science, 30 (2).

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    209
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Eitlie, J.E. (1985). The impact of interorganisational manpower flows on the
innovation process. Management Science, 31 (9).
Eveland, J.D. (1977). Implementation of Innovation in Organisations: A
Process Approach. Doctoral thesis, University of Michigan.
Hirschheim, R.& Newman, M. (1988). Information systems and user resistance:
Theory and practice. The Computer Journal,  31 (5).
Huber, G.P. (1983). Cognitive style as a basis for MIS designs: Much ado about
nothing? Management Science,  29 (5).
Huntsberger, D.V. & Billingsley, P. (1973). Elements of Statistical Inference.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc.
Ives, B., Olson, M.H., & Baroudi, J.J. (1983). The measurement of user
information satisfaction. Communications of the ACM,  26  (10).
Keen, P.G.W. (1981). Information systems and organisational change. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 24 (1).
Kendall, M.G. (1970). Rank Correlation Methods. London: Charles Griffin &
Co.
Kirton, M. (1976). Adaptors and innovators: A description and measure. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 61 (5).
Kirton, M. (1980). Adaptors and innovators in organisations. Human Relations,
33 (4).
Kirton, M. (1984). Adaptors and innovators - Why new initiatives get blocked.
Long Range Planning,  17 (2).
Kirton, M.J. (1987). KAI Manual. Monograph, Occupational Research Centre,
Hatfield Polytechnic, Hatfield.
Kirton, M.J. (1988). KAI Publications List. Monograph, Occupational Research
Centre, Hatfield Polytechnic, Hatfield.
Kirton, M.J. & McCarthy, R.M. (1985). Personal and group estimates of the
Kirton Inventory Scores. Psychological Reports 57.
Lusk, E.J.& Kersnick, M., (1979). The effect of cognitive style and report format
on task performance: the MIS design consequences. Management Science,
25 (8).
Markus, M.L. (1983). Power, politics, and MIS implementation. Communica-
tions of the ACM. 26 (6).
Olson, M.H. & Ives, B. (1981). User involvement in system design: an empirical
test of alternative approaches. Information and Management, 4.
Rosen, B. & Jerdee, T.H. (1976). The nature of job-related age stereotypes.
Journal of Applied Psychology,  61 (2).
Rushinek, A. & Rushinek, S.F. (1986). What makes users happy? Communica-
tions of the ACM. 29 (7).

210   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Wanous, J.P. & Lawler, E.E. (1972). Measurement and meaning of job satisfac-
tion. Journal of Applied Psychology,  56 (2).
Woodruff, C.K. (1980). Data processing people - Are they really different?
Information and Management,  3.
Zmud, R.W. (1983). The effectiveness of external information channels in facilitat-
ing innovation within software development groups. MIS Quarterly: June.
ENDNOTE
1
Most of these articles are old, but no definitive works on user acceptance of
e-commerce could be found in South Africa.

Relating Cognitive Problem-Solving Style to User Resistance    211
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.

212   Mullany and Lay
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  213
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter XII
Electronic Commerce and
Data Privacy: The Impact of
Privacy Concerns on
Electronic Commerce Use
and Regulatory Preferences
Sandra C. Henderson, Charles A. Snyder and Terry Anthony Byrd
Auburn University, USA
ABSTRACT
Electronic commerce (e-commerce) has had a profound effect on the way we
conduct business. It has impacted economies, markets, industry structures,
and the flow of products through the supply chain. Despite the phenomenal
growth of e-commerce and the potential impact on the revenues of businesses,
there are problems with the capabilities of this technology. Organizations are
amassing huge quantities of personal data about consumers. As a result,
consumers are very concerned about the protection of their personal
information and they want something done about the problem.This study
examined the relationships between consumer privacy concerns, actual e-
commerce activity, the importance of privacy policies, and regulatory

214  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
preference. Using a model developed from existing literature and theory, an
online questionnaire was developed to gauge the concerns of consumers. The
results indicated that consumers are concerned about the protection of their
personal information and feel that privacy policies are important. Consumers
also indicated that they preferred government regulation to industry self-
regulation to protect their personal information.
Electronic commerce (e-commerce) is revolutionizing the way we conduct
business. It is changing economies, markets, and industry structures; the flow of
products and services through the supply chain; as well as consumer segmentation,
values, and behavior (Drucker, 1999). “It is redefining commerce, transforming
industries, and eliminating the constraints of time and distance. There is not a market
on the face of the earth which will be ignored (PwC, 1999a).”
Despite the phenomenal growth of e-commerce, two studies recently
released by the Wharton School indicated that while total spending was up, the
average number of dollars spent per consumer was down. The researchers found
that the concern about privacy and an unwillingness to trust online businesses
with private data are the two biggest factors contributing to the decline in the
dollar amount of sales per consumer (Garfinkel, 2000). According to
PricewaterhouseCoopers, without privacy protection, there is no consumer
confidence in e-commerce (PwC, 1999b).
This paper reports the results of a study that explored consumers’ concern
about the privacy of their personal information and their perceived importance of
privacy policies.  We also looked at consumer preferences for the alternative
regulatory approaches to protecting privacy–government regulation or industry
self-regulation.
In the following sections, we first discuss the existing literature on both e-
commerce and privacy. We then follow with a theoretical model that links consumer
attitudes toward privacy with the different regulatory options. Details of the study’s
methodology and results are followed by a discussion of the findings. We conclude
with a discussion of the implications for both researchers and managers.
E-COMMERCE
Definitions of e-commerce vary widely, but in general e-commerce refers to all
forms of commercial transactions involving organizations and individuals that are
based upon the processing and transmission of digitized data, including text, sound,
and visual images (OECD, 1997; US DOC, 2000). In its most basic form, e-
commerce includes technologies such as telephones, facsimile machines, auto-
mated teller machines (ATMs), electronic funds transfer (EFT), and electronic data

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  215
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
interchange (EDI). More often, though, e-commerce is simply thought of as the
buying and selling of goods and services through the Internet, particularly the World
Wide Web (WWW).  The two most common forms of e-commerce are labeled
business-to-consumer (B2C) and business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce.
B2C e-commerce may be thought of as the basic type of e-commerce because
it was first exploited by retail “e-businesses” such as Amazon.com, eTrade, and
eBay that were created as Internet-only versions of traditional bookstores, broker-
age firms, and auction houses. These e-businesses could deliver almost unlimited
content on request and could react and make changes in close to real time because
of the freedom from the geographic confines and costs of running actual stores
(Buckley, 1999). These factors soon caused traditional “brick and mortar” stores to
launch their own online stores (e.g., Barnes and Noble, Merrill Lynch, Southebys).
B2B e-commerce has many of the same advantages that hold for B2C e-
commerce organizations such as the ability to increase the services they can offer
their business customers. Internet technology has helped create new relationships
and to streamline and augment supply-chain processes. The roles of logistic and
financial intermediaries (e.g., FedEx, UPS, American Express) are expanding as
these changes are occurring (Buckley, 1999).
E-commerce is not without risks or barriers. Market conditions constantly
change as new competitors can easily enter the market with new business models.
Customer loyalty is fleeting, as competitors are only a mouse click away. Competi-
tive advantage is short-lived, as traditional barriers are rendered irrelevant by
technological advances (Oracle, 1999). One risk that has received a lot of attention
recently concerns the privacy and security of personally identifiable information
(PII) transmitted over the Internet and stored by the organization collecting the data
(Hoffman, Novak, & Chatterjee, 1993).
PRIVACY
According to Westin (1967), privacy is “the claim of individuals, groups or
institutions to determine for themselves when, how, and to what extent information
about them is communicated to others.” Information privacy can be thought of as
“the ability of the individual to personally control information about one’s self”
(Stone, Gardner, Gueutal, & McClure, 1983). Personal information privacy has
become one of the most important ethical issues of the information age (Culnan,
1993; Mason, 1986; Smith, 1994).
Data privacy is a major issue facing nearly every business in every country in
the world. Over the past several years, many surveys have found consistently high
levels of concern about privacy (Cranor, Reagle, & Ackerman, 1999; Culnan, 1993;
GVU, 1998; Harris Louis and Associates & Westin, 1991, 1994, 1996; Louis Harris
& Associates, Inc., 1999; Milberg, Burke, Smith, & Kallman, 1995; Smith, Milberg,
& Burke, 1996). This attention to the data privacy issue has been brought about, in

216  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
part, by the increasing impact of information technologies (IT) such as the Internet
on daily life and by recent media attention (Smith, 1993).
The European Union’s (EU) Data Protection Directive also has contributed to
the concern over the protection of an individual’s data privacy. The directive was
enacted to protect European citizens from privacy invasions. One of the major
provisions of the directive prevents the transfer of personal data to countries whose
privacy laws or policies do not measure up to those of the EU.
The United States is especially concerned about the implications the directive
will have on trade with Europe (Santosus, 1998). The 2-year negotiations between
the US Department of Commerce and the European Commission’s (EC) Internal
Market Directorate resulted in the EC finally accepting the US “safe harbor”
principles, which are supposed to meet the test of the European directive in protecting
personal data (LaRussa, 2000; Mogg, 2000).
Even with the satisfactory outcome of the EU and US negotiations, consumers and
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) have pushed and will continue to focus on the issue
of data protection in the US as rumors surface that the FTC is ready to recommend new
regulations to protect online privacy (Schwartz, 2000). This is a complete turnaround
from their prior position that self-regulation is the method of choice.
Online Privacy
There have been several recent studies that addressed the issue of online
privacy.  The FTC conducted three studies between 1998 and 2000. These studies
found that most Web sites collected personal information from consumers and most
had not implemented the fair information practice principles originally outlined by
the 1998 study (FTC, 1998, 1999, 2000). Culnan (1999a, 1999b) conducted two
studies that revealed that once again most Web sites collected personal information
while only a limited percentage implemented all of the fair information practice
principles.
 What these studies do not show, however, is how consumers view efforts to
protect their personal data on their behalf. This study examines the variables that
affect consumer views of privacy, the importance of privacy policies, and whether
governmental or self-regulation is more desirable.
RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES
The research model proposed for this study is shown in Figure 1. The model
considers the interrelationships among several factors based on the literature. The
following sections describe each component of the proposed model and develop
associated hypotheses.

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  217
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
PRIVACY CONCERNS
Privacy is a multidimensional concept. Agranoff (1991) defined information
privacy in terms of three issues: data collection, data accuracy, and data confiden-
tiality. Smith et al. (1996) identified four dimensions that constitute the construct
“individual privacy concerns” (PRIVCON). The four factors are: collection, unau-
thorized secondary use, improper access, and errors.
The collection dimension involves concern that extensive amounts of PII are
collected and stored in databases. Unauthorized secondary use deals with information that
is collected for one purpose but is used for another, secondary purpose (internally within
the organization collecting the PII) without authorization from the individuals. Improper
access is concerned with data about individuals that are available to people without proper
authorization from the individual (i.e., information sold or rented to a third party). The last
area of concern involves inadequate protections against deliberate and accidental errors
in personal data (Smith et al., 1996).
The results of several studies, governmental, industry and academic, show that
individuals are concerned about the privacy of their personal information (Cranor
et al., 1999; Culnan, 1993; Harris et al., 1991, 1994, 1996; Louis et el., 1999;
Milberg et al., 1995; Milberg, Smith & Burke, 2000; Smith 1993, 1994; Smith et al.,
1996; Stone et al., 1983).
ACTUAL E-COMMERCE ACTIVITY
Prior research suggests that individuals with higher levels of concern about
their information privacy may be more likely to refuse to participate in activities that
require them to provide personal information (Smith et al., 1996; Stone et al., 1983).
Understanding the behaviors that cause individuals to accept or reject computers
ACTUAL
REGPREF
IMPPP
PRIVCON
PERUSE
ANTECEDENT
VARIABLES
PH
Figure 1: Research Model

218  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
and systems has been one of the most challenging issues in information systems (IS)
research (Swanson, 1988). Previous IS research has used intention models from
social psychology as the basis for research on the determinants of user behavior
(Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989; Swanson, 1982).
In the research model proposed for this study we did not use the behavioral
intention, but we used the individuals’ perceptions of their actual e-commerce
activity. The research model posits that privacy concerns (attitude) have a direct
impact on a consumer’s actual e-commerce activities. Previous research indicates
that individuals may take a variety of different actions based on their levels of
concern, such as having no intention to provide personal information (Culnan, 1993;
Stone & Stone, 1990). Therefore, we hypothesized:
H1: Higher levels of privacy concerns will result in lower levels of actual e-
commerce activity.
The research model in Figure 1 also captures the effect of perceived usefulness
(PERUSE) on actual e-commerce activity. The following was hypothesized:
H2: Higher levels of perceived usefulness result in higher levels of actual e-
commerce activity.
Culnan (1993) included a variable to measure whether the respondents had
shopped by mail or phone during the previous year. This study also used a variable
that gauges a consumer’s proclivity to purchase merchandise (PH) sight unseen.
Thus the following hypothesis was proposed:
H3: The more likely a consumer is to purchase merchandise or services via mail,
telephone or over the Internet during the past year, the higher the level of actual
e-commerce use.
IMPORTANCE OF PRIVACY POLICY
Several studies have looked at the privacy policies of Web sites (Culnan,
1999a, 1999b; FTC, 1998, 1999). In addition, the FTC issued its report, “Privacy
Online: Fair Information Practices in the Electronic Marketplace,” as a result of the
previous studies (FTC, 2000). Neither study looked at how consumers feel about
privacy policies. However, the IBM Multi-National Privacy Survey did examine the
relationship between consumers and privacy policies (Louis et al., 1999). This study
also examined the relationship between privacy concerns and the importance of
privacy policies (IMPPP). Thus, the following hypothesis was proposed:
H4: The higher the level of privacy concern, the higher the perceived importance
of privacy policies.
None of the previous studies have examined the impact of e-commerce usage
on the perceived importance of privacy policies (IMPPP). The more PII consumers
provide over the Internet, the more vulnerable their data becomes. Thus, the
following was hypothesized:

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  219
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
H5: The higher the level of actual e-commerce activity, the more important a
consumer will view an organization’s privacy policy.
REGULATORY PREFERENCE
How well corporations manage privacy often drives the desire for government
regulation (Milberg et al., 2000). Several studies suggested that consumers’
perceptions of how their personal data is handled by organizations impact their
propensity to complain about privacy concerns and to demand governmental
involvement (Harris et al., 1991, 1994, 1996; Stone & Stone, 1990). Milberg et al.
(2000) found a positive direct relationship between privacy concerns and regulatory
preferences (REGPREF). Thus, the following hypothesis was proposed:
H6: There is a positive direct relationship between consumer privacy concerns and
regulatory preferences.
ANTECEDENTS
Because life experiences tend to shape attitudes toward privacy, two
antecedents were also included in the research model: (1) prior privacy invasion
experience (PIE) (Culnan, 1993; Harris et al., 1991; Smith et al., 1996; Stone &
Stone, 1990) and (2) technology knowledge (TK). Culnan (1993) did not find
prior privacy experiences to be significant. However, Smith et al. (1996) found
that persons having been the victim of personal information misuse should have
stronger concerns regarding information privacy. Thus, we proposed the fol-
lowing hypotheses:
H7a:Privacy concerns are higher if an individual has experienced a prior privacy
invasion.
H7b:An individual’s actual e-commerce activity decreases if the individual has
experienced a prior privacy invasion.
Prior research has established a positive relationship between experience with
computing technology and a variety of outcomes such as affect towards computers
and computing skill (Harrison & Rainer, 1992; Levin & Gordon, 1989). Agarwal
and Prasad (1999) did not find that prior experience with similar technologies had
a significant impact on attitude or behavior intentions. The Agarwal and Prasad
(1999) study also did not test technology experience on actual system use. The IBM
study found that groups that use computers and access the Internet to the greatest
extent have relatively greater levels of confidence in companies that do business on
the Internet (Louis et al., 1999). We propose that there is a significant effect of
technology knowledge on the actual e-commerce activity. Thus, the following was
hypothesized:

220  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
H8a:Higher levels of technology knowledge increase the privacy concerns of an
individual.
H8b:Higher levels of technology knowledge increase the levels of actual e-
commerce use.
Demographics such as gender, age, and education play a role in an individual’s
privacy concerns. Nickell and Pinto (1986) found that males tend to have more
positive computer attitudes. Harrison and Rainer (1992) found that males exhibited
significantly higher computer skill levels than females. Previous research has found
evidence of a negative relationship between age and acceptance of technological
change (Harrison & Rainer, 1992; Nickell & Pinto, 1986). One study posited that
education is negatively related to computer anxiety (Igbaria & Parsuraman, 1989).
The IBM study found that the younger, more educated, more affluent consumers are
most likely to take steps to protect their privacy (Louis et al., 1999). Therefore, the
following was hypothesized:
H9a:Gender, age, and education have a direct impact on the level of privacy
concerns.
H9b:Gender, age, and education have a direct impact on the level of actual e-
commerce activity.
METHOD
Sample and Procedure
The study was conducted during the spring and summer of 2000 to investigate
the consumer privacy concerns and the relationships with behavioral intention to
provide PII, actual e-commerce activity, and regulatory preferences. Since the
research topic dealt with e-commerce over the Internet, the authors decided to put
the questionnaire on the Internet. A study conducted by Brigham Young University’s
assessment office found that with electronic surveys, the response rate is better than
with traditional mail surveys, the turnaround time is quicker, and data validity is
nearly identical to mail surveys (Lindorf & Wygant, 2000).
Information on the survey was sent via email to the faculty and staff of the
Department of Management at a large university in the southeast United States. In
addition, a request for participants was announced in a few selected undergraduate
management classes. While many criticize the use of students for business and
social science research, other studies found students are adequate surrogates for
decision makers (Hughes & Gibson, 1991; Remus, 1986). In this case, students are
consumers who have to make decisions concerning their use of e-commerce over the
Internet and providing PII to those Web sites. An unexpected group of respondents
came from several participants contacting the authors for permission to give the
survey URL out to people who would be interested in the study.

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  221
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
A total of 172 usable responses were submitted. Respondents were 63% men
and 37% women. Sixty-two percent of the respondents were in the 18-29 age group;
26% were in the 30-49 age group; 12% were in the 50 and over age group. The
respondents reported their education level as follows: 5% have a high school
education or less, 42% have some college, and 53% are college graduates.
Questionnaire Development
The questionnaire was developed from scales and techniques used in prior
research. Each section was coded in hypertext markup language (HTML), JavaScript,
and Active Server Pages (ASP). JavaScript was used to ensure that certain responses
were completed. ASP was used to select a random Web page for the respondent to
examine and to submit the responses from the completed questionnaire to the
database used to collect the data.
Once the questionnaire was completed, several colleagues reviewed it to check
for completeness and understandability. Several other individuals (outside academia)
were asked to test the questionnaire by completing the survey online and provide
comments concerning any problems. The responses confirmed that the question-
naire was clear and understandable. Internal consistency of the appropriate scales
was calculated using Cronbach’s alpha. The alpha for PRIVCON was 0.72, 0.88 for
IMPPP, and 0.92 for TK. All the alphas were above the cutoff value suggested by
Nunally (1978) of 0.70 for hypothesized measures of a construct.  The questionnaire
items can be found in the appendix.
Measures
Several measures were required to evaluate the hypotheses. The following
section describes each scale and the variable it measures.
Privacy Concern. Measurement of an  individual’s privacy concern
(PRIVCON) was obtained by using items taken from existing scales (Culnan, 1993;
Louis et al., 1999; Smith et al., 1996). Respondents scored all items on a 5-point
Likert-type scale, with Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree.
Actual E-Commerce Activity. The respondent’s actual e-commerce activity
(ACTUAL) was obtained by using a scale adapted from a previous study (Louis et
al., 1999). Respondents were asked questions concerning e-commerce activities
during the past year. For each item, the respondent chose between the following
responses:  Never, 1-2 times, 3-5 times, 5-10 times, and Over 10 times.
Importance of Privacy Policy. The perceived importance of a Web Site’s
privacy policy (IMPPP) was measured using a scale adapted from a previous study
(Louis et al., 1999). The respondents rated the importance of components of an
organization’s privacy policy on a 5-point Likert-type scale ranging from Not At All
Important to Absolutely Essential.
Regulatory Preference. Regulatory preference (REGPREF) was assessed by
using a similar method to Milberg et al. (2000). Respondents were asked to indicate

222  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
their agreement or disagreement (using a 5-point Likert-type scale, with Strongly
Disagree and Strongly Agree as the endpoints) with the following questions: “the
government should enact additional laws in order to protect the privacy of individu-
als...” and “Industries should rely on self-regulation in order to protect personal
information collected...” The difference between the two measures (preference
rating for governmental intervention minus preference rating for industry self-
regulation) was used to indicate the degree to which the respondent preferred
government regulation to industry self-regulation (Milberg et al., 2000).
Purchasing Habits. A consumer’s propensity to purchase (PH) merchandise
without the benefit of seeing and touching the item(s) before purchasing them was
assessed using two items used by Culnan (1993). These items assessed whether the
consumer had purchased items by mail or phone during the past year. Another item
that covers Internet purchases was added. The respondents chose between the
following responses: Never, 1-2 times, 3-5 times, 5-10 times, and Over 10 times.
Perceived Usefulness. Perceived usefulness (PERUSE) was assessed by
asking the respondents how strongly they agree or disagree with a question
concerning benefits of using the Internet as opposed to any potential privacy
problems.  Respondents rated the item on a 5-point Likert-type scale anchored by
Strongly Disagree and Strongly Agree.
Prior Privacy Invasion Experience. Respondents were asked whether
they had ever had a prior privacy invasion experience (PIE). The respondent
checked either yes or no. A space was provided for an explanation of the privacy
invasion experience.
Technology Knowledge. Technology knowledge (TK) was assessed by
asking the respondent to rate the level of expertise with computer and Internet
technology. For each item, the respondent chose between the following responses:
Not at all knowledgeable, Somewhat knowledgeable, Knowledgeable, Very knowl-
edgeable.
Demographic Items. Respondents were asked three demographic items:
gender, age, and education. The range of responses for age was as follows: 18-29,
30-49, and 50+. Education was assessed using the following possible responses:
High school or less, Some college, and College graduate.
RESULTS
Method of Analysis
EQS was used to determine the relationships among the variables shown in the
path diagram shown in the model in Figure 1. EQS, a structural equation modeling
software developed by Bentler (1990), implements a general mathematical and
statistical approach to the analysis of linear structural equations. Using EQS, the
researcher is able to check the overall goodness of fit of the proposed model and to

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  223
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
compare the relative goodness of fit of competing models, thereby assessing the need
for, and strength of, different path models (Bentler, 1990; Hartwick & Barki, 1994).
Overall Goodness of Fit
There is not one generally accepted measure of overall model goodness of fit,
or even a set of optimal tests. Thus, we must rely on the use of multiple fit criteria.
In this study, four goodness of fit indices were used. The first is the 32 statistic,
which tests the proposed model against a fully saturated model–meaning that all
variables are correlated (Bentler, 1990; Hartwick & Barki, 1994). A nonsignificant
32 value indicates good fit. However, the 32 is sensitive to sample size. In large
samples, the 32 is almost always significant.
A better measure using the 32 statistic is to divide it by its degrees of freedom.
In this case, the smaller the value, the better the fit. The literature gives several
thresholds for reasonable fit: 5.0 or less (Wheaton, Muthen, Alwin, & Summers,
1977) and 3.0 or less (Carmines & McIver, 1981) and between 1.0 and 2.0 (Hair,
Anderson, Tatham, & Black, 1998).
The most widely used overall goodness of fit indices are the goodness of fit
index (GFI) and the adjusted goodness of fit index (AGFI). GFI measures the
absolute fit of the measurement and structural models to the data. AGFI adjusts the
value of the GFI to the degrees of freedom in the model. Thresholds for these indices
are above 0.90 and above 0.80, respectively Chin and Todd, 1995, and Segars and
Grover, 1993. A more restrictive threshold of above 0.90 for AGFI is often cited in
IS research (Chin & Todd, 1995; Hair et al., 1998).
Another measure of goodness of fit is the comparative fit index (CFI), which
is appropriate for all sample sizes and is thought to provide a more stable estimate
than some of the other fit indices (Bentler, 1990; Hartwick & Barki, 1994). Values
greater than 0.90 reflect acceptable fit.
Finally, the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) index mea-
sures the discrepancy in the population between the observed and estimated
covariance matrices per degree of freedom. Thus, RMSEA is not affected by sample
size (Garver & Mentzer, 1999). RMSEA is acceptable if the value is 0.08 or less
(Hair et al., 1998).
The initial measurement model did not fit the data adequately (32 = 123.54,
GFI = 0.88, AGFI = 0.79, CFI = 0.61, RMSEA = 0.12) as illustrated in Table 2. Thus,
the model was altered using the modification index provided by the LM test. The LM
test represents the expected 32 decrease due to model modification (Bentler &
Chou, 1993). The modifications based on this index are shown in Figure 2. The
following were added to the model: covariances between some of the antecedent
variables and direct paths between GENDER and IMPPP, between TK and IMPPP,
and between PERUSE and REGPREF. The covariances added are supported by the
significant correlations between the antecedent variables (see Table 1). Previous
studies showing that gender and technology skills/knowledge have an impact on

224  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
computer attitudes provide support for the direct paths that were added to the model
(Agarwal & Prasad, 1999; Harrison & Rainer, 1992).
The final model fit the data quite well (32 = 49.71, GFI = 0.95, AGFI = 0.89,
CFI = 0.91, RMSEA = 0.06), as illustrated in Table 2, giving evidence that the model
is supported. Table 3 illustrates the standardized coefficients and t-values for the
paths between the antecedent variables and the PRIVCON and ACTUAL variables.
All the covariances between the antecedent variables were significant (see Table 4).
Tests of Hypotheses
As with prior research, consumers are concerned about the protection of their
personally identifiable information. The mean of the privacy concern measure was
3.76, where 1 = Strongly Disagree and 5 = Strongly Agree. The first four items of
the measure resulted in more concern than the remaining three. The mean for the
first four questions was 4.28, indicating a stronger concern with the protection of
consumer personal information.
A list of the hypotheses and results can be found in Table 5. H1 was not
supported (coefficient = -.056, t = .804). Higher levels of privacy concerns
negatively impact actual e-commerce activity, however the results were not signifi-
cantly significant. H2 was supported (coefficient = .145, t = 2.257). Support for H2
indicates that if the consumer feels that the benefits of using the Internet are
sufficient, he or she will provide personal information and continue to participate
in e-commerce activities despite any privacy concerns.  There was strong support
for H3 (coefficient = .425, t = 6.597). The results indicate that if a consumer is likely
to buy goods and/or services sight unseen, it does not matter if the medium is the
telephone, the mail, or the Internet.
H4 was supported (coefficient = .424, t =6.195), indicating that as consumers
are more concerned with the vulnerability of their personal information, the greater
they perceive the importance of privacy policies. An additional finding from the
final model shows a significant negative relationship between gender and the
perceived importance of the privacy policy (coefficient = -.224, t = 3.145). The IBM
study found that males place more importance on an organization’s privacy policy
(Louis et al., 1999). Technology knowledge was also found to impact the importance
of privacy policies (coefficient = -.165, t = 2.296). H5 was not supported (coefficient
= -.129, t = 1.804). Actual e-commerce usage does not significantly impact the
perceived importance of an organization’s privacy policy.
The findings indicate that H6 was supported (coefficient = .264, t = 3.589). As
consumers become more concerned with the protection of their personal data, they
become more likely to prefer governmental regulation to industry self-regulation.
Another finding that was not hypothesized was the significant relationship between
the actual e-commerce activity and regulatory preferences (coefficient = .153, t =
2.060). This possibly indicates that if a consumer provides personal information to a
Web site, he or she would prefer stronger laws–as opposed to self-regulation–to
ensure that the personal information is protected.

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  225
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
One of the two parts to H7 was supported. H7a was supported (coefficient =
.333, t = 4.332), indicating that if an individual has experienced a privacy invasion
experience, he or she will be more concerned with the protection of their personal
data.  H7b was not supported (coefficient = -.038, t = .522), indicating that even a
privacy invasion experience will not keep an individual from participating in e-
commerce over the Internet.
Only one of the two-part H8 was supported. H8a (coefficient = -.011, t =
.141) was not supported. Increased technology knowledge did not have a
significant effect on privacy concerns. However, higher levels of technology
knowledge do tend to significantly increase actual e-commerce use (H8b;
coefficient = .185, t = 2.681).
H9a was partially supported. Age and education had a significant effect on the
level of privacy concerns (coefficient = .170, t = 2.154; coefficient = -.170, t = 2.130;
respectively). Gender did not significantly impact the level of privacy concern
(coefficient = .066, t = .884). H9b was also partially supported. Education does not
have a significant impact on the actual level of e-commerce activity (coefficient =
.107, t = 1.506). Age and gender did impact the level of actual e-commerce activity
(coefficient = -.145, t = 2.035; coefficient = .166, t = 2.475; respectively). Younger
PIE
PERUSE
PH
PRIVCON
ACTUAL
TK
Gender
Age
Education
IMPPP
REGPREF
-.229
(2.670)
-.056
(.804)
.424
(6.195)
-.224
(3.145)
.165
(2.296)
-.129
(1.804)
.264
(3.589)
.153
(2.060)
Figure 2: Final Model

226  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 1:Correlation Matrix with Standard Deviations
Note: Standard deviations enclosed in parentheses.
* Correlation significant at the 0.05 level; ** Correlation significant at the 0.01 level.
TK           GENDER   AGE
EDU
 PIE
PH
PERUSE  PRIVCON  ACTUAL  IMPPP
REGPREF
TK
(1.496)
GENDER
 .271**
(.485)
AGE
-.220**
-.061
(.687)
EDU
 .110
 .046
 .276**
(.591)
PIE
 .015
 .058
 .194**
 .304**
(.431)
PH
 .171*
 .101
 .131*
 .215**
 .194**
(2.184)
PERUSE
 .067
 .136*
 .041
 .024
-.099
 .176*
(1.110)
PRIVCON
-.041
 .051
 .164*
-.011
 .310**
-.014
-.168*
(3.769)
ACTUAL
 .346**
 .255*
-.113
 .171*
 .029
 .480**
 .265** -.130*
(5.089)
IMPPP
 .040
 -.189**  .102
-.050
 .128*
-.146*
-.206**  .421**
-.197**
(2.574)
REGPREF
-.059
 .085
 .010
 .069
 .149*
-.016
-.222**  .285**
 .061
 .212**
(1.774)

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  227
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
 
PRIVCON 
ACTUAL 
IMPPP 
REGPREF 
TK 
-.011(.141) 
 .185(2.681) 
 .165(2.296) 
 
GENDER 
 .066(.884) 
-.166(2.475) 
-.224(3.145) 
 
AGE 
 .170(2.154) 
-.145(2.035) 
 
 
EDUCATION 
-.170(2.130) 
 .107(1.506) 
 
 
PIE 
 .333(4.332) 
-.038(.522) 
 
 
PH 
 
.425(6.597) 
 
 
PERUSE 
 
.145(2.257) 
 
 
PRIVCON 
 
-.056(.804) 
 .424(6.195) 
 .264(3.589) 
ACTUAL 
 
 
-.129(1.804) 
 .153(2.060) 
 
Table 3: Standardized Coefficients and T-Values for Final Model
Covariance 
Coefficient 
T-Value 
TK - GENDER 
  .256 
3.255 
TK - AGE 
-.232 
3.128 
AGE - EDUCATION 
 .284 
3.589 
AGE - PIE 
 .205 
2.635 
EDUCATION - PIE 
 .313 
3.811 
 
Table 4: Coefficients and T-Values for Covariances between Antecedent
Variables
Table 2: Goodness-of-Fit Indices for the Initial and Final Models
Measure 
Initial Model 
Final Model 
X2 (d.f.) 
123.543 (38) 
49.712 (30) 
p-value 
<0.000 
0.013 
X2 / d.f. 
3.251 
1.657 
GFI 
0.878 
0.948 
AGFI 
0.789 
0.886 
CFI 
0.613 
0.912 
RMSEA 
0.119 
0.064 
32
32

228  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
individuals tend to use the Internet more than older individuals and males tend to use
the Internet more that females.
DISCUSSION
A specific research objective in this study was to examine the relationship
between an individual’s privacy concerns and e-commerce use. More specifi-
cally, the purpose was to ascertain whether privacy policies have an impact on
actual e-commerce activities and whether privacy concerns impact an individual’s
preference for government regulation or industry self-regulation for protection
of personal information. To this end, we proposed and tested a model based on
Hypotheses 
 
Results 
H1:   Higher levels of privacy concerns will result in 
lower levels of actual e-commerce activity. 
Not supported 
H2:   Higher levels of perceived usefulness result in 
higher levels of actual e-commerce activity. 
Supported 
H3:   The more likely a consumer is to purchase 
merchandise or services via mail, telephone, or 
over the Internet during the past year, the higher the 
level of actual e-commerce use. 
Supported 
H4:   The higher the level of privacy concern, the higher 
the perceived importance of privacy policies. 
Supported 
H5:   The higher the level of actual e-commerce activity, 
the more important a consumer will view an 
organization’s privacy policy. 
Not supported 
H6:   There is a positive direct relationship between 
consumer privacy concerns and regulatory 
preferences. 
Supported 
H7a:  
  
H7b:  
Privacy concerns are higher if an individual has 
experienced a prior privacy invasion.  
An individual’s actual e-commerce activity 
decreases if the individual has experienced a prior 
privacy invasion. 
Supported 
 
Not supported 
H8a:  
 
H8b:  
Higher levels of technology knowledge increase the 
privacy concerns of an individual.  
Higher levels of technology knowledge increase the 
levels of actual e-commerce use. 
Not supported 
Supported 
H9a:  
 
 
H9b:  
Gender, age, and education have a direct impact on 
the level of privacy concerns. 
 
Gender, age, and education have a direct impact on 
the level of actual e-commerce activity. 
Age – Supported 
Education – Supported 
Gender – Not supported 
Age – Supported 
Education – Not supported 
Gender - Supported 
 
Table 5: Hypotheses and Results

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  229
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
existing theories.
In general, the findings of the study were consistent with theoretical expecta-
tions, as most of the hypotheses were supported. The most surprising finding was
that higher levels of privacy concern (H1) did not have a significant impact on actual
e-commerce activity. This finding coupled with the perceived usefulness (H2) could
possibly indicate that consumers will continue using the Internet if they feel the
benefits and convenience of the Internet outweigh any privacy problems. In
addition, consumers who have privacy invasion experiences are more concerned
about privacy (H7a) issues but do not necessarily decrease actual e-commerce
usage (H7b). Again, this can help explain the continued rise in e-commerce use in
the face of parallel increased privacy concerns.
It is clear that individuals are concerned about the privacy of their personal
information. Numerous surveys over the years have indicated a high percentage of
respondents are very concerned about this issue (GVU, 1998; Harris et al., 1991,
1994, 1996; Louis et al., 1999). High levels of concern over the privacy issue have
led many to express a desire for regulatory control. Our findings concerning the
relationship between privacy concerns and regulatory preferences (H6) are consis-
tent with those found by other studies (GVU, 1998; Milberg et al., 2000). The
findings showed that consumers prefer government regulation to industry self-
regulation with regards to the protection of their personally identifiable informa-
tion.
Individuals who have higher levels of privacy concerns feel that privacy policies
are important (H4). However, the negative relationship (marginal) between actual
e-commerce activity and the importance of privacy policies indicates that consumers
who use the Internet more place less importance on those policies. This finding
suggests that high-level Internet users feel that privacy policies are either inadequate
or ineffective.
Limitations
Although previous research provides support that students are acceptable
surrogates for decision makers (Hughes & Gibson, 1991; Remus, 1986), other
researchers criticize the use. The use of students in this study was justified due to
the subject nature and the fact that they are consumers. Since students are usually
comfortable Internet users they should be suitable subjects.
Implications and Directions for Future Research
The findings of this study have regulatory, organizational, and research
implications. Now, more than ever, it appears that consumers are ready for
government intervention in order to protect their personal information. This affects
organizations because their efforts at self-regulation did not work well enough
according to the FTC (2000). While great strides were made towards protecting the
personal information of consumers, self-imposed privacy policies did not get the job

230  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
done (FTC, 2000). It appears that laws will be passed (Schwartz, 2000), organiza-
tions will have to make changes in order to be in compliance, and this may necessitate
a change in business models for many e-commerce organizations.
There are many opportunities to develop and extend models dealing with the
privacy issue. Further research could include a study to align the attitudes of
consumers in relation to behavioral intentions and actual use utilizing the TRA and
TAM models.  Researchers could also expand the antecedent variables to gain a
better understanding of the underlying issues surrounding privacy concerns, behav-
ioral intention, and actual use of e-commerce or the Internet in general.
Another avenue of research would be to determine why consumers are
indicating a preference for government regulation for protection of their personally
identifiable information. Focus groups could be set up to determine why high-level
Internet users feel that industry self-regulation is not as desirable as government
regulation for this issue.
CONCLUSION
Research on the issue of privacy, while not new, has recently become a hot
topic. The Internet and the EU Data Protection Directive have played a large role in
this interest. In addition, media attention has made the consumer very aware of the
data privacy issue. They have become very aware of just how vulnerable their
personal information is and they want something done about it.
Relatively speaking, e-commerce is new and not fully understood. E-commerce
is growing faster than anyone expected and, of course, will experience growing pains
such as the backlash stemming from the ability to invade the privacy of Internet users
and the lack of data protection against any invasions.  Research such as this study
should help organizations understand just how critical the privacy issue is and allow
adjustments to their business models to accommodate the concerns of consumers.
In the long run, protecting the data privacy of consumers will help ensure success and
longevity for organizations in this new economy.
APPENDIX
Questionnaire (adapted from the online version)
Instructions: Read each question carefully and either click on the button
indicating your answer or type in your answer in the space provided.

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  231
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Unsure 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
a.  The government should enact 
additional laws in order to protect the 
privacy of individuals using the 
Internet. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
b.  Industries should rely on self-
regulation in order to protect personal 
information collected on Internet sites. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
 
Regulatory Preferences
How strongly do you agree or disagree with the following statements?
 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Unsure 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
a.  Companies should never share 
personal information with other 
companies unless it has been 
authorized by the individuals who 
provided the information. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
b.  Companies should take more steps 
to make sure that unauthorized people 
cannot access personal information in 
their computers. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c.  Companies are collecting too much 
personal information about me. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
d.  Consumers have lost all control 
over how personal information is 
collected and used by companies. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
e.  Most businesses handle the 
personal information they collect 
about customers in a proper and 
confidential way.* 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
f.  Existing laws and organizational 
practices in the U.S. provide a 
reasonable level of consumer 
protection today.* 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
g.  Business Web sites seem to be 
doing an adequate job providing 
notices and informing visitors how 
any personal information collected 
will be used.* 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
 
Privacy Concerns
How strongly do you agree or disagree with the following statements?

232  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Importance of Privacy Policies
 
Not At All 
Important 
Somewhat 
Important 
Important 
Very 
Important 
Absolutely 
Essential 
a.  An explanation to 
customers of what 
personal information is 
collected about them and 
how it will be used. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
b.  A choice to 
consumers not to have 
their name passed along 
to other companies for 
their marketing purposes. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c.  A procedure allowing 
customers to see what 
personal information the 
company has stored 
about them and to make 
any needed corrections. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
 
Many individuals and organizations feel that companies should adopt privacy
policies. Indicate how important it is for a company to adopt and communicate or
provide the following to its customers.
Internet Activity
During the past year, have you personally...
 
Never 
1 - 2 
Times 
3 - 5 
Times 
5 - 10 
Times 
Over 10 
Times 
a.  Visited a Web site to get information? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
b.  Provided personal information to a 
Web site such as your date of birth, your 
age, or your address? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c.  Used a credit card to pay for 
information purchases on the Internet? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
d.  Used a credit card to pay for goods or 
services purchased on the Internet? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
e.  Conducted home banking online (i.e., 
checking balances or paying bills online)? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
f.  Invested in the stock market or traded 
stocks online? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
g.  Participated in an online auction as a 
seller? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
h.  Participated in an online auction as a 
buyer? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
 

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  233
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Technology Knowledge
 
Not At All 
Knowledgeable 
Somewhat 
Knowledgeable 
Knowledgeable 
Very 
Knowledgeable 
a.  Computer 
technology? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
b.  Internet 
technology? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
 
How knowledgeable would you say you are when it comes to...
Prior Privacy Invasion Experience
As far as you know, as a consumer...
Have you personally ever been the victim of what you felt was an
improper invasion of privacy by a business or organization?
•  No • Yes
Purchasing Habits
 
Never 
1 - 2 
Times 
3 - 5 
Times 
5 - 10 
Times 
Over 10 
Times 
a.  Bought something from a catalog or 
brochure sent to your residence? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
b.  Bought any product or service offered 
to you by a telephone call to your 
residence? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c.  Bought any product or service through 
a Web site on the Internet? 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
 
During the past year, have you personally...
Perceived Usefulness
How strongly do you agree or disagree with the following statement?
 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Unsure 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
a. The benefits of using the Internet to 
get information, send e-mail, and to 
shop far outweigh the privacy 
problems that are currently being 
worked on. 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
 

234  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Demographic Information
Gender
c Female
c Male
Age
c 18 - 29
c 30 - 49
c 50+
Education
c High school or less
c Some college
c College graduate
REFERENCES
Agarwal, R. and Prasad, J. (1999). Are individual differences germane to the
acceptance of new information technologies? Decision Sciences, 30(2),
361-191.
Agranoff, M. H. (1991). Controlling the threat to personal privacy: Corporate
policies must be created. Journal of Information Systems Manage-
ment, 8, 48-52.
Ajzen, I. and Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding Attitudes and Predicting
Social Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bentler, P. M. (1990). Comparative fit indexes in structural models. Psychological
Bulletin, 107(2), 234-246.
Bentler, P. M. and Chou, C.-P. (1993). Some new covariance structure model
improvement statistics. In Bollen, K. A. and Long, J. S. (Eds.), Testing
Structural Equation Models. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Buckley, P. (1999). The emerging digital economy II, US Department of
Commerce. Retrieved February 1, 2000 on the World Wide Web: http://
www.ecommerce.gov/ede/chapter1.html.
Carmines, E. G. and McIver, J. P. (1981). Analyzing models with unobserved
variables: Analysis of covariance structures. In Bohrnstedt, G. W. and
Borgatta, E. F. (Eds.), Social Measurement: Current Issues. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  235
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chin, W.W. and Todd, P.A. (1995). On the use, usefulness, and ease of use of
structural equation modeling in MIS research: A note of caution. MIS
Quarterly, 19(2), 237-246.
Cranor, L. F., Reagle, J. and Ackerman, M. S. (1999). Beyond concern:
Understanding net users’ attitudes about online privacy. AT&T Labs-
Research Technical Report TR 99.4.3. Retrieved February 1, 2000 on the
World Wide Web: http://www.research.att.com/library/TRs/99/99.4/99.4.3/
report.htm.
Culnan, M. J. (1993). How did they get my name? An exploratory investigation of
consumer attitudes toward secondary information use. MIS Quarterly,
17(3), 341-363.
Culnan, M. J. (1999a). The Georgetown Internet Privacy Policy Survey.
Retrieved December 1, 1999 on the World Wide Web: http://www.msb.edu/
faculty/culnanm/gippshome.html.
Culnan, M. J. (1999b). Privacy and the top 100 Web sites: A report to the Federal
Trade Commission. The Online Privacy Alliance. Retrieved December 1,
1999 on the World Wide Web: http://www.msb.edu/faculty/culnanm/
gippshome.html.
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P. and Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User acceptance of
computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical models. Manage-
ment Science, 35(8), 982-1003.
Drucker, P. F. (1999). Beyond the information revolution, The Atlantic Monthly.
Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, Attitude, Intention and Behavior: An
Introduction to Theory and Research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
FTC. (1998). Privacy online: A report to congress. Federal Trade Commission.
Retrieved on the World Wide Web: http://www.ftc.gov/privacy.
FTC. (1999). Self-regulation and privacy online: A report to Congress. Federal
Trade Commission. Retrieved December 1, 1999 on the World Wide Web:
http://www.ftc.gov/privacy.
FTC. (2000). Privacy online: Fair information practices in the electronic market-
place. Federal Trade Commission. Retrieved June 21, 2000 on the World
Wide Web: http://www.ftc.gov/reports.
Garfinkel, S. (2000). Protecting your privacy concerns about third-party monitor-
ing putting a damper on e-commerce. Boston Globe, January, C4.
Garver, M. S. and Mentzer, J. T. (1999). Logistics research methods: Employing
structural equation modeling to test for construct validity. Journal of Business
Logistics, 20(1), 33-57.
GVU. (1998). GVU’s 10th WWW user survey. Georgia Tech Graphics,
Visualization & Usability Center. Retrieved on the World Wide Web: http:/

236  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
/www.gvu.gatech.edu/user_surveys.
Hair, J. F., Jr., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L. and Black, W. C. (1998).
Multivariate Data Analysis (5th ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Harris Louis and Associates and Westin, A. F. (1991). Harris-Equifax Con-
sumer Privacy Survey 1991. Atlanta, Georgia: Equifax, Inc.
Harris Louis and Associates and Westin, A. F. (1994). Equifax-Harris Con-
sumer Privacy Survey 1994. Atlanta, Georgia: Equifax, Inc.
Harris Louis and Associates and Westin, A. F. (1996). The 1996 Equifax-Harris
Consumer Privacy Survey. Atlanta, Georgia: Equifax, Inc.
Harrison, A. W. and Rainer, R. K., Jr. (1992). The influence of individual
differences on skill in end-user computing. Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems, 9(1), 93-111.
Hartwick, J. and Barki, H. (1994). Explaining the role of user participation in
information system use. Management Science, 40(4), 440-465.
Hoffman, D. L., Novak, T. P. and Chatterjee, P. (1993). Commercial scenarios
for the Web: Opportunities and challenges, Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 1.
Hughes, C. T. and Gibson, M. L. (1991). Students as surrogates for managers in
a decision-making environment: An experimental study. Journal of Manage-
ment Information Systems, 8(2), 153-166.
Igbaria, M. and Parsuraman, S. (1989). A path analytic study of individual
characteristics, computer anxiety, and attitudes toward microcomputers.
Journal of Management, 15(3), 373-388.
LaRussa, R. S. (2000, June 9). Cover letter to U.S. organizations. Acting Under
Secretary for International Trade Administration. Retrieved on the World
Wide Web: http://www.ita.doc.gov/td/ecomm/LaRussaLetJune2000.htm.
Levin, T. and Gordon, C. (1989). Effect of gender and computer experience on
attitudes towards computers. Journal of Educational Computing Re-
search, 5(1), 69-88.
Lindorf, R. and Wygant, S. (2000). Surveying collegiate surfers-Web methodol-
ogy or mythology? Quirks Marketing Research Review. Retrieved June 20,
2000 on the World Wide Web: http://www.surveynetwork.com/surveys.asp.
Louis Harris & Associates Inc. (1999). IBM Multi-National Consumer Privacy
Survey. New York, NY: IBM Global Services.
Mason, R. O. (1986). Four ethical issues of the information age. MIS Quarterly,
10(1), 4-12.
Milberg, S. J., Burke, S. J., Smith, H. J. and Kallman, E. A. (1995). Values,
personal information privacy, and regulatory approaches. Communications
of the ACM, 38(12), 65-74.

Electronic Commerce and Data Privacy  237
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Milberg, S. J., Smith, H. J. and Burke, S. J. (2000). Information privacy: Corporate
management and national regulation. Organization Science, 11(1), 35-57.
Mogg, J. F. (2000, July 27). Letter from Commission Services transmitting the
European Commission’s adequacy finding, European Commission Internal
Market Director-General. Retrieved September 7, 2000 on the World Wide
Web: http://www.ita.doc.gov/td/ecom/EUletter27JulyHeader.htm.
Nickell, G. S. and Pinto, J. N. (1986). The computer attitude scale. Computers
in Human Behavior, 2, 301-306.
Nunally, J.C. (1978). Psychometric Theory, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill: New York.
OECD. (1997). OECD Policy Brief No. 1-1997: Electronic commerce. Organi-
zation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Retrieved March 7,
2000 on the World Wide Web: http://www.oecd.org/publications/Pol_brief/
9701_Pol.htm.
Oracle. (1999). The Internet changes everything. CIO.
PwC. (1999a). Electronic Business Outlook. PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
Retrieved July 13, 2000 on the World Wide Web: http://www.e-
business.pwcglobal.com/pdf/PwCPrivacy.pdf. C:\MyFiles\ECPrivacy.wpd.
PwC. (1999b). Privacy...A weak-link in the cyber-chain: Privacy risk management
in the information economy. PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. Retrieved July
13, 2000 on the World Wide Web: http://www.e-business.pwcglobal.com/
pdf/PwCPrivacy.dbf.
Remus, W. (1986). Graduate students as surrogates for managers in experiments
on business decision making. Journal of Business Research, 14, 19-25.
Santosus, M. (1998). Too much ado about nothing. CIO, August.
Schwartz, J. (2000). FTC to propose new online privacy rules. The Washington
Post, E1.
Segars, A. H. and Grover, V. (1993). Re-examining perceived ease of use and
usefulness: A confirmatory factor analysis. MIS Quarterly, 17(4), 517-525.
Smith, H. J. (1993). Privacy policies and practices: Inside the organizational maze.
Communications of the ACM, 36(12), 105-122.
Smith, H. J. (1994). Managing Privacy: Information Technology and Corpo-
rate America. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Smith, H. J., Milberg, S. J. and Burke, S. J. (1996). Information privacy: Measuring
individuals’ concerns about organizational practices. MIS Quarterly, 20(2),
167195.
Stone, E. F., Gardner, D. G., Gueutal, H. G. and McClure, S. (1983). A field
experiment comparing information—privacy values, beliefs, and attitudes
across several types of organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology,
68(3), 459-468.

238  Henderson, Snyder and Byrd
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Stone, E. F. and Stone, D. L. (1990). Privacy in organizations: Theoretical issues,
research findings, and protection mechanisms. In Rowland, K. M. and Ferris,
F. R. (Eds.), Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management,
349-411. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Swanson, E. B. (1982). Measuring user attitudes in MIS research: A review.
OMEGA, 10, 157-165.
Swanson, E. B. (1988). Information System Implementation: Bridging the
Gap Between Design and Utilization. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
US DOC. (2000). Defying definition. U.S. Department of Commerce. Retrieved
March 7, 2000 on the World Wide Web: http://www.ecommerce.gov/6.htm.
Westin, A. F. (1967). Privacy and Freedom. New York: Atheneum.
Wheaton, B. B., Muthen, B., Alwin, D. F. and Summers, G. F. (1977). Assessing
reliability and stability in panel models. In Heise, D. R. (Ed.), Sociological
Methodology. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
This chapter was previously published in the book, Social Responsibility in the Information Age: Issues and
Controversies, edited by Gurpreet Dhillon, copyright © 2002, Idea Group Publishing.

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 239
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter XIII
Impersonal Trust in B2B
Electronic Commerce: A
Process View
Paul A. Pavlou
University of Southern California, USA
ABSTRACT
Although the notion of impersonal trust is not new, its significance has
dramatically increased with the emergence of interorganizational eCommerce.
Two types of trust are usually distinguished in interfirm exchange relations–
an impersonal type created by structural arrangements, and a familiarity type
arising from repeated interaction. This chapter contributes to the emerging
body of knowledge regarding the role of trust in B2B eCommerce, which is
primarily impersonal. The nature of trust is examined, and credibility and
benevolence are defined as its distinct dimensions. Impersonal trust-primarily
arising from credibility-focuses on institutional structures that B2B exchanges
enable through signals and incentives to facilitate interfirm relations.
Following the economic, sociological and marketing literature on the sources
and processes under which trust engenders, a set of three cognitive processes
that generate impersonal trust is determined. Applied to B2B exchanges, four
antecedents of impersonal trust are proposed to trigger these processes:
accreditation, feedback, monitoring and legal bonds. In addition, impersonal
trust is proposed to increase satisfaction, reduce risk, encourage anticipated
continuity and promote favorable pricing. A theoretical framework is then
proposed that specifies the interrelationships between the antecedents,

240 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
underlying processes and consequences of impersonal trust in B2B eCommerce.
The theoretical and managerial implications of this study on B2B eCommerce
are discussed, and directions for future research are proposed.
INTRODUCTION
The recent outbreak of electronic exchange activities, enabled primarily by the
Internet, led to the emergence of B2B eCommerce. Interorganizational exchange
relationships can provide a strategic source of efficiency, a competitive advantage
and increased performance (Zaheer et al., 1998). A B2B exchange is a new form
of structural platform that acts as a virtual intermediary enabling firms to conduct
any-to-any online relations. As in traditional interfirm relations (Bromiley and
Cummings, 1995), trust has also been considered crucial in online exchange
relationships (Brynjolfsson and Smith, 2000), perhaps more given the impersonal
nature of eCommerce (Keen, 2000). Trust in B2B eCommerce is mostly imper-
sonal and it is created by structural arrangements through signals and incentives,
whereas trust in traditional exchanges has been mostly based on familiarity, arising
from repeated interaction. Impersonal trust is likely to be important where no social
relations exist, relationships are episodic, there is information asymmetry and
uncertainty, and there is some important delegation of authority between firms
(Shapiro, 1987). Therefore, the context of B2B eCommerce resembles the
characteristics where impersonal trust should be necessary. Hence, interfirm
relations have been undergoing some dramatic changes, making the role of
impersonal trust in B2B eCommerce of fundamental theoretical and managerial
importance. Empirical evidence also suggests that B2B eCommerce moves away
from basic transactions towards interfirm collaboration (Dai and Kauffman, 2000),
making impersonal trust increasingly important. Therefore, this chapter attempts to
shed light on the nature, antecedents and consequences of interorganizational trust1
that is embedded in the impersonal context of B2B eCommerce.
Practically all transactions require an element of trust, especially those
conducted in an uncertain environment. However, trust in B2B eCommerce does
not comply with the traditional dyadic context of familiarity-based trust. The
traditional setting for establishing trust based on familiarity not only may not be
realistic in B2B eCommerce, but it could also limit its extent. Even if there is a rich
tradition of scholarly research focused on familiarity-based trust in interfirm
exchange relations (Geyskens et al., 1998), there is no agreed-upon understanding
of interorganizational impersonal trust. In today’s B2B exchanges, the traditional
setting of establishing trust based on reputation, familiarity and length of the
relationship (Doney and Cannon, 1997) may not be readily obtainable. In addition,

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 241
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the absence of salespeople makes trust based on the salesperson’s expertise,
likeability and similarity mostly unavailable. Therefore, an impersonal type of trust
may be more appropriate in B2B eCommerce. There is an urgent need to go
beyond traditional dyadic relationships and examine a larger context of buyer-
supplier relations in B2B eCommerce. When an increasingly large number of firms
conduct business with many new, even anonymous partners, the need to understand
the concept of impersonal trust in B2B eCommerce becomes fundamental.
Trust is important in impersonal exchange relationships, especially where
information asymmetry and uncertainty may give rise to opportunism (Akerloff,
1970), which usually leads to mistrust, agency risks and high transaction costs. B2B
eCommerce takes place in an uncertain environment that allows substantial
information asymmetry between firms. Opportunism creates the problems of
adverse selection and moral hazard, which are described in agency theory (Jensen
and Meckling, 1976). Adverse selection occurs when firms may be motivated to
misrepresent their respective abilities to the other trading firm. Moral hazard occurs
when firms do no put forth the level of effort agreed upon, or fail to complete the
requirements of an agreement (Mishra et al., 1998). The problems of adverse
selection and moral hazard could result in excessive risk associated with online
transactions, eroding the foundations of B2B eCommerce, and jeopardizing its
proliferation. However, according to game theory, under suitable mechanisms
opportunism does not pay off in the long run (Kandori, 1992). The institutional
structures of B2B exchanges can transform many single transactions into a
continuous sequence of relations between organizations, preventing opportunism
through cooperative signals and incentives. Drawing from agency theory and
transaction costs economics (TCE), trust may be viewed as a risk-reduction
mechanism, decreasing transaction and agency costs and providing flexible trans-
actions (Beccera and Gupta, 1999). B2B exchanges provide means of building
trust through a series of safeguarding mechanisms, such as accreditation, feedback,
monitoring and legal bonds. Since B2B exchanges are becoming an important
coordination mechanism for economic activity, this chapter attempts to provide a
framework to explain the process by which their mechanisms may engender
impersonal trust. Moreover, the consequences of impersonal trust in B2B
eCommerce are examined.
Despite the prolific differences between the traditional view of trust and
impersonal trust in B2B eCommerce, this chapter proposes that impersonal trust
can still complement interfirm exchange relations. The purpose of this chapter is to
provide new insights into how trust develops in the impersonal context of B2B
eCommerce by drawing on trust-building cognitive processes (Doney and Cannon,
1997). The global concept of trust is viewed as a two-dimensional construct in

242 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
terms of the dimensions of credibility and benevolence. Drawing from the literature
on the sources and cognitive processes through which trust engenders, I propose
that impersonal trust is associated with the dimension of credibility, and four
antecedents of impersonal trust are then extracted. Furthermore, I examine how
impersonal trust influences satisfaction, perceived risk, anticipated continuity and
favorable pricing. More specifically, I propose a conceptual framework to describe
a set of interrelationships between the antecedents and consequences of impersonal
trust by attempting to answer these research questions: 1) What is the nature of
impersonal trust in B2B eCommerce? 2) Which are the antecedents and conse-
quences of impersonal trust?
The chapter is structured as follows: the next section reviews the current
literature on trust, describes the nature and dimensions of impersonal trust, and
portrays how a set of trust-building cognitive processes engenders credibility. A
conceptual framework that examines the antecedents and consequences of imper-
sonal trust is then developed in the context of B2B exchanges. Finally, the
theoretical and managerial implications of this research are discussed in terms of the
future of B2B eCommerce, and recommendations for future research are pro-
posed.
CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT
Trust is important because it is a key element of social capital and has been
related to desirable economic and social outcomes (Arrow, 1974; Geyskens et al.,
1998; Zaheer et al., 1998) and a source of competitive advantage (Barney and
Hansen, 1994). Trust has also been considered to reduce opportunistic behavior
and transaction costs, resulting in more efficient governance (Bromiley and
Cummings, 1995). Sociologists argue that buyer-supplier relations are embedded
in a social context that modifies economic activity in important ways (Granovetter,
1985). For example, it can be intertwined with markets to produce “relational
contracts” to ensure flexibility and opportunity (Macneil, 1980), and with hierar-
chies to produce “hierarchical contracts” to ensure stability and equity (Stinchcombe,
1985). In terms of theory building, trust-embedded economic theories provide a
richer explanation of interfirm relationships than trust-absent theories, and also
improve their descriptive and explanatory power (Beccera and Gupta, 1999). Even
if rational analysis of risk can only study a calculative cooperation, independent of
trust (Williamson, 1985), some authors did manage to merge economic and
sociological theories and highlighted the role of trust in exchange relationships
(Gulati 1995; Ouchi, 1980). In general, the role of trust is of fundamental
importance and has an impact on all levels of buyer-supplier relationships.

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 243
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
There are two contextual forms of trust: impersonal created by institutional or
structural arrangements through signals, incentives and rational calculation (Shapiro,
1987), or familiarity arising from long-term relationships through repeated interac-
tion. The impersonal trust is the basis of the studies of trust from a rational cognitive
perspective, often game-theoretic, mainly based on the value of keeping a
reputation of honesty and competence (Dasgupta, 1988). Impersonal trust arises
when no familiarity between firms is available but some structural arrangements
allow subjective expectations of a firm’s credibility; on the other hand, familiarity
trust mainly arises from subjective anticipations of a firm’s benevolence based on
prior interaction. Therefore, the willingness of one firm to become vulnerable to
another firm’s actions depends both on the familiarity and impersonal types of trust.
While there is an extensive literature on the antecedents and consequences of
familiarity trust in buyer-supplier relationships (Doney and Cannon, 1997; Geyskens
et al., 1998), the literature on impersonal trust is in many aspects deficient, especially
at the empirical level.
Trust is formally defined as the subjective probability with which a firm
assesses that another firm will perform a particular transaction according to its
confident expectations in an uncertain environment. This definition captures three
important attributes of trust: first, the subjective probability embraces the fact that
trust is not an objective anticipation; second, the confident expectation encom-
passes a possibility of a (mutually) beneficial outcome; finally, the uncertain
environment suggests that delegation of authority from one firm to another may have
adverse (harmful) effects to the entrusting firm in case of betrayal. Therefore, trust
is the subjective evaluation of the other firm’s characteristics based on limited
information (Beccera and Gupta, 1999). While trust could greatly improve the
effectiveness of the market (Arrow, 1974), both economists and sociologists
object that trust could ever become a stable coordinating mechanism because trust
fails when cooperation is less profitable than cheating (Granovetter, 1985).
However, given an institutional structure to encourage and safeguard cooperation,
impersonal trust that is trust based on institutional arrangements through signals and
incentives could perhaps be able to effectively coordinate economic activity.
The Nature of Impersonal Trust
An impersonal analysis of trust enables studying rational and contextual
cooperation, independent of familiarity trust that is usually irrational. The literature
on interorganizational relations provides two general characteristics of trust:
confidence or predictability in a firm’s expectations about the other firm’s behavior,
and confidence in another firm’s goodwill (Ring and Van de Ven, 1992). Moreover,
trust has been viewed as the expectation that a firm can be relied on to fulfill

244 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
obligations (Anderson and Weitz, 1989), behave in a predictable manner, act fairly
and not take unfair advantage of another firm, even given the chance (Anderson and
Narus, 1990). Credibility arises from the belief that the other firm is honest and
competent (Anderson and Narus, 1990), whereas benevolence arises from the
belief that a firm is genuinely interested in the other firm’s welfare and would seek
mutual gains. Therefore, there is a broad consensus that there are two distinct
dimensions of trust: credibility and benevolence (Ganesan, 1994), who investigated
them independently and concluded that they did demonstrate different relationships
with other variables. Credibility deals with predictability, acknowledging contracts
and fulfilling the requirements of an agreement, while benevolence deals with
expectations that a firm will not act opportunistically, even given the chance.
Therefore, this research views two distinct trust dimensions: impersonal trust or
credibility, which is based on the extent to which a firm believes that the other firm
has the honesty and expertise to perform a transaction reliably, and familiarity trust
or benevolence, which is based on the extent to which a firm believes that the other
firm has intentions beneficial to both firms, even when new conditions without prior
commitments arise.
The proposed view of trust readily corresponds to extant conceptualizations
of trust. For example, Zaheer et al. (1998) viewed interfirm trust as three
components–predictability, reliability and fairness. Impersonal trust encompasses
predictability and reliability, while familiarity trust is equivalent to fairness. In
addition, the two-dimensional view of trust is comparable to the three forms of trust
defined by Sako and Helper (1998). First, contractual trust, which refers to the
other firm being honest and fulfilling the explicit and implicit requirements of the
contractual agreement, and second, competence trust, which pertains to whether
the other firm is capable of fulfilling the contract, encompass impersonal trust.
According to Sako and Helper, competence and contractual trust are often
indistinguishable since contract default might be due to either dishonesty or mere
inability. On the other side, goodwill trust, which relates to a firm’s open commit-
ment to take initiatives for mutual benefit while withholding from opportunistic
behavior refers to familiarity trust. In sum, there is a hierarchy of trust, where fulfilling
a minimal set of obligations constitutes credibility (impersonal trust), and honoring
a broader set constitutes benevolence (familiarity trust).
B2B exchanges reduce the need for familiarity trust by structuring the
transactional context in such a way that opportunism becomes irrational, while
cooperation becomes a mutually beneficial solution. In this context, B2B exchanges
compensate for the low levels of familiarity trust, which is difficult to accomplish
among a great number of firms, by promoting impersonal trust based on credibility.
In addition, transactional arrangements aim to predict most probable unforeseen

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 245
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
contingencies to avoid relying on another firm’s benevolent motives. Hence, B2B
exchanges provide a set of trust-building functions such as accreditation, feedback,
monitoring and legal bonds that make opportunism irrational, thus promoting a
trustworthy environment. The fact that many real-life anonymous B2B exchanges
function without familiarity trust (e.g., Altra.com, Chemconnect.com) suggests that
impersonal trust is at least sufficient for basic market transactions. Credibility can
be regarded as the dimension of trust that governs economic activity along with the
price mechanism in B2B eCommerce. Following Ganesan (1994) and the recom-
mendations of Geyskens et al. (1998), I propose that trust has two theoretically and
empirically distinct dimensions, credibility and benevolence. Impersonal trust based
on credibility mostly applies to B2B eCommerce, which focuses on institutionalized
structures and arrangements that B2B exchanges provide to create a stable context
within which interfirm cooperation could develop.
A Process View of Impersonal Trust
Doney and Cannon (1997) drew on several theories developed in social
psychology, sociology, economics and marketing to isolate five cognitive processes
through which trust engenders. These distinct processes by which trust can develop
are the capability, the transference, the calculative, the intentionality, and the
prediction process. These processes suggest a trust-building attempt, followed by
a favorable outcome towards actually engendering trust. Therefore, these pro-
cesses assume both an attempt towards developing trust, followed by a positive
outcome. For example, the calculative process does not solely generate trust; the
outcome of the calculation may generate trust given a favorable assessment of the
calculation. In general, these five processes engender the global construct of trust.
However, only the capability, transference and calculative processes are able to
generate trust in an impersonal context. The processes of intentionality and
prediction necessitate interaction and familiarity-learning from contact. Therefore,
only capability, transference and calculative are proposed to act as mediating
variables connecting the antecedents of impersonal trust in B2B eCommerce with
credibility. For a more exhaustive view of all five impersonal and familiarity trust-
building cognitive processes, see Pavlou (2001).
Capability Process
Can I trust a firm to have the competence to perform as expected? According
to Sako and Helper (1998), competence is the source of capability trust, which
assesses whether a firm is able to carry out its promises. Doney and Cannon (1997)
argued that trust can be developed from evaluating a firm’s competence. The
capability process is unavoidable in all aspects of B2B exchange relations, and as

246 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
long as there is adequate information to perceive competence, this impersonal trust-
building process can become the groundwork of a trustworthy relationship.
Therefore, the capability process of engendering trust may develop in eCommerce
to promote trust in a firm’s credibility.
Transference Process
Can I trust a firm based on its performance in prior transactions with others?
The institutional source of trust is associated with structural arrangements that build
trust through incentive mechanisms (Shapiro, 1987). Trust can be gained based on
reliable information received from a trusted network of firms, suggesting that trust
can be transferred from one buyer to another, even if the trustor has no other
experience. A firm may employ the cognitive transference process (Doney and
Cannon, 1997) to analyze information from other firms to form its trust perceptions.
Therefore, given a trustworthy network of firms, the transference process of
engendering trust can become another element of impersonal trust and build trust
in a firm’s credibility.
Calculative Process
Can I trust a firm based on a calculation of its costs and benefits of cooperating?
The economics literature suggests that the primary source of trust is based on a
buyer’s sober calculation of the other firm’s cost and benefits of cheating (Dasgupta,
1988). Hence, trust involves a calculative process that a buyer assesses the
potential losses compared to the short-term gains of a firm’s non-cooperative
behavior (Doney and Cannon, 1997). This process suggests that as long as it is
irrational for a firm to cheat, it can be trusted since it is to its advantage to cooperate.
Therefore, the calculative process can become another constituent of trustworthy
transactions. This subjective calculation has different implications for the two
dimensions of trust. While a firm’s credibility can be trusted, benevolence cannot
be generated based on the calculative process. According to the definition of
benevolence, the other firm is expected to cooperate, even given the chance
(greater benefits) of cheating; hence, the calculative process will always suggest that
a firm’s benevolence cannot be trusted because the benefits of cheating given the
chance would always be greater. Therefore, the trust-building calculative process
can build trust in a firm’s credibility.
Antecedents of Impersonal Trust in B2B eCommerce
An increasingly important application of interfirm eCommerce is the B2B
exchange, which is an interorganizational information system (IOIS) through which
multiple firms interact to identify and select partners, negotiate and execute

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 247
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
transactions. Most IOIS support the following market-making functions: identifica-
tion, selection, execution and integration (Choudhury et al., 1998). Moreover, B2B
exchanges provide some trust-building mechanisms that are proposed to act as
antecedents of impersonal trust. Some antecedents can invoke multiple trust-
building processes, and each antecedent represents a different method of develop-
ing impersonal trust through these basic processes.
Accreditation
Accreditation or prequalification is defined as efforts undertaken ex ante to
verify a firm’s capability to perform as expected (Heide and John, 1990). The idea
of accreditation makes sense only in a world with uncertainty and risk; in this sense,
accreditation is a type of market signaling activity. Adverse selection problems can
be managed by implementing qualifications processes that identify potential trading
firms ex ante that have the skills necessary to transact in a B2B exchange (Bergen,
Dutta and Walker, 1992). Accreditation may also take the form of screening by
known track records; for example, e-steel.com (www.e-steel.com), a B2B
exchange for trading steel, requires all potential participants to have prior trading
experience and letters of reference from previous trading partners in order to
register in its marketplace. Accreditation could be ascertained by a third-party B2B
exchange, which may become a reliable means of characterizing firms. Accredita-
tion triggers the capability process to assess a firm’s capability to fulfill its promises,
since qualification efforts can screen out incompetent firms. In this regard, accredi-
tation is a signal that reduces adverse selection problems. Moreover, if a firm has
information whether organizations are accredited, trust could be granted based on
a firm’s history and reputation. Accreditation is used as a surrogate of reputation
for competence, which is transferable to other firms in a B2B exchange. Therefore,
the transference process is also triggered by accreditation efforts. In sum, imper-
sonal trust is associated with accreditation through inducing the capability and
transference processes.
Feedback
Research in game theory has shown that a properly designed third-party
system can be an effective for assuring cooperation (Kandori, 1992). By introduc-
ing an appropriate feedback mechanism, each firm is transformed into a long-term
player who conducts repeated transactions, constraining them into cooperative
behavior. If there is a repeated play and an indeterminate ending point, formal
analysis shows that organizations may arrive at a stable cooperative outcome
(Radner, 1986). The feedback mechanism in many B2B exchanges is similar in
nature to the suitable mechanism of trust presented by Lahno (1995). Given such

248 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
mechanism, firms are informed about other firm’s past behavior and they are able
to choose them. Hence, the probability of finding partners depends on their past
behavior. On the basis of this dependency, only cooperative conduct pays in the
long run; hence, rational firms tend to act trustworthy. This dependency engenders
trust by triggering the calculative process, following a sober assessment that a firm’s
benefits of cheating are greater than the costs of lost transactions.
Feedback may also be regarded as a surrogate (signal) of good reputation
(Pavlou and Ba, 2000), which is an important antecedent of trust in buyer-seller
relationships (Anderson and Weitz, 1989). Therefore, reputable firms would have
greater incentives to cooperate since they have a better feedback to protect than
non-reputable firms do, and they are more likely to act ethically (Telser, 1980).
Following the same argument, firms would eminently value long and unblemished
history, since more organizations are more unlikely to destroy a good name to
exploit a single transaction. Therefore, feedback triggers the transference process
of engendering trust, where firms infer trustworthiness through feedback from other
firms participating in a B2B exchange. Feedback mechanisms provide both signals
of past experience, and also incentives for cooperation. Consequently, feedback
is associated with impersonal trust by triggering both the calculative and transfer-
ence processes.
Monitoring
In B2B exchanges, monitoring may have two aspects. First, a third-party
authority monitors all interfirm transactions and assures that everything is performed
in accordance with the agreed terms. In case of a problem, a neutral authority
attempts to solve the issue to the satisfaction of both firms, or in accordance with
the prearranged agreement. Second, a third-party authority can assure that the
quality of all products exchanged is in agreement with the preapproved specifica-
tions. For example, independent contractors offer quality-assurance services to the
B2B exchange of Chemconnect.com (www.chemconnect.com). Therefore, agency
risks of moral hazard are minimized by monitoring that discourages opportunistic
behavior. B2B exchanges may continually monitor the trading activity, convey
sanctions to inappropriate trading behavior and punish any wrongdoing. Third-
party monitoring provides the incentives for firms to engage in cooperative and
honest practices. Therefore, the calculative process suggests that trust can be built
when a B2B exchange monitors the transaction if the costs of opportunistic behavior
will be higher than the benefits from cheating. Given proper government, monitoring
provides the incentives for firms to engage in cooperative practices since simple
calculation would suggest that the costs of opportunistic behavior would exceed

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 249
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
potential short-term benefits. Hence, the calculative process can be invoked by
monitoring, which is proposed to be associated with impersonal trust.
Legal Bonds
Written contracts are also proposed as a mechanism to reduce opportunistic
behavior and moral hazard. However, contracts are only partial safeguards against
opportunism since they are almost always incomplete due to unforeseen circum-
stances, since firms are considered boundedly rational and cannot foresee all
possible states of nature (Williamson, 1985). Nevertheless, impersonal trust based
on legal bonds can be built on the basis of the calculative process since it is rational
to cooperate given a legal contract that increases the costs of opportunism.
Therefore, legal bonds provide protection and can promote trust in a firm’s
credibility.
Consequences of Impersonal Trust
Satisfaction
According to Anderson and Narus (1990), satisfaction is conceptualized as
a very important consequence of exchange relationships, showing that satisfaction
is an outcome of trust-based relationships. Mutual trust indicates equity in the
exchange and promotes satisfaction. Moreover, trust enhances channel member
satisfaction by reducing conflict (Anderson and Narus, 1990; Geyskens et al.,
1998). In summary, satisfaction represents an important outcome of business
exchange relations and a global evaluation of fulfillment exchanges relationships
(Dwyer et al., 1987), in which both dimensions of trust should contribute. Following
Ganesan (1994), there should be a positive relationship between satisfaction and
impersonal trust.
Perceived Risk
Most buyer-supplier relationships are characterized by information asymme-
try since one firm usually possesses uneven information regarding the transaction
compared to the other firm (Mishra et al., 1998). The general problem faced by
organizations is the inability to foresee and control the actions of the other firm,
leading to delegation of some authority to the other party. This problem creates a
double-sided agency relationship between the buyer and the supplier (Jensen and
Meckling, 1976). According to Shapiro (1987), agency relationships are present
in all types of social relationships from simply familiarity interactions to complex
forms of a firm. Although risk is inevitable in every transaction, trust reduces the
expectations of opportunistic behavior (Sako and Helper, 1998) and risk percep-
tions (Ganesan, 1994). Trust has been shown to reduce the perceived risk of being

250 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
taken advantage of from the other firm (Anderson and Weitz, 1989) and improves
favorable impressions for the other firm (Anderson and Narus, 1990). Since signals
and incentives were shown to build trust and reduce fears of moral hazard and
adverse selection, trust should also reduce perceived risks. Consequently, trust in
a firm’s credibility should diminish risk perceptions, predicting a negative relation-
ship between impersonal trust and perceived risk.
Anticipated Continuity
Anticipated continuity is defined as the perception of a firm’s expectation of
future transactions in a B2B exchange. There is significant evidence to suggest a
strong association between trust and a propensity to continue a relationship
(Morgan and Hunt, 1994). According to Ganesan (1994) trust is a necessary
ingredient for long-term orientation because it shifts the focus to future conditions.
Similarly, Morgan and Hunt found a negative relationship between trust and
propensity to leave, and also Anderson and Weitz (1989) showed that trust is key
to maintaining continuity in buyer-supplier relationships. Therefore, trust should be
associated with a firm’s intention to continue participating in a B2B exchange. Firms
participating in impersonal B2B exchanges usually make decisions based on
objective, calculative evidence (credibility), rather than subjective evaluations
(benevolence) since familiarity trust is rarely present. Nevertheless, anticipated
continuity should be affected by trust in a firm’s credibility, predict a positive
relationship between impersonal trust and anticipated continuity.
Pricing
A major reason for the existence of different prices is the need to compensate
some firms for reducing agency risks and transactions costs (Rao and Monroe,
1996). Therefore, in an efficient or dynamic pricing mechanism, firms need to
reward reputable firms with better prices to assure safe transactions, since
reputable firms are more likely to reduce transaction and agency costs. Similarly,
in B2B exchanges, trustworthy firms are likely to reduce such costs and receive
more favorable pricing. This phenomenon could be explained by the notion of
returns to reputation (Shapiro, 1983), where reputable agents tend to receive more
favorable terms. On the contrary, organizations tend to mandate compensation for
the risk they are exposed to when they transact with less reputable firms.
Consequently, differences in trust may cause different prices given a dynamic
pricing scheme. Pavlou and Ba (2000) empirically showed that differences in trust
perceptions affect price premiums and discounts in eCommerce auctions. Similarly,
in B2B exchanges with dynamic pricing schemes, impersonal trust is viewed as a
risk-reduction mechanism, allowing trustworthy firms to obtain more favorable

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 251
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
pricing terms for reducing transaction-specific risks. The complete set of anteced-
ents, trust-building processes and consequences of impersonal trust is shown in
Figure 1.
DISCUSSION
The primary contribution of this research is that a set of interrelationships
between constructs that tend to be associated with impersonal trust in B2B
eCommerce are specified. First, the nature and dimensions of trust in eCommerce
are described, and it is proposed that impersonal trust is mostly applicable in this
context, primarily arising from the dimension of credibility. Second, the conceptual
development provides the trust-building cognitive processes that may engender
impersonal trust. Third, four trust-building mechanisms usually present in B2B
exchanges are proposed to act as antecedents of impersonal trust by triggering the
trust-building cognitive processes. Finally, four consequences of impersonal trust
on key aspects of interfirm exchange relations are proposed. Although this study
does not empirically examine the interrelationships among these variables, the
theoretical foundation provides a comprehensive view of the role of impersonal trust
in B2B eCommerce; an empirical validation of the proposed framework can be
seen in Pavlou (2001). Another contribution of this research is the examination of
the two distinct dimensions of trust–independently, proposing that each dimension
would have different underlying cognitive processes, antecedents and conse-
quences. While the extant literature paid particular attention to benevolence as the
most important aspect of interfirm trust and viewed trust as a global construct, this
Feedback  
Monitoring 
Legal Bonds 
Credibility 
(Impersonal 
Trust) 
Satisfaction 
Perceived  
Risk 
Anticipated 
Continuity 
Calculative 
Process 
Transference 
Process 
Capability 
Process 
Favorable 
Pricing  
Accreditation 
Figure 1: Conceptual Framework

252 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
research showed that in B2B eCommerce, impersonal trust arising from the
dimension of credibility could be studied as an independent concept in its own right.
Viewing trust as a unidimensional construct may be a valid simplification when
analyzing long-term relationships (Doney and Cannon, 1997). However, given the
impersonal context of B2B eCommerce, this simplification underscores the impor-
tance of credibility on vital outcomes of interfirm exchange relations (Ganesan,
1994).
Key Findings
This research is one of the first to address the importance of impersonal trust
in B2B eCommerce. In online interfirm exchange relations where familiarity trust in
not readily applicable, impersonal trust can still have beneficial outcomes, primarily
based on the dimension of credibility. The two dimensions of trust-credibility and
benevolence–are related constructs, although theoretically distinctive from each
other. While there is rich scholarly literature on the antecedents of familiarity trust,
no research has investigated the effect of an extensive set of antecedents of
impersonal trust. Not only does this study propose some precursors of impersonal
trust in B2B eCommerce, these antecedents are theoretically grounded in the
cognitive processes by which trust engenders. Whereas it may appear that
impersonal processes-competence, transference and calculative-are only weak
complements of the familiarity-based processes-intentionality and prediction, the
proposed impersonal processes seem to be critical in establishing trust and
generating favorable social and economic outcomes. Therefore, even if the notion
of studying impersonal trust independently is novel, its antecedents and conse-
quences are established based on solid ground.
Theoretical Implications
This research proposes that firms tend to make many decisions based on
objective evidence of competence, reliability and honesty (credibility). This finding
is in line with Williamson (1993) who argued that familiarity trust only exists at the
individual level, whereas business relations require institutional safeguards against
opportunism. Also, Ganesan (1994) showed that even in long-term interfirm
relationships, credibility was the sole determinant of long-term orientation. There-
fore, these findings call for reconceptualization of the role of interfirm trust and more
exhaustive research on the antecedents and consequences of the impersonal
concept of trust. Nevertheless, whereas the dimension of credibility is proposed to
induce favorable outcomes in interfirm exchange relations, it is not the purpose of
this chapter to undermine the importance of familiarity trust. However, while other
researchers argued that benevolence is the only stable form of trust (Granovetter,

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 253
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
1985), I argue that credibility is also a robust form that is increasingly important in
the impersonal environment of B2B eCommerce.
Many authors argued that trust is only embedded in repetitive transactions and
ongoing relationships, essentially arguing that impersonal trust is not a true form of
trust but a functional substitute for it (Granovetter, 1985; Williamson, 1993). Sitkin
and Roth (1993) argued that ‘legalistic remedies’ are not effective in creating trust,
while Granovetter (1985) maintained that institutional processes are ‘functional
substitutes’ of trust. On the contrary, Shapiro (1987) argued that institutional
practices and norms could provide a very strong level of trust. In sum, the role of
impersonal trust in the literature has been controversial; however, given the
importance of impersonal trust in today’s B2B eCommerce, this chapter attempts
to disentangle the complex notion of trust and encourage research on the anteced-
ents, underlying trust-building cognitive processes and consequences of each
distinct dimension. By examining the two types of trust independently, research
could validly conclude which type is robust, easy to build and maintain, and
consequential.
Lewicki and Bunker (1995) argued that there are different levels of trusting
relationships with impersonal processes as the most fragile and familiarity ones as
the most robust. However, the impersonal processes are fragile if the underlying
institutional structure is fragile, and the signals and incentives are weak. Given strong
and well-accepted institutional rules, practices and norms to guide B2B eCommerce,
impersonal trust can also become a robust mechanism to govern interfirm economic
activity. Even if familiarity trust is indeed more robust, familiarity may not always be
possible in eCommerce, since it may be physically or socially difficult to personalize
all interfirm relationships, and it might also have negative economic consequences
(Helper, 1991). Therefore, impersonal trust can be encouraged in B2B exchanges
without significant costs, and provide substantial benefits to the participating firms
without forcing them into repetitive transactions.
Managerial Implications
This study has practical implications for the ways B2B exchanges might
increase the general level of interorganizational trust. Heightening the extent of firm
accreditation, improving feedback mechanisms, and ensuring an effective monitor-
ing and legal system promotes a trustworthy environment. Failure to provide these
antecedents of trust might reduce the general level of credibility in the marketplace,
which would eventually force firms to seek other alternatives. Moreover, this study
proposes that impersonal trust is an important determinant of satisfaction, reduced
perceived risks, anticipated continuity and favorable pricing. These associations set
new standards for B2B exchanges; an important consideration should be to

254 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
develop the appropriate mechanisms to build and sustain interfirm trust. Since the
future of most B2B exchanges relies on many participating firms, high liquidity and
trade volume, impersonal trust would probably become an important determinant
of the future of many B2B exchanges. This research not only proposes the
antecedents of impersonal trust, but it also indicates the cognitive sequences by
which trust develops.
In considering their participation in B2B exchanges, firms should appreciate
the role of impersonal trust that is based on functional mechanisms, institutional
structures and regulations instituted in the marketplace. Since these structures
provide the secure context in which interfirm exchange relations can develop,
companies should either depend on these structures to trust other firms, or rely on
exchange relations with familiar partners. Managers should decide which exchange
relations should be based on impersonal trust, and which on familiarity trust. For
more extensive managerial recommendations on how the proposed framework
could be useful, see Pavlou (2000).
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research
This research attempts to make theoretical contributions to the academic and
managerial literature on the role of impersonal trust in B2B eCommerce. The
purpose is to stimulate empirical research in the area towards validating the
proposed framework and shedding some light on the pragmatic nature of imper-
sonal trust in B2B eCommerce. It should be clear that this framework proposes only
a subset of the many possible relationships between trust and its antecedents,
cognitive processes, consequences and other moderating variables. Hence, other
important constructs could have been neglected. Future research should take a
more extensive approach to cover other variables related to impersonal trust in B2B
eCommerce. Therefore, future research should identify other factors that comple-
ment the proposed conceptual model, and empirically test a more complete
framework.
The proposed framework may not be generalizable to other dissimilar cultures.
Governance by familiarity trust is prevalent in Japanese markets; hence, impersonal
B2B eCommerce might be an infeasible solution in this culture. For example, Sako
(1992) compared Japanese and British companies and showed that Japanese firms
exhibit higher levels of familiarity trust towards their trading partners. Therefore, the
notion of worldwide B2B eCommerce may be restricted by the cultural norms of
some nations that rely on familiarity relations. Future research should examine the
role of ethnic culture in interfirm relations and predict the boundaries of global B2B
exchanges.

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 255
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
REFERENCES
Akerlof, G. (1970). The market for ‘lemons’: Quality under uncertainty and the
market mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, August (84), 488-
500.
Anderson, E. and Weitz, B. (1989). Determinants of continuity in conventional firm
working partnership. Journal of Marketing, 54(1), 42-58.
Arrow, K. J. (1974). The Limits of Firms, New York: Norton.
Barney, J. B. and Hansen, M. H. (1994). Trustworthiness as a source of
competitive advantage. Strategic Management Journal, Special Issue (15),
175-190.
Beccera, M. and Gupta, A. K. (1999). Trust within the firm: Integrating the trust
literature with agency theory and transaction cost economics. Public Admin-
istration Quarterly, 177-203.
Bergen, M. E., Dutta, S. and Walker, Jr., O. C. (1992). Agency relationships as
marketing: A review of the implications and applications of agency-related
theories. Journal of Marketing, 56, 1-24.
Bromiley, P. and Cummings, L. L. (1995). Transaction costs in firms with trust. In
Bies, R., Sheppard, B. and Lewicki, R. (Eds.), Research on Negotiation in
Firms. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Brynjolfsson, E. and Smith, M. D. (2000). Frictionless commerce? A comparison
of Internet and conventional retailers. Management Science, 46(4), 563-
585.
Choudhury V., Hartzel, K. S. and Konsynski, B. R. (1998). Uses and conse-
quences of electronic exchanges: An empirical investigation in the aircraft
parts industry. MIS Quarterly, 471-507.
Dai, Q. and Kauffman, R. J. (2000). Business models for Internet-based
eProcurement systems and B2B electronic markets: An exploratory assess-
ment. 34th Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science, January
2001.
Dasgupta, P. (1988). Trust as a commodity. In Gambetta, D. (Ed.), Trust: Making
and Breaking Cooperative Relations. New York: Basil Blackwell, Inc.
Doney, P. M. and Cannon, J. P. (1997). An examination of the nature of trust in
buyer-seller relationships. Journal of Marketing, April (61), 35-51.
Dwyer, F. R., Schurr, P. J. and Oh, S. (1987). Developing buyer-seller relation-
ships. Journal of Marketing, 52(1), 21-34.
Ganesan, S. (1994), Determinants of long-term orientation in buyer-seller relation-
ships. Journal of Marketing, 58, 1-19.
Geyskens, I., Steenkamp, J. B. and Kumar, N. (1998). Generalizations about trust
in marketing channel relationships using meta-analysis. International Jour-

256 Pavlou
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
nal in Marketing, 15, 223-248.
Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic action and social structure: The problem of
embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology, 91(3), 481-510.
Gulati, R. (1995). Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties for
contractual choice of alliances. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 85-
112.
Heide, J. B. and John, G. (1990). Alliances in industrial purchasing, the determi-
nants of joint action in buyer-supplier relationships. Journal of Marketing
Research, 37, 24-36.
Helper, S. (1991). How much has really changed between U.S. automakers and
their suppliers? Sloan Management Review, Summer (32), 15-28.
Jensen, M. C. and Meckling, W. H. (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial
behavior, agency costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial
Economics, 3, 305-360.
Kandori, M. (1992). Social norms and community enforcement. Review of
Economic Studies, 59, 63-80.
Keen, P. G. W. (2000). Ensuring eTrust. Computerworld, March, 34(11), 13,
46.
Lahno, B. (1995). Trust, reputation, and exit in exchange relationships. Journal of
Conflict Resolution, 39(3), 495-510.
Lewicki, R. J. and Bunker, B. B. (1995). Trust in relationships: A model of
development and decline. In Bunker, B. B. and Rubin, J. Z. (Eds.), Conflict,
Cooperation and Justice. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Macneil, I. R. (1980). The New Social Contract. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Mishra, D. P., Heide, J. B. and Cort, S. G. (1998). Information asymmetry and
levels of agency relationships. Journal of Marketing Research, 35, 277-
295.
Morgan, R. M. and Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relation-
ship marketing. Journal of Marketing, July (58), 20-38.
Ouchi, W. G. (1980). Market, bureaucracies and clans. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 25, 129-141.
Pavlou, P. A. (2001). The role of trust in electronic commerce: Evidence from
business-to-business and business-to-consumer electronic intermediaries.
Working Paper, Marshall School of Business, University of Southern
California.
Pavlou, P. A. (2000). Building trust in B2B relationships through electronic
commerce intermediaries. Working Paper, Marshall School of Business,
University of Southern California.

Impersonal Trust in B2B Electronic Commerce: A Process View 257
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Pavlou, P. A. and Ba, S. (2000). Does online reputation matter? An empirical
investigation of reputation and trust in online auction markets. Proceedings of
the 6th Americas Conference in Information Systems, Long Beach, CA.
Radner, R. (1986). Repeated partnership games with imperfect monitoring and no
discounting. Review of Economic Studies, 111, 43-57.
Ring, P. S. and Van de Ven, A. H. (1992). Structuring cooperative relationships
between firms. Strategic Management Journal, 13, 483-498.
Sako, M. (1992). Trust in Exchange Relations. Cambridge, MA: University
Press.
Sako, M. and Helper, S. (1998). Determinants of trust in supplier relations:
Evidence from the automotive industry in Japan and the United States.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Firm, 34, 387-417.
Shapiro, S. P. (1987). The social control of impersonal trust. American Journal
of Sociology, 93, 623-658.
Sitkin S. B. and Roth, N. L. (1993). Explaining the limited effectiveness of ‘legalistic
remedies’ for trust/distrust. Firm Science, 4, 367-392.
Stinchcombe, A. L. (1985). Stratification and firms. Selected Papers, Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Telser, L. G. (1980). A theory of self-enforcing contracts. Journal of Business,
53(1), 27-44.
Williamson, O. E. (1975). Exchanges and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust
Implications. New York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York:
The Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1993). Calculativeness, trust and economic firm. Journal of
Law and Economics, 26, 453-486.
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B. and Perrone, V. (1998). Does trust matter? Exploring the
effects of interfirm and interpersonal trust on performance. Organization
Science, 9(2), 141-159.
This chapter was previously published in the book, Business to Business Electronic Commerce: Challenges
& Solutions, edited by Merrill Warkentin, copyright © 2002, Idea Group Publishing.

258   About the Authors
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
About the Authors
Sam Lubbe has spent more than 18 years working in the field of Information
Systems.  He has served some time as a user and as an IT professional.  He always
ensured that the organizations obtain the maximum benefit for the amount of money
they invested in e-commerce. Recently, he has specialized in the area of e-
commerce in SMEs.  He has published some articles in this subject area. He holds
a B.Com., B.Com. (Hons.), M.Com. and Ph.D. and is a Head of Department in
IT at Cape Technikon in South Africa.
*     *     *
Udo Averweg is employed as an Information Analyst by eThekwini Municipality,
Durban, South Africa. He entered the Information Technology (IT) industry during
1979 and holds a master’s degree in Information Technology (cum laude). He is
a professional member of the Computer Society of South Africa and has delivered
research papers at local and international (Hawaii, Australia and Egypt) IT
conferences.
Terry Anthony Byrd is associate professor of MIS in the Department of
Management at the College of Business, Auburn University. He holds a BS in
electrical engineering from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and a PhD
in management information systems from the University of South Carolina. His
research has appeared in MIS Quarterly, Journal of Management Information
Systems, Decision Sciences, OMEGA, Interfaces and other leading journals. His
current research interests include the strategic management of information technology,
information technology architecture and infrastructure, electronic commerce, and
information technology implementation.

About the Authors    259
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Eric Cloete B.Sc. (Mathematics), B.Sc. Hons. (Applied Mathematics), NHOD,
M.Sc. (Computer Science), D.Tech (IT). Dr. Cloete is a born Capetonian, with a
firm belief that we can take the distance out of our education with the proper use
of technology. He worked for many years in tertiary education at a number of
institutions in South Africa and abroad. He is currently the convener for Electronic
Commerce, a final-year module in Information Systems at the University of Cape
Town. His research interests include e-business, e-learning and super- computers.
He is also a keen musician and plays a number of instruments on a semi-professional
basis.
Geoff Erwin has spent more than 20 years working in the field of corporate
computers and information systems. He has worked with computers as an IS
professional and as a user. In all these capacities, he has been concerned with
obtaining value for money from the information systems effort. He is a Dean in the
Faculty of Business Informatics, Cape Technikon, South Africa.
Rick Gibson has more than 20 years of software engineering experience and is
authorized by the Software Engineering Institute to lead assessments of software
and systems development organizations. In this role, he has extensive domestic and
international experience in the conduct of evaluations and the subsequent development
of process maturity improvement action plans for software organizations. He is
currently the department chair and an associate professor at American University,
Washington, D.C., for the Department of Computer Science and Information
Systems. His responsibilities, as a faculty member, include teaching graduate
courses in software engineering, decision analysis, and knowledge management.
He has published a variety of books, book chapters, and journal articles on
software development and quality assurance.
Jatinder N. D. Gupta is currently Eminent Scholar of Management, Professor of
Management Information Systems, and Chairperson of the Department of
Accounting and Information Systems in the College of Administrative Science at the
University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, Alabama.  Most recently, he was
Professor of Management, Information and Communication Sciences, and Industry
and Technology at the Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana.  He holds a PhD in
Industrial Engineering (with specialization in Production Management and Information
Systems) from Texas Tech University.  Co-author of a textbook in Operations
Research, Dr. Gupta serves on the editorial boards of several national and
international journals.  Recipient of the Outstanding Faculty and Outstanding
Researcher awards from Ball State University, he has published numerous papers

260   About the Authors
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
in such journals as Journal of Management Information Systems, International
Journal of Information Management, INFORMS Journal of Computing,
Annals of Operations Research, and Mathematics of Operations Research.
More recently, he served as a co-editor of a special issue on Neural Networks in
Business of Computers and Operations Research and a book entitled, Neural
Networks in Business: Techniques and Applications. His current research
interests include information and decision technologies, scheduling, planning and
control, organizational learning and effectiveness, systems education, and knowledge
management.  Dr. Gupta is a member of several academic and professional
societies including the Production and Operations Management Society (POMS),
the Decision Sciences Institute (DSI), and the Information Resources Management
Association (IRMA).
Sandra C. Henderson is a doctoral candidate of MIS in the Department of
Management at Auburn University. She holds a master’s of accountancy with a
concentration in accounting information systems from Florida State University and
a BS in Accounting from Albany State University. Her research has appeared in
Information & Management and several proceedings. Her research interests
include information privacy, electronic commerce, and systems development.
Mike Mullany was born in Pietermaritzburg, South Africa in 1950, where he was
educated at Athlone and Alexandra High Schools.  In 1968, he obtained a university
entrance with high marks in Physical Science and Mathematics.  After working for
some years in the computer industry, he completed his B.Sc. degree in Mathematics
at the University of Natal.  Later, he obtained a variety of teaching and computer-
related qualifications, culminating in his Master of Commerce Degree (Information
Systems), awarded with distinction by the University of Cape Town, in 1989.  Since
then, he has taught Information Systems at the Universities of Cape Town and
Natal, and is currently a senior lecturer in Information Systems at the Northland
Polytechnic in New Zealand.  His particular research interest is the use of
psychometric instruments to determine aspects of information system success.  He
has presented papers on this and related topics at conferences in South Africa, New
Zealand and the United States.
Marlon Parker has spent the last three years working in the field of Information
Systems and Business Intelligence. He served some time as a user and as an IT
professional. Recently he has specialized in the area of technology-enhanced e-
learning and assisted with the implementation of some online courses at the Cape

About the Authors    261
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Technikon. He holds a B. Tech. Degree in Information Technology at the Cape
Technikon.
Shaun Pather has over ten years of experience in IT training and education.
Currently he is a Senior Lecturer in Information Systems, at the Cape Technikon.
His teaching interests include Systems Analysis and Design, and Strategic
Management Information Systems. He has been involved in various graduate and
post-graduate IS programs for a variety of institutes, as well as executive
management training.   He has experience with consulting with various SMEs and
IT training companies.  His research interest is in the field of e-commerce evaluation.
Paul A. Pavlou is a Ph.D. Candidate of Information Systems at the Marshall
School of Business in the University of Southern California (USC). He holds a
master’s degree in Electrical Engineering from USC, and a bachelor’s degree in
Managerial Studies and Electrical Engineering from Rice University (magna cum
laude). His current research interests are mostly in the area of electronic commerce,
dealing with interorganizational and consumer relationships, the role of trust and
marketing communications. Mr. Pavlou is the author of several papers that
appeared as journal articles, book chapters and conference proceedings.
Sushil K. Sharma is currently Assistant Professor of Information Systems at the
Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana.  He received his Ph.D. in Information
Systems from Pune University, India and taught at the Indian Institute of Management,
Lucknow for eleven years before joining Ball State University. Prior to joining Ball
State, Dr. Sharma held the position of Visiting Research Associate Professor at the
Department of Management Science, University of Waterloo, Canada. Dr.
Sharma’s primary teaching interests are e-commerce, computer communication
networks, database management systems, management information systems, and
information systems analysis and design. He has extensive experience in providing
consulting services to several government and private organizations, including
World Bank funded projects in the areas of information systems, e-commerce, and
knowledge management. Dr. Sharma is the author of two books and has numerous
articles in national and international journals. His current research interests include
database management systems, networking environments, electronic commerce
(e-commerce), knowledge management, and corporate information systems.
Shawren Singh is a lecturer at the University of South Africa (Unisa) in the
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems. He is actively involved

262   About the Authors
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
in research relating to e-commerce, human computer interaction (HCI), Internet
security, Web-based courseware tools, Internet applications, Web-based education
and accounting information systems. He is a member of SAICSIT (South African
Institute for Computer Scientists and Information Technologists, SAICSIT council
member), SACLA (South African Computer Lecturers Association) and a member
of the Unisa HCI Focus group. He has been invited as a guest speaker to local South
African academic institutions and has presented his research at international
conferences. He has lectured the following undergraduate level courses, ISD
(Information Systems Development), Object-Oriented Approaches, Introduction
to Computer Systems and Human-Computer Interaction.
Charles A. Snyder is the Woodruff Endowed Professor of MIS in the Department
of Management at the College of Business, Auburn University. He received a Ph.D.
in management from the University of Nebraska. He holds an M.S. in Economics
from South Dakota State University, an M.B.A. from Ohio State University, and
a B.F.A. from the University of Georgia. His research has appeared in the Journal
of Management Information Systems, Information & Management, The
Academy of Management Review, and many other leading journals. His research
interests include knowledge management, information resource management,
expert systems, computer-integrated manufacturing, systems analysis and design,
and telecommunications management.
Paul A. Taylor is currently at the University of Leeds, UK. Previously, he was a
senior lecturer in the sociology of technology at the University of Salford, Greater
Manchester, UK. His main research interest centers upon the computer underground.
In addition to numerous international articles, his main previous publication in this
area is Hackers: Crime in the Digital Sublime (Routledge, 1999). He is currently
working on several other book projects including another forthcoming Routledge
book co-authored with Tim Jordan of the Open University and which is provisionally
entitled “Hacktivists: Rebels with a Cause?”
Roberto Vinaja is an Assistant Professor of Computer Information Systems in the
Department of Computer Information Systems and Quantitative Methods, University
of Texas Pan American. His research interests include Global Electronic Commerce,
Networking and Telecommunications.

Index    263
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
A
absenteeism  191
accreditation  247
active server pages  221
adaption-innovation theory  187,  204
adaptive problem-solvers  185
adverse selection  241
analyst-user dyad  203
analyst-user interface  204
anticipated continuity  250
artificial intelligence  99
asset structure  85
atmosphere  64
B
B2B exchange  240, 246
benevolence  244
best-fitting regression  203
binding agent  127
biopolitical power  19
bit tax  39
brick and mortar  96
build-up  64
business risk  85
business-to-business (B2B)  51, 104
business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce
215
business-to-consumer (B2C)  51, 104,  215
business-to-employee (B2E)  51, 104
C
capitalization  146
channels of communication  164
circulation of struggles  7
citizens-as-consumers  14
clustering strategy  5
cognitive processes  245
commercial tie-up  6
communication  64
computer anxiety  220
Computer Matching Privacy and Protection
Act  37
computer-based information systems
(CBIS)  52
computer-student  156
cookies  45
counter-populating  10
covert resistance  190
crack down  42
credibility  244
curates  13
customer-orientated  7
cyber slacking  42
D
data mining  100
data privacy  215
data protection directive  216
data warehouses  100
Daz Doorstep Challenge  6
developing countries (DC)  23
Index

264   Index
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
devil’s advocate stance  2
digital age  45
digital divide  36,  65
digital zapatismo  16
direct mail marketing  42
discipline  64
dot-com dreamers  140
E
e-commerce  23,  136,  213, 220
e-commerce accepted practice (EDAP)  50
e-commerce enterprises  137
e-commerce fiascoes  141
e-learning  160
economic development  25
economic transaction histories  89
educational technology (ET)  157
electronic civil disobedience  11
electronic commerce for developing
countries  24
electronic data interchange (EDI)  111
electronic disturbance theatre (EDT)  11
electronic fund transfers (EFT)  54,  111
enterprise information systems  107
espace quelconque  5
EU (European Union)  24
everyone’s information system  107
executive information systems (EIS)  103,
107
executive support systems (ESS)  107
F
familiarity trust  243
feedback  147, 247
financial leverage  85
financial structure  85
flexibility  161
Free Trade Agreement between Canada,
U.S.A, and Mexico  14
frequently asked questions (FAQ)  97
friction-free capitalism  2
G
generalised audit software (GAS) technique
59
global information infrastructure (GII)  24
goodness-of-fit  196
government regulation  214
groupware  111
gung-ho frontier  3
H
hacktivists  18
high-penalty overhead  201
higher-risk tool  205
human dimension  163
hypertext markup language  221
I
impersonal trust  240, 243
incentives  241
information asymmetry  240
information systems (IS)  103
information technology (IT)  52
information warfare  36
infrastructure development  25
innovative analyst  194
innovators  185
inter-communication  162
International Telecommunication Union
(ITU)  24
Internet relay chat (IRC)  160
Internet service providers (ISP)  74
interorganizational information system
(IOIS)  246
ITQuadrant  141
J
Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE)  60
Just in Time (JIT)  127
K
Kirton Adaption-innovation Inventory
(KAI)  185
L
laissez-faire ideology  4
legal bonds  249
leverage  85

Index    265
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
low mean values  171
M
management  147
manifest content  145
manifest destiny  3
marketing  147
McDonaldization  4
modus operandi  13
monitoring  248
monopolistic trends  40
monopoly practices  39
moral hazard  241
multi-national cooperation  25
multiple constituency approach  109
N
National Information Infrastructure (NII)  24
neo-tribes  8
networked computing  112
new economy  34
new labour  6
O
online analytical processing (OLAP)  106
online customer service  96
operating leverage  85
operation turnout  6
operational objectives  73
opportunism  241
organizational decision makers  89
organizational information visualization  88
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD)  24
overt resistance  190
P
paradox of incommunicability  7
parameters  148
peer-to-peer  167
perceived risk  249
personal information  215
personal information privacy  215
political democratization  24
precise contradiction  204
pricing  250
privacy  213
privacy invasion  219, 222
privacy policies  213
propensity to purchase  222
psychological withdrawal  191
pure intellectual distance  18
R
r-score  196
race towards weightlessness  6
regulatory preference  213
return on investment (ROI)  70
S
satisfaction  249
security  148
self-regulation  229
semiological guerilla warfare  11
shared data bases  112
shared mindset  72
shoulder-looking  42
signals  241
small, medium and micro enterprises
(SMMEs)  63
small to medium enterprises (SMEs)  122
social drama  16
social isolation  43
social obsolescence  77
South African National Small Business Act
122
South African revenue services (SARS)  57
South African SME business sector  128
supply chain  213
supply chain management (SCM)  112,  143
surrogate  190
system satisfaction schedule  195
systems development life cycle (SDLC)  139
T
teacher-computer-student  156
teacher-student  156
technology dimension  163
technology knowledge  219
technology objectives  73

266   Index
Copyright © 2003, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
technology-delivered e-learning environ-
ment  173
tertiary institutions  159
text conferencing  98
three-ring binder  4
trust  243
trust-building cognitive processes  241
U
uncertainty  240
underground puissance  8
universal tool  158
V
value chain integration  127
value-added networks (VANs)  111
vertical events  7
videoconferencing session  99
virtual classroom  159
virtual learning environments (VLEs)  159
voice over the Internet protocol (VOIP)  97
W
web surfing  35
web-based Instructional Systems model
164
wireless application protocol (WAP)  105
World Wide Web (WWW)  53,  172

InfoSci-Online
Database
www.infosci-online.com
Provide instant access to the latest offerings of Idea Group Inc. publications in the
fields of INFORMATION SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY and MANAGEMENT
A product of:
INFORMATION SCIENCE PUBLISHING*
Enhancing Knowledge Through Information Science
http://www.info-sci-pub.com
*an imprint of Idea Group Inc.
During the past decade, with the advent of
telecommunications and the availability of
distance learning opportunities, more college and
university libraries can now provide access to
comprehensive collections of research literature
through access to online databases.
The InfoSci-Online database is the most
comprehensive collection of full-text literature
regarding research, trends, technologies, and
challenges in the fields of information science,
technology and management.  This online
database consists of over 3000 book chapters,
200+ journal articles, 200+ case studies and over
1,000+ conference proceedings papers from
IGI’s three imprints (Idea Group Publishing, Information Science Publishing and IRM Press) that
can be accessed by users of this database through identifying areas of research interest and keywords.
Contents & Latest Additions:
Unlike the delay that readers face when waiting for the release of print publications, users will find
this online database updated as soon as the material becomes available for distribution, providing
instant access to the latest literature and research findings published by Idea Group Inc. in the field
of information science and technology, in which emerging technologies and innovations are
constantly taking place, and where time is of the essence.
The content within this database will be updated by IGI with 1300 new book chapters, 250+ journal
articles and case studies and 250+ conference proceedings papers per year, all related to aspects of
information, science, technology and management, published by Idea Group Inc.  The updates will
occur as soon as the material becomes available, even before the publications are sent to print.
InfoSci-Online pricing flexibility allows this database to be an excellent addition to your library,
regardless of the size of your institution.
Contact: Ms. Carrie Skovrinskie, InfoSci-Online Project Coordinator, 717-533-8845
(Ext. 14), cskovrinskie@idea-group.com for a 30-day trial subscription to InfoSci-Online.
30-Day
free trial!

For subscription information, contact:
Idea Group Publishing
701 E Chocolate Ave., Ste 200
Hershey PA 17033-1240, USA
cust@idea-group.com
URL: www-idea-group.com
For paper submission information:
Dr. Mehdi Khosrow-Pour
Information Resources Management
Association
jeco@idea-group.com
Journal of Electronic
Commerce in
Organizations (JECO)
The International Journal of Electronic Commerce
in Modern Organizations
Mission
The Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations is designed to provide comprehensive
coverage and understanding of the social, cultural, organizational, and cognitive impacts of e-
commerce technologies and advances on organizations around the world. These impacts can be
viewed from the impacts of electronic commerce on consumer behavior, as well as the impact of
e-commerce on organizational behavior, development, and management in organizations. The sec-
ondary objective of this publication is to expand the overall body of knowledge regarding the human
aspects of electronic commerce technologies and utilization in modern organizations, assisting
researchers and practitioners to devise more effective systems for managing the human side of e-
commerce.
Coverage
This publication includes topics related to electronic commerce as it relates to: Strategic Manage-
ment, Management and Leadership, Organizational Behavior, Organizational Developement, Orga-
nizational Learning, Technologies and the Workplace, Employee Ethical Issues, Stress and Strain
Impacts, Human Resources Management, Cultural Issues, Customer Behavior, Customer Rela-
tionships, National Work Force, Political Issues, and all other related issues that impact the overall
utilization and management of electronic commerce technologies in modern organizations.
ISSN:
1539-2937
eISSN:
1539-2929
Subscription:
Annual fee per volume (4 issues):
Individual US $85
Institutional US $185
Editor:
Mehdi Khosrow-Pour, D.B.A.
Information Resources
Management Association, USA
Journal of Electronic
Commerce in
Organizations
an international journal of electronic commerce in modern organizations
Idea Group Publishing
Publisher of IT books, journals and cases since 1988
http://www.idea-group.com
Vol. 1, no. 1
January-March 2003
	
	
		
			
				
		
			
NEW!
NEW!

