 
 

 
Epilogue by Gerolf Steiner Translated by Leigh Chadwich 
 
The Snouters was originally published in Germany, under 
the title Ecu und Leben der Rhinogradentia, by Gustav 
Fischer Verlag Stuttgart n 1957. Copyright © 1964 by 
Gustav Fischer Verlag Stuttgart. 
Portions of the book appeared in Natural History magazine in 
April 1967 and is reprinted here with permission. 
The 15.plates and 12 text figures in this volume were drawn 
by Gerolf Steiner. 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637 The 
University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London 
English translation copyright © 1967 by Doubleday & Company, Inc 
 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Introduction 
 
General 
 
Description of the several groups 
Uni-Snouters (Monorrhina) 
 
Primitive Snouter Types 
(Archirrhiniformes) 
 
Soft-nosed Snouters (Asclerorrhina) 
 
Surface Snouters (Epigeonasida) 
 
Mud Snouters (Hypogeonasida) 
 
Burrowing Snouters (Georrhinida) 
 
Proboscipedes (Sclerorrhina) 
 
Snout Leapers (Hopsorrhinida) 
 
Multi-Snouters (Polyrrhina) 
 
Four-Snouters (Tetrarrhinida) 
 
Six-Snouters (Hexarrhinida) 
 
Long-nosed Snouters (Dolichoproata)  
Epilogue 
 
Bibliography 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Among mammals the order SNOUTERS holds an unique position, to be 
explained first of all By the fact that these most oddly constructed animals 
haw been discovered only very recently. That hitherto they have remained 
unknown to science is because their native land, the South Sea Archipelago 
Hy-yi-yi (written Heieiei in German), was not discovered until the year 1941 
and even then was visited for the first time by civilized Europeans through a 
rare chance connected with the Pacific war. But in addition this group of 
animals has particular significance because among them are found principles 
of structure, modes of behavior, and ecological types that are unknown 
elsewhere, not just among mammals but among vertebrates in general. 
Discovery of the archipelago is to be credited to the Swede Einar 
Pettersson-Skämtkvist who-escaping from Japanese imprisonment-was 
wrecked on the island Hy-dud-dye-fee (Heidadaifi). This island, which in  
contrast to many islands of the South Seas is not of volcanic origin even 
though it does not lack an active volcano (Kotsobousi-Kozobausi) of 
respectable height (5740 feet), extends some twenty miles from north to 
south and about ten miles east to west, consists predominantly of limestone 
and metamorphic shales, and has as its highest elevation Shou-wunoonda  

(Schauanunda), a twin-peaked mountain 7316 feet high. The climate of the 
island is extremely equable, as is customary of islands of the central and 
eastern Pacific. The tropical vegetation, the botanical evaluation of which 
has scarcely begun, displays alongside genera of worldwide distribution 
many endemic forms of archaic character (thus the Maierales, closely related 
to the Psilotales; and the genus Necolepidodendron,  to be classed among the 
Lepicodendrales; and likewise the Schultzeales, that form a series of 
magnificent virgin forest trees that are to be ranked near the Ranmiculaceae; 
and many more). The Hy-yi-yi Archipelago, to which Hy-dud-dye-fee 
belongs, must hence be of ancient origin, as is true also in respect to the 
geological-palaeontological findings almost exclusively palaeozoic deposits; 
cf. Classification of the Miliolid Sands from the Upper Horizon D16 of 
Mairuvili by Ezio Sputalave. At the very latest, the island group must have 
become completely isolated from other continents in the Upper Cretaceous; 
likewise it is to be assumed that the archipelago, for its part, is the remnant 
of a fair-sized continent, since - in contrast to New Zealand - it contains an 
incomparably greater variety and peculiarity of native groups of organisms 
on a total island area of only slightly more than 650 square miles. 
The natives found by Skämtkvist on his arrival in 1941 called themselves 
Hooakha-Hutchi (Euacha-Hat-schi). They have since become extinct, but 
according to Skämtkvist seem to have been polynesian-europaeoid. It was 
impossible to investigate their language because a headcold introduced by 
the discoverer destroyed these children of nature inside of a few months. Of 
their cultural artifacts only a few wooden objects could be saved 

 
 
PLATE I 

(cf. also Deuterich 1944 and Combinatore 1943). Weapons were unknown to 
the Hooakha-Hutchi. The peaceful tribe was supported by the natural bounty 
of the surroundings. There was no excess of births; ratter, "from time 
immemorial" twenty-two chiefs had held sway over approximately seven 
hundred souls. This much Skämtkvist was able to ascertain. These  
arrangements had the fortunate scientific byproduct that despite the presence 
of humankind the extraordinary archipelago world of organisms was 
preserved, as is the more astounding because almost all the terrestrial 
animals would have been destroyed if they had been hunted more in-
tensively. 
Despite the fact that their native home was unknown, Snouters had been 
mentioned on one previous occasion. No lesser personage than the poet 
Christian Morgenstern some sixty years ago announced the existence of the 
Snouters in his well-known poem; 
"Along on its proboscis  
there goes the nasobame1  
accompanied by its young one.  
It is not found in Brehm,*  
It is not found in Meyer,**  
Nor in the Brockhaus** anywhere.  
'Twas only through my lyre 
 we knew it had been there.  
Thenceforth on its probosces  
(above I've said the same) 
 accompanied by its offspring 
 there goes the nasobame." 
 
* Classical German treatise on zoology, first edition 1863, Fourth (last) edition 1918. 
** Names of well-known German encyclopedias. 

This concise and yet clear description, that expresses the peculiar gait of 
this Snouter even in the rhythm of the verse, answers to a hair that of 
Nasobema lyricum.2 Hence one cannot think other than that Morgenstern 
must have had a specimen of this Snouter before him or have had detailed 
information about it. Bleedkoop 1945 in Das Nasobemproblem (The 
Nasobame Problem) considers that there are two possibilities. Either 
Morgenstern was briefly in Hy-yi-yi during the years 1893 to 1897, or 
through some chance or other he received a hide of Nasobema lyricum (the 
hónatata of the natives). Yet no tropical expedition of Morgenstern's is 
known, and how might he have obtained a hide? According to a verbal 
communication from Mrs. Kathe Ziller, with whom Morgenstern was well 
acquainted, he is said to have come home one evening in 1894 in the greatest 
excitement, muttering over and over "Hy-yiyi, Hy-yi-yi !" Soon thereafter, it 
is said, he composed the poem in question, which he also showed her 
brother. Bleedkoop concludes from this that Morgenstern had learned of Hy-
yi-yi from an acquaintance. But whether he actually had the hónatata before 
him, or with a poets intuition simply sketched a picture of the animal, mist 
remain enigmatic. The lines: "'Twas only through my lyre we knew it had 
been there" would permit the deduction that he didn't actually see it, but 
knew of it only by description. Perhaps too he wished to veil the islands with 
their ancient organisms from European greed and hence-to an extent as 
camouflage-wove these lines into his poem? We do not know, just as we do 
not know from whom Morgenstern got his information about Hy-yi-yi and 
its fauna. Actually the only possibility in this direction is a merchant sailor, 
Captain Albrecht Jens Miespott, who died at an early age; Morgenstern 
maintained a considerable correspondence with him. In 1894, after returning 
from a long and extraordinary journey, Miespott died in a state of mental 
derangement in Hamburg. Perhaps it was he who knew the secret of Hy-yi-
yi and carried it with him to the grave. So much for Bleedkoop's 
investigations. 
In a meritorious study 1.1. Schutliwitzkij occupied himself with the same 
problem. He comes to about the same conclusion as Bleedkoop, but with the 
difference that he considers it possible that between the years 1894 and 1896 
Morgenstern received from Miespott's estate a living hónatata, that he kept 
in a cigar box for some weeks. Yet here too the data are contradictory. 
Moreover, it could have been no more than a "pouch-baby," since hónatatas 
grow to a respectable size (cf. p. 55). All that is certain is that the cigar box 
was quite a deep one, labeled "Los selectos hediondos de desecho" 
1-nasus Lat.=nose; Bema Grk.=to walk. 
2 lyricus Grk.==pertaining to the lyre. 
 
 
 
 

GENERAL 
 
    The Snouters, which are regarded as a special order of the mammals, and 
which have found a monographer in the well-known specialist Bromeante 
de Burlas, are- as the name indicates-all distinguished by tie fact that the 
snout is extraordinarily developed. It may be present singly, or in a greater 
number. The latter condition is unique among the vertebrates. Now, 
anatomical investigations (here we follow Bromeante de Burlas' discus-
sions) have shown that in the polyrrhine species the nasal rudiment is cleft 
at an early embryonic stage, so that the rudimentary individual nostrils that 
develop from it have a holorrhinous differentiation, i.e. each forms a 
complete snout (cf. Fig. 1). Together with the early polyrrhinallization 
there occur numerous extensive alterations of the entire structural plan of 
the head. Special muscles, derived from the facial musculature (innervated  
by the  N. Facialis or by a branch, the N. nasuloanbulacralis3 that is 
unusually well-developed here) take part-in the musculation of the snout. 
Beyond this, in one group (the hopsorrhines4 or Snout Leapers) the 
capacity of the 
 

 
 
 
[Fig. l] Nasobema lyricum. Head of a  
young embryo, to show the polyrrhine  
condition (after Stultén 1949). 
 
snout to develop energy is increased further by M. longissimus dorsi, which 
is drawn out forwards over the skull. The nasal sinuses and the corpora 
spoigiosa undergo far-reaching alteration and an increase in size, which are 
accompanied by a shift in function. Thus for instance in almost all of the 
more advanced forms the tear duct takes on the functions of an outer 
respiratory passage. Such special details will be considered further in 
discussing the individual species. 
Inasmuch as in these rhinograde animals-with exception of the genus 
Archirhinus (a Primitive Snouter) the nasarium6 serves as a means of 
progression, the other appendages have lost their locomotory functions. 
Correspondingly, the posterior appendages are  mostly more or less reduced, 
while the anterior appendages have been modified as grasping organs for 
holding the food or as little hands for grooming. In the genus Rhinostentor 
(Trumpet Snouters) they participate in the formation of a water-filtering 
apparatus. 
Whereas, then, the paired appendages are less impressive features of the 
general organization of the Snouters, with these animals the tail occupies an 
outstanding place and in its construction has developed manifold and alto-
gether aberrant-types. Thus one finds not only coiling tails and lasso-like 
tails, but also in the sclerorrhines6 (the Proboscipedes) the tail serves the 
more primitive forms for jumping and the more advanced as a grasping 
organ (cf. pp. 35, 36, and 48). 

In most Snouters the body is covered with a fairly uniform coat, in which 
no distinction can be made between underfur and guard hairs; this is to be 
attributed not only to the climatic conditions of the archipelago, but 
according to Bromeante de Burlas is to be regarded as a primitive character. 
This view is favored also by the regular way in which the hairs are grouped. 
In one genus there are in addition strong horny scales (similar to those of 
scaly anteaters), that are altogether of the nature of reptilian scales. At times 
the coloration of the coat is magnificent. Famous above all is the 
extraordinary luster of the pelt, caused by the special structure of the hair 
cortex. The bare spots too-head, feet, tail, ears, combs of skin on the head 
and especially on the snout-are brilliantly colored at times. A few aquatic 
species, and the very small burrowing species that are found on the sandy 
shore, are completely bare; likewise a single parasitic species (cf. p. 19). 
The manner of feeding varies greatly  among the different families, and 
even within the same family or genus. Yet this is hardly surprising when one 
recalls that besides a single aquatic shrew7 the Snouters are the only 
mammals of the archipelago and have thus been able to take possession of 
all ecological niches. Most of the rhino-grade animals, the average size of 
which is indeed small, eat insects. But in addition there are also herbivores-
especially fructivorous species-and one predacious genus. To be mentioned 
finally as particularly specialized forms are the plankton feeders that live in 
fresh water, and the burrowing forms, among which are the tiniest verte-
brates known. The crab-eaters among the hopsorrhines can be derived 
readily from the insectivorous forms. A strange case of symbiosis will be 
discussed in the systematic section (pp. 15, 37). 
It is particularly remarkable that among tie Snouters there is one flying 
genus (with a single species), and that there are also sessile and parasitic 
forms. Considering the habits and the structural organization of the animals, 
however, one is not astonished that the number of species is rather large. In 
this connection geological interest is attached to the excellent study by M. 0. 
Jester and S. P. Assfugl of the genus Dulcicauda8 (the Honeytails). These 
authors were able to show that land bridges must have persisted for various 
lengths of time between the different islands of the archipelago, and wire 
able to estimate the dates of their interruption (cf. dso Ludwig 1954). All in 
all, the study with this material of Rassen-kreise and their evolution (Rensch 
1947) is especially promising, even though in many areas there are great 
gaps that are hardly to be closed even by the palaeontological approach, 
since the pertinent fossils lie in deposits that have sunk beneath the surface 
of the sea. 

In general the reproductivity of the Snouters is not high, which permits the 
conclusion that the death rate also is low. So far as now is known there is 
invariably a single young at a birth (the Snout Leapers with physiological 
polyembryony are an exception). However, pregnant females occur all year 
long. The period of gestation-again with exception of the Snout Leapers-is 
long and lasts seven months on the average. Among the monorrhine forms 
the young are so advanced in development at birth that they do not have to 
be suckled. Correlatively, the mammary glands of these Snouters are 
vestigial or display, in the genus Columnifax9 (Pillar Snouters), lactation 
independent of a lactation hormone (cf. p. 15). In the polyrrhine genera, in 
which the newborn are in quite a dependent condition, there is a single pair 
of (mostly axillary) teats. As a rule these species also possess a brood pouch, 
that is formed of skin folds on the throat and is supported by cartilaginous 
bars descending from the Adam's apple. 
The rhinogrades have scarcely any enemies. In the interior of the islands 
the only warm-blooded creatures besides the already mentioned swamp 
shrew (Limnogaloides) are birds of the genus Hypslboas10 (Megaphone 
Birds). All these are of the size of songbirds and have occupied biotopes 
quite distinct from those of the Rhinogradentia. According to Bouffon and 
Sctprimarsch they are descended from petrels, and in fact from forms close 
to Hydrobates. Reptiles are lacking. There occurs only a single primitive 
amphibian species (Urobombinator submersus11), whose gigantic larvae are 
devoured by the Hooakha-Hutchi at ceremonial feasts The slow-moving 
Nasobema species have enemies from their own ranks in the predacious 
rhinogrades of the genus Tyrannonasus.12 However, this genus is confined to 
a few islands. For the most part, only the oceanic birds that at certain 
seasons breed on some of the smaller islands occasionally take a rhinograde. 
However, those very species (for instance the Honeytails and the Pillar 
Snouters) that live on the shore are protected from the birds' attacks, in part 
by poison devices and in part by being inedible; and the Snout Leapers are in 
general so agile that they are not to be caught by these birds. 
Here attention may be called to yet another peculiarity of the Hy-yi-yi-an 
fauna: the insects display a great number of very primitive forms. Thus the 
cockroach-like kinds are represented by numerous structurally distinct types, 
most of which can be placed among the Blattadae. Besides these there are 
also a few more advanced insects, above all Hymenoptera, whereas 
Lepidoptera are absent altogether. Hence, pollination is accomplished partly 
by Hymenoptera (above all by the Pseudobombus species, that outwardly 
resemble bumble-bees but that actually are related to the xylocopids), and 
partly by caddisflies and cockroaches. There are no ants. 

As a marked peculiarity the six-winged insects (Hexaptera of the 
superorder Hexapteroidea13) should be mentioned; they are descendants of 
the Palaeoiictyoptera and have terrestrial larvae. These insects are mostly 
animals of the open country; i.e. except for a few species they avoid the 
thick virgin forests that clothe the mountain slopes of the larger islands. Here 
too we may record the peculiarity that the larger islands have some endemic 
species. These primitive forms are wholly lacking in the smaller islands. 
Probably this is to be attributed to the fact that the smaller islands (for 
instance Owmvussa or Sawabisi) are coral islands and hence of recent 
formation, or because they do not afford sufficient protection against the 
wind for inept fliers, so that an endemic species there died out as the islands 
sank and grew smaller. 
With respect to the systematic arrangement of the Snouters, the following 
considerations apply: 
As shown by the single species that still walks on all four legs (genus; 
Archirrhinos=Primitive Snouters), they must have been derived from 
primitive insectivores. In this connection the presence on Mairovili cf 
Limnogaloides is significant; for this animal, that unquestionably is to be 
reckoned among the Insectivora, has many features in common with 
Archirrhinos, so that it is not impossible that both species may be traced lack 
to a common ancestry. 
For the rest, the systematic classification of the Snouters follows 
predominantly the degree of development of the snout. The "family tree" in 
Fig. 2, shewing the systematic subdivisions of the order, was proposed by 
Bromeante de Burlas (1950). According to .1 he distinguishes as principal 
groups Uni-Snouters that walk on legs=Monorrhina pedestria (with 
Archirhinus haeckelii as the sole species), Uni-Snouters that walk on the 
snout =-Monorrhma nasestna (with Soft-nosed Snouters =Asclerorrhina 
and Proboscipedes=Sclerorrhna), and Multi-Snouters=Polyrrhina (with 
Short-nosed Snouters 

 
 
 
[Fig. 2] Proposed family tree of the individual genera of the  
Rhinogradentia (modified from Bromeante de Burlas, with the  
help of Stultén's data). I. Archirrnos 2. Nasolimaceus/ 3. Emunctafor; 
4. Dulctcauda; 5. Columnifax; 6. Khmotaema; 
7. Rhinonphoma; 8. Rhmostentor; 9. Rhinotalpa; 
10. Enterorrhmus/ li. Holorrhinus; 12. Remanonvus; 
13. Phyllohoppla/ 14. Hopsorrhmus; 15. Mercatorhinus; 
16. Otopteryx; 17. Orchidiopsts; 18. Ltliopsis; 19. Nasobema; 
20. Stella; 21. Tyrannonasus; 22. Eledonopsis; 23 Hexanthus; 
24. Cephialantus; 25. Mammontops;  26. Rhinochibpus. The  
thickness of the branches indicates the relative numbers of species  
of the several genera. Here Dulcicaudci and Dulcldauca that  
elsewhere are regarded as separate genera are placed  
together under Dulcicauda. 
=Brachyproata- and Long-nosed Snouters=Dolichoproata). Whereas most 
genera can be accommodated without difficulty in this scheme, it is still 
uncertain with regard to the Mole Snouters=Rhinotalpiformes whether they 
can be united in a single group with the Burrowing Snouters= 
Hypogeonasida,14 or whether they lave been derived from the Sclerorrhina 
(Proboscipedes) and possess a secondarily expanded nasarium. 

 
The 14 families contain altogether 189 species; there is still a possibility 
that one or another unknown species inhabits some isolated region of the 
archipelago. This may be anticipated the more because the just-mentioned 
group of the Rhinotalpiformes has yielded surprising discoveries of new 
types in recent years. Some systematic difficulties are to be expected also 
when the question is clarified for broadly distributed species as to when we 
are dealing with true races, i.e. genetically distinct populations, and when 
merely with local modifications. The example of Mammontops15 (Shaggy-
faced Snouters), that originally was native to Shou-wunoonda and later was 
kept by the Naval Administration in the 200 at the experimental station on 
Shay-nay-lukha (Schaielacha), demonstrated the extraordinary degree to 
which the phenotype could be modified. Genetic experiments have failed 
hitherto because of the difficulty of rearing the animals (cf. p. xix). Only 
Hopsorrhinus once again affords an exception. However, here experiment 
last shown that the different island forms are true--though closely related-
species. Only when Hopsorrhinus aureus (the Golden Snout Leaper) from 
Mitadina was erased with Hopsorrhinus macrohopsus16 (Pike's Snout 
Leaper) from Hy-dud-dye-fee were there a few of the offspring with a 
limited 
capacity 
for 
reproduction. 
Hopsorrhinus 
mercator17 
{=Mercatorrhinus galactophilus,18 Healey's Snout Leaper) too has proved 
favorable for genetic experimentation; with a gestation period of only 
eighteen days it usually bears eight young of a single sex and is very readily 
maintained on commercially obtainable condensed milk for babies (cf. p. 
37). 

 
3 nasulus Lat.==a little nose; ambulare Lat.=to walk.  
4 hopsos Grk.==a jump or leap (a word, found only h Chrysostomos 
of Massilia, that apparently is to be traced back to a West Germanic root); rhis, rhinos 
Grk.=a nose-. 
 
5Bromeante de Burlas designates as nasarium the entirety of the rhinal ambulacrum, 
irrespective of the origin of its components. Hence "nasarium" is a functional rather 
than a morphological concept. Since this term has become entrenched in the literature 
and its use avoids the necessity of lengthy descriptions, it -will be employed throughout 
the passages that follow, 
 
6skleros Grk.=hard. 
 
7 Limnogalotdes mairuvtitensis B. d. B. (the Mairuvilian swamp shrew) is a primitive 
insectivore. That it belongs to the true shrews has recently been contested. On this 
account too the earlier name Limnosorex malruvlliensis has come into disuse. The dental 
formula, the well-developed zygomatic arch, the unusually small forebrain, and the 
presence of intervertebral muscles along the entire length of the tail are regarded as 
especially primitive characters. 
 
8 dulcis Lat.==sweet: cauda Lat.==tail. 
 
9 columnar Lat.==pillar; fax Lat==-making. 
 
10 hypsiboas Grk.=Loud crier (Doric form of Attic hypsiboes). 
 
11 ura Grk.==tail; bombina Lat.==toad; submenus Lat.=submerged. 
 
12 tyrant-nose. 
 
13 six-winged insects. 
 
14hypo Grk.==under; gea Grk.==earth. 
 
15 mamont, Russ., borrowed from Palaeoslberian languages=mammoth. The spelling 
mammonta is intrinsically erroneous, but correct according to the rules of nomenclature, -
ops Grk.==face. Ii the figure (Fig. a) the spelling accepted in the years 1952-56 has been 
used. 
 
16makros Grk.==big; hopsos cf. Footnote 4. 
 
17 mercator Lat.==a merchant. 
 
18 galacto-philus Grk.==fond of milk, 
 

THE SNOUTERS  
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE SEVERAL GROUPS 
 
 
SUBORDER: Monorrhina (Uni-Snouters),  
SECTION: Pedestria (Foot-Walkers),  
TRIBE : Archirrhimformes (Primitive Snouter Types),  
FAMILY: Archirrhinidae (Primitive Snouters sens, lat.), 
 1 GENUS: Archirrhinos (Primitive Snouters proper),  
I Species. 
    Archirrhnos haeckelii (Haeckel's Primitive Snouter) is the only living 
representative of the Primitive Snouters.* It still walks on four legs like 
other mammals and still lacks a highly differentiated nasarium. Thus the 
snout is altogether unadapted to function as a locomotory organ and merely 
serves the animal as a support when it is devouring captured prey (cf. Plate 
II, animal in background) . The habits of the Primitive Snouter resemble in 
many respects those of a shrew; whereas in the daytime it sleeps in a simple 
nest under roots, at twilight it emerges in search of food. Then the mouse-
sized creature with its thick head and enormous snout may be seen running 
about and chasing the huge cockroaches, large numbers of which often are 
gathered around the banana-shaped berries that have fallen at the foot of the 
Wisoleka trunks. When a Snouter has caught an insect, it dives swiftly onto 
the snout, the margins of which spread quickly apart to form a broad 
supporting surface. Viscous nasal mucus provides firm hold of the ground. 
And now the greedy beast brings the food very rapidly to its mouth with all 
four feet. From afar the feasting creatures betray their presence with loud 
chattering squeaks. Once the meal is done they reverse from their headstand 
just as quickly, the margins of the snout are rolled inward again, and the 
chase is resumed. Little is known as yet about the reproduction of these 
animals, since they occur only in the inaccessible mountain forests of Hy-
dud-dye-fee. 
 

 
PLATE II 
 
*In contrast with all other Snouters, fossils are known of Archirrhinos or of closely 
related forms. On the island Owsa-dowsa (Ausa-dausa), that is tectonically exceptional in 
the archipelago there are Early Tertiary deposits that might perhaps be assigned in part to 
the Upper Cretaceous also. In excavations of these there have been found teeth of an 
archlrrhine that must have been the size of a house cat. 
 
 

SUBORDER: Monorrhina (Uni-Snouters), 
 SECTION: Nasestria (Snout-Walkers),  
TRIBE: Asclerorrhma (Soft-nosed Snouters),  
SUBTRIBE: Epigeonasida19 (Surface Snouters),  
FAMILY: Nasolimacidae20 (Snail-like Snouters),  
GENUS: Nasollmaceus (Slime Snouters),  
4 Species,* 
GENUS: Rhinolimaceus (Sugarmice),  
14 Species. 
 
* Here, as in subsequent sections, only a single especially typical 
representative is named and described. For detailed date reference is 
made to the work by Bromeante de Burlas (1951) and to the somewhat 
shorter monograph by J. D. Bitbrain (1950). 
The monorrhine Nasestria, with the tribe Asclerorrhina, are closely related 
to the archirrhines. Without exception they are animals in which the 
modifications of the nasal region made in connection with an altered mode 
of locomotion have remained within narrow limits. The significant features 
comprise enlargement of the snout and of those parts of the skull that serve 
to support it. However, the following structural peculiarities are to be 
regarded as new developments: multiple subdivision of the muscles of the 
snout, and of the nasal sinuses, whereby is formed a system of air chambers 
that intercommunicate but that can be closed off from one another by special 
muscles; further the marked development of the corpora spongiosa, that 
provide the snout with the turgor essential for its functions. In most species 
this can be varied at will. Besides, the muscles of those portions of the face 
adjacent to the snout are in part extended over the snout itself and 
differentiated extensively so that the snout (which according to Bitbrain is 
already a true nasarium) has gained considerable flexibility. A further 
characteristic is the great expansion of the secretory epithelium, the 
voluntarily regulated mucus production of which is important for the 
locomotion of the animals and for their fastening themselves securely in 
place. 

 
As already mentioned in the General Section, the appendages are reduced 
or modified. The hindlegs are vestigial (but are never lacking entirely) and 
are practically without function. The anterior appendages serve both for 
seizing the food and for grooming. 
Nasollmaceus palustris21 (the Fadelacha Slime Snouter) will be described 
as a typical representative of the nasolimacids. It is also most closely related 
to Archlrrhinos. This approximately mouse-sized creature, with a vivid 
golden-brown pelt, occurs on Mairuvili and there inhabits the muddy banks 
of the Fadelacha. It has a short but broad snout, the anteriorly directed 
ventral surface of which is modified as a creeping foot and functions much 
like the foot of Helix, with the difference however that the locomotory 
waves of contraction succeed one another more rapidly and are reversible. 
The speed of translation is greater than would be expected from the 
mechanism of movement. When the animal is 

 
 
PLATE III 

 
in flight or is chasing something it will cover some 30-40 ft/min. Under such 
circumstances it seems to glide with almost ghostly speed over the smooth 
damp mud; and the precise mode of progression is no longer to be followed 
by eye but can be recorded only by high-speed photography. An impressive 
motion picture of this has been made recently by F. Hyderitsch of the 
Scientific and Medical Cinematographic Company, Black Goats. Snails of 
an endemic genus (Ankelella) furnish the sole food of the Nasolimaceiis 
species; only Rhimolimaceus fodiens,22 known to the sailors of the marine 
base as "Lucky Pierre," digs out earthworms (that in part belong to the same 
genera as the endemic earthworms of New Zealand !). Before they lose their 
"baby teeth," the young feed mostly on larval insects (chironomids), 
inasmuch as they are not yet able to cope with the hard snail shells. 
Mating, during which the male occasionally utters sounds as though he 
were blowing his nose, takes place mostly at night. Then the male dashes in 
tight curves around the female, who also is rotating. From time to time she 
too emits a gentle "Hm-hm." The stage for these games of love is usually a 
large flat stone that is coated with a thin, slimy layer of diatoms and ever 
which the water occasionally purls besides. The affair as a whole has a 
grotesque resemblance to the dancing of a human couple on ice skates. The 
act of mating lasts but a few seconds, and then the partners forsake one an-
other, going very rapidly in opposite directions with a sound as of gentle 
nose-blowing. After gestation of twenty-six (?) months the female bears a 
single offspring that already resembles the parents in all details and that, 
without further dependence on them, undertakes a life of its own. 
The animals do not patrol a constant range; they lead strictly solitary lives 
and are tolerant of on; another. In general, as Snail-like Snouters that are 
adapted to muddy fresh-water beaches, they are confined to the bodies of 
water where they were born, since they can neither swim nor will willingly 
cross extended stretches of other than muddy or sandy substrates. Despite 
this, from time to time one comes upon immature specimens-whose ap-
pendages at this stage still are relatively more strongly developed-wandering 
slowly overland in search for other bodies of water. The animals can't 
withstand sea water-like many other Snouters-and on this account it is 
understandable that there are numerous specific variations on different 
islands. 

 
Closely related to Nasolimaceus -palustris is Nasolimaceus conchicauda23 
(the Armor-tailed slime Snouter). This animal that as its name implies has 
an armored tail, lives on the little volcanic islet Eeza-zofa (Isasofa), on the 
marsh of the same name. By bending its tail ventrad beneath it the animal 
can conceal itself in it as though in a beach chair. It is significant that Eeza-
zofs is inhabited by a hypsiboant that poses a threat to the Snouter. This is 
the flightless Hypsiboas fritschii (Fritsch's Megaphone Bird), an adept 
runner and swimmer the size of a thrush, that feeds upon practically all 
animals it cm catch and overcome. 
The remaining nasolimacids are well protected against enemies by the fact 
that at the base of the tail they have a gland that gives off a sweet secretion 
(whence the name "Sugarmouse"). The fluid attracts a very small Pseudo-
bombus species, that is extremely ready to sting for the most part the 
Sugarmice are attended by swarms of these insects and hence are 
protected.* 
*According to studies by Shirin Tafarruj the glandular secretion contains only small 
amounts of glucose but in addition to them a sweet substance the constitution of which 
has still not been fully determined; structurally this is close neither to dulcin nor to 
saccharin and in pure form is some 200-times more stimulating than saccharin. It is 
noteworthy that this material has approximately equal sweetness for people and for the 
insect. 
 
19 Ept Grk.=upon; gea cf. Footnote 14. 
20 limax Lat.==a snail. 
21 palustris Lat.=marsh-inhabiting. 
22 fodlens Lat.==burrowing. 
23 conche Grk.==a shell or shield; caitda Lafc cf. Footnote 8. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
FAMILY: Rhinocolumnidae (Pillar-nosed Snouters  
sens. lat.), 
 GENUS; Emunctator (Snufflers) 
I Species, 
GENUS: Dulcicauda (Honeytails),  
19 Species, 
GENUS: Dulcidauca24 (Sugartails), 
I Species, 
GENUS: Columnifax (Pillar-nosed Snouters proper) 
11 Species. 
The position of the rhinolimacids in classification is still disputed: whereas 
Spasman and Stultin as late as 1947 still maintained that they were to be 
placed in a special Section (Sedentaria) opposite the Peripatetica, today 
people mostly follow Bromeante de Burlas and include them in the subtribe 
Epigeonasida. The principal reason for this is the discovery of Emunctator 
sorbens (the Snuffling Sniffler), that occupies a place intermediate between 
the errant rhinolimacids and the sedentary rhinocolumnids. 
On the other hand it is not impossible that the rhinocolumnids are a 
polyphyletic group. Bouffon (1954) only recently has once again pointed out 
that then are radical 
 
 

 
PLATE IV 

 
differences between Emunctator and Dulciauda on the one hand and 
Columnifax on the other: 1. the innervation of the hyporrhinal musculature is 
fundamentally different in the two groups; and 2. the substances found in the 
column base (the pedestal on which Dulciauda and Columnifax stand) are in 
part very distinct. The prehensile threads of Emunctator and the supporting 
base of Dulciauda both contain the so-called "Emunctator-mucin," that has 
in it a pentose-containing mucoid sulphuric acid which is lacking in 
Columnifax. On the other hand, the Columnifax pedestal contains a 
pseudorhinok-eratin that does not occur in the other genera. 
The Snuffling Sniffler, Emunctator sorb en: (cf. Plate IV), is an animal 
about the size of a small rat. It lives on Hy-dud-dye-fee along the banks of 
slowly flowing brooks. There it clings to the stalks of plants that rise above 
the surface. Its manner of obtaining nourishment is most peculiar; from the 
elongate snout it blows long, fine prehensile threads that hang down into the 
water and to which little aquatic animals get stuck. The prey (mainly 
copepods and larval insects, but also isopods and amphi-pods, and less often 
small fish) is in part ingested choanally by pulling up the slimy threads, and 
is in part licked off the snout by the extremely long tongue. 
The sluggish, dull animals possess, as a means of defense, a long, very 
mobile tail with a poison gland at the tip; the toxin is secreted into a hollow 
claw (derived from modified hairs). Since Emunctator lives for the most part 
in small groups, the little creatures can protect one another by mutual tail-
wagging. 
As a typical representative of the genus Dulcicauda, D. gnseaurella (the 
Greyish-Golden Honeytail) will be described (here as in what follows the 
names assigned by Bromeante de Burlas will be used, and hence die name of 
 

 
PLATE V 

 
the original author "usually is not given). This species, together with D. 
aromaturus (the Perfumed Honey-tail) is found on Mitadina, D. griseaurella 
in the (astern and Z). aromaturus in the western half of the island. 
The odd thing about these animals is that they are true sedentary forms that 
stand fast on their snouts and normally never forsake the place of attachment 
that they have chosen when young. Thus they remain supported on the 
snout, that gives off a reddish-yellow secretion which in time elevates the 
creatures (head+torso ca. 3 in. long, tail about 4 in.) on a conspicuous, pillar-
shaped pedestal, known as the base or sella (cf. Plate V). Especially toward 
the tip, that bears a poison-claw, the tail has a wealth of dermal glands, that 
secrete a fruity, sticky product. Insects attracted to settle on the rail by the 
fragrance thus given out, stick to it and are picked off by the forepaws and 
brought to the mouth. At times, when the insects landing mostly are small 
they are not collected individually from the tail, but from time to time the 
animal pulls the tail through the mouth and licks them off. 
Dulcicauda lives in colonies on rubbly slopes near the shore. These 
colonies regularly are associated with a small land crab (Chestochele25 
marmorata) that feeds on scraps from the Snouters' meals and carries away 
their droppings. 
At mating time the males descend from their pedestals and approach the 
females, slipping and sliding along with their forelegs in advance; once 
copulation his been accomplished they return to their pedestals. They are en-
abled to free themselves from the base of their column through a partial 
dissolution of its uppermost layers by means of enzymes given out by 
Pusdiva's glands of the discus nasalis (the same is true in regard to the 
dissolution of the fastening mucus in Archirrhinos). 

 
The genus Columnlfax is distinguished in general by a reduction in length 
of the prehensile tail. On this account the animals are unable to catch their 
own prey. Only young specimens, not yet three months old, still have a 
relatively long, secretory tail and still nourish themselves in the same way as 
Dulcicauda or Dulcidauca (Dulcldauca is characterized by loss of the 
posterior appendages). With older individuals there is established a most 
noteworthy symbiosis with a hopsorrhinid: each of the eleven Columnlfax 
species is associated with one of the eleven subspecies of Hopsorrhinos 
mercator (Healey's Snout Leaper). The two partners are rigidly dependent 
on one another, and see to each others' nourishment: in the littoral zone 
where the two live the predominant booty of Hopsorrhinus mercator is small 
hermit crabs which, however, it is unable to ingest because of its oral 
modifications (cf. p. 37). Hence it turns them over to the Pillar Snouter after 
it has suppressed the latter’s defense reactions by means of definite sounds 
and gestures. (Columnifax defends itself by squirting out a secretion from 
anal stink glands, and with its very mobile snout is able to twist some 180° 
about the long axis). Thereupon Columnlfax permits the hopsorrhinid to 
suckle in connection with the described symbiosis, milk is produced by 
individuals of both sexes, when over three months old, without reference to 
any sexual function (cf. Plate VII). 
 
24Dulcidauca: an anagram of 'Dulcicauda, cf. Footnote 8. 
   25 chestón Grk.==dung (In Euphémios Thereutea of Alexandria); 
chele Grk.==a deft claw, crab's pincers. 
 

 
SUBTRIBE: Hypogeonasida (Mud Snouters), 
 FAMILY: Rhinosiphonidae (Siphon Snouters Sens. Lat.),  
GENUS: Rhinotaema (Ribbon Snouters), 
2 Species 
GENUS: Rhinosiphoma (Siphon Snouters Proper), 
3 Species 
FAMILY: Rhinostentoridae (Trumpet Snouters Sens. Lat.), 
GENUS: Rhinostentor (Trumpet Snouters Proper),  
3 Species 
The Hypogeonasida too are in themselves a relatively isolated group. They 
are all small unimpressve animals with originally a subterranean way of life 
that is most typically developed in the genus Rhinotaema. As a characteristic 
representative Rhinotaema asymmetrica (the Snorkeling Ribbon Snouter) 
will next be described. 
 
[Fig. 3] Rhinotaema asymmetrica. (Orig.) 
 
This animal lives in the mud of a few small lakes as in the supralittoral 
regions of a few gently flowing streams. There it feeds principally upon 
oligociaetes and larval insects, that it digs out and gulps down with its long, 
proboscis-like mouth. In doing this, Rhinotaema daily digs itself forward 
one or two yards it a depth of about a foot. Respiration is made possille by 
the long nose, that is extended siphon-like as much as 16 in.- i.e. up to some 
four times the length of the animal's head and body (cf. Fig. 3). The 
asymmetry of the snout -the left nostril with its terminal rosette serves for in-
halation and the right for exhaling-affords a perfect supply of air, despite the 
length of the air tubes. 

 
Nothing is known regarding mating and reproduction. Pregnant females 
and very small young are to be found all year long. 
Beilig was able to extract from isolated Rhinotaema snouts a mucin that is 
identical with that of Emunctator. Morphologically too much can be 
advanced ii favor of the view that the hypogeonasids derive from 
Emunctator-like ancestors (cf. Bromeante de Burlas 1952 as well as Jerker 
and Celiazzini 1953). 
The genus Rhinosiphonia differs from Rhinotaema primarily in the finer 
construction of the snout but does not offer any further distinctions from 
Rhinotiema that require comment here. Instead we may discuss here one 
Rhinotaenia species that is unique in its peculiar parasitic habits. 
Rhinotaenia tridacnae (the Shell-inhabiting Ribbon Snouter; cf. Fig. 4) is 
found in the tidal zone throughout the archipelago. The young animals and 
the nales live in mud that is deposited in still portions of the lagoons or that 
collects in little clefts between the blocks of coral. Even more than with the 
rest of the Rhinogradentia 
 
 
 
[Fig. 4] Rhinotaenia tridacnae, shown at the age of sexual maturity. 
Note the reduction of the paired extremities as well as the anal 
and urogenital orifices. The head is remarkable for its small size, 
for the nasal orifice and oral proboscis, and for the importance of 
the tear ducts situated in front of the regressive eyes. (Orig.) 

 
and especially with the hypogeonasids, homiothermy is only very 
incompletely developed with Rhinittaenia tridacnae. Connected with this is 
the fact that R tridacnae will for a considerable time withstand a more or 
less complete interruption of oxidative metabolism Of course the creatures 
live in the upper tidal zone, tie mud of which is inundated for only from a 
quarter- to half-an-hour at a time. Yet these animals can withiand being cut 
off from atmospheric air for as much as three hours. They then fall into a 
kind of fit and-bareskinned as they are-turn blue over the whole body, to 
regain a yellowish flesh color as soon as they inhale air once more. 
 
Now at high tide the mature R. tridacnae females enter the open shells of 
the genus Tridacia (Giant Mussels) and burrow very swiftly down between 
the shell and the mantle. There they soon cause a swelling of the mantle 
about as large as a fist or a child's head, only a part of which, however, 
delaminates mother-of-pearl; at low tide this growth is filled with air by the 
mussel and projects like a hernia into the gill space. With its suctorial 
proboscis the parasite takes in from the host both hemolymph and a part of 
the sexual products. Mating with the Rhinotaenia males takes place at flood 
tide at night. Apparently the young also are born at flood tide at night. 
The rhinostentorids are closely related to Rhinotaenia, but have become 
adapted to a submerged life and hence have undergone some modifications* 
that arc expressed most typically in Rhinostentor submersus26 (the Cladoc-
eran-like Trumpet Snouter). 
Rhinostentor submersus lives in various crater lakes and brackish lagoons 
in the archipelago, and feeds there on plankton, to wit principally on the 
leaf-footed crab, Branchipusiops lacustris, that for the most part occurs here 
in numbers that only occasionally are reduced by the ubiquitous Cladocera 
or Rotatoria. Here Rhinostentor hangs, at a depth of 8-20 in., from a nisal 
siphon that is constructed in general like that of Rhinotaenia but that, in 
correlation with an aquatic habit, exhibits an expansion of the nasal rosette. 
The rostte grows funnel-like around the outgoing nasal passage while the 
afferent nasal passage is raised above it to form a small secondary rosette. 
The funnel-shaped or trumpet-shaped 
*Here there is no attempt at an explanation in the sense of Boker, 
but merely a record of the observations.  
 
 
 
 

 
[Fig. 5] Rhinostentor submersus. (Orig.) 
nasal rosette (cf. Fig. 5) is fringed with water-repellent hairs and at the 
margins (modified wax glands) gives off a water-repellent, wax-like coating, 
so that the animal depends from this trumpet as from a buoy. Along the sides 
of the otherwise naked body, there is a row of stiff, thick bristles that 
ventrally form a kind of groove within which the anterior appendages, 
likew.se covered with combs of stiff bristles, carry out rowirg motions. The 
whole arrangement works like the filtering apparatus of a Daphina (=water 
flea), and with its oral proboscis the Rhinostentor removes from this 
filtration device the planktonic organisms that are wafted in and caught 
there. 
In Rhinostentor spumonasus (the Frothing Trumpet Snouter) the same 
relationships prevail, with the exception that the creature hangs not from its 
nasal trumpet but instead from a bubbly mass floated of from the latter; into 
this mass the Snouter withdraws for sleeping, for mating, and at signs of  
danger. 
A visitor to the archipelago is provided vith a very impressive experience 
by the foam floats of Rhinostentor foetidus (the Stinking Trumpet Snouter; 
(Fig. 6), not only because they often float about in great masses on the most 
varied bodies of fresh water but because at times their unbearable odor ruins 
a sojourn at many of these otherwise so idyllic spots. R. foetidus lives alto- 

 
 
[Fig. 6] Rhinostentor foetidus. (Orig.) 
gether within these rafts that it has made. Its ventral collecting apparatus is 
reduced to a pair of small rakes with which the creature, creeping in regular 
paths about its raft and pulling itself along by the somewhat reduced nasal 
trumpet, gathers its food. This food consists of larval fungus gnats of the 
genus Spumalyofhilus, that browse on the mycelia that ramify throughout the 
floating mucus. The fungus, that has not been positively identified although 
it is one of the Eumycetis, is nourished by the dying blue-green algae that 
swam throughout the floating mucus. Thus there is a symbiotic system: 
Rhinostentor, via the nutrients contained in the mucus and excreted in the 
urine and feces, supplies the algae with a suitable substrate, that is enclosed 
by the fungal strands. The algae assimilate this food and are then partly 
sucked dry or metabolized by the fungus.* The fungus is eaten by the larval 
fungus gnats. A part of these larvae furnish the rhinostentorian's food. 
It is of interest that the mucoid rafts of Rhinostentor spumonasus and Rh. 
foetidus are inhabited by a whole series of other animals; Fritsch's 
Megaphone Bird regularly makes use of them as a nesting site. The six-
winged damselfly, Hexapteryx handlirschii deposits its eggs on. them; and 
the larvae that hatch eat the larval fungus gnats. A whole series of 
Springtails (Colembola), among many other creatures, lives in the oxygen-
rich air bubbles on the upper surface of the floats. 
*Whether this constitutes a modified lichenaceous symliosis is uncertain. 
 
26 cf. Footnote 7. 
 
 
 
 

 
SUBTRIBE: Georrhinidae (Burrowing Snouters), 
FAMILY: Rhinotalpidae (Mole-Like Snouters), 
GENUS: Rhinotalpa (Mole Snouters), 
4 Species, 
GENUS: Enterorrhinus (Gut Snouters), 
5 Species, 
FAMILY:Holorrhinidae (Allsnouters), 
GENUS: Holorrhinus (Wholesnouters), 
18 Species, 
GENUS: Remanonasus27 (Dwarf Snouters), 
1 Species 
Although the Burrowing Snouters have a thoroughly primitive-looking 
nasarium, that doubtless has been derived from that of the ancestral 
Snouters, nevertheless they are remarkable in that in extreme cases the 
snout predominates heavily over the rest of the entire body. In this respect-
quite apart from the concomitant reduction of their whole structural 
organization-they are unique, not only among Snouters but among all verte-
brates. 
Relationships closest to those that originally prevailed are shown by the 
genus Rhinotalpa (Mole Snouters); and from these we choose as a typical 
representative 
 
                                               

                       
 
[Fig. 7] Rhinotalpa phallonasus. (Orig.) 
Rhinotalpa phallonasus, the Glansnosed Mole Snouter, which is native to 
Mairuvili (cf. Fig. 7). This is a creature the size of a mouse and has more or 
less the habits of a mole; i.e. it lives in passageways it has dug in the humid 
ground and feeds on soil insects and earthworms. Both fore- and hind-
appendages are greatly reduced. The autopodium is very well preserved and 
together with the large claws serves both as a pushing device and as an 
anchor in the tunnel. The; labor of digging, however, is carried out by the 
snout, that is equipped with large erectile organs and into which spacious air 
sacs (derived from the nasal sinuses) are incorporated; these last also 
contribute to the expansion of the snout. Not only around the thickest portion 
of the snout but also around the occiput and vertral to the lower jaws are 
wreaths of strong, posterioriy directed bristles; both wreaths can be extended 
and are concerned in locomotion, that occurs in the following phases: 
    l. the wreath of bristles on the throat is spread out, as are the daws of the 
appendages;  
   2. the snout is inflated by taking air in through the mouth and 
simultaneously closing the glottis (contributory is the ability to close off the 
nares); 
    3. the nasal wreath is extended; the air is blown out of the snout and the 
animal pilled ahead by contraction of M. retractor nasarii, after which 
Phase-l may be repeated.  
   The nasal erectile organs come into action only in very hard ground and 
ther have the special function of stiffening and expanding tie anterior end of 
the snout. But in general the animal does as little digging as possible and 
uses passageways that are already at hand; as a result of the way in which 
they were excavated they are very firm-walled. Along them the animal 
glides with remarkable speed, in tie process gathering up, with a rake formed 
by the chaetae sub-mentales,28 the earthworms found on the way; it then 
removes the worms from the rake with the oral proboscis. The papillae 
basonasales play an important part in the perception of the prey. Their 
innervation, apart from that from the sensory facial nerves, comes also from 
those nerves that in related forms supply Jacobson's organ, and hence the 
papillae are organs both of the chemical and of the contact-olfactory sense. 

 
At the posterior end, Rhinotalpa possesses above the tail a gland that 
serves for defense; this is especially important to the little creature because it 
is not able to turn around and because its tunnels frequently are inhabited by 
a small, aggressive species of land crab (Chelygnathomachus29 altevogtii). 
Between the rudimentary hindlegs are also the teats; the young ere pushed 
back to them briefly after birth. In this particulir, Rhinotalpus displays signs 
of primitiveness, inasmuch as other monorrhines no longer suckle their 
young. 
Even in Rhinotalpa there is already indicate! a structural peculiarity that 
has been realized to a far greater extent in other representatives of the 
geonhinids: a tendency for filling the body cavity with connective tissue. In 
Rhinotalpa this holds only for the pleural regions, so that here the lungs are 
connected firmly wi'h the pleural wall. In Rhinotalpa phallonasus this is less 
the case than in the smaller, closely related R. angustinasus (the Narrow-
nosed Mole Snouter), in which are to be found yet other structural features 
that are unknovn elsewhere among mammals and that are connected with the 
small absolute size of the creatures (cf. Fig. 8). Among these the following 
peculiarities should be stressed: reduction of the relative length of the 
digestive tract; decrease in pulmonary capacity; disappearance of the nares; 
lack of hair; expansion of the ciliated epithelium, that in Rh. phallonasus 
clothes only the larger sinuses, so that here it reaches the basal external 
region of the snout; simplification of the brain; reduction of the eyes; and 
finally, as the most striking physiological characteristic, complete loss of 
homoiothermy. Naturally all these structural and functional peculiarities are 
connected closely with the animal's habits; it does not live in solid ground, 
but in cavities in beds of coarse gravel. Therein it goes back and forth much 
like Rh. phallonasus, but with the difference that, in correlation with its 
longish build it is able also to undulate to some extent. Significantly too, the 
creature does not seek out only clefts that contain air but also those that are 
filled with ground water. In them it takes water into the lungs, that are 
reduced to simple sacs. The sinuses serve as additional respiratory organs. 
During rapid progression they too are filled rhythmically with water. When 
the animal is at rest, surface respiration through the richly glandular 
epidermis appears to suffice. 

 
Developments already indicated in the Rhinotalpa are much more fully 
emphasized in Enterorrhinus, the Gut Snouter. Representatives of this genus 
grow to a maximal length of 0.7 inches and display extraordinarily extensive 
reduction: of the extremities only the claws are retained, and their 
musculature can no longer be homologized with definite limb muscles. The 
gut is linear. Lungs are lacking. The heart is a simple circulatory tube, and 
its condition corresponds to that displayed elsewhere by young mammalian 
embryos. The entire body surface is ciliated. The brain completely lack; 
subdivisions, at least outwardly. Of the skeleton, only a weakly developed 
notochord can be distinguished; this extends dorsal to the gut and forward 
beneath the brail into the snout. As to the sexual organs nothing is known. 
The kidneys are protonephridia, with a single ciliated funnel on each side. 
This funnel sticks out into an eidothelial sack that lies at the base of the 
snout within the body cavity, which is filled with connective tissue. A 
genito-urinary sinus no longer is present. 
The genus is represented by a single species on each of the five big islands 
of the archipelago. There the animals live on the gravelly beaches of the 
deltas of small streams in a restricted region that is United narrowly by the 
salt content of the ground water (ca. o.6%-1.4%). Within such areas one 
often cones upon isolated snouts and upon specimens that, in relation to their 
body size, have either an extraordinarily large or exceptionally small snout, 
so that one is led to suspect that multiplication takes place by fission at the 
base of the snout. 
Were it not that the Mole-like Snouters were already known and the 
relationship between Rhinotalpa and Enterorrhinus beyond question, never 
would one lave suspected that the animals now grouped together in the 
family Holorrhinidae (Allsnouters) are Snouters. For these are tiny 
organisms, a few millimeters in size, whose structure has become so 
"primitive" that the thought of classifying them among the chordates would 
never have occurred. 

 
In the first holorrhine genus, Holorrhinus (Whole-snouters), chordate 
structure has been retained in the following particulars; a slender notochord 
extends the whole length of the snout and through the entire, greatly reduced 
trunk. Present is a closed though reduced circulatory system that, however, 
bears early embryonic traits. Of the kidneys there is still on each side the 
ciliated funnel mentioned above; it opens into an endothelial ampulla. So far 
as sexual organs have been found-as yet only in the male-they lie not far 
from the rear of the animal, in a region when a band of well-differentiated 
muscle indicates the former position of the posterior limbs, that otherwise an 
no longer demonstrable. The musculature is inserted on bluntly protruding 
body angles, that play some part in digging activity. On the other hand, a 
whole series of structural features give the organisms a stamp divergent from 
that of the chordates: the lengthy nasal sinuses participate in digestion, in 
addition to the short, straight gut. They function as appendices or in a 
manner similar to that of the endodermal caeca of many invertebrates, and 
are alternately filled with or emptied of food. The somatic muscles no longer 
are striated, but smooth The brain is markedly reduced, and during early 
developmental stages the nerve tube becomes split into two strands of tissue 
from which there develop, adjacent to the notochord, two chains of ganglia 
that are connected by cross-commissures. The body cavity is filled with 
connective tissue. The outer surface, as is already the case in Enterorrhius is 
covered with a ciliated epithelium, within which are scattered mucous cells 
that likewise have originated from the nasal passages. Additionially it is 
noteworthy that in the endothelial spaces of the adrenals rows of ciliated 
cells bear greatly elongated cilia, producing an effect like that of flame cells. 
The 18 species of the genus Holorrhinus are distributed over the entire 
archipelago, living there partly in the sands of the flood plains and partly in 
the brackish waters of the coastal beaches. Locomotion normally is caudad. 
Two species (Holorrhinus variegatus=the Variable Wholesnouter and H. 
rhinenterus=Pinnochio's Wholesnouter) live in streams; frequently they 
have been reared successfully from apparently freshly deposited young, 
found as neurulae in an epithelial bladder, and this has provided interesting 
information about the structure of these animals. Thus, in the course of this 
work it has been shown that the eyes (these animals are able to see) arise as 
evaginations of the sac-like brain, but then persist as simple vesicular eyes 
while the brain is secondarily losing its central cavity and is becoming a 
broad, buckle-shaped structure the main ganglionic masses of which are 
disposed to right and left of the esophagus. 

 
Up till now only a singe species of the gems Remanonasus30 has been 
found, from the river sands of the Wisi-Wisi, a stream on Mainivili island. 
This is a worm-like creature that reaches a maximal length of 2 mm. What 
distinguishes 
Remanonasus 
menorrhinus,31 
the 
Turbellarian-like 
Dwarfsnouter, from the preceding genus, is above all the loss of the anus and 
of the 
 
 
 
 
[Fig. 8] The anatomical series; Rhinotalpa phallomsus- Rhinotalpa 
angustinasus-Enterorrhmus dubius-Hdorrhinus ammophilus-Remanonasus 
menorrhinus. The numbers show the over-all length in mm. Of the internal 
organs only the digestive tract is outlined. (After Mayer-Meier IS49) 
system of blood vessels. Likewise there is no longer a trace of a notochord 
to be found. Unfortunately only males of these animals have been 
discovered up to the present. The kidneys no longer have any demonstrable 
ciliated funnel-like formation, but appear :o be constructed like 
protonephridia, with a single huge cilia-bearing flame cell on each side. 
Hence it is not surprising that various scientists have concluded that these 
animals are not to be counted among the Rhinogradentia at all. Miiller-
Girmadingm (1948) described them as Dendrocoelopsis minutissima and 

 
sought to classify them as Tridadida; however, Mayer-Meier (1949) showed 
with the help of careful histological investigations that particularly the irucus 
cells could not be looked on as typically tricladid. Nevertheless he was 
forced to grant that certain structural characteristics bore such great 
similarity to those of the tricladid Turbellaria that at least it was not 
altogether impossible that the tricladids had been derived from 
Remanonasus-like forms. Thus, the seemingly cephalic position of the 
testicles in the tricladids- that initially strikes any unbiased observer as odd-
is comprehensible without difficulty when one recalls that the holorrhinids 
crawl backwards and that hence their caudal pole has become 
physiologically the anterior one. Furthermore, the form of the digestive tract 
first becomes completely understandable when-as illustrated by the 
transitional forms of the morphological series (cf. Fig. 8)-one derives it from 
the gut+nasal sinuses of the georrhinids. Of course the entire question can 
only be settled finally after animals with mature female sexual apparatus 
have been found. That this apparatus is sc complex in the tricladids and in 
the turbellarians generally does of course suggest their derivation from more 
highly differentiated animals. Remane (1954) too emphasizes this, but would 
prefer to derive the Turbellaria from annelids. Stultén (1955) more recently 
is inclined to the opinion that the Rhabdocoela might have descended from 
annelids, but that the Tridadida (and the Polycladtda, that in any case are to 
be derived from the latter) possessed rhinogradentiate ancestors.31a 
   The tribe of the sclerorrhines (the Proboscipedes) constitutes a series of the 
strangest and rrost beautiful species of the Rhinogradentia. Common tc them 
is the fact that the nasarium32 has become a leading organ, a nasal leg, with 
which the animal can make mighty jumps; however, in view of the 
gravitational relationships (cf. Plate V), these are directed backward. 
The most primitive conditions are found among the Arboreal Snout 
Leapers, the perihopsids,33 whose appendages still bear a certain 
resemblance to those of the Archirrhiniformes. However, locomotorily to be 
regarded as the most typical are the Hopsorrhinidae, the Snout Leapers sens. 
strict,, in which the hind legs have disappeared except for slight remnants of 
the femur and tibia, and whose snout serves as the sole organ of progression. 
Finally, in the Orchidiopsidae (Orchidsnouter-like Snouters) the snout has 
become softened secondarily, in correlation with their more sessile habits. 

 
 
27 remanere Lafc==to remain; nasus cf. Footnote i. 3   
28 An attempt has been made to trace the chaetae suimmtales back to the collecting 
basket of the rhinostentorids, and thus tc derive the georrhinids from the hypogeonasids 
(Naquedai 1948). However, everything else in the organization of the two subtribes 
speaks against this conception. 
29 chele cf. Footnote 25; gnathos Grlc.=denririon; maMmenos or -mdchos Grfc.==a 
warrior. 
 
30 cf. Footnote 27. 
31menein Grk.=to remain; rhis cf. Footnote 4. 
31a For the sake of objectivity, it should be noted that Griss6, in his foreword to 
Anafomie et biologic de$Rhmo grades (Masson 8 Cie, Paris 1962), contests that 
Remanonasus is a snouter. He prefers to tske it as an endopsammic flatworm rather than 
a degraded Rhmograde. 
 
32 cf. Footnote 5. 
 
33 peri Grk.==around; Jwfioi cf. Footnote 4. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SUBTRIBE: Hopsorrhinida (Snout Leapers sens. lat.),  
FAMILY: Amphihopsidae (Two-way Snout Leapers or Arboreal Snout 
Leapers); 
GENUS; Phyllohopla (Leaf Leapers),  
2 Species, 
FAMILY; Hopsorrhinidae (Snout Leapers sens. strict.),  
GENUS; Hopsorrhinus (Toothed Snout Leapers), 
14 Species, 
GENUS: Mercatorrhinus (Suctorial Snout leapers), 
11 Species, 
GENUS; Otopteryx (Earwings),  
1 Species, 
FAMILY: Orchidiopsidae (Orchidsnouter-like Snouters), 
GENUS; Orchidiopsis (Orchidsnouters), 
5 Species, 
GENUS: Llliopsis (Lilysnouters),  
3 Species. 
The Two-way Snout Leapers are creatures of the virgin forest and live in 
the crowns of the trees, where they leap nimbly from branch to branch or 
creep at leisure along the twigs. They are compactly built, and like most 
Rhinogradentia are insectivores abort the size of a mouse. 
Whereas their torso and limbs have retained many archirrhiniform features, 
immediately conspicuous on the large head with its great eyes is the jointed 
smut, which ends distally in a dorsally located sole-plate ani which is moved 
by powerful facial muscles and by a s'rong protractor, M. extensor nasipodii 
longns (==M. Imgissimus nasarii). According to Stultén, M. extensor 
nasipodii longus has been derived from the anteriorly lengthened M. 
longissimus dorsi or M. I. tfwracis, as it indicated by its innervation via 
thoracic spinal nerves (cf. also Fig. 11). Just as oddly shaped as the snout B 
the tail; it too is exceptionally muscular and powerful and bears a terminal 
sole-plate, the strong bristles of which permit the tail to be braced firmly 
against roughened areas of the substrate (Fig. 9). In addition to the 
metameric 

 
[Fig. 9] Phyllohopla bambola. (Orig.) 
 
caudal muscles, that as a primary character have always been retained 
among the Rhinogradentia- a primitive feature to which Tnifagura (1948) 
and Izecia (1949) have already drawn attention-it is above all M. iliocaudalis 
that acts as an extensor of the tail. Now, by means of the snout and the tail 
the periopsids are able to leap with improbable celerity back and forth 
through the thicket of vines, now frontwards, now backwards, and then 
sidewise, so that they are very hard to catch. This agility of theirs is at first 
hard to comprehend, since they are practically without enemies. However, 
they live together in small groups, within which there IS a perpetual rushing 
to and fro, a chasing and a fleeing, that no doubt has to do with contests over 
their pecking order, the sociological significance of which has not yet been 
fully explained. In addition, their skill is of course useful to the animals also 
in their gathering of nourishment; 
for they feed almost exclusively on flying insects, that are snatched in the 
course of a leap. 
The Hopsorrhinidae, in contrast with the preceding group of Snouters, live 
on the ground. As already mentioned, their hindlimbs are vestigial and no 
bnger visible externally. The snout is even further diferentiated than in the 
Perihopsidae, in that it has undergone a division into three segments; next to 
the head (cf. Fig. 10) is the nasur, which is connected by a joint with the 
nasibia, to which the rhinanges finally are autonasally attached. Extension 
of the nasur and the nasibia is by means of two separate bellies of M. 
extensor nasipodii, while the rhinanges are moved by the facial nusculature 
and M. flexores longi and breves of the tasipodium (that is by those both of 
the zygonasium. and the autonasium), which also are derived from the facial 
musculature. 

 
As a result of ankylosis of the vertebrae and because of ventral stiffening 
provided by the sternum and the processus styliformis34 of the pubis, the 
torso is firmly encapsulated. The forelimbs are mobile grasping organs. The 
tail no longer subserves progression but is used for securing the food, that 
consists primarily of amphipods, isopods, and little hermit crabs from the 
high tide level. In consequence, the supporting caudal sole-plate has been 
modified to constitute a par of grasping tongs, the claws of which have been 
formed from modified or fused hairs and in cross-section present a 
histological picture resembling that of rhinoceros horn tissue. With this tail 
the Snout Leapers are most adept at pulling their prey out of the narrowest 
clefts and hiding places. Their leaps, that at ordinary speeds of progression 
cover about one-and-a-half body lengths but when fleeing or pursuing a 
mate or rival nay be ten times as great, regularly are rearward (cf. Plate VI). 
The jump can be guided to some extent by sight movements of the huge 
ears. 
The Snout Leapers belong to the most frequently encountered 
Rhinogradentia. Everywhere on the shore they inhabit the stony coral 
patches, the sands of the flood plains, or the volcanic or sedimentary gravel 
beds. It seems that the stronger males maintain small harems and drive off 
weaker males. However, the differences between the sexes are so slight that 
field observation has not yet permitted analysis of details of behavior within 
the packs. 
Stultén placed the first two genera of the Hopsorrhinidae under the single 
genus Hopsorrhinus, However, more recently Bromeante de Burlas has 
reached the conclusion that the genus Mercatorrhinus36 definitely deserves 
separation; whereas the Hopsorrhinus species all feed in the manner 
described above and in this connection possess the original type of dentition 
(whence also the common name "Toothed Snout Leapers"), all 
Mercatorrhinus species no longer are able to ingest solid food and are fully 
dependent on the symbiotic relationship described above (p. 15) with the 
Pillar-nosed Snouters of the genus Columnifax. This is apparent not only in 
the oral formation-absence of teeth, reduction of M. masseter and M. 
temporalis-but also in the vestigial nature of the forelimbs. Together with 
these reductions the animals, in correlation with their symbiosis, have 
acquired some capacities that are lacking in the idiotrophic forms. Thus, 
they are able to squat on the tail, which they coil beneath them, and co so 
regularly whenever, after having handed over their prey, they sit down next 
to a Colummfax to await their nourishment. (For the collator [Steiner] of 
these notes, however, De Burlas' arguments do not carry full conviction. 
Therefore, following Stümpke’s own example, the question of the genus 
Mercatorrhinus is left open.) 

 
That all the Suctorial Snout Leapers can be cultured readily was already 
noted at the beginning (p.xxiv), and depends on the ease with which 
artificial substitute food can be obtained: inasmuch as Colummfax milk is 
relatively rich in sugar and low in fat content and thus greatly resembles 
human milk, the animals can without difficulty be fed on condensed milk 
used for tables. Yet this is carried out successfully only with the help of an 
 
 
 
Plate VI 
 
artifice that was discovered by exhaustive studies of the behavior of the 
animals. 

 
When. such a mercatorrhine is hungry, its drive to search for food is 
activated. The animal wanders about and sticks its tail into clefts and cracks 
in order to seize the aforementioned crabs. If it has taken prey, it then 
cautiously approaches a Pillar-nosed Snouter, and with characteristic leaps 
calls itself to the latter's attention. Not until a nearby Columnifax utters a 
grunt does the mercatorrhine come closer, and in fact approaches from the 
ventral side of the Columnifax. For its part, the latter keeps twisting 
constantly about its long axis at the approach of any animal whatever, 
always ready to squirt the secretion of its stink glands toward the potential 
attacker. But now Mercatorrhinus comes nearer in such a way that it makes 
repeated sidewise leaps to left and right, so that Columnifax can see it 
clearly. At intervals too it stands on its snout and with the tail holds aloft the 
prey, which it waves vigorously and vibrantly from side to side. Only when 
Columnifax ceases its lengthwise writhing and lets a long, guttural snuffling 
be heird, does Mercatorrhinus close in from the ventral aspect and hand 
over its medium of barter, its prey. Thereupon Columnifax examines this, to 
see that it is thoroughly fresh. If it is not, the Pillar-nosed Snouter at once 
assumes a defensive stance and squirts stinking secretion all over the bearer, 
unless the latter has meanwhile leaped hastily away to a safe distance. Only 
when the "goods" are beyond reproach does Columnifax offer its breast to 
Mercatorrhinus, that then gives a little hop onto its coiled-up tail and begins 
to suck. 

 
Plate VII 
 

Now, with captured mercatorrhines it became apparent that they could not 
be maintained without Columnifax. On the other hand, adequate prey was to 
be gathered only with difficulty. But since incidental observations had 
shown that Mercatorrhinus did well on the artificial diet mentioned, forced 
feeding was then tried. However, this is tedious and often the way active 
animals were injured fatally in the process. Only meticulous observation of 
the rigidly determined "bargaining rite" provided the solution: it was noted 
that Mercator-rhimis, even if it had found no food suitable for Colummfax, 
nevertheless would occasionally still attempt to suckle. The above-
mentioned "horrified" defense reaction of Colummfax fails to occur when 
Cohmnifax is still sated from previous meals and also has an excess supply 
of milk, the reduction of which has a pleasurable aura. Under such 
circumstances the "deceitful" Mercatorrhinus, that for instance has 
proffered merely an empty snail shell with no Pagurus inside, may be given 
milk. On the other hand, Mercatorrhinus will not drink without having first 
carried, out the entire ritual of exchange. It has to have captured "prey" and 
have presented this, after having made the dancing approach outlined above, 
before it will drink. Beyond this, the following features on the part of 
Columnifae are essential: the shape of a wedge, thicker at the top; yellow 
color; eye spots in the lower third; hissing sound; and proper udder form. 
Besides it must take the "prey" from the donor. One of Bitbrain's colleagues 
succeeded in making a relatively simple electronically operated device that 
met the requirements indicated. At maximal speed of operation it is able to 
suckle 80 Mercatorrhinus specimens an hour. Empty snail shells are used as 
"prey"; after they have been accepted by the Columnifax model they 
gravitate beneath the false bottom of the cage into cracks from which they 
can igain be fetched by Mercatorrhinus. 

 
 
The peculiar MercatorrMmis-fleas, that did great damage to the 
experiments in the beginning, can be controlled effectively by means of 
sticky paper on the underside of the upper layer of the double-bottomed cage 
(DDT and other insecticides are too toxic to Mercatorrhinus). 
The Earwing, Otopteryx volltans B. d B. (=Hopsorrhmus viridiauratus36 
STU.), the only representative of its genus, is by "its structure readily to be 
recognized as a modified hopsorrhine (Plate VIII). Actually this animal is 
distinguished from its cousins only by the enormous size of the ears and the 
differentiation and strengthening, in correlation with its flight ability, of the 
musculature of the external ear. The one other difference, its vestigial tail, is 
a structural detail of little import. In all other respects, Otopteryx is a typical 
hopsorrhine, so that Stultén even hesitated to split it off fiom the other 
genera. However, in addition to what has been said, the following points are 
to be cited in favor of establishing a separate genus: the nasarium is 
extremely slender and gracefully constructed. The muscles that move the 
rhinanges are in part reduced, so that the animal is not able to run over 
uneven ground with the agllity of the hopsorrhines. On the other hand, the 
abductors of the rhinanges are especially powerful; they seive to expand the 
autonasium, that functions as a steering tail. On the head there should be 
mentioned further the development of special bony ridges-the seats of 
attachment of the aural musculature-as well as the os alae auris, which 
however is not a bone but a calcined fibrous cartilage; and in addition the 
formation of air-filled lateral nasal sinuses beneath and within the bony 
ridges mentioned. In common with the hopsorrhines, Otopteryx displays 
 

 
PLATE VIII 
 
inversion of the course of the hairs over large parts of the surface of the 
rump. 
In Otopteryx the iridescence of the pelt, that gives other representatives of 
the sclerorrhines tie brilliance of metallic surfaces or of jewels, attains its 
highest expression, so that the animals can be compared only with tropical 
butterflies or hummingbirds. Hence it is a magnificent sight when with rapid 
strokes of its ears the animal dashes close above the flower-bedecked 
mountain meadows in pursuit of dragonflies or of Hexaptera, or climbs 
abruptly aloft into the blue sky, there to wheel in play with others of its kind. 
Most enchanting of all are the newborn-still scarcely able to hold their ears 
out-that stagger calopteryx-like about the flowers, on the search for small 
insects. The strangest thing about all this is that Otopteryx flies backward, 
thoigh this too is comprehensible when one recalls that the flight of 
Otopteryx has been derived from the gliding of the hopsorrhines, that leap 
backward. 

 
Especially peculiar and characteristic is the take-off and landing of the 
Earwings. The animal, standing on its flexed snout, first "cocks" its ears, i.e. 
raises them vertically so that they touch one another; then flexes the 
deutonasal joint even more strongly, is in Hopsorrhinus (cf. Plate VI above); 
after which the several phases ensue as in the latter, with the difference that 
the leap is more vertical. Shortly before the jump reaches peak height, the 
ears are powerfully depressed. The fully-extended snout is spread wide in 
the autonasal region, and the animal flies. These individual phases can of 
course be analyzed only by high-speed pictography. The process of flight 
itself is extremely rich in variety: when an adept insect is being pursued, or 
during playful flight maneuvers, great distances are traversed at blinding 
speed, with the ears beating uninterruptedly up and down at a rate of about 
ten strokes/sec. During searching flight, earbeats of equal frequency but of a 
small amplitude alternate with short periods of gliding. Along the slopes, in 
the usually breezy island winds, Otopteryx also is able to soar at length. At 
all events it does not often go high into the air, and for the most part remains 
at altitudes not above twenty yards. Its method of landing is peculiar, being 
rendered difficult by the fact that the snout must perform in a double 
capacity, both as a foot and as a steering tail; if an Earwing wishes to come 
to earth, it mostly approaches the landing place in a steep glide, with the ears 
held somewhat dorsad and nasad. When close above the ground it suddenly 
adopts a vertical stance with the hind end somewhat elevated, which results 
in an abrupt, temporarily upward arc during which the steering tail - i.e. the 
tip of the snout- almost touches the earth. In this position, in which the ears 
are strongly arched (M. inarcantes auris37) the animal glides forward for yet 
a short stretch close above the ground, losing altitude and velocity the while. 
Then it suddenly folds the nasal steering mechanism together, curves the 
snout ventrad, and after elevating the ears to their full extent lets itself settle 
elastically onto the snout, which by now is stretched far caudad. This last 
phase of the alighting process again bears a great resemblance to the landing 
of the hopsorrhines affer a leap (cf. Plate VI above, phases 6-8). 
The way in which Otopteryx has solved the problem of locomotion-from 
the morphological standpoint a most extraordinary solution-calls for a 
comparison with the other flying forms of the animal kingdom. With 
 
 

 
 
[Fig. 10] Otopteryx volitans,skeleton. I. Articulctio nasofrontalis! 2. Nasur; 
3. Articulatio deutonasalh; 4. Nasibia; 
5. Articulatio carponasalis; 6. Rhinanges (=Nasatges} I-IV; 7. Processus 
jugalauris; 8. Os alae auris (=Cartiago aeroplana), 9. Christa temporalis; 
10. Processus pubici (Orig.) 

(photo inserted for electronic edition) 
exception of the Rhinogradentia themselves, true fliers have appeared only 
four times altogether: the insects, the flying reptiles, the birds, and the bats. 
Among these, the insects, whose organs of flight are supplementary 
additions not made at the expense of terrestrial locomotion, actually have 
found the most complete solution. The bipedal gait of birds likewise 
permitted great mobility both on the ground and in the air, even though in 
actuality the wings were "stolen" from the mechanism for progression on 
land. Among the flying reptiles and the bats the power of flight arose at the 
cost of locomotion on foot; and therefore the two group were not and are not 
fully qualified to compete with the others just mentioned. But in Otopteryx 
now the situation is just as favorable as in insects, i.e. the ears are actually 
supplementary instruments of flight. Nonetheless, Otopteryx, 

 
[Fig. 11] Otopteryx volitans, musculature. 
I. M. lacrymonasuralis; 2. M. extensor nasipodii superficialis; 
3. M. extensor nasipodii longus; 4. M. masseier; 
5. M. depressor mandibulae; 6. M. aeroplano-jugalairis posterior; 7. M. 
aeroplano-jugalauns anterior; 8. Lewtor aeroplanae. To the right of 3, M. 
extensor nasipodn has been bared by partial removal of M. trapezius 
cervicalis. (Orig.) 
 
with the high degree of limb reduction that preceded flight, has been derived 
from animals that were strongly specialized in a single direction- yet in their 
nasal "monopoly" they are quite comparable to hopping birds. In any case 
Otopteryx enjoys a clear advantage over flying reptiles or bats; for it is a 
most skillful leaper, and the participation of the snout in flight has not 
limited its usefulness for terrestrial progression to the same extent as has 
occurred with the anterior limbs of these other groups. Whether Otopteryx 
could hold its own in sharper competition with continental animals is 
questionable. At all events it has scarcely my enemies in the islands. Neither 
the indigenous Megaphone Birds nor the seabirds, that are numerous from 
tme to time along the coast, can catch it in flight. In agreement with this is 
the fact that one rarely finds pregnant specimens. The period of gestation is 
at least as short as with the hopsorrhines. Only a single foetus is carried at a 
time (Harrokema and Irri-Egingarri). It is suspected that the females bear 
two young per annum. 

 
The Earwings are not to be kept in captivity, because they remain too 
easily frightened, bruise the buttocks in their wild leaps and attempts at 
flight, and soon succumb to the infections that arise in the wounds. 
The Orchidsnouters (Orchidiopsidae) can be traced back to hopsorrhine 
ancestors that exchanged the terrestrial way of life for an arboreal one, but 
that already possessed the various hopsorrhine reductions-in particular the 
disappearance of the hindlimbs. Hence, adept climbers could no longer be 
developed from them. Instead there must have been initiated an evolutionary 
course in which the animals no longer leaped from place to place but rather 
climbed slowly about with the help of the forelimbs and the tail. 
Representatives with a functional nasal leg are at all events no longer 
known, and in their, habits and construction the Orchidiopsis and Liliopsis 
species of today are so highly specialized that initially their derivation from 
Snout Leaders was not even considered (cf. Gaukari-Sudur, Bouffon and 
Paigniopoulos). However, in the meantime some developmental data of 
evolutionary significance have been gathered, and from them it is clear, 
without possibility of contradiction, that a nasur and a naslbia as well as 
rhinanges are at first laid down in the embryonic Orchidiopsis snout but are 
later resorbed, so that the snout of the fully developed animal must be 
regarded as having been softened secondarily. (Bouffon and Zaprtegin-garri 
1953 write: "Les embryons des Orchidiofsides ne manquent point m de 
nasur ni de nasibie, mais pendant le develop fement [longueur de Vembryon 
eniiron 15 a 18 mm'] il y a lieu un ramollusement progressif de ceux-ci, de 
telle façon, que le nouveau-né ne montre plus ancune trace d'ossification 
dans son nasarlum epiati et pétaloīde."*) It is especially to Bouffon and his 
school that we are indebted for the further explanation of the organizational 
peculiarities of the Orchidiopsidae. Thus Bouffon and Lo-Ibilatze-Sudur 
were able to show that the secretory attractant ("mucus attirant") of the 
Orchidiopsis species is not formed by the outer nasal surface, which in fact 
lacks any glandular cells that could be thus involved. Rather, it is produced 
by the great glandular fields of the inner surface, along the nasal passages, 
and is thereafter spread manually over the outer surface of 
*Translation: (Bouffon and Zapartegingarri 1953 write; "Embryonic orchidiopslds lack 
neither a nasur nor a naslbia, but during development [length of the embryo from 15 to 
18 mm] these undergo a progressive softening such that the new-born animal no longer 
shows any trace of ossification in its flattened, petal-like nasarium.") 
 

 
PLATE IX 
 
the snout. Furthermore, the same authors succeeded in demonstrating that 
the grasping mechanisms of the tail are homologous structures in 
Orchidiopsis and in Hopsorrhmus. And finally Asteiides, a pupil of 
Bouffon's, was able to bring proof that in the snout of orciidiopsids there are 
vestiges of At. extensor nasipodii, that during embryonic development have 
the location characteristic of the hopsorrhine Rhinogradentia. 

 
Ankers Vanilla-perfumed Orchidsnouter, Omhidiopsis rapax,38 the best-
known representative of the family, lives in the forests of Mitadina, 
especially at the level of the higher tree crowns, but also at more moderate 
elevations where windfalls or floods have left openings in the woods (Plate 
IX). Ordinarily the animal stands motionless on its tail and hence, seen from 
afar, bears a certain resemblance to a big flower.39 The genesis of the 
similarity is that the huge ears, the medial dermal comb, and the flattened 
snout, protrude with vivid colors like floral petals from the head, whereas 
the inconspicuous green torso is at first inapparent. The already mentioned 
attractant secretion on the snout smells of vanilla and acts as an odorous 
lure. Insects that settle on the snout or that flutter close above it are snatched 
like lightning with the prehensile paws at the ends of the long, thin arms, and 
are conveyed to the mouth. Occasional changes of location are made with 
chameleon-like slowness, with the help of the forepaws and the two-clawed 
grasping tail. As to the mutual interrelationship among the several 
individuals of a species nothing is known; however, about a dozen pregnant 
specimens carrying embryos in various stages of development have been 
taken up to now (cf. above). 
Among the three Liliopsis species, that are distinguished from 
Orchidiopsis by the position of the ears and the cephalic combs, there is one 
that sleeps by day and "blooms," i.e. maintains its predacious pose, at night. 
This animal, commonly called the "glowing lily" in English and the 
"Wundernase" (=Miracle Snouter) in German (Liliopsis thaumatonasus), is 
extraordinary in that its mucous attractant gives off light. As with the 
luminescent slime of other animals (cf. Buchner), in the "glowing lily" too 
the light evidently is produced by symbiotic bacteria. At all events the tiny 
slime organisms that are held responsible have not yet been cultured, and 
electronmicrographic magnifications have failed to confirm their cellular 
nature beyond question. 

 
 
 
34 The p. styliformis is a structural innovation, that has nothing to do with a pro- or an 
eptpubis and that also shows no relationship to the  os marsupialis of the monotremes or 
didelphids. 
35 cf. Footnote 17. 
36 egiridi-auratus Lat.==greenish-gold. 42 
37 inarcare Lat.=to arch. 
38rapax Lat.==rapaclous. 
39Since orchids do not occur on any Island in the arehbelago, the name "Orchidiopsis" 
actually is an unfortunate choice; tiere is in fact no orchid-mimesis in the situation. At all 
events, thise flowers (Rochemontia renatellae ST.) that are the models for the simesis of 
Orchidiofsis are superficially very similar both in appearanc< and odor to orchids, 
although they are closely related to the Ranuiculaceae. 

 
 
SUBORDER; Polyrrhina (Multl-Snouters), 
PHALANX: Brachyproata (Short-nosed Snouters), 
TRIBE: Tetrarrhinida (Four-Snouters), 
FAMILY: Nasobemidae (Snout Walkers sens. lat.), 
GENUS: Nasobema (Snout Walkers), 
5 Species, 
GENUS; Stella (The Small Snout Walker), 
l Species, 
 FAMILY: Tyrannonasldae (Predacious Snouters 
sens. lat.) 
GENUS; Tyrannonasus (The Predacious Snouter), 
                        l Species. 
 As the name indicates, the Polyrrhina are set apart by the possession of 
several snouts. In this feature they exemplify a peculiarity that, though it 
appears as an element foreign to mammalian systematics, nevertheless -if 
considered generally- is repeated in other phylogenetic series of animals, i.e. 
a multiplication of organs that in more or less closely related forms occur 
singly or in single pairs, or that are present in only a few of these related 
forms. As is well-known, one can-at least in thought-derive all the Articulata 
from polym-erous creatures whose counterparts or whose earlier ancestors 
are oligomerous; similarly there may be mentioned here the variable number 
of gill slits among the relatively closely related lower vertebrates. Now, the 
multiplicity of the snout in the polyrrhine Rhinogradentia appears-purely 
formally--as the mere multiplication of an organ, at an early embryonic stage 
(cf. Fig. l). At all events it is not proper to cite it simply as an example of 
multiple malformation or mismodification and to draw a parallel between it 
and what is known from the morphogenesis of aberrant Drosophila mutants, 
as Knaddle and Kicherling have tiled to do. Middlestead and Hassenstine 
very rightly have emphasized that with simple duplications the independent 
movement of the several snouts would necessarily be impossible, since one 
knows through the investigations of P. Weiss among others that such 
duplications 
receive 
identical 
motor 
impulses. 
Thus 
among 
the 
Rhinogradentia polyrrhiny is accompanied by a corresponding central 
nervous coordination of an equally great degree of differentiation. From the 
evolutionary standpoint this situation holds within it significant difficulties, 
when one recalls that the Rhinogradentia must have arisen at the earliest in 
the Upper Cretaceous. According to Remane (1954) it must be taken as an 

indication of relative primitiveness that among the polyrrhines there exist at 
least three groups with respect to the condition of polyrrhiny: those with 
four, those with six, and those with 38 snouts, quite apart from the various 
types of nasal differentiation within these groups. Also it is to be assumed 
that the separation of these groups took place very early; just as the 
separation of the polyrrhines from the monorrhines must have occurred very 
early. In the current state of investigation it is even difficult to trace the 
polyrrhines back to Archirrhinos or to archirrhmiform primitive 
Rhinogradentia. It is altogether erroneous to try to trace the polyrrhines back 
to nasestrian monorrhines, as d'Epp has attempted to do (Stultén 1949; 
Bromeante de Burlas 1949). One of the main reasons for this judgment is 
that the structure of the nasarium - quite apart from the matter of polyrrhiny- 
is altogether different, and that the reduction of the hindlimbs is ac-
complished in quite a different manner, moreover that the number of ribs 
and the development of the zygapophyses of the vertebrae in the 
monorrhines is completely aberrant (in the direction of the conditions seen in 
the Xenarthra, but of course as a manifestation of convergence), whereas the 
polyrrhines have more nearly maintained the original relationships. 
Nevertheless the mono- and polyrrhines do exhibit one feature in common; 
the expanded tear duct, that in many instances serves as a respiratory 
passage. Bromeante de Burlas regards this as a result of structural 
convergence, that probably is related to the change in function of the snout 
(s) and their cavities. So it comes about that the distal nasal openings, in 
those forms where they occur, mostly subserve special functions that are not 
connected with respiration: olfactory examination, the intake of food, and 
finally even participation in the production of the animal's voice (cf. p. 83). 
Details regarding the construction of the nasarium cannot be given in this 
concise report For them we make reference to the studies by Bromeante de 
Burlas, Stultén, and Bouffon, as well as to the comprehensive exposition of 
these matters by H. Stümpke. 
The Great Morgenstern's-Nasobame, the hónatata of the natives 
(Nasobema lyricum; Plate X), is the best-known representative of the 
polyrrhines and on this account will be discussed in somewhat more detail. 
As a typical polyrrhine it has on its short, fat head four equal snouts, that are 
fairly long and on which-as already 
 

 
PLATE X 

 
 
described by Morgenstern-it walks. It is enabled to do this, despite an 
inadequate nasal skeleton, because the snouts are rendered quite rigid by the 
strong turgor of their corpora spongiosa. Besides there ramify through the 
snouts highly branched air-passages, the filling of which is regulated by the 
ampullae choanales (differentiations of the soft palate at the margins of the 
turbinallas that extend far ventro-caudad), so that the turgor of the snout is 
ensured by two systems; the hydraulic system of the corpora spongiosa, that 
is responsible primarily for the lasting rigidity required in walking, and the 
pneumatic system, that endows the gait and the movements with elasticity 
and that reduces the danger of damage when hard objects are encountered 
unexpectedly. In addition to the part played by the ampullae oioanales a 
contribution is made by the ampullae pneumonasales, that are formed from 
the powerfully developed nasal sinuses. There are three of them on each side 
and they distribute, the air delivered under pressure by the ampullae 
choanales. The canales ramosi of the smuts themselves have yet another 
orificium externum below the tip of the snout; mostly it is kept closed, but it 
can be opened reflexly very rapidly if strong mechanical stimuli impinge on 
the snout, so that the latter can collapse instantaneously. The. system 
mentioned is innervated from N. trigeminus, while N. faclalis supplies 
primarily the perinasal circular and longitudinal musculature. Like all 
polyrrhines, Nasobema lacks the os nasale altogether; it is not even laid 
down in the embryo. 
The paired appendages are relatively well-developed. Very young animals 
display but little reduction of them. With older specimens, i.e. with those 
that haw attained about 2/3 of the maximal body length, the posterior limbs 
are practically immovable and are also without function. The forelimbs are 
prehensile orgais that are supplemented effectively by the long, lasso-like 
tail. 

 
The tall is specialized to an extreme degree, and its organization is to be 
understood only in relation to the habits of the Nasobames. It serves these 
fructivorous animals for fishing down their food from great heights. The 
way in which this is accomplished is that tie tail, only the proximal portion 
of which is penetrated ay the vertebral column, incorporates a gas-filled 
chamel that is connected with the coecum; so that, after the sphincter gaso-
tubalis has been relaxed, the canal can be filled suddenly with belly-gases, 
whereupon the tail is abruptly blown taut and hurled upward to a height of 
more than four yards. Because of a strongly musculated ampulla (cross-
striated fibers, derived from the ilio-caudal musculature) at the base of the 
tail, this occurs with such violence that in the twinkling of an eye the :ail is 
projected with a slight pop to its full length. No sooner has the tip of the tail, 
richly supplied with tactile papillae, seized the fruit than the gas is released 
with a gentle whistle from the tail, that again becomes a flattish ribbon and 
contracts. The fruit that has been pulled down is then seized by the forepaws 
and brought to the mouth. It is interesting that the production of gas in 
general is rather well adapted to this mechanism: the hungrier an animal is 
the more strongly inflated is its colon and hence the ampulla gasomotorica. 
Related is the fact that very hungry animals, even when no reward is in 
sight, will carry out a "dry run" of the fruit-catching performance or will hurl 
the tail aloft toward all sorts of objects that resemble fruits. This is especially 
noticeable with Nasobema acolus40 (The Bluenosed Nasobame). 
Once a year Nasobema bears a single young that at first is carried about in 
the throat-pouch, which opens caudad, and that nourishes itself from the 
mother's axillary teats. The throat-pouch occurs only in females and is 
supported by cartilages derived from those of the Adam's apple. The animals 
are monogamous and the two sexes are very tender toward one another. The 
post-partum female is fed by the male. Only on the largest islands of the 
archipelago do the Nasobames have enemies, in the predacious Nasobames 
(Tyrannonasus imperator B. d. B.=Nasobema tyrannonasus STU.) that 
occur there. It is remarkable that the Hooakha-Hutchi, at their equinoctial 
ceremonies that took place each fall and spring, ate Nasobames roasted in 
leaves at these ritual feasts. They regarded the animal as holy, and did not 
hunt it except in connection with these religious rites. 

 
The genus Stella was erected by Bromearte. Stultén still assigns Stella 
matutina41 B. d. B. to Nasobema, as Nasobema morgensternii. The 
differences between the two genera are indeed small, and have to do with the 
tail-hurling mechanism, that is considerably less highly differentiated in the 
Little Morgenstern's-Nasobame, a situation that no doubt is related to the 
fact that Stella maittina lives almost exclusively on berries that grow near 
the ground. 
In contrast with the peaceable Nasobames, the only extant representative of 
the tyrannonasids is a predacious fellow that feeds almost exclusively upoi 
them. In its organization, Heberer's Predatory Nasobame, Tyrannonasus 
imperator B. d. B. (=Nasobema. tyrannonasus Stultén) indeed resembles the 
Nasobames in all major respects, but differs in the development of the fail, 
that-as in the rhinocolumnids-bears a poison claw at the tip; 
and besides of course because of its predatory teeth, the sharp points of 
which are suited for ripping the flesh from the victim. Additionally 
remarkable is the fact that the posterior limbs are astonishingly well-
developed for a nasestrian species, as is related to their employment in 
seizing the prey. Finally it may be mentioned that there is no grain to the 
coat of this species, whose pelt gives rather a plushy impression, somewhat 
like that of a mole. 
Tyrannonasus imperator is especially noteworthy for two reasons: like all 
polyrrhine species the animal is not particularly swift on nose, and yet it 
travels at a more rapid pace than the nasobemids. But now, sines all polyr-
rhine species, because of their intranasal pneumatic apparatus, when walking 
give out a whistling hiss that can be heard from afar, Tyrannonasus is unable 
to creep silently upon his victims; but-since they flee while he is still at a 
distance-must first lie quietly in wait and then stride after. In this process of 
flight and pursuit that, because of the considerable expenditure of noise and 
the yet, so moderate velocity, at first strikes the; onlooker as comical, 
Tyrannonasus often must trail the intended victim for hours in order to catch 
up with him, since Nasobema uses the tail in flight also, by hurling it aloft, 
encircling branches with it, and thus swinging across ditches or small 
streams. Even when the predator has come very near the object of  his 
pursuit, Nasobema often also employs the tail successfully as a last resort 
hanging by the tail from a branch, it swings back and forth in circles or with 
broad pendular movements close above the ground until the predator, in his 
constant efforts to grab the prey, finally gets dizzy and throws up. 
 

 
PLATE XI 
 
Then, during this interval of the predator's disorientation, Nasobema 
frequently is able to make off. 

 
But once Tyrannonasus has actually taken hold of his victim, the latter has 
no further hope of escape: by means of the toxic claw he is poisoned and 
soon collapses in tears, while the predator gives him the coup de grace, 
hauls him to a shady spot, and there at leisure devours him down to the 
larger bones. Whereas a most striking characteristic of Tyrannonasus thus is 
his tough endurance in pursuit, a second peculiarity is the additional ability 
to fast for an extraordinarily long time for a mammal. This capacity is 
related both to m astonishingly low basal metabolic rate and to the ability to 
store glycogen not only in the liver but in sub epidermal depots. 
Histologically the latter are composed of derivatives of the same embryonic 
cells as those that give rise to the fatty tissue that occupies this location in 
other organisms. Storage of energy in the form of glycogen rather than fat 
seems to be more economical, at least in Tyrannonasus. As this process 
progresses after feeding, the engorged animal becomes quite misshapen in a 
couple of days; immediately after its ample repast it lies down in a spot 
protected from the rain and dozes there until the sub epidermal store of 
glycogen is depleted, which takes several weeks. Only after the animal has 
grown slender again, but still retains in the liver sufficient reserves for 
possible predatory pursuits, does it again become active go out on the hunt. 
The noteworthy fact that the captured Nasobame weeps has psychological 
interest, for it presupposes that the animal possesses insight and the  power     
of reflection. In view of the considerable volume  and degree  of 
differentiation of the brain, such a possibility is not excluded (cf. in 
connection H. W. Gruhit 1947). 

 
 
In their nutritional physiology, the tetrarrhines (Four-Snouters) fall entirely 
outside the framework of the order and in this respect surely are secondarily 
divergent forms. According to Bouffon (1953) matters here are as follows: 
the Rhinogradentia are primarily insectivorous in habit, and the generally 
small size of the animals is correlated with this. In instances where there has 
been a specialization of the habits and way of nourishment that distinguishes 
the animals from the typical insectivorous type, they nevertheless are to be 
derived from it; all the crab-eating hopsorrhines (Snout Leapers) and their 
milk-symbiotic forms are close to this insectivorous type, and likewise the 
hypogeonasids (Mud Snouters) and the georrhinids (Burrowing Snouters) 
can be derived therefrom. With the tetrarrhines, those more primitive 
members are out-and-out fructivores, such a derivation seems more difficult, 
although for example the dentition fundamentally is wholly of the 
insectivorous kind. Above everything else, the digestive tract displays 
extensive specialization, not to mention the gas-producing coecum. But the 
main factor that distinguishes the tetrarrhines from most other 
Rhinogradentia is the considerable body size. The Nasobames get to be 
nearly 3 feet high! The derivation of the Predacious Nasobame, 
Tyrannonasus, at first appears easier, inasmuch as seemingly a simple 
increase in all dimensions would convert an insectivorous into a predacious 
type. But Bouffon, by means of penetrating studies, has shown that 
Tyrannonasus has descended from the fructivorois species. This is revealed 
primarily in the organization of the digestive tract and of the tail, which 
during puberty is still nasobematous. Bouffon believes that the modification 
into a predator-and in fact into a monophagous predator-came to pass via a 
predatory commensalism. Certain peculiarities in the behavior of the 
predator  give further indications in this direction: namely, it greedily 
devours fruits thrown aside by the fleeing Nasobames, and only attacks the 
latter when it can fall upon than while they are eating fruit. In agreement 
with this is the fact that young Tyrannonasus specimens are not predacious 
but merely pounce upon the feeding Nasobame in order to snatch their fruits 
away, or to feed upon the remnants of their meals. 
This phenomenon, as Bouffon too points out, is by no means unique in the 
world of animals; the transition from the insectivorous to the fructivorous 
habit has frequently been observed, thus for example among the thrush-like 
songbirds, in the insectivores themselves, is well as in the South American 
Chiroptera, prosimiais and catarrhine monkeys. 
 
40 Aeolus Grk.=the wind god. 
41 stella mafutma'Lat=Morgenstern (==morning star). 
 
 
 

TRIBE: Hexarrhinida (Six-Snouters sens. lat.},  
FAMILY: Isorrhinidae (Equal-snouted Snouters),  
GENUS: Eledonopsis42 (Ribbon Snouters),  
S Species, 
GENUS; Hexanthus (Six-flowered Snouters),  
3 Species, 
GENUS: Cephalanthus43 (Flower-faced Snouters),  
7 Species, 
FAMILY: Anisorrhinidae* (Unequal-snouted Snouters),  
GENUS: Mammontops44  (Shaggy-faced Snouters), 
1 Species 
 The tribe Hexarrhinida (Six-Snouters sens. ait.} comprises two very 
different families; whereas tie Equal-snouted Snouters (Isorrhinidae) are 
small insectivorous animals of relatively primitive organization, the sole 
species in the family of Unequal-snouted Snouters (Anisorrhinidae) is of a 
type that at first glance seems much more reminiscent of the Nasobemidae 
but that also displays a whole series of features that separate it from this 
family. Bouffon feels therefore that the tribe Hexarrhinida erected by 
Bromeante de Burlas cannot be upheld or that it is polyphyletic. This will be 
considered later when Mammontops ursulus45 is discussed. 
The Equal-snouted Snouters, as already sad, are animals that -apart from 
their polyrrhiny- are to be regarded as primitive; the paired appendages are 
scarcely reduced and still are well adapted for progression, even though the 
animals make but little use of then. The differentiation of the snout likewise 
is still primtive.* On the other hand, the progressive genera Hewnthus and 
Cephalanthus Br. d. B. (=Ranunculonasus and Corbulonasus STU.) are 
distinguished by highly developed mimesis, that has modified the exterior of 
tht animals in a most peculiar fashion. [Translator's note; Br. d. B. is just B. 
d. B. elsewhere.] 

 
As representative of the more primitive genus Eledonopsis, Eledonopsis 
terebellum- (The Tubeworm-snouted Ribbon Snouter) will be described; 
In little holes in the ground, beneath stones and roots, on Mairuvili one 
frequently finds a small animal the size of a shrew, that sleeps there rolled 
up during the daytime and on first glance looks just like a little shrew, with 
grayish-brown fur and rosy paws. The little creature does not try to run 
away and lets itself be put back into its den. If one marks the position of 
such a hole and at night makes a flash-photograph of its entrance and the 
surroundings, then one sees on the picture that four to six ribbon-like 
structures are stretched forth from the hole. These rose-colored ribbons are 
some 2-3 mm wide and as much as a foot long. On the upper surface they 
bear two narrow, damply glistening grooves to which are stuck, one sees, 
some tiny insects, mostly podurids (springtails) and barklice (Corrodentia). 
If one tries to view these structures more closely with a flashlight they are 
then pulled quickly back into the hole. For a long time the phenomenon 
failed to yield to more precise observation. In fixed specimens the ribbons 
were indeed to be identified without further ado as snouts, but their function 
became explicable only when the animals were kept permanently in the light 
(Schaller's method). Now it became apparent that the ribbons actually are 
the snouts, and the two grooves the drawn-out nares that have been 
swiveled upward; furthermore it was found that the ciliated epithelium of 
the nasal cavities was continued throughout the nares and that, together with 
the nasal mucus, served to transport the small insects that stuck there; these 
were swept into the nasal passages and were carried choanally to the 
digestive tract. Besices, it developed that Eledonopsis also is able to entrap 
larger insects-up to the size of woodlice-and move them proximad in this 
fashion, while the ribbon-like snout contracts and forms a gutter within 
which the prey is brought to the base of the snout, partly by means of tte 
current set up by the cilia and partly by means of peristaltic movements of 
the trough. There the prey either is seized with the tongue or dug with the 
hands out of the nasal parts directed toward the head, and devoured. 
Interesting too is it that large, unwieldy animals-primarily spiders of the 
families Heieiatypidae and Lyccsodromi-dae-are first entrapped in the nasal 
slime and then entwined by several snouts and drawn toward the head. As to 
when the various prey-catching mechanisms are set in motion, the decision 
is made in part by the very acute tactile sense and then too by the chemical 
sense, that 
 

 
PLATE XII 
 
extends clear to the tips of the snouts. (Here it is a matter of receptors and 
nerves that bear the same relationship to the actual olfactory organ as 
Jacobson's organ in many other vertebrates.) 
In Eledonopsis care of the brood, differs in no wise from that of other 
Placentalia. A marsupial pouch is not present. The young become 
independent it a very early age. Mating seems to take place at night. Up till 
now attempts to rear Eledonopsis in captivity lave been unsuccessful. 

 
The behavior of young specimens of the Six-flowered Snouters 
(Hexanthus) is very similar to that of Eledonopsis. They too live in holes in 
the ground or under leaves and from there stretch out their snouts in order to 
catch prey. But this is true only of the very young animals that have just 
begun to get their own food after having been released from their mother's 
nursery. Later, the following differences from Eledonopsis come about; the 
nasal groove grows together, in a proximal to distal direction, in such a way 
that ultimately openings remain only at the base and the tip of the snout 
while the rest of the snout forms a covered tube. Then four broad, pointed 
dermal lobes grow out at the tip of each snout. According to the species, 
these are variously cdored and are capable besides of fairly strong color 
changes within the limits set by the specific basic coloration. 46 
Eventually each snout comes to look like a long-stalked flower. During 
this modification of their snouts the animals scarcely change their habits at 
all. They continue to stretch their snouts forth from their hiding place, but 
curl them higher and higher about the stems of plants,47 and get their 
nourishment as described above. At all events there now takes place a 
constantly greater change in the menu. For now they catch primarily flying 
insects that, deceived by the flower-like shape and color, settle at the tips of 
the snouts. Transportation of small victims continues in the manner already 
described. As also explained above, somewhat larger specimens are borne 
cephalad by peristaltic movements in the nasal tubes. Yet larger objects, that 
could not pass through, are -in contrast with Eledonopsis- not taken in entire. 
instead, the very expansible, corolla-like flaps of the snout are folded about 
the insect so that it is practically wholly enwrapped; thereupon the 
Hexanthus vomits through the appropriate snout and digests the specimen to 
the point where it can be sucked back through the nasal tube. 
  Mature Hexanthus do not continue to lurk in holes; rather, they lie on rocky 
slopes amid the greenery of grassy patches and small herbs. Their own 
greenish coloration makes them inconspicuous there, and their snouts are for 
the most part twined about the stalks of those flowers whose color and shape 
they can simulate. Moreover, this adaptation contains a visual element; if 
Hexanthus is presented with blue flowers pasted to a sheet of cardboard 
behind which the snouts are lying among yellow flowers, then the rhinal 
corolla-like lobs turn blue -and vice versa. Furthermore, the various 
Hexanthus species have differing photoperiodic behavior whereas the 
Globeflower Snouter (Hexanthus ranunailonasus= Ranunculonasus 
pulcher48) is thoroughly diurnal, the predominantly violet snouts of the 
Gorgeous Night- 
 
 

 
 
 
PLATE XIII 
 
Snouter (Hexanthus regma-noctis49) blosson mainly at night. In 
contradistinction to the Ranunculoiasus Snouters, that have merely a slightly 
acidic odor, like that of sour milk, these Night Snouters emit a strong 
fragrance of vanilla, that attracts nocturnal six-winged insects. 
To the genus of the Flower-faced Snouters (Cepha-lanthus=Corbulonasus) 
belongs a whole series of the most beautiful Rhinogradentia that are known. 
All of them are distinguished by the fact that the short, broad, petal-like 
snouts are set close about the mouth and are supplied with a very simple epi- 
and hyponssal musculature, that permits the animals to clap together the 
tonically outspread snouts very rapidly whenever an insect settles in the oral 
field. 
A further peculiarity is that these mentally very limited animals emit 
strong oral fragrances, that apparently serve likewise for the attraction of 
insects. An additional oddity is that-in contrast with other polyirhines-rep-
resentatives of this genus neither care for :he brood in any way nor suckle 
them. 

 
As a typical representative of the genus w choose the Miraculous Flower-
faced Snouter (Cephahnthus thaumasios50=Corbulonasus longicauda51), that 
lives colonially on Mitadina in the meadows of Ramnculaceae of the more 
elevated mountainous regions. Skämtkvist describes the sight of such 
colonies as the most beautiful thing he saw on Hi-yi-yi. The vividness of tie 
colors and the luster of the snouts is said to be quite extraordinary, and the 
characteristic spectacle of the animals' swaying on their tails in the fresh sea 
breezes enchanting. Evidently what pleases us most in these curious 
creatures is 
 
 
PLATE XIV 
 
for the flower-seeking insects nothing more than the presentation of 
hypereffective stimuli; and in this sense too is to be interpreted the 
buttermilk-like odor that emanates from the open mouths of the lurking 
cephalanthids. 

 
In addition to the nasarium, which has already been discussed, one of their 
striking features is the stiffened tail, that may be as much as twenty inches 
long. An interesting thing is how the caudal structure changes as the animal 
grows; the newly born animals, that already possess a fully developed 
nasarmm, fall to the ground and climb up on the stems of nearby flowers. 
Having reached the top, they bite off all the buds, unfold the nasarium, and 
begin to capture prey just as older specimens do. Their still soft tail is then 
just about the length of the body and differs in no respect from a normal 
mammalian tail. But it promptly grows in length, and in fact by means of 
elongation of the vertebrae; as the inervertebral articulations ankylose and 
the intervertebral sinews and ligaments also stiffen, the caudal musculature 
degenerates, so that of M. ischiocaudalic, M. iliocadails and M. depressor 
caudae there remain only ligamentous bundles that are attached to the caudal 
vertebral column and to its rigidified uniting structures. The tip of the tail 
bears a much cornified epithelium, that eventually forms a sort of pointed, 
plugshaped horny cap. As soon as the tip of the tail reaches the ground, the 
animal that had climbed up the plant stem starts to bore this caudal plug into 
the ground, which within four to six days it penetrates to a depth of as much 
as 6 inches. Then the animal lets go of the plant stem and henceforth is 
supported by its own tail, that continues to lengthen. The degree of caudal 
extension attained depends on the nutritional state of the animal, and 
proceeds more slowly when the latter is well fed. An animal once firmly 
"planted" in this way can no longer move from its location, but simply waits 
there for prey with folded arms and open mouth. As mentioned, the mental 
capacities are slight. Mating takes place when it is windy; as the specimens 
are blown back and forth on their tails and come into contact the desirous 
males take firm hold of the females. The period of gestation is said to be but 
three weeks, and the total duration of life is estimated maximally at eight 
months. Growth from birth to maturity requires perhaps two months; from 
birth to caudal implantation eighteen to twenty-two days. 

 
Not infrequently one finds colonies that make a pitiful impression; the 
snouts look limp and are discolored and incrusted. The creatures are losing 
weight, and their soft whimpering is audible from afar. Such colonies have 
been attacked by a nasal scab, that is caused by a species of mite that is 
closely related to the gamasids. A slight infestation scarcely causes 
noticeable harm. But when mass increase of the mites renders the snouts 
ineffective for taking prey, this is naturally a catastrophe for Cephalanthus. 
The starving, tortured creatures that dig constantly at their diseased snouts 
and thereby merely increase their suffering. At the end there are only the 
little corpses hanging on their long caudal stalks; and in many places one 
finds standing in the meadows groups of sixty to a hundred skeletonized 
tails, beneath which there lie only the decaying remains of bones and hides. 
However, the primary cause of the epizoötics is not the endemic mites, but 
rather viral diseases favored by variations in the weather; they reduce the 
natural resistance to the mites, in that individuals suffering from viral 
disease are not able to give regular care to their snouts aid to keep them 
properly lubricated. 
The majority of Cephalanthus species live in the manner described. Only 
Cephalanthus ineps52 (=Corbulona-sus ineps} and Cephalanthus piger53 
(=Coibulonasus acaulls 54) have reduced tails and simply lie on their backs 
in sunny spots between stones and flowers. According to Bromeante de 
Burias, their separation from other cephalanths as a new genus, already 
weighed above does not seem justified. 

 
As has been mentioned on p. 66, the anisorrhine Mammontops ursulus 
(The Bearlike Shaggyfaced Snouter), that likewise occurs in the mountain 
meadows of Mitadina, falls quite outside the hexarrhine sens. It is a 
relatively majestic animal, that attains an overall height of 4 feet 3 inches in 
the male and 3 feet 7 inches in the female; and is herbivorous. 
Its snouts are differentiated somewhat in ihe tetrar-rhine manner, and this 
is what causes uncertainty as to the proper systematic arrangement; whereis 
Stulten favors placing Mammontops in the immediate vicinity of the 
tetrarrhines, in that he lays more weight on the nasal structure than on the 
number of snouts, Broneante de Burias holds the opinion that the number of 
snouts deserves the greater systematic consideration, while the degree of 
nasal differentiation is to be regarded as due merely to convergence. In 
support of this view he draws upon the investigations of the group of French 
scientists (Bouffon, Irri-Egingam, and Chaiblin), who have shown that the 
innervation of the several groups of muscles in the tetrarrhines is quite 
different from that of Mammontops. Here it seems to be a matter of a further 
differentiation of the epi- and hyporrhinal muscle sips of the isorrhines; and 
the absence of corpora sponyosa from 
 
 

 
PLATE XV 
 
the snouts of recent isorrhines no longer appears so primitive as was once 
assumed. Bouffon and Gaukari-Sudur postulate for the hexarrhines common 
tetrarrhine-like ancestors from which the isorrhines of today have developed 
on the one hand and the anisorrhiies on the other. In this connection it is 
nevertheless a curious fact that the isorrhines display emphatically primitive 
features in respect to their paired appendages, while in the anisorrhinous line 
these are especially reduced. Moreover it is noteworthy that the hair whorls 
that are characteristic of the polyrrhines are lacking in the isorrhines. 
Against the placement of too much stress on this feature, Bromeante de 
Burlas brings up the point that even the surely secondarily evolved 
Orchidiopsis does not exhibit an inversion in the course of the hairs although 
such an inversion is most conspicuous in the much more primitive 
hopsorrhines. In any case the problem of the position of Mammontops will 
have to be left open for the present, until more extensive detailed 
investigations have been made. 

 
Mammontops occurs in small herds that are led by older males. The 
animals feed almost exclusively on a composite, Mammontopsisitos 
dauciradix,66 that they tear up by the roots with their two grasping snouts. 
The dentition is the most highly specialized known among the 
Rhinogradentia (aside from the total loss of teeth in the mercatorrhines); the 
incisors are reduced, the canines small and blunt, the premolars and molirs 
broad and slab-like. 
The Shaggyfaced Snouter suckles its offspring, that clings with its snouts 
to the thick fur of the mother and also to her stiff, inguinal teats. The 
reproductory rate is low. The animals seem to grow quite old. Older males 
are distinguished from the uniformly chocolate-brown younger males and 
the females by a silvery gray tail, the waving of which releases a following 
response on the part of the herd. For example, Tassino di Campotassi was 
able, by whitening the tail of a young female, to provoke a following 
reaction from the herd into which he put her. The whitened tail was 
particularly effective as a supernormal releaser of the following response in 
the younger males. 
*but cf. page 76. 
42 eledone Grk.==an animal, related to the octopus. 
43 kephale Grk.==a head; anthos Grk.=a flower. 
*Translator's note re Amsorrhinidae; under most circumtances this should be 
Mammontopsidae, since Mammontops is the sole gnus; however there are situations in 
which the rules of nomenclaure would allow the family name Anisorrhinidae. 
44 cf. Footnote 15. 
45 ursulus Lat.=a little bear. 
46Freddurista and Perischerzi have shown that reds are regulated by expansion of the 
capillaries, yellows by the superficial fatty tissue (that lies, however, below the 
subepithelial capillary nett, and blues by black pigment situated in contractile 
melanophores. 
47 constantly to the left, both the snouts of the right side of the body as well as those of 
the left (cf. Ludwig 1932). 
48 ranunculus Lat.=a crowfoot (flower) ; pulcher Lat.=bo.udful. 
49 regina noctis Lat.==queen of the night 
50 thaumasios Grk.=marvelous, rare. 
51 longi-cauda Lat.==loDgtailed. 
52 ineps Lat.==mentally sluggish. 
53 figer Lat.=lazy.  
54 akaulos Grk.==stalkless. 
55sitos Grk.=food; dauci-radw Lat.==a carrot-like root.  
 

 
PHALANX: Dolichoproata (Long-nosed Snouters), 
FAMILY: Rhinochilopidae56 (Tasselsnouter-like Snouters), 
GENUS; Rhinochllopiis (Tasselsnouters*), 
2 Species. 
 
   The genus Rhinochilopus with its two species, Rh. ingens57(The Giant 
Tasselsnouter) and Rh. musicus (The Pipeorgan Tasselsnouter), possesses 
the most impressive polyrrhiny: in both these animals the head has been 
protracted into a long proa or rostrum. The underside of this structure is 
supported by the maxillary, the premaxillary and the palatine, the upperside 
ly the maxillary, premaxillary and nasulary, as well as by a part of the nasal 
bone. The lower side (cf. Fig. 12] exhibits a lengthening of the oral cleft, the 
so-called pioal groove (2), that is enclosed by the lips. At the anterior end of 
the proa the male bears two asymmetric incis3rs. To the right and left of this 
proal groove are the nineteen pairs of snouts, here termed nasidi (3, or 9). 
Tie first pair serves as tentacles, the rest as organs of locomotion. (As to the 
more detailed structure of the nasarium, see below.) The paired appendages 
are much reduced. The hindlegs function solely as antennae for use during 
rearward movement. The forelegs do not touch the ground and also play no 
part in the uptake of food. In the female they serve to clasp the invariably 
single offspring, The tail too is no more than an organ of touch. The animals 
attain a respectable size (in Rh. musicus nearly 5 ft. from proa to the base of 
the tail, in Rh. ingens more thm 7 ft.). They are omnivorous but prefer 
insects, snails, and fungi, and also berry-like fruits. Occasionally they also 
consume young leaves. Rhinochilopus is solitary, wandering in leisurely 
fashion through the virgin forest and especially through the less dense 
portions and the margins of the woods, where it has definite routes and 
stamping spots. However, the animals have no fixed beats, and make un-
contested use of the paths of conspecific individuals. 

 
The most noteworthy peculiarities of the two species, especially of Rh. 
musicus, are however the wooing procedure and the correlated nasarial 
specialization, that will be described briefly: like most Rhinogradertia, Rhi-
nochilopus no longer respires exclusively through the nares, but 
predominantly through the tear duct, that likewise is expanded significantly, 
as it is in almost all species (cf. also Fig. 4). Now, on the one hand the !ear 
duct (Fig. 12, 7) is connected immediately with tfc throat, from which a 
passage-the ductus osmaticus-runs into the proa and there gives off the 
ductuli osmatid (4) into the nasuli. On the other hand, the tear duct also is 
connected via the ductus inflatorius with the vesica inflatrix orgam (8), 
which again for its part communicates by way of the ductus vesico-gularls 
with the throat. A second connection (6) between tear duct and vesica 
inflatrix organi and the nasuli the ductus musicus, supplies the 
 
 
[Fig. 12] Rhinochtlopus musicus; advanced embryo. I. Incisor rudiments 
(only in the male) ,' 2. Subproal groove; 
3. Ductulus musicus of one excised nasulus; 4. Dictulus osmaticus, same; 5- 
Nasular corpus spongiosum; 6. Ductus musicus; 7. Tear duct; 8. Vesica 
inflatrix organi; 9. Nasuli. The more medially situated ductus osmaticus is 
no: numbered. Note the distinct structure of the first nasulus, apparent even 
in the embryo. (After Bouffon and Gaukari-Sudur 1952) 

 
ductiill musici, that are located in the nasuli laterad of the ductuli osmatid. 
When at rest the vesica infletrix organ! lies beneath the skin of the cheek, 
and on activation of the nasal pipeorgan is inflated to the size of a child's 
head. The apparatus as a whole constitutes a differentiation of the tear duct 
and the choanal portion of the nose, as may be determined in young 
embryos. As additional components the pipeorgan includes the corpora 
spongiosa (5) of the nasuli, as well as the nasilar circular and longitudinal 
musculature. 

 
In its entirety the apparatus operates as folows; during progression the 
ductus musici and ductuli nusici are closed and together with the corpora 
spongusa afford the nasuli the turgor required if the circular and longitudinal 
musculature is to suffice to move then. During inspiration, air flows in 
through the ductuli osmatici. Thus the air is constantly being tested. The first 
pair of nasuli, that function as tentacles, are especially concerned with 
olfactory examination. Directional olfactory testing is rendered possible by 
the division, in the proa, of the olfactory nerve in such a manner that each 
pail of nasuli comes to have a distinct olfactory epithelium Food is taken in 
through the nasuli by being grasped ty a digit-shaped lengthening of the 
nasular tip or by being encircled by the distal third of the entire nasulus and 
then brought into the proal groove. The prey is then impelled toward the 
mouth by the strongly protracted lips. The musical apparatus of the 
nasarium is made use of only during courtship. Then the males lie flat on the 
ground. The ductuli osmatici cease to function, as do thg corpora spongiosa. 
Initially the nasalar musculature rehxes completely. Only the sphincteres 
terminates of the ductuli musici are slightly contracted. The sphincteres 
glossi-formes, situated at the base of each ductulits musicus, are relaxed. 
Now, by means of violent, persistent breathing, the animal inflates the 
vesicae inftatores o'gani and thereby also puts the ductus musici under 
pressure. By opening slightly the sphincteres glossiformes the nasuli now 
are inflated, and though the circular muscilature is fully relaxed the 
longitudinal musculature can make the nasulus longer or shorter. If now a 
sphincter glossi-formis is suddenly opened more widely, brief puffs of air 
pass into the corresponding nasulus and cause it to reverberate, inasmuch as 
the air column it contains is set into vibration by the lips of the sphincter. 
Since each nasulus can be lengthened or shortened in rapid alternation, it 
works like a wind instrument on the principle of a slide trombone, with the 
peculiarity that long-lasting tones cannot be produced, but only successions 
of short ones. With eighteen pairs of nasuli that function in this wise (the 
first pair lacks a sphincter glossiformis58), the animal has command, so-to-
speak, of 36 wind instruments that can be activated independently. Hoy they 
are employed in courtship has been described graphically by Skämtkvist: 

 
"At that time-it was the vernal equinox-the Hooakha-Hutchi were 
celebrating the hónatata feast, at which the smoked hónatatas were 
consumed to the accompaniment of ritual chants in the village long house It 
was in the evening, at dusk. The ceremonial meal lasted not more than two 
hours. Then the village company arose and betook themselves to a nearby 
forest glade, at the western edge of which they all sat down. The full moon 
was already visible above the treetops on the mountain opposite when the 
Mostada Datsawima (the 'Lords of the Myriapods') made their appearance 
from the dark of the woods and stepped out into the glade. Silently, as if they 
were floating, the great beasts moved. In the uncertain moonlight their legs 
(snouts) were not to be clearly made out. Only the luster of the long leads 
and backs could be discerned. There were fourteen or sixteen animals, that 
first paraded in a circle a couple of times before the six especially huge 
males lay down and extended all their snouts, while the females continued to 
circle about them. And now there began the most peculiar concert that I had 
ever heard: it began with tie hollow, rhythmic lowing of one of the animals. 
Slow a: first and then growing faster. Soon a second one joined in, lowing a 
few notes higher; and finally all six were taking part. The rhythm varied, but 
was maintained in rigid synchrony by all the animals, while the number of 
participating voices grew and grew. All at once there was a silence, and then 
a sharp, bleating tremolo, many-voiced and prestissimo, was superimposed 
on this rhythmic, half-rumbling, lowing or thrumming, hollow outcry. This 
constituted the second movement. In time, this 'solo' by the individual male 
concerned in its production was heightened by the weaving into it, in 
addition to the bleating and 'staccato' passages, of slurred and smudged tonal 
transitions. The beast that had the solo part could be distinguished by the 
fact that its snouts, that low were readily discerned inasmuch as they were 
extended to one side, were alternately inflated and made shorter and longer. 
Suddenly there was silence once again; and then the hollow basic pattern of 
the whole musical chorus started up once more, whereupon a second male 
gave solo voice. During this 'concerto' the females circled in slow, regular 
tempo about the performing males, until the last of these had finished his 
solo contribution. Then the males arose, and the whole ghostly company 
vanished slowly, as they had come, into the dark forest. The inhabitants of 
the village stood up, and bowed deeply toward the place into which the 
Mostada Datswima had disappeared, and deeply once again toward the full 
moon. Then we walked back into the village, where until the hour was late 
the pipes and drums resounded, a pale echo of the music heard earlier . . ." 

 
Sad to relate, a thorough study of these animals was no longer possible, 
since they too-just like the Hooakha-Hutchi-soon fell victims to the head 
cold introduced by Skämtkvist. Skämtkvist did succeed, however: in captur-
ing and taming one of the males. The animal seemed very intelligent, as is 
understandable in view of the weight of its brain, which was determined 
later. It grew very tame, and Skämtkvist was even able to teach it two of 
Bach's organ fugues that he knew by heart, so that it could perform them 
perfectly. Only its inability to produce long-held notes caused any difficulty. 
Here the animal made shift with very rapid tremoli, by using four nasuli 
adjusted to the same pitch. 
 
56 chtlo-pus Grk.=a myriapod. 
 
*Translator's note: "Tatzel" signifies "paw" rather than "tassel," but the English term 
"Tasselsnouters" seems more suitible for these animals. 
 
57 ingens Lat.==enormous. 
 
58 The sphincter glosiformis is not a simple circular muscle. The entire dosing mechanism 
summarized in the term is composed of the actual sphincter, that extends around three-
quarters of the arcumference of the nasulus, and a stout cushion of connective tissue, Aat 
occupies the remaining quarter. On this cushion of connective tissue there sits a V-shaped 
pair of outgrowths that act aa vocal cords. The vocal apparatus might logically be called a 
"narynx," since it constitutes a wholly comparable analog of the larynx and syrinx. 

 
 
 
EPILOGUE 
HARALD STÜMPKE'S manuscript was awaiting publication when it became 
known that, during secret tests of atomic explosions (about which even the 
Press had heard nothing), the entire Hi-yi-yi Archipelago had been annihi-
lated through the oversight of some subordinate. As a result of tectonic 
tensions that had not been anticipated, the whole group of islands sank 
beneath the sea when the burst was set off some 125 miles distant. 
At the time in question, an international commission for study of the 
archipelago was in session on Mairúvili. Among those present were most of 
the scientists named in this work. With them there went down the Darwin 
Institute of Hi-yi-yi, situated on the lovely eastern bay of the islands, and in 
it the irreplaceable photographic material, the various preparations and 
observational and experimental records that were to have formal the nucleus 
of a great, comprehensive treatise concerning the archipelago and its 
geological, historical, zoological, and sociological peculiarities. 
Thus it was most fortunate that, shortly before his voyage, Stümpke had 
undertaken to compose a short exposition of the structure and habits of the 
Rhinogradentia. Toward preparation of drawings he had supplied me also 
with some material that he-one can only say, Alas! -took back to Hi-yi-yi 
with him. Still it was in this way that at least a part of the lifework of this 
modest and deserving seeker after Truth could be preserved as a balanced 
whole for science and for a broader audience, and with it the knowledge of a 
now-vanished world. 
Heidelberg, October 1957        GEROLF STEINER 

 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
ASTEIDES, S.  (1954); Le nez d'Orchidiopsis, son anitomie, son 
developpement. C. r. Soc. biol. Rh. 516; 28.  
BEILIG, W.  (1954); Ein vanadiumhal tiger Eiweisssymilex aus den 
nasalen Fangfäden von Emunctator. S. H. Z. physiol. Chem. 
884; 55.  
BITBRAIN, J. D.  (1946); Anatomical and histological sudy of the 
nose of a Rhinogradent, Rhinolimaclus. J. gen. Amt. Soyi 18. 
---- (1950) '• The Rhinogradents. Univ. Press S. Aidrews. 
BLEEDKOOP, FR. (1945): Das Nasobemproblem. Z. v. Lit. 34; 
205. 
BÖKER, H.  (1935 and 1937): Einfuhrung in die vergleichende Anatomie der 
Wirbelriere. Fischer, Jena. 
BOUFFON, L.  (1953) '. A propos du systeme nutritif des Rhinogradents. Bull. 
Darwin Inst. Hi. f; Suppl. 2. 
---- (i954); A propos du groupe polyphyletique de Rhinoco- 
lumnides. Bull. Darwin Inst. Hi. 8; 12.  
BOUFFON, L. , and GAUKAM-SUDUR, O.  (1952); [/anatomic 
comparee des Polyrrhines. Bull. Darwin Inst. H. 6; 33.  
BOUFFON, L., IRM-EGINGARRI, J., and CHAIBUN, F. (1953) i 
A propos de 1'innervation du nasoire des PolyrrKnes. C. r. 
Soc. Biol. Rh. JJJ; 24.  
BOUFFON, L. , and LO-IBILATZE-SUDUR, Ch. (1954) : Comment 
Orchidiopsis attire-t-elle sa proie? La nature (P) v; 311.  
BOUFFON, L. , and SCHPRIMARSCH, J.  (1950); Corcernant la 
question de la descendance du genus endemique Hypsiboas. 
Bull. Darwin Inst. Hi. 4; 441. 
BOUFFON, L., and ZAPARTEGINGARRI, V.  (1953); 3ur Fembry- 
ologie des Orchidiopsides. Bull. Darwin Inst. H. 7; i6.  
BROMEANTE DE BURLAS Y TONTERIAS, J. (1948); A systematica 
dos Rhinogradentes. Bull. Darwin Inst. Hi. 2; 4j. 
---- (19480); Systematic studies on the new wder of the Rhinogradents. Am. 
Nat. F. 374; 1498. 

---- (i949) '• Os Polyrrhines e a derivacao d'elles Boll. Braz. Rhin. i,' 77. 
---- (l950) : A derivacao e a arvore genealogica cbs Rhinogradentes. Boll. 
Braz. Rhin. 2; 1203. 
---- (i95i); The Rhinogradents. Bull. Darwin Inst. Hi. SS Suppl. 
---- (i952) ; The Hypogeonasidae. Bull. Darwin Inst. Hi. 6; 
120. 
---- (i954)i The hides of Rhinogradents and their grain. 
Nature (Danuddlesborough) 92; 2.  
BROWN, A. B. , and BITBRAIN, J. D.  (1948); A sinrple electronically controlled 
substitute for feeding Merca:orrhinus. J. 
psych, a. neur. contr. 181; 23. 
 BUCHNER, P. (1953); Endosymbiose der Tiere mit pflanzlichen 
Mikroorganismen. Birkhauser, Basel.  
COMBINATORE, M.  (1943) ; Un pezzo di legno appurtato, trovato 
sulla spiaggia di Owsuddowsa. Lav. preist. (Milmo) 74; 19.  
D'EPP, FR.  (1944); La descendance des Polyrrhinei. C. r. Soc. 
biol. Rh. so6i 403.  
DEUTERICH, T. (1944); Em holzemer Suppenlöffel von Haida- 
daifi. Z. f. v. Prahist. 22; 199. 
---- (l944a); Grundsatzliches fiber die Eßlestecke der 
Huacha-Hatschi, eines ausgestorbenen polynesisch-bajuwa- 
rischen Mischvolkes. ibid. 2 4;-312. 
 FREDDHRISTA, P., and PERISCHERZI, N.  (1948): II :amblamento 
di colore fssiologico nei mammiferi, specialemente nei generi 
Hexanthus e Cephalanthus (Polyrrhina, Rhiiogradentia) 
Arch. di fisiol. comp. ed. irr. 34; 222. 
 
GAUKARI-SUDUR, O. , BOUFFON, L. , and PAIGNDPOULOS, A.  
(1950): I/anatomie comparee des Sclerorrhine. C. r. Soc. 
Biol. Rh. 5i2! 39.  
GRUHLE, H. W.  (1947); Ursache, Gnind, Motif, Auslosung. 
Festschr. f. KURT SCHNEIDER, Heidelberg, Sclerer.  
HARROKERRIA, J. , and IRRI-EGINGARRI, J. (1949); Note sur la 
biologie d'Otopteryx volitans. C. r. Soc. Biol. Ih. 511; 56.  
HYDERITSCH, F.  (1948); The slug which was a mammal. Sci.a. 
med. cinemat. Cie, Black Goats.  
IZECHA, F.  (1949); La primitividad de la cola de los Rhi- 
nogradentes. Boll. Arg. Rhin. 2; 66.  

JERKER, A. W. , and CELIAZZINI, S.  (1953): The ancestors of 
the Hypogeonasidae, were they Emunctators? Evolution 
(Littletown) JJ; 284. 
 JESTER, M. O., and ASSFUGL, S. P. (1949); The genus Dulci- 
cauda and the problem of "Raßenkreis." Bull. Darwin Inst. 
Hi. 3; 2il.  
LUDWIG, W. (1932); Das Rechts-Links-Problem in Tierreich 
und beim Menschen. Berlin. 
---- (1954) s Die Selektionstheorie. In: Die Evolution der 
Organismen. Hrsgeg. v. G. HEBERER. Fischer, Stittgart. MAYER-MEIER, R. 
(1949); Les "Triclades" de MÜELLER-GIRMADINGEN, sont ils des 
mammiferes? Bull. bnl. mar. St. 
V. H. 171 i. 
MORGENSTERN, CHR. (1905) : Galgenlieder. B. Cassrer-Berlin.  
MÜLLER-GIRMADINGEN, P. (1948); Les triclades do sables du 
Wisi-Wisi. Acta Helvetica Nas. Ser. B. IS! 210.  
NAQUEDAI, BR. B. (1948); Georrhinida et Hypogeoiasida, deux 
subtribes parentes. C. r. Soc. biol. Rh. 5101 64.  
PETTERSSON-SKÄMTKVIST, E. (1943); The discovery of the Hi- 
lay-Archipelago. J. A. geogr. 322; 187. 
---- (1946) : Aventyrer pa Haiaiai-oema. Nystrims Forlag 
och Bokhandel, Lilleby.  
PUSDIVA, FR. (1953); tJber die Schleimdrusen und de proteoly- 
tfschen Prozesse m der Sellarscheibe von Dulciciuda grise- 
aurella. S. H. Z. physiol. Chemie 822; 1443. 
 
REMANE, A.  (1954); Die Geschichte der Tiere. Ii; Die Evolution der 
Organismen, hrsgeg. v. G. HEBERER. Fiseher, Stuttgart.  
REMSCH, B.  (1947); Neuere Probleme der Abstunmungslehre. 
Stuttgart.  
SCHUTLIWITZKIJ, I. I. (1947) ; Hat Morgenstern die Rhinogra- 
dentier gekannt? (Russisch mit dtsch. Zusanmenfassung.) 
Lit. prom. N. S. 27; 8i.  
SHIRIN TAFARUJ (1954) ; A propos du chimisme du sue attractif 
des Nasolimacides. J. physiol. irr. u; 74.  
SPASMAN, O. , and STULTÉN, D. (1947); Rhinogndenternas sys- 
temet. Acta Scand. Rhin. 4; I.  
SPUTALAVE, E. (1946) : Le sabbie miliolidiche del orizzonte D 16 

13 superiore dell'isola Miruveely. G. geogr. frdd. Ital. Jp<?^' 
12.  
STULTÉN, D. (1949) ; The descendency of the PolTrhines. Bull. 
Darwin Inst. Hi. 3; 31. 
---- (i95o) '• The anatomy of the nasarium of Hopsorrhinus. Bull. Darwin 
Inst. Hi. 4; 511. 
---- (i955) '• The evolution of turbellarians, a leview of new 
aspects. Piltdown Univ. press.  
STÜMPKE, H. (1956); Das Nasarium der Poljrrhinen, erne 
Zusammenfassung der bisherigen Ergebnisse, unrer besonderer 
Berucksichtigung der neueren Untersuchungen iber die Inner- 
vierung. Zool. Jahrb. Abt. XX-XI, 43; 497.  
TASSINO DI CAMPOTASSI, I.  (1955): Un "releaser" sopranormale 
in Mammontops. G. psicol. comp. e corn. 2: 714  
TRUFAGURA, A.  (1948); La cola de los Rhinogndentes. Boll. 
Arg. Rhin. I,' I. 
 

