
THE BRAIN IN MOTION


THE BRAIN  
IN MOTION
From Microcircuits to Global Brain Function
STEN GRILLNER
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Mas­sa­chu­setts
London, ­England

© 2023 Mas­sa­chu­setts Institute of Technology
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND license.
Subject to such license, all rights are reserved.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided comments 
on drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential for establishing the 
authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with gratitude the contributions 
of ­these other­wise uncredited readers.
This book was set in Adobe Garamond and Berthold Akzidenz Grotesk by Westchester 
Publishing Services. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Grillner, Sten, 1941– author.
Title: The brain in motion : from microcircuits to global brain function / Sten Grillner.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2023] | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022054177 (print) | LCCN 2022054178 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9780262048200 (paperback) | ISBN 9780262375313 (epub) | 
ISBN 9780262375306 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: Locomotion. | Neurophysiology. | Comparative neurobiology. | 
Motor ability. | Movement disorders.
Classification: LCC QP301 .G685 2023 (print) | LCC QP301 (ebook) | 
DDC 612.7/6—dc23/eng/20230315
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022054177
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022054178

Preface  ix
	 1	 THE VERTEBRATE MOTOR REPERTOIRE AND THE EVOLUTION  
OF THE BRAIN  1
1.1  Introduction  1
1.2  Vertebrate Motor Be­hav­ior from Lamprey to ­Humans: Overview in an  
Evolutionary Perspective  3
1.3  The Basic Building Blocks of Be­hav­ior: Motor Programs and Their  
Se­lection—­Overview  21
1.4  The Blueprint of the Vertebrate Motor System Is 500 Million Years Old  27
	 2	 EXECUTION OF MOVEMENT: A PALETTE OF CPGS AND MOTOR  
CENTERS FROM MIDBRAIN TO SPINAL CORD  39
2.1  Introduction  39
2.2  CPG Networks Producing Locomotor, Respiratory, and Chewing Movements 
and Related Be­hav­iors  40
2.3  A Brainstem Center for Coordination of Reaching and Grasping Movements  
in the Lateral Reticular Medulla  66
2.4  The PAG Channels Commands from the Hypothalamus and Amygdala  71
2.5  Integration of Innate Motor Programs in Daily Life: Skilled Aspects of the  
Control of Motion  78
2.6  Conclusion  80
Contents

vi    Contents
	 3	 THE VERTEBRATE SOLUTION FOR ACTION IN THE  
EGOCENTRIC SPACE: MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION IN  
THE TECTUM/SUPERIOR COLLICULUS  81
3.1  Introduction  81
3.2  Multisensory Repre­sen­ta­tion of the Surrounding Space in the Tectum/SC  82
3.3  Tectum/SC Control of Eye, Orienting, and Evasive Movements  89
3.4  Conclusion  96
	 4	 THE ROLES OF THE BASAL GANGLIA: FOR INITIATION OF  
MOVEMENT AND MOTOR LEARNING  97
4.1  Overview: The Relation between the Cortex and the Basal Ganglia  97
4.2  Basal Ganglia: Organ­ization  101
4.3  Synaptic Interaction within the Striatum  117
4.4  Integrated Function of the Basal Ganglia  127
4.5  Dysfunction of the Basal Ganglia: Parkinson’s and Huntington’s Diseases  
and Other Conditions  143
4.6  The Contribution of the Basal Ganglia to the Se­lection of Action and the  
Control of Movement Amplitude  153
4.7  The Organ­ization of the Basal Ganglia Is Conserved from Lampreys  
to Primates  160
	 5	 THE ROLE OF THE CORTEX IN THE CONTROL OF MOVEMENT  165
5.1  Introduction  165
5.2  Somatosensory and Visuomotor Coordination Critical in the Preparatory  
Phase and the Transition between Dif­fer­ent Commands in a  
Motor Sequence  168
5.3  The Motor Areas in the Frontal Lobe of Primates and Other Vertebrates  175
5.4  Neocortical Organ­ization at the Cellular Level and the Interaction between  
the Frontal Motor Areas, Striatum, and Downstream Motor Targets  189
5.5  Motor Capacity ­after Lesions to the Neocortex, Including the  
Motor Cortex  197
5.6  Cortical Control of Robotic Arms via the Brain-­Machine Interface ­after  
Spinal Cord Injury  200
5.7  Concluding Remarks: The Neocortex and the Control of Movement  201

vii    Contents
	 6	 THE CEREBELLUM: CONTRIBUTES TO THE PERFECTION  
OF COORDINATION  203
6.1  Introduction  203
6.2  The Cerebellar Circuitry  203
6.3  Spinal Cord Interaction with the Cerebellum: Locomotion and  
Other Movements  210
6.4  The Cerebellum and the Vestibulo-­Ocular and Optokinetic Reflexes:  
Calibration of Motor Action  215
6.5  Parallel Fiber Synapses onto Purkinje Cells: Active and ­Silent Synapses—­
Plasticity  218
6.6  The Cerebellum’s Role for Learning to Associate Two Related but  
In­de­pen­dent Pro­cesses: Conditioned Reflexes  219
6.7  Modeling and Simulation of the Cerebellar Circuitry  219
6.8  Concluding Remarks: The Overall Role of the Cerebellum  220
	 7	 COMMENTS ON WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED AND  
THE CHALLENGES AHEAD  223
7.1  “To Move or Not to Move,” a Question Answered by the Basal Ganglia  
in Close Interaction with the Cortex  224
7.2  The Major Orga­nizational Building Blocks of Motion  226
7.3  The Role of the Cerebellum: The Perfection of Coordination  226
7.4  Some Challenges Ahead  227
References  231
Index  261


I have written this book to convey my views on how the brain controls our 
movements, having worked on the design of microcircuits as well as global 
brain functions of the ner­vous system, from the spinal cord to the forebrain, 
using animal models, sometimes including ­humans. I ­will apply a com-
bined motion and evolutionary perspective since most control systems are 
conserved, although new designs have been added along vertebrate evolu-
tion. Many of the views I hold ­today on how the brain operates have been 
sharpened or emerged from numerous enjoyable discussions with colleagues 
and collaborators worldwide and with many postdocs and PhD students, to 
whom I am of course indebted.
I begin the book by dealing with the evolution of the behavioral reper-
toire of vertebrates, followed by the function of the many microcircuits that 
underlie the basic parts of our motor repertoire and instinctive be­hav­ior, 
ranging from the hypothalamus to the spinal cord. This is followed by the 
midbrain cir­cuits analyzing the egocentric world, and then the basal ganglia 
interacting with the cortex and cerebellum to achieve an integrated control 
of the vari­ous motor cir­cuits and be­hav­ior in general. I am arguing that the 
forebrain is like the conductor of an orchestra, while the microcircuits for 
reaching, grasping, posture, locomotion, and numerous other patterns of 
be­hav­ior correspond to all the members of the orchestra. The conductor 
determines when each of them ­will be called into action.
With the broad scope that I chose, it follows that I ­will discuss some areas 
in greater detail than ­others due to my personal preferences, not necessarily 
Preface

x    Preface
­because they are more impor­tant. I cite to a large extent reviews, and to some 
degree the original references as well, but ­will have neglected many, given the 
space limitations of this book, and ask for your understanding.
To some degree, this book reflects my scientific foci over an extended 
period. My early interest was related to the spinal organ­ization of locomotion 
in mammals, and subsequently to understanding the intrinsic function of 
the central pattern generator (CPG). Next, I moved to the lamprey spinal 
cord (with Peter Wallén) and then extended our studies to the supraspinal 
control from the brainstem and the control of body orientation. From then 
on, my experimental work has often been combined with simulation as a 
complementary tool (with Anders Lansner and Jeanette Hellgren Kotaleski). 
­After studying the visuomotor coordination of gaze mediated through the 
midbrain, we de­cided to explore the forebrain mechanisms engaged in the 
se­lection of be­hav­ior. To our surprise, we found that the detailed organ­
ization of the basal ganglia was conserved over 500 million years from the 
lamprey to mammals, and the sensory and motor areas in the mammalian 
cortex ­were also found in the lamprey. The blueprint of the vertebrate ner­
vous system had thus already evolved when the evolutionary line leading to 
mammals became separate from that of the lamprey, although the number 
of neurons has increased by ­orders of magnitude, and thereby the potential 
for a more varied behavioral repertoire as well. This evolutionary perspective 
has been a rewarding focus for my work over the last several years.
In the pro­cess of writing this book, I have had the indispensable help 
of my colleague Dr. Brita Robertson, who has scrutinized and commented 
on all parts of the text and designed many of the figures; Professor Abdel El 
Manira, who has also read and commented on all the chapters as they ­were 
written, and Professors Jeanette Hellgren Kotaleski and Gilad Silberberg and 
Johanna Frost Nylén, a se­nior PhD student, who have given me very valu-
able feedback on some chapters. Dr. Lena Grillner, my wife, has provided 
an unimaginable amount of understanding and support of my priorities 
throughout my scientific journey, including the completion of this book.
My research has been funded each year since 1970 by the Swedish 
Research Council, by many grants from the Eu­ro­pean commission over 
many de­cades, and also by many other foundations.

To move ­things is all mankind can do—­whether in whispering a syllable 
or in felling a forest.
—­C. S. Sherrington (1924)
1.1  INTRODUCTION
All living creatures need to interact with their environment, and even the 
most basic creatures have a set of innate motor cir­cuits that can be called 
upon to feed, locomote, fight, or flee. In this chapter, I ­will show how the 
motor repertoire of vertebrates has evolved from that of protovertebrates to 
that of primates. I ­will consider all types of movements, ­whether they are 
the delicate fin­ger movements of a pianist or whole-­body movements such 
as locomotion and posture. I ­will avoid making any distinction between 
voluntary movements and basic motor patterns, since both walking and 
playing the piano are performed at ­will. I ­will also argue that the bases for 
practically all movements are innate cir­cuits. Skilled movements often utilize 
innate components that can be programmed in a par­tic­u­lar sequence. I have 
argued ­earlier that contrasting innate versus learned movements provide a 
false dichotomy (Grillner & Wallén, 2004).
An impor­tant message ­will be that we have a rich motor infrastructure 
extending from whole-­body movements to reaching and in­de­pen­dent fin­
ger movements in primates, and that ­these dif­fer­ent building blocks can 
be recruited to design more complex movements. A skilled movement can 
be produced by combining distinct innate components in a well-­timed 
THE VERTEBRATE MOTOR REPERTOIRE 
AND THE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN
1

2    Chapter 1
sequence and by tinkering with the amplitude of the vari­ous components, 
­whether the activity is playing tennis or writing a letter. ­These novel inte-
grated motor patterns, which can be perfected through training, represent 
new skilled motor programs. They are put together by innate components 
from the motor infrastructure, and the learned parts comprise mostly specific 
timing and fine-­tuning.
The neural cir­cuits for generating the ­human movement repertoire reside 
mostly in the midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord, while the forebrain deter-
mines when ­these cir­cuits ­shall be recruited and the precise sequence of activat-
ing the innate motor components, sometimes called “motor primitives.” The 
role of the cortical cir­cuits and the basal ganglia together is thus to determine 
when the cir­cuits for execution of movements ­shall become active. The analogy 
to an orchestra given in the preface and shown in figure 1.1 is relevant: the 
conductor (forebrain) determines what should be done and when, while each 
member of the orchestra (each motor microcircuit) performs his or her part, 
resulting in a well-­coordinated symphony (skilled movement).
The conductor – the forebrain
The orchestra – midbrain to spinal cord 
Figure 1.1
The orchestra and its conductor. The ner­vous system resembles in a sense an orchestra, each 
member of which has a special skill (e.g., playing the violin or the flute); but when and how the 
members play is ­under the control of the conductor. All the vari­ous motor programs or micro-
circuits of the ner­vous system are located in the midbrain-­spinal cord.

3    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
I ­will start by giving a brief evolutionary perspective on the vertebrate 
motor repertoire, followed by the cir­cuits for executions of movement, rep-
resenting a motor infrastructure of innate motor cir­cuits located mostly in 
the brainstem and spinal cord. Then comes a description of the intricate 
forebrain pro­cessing with close interaction between the cortex and basal 
ganglia, as well as considering the contribution of cerebellum.
1.2  VERTEBRATE MOTOR BE­HAV­IOR FROM LAMPREY TO 
­HUMANS: OVERVIEW IN AN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE
Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.
—­T. G. Dobzhansky
The oldest group of living vertebrates is the cyclostomes, represented by the 
lamprey, and the youn­gest groups comprise the birds and primates. Next, 
we discuss the range of motor be­hav­iors that have evolved in the dif­fer­ent 
classes of vertebrates (see figure 1.6 ­later in this chapter) in an evolutionary 
perspective. They can roughly be divided into the following groups:
•	
Whole-­body movements, such as locomotion and posture, are repre-
sented in all classes of vertebrates, from swimming in fish and flying in 
birds to walking in tetrapods and bipeds. They are a precondition for 
escaping, freezing, foraging, and exploratory be­hav­iors.
•	
Specific movements of the appendages, such as reaching and grasping, 
gradually evolve from amphibians to primates.
•	
Orofacial movements are used for ingesting food, manipulating objects, 
and in defense or attack. Included ­here are the associated motor patterns 
of chewing and swallowing.
•	
Respiratory movements are required to inhale oxygen and exhale carbon 
dioxide through the gills or lungs. Volitional control of the airflow is 
critical for vocalization and also depends on the larynx and the dynamic 
shape of the oral cavity, ­whether in frog calls, birdsong, or ­human speech.
•	
Vari­ous species display characteristic courtship be­hav­iors, which are dif­
fer­ent for males and females, as well as specific motor patterns under­lying 

4    Chapter 1
spawning or mating. Birds and mammals ­handle their young through 
characteristic maternal (and, in some species, paternal) be­hav­iors.
•	
Many birds and mammals express dif­fer­ent forms of emotions through 
vocalization and facial or bodily motor patterns.
•	
All classes of vertebrates have similarly or­ga­nized eye movements and 
display both orienting movements, ­toward an object of interest, or eva-
sive movements, to avoid collision or confrontation with objects in the 
surrounding environment.
1.2.1  Whole-­Body Movements
1.2.1.1  Posture
During locomotion, most vertebrates, from fish to birds and mammals, have 
the body oriented with the back in a dorsal position, and a few bipedal spe-
cies such as ­humans have the trunk in a vertical position. The vestibular sense 
organs play a dominant role in the control of body position in fish, as in other 
vertebrate groups, in which proprioceptive reflexes from the limbs also have 
made significant contributions for maintaining the orientation of the body. 
The projection of the center of gravity needs to be kept dynamically between 
the vari­ous points of support as the limbs move. ­There is a seamless transi-
tion from locomotion to posture, as elegantly formulated by Sherrington’s 
statement that “posture follows movement like a shadow.” (see Grillner & El 
Manira, 2020). Most likely, the postural control system is integrated with the 
locomotor system during ongoing locomotion, and when the movements 
stop, the postural system continues to operate in­de­pen­dently in the absence 
of locomotor movement.
At rest, the body can voluntarily assume a wide variety of positions, such 
as standing, sitting, lying, or with the head bent forward. To provide the appro-
priate neural commands requires integrated information about the positions 
of all the parts of the body in relation to each other, which is provided mainly 
by the proprioceptive system. Similarly impor­tant is information regarding 
the orientation of each body part in relation to gravity. This information, 
partly pro­cessed dynamically in the spinal cord and cerebellum, is available 
continuously to the central ner­vous system and is sometimes referred to as the 
“body scheme.” The position of the body at any given point of time serves as 

5    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
a platform for other movements (Gray, 1968), as when reaching out to grab 
a ball.
1.2.1.2  Locomotion
The lamprey has a long, slender, eel-­like body without any paired fins, and 
it swims with undulatory swimming movements propagated along the body 
(figure 1.2a). ­These movements are steered by adding excitation to the moto-
neurons on one or the other side of the body. The trunk movements are 
controlled by the segmental motoneurons, located along the spinal cord in a 
medial motor column (MMC). In addition, vertebrates with limbs or paired 
fins have a lateral motor column (LMC) at both the cervical and lumbar lev-
els, which innervates the forelimbs and hindlimbs or the corresponding fins.
Next in line, the sharks (elasmobranchs) represent the second-­oldest group 
of vertebrates and also swim with undulatory waves propagated along the 
body. They have evolved paired pectoral and pelvic fins that are controlled by 
the motoneurons of the newly evolved LMC. The large pectoral fins in the 
A
D
E
F
G
H
I
B
C
Figure 1.2
Dif­fer­ent forms of locomotion among vertebrates. A. Lamprey. B. Elasmobranch (skate). C. Tele-
ost (perch). D. Amphibian (salamander). E. Ostrich (walking). F. Ea­gle (flying). G. Cheetah (the 
fastest mammal with regard to locomotion). H. Primate (arboreal locomotion). I. Variation of 
­human locomotion.

6    Chapter 1
shark are used very efficiently for steering during locomotion. In the related 
skate, the pectoral fins have been further enlarged and take part in the propul-
sion, with a dorsoventral traveling wave from rostral to caudal (figure 1.2b). 
A remarkable and unexpected finding (Jung et al., 2018) was that the pelvic 
fins of the ray can induce alternating movements of the fins in a leglike fashion 
that result in forward motion, when the ray rests on the bottom of the sea and 
is not actively swimming.
In the teleosts (bony fish), the pectoral fins have gained further in­de­
pen­dence and can be moved in­de­pen­dently (figure 1.2c), such as when the 
fish is positioning itself to eat snails on a rock. The fins can also contribute 
to locomotion at slow speeds, while at higher speeds, the undulatory trunk 
movements dominate and the pectoral fins are folded to the side of the body. 
This very large group of species (numbering around 20,000) displays many 
variations and body shapes. Some fish, such as the mudskipper (periophtal-
mus lineage) in the Goby ­family, have their pectoral fins directed ventrally 
and can be used as propulsive appendages. The mudskipper is thus able to 
move on land for shorter distances than in the ­water, while the body is kept 
stiff.
Amphibians constitute the first tetrapod group that evolved forelimbs 
and hindlimbs for locomotion with the same skeletal parts as in mammals, 
including “fingers/digits,” and the same muscle groups in the limbs and 
trunk. The salamander group swims with fishlike, undulatory movements 
with the limbs kept close to the body. At slower speeds, they walk ­either on 
the bottom of ponds or on the ground with an alternating gait and with the 
limbs held in a lateral direction that ascertains a more stable control of body 
posture (figure 1.2d). The other amphibian group, the anurans, comprises 
frogs and toads, which have a more compact and square body shape. Frogs use 
mostly a hopping gait, with the hindlimbs extended in phase (synchronous) 
with the propulsive phase, but they can also alternate. While the animal is 
in the air, the hindlimbs are flexed while the forelimbs become extended as 
the frog approaches the ground. This means that at the amphibian stage, the 
basic modes of “tetrapod coordination” had already evolved with alternating 
gaits as in walking or trotting, or “in phase coordination,” as during hopping 
or mammalian galloping.

7    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
Reptile locomotion for many groups, such as crocodiles and lizards, is 
similar to that of the salamander, but turtles have stiff shells and use their 
limbs only for walking and swimming. Fi­nally, snakes have lost their append-
ages and display a variety of undulatory movements; for some, such as eels or 
lampreys, it is swimming, while ­others display more specialized forms, like 
the sideways movements of the sidewinder (Gray, 1968).
The bird lineage represents a further extension of the reptilian sauropsids 
(dinosaurs) group, and their forelimbs have been restructured to wings, but 
with a similar basic set of skeletal parts and muscles. Birds have sacrificed 
the reaching and grasping ability of the forelimbs for being able to explore 
the world in three dimensions, like the ea­gle shown in figure 1.2f. The wings 
are used in phase during flight rather than in alternation, as in walking. The 
hindlimbs are mostly used for bipedal walking (the ostrich in figure 1.2e) or 
hopping (the magpie), or for swimming (ducks or gulls, in this case generally 
with webbed feet). The legs can also be used to secure the location of pieces 
of food on the ground, while the bill is for grasping. Some birds, such as 
ospreys or ea­gles, can also use the hindlimbs during hunting to seize a fish or 
another prey with their feet and transport it to a safe place. This prehensive 
ability of the hindlimbs is a unique function that is normally a task for the 
forelimbs in other vertebrate groups.
The basic motor patterns of standing, flying, and landing are innate. I 
once observed a young nestling of a blackbird that had its nest on the win-
dowsill on my balcony. The young blackbird, ready to leave the nest, was 
standing on the rim of the nest, and then it flew to the railing of the balcony 
and grasped it. A minute ­later, it flew down some five meters to the ground 
and, just before landing, flapped its wings to stop the downward momentum 
and land almost perfectly. Given that this was the fledgling’s very first trial, 
it was an impressive event to observe. At the same time, this shows that the 
entire sequence of motor patterns used in an appropriate sequence (flying, 
grasping the rail, flying again, and landing) must be genet­ically coded as 
well as the basic aspects of visuomotor coordination, since they ­were able to 
­handle this difficult task on the very first trial.
In mammals, the alternating gaits are walking and trotting, and in some 
species pacing. In the latter case, the forelimbs and hindlimbs on the same side 

8    Chapter 1
are synchronous rather than alternating, as in a trot. Most species also display 
in phase movements such as in the forms of galloping and bounding as dem-
onstrated by the cheetah in figure 1.2g that can actually reach over 100 km/h 
during a sprint and represents the fastest ­running mammal. Sea-­living species, 
such as ­whales and seals, move mainly through dorsoventral movements of 
the body and the appendages have been reduced in size and are mostly used 
for steering.
Arboreal mammals, such as the squirrel, jump from branch to branch 
and have developed an ability to grasp very efficiently as they approach a new 
target. Primates, notably the orangutangs, have evolved the capacity to use the 
forelimbs in­de­pen­dently as they swing from one branch of a tree to another 
(figure 1.2h). This means that a primate must have a precise estimate of the 
location of the new target, elicit an appropriate reaching command, and upon 
reaching the target, be able to firmly grasp the new branch. At this point, it 
needs to carry the weight of the entire body on one arm, swing forward to a 
new target, and use the other arm (or, more precisely, the hand) for grasping. 
Most primates, such as baboons, use all four limbs for locomotion, but many 
monkeys and apes are bipedal for part of the time (Higurashi et al., 2019). This 
has the advantage of freeing the forelimbs for grasping objects, such as palat-
able fruits, or (for some apes) using stones as tools. Having the body upright, 
of course, means a better overview as animals move around in a landscape 
that offers many opportunities, but also threats. The bipedal locomotion of 
nonhuman primates is dif­fer­ent from that of ­humans, in that the knees are 
bent during the support phase in the tetrapod gait, whereas in the ­human 
walk, the legs are kept straight. During ­running, however, the limbs remain 
bent and springy during the support phase (Grillner et al., 1979). ­Humans 
can combine locomotion with a variety of impressive motions, such as ­those 
of the ballet dancer in figure 1.2i.
The basic pattern of coordination of the hindlimbs, as viewed by elec-
tromyographical activity in the leg muscles, are similar in dif­fer­ent mammals 
(rodents to primates), reflecting the four phases of each step cycle (support, 
liftoff, forward motion of the leg, and touchdown). This basic pattern of coor-
dination is also found in birds such as guinea fowls (Dominici et al., 2011). 
This implies that the four-­phase motor pattern existed in the last common 

9    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
ancestor, which would be an early reptile, or possibly an amphibian. The trunk 
and forelimb motor patterns are thus conserved, even though the efficacy of 
the locomotor movements varies remarkably from the impressive run of a 
cheetah to the lethargic movements of a turtle. This is likely accounted for by 
a conserved organ­ization of the locomotor networks at the level of the spinal 
cord.
1.2.1.3  Flight, freeze, or fight
An impor­tant priority for all vertebrates is to be able to react to an impending 
threat by fleeing through an almost instantaneous activation of the locomo-
tor system. Many vertebrates instead react to a potential threat by becoming 
inactive—­that is, to freeze and remain still in a given posture. The reason for 
this is that most predators detect prey as they move, and therefore the “playing 
dead” reaction can be lifesaving. The third possibility is to attack and fight, 
which requires not only the locomotor system, but also a flexible, well-­adapted 
body and jaws.
1.2.2  Reaching, Grasping, and Accurate Foot Placement  
during Locomotion
The paired pectoral fins in fish can be used in­de­pen­dent of each other for posi-
tioning themselves, such as in relation to pieces of food. The proximal parts of 
the fins evolve into the forelimbs of amphibians with the basic skeletal design 
of a shoulder, upper and lower forelimb, hand bones and digits, and the related 
muscle groups. This design is used throughout vertebrate phylogeny, although 
dif­fer­ent adaptations have taken place, such as in hoofed animals.
Amphibians and reptiles clearly steer their locomotor movements with the 
help of the forelimbs and use their distal, fingerlike appendages for grasping 
vari­ous structures in the context of locomotion, as when they move along the 
stem of a tree and reach out for support. ­There is a large array of specializations 
of the “hand,” particularly in reptiles, to enhance friction and facilitate move-
ments on leaning surfaces. This can take many forms, such as pads on digits.
In many species, the forelimbs are also used for in­de­pen­dent reaching and 
grasping, such as during feeding and prey capturing in many frog species (Gray 
et al., 1997). Frogs can reach out with a forelimb to grasp prey (e.g., an insect) 
and bring it to the mouth. The digits of the frog’s hand are at first extended 

10    Chapter 1
and then contracted around the object as it grasps (figure 1.3a). Frogs also use 
the forelimbs to push food into the mouth.
Many mammals can reach for specific targets, as when eating, when the 
food can be secured by one hand or foot while the jaws grab pieces of the 
food item. This strategy is typically found in dogs. Rodents and cats use more 
advanced movements and have the capacity to grasp small pieces of food such 
as seeds with their paws and bring them to the mouth. The paw must first be 
oriented ­toward the location of the food and then be reshaped. The paw is held 
comparatively open for grasping larger objects, but with the digits more con-
tracted if the object is small (Whishaw et al., 1992; Whishaw & Coles, 1996; 
Iwaniuk & Whishaw, 2000). The successive stages in the grasping be­hav­ior are 
A
C
D
Locomotion with accurate positioning of limbs
Accurate positioning of limbs without locomotion
Vision
X, Y, Z
X, Y, Z
B
Figure 1.3
Reaching is pre­sent from amphibians to primates. A. A frog grasping to remove an attacker 
(coutesy of David Maitland). B. The passerine, prepared to grasp around the branch of a tree, 
while landing. C. A primate pointing ­toward a target. D. Precision walking of an animal requires 
placing the limbs on specific targets and the same corticospinal neurons are used for reaching 
and during locomotion.

11    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
remarkably similar in rodents and ­humans (Sacrey et al., 2009), which suggests 
that the neural machinery for reaching, and grasping is conserved, prob­ably 
based on the grasping circuitry already pre­sent in frogs. Mice can even peel 
off the capsule of a seed while holding it in the paw, using the mouth/teeth for 
­handling the capsule of the seed—­indeed a sophisticated case of fine motor 
control. They can also grasp elongated objects such as a piece of pasta. The 
neural bases of reaching and grasping circuitry have been explored in some 
detail (Ruder et al., 2021; Esposito et al., 2014).
1.2.2.1  Many primates have the ability to move each  
fin­ger in­de­pen­dently
Most animals use the paw/hand to contract or extend the digits synchronously 
so that it functions as a unit. A further development in some primates is in­de­
pen­dent control of individual digits, which is required when an object must 
be retrieved from a small hole, for instance. The control of individual fin­gers 
requires an intact corticospinal system. This control is lost ­after lesions of the 
corticospinal tract (Porter, 1987), but it gradually recovers, although not at the 
same level. Fi­nally, the ­human hand is an outstanding, versatile tool that can 
be used in numerous configurations with the dif­fer­ent fin­gers, such as when 
carry­ing heavy objects, creating novel pieces of art (like that of a silversmith), or 
playing the piano or the violin (see chapter 5). This all depends on our ability 
to use our fin­gers in amazing combinations. Our ability to move the fin­gers 
in­de­pen­dently is innate and typical of our species, but we can learn to use our 
fin­gers in a variety of contexts and adapt the movements to new situations like 
tying shoelaces (Dhawale et al., 2017, 2021).
1.2.2.2  Birds reach out and grasp with their hindlimbs
Many birds, particularly passerines, can rest while sitting on a small twig of 
a bush or tree. This depends entirely on their ability to grasp the small twig 
with their feet (hindfeet) when landing, based on previous visual information 
used to orient the feet appropriately (see figure 1.3b). In addition, they need 
to have an astounding equilibrium control as they maintain body orientation 
as the branch that they are sitting on is moving in the wind, which requires 
exquisite vestibular and proprioceptive control. Birds can also use one limb 
to secure the position of a piece of food on the ground while using the beak 

12    Chapter 1
to subdivide the food into palatable parts. As mentioned ­earlier, ea­gles and 
ospreys use their feet to capture prey, such as a fish or a rabbit, and then carry 
the prey while flying to their nest or some other location.
1.2.2.3  The role of reaching cir­cuits during locomotion
The forelimbs are used for steering locomotor movements by rotating the limbs 
in the desired direction before they are placed on the ground, together with 
orienting the body in the same direction. In addition, the forelimbs are used 
for an accurate placement of the feet during each step on uneven terrain. 
This is like performing a reaching movement ­toward a specific position, 
but with the added complication of the ongoing locomotor movements 
(Georgopoulos & Grillner, 1989). That the same neural machinery is actu-
ally used during reaching and locomotion is shown by the fact that the very 
same corticospinal neurons are activated both in a reaching task and during 
precision walking in the cat (figure 1.3c,d; also see Yakovenko & Drew, 
2015). The same neural control system can thus be used in­de­pen­dently for 
reaching ­toward dif­fer­ent targets in the environment or in combination with 
locomotion for accurate foot placement with each step. It can even be argued 
that the origin of reaching movements is related to the requirement to place 
the limbs at an optimal point of support during locomotion.
1.2.2.4  Rhythmic scratch reflexes or grooming movements
In most tetrapods, it is impor­tant to keep the body clean and remove irritants 
from the skin. In amphibians, one hindlimb is used to wipe away irritants on 
the same side of the body. In mammals, as well as in birds and reptiles, a scratch 
reflex occurs which is directed to remove irritants on the skin. This requires 
rhythmic movements of the leg, and in addition, the paw is directed to the 
specific location of the irritant on the body. The leg performs rhythmic move-
ments resembling ­those of locomotion, but the hip joint is held in a position 
so that the paw can make contact with the affected skin area. This seemingly 
complex pro­cess, requiring a body plan, can be performed by the spinal cord 
cir­cuits without any contribution from higher centers (Stein, 2008; Fukson 
et al., 1980; Sherrington, 1906). ­Either one or two forelimbs perform groom-
ing movements that are also rhythmic and directed to cleaning par­tic­u­lar areas 

13    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
on the head and face. ­These movements are coordinated at the brainstem–­
spinal cord level (Kalueff et al., 2016). In some species, such as the ­horse, not 
all parts of the body can be reached by a limb, and the animal may then rub 
the body against a tree, for instance, to remove the irritant.
1.2.3  Orofacial Movements: A Main Source for Interaction  
with the Surrounding World
Although most vertebrates interact with the environment by using their 
mouths and jaws, the neural control of this impor­tant motor be­hav­ior has 
been much less studied than control of the limbs. The oldest vertebrate 
group, the cyclostomes, lack jaws but have a circular mouth, which is used to 
efficiently suck onto their prey, while the rough tongue is used to penetrate 
the skin of the prey. Over an extended time, they suck the body fluids from 
the victim, which can become seriously weakened or even die.
All the other vertebrates have jaws that are used not only for ingesting 
food, but also for interacting with the surroundings and in defense, attack, 
or play. For most species, the orofacial control system is the most impor­tant 
neural machinery for exploring and interacting with the surrounding world. 
In monkeys, apes, ­humans, and some other species, the arms and hands have 
instead at least partially taken over this role.
For feeding, most animals grab large or small pieces of food and simply 
swallow, ­whether they be sharks, crocodiles, or seagulls. Further parcellat-
ing the food by chewing before swallowing is mainly a mammalian devel-
opment, and it is coordinated by networks in the brainstem (Dellow & 
Lund, 1971). This entails opening and closing the jaws, as well as moving 
the tongue in the opening phase to relocate the food in the mouth. When 
the food is brought to the posterior parts of the pharynx, a swallowing 
network becomes activated that brings the food down to the ventricle by a 
programmed sequence of muscle actions (Jean, 1990, 2001).
Mammals also use the jaws for carry­ing food or their young. A dog may 
carry some object back to its owner, and the jaws also can be used in hunting, 
as when a cheetah attacks an antelope. The latter be­hav­ior is a whole-­body 
engagement, but the jaws play the central role in killing the prey, as also done 

14    Chapter 1
when animals fight for their life. On the other hand, when pups are playing, 
they abstain from severe bites but simulate fighting and learn to perfect their 
movement repertoire.
1.2.4  Breathing, Vocalization (Including Birdsong and  
­Human Speech), and Expression of Emotions
1.2.4.1  Respiration
All vertebrates breathe with rhythmic movements to produce ­water flow over 
the gills or airflow to and from the lungs. The rhythmic movements are in both 
cases produced by brainstem networks of a similar design (Del Negro et al., 
2018; Cinelli et al., 2013, 2016; Missaghi et al., 2016), although the down-
stream respiratory structures may be arranged in a radically dif­fer­ent way in 
vari­ous animal groups. The respiratory regulation of breathing frequency and 
depth of breath is regulated by chemoreceptors that sense the carbon dioxide 
and oxygen levels in the blood.
1.2.4.2  Vocalization, including speech
The airflow of the lungs is also used for vocalization, along with a modulation 
through the larynx and the dynamic shape of the oral cavity. A set of innate 
warning calls are used by most birds and mammals to signal a pos­si­ble threat. 
Neural cir­cuits in the midbrain, including the periaqueductal gray (PAG), 
are responsible for eliciting the commands for vocalizations of this type. The 
crying of a newborn baby belongs to this category, as does other sounds, such 
as the barking of a dog or the purring of a cat.
Birdsong is a more sophisticated form of vocalization that is often species-­
specific and produced by neural cir­cuits in the forebrain. In most songbirds, it 
is seen as depending on some sort of vaguely defined innate neural template, 
which is dif­fer­ent for each species. The song is reinforced by the young having 
heard it in early life and have it crystallized when it starts to sing ­later in life. 
However, the motor sequences can be modified extensively through learning 
by exposing the bird to modifications of the original song. Some birds, such 
as the parrot and the mockingbird, have the unique ability to learn through 
imitation, including the calls of a variety of other birds, traffic sounds, and 
­human sounds.

15    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
The same princi­ples are used to some degree in the most unique ­human 
be­hav­ior, speech, which allows us to communicate about past, pre­sent, and 
­future events (see also chapter 5). As ­children, we learn the words and logic 
of our own native language, as well as the vari­ous sounds that are used. As the 
brain gradually matures, more advanced pro­cesses evolve as cognition. It all, 
however, depends on the ability to dynamically control the respiratory flow, 
the dynamic preshaping of the oral cavity, and the position of the tongue. This 
astounding ability to develop language has ultimately allowed the development 
of civilizations, together with the possibility of transferring knowledge through 
writing. The latter invention, written language, evolved only late in the short 
history of our species.
1.2.4.3  Expression of emotions
Most animals, from fish to mammals, use facial expressions or body pos-
tures with vocalizations to express anxiety, aggression, satisfaction, maternal 
be­hav­ior, and courtship be­hav­ior. In 1872, Charles Darwin published The 
Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, one of his many remarkable 
books. He could show that the expression of ­human emotions such as smil-
ing, laughing, crying, anger, and worry is innate and expressed in a similar 
way in dif­fer­ent parts of the world. Figure 1.4 shows reproductions of some 
of the original plates of Darwin, showing a smiling girl, a weeping child, a 
worried boy, a ­woman expressing disapproval, and fi­nally an angry toddler. 
One must recall that using photography in 1872 at the time was a high-­tech 
enterprise. The sculpture of the angry boy, made by Gustav Vigeland, is dis-
played in Oslo. Darwin pointed out that, for instance, ­children born blind 
smile as beautifully as ­children who can see, and therefore the neural cir­cuits 
that generate the smile must be innate. He also discussed the role of the facial 
muscles that could be activated to elicit the facial expressions under­lying the 
vari­ous emotions. He concluded that each type of emotion was based on a 
combination of active facial muscles. He actually reported the effect of selec-
tive stimulation of the dif­fer­ent facial muscles (e.g., the forehead, eyebrows, 
and shape of the mouth) and how they contribute to the expression of the 
dif­fer­ent emotions (i.e., in a sense, a set of motor programs).

16    Chapter 1
­Humans are now considered to have seven characteristic facial expres-
sions (Ekman et al., 1987). Our motor programs to express emotions are 
innate, but what we laugh at or react to with disgust is culturally bound. 
Darwin also noted that other mammals such as dogs display signs of plea­sure 
when meeting individuals that they know, or anger, or submissive be­hav­ior 
when they have misbehaved.
1.2.5  Eye, Orienting, and Avoidance Movements
Most vertebrates depend on vision, but to varying degrees. Eyes with well-­
developed ret­i­nas exist in the lamprey and all later-­evolved classes of ver-
tebrates. The visual information is pro­cessed first in the ret­ina and then 
transferred in a retinotopic fashion to the midbrain roof (tectum, called the 
“superior colliculus [SC]” in mammals) and in parallel to the visual area in 
Anger
Worried
Smiling
Crying
Disapproving
A
B
PLATE I
1
C
D
E
Figure 1.4
The expression of dif­fer­ent forms of emotions in ­humans depends on specific motor programs. 
Some of Darwin’s (1872) original illustrations of the expression of emotions in ­humans (a girl smil-
ing, a child weeping, a worried expression of af a boy, and a ­woman expressing disapproval) are 
shown in (A)–(D). Panel (E) shows a sculpture of a boy displaying anger made by Gustav Vigeland.

17    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
pallium in the lamprey, and for object recognition to the visual cortex in 
mammals. The retinotopic map is located superficially in the tectum/SC. In 
register, but deeper, ­there is a motor map, which can elicit eye movements 
­toward the part of the visual field that has been activated by the overlying 
retinotopic area or orienting movements of the head and body. The control 
of eye movements is through the same groups of eye muscles in the lamprey 
and other vertebrates and controlled by the same cranial motor nuclei (third, 
fourth, and sixth).
To be able to maintain stable vision, the gaze is controlled through 
vestibulo-­ocular reflexes producing compensatory eye movements as the 
head moves and optokinetic reflexes elicited when an object is drifting over 
the ret­ina. In addition to eye movements, orienting movements of head 
and body are elicited. If a large object appears ahead, a dif­fer­ent set of tectal 
neurons become activated to avoid collision and elicit an avoidance move-
ment. ­These mechanisms, including nystagmus, exist in both the lamprey 
and mammals and most likely represents a basic neural design feature that is 
required for an optimal usage of vision during movements in all vertebrates.
A dif­fer­ent class of eye movements includes ­those used to track a visual 
object, as when watching a tennis ball moving back and forth. In mammals, 
this is pro­cessed in the cortex. It is not yet clear which vertebrate groups pos-
sess this capability. The tracking movements require much more time for pro­
cessing than the vestibulo-­ocular compensatory movements. Thus, the basic 
features of control of the gaze developed very early in vertebrate evolution.
Animals that often move in dark habitats, such as rats, mice, and the cat, 
have developed complementary tactile sensors, the whis­kers, which are very 
sensitive and respond to the slightest contact at the far end of each whisker. 
They are used extensively by rodents to maneuver in dark passages and rely on a 
complex pro­cessing in the barrel cortex and in other parts of the ner­vous system.
1.2.6  Innate Motor Programs during Ontogeny:  
Maturation and Plasticity
When a motor program starts to operate in the very young, it is usually 
far from perfect and reaches completion as the animal grows. The motor 
program may also become optimized as it is used—­practice makes perfect. 

18    Chapter 1
Many mammals, such as cats and dogs, play extensively during the first few 
months of life with their littermates. Play no doubt provides a very versatile 
training and exposure to a variety of movements and makes their movement 
repertoire perfected.
The ­human baby is born quite immature and goes through stages of 
maturation during the first year (figure 1.5). When it is born, it can breathe, 
be fed, and cry, and a few other faculties are developed. With each month, 
the baby ­will successively be able to balance the head, to sit and stand with-
out support, to crawl, and fi­nally to walk a few steps. It is impor­tant to realize 
that this is essentially a biological maturation pro­cess, and the child is not 
“learning to walk,” as the common expression says.
0 Months
2 Months
4 Months
9 Months
15 Months
14 Months
10 Months
Figure 1.5
The progressive maturation of the motor development of the ­human infant and young child. 
At two months ­after birth, a child can lift its head; at four months, it can sit up with support. 
Subsequently, it can stand with support, crawl, stand without support, and fi­nally walk. The 
approximate time at which a child can perform ­those motor tasks is indicated above each image. 
The variability in the maturation pro­cess is substantial among dif­fer­ent ­children.

19    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
Other mammals, such as hoofed animals, are born very mature. A few 
minutes ­after birth, some antelopes are not just able to stand but also run, such 
as the calf of the wildebeest (antelope), which must be able to respond to the 
impending threat from predators by ­running away (see figure 1.6a). Likewise, 
some birds can stand and walk upon hatching and even pick up grains off the 
ground.
Why do we have this marked difference? Garwicz et al. (2009) provided 
an unexpected answer to this question, as they showed that ­there is a linear 
relation between brain weight and the time from conception ­until when an 
animal starts to locomote—­from mice to ­humans and elephants. The latter 
have the largest brains (figure 1.6b). Locomotion is a complex task, consid-
ering many aspects that need to be integrated—­locomotion, posture, and 
visuomotor coordination (to mention just a few), and the difficulty must 
be expected to increase with the weight of the animal. It is, of course, to be 
expected that it takes a much longer time to form the complex brain of a 
­human than the tiny brain of a mouse.
–1.0 –0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
1.0
log(AbsBrM) g
Days (log) after conception
Hamster
Rat
Hedgehog
Ferret
Cat Dog Sheep
Chital
Elk
Hippopotamus
Horse
Camel
Elephant
Human
Gorilla
Chimpanzee
Cow
Macaque
Aardvark
Armadillo
Guinea pig
Tree shrew
Elephant shrew
Mouse
1.5
1.5
2.0
2.0
2.5
2.5
3.0
3.0
B
A
3.5 4.0
Figure 1.6
Mammals differ in their degree of maturation at time of birth. A. One extreme is represented 
by the antelope (wildebeest), shown ­here with a young calf galloping ­behind the ­mother, ten 
minutes ­after delivery. B. The adult brain weight of dif­fer­ent mammals plotted versus the time 
to onset of walking calculated from day of conception (log-­log scale). Note the linear correla-
tion between brain weight and the time to start walking. Some species are very immature at 
birth, such as the ­human baby, and ­others very mature, such as the deer/elk, and yet they fall 
on the same regression line. Solid symbols represent species that can assume a plantigrade 
hindlimb standing position; open symbols represent species that cannot do so. Modified from 
Garwicz et al. (2009).

20    Chapter 1
Most animals grow gradually to a weight many times greater than that 
of the young pups or larvae. This means that the neural circuitry must adapt 
in a remarkable way to be able to control the increasing mass that it has to 
steer in actions such as reaching or locomotion—­consider, for instance, the 
weight of a newborn compared to an adult elephant. The entire control sys-
tems for posture and locomotion need to be recalibrated as an animal grows. 
In another example, the locomotor network of the larval zebrafish becomes 
somewhat modified, and some neurons take on a new role on the way to 
becoming an adult, during which pro­cess the weight and size has increased 
many times. The maximal swimming frequency is high for the small larvae 
and much lower for the adult, although the speed of swimming can be much 
faster in the latter (see chapter 2).
As an animal grows, remarkable changes need to take place in the ner­
vous system. This concerns the efficacy of the synaptic transmission, neuro-
nal properties, number of neurons, and even the size of the ner­vous system. 
The latter ­will increase, and the length of many axons ­will likewise. The size 
and number of muscle fibers and the entire body ­will increase as well. Some 
vertebrates continue to grow throughout life, whereas ­others reach their 
permanent weight in adulthood.
1.2.7  Conclusions
Many aspects of vertebrate motor be­hav­ior have their origin early in verte-
brate phylogeny, and all display escape reactions and freezing. As the limbs 
evolve, they can be used for steering, and, already in amphibians, they are 
also used for reaching and grasping, although the precision and versatility 
increase gradually in mammals. Primates add the ability of in­de­pen­dent fin­
ger movements, which allow fine manipulation and enable ­humans to play 
the piano. Control of the eyes is conserved from the lamprey to primates, as 
well as the innervation pattern of the eye muscles and the control of orient-
ing and evasive movements. The latter are critical when moving around in a 
complex terrain in which you need to avoid bumping into obstacles, and the 
orienting movements are needed to point the eye, head, and body ­toward a 
point of interest, as during foraging.

21    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
1.3  THE BASIC BUILDING BLOCKS OF BE­HAV­IOR:  
MOTOR PROGRAMS AND THEIR SE­LECTION—­OVERVIEW
1.3.1  Execution of Movements: A Palette of CPG Networks  
and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord
As mentioned previously, all vertebrates possess a set of innate motor pro-
grams for locomotion, postural adjustments, respiration, swallowing, eye 
movements, and many more actions that form a motor infrastructure for 
execution of the basic motor repertoire of a species. ­These motor programs or 
central pattern generator (CPG) networks reside in the midbrain, brainstem, 
and spinal cord (figure 1.7). They can be recruited when needed by forebrain 
cir­cuits.
Definitions:
•	
The term “CPG” is used for a cir­cuit that generates a specific pattern of 
be­hav­ior, such as locomotion, respiration, or chewing, which are rhyth-
mic, but also ­those that generate motor sequences such as swallowing or 
coughing.
•	
The terms “cir­cuits” and “networks” are broader and more general and 
­will include CPGs.
­Table 1.1
Classes of vertebrates and patterns of coordination
Locomotion  
(Undulatory)
Locomotion (Limbs)
Reaching
Grasping
Eye/Orienting 
Movements
Lampreys
+
+
Elasmobranchs
+
+
+
Teleosts
+
(+)
+
Amphibians
+
+
+
+
+
Reptiles
+
+
+
+
+
Birds
+
+
+
+
Mammals
Whales
+
+
+
+
Note: Among mammals, ­whales and related groups use dorsoventral undulatory swimming, and teleosts 
have paired fins but use them mostly in relation to steering and for positioning themselves (shown by the 
parentheses).

22    Chapter 1
•	
The term “microcircuits” is mostly used to refer to parts of an integrated 
cir­cuit, such as a part of the CPG or part of the hand-­to-­mouth synergy.
•	
Motor primitives overlaps with CPGs, but they can also be used for 
parts of a CPG, such as the flexor synergy during locomotion or the 
microcircuit generating saccadic eye movement.
Classic experiments from the Sherringtonian era and ­later have shown 
that well-­coordinated movements can still be elicited in mammals in which 
the forebrain had been inactivated (decerebrate preparations). ­These animals, 
with only the midbrain and structures further down intact, can breathe and 
adapt their breathing to metabolic demands. If food is put in their mouths, 
they swallow and sometimes perform locomotor movements spontaneously 
or if stimulated in a specific midbrain locomotor command center, the mes-
encephalic locomotor region (MLR). Eye and orienting movements can be 
elicited by stimulation at dif­fer­ent sites in the midbrain roof, such as the 
superior colliculus (SC). Figure 1.7 shows examples of the innate motor 
programs mostly available in both mammals and the lamprey. Thus, the spi-
nal cord contains the networks coordinating locomotion, but they become 
turned on from supraspinal command centers. ­These cir­cuits or CPGs deter-
mine when each group of motoneurons is activated in each step or swim 
cycle. The spinal cord also contains the circuitry for protective reflexes like 
the flexion reflex, which elicits a withdrawal of the limb from a harmful place 
or the scratch or wiping reflex, which birds, mammals, and amphibians use 
to remove irritants from the skin. The CPGs for respiration and chewing 
are located in the brainstem. The control of body orientation depends on 
vestibular pro­cessing at the brainstem level and sensory input from the limbs.
The many innate cir­cuits, CPGs, and other networks form a palette of 
options for the forebrain to select among. In mammals, preformed neural 
cir­cuits are thus available for eye movements, reaching, chewing, swallow-
ing, respiration, locomotion, posture, protective reflexes, and many more 
actions in mammals. ­There is a similar organ­ization in the lamprey, but 
cir­cuits for the control of limbs are lacking, for obvious reasons (figure 1.7). 
­These cir­cuits provide the neural basis of the standard behavioral repertoire 
of any species. Each CPG provides a standard format for its motor pattern. 

23    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
In locomotion, for instance, a sequential activation of the vari­ous muscles 
results in a support phase of the limb, followed by a liftoff phase, a forward 
movement of the limb during the swing phase, and fi­nally a placement of 
the foot on the ground. However, ­under natu­ral conditions, each individual 
step ­will vary due to the terrain, and therefore the CPG activity needs to 
be able to adapt to ­these perturbations. This is handled by sensory input, 
signaling the load on the limb, and the position of proximal and distal 
Breathing
Spawning
behavior
Fight, ﬂight, and
freeze
Swallowing
Spinal cord
Cerebellum
Cerebral cortex
Basal ganglia
Eating and drinking
Fine motor skills
(speech, hand-ﬁnger 
control)
Protective reﬂexes
Locomotion generator
Breathing
Chewing
Swallowing 
Eye movements
Reaching
Grasping
Expression of emotions
Spinal cord
Eye motor map
Op tec
Basal ganglia
Locomotor CPG
Primate
Lamprey
Swallowing CPG
Protective reﬂexes
Respiratory CPG
Locomotor CPGs
Postural networks
Chewing CPG
Selection
Sequencing
Timing
Grasping
Saccadic motor map
Expression of emotions
Reaching
PAG
Figure 1.7
Common motor infrastructure from lampreys to primates. As indicated, the primate and lamprey 
brains contain the neuronal networks (CPGs) controlling dif­fer­ent basic aspects of motor be­hav­
ior. The networks are located in the spinal cord (e.g., locomotion), brainstem (e.g., swallowing, 
breathing), and midbrain (eye, orienting/evasive movements). The basal ganglia are similarly or­ga­
nized in the lampreys and primates and play a crucial role in the se­lection of motor be­hav­iors. In 
primates as well as other mammals, the ce­re­bral cortex contributes to the control of fine motor 
skills. Abbreviations: PAG, periaqueductal gray; Op tec, optic tectum. From Grillner and El Manira 
(2020).

24    Chapter 1
joints. In addition, predicted perturbations such as upcoming obstacles can 
be handled by visuomotor signals from the cortex and other structures that 
become integrated with the CPG commands in the spinal cord.
1.3.2  Se­lection of Motor Programs a Forebrain Affair:  
Basal Ganglia and Cortex
For the se­lection of be­hav­iors, several key forebrain structures are engaged, 
in par­tic­u­lar the basal ganglia, including the dopamine system, cortex, and 
thalamus. They determine if a downstream motor program is to be recruited 
or if it is time to terminate an action pattern.
The CPGs in the midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord are directly or 
indirectly ­under a tonic inhibitory control from the basal ganglia output 
nuclei, which is the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) and globus pallidus 
interna (GPi). A recent study in the mouse has shown that the SNr targets 
no fewer than forty-­two downstream target structures in the midbrain and 
brainstem (McElvain et al., 2021) and thus can exert control over them. The 
rationale for this is presumably to ascertain that the CPGs should remain 
inactive ­until specifically called into action. By selectively inhibiting a group 
of SNr/GPi neurons involved in the control of a specific motor program, 
the downstream center ­will be disinhibited and allowed to be recruited into 
action. The disinhibition due to the inhibition of neurons in the SNr/GPi 
can be complemented by excitation from other sources such as the cortex.
The basal ganglia thus play a central role in the pro­cess of selecting 
which action is to be initiated (for more, see chapter 4 and figure 1.10a). 
The striatum, the input structure, is the main pro­cessing center and ­will 
determine the level of activity in the SNr/GPi. Activation of the striatum 
is primarily driven by excitatory glutamatergic input from the vari­ous parts 
of the cortex, each affecting dif­fer­ent compartments of striatum—­a topical 
organ­ization. The input to the striatum from the nuclei in the thalamus is 
almost as impor­tant. ­These nuclei, in turn, receive input from a variety of 
subcortical structures and the cerebellum. Another impor­tant ­factor is the 
dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) and the 
adjacent ventral tegmental area (VTA). Dopamine neurons are tonically 
active at rest and are further activated by salient stimuli in the surroundings 

25    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
and in reward situations, and conversely, they are depressed if an expected 
reward is not received.
The motor cortex proj­ects heavi­ly to the somatomotor part of the stria-
tum (dorsolateral striatum in rodents) and directly to downstream centers 
in the midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord. It is thus likely that when a 
downstream motor center is activated, ­there ­will be a combined disinhibi-
tion through the SNr and basal ganglia and direct excitation from the cortex 
(see chapters 4 and 5). The dorsomedial parts of the striatum receive input 
from the prefrontal and limbic areas and the ventral striatum from the hip-
pocampus and limbic areas and are thought to pro­cess information of a more 
cognitive and emotional nature.
1.3.3  The Role of the Cortex: Far from Straightforward
The role that the cortex plays in the initiation of be­hav­ior is ambiguous 
and varies most likely ­under dif­fer­ent conditions. Arber and Costa (2018) 
considered that the cortex may express a wish, while the basal ganglia would 
determine ­whether that wish would be fulfilled (figure 1.8). The Ölveczky 
laboratory (Kawai et al., 2015) showed that a learned be­hav­ior like a double 
pedal press with a fixed time interval could be produced with the same preci-
sion on the first trial ­after removal of the frontal motor areas, and thus the 
motor cortex is not needed for the initiation and execution of this learned 
motor sequence. However, the motor cortex was required during the learn-
ing period. ­There is thus an intricate interaction between the two structures.
In mammals, such as rodents, rabbits, and cats, removal or inactivation 
of the neocortex in young animals, leaving the rest of the brain intact, has 
surprisingly ­little effect on the standard motor repertoire. Such a decorticate 
animal ­will walk around, perform exploratory movements, search for food 
and ­water, eat, and go through phases of sleep and active be­hav­ior (Bjursten 
et al., 1976). They can live for years in a laboratory environment. This means 
that the pro­cess of initiation of dif­fer­ent patterns of be­hav­ior can be handled 
by the basal ganglia, with input from the thalamus but without input from 
the cortex.
However, dynamic tasks requiring visual interaction with moving objects 
or fine manipulation of objects ­will most likely require the cortex. Also, 

26    Chapter 1
precision actions involving in­de­pen­dent fin­ger movements in primates, like 
playing the piano or knitting, may depend on direct corticospinal projections 
to motoneurons. Transection of the corticospinal axons, leaving the rest of 
the cortical control of the basal ganglia, midbrain, and brainstem intact, leads 
to a loss of in­de­pen­dent fin­ger movements, but the other part of the motor 
repertoire remains largely intact (Porter, 1987; Lawrence & Kuypers, 1968a, 
1968b).
Motor cortex
Basal ganglia
  Selection
  Commitment
  Vigor
Broadcasting
Dopamine
Action choice
Commands
Execution
Hypothalamus
Colliculus
Brainstem
  Integration
  Command
  lines
Sketetal muscles
Spinal cord/Brainstem
  
Executive circuits
Locomotion
Steering
Posture
Chewing
Orienting (eye)
Voiding
Behavioral arrest
Figure 1.8
The contribution of vari­ous parts of the ner­vous system to the control of movement. Redrawn 
and modified from Arber and Costa (2018).

27    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
1.4  THE BLUEPRINT OF THE VERTEBRATE MOTOR SYSTEM 
IS 500 MILLION YEARS OLD
The first vertebrate group that diverged from the evolutionary line leading 
to mammals are the cyclostomes with two ­sister groups, the lamprey and 
the hagfish. What is common between the detailed organ­ization of the 
lamprey ner­vous system of ­today and the mammalian ner­vous system most 
likely existed at the point when the lamprey diverged from the mammalian 
line, around 560 million years ago, at the time of the Cambrian explosion 
(Kumar & Hedges, 1998). The lamprey ner­vous system has been subject to 
a detailed analy­sis on all levels, from the spinal cord to the forebrain, dur-
ing the last few de­cades. It shows remarkable similarities to the mammalian 
lineage, as we ­will discuss next, and has recently been reviewed in some detail 
(Suryanarayana et al., 2021a, 2022; Grillner, 2021). The gross organ­ization 
with a spinal cord, brainstem, midbrain, and forebrain had been established 
early, as well as the presence of cranial motor nuclei and dorsal root ganglions 
and ventral roots in the spinal cord. For instance, Sigmund Freud (1878) as 
a very young neurologist established the sensory organ­ization of the lamprey 
spinal cord before directing his attention to the complexity of the ­human 
subconscious and the presumed importance of dreams. In this section, I ­will 
compare the lamprey ner­vous system with that of mammals, particularly the 
parts that are involved in the control of motion.
1.4.1  The Lamprey Cortex: Pallium
The lamprey pallium/cortex had been considered as mainly an olfactory struc-
ture without layers since the early 1900s. This turned out to be wrong, as we 
started to explore the role of the forebrain in the context of how movements are 
selected by the brain. We found that the small structure corresponding to the 
mammalian neocortex, called the “pallium,” was a three-­layered cortex with a 
molecular layer and two cellular layers, and with the same proportion of inhibi-
tory GABAergic interneurons and excitatory glutamatergic interneurons as in 
mammals (figure 1.9a–­e). Moreover, stimulation of the lamprey pallium could 
elicit eye, orienting, and locomotor movements in a circumscribed motor 
area in which projection neurons targeted downstream motor centers in the 
tectum, midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord in the same way as in mammals 

28    Chapter 1
(Ocana et al., 2015; Suryanarayana et al., 2017, 2020), and with the same type 
of monosynaptic connections and synaptic transmission (figures 1.9f,g). The 
properties of the projection neurons resemble the mammalian counter­parts 
regarding cellular properties and their dendrites extending into the molecular 
layer, as is characteristic for the mammalian pyramidal neurons.
We could subsequently show that ­there is a visual area in the lamprey 
pallium/cortex with a retinotopic repre­sen­ta­tion (dif­fer­ent parts of the visual 
field are represented by separate neurons located in dif­fer­ent parts of the 
cortex). Between the motor area and the visual area is a somatosensory area 
with dif­fer­ent parts of the body represented in dif­fer­ent locations (Suryana-
rayana et al., 2020; figure 1.9h). Thus, the lamprey cortex (dorsal pallium) 
has the same general organ­ization with a motor area, a visual area, and a 
somatosensory area in sequence. The thalamic relay neurons are specific to 
the sensory input from the ret­ina and somatosensory input, respectively, and 
terminate on neurons corresponding to the mammalian layer 4 neurons in 
the cortex. The sensory neurons of the olfactory mucosa target the mitral 
and tufted-­like cells in the olfactory bulb (figure 1.9i), and proj­ect in turn 
and separately to dif­fer­ent parts of the olfactory cortex (ventral pallium), as 
in mammals (Suryanarayana et al., 2021b).
In conclusion, the overall organ­ization with the motor and sensory 
repre­sen­ta­tion in the pallium/cortex is pre­sent in the lamprey, but in three 
instead of six layers as in the neocortex. The olfactory cortex has three layers 
in the lamprey and in its mammalian counterpart. The cell types and propor-
tion of γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA) interneurons and glutamate neurons 
are similar. This means that the lamprey cortex provides a blueprint of that 
of mammals, with the basic building blocks of the cortex in place, but with 
the number of neurons being ­orders of magnitude smaller and thereby hav-
ing less computational power. ­Whether ­there is a hippocampal area is not 
yet clear, but a neural solution for spatial navigation is most likely required.
1.4.2  The Basal Ganglia of Importance for Se­lection of Be­hav­ior:  
Conserved from Lampreys to Mammals
When we started to investigate the lamprey basal ganglia, we anticipated 
a simplified structure that could aid in the se­lection of be­hav­ior through 

Figure 1.9
Cell types and organization in the lamprey pallium/cortex. A. Retrogradely labeled IT type cells 
(arrows) following neurobiotin injection in the contralateral pallium (inset). B, C. The IT-­type cells 
(b, arrows), from the region of the dotted square in A do not express GABA (C, arrowheads). Note 
the three layers—­the molecular layer and the outer and inner cellular layers. D. Overall percentage 
and number of GABAergic and non-­GABAergic pallial neurons. E. Schematic of the lamprey pal-
lium with segments, indicated with dotted lines, used for cell counting (Pal, pallium; MPal, medial 
pallium; lv, lateral ventricle). F. Schematic of a transverse section of the lamprey pallium indicating 
the efferent targets of pallial projection neurons (PT-­type, pyramidal tract type). G. Projections of 
PT-­ and IT-­type pallial neurons in the lamprey. H. Summarizing schematic of the lamprey dorsal 
pallium, showing retinotopic visual areas, somatosensory areas, and motor areas, as well as the ret­
i­nal, trigeminal, and dorsal column nucleus afferents relayed via distinct subpopulations of thalamic 
neurons. I. The olfactory system in lamprey resembles that of mammals in many re­spects with a 
dual efferent system from the main olfactory bulb conveyed via tufted-­like and mitral cells. The latter 
target the olfactory cortex located in the ventral pallium, whereas the former target a separate ­limited 
region, the dorsomedial telencephalic nucleus (dmtn). Note the dif­fer­ent morphologies of the mitral 
(magenta) and tufted-­like (blue) cells. mya, million years ago. From Suryanarayana et al. (2022).
Pallium
A
Pal
22%
522 cells
78%
2372 cells
B
D
E
F
G
H
I
MPal
MPal
Pal
Optic tectum
(eye)
Mesencephalic
tegmentum
Reticulospinal
Spinal cord
Olfactory
bulb
Pal recording
Mitral cell
Tufted-like cell
Dorsal pallium
Medial
pallium
Striatum
Ventral part of pallium
Piriform
GPh
Visual
Som. sens.
Motor
Iv
dmtn
Visual area
Somatosensory area
(trigeminal)
Somatosensory area
(spinal)
Pallium
Motor area
Thalamus
+
+
+
Retina
Trigeminal
nucleus
Dorsal column nucleus
Stimulation of the
dorsal column at the level of
rostral spinal cord
Stimulation of
the trigeminal nerve
Quadrant speciﬁc
retinal stimulation
SNc
STN
Striatum
Thalamus
Basal ganglia
dmtn
Pal
Ouert cell
layer
ipsi
Contra
PT
Thalamus 
Depressing synapse
Striatum
Facilitating synapse
DA 5-HT
Modulator input
Hist
Motor centers
IT
Pallium/cortex
Iv
C
Molecular
layer
Outer cell
layer
Inner cell
layer
GABA
GABA
Neurobiotin
Neurobiotin
Nissl
Inhibitory, excitatory 

30    Chapter 1
an action on downstream motor center. We ­were very surprised to find an 
organ­ization that in considerable detail resembled that of mammals.
The general organ­ization of the basal ganglia in figure 1.10a applies 
to both lampreys and mammals. The input level, the striatum, the output 
level SNr/GPi, the intrinsic nucleus globus pallidus externa (GPe) and the 
subthalamic nucleus (STN) are the major building blocks of the vertebrate 
basal ganglia. The afferent projections to the striatum are from the same 
two types of neurons in the pallium/cortex, pyramidal tract (PT) projection 
neurons, and intratelencephalic (IT) neurons, as well as from the thalamus. 
The striatum consists mostly of projection neurons subdivided in ­those 
expressing dopamine receptors of the D1 or D2 type, which are the origin 
of ­those that subserve initiation of be­hav­ior (D1), the direct pathway, and 
­those that instead counteract movements (D2) and form the indirect path-
way (Stephenson-­Jones et al., 2011, 2012a; Grillner & Robertson, 2016). 
The dopamine innervation originates from the lamprey SNc and is activated 
by salient stimuli that originate in part from the conserved lamprey SC, the 
tectum, as in mammals (Pérez-­Fernández et al., 2017), as discussed further 
in chapter 4. At least two of the subtypes of the mammalian interneurons in 
the striatum exist in the lamprey. Furthermore, the connectivity, the trans-
mitters employed, and the neuropeptides expressed (e.g., substance P and 
enkephalin; figure 1.10b) are conserved. The related circuitry of the lateral 
habenula and the circuitry involved in the control of the level of activity 
in the dopamine neurons are virtually identical (Stephenson-­Jones 2012b, 
2013, 2016; figures 1.10c,d).
In conclusion, the basal ganglia, a major part of the circuitry involved 
in the control and se­lection of be­hav­ior, is conserved regarding the general 
organ­ization with subnuclei, transmitters and intrinsic connectivity and cel-
lular membrane properties (see also chapter 4). The fact that the basal ganglia 
have remained practically unchanged is presumably related to the fact that 
the design has functioned well and ­there has been no evolutionary pressure 
to modify the circuitry—or rather any change/mutations induced have been 
for the worse. However, the number of neurons has increased many times 
over in mammals.

31    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
Pallium/cortex
Striatum
GPe
SNr/GPi
STN
Tectum
Motor programs
Sensory
information
D1 direct
MLR
DLR
Salience
pathway
D2 indirect
PPN
LHb
Striatum
Medial
habenula 
IPN
Reward
absence of expected reward
aversion 
Lateral
habenula
GPh
Freezing, ﬂight
Pallium/cortex
thalamus
PAG/
griseum centrale
DA
Striosomes
 SNr/GPi
Pallium/cortex
SNc
STN
Thalamus
Striatum
SC/MLR/DLR
DA
Hyperdirect  pathway
Indirect “no go” pathway
GPe 
Saccades
LocomotionPosture
Swallowing
Basal ganglia
dSPN
iSPN
D1/SP
Dopamine
GABA
Glutamate
A
B
C
D
Input to striatum
Cortical IT-type             +
                
     Cortical PT-type                                   
     Thalamus                                                      
     Dopamine                
+     
   
     5-HT
                  
   
     Histamine                 
 
   
Striatal spiny projection neurons (SPN)
     D1R/SP                                                
     D2R/Enk
                                
     Spiny dendrites                                
     Kir
                  
     GABA
                               
     DARPP32                
   
   
     Rest hyperpol.
                               
Striatal interneurons
Cholinergic
+
  +
        Fast spiking (FS)
+               +
           Subtypes of INs                  ?                 +
Lamprey Mammals
Lamprey
Mammals
Output pathway SNr/GPi
Spontaneous activity                 +                +
Sirect input D1R/SP SPN           +                +
GABA                                          +                +
Parvalbumin
    
     
+
Indirect loop
GPe
 
 
         +                 
Direct input from 
D2R/Enk SPN                               +                +
GABA
 
 
                      
Subthalamic nucleus                         +             +
Glutamate
               +                 
Spontanous activity                   +             +
Ih   
                          +                 
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
 +
               +
               +
 +
 +
 +
 +
Prototypical                                +             +
Arkypallidal  
                       ?                 +
D2/Enk
Direct “go” pathway
DA
SNc/VTA
Figure 1.10
The lamprey basal ganglia. A. The organ­ization of the basal ganglia. The striatum consists of 
GABAergic neurons, as do the GPe, GPi, and SNr. The SNr and GPi represent the output 
level of the basal ganglia, and they proj­ect via vari­ous subpopulations of neurons to the tectum/
SC, the MLR, and diencephalic locomotor region (DLR), and other brainstem motor centers, as 
well as back to thalamus with efference copies of information sent to the brainstem. The direct 
striatal projection neurons (dSPNs) that target SNr/GPi express the dopamine D1 receptor 
(D1) and substance P (SP), while the indirect striatal projection neurons (iSPNs) express the 
dopamine D2 receptor (D2) and enkephalin (Enk). Also indicated is the dopamine input from the 
SNc (green) to striatum and brainstem centers. Excitatory glutamatergic neurons are shown in 
pink and GABAergic structures in blue. B. A ­table showing the key features of the basal ganglia 
organ­ization that are found in mammals and the lamprey. C. The SNc connectome in the lamprey 
and mammals. The efferent and afferent connectivities of the SNc are virtually identical. D. The 
striatum targets both the medial and lateral habenulas. The medial habenula sends projections 
to the interpeduncular nucleus (IPN) and further to the PAG/griseum centrale. In mammals, the 
PAG triggers a variety of fixed action patterns related to freezing and flight. The lateral habenula 
is engaged in the control of the vari­ous modulator systems and receives input from the gluta-
matergic part of globus pallidus (GPh), which in turn receives inhibition from the striosomal 
compartment of the striatum. The striosomes, GPh, and lateral habenula itself receive input from 
the pallium, thalamus, and other structures. From Suryanarayana et al. (2022).

32    Chapter 1
1.4.3  The Thalamus and Hypothalamus
The thalamus serves in all vertebrates as a sensory relay nucleus that forwards 
information from the ret­i­nal cells to neurons in the visual areas in the cortex/
pallium, and correspondingly, somatosensory information is channeled to the 
somatosensory areas. The thalamus also mediates prepro­cessed information 
through the higher-­order thalamic nuclei, such as major input from the tec-
tum/SC that is forwarded to the cortical/pallidal areas involved in visuomotor 
coordination. The thalamus receives input from the output nuclei of the basal 
ganglia, which in turn target a specific thalamo-­striatal projection that provides 
feedback to the striatum. ­These components exist in both the lamprey and 
mammals (Suryanarayana et al., 2020, 2022).
In mammals, the hypothalamus is involved in the control of the 
endocrine system through the hypophysis, the diurnal rhythm from the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus, defensive be­hav­iors (freezing, escape, aggression), 
reproductive be­hav­iors (sexual and maternal be­hav­iors), and ingestive be­hav­
iors (food and fluid intake, foraging). ­These are all essential aspects for sur-
vival, and they are considered innate (see chapter 2). In the lamprey, the 
organ­ization of this aspect of be­hav­ior has not been studied in any detail. But 
the control of the hypophysis is pre­sent, as well as the general organ­ization 
in subnuclei (Nieuwenhuys & Nicholson, 1998), the expression of several 
peptides (e.g., galanin), and a conserved histamine projection (Brodin et al., 
1990). The PAG receives major input from the hypothalamus to its vari­ous 
subcompartments that conveys many aspects of the defensive, ingestive, and 
reproductive be­hav­iors in mammals. The lamprey counterpart of PAG, the 
griseum centrale, also receives input from the hypothalamus (Olson et al., 
2017).
In conclusion, the thalamus in the lamprey has in princi­ple the same 
design as in mammals, with a relay function to cortical sensory areas, and 
thalamostriatal projections and input from the tectum/SC are impor­tant for 
visuomotor coordination. The details of the hypothalamic control of be­hav­
ior in the lamprey remain to be studied, but the overall organ­ization, based 
mostly on anatomy, seems to resemble that of mammals.

33    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
1.4.4  The Midbrain Roof, the Tectum, Is Concerned with Events  
in the Immediate Surrounding Space
The roof of the midbrain is called the “tectum” in most vertebrates, but 
in mammals, it is called the “superior colliculus (SC).” The tectum/SC is 
concerned with what happens in the immediate surrounding space. Events 
activating dif­fer­ent parts of the visual space ­will activate selective parts of the 
ret­ina, which in turn ­will send axons to the superficial part of the tectum/SC, 
arranged such that a retinotopic map of the surrounding space is formed. If 
a salient stimulus activates a specific spot in the ret­ina, it ­will then activate a 
specific area in the tectal map. The tectal neurons in this area can then acti-
vate tectal output neurons, which in turn elicit a saccadic eye movement or 
a head-­orienting movement to direct the gaze ­toward the salient object that 
gave rise to the gaze shift. Subsequently, it ­will be determined which action 
to take. Moreover, the selected population of tectal neurons activated ­will 
strongly inhibit the neurons in the surrounding tectal area, which inhibits 
other potential movements. This arrangement of the tectum is pre­sent in all 
vertebrates that depend on vision, ­whether in lampreys, ea­gles, or primates 
(Isa et al., 2021).
Information about the surrounding space is also provided by sounds. 
When ­humans or other animals are in a pitch-­dark environment, auditory 
information provides an auditory spatial map that is fed into the tectum at a 
level just deeper than and spatially aligned with the visual map. This arrange-
ment also exists in the lamprey, but electrosensation provides the map of the 
surrounding space, mediated by receptors on the head and body, which is 
aligned with the visual map. If visual and electrosensory stimuli originating 
from the same point in space occur at the same time, they facilitate each 
other. Concurrent stimuli originating from dif­fer­ent parts of the surround-
ing space instead inhibit each other in the lamprey, and correspondingly in 
mammals with visual and auditory stimuli (Kardamakis et al., 2016; Stein & 
Stanford, 2008). The pro­cessed information in the tectum/SC is also for-
warded to the thalamus and further to the higher-­order visual areas in the 
cortex/pallium from the lamprey to primates (Isa et al., 2021; for details, 
see chapter 3).

34    Chapter 1
In conclusion, the design of the cir­cuits in the roof of the midbrain 
that respond to events in the immediate surrounding space remain similar 
throughout vertebrate phylogeny, although vision can be combined with 
other senses such as hearing, electrosensation, and even infrared radiation 
in dif­fer­ent vertebrate groups. However, the ret­i­nal map is further refined 
in mammals, with ret­i­nal afferents providing a number of types of visual 
information separated into dif­fer­ent layers of the visual map.
1.4.5  Cerebellum
The cerebellum is pre­sent in all vertebrate groups, from fish to mammals, but 
in the lamprey, ­there is only a tiny bridge of neurons across the rostral part of 
the fourth ventricle that has been considered to be a precursor of the cerebel-
lum (Sugahara et al., 2021b). It is, however, uncertain, ­whether the presumed 
cerebellar circuitry is functional. A recent single-­cell RNA sequencing study 
indicates that the lamprey is devoid of cerebellar cell types (Lamanna et al., 
2022). The cerebellum is well developed in elasmobranchs (sharks and rays), 
the next group to be formed in the phyloge­ne­tic tree.
1.4.6  Cranial Nerves and the Senses
Olfaction and vision are well developed in the lamprey, as well as their central 
connectivity as mentioned previously. This applies also to the sensory input 
from the trigeminal area. The vestibular apparatus has only two semicircular 
canals, but they are arranged so that they can sense rapid movements in three 
planes. Receptors signaling the head position are located in a vestibular sac, 
resembling the situation in mammals (sacculus and utriculus).
On the motor side, the innervation of the eye muscles through the 
oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves are similar between the lamprey 
and mammals with some ­limited differences (Fritzsch et al., 1990). The 
trigeminal innervation controls the oral muscles, and ­there is also a facial 
nucleus (the seventh cranial nerve, NVII). The glossopharyngeal and vagus 
nerves carry the efferents to the respiratory muscles and have sensory gusta-
tory components.
The organ­ization and roles of the dif­fer­ent cranial nerves ­were estab-
lished before the lamprey line of evolution diverged from that leading to 
mammals.

35    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
1.4.7  Brainstem
The lamprey brainstem has a group of descending reticulospinal neurons sub-
divided into an anterior, ­middle, and posterior nucleus, which convey mono-
synaptic excitation to spinal motoneurons and interneurons, as in the pontine 
reticulospinal pathway in mammals (Grillner & Lund, 1968; Rovainen, 1974; 
Ohta & Grillner, 1989). They are active during the initiation of locomotion, 
postural adjustments, and steering (see also chapter 2). ­There is also a crossed 
and uncrossed vestibular projection to the rostral spinal cord and a 5-­HT pro-
jection to the spinal cord, like the raphe-­spinal pathway in both mammals and 
lamprey (Brodin et al., 1986). In the lamprey, ­there is a very ­limited supply of 
noradrenergic innervation and no coeruleo-­spinal projection. ­These are compo-
nents that are represented in mammals, where the number of nuclei and control 
systems has been markedly expanded (e.g., chewing occurs only in mammals).
Of course, the addition of forelimbs and hindlimbs in tetrapods during 
evolution requires further control via discrete pathways, as does the chang-
ing type of locomotion from body undulations to tetrapod walk and gallop. 
The versatility of the limbs to be used for reaching and grasping and the 
manipulation of food and other items evolve gradually ­until it fi­nally reaches 
perfection in the control of the ­human hand.
The brainstem respiratory centers that drive the rhythmic respiratory 
movements are to a large degree conserved. In contrast, the respiratory move-
ments used to extract oxygen from ­water in the gill pouches of the lamprey 
differ markedly from ­those used when breathing air through lungs, as in 
tetrapods (see chapter 2; Cinelli et al., 2013; Gariépy et al., 2012).
In conclusion, the lamprey brainstem contains much of the basic ver-
tebrate design as in tetrapods, with vestibular control mechanisms, the 
reticulospinal contribution, and a 5-­HT system. ­There is also the intrinsic 
organ­ization with the pro­cessing related to the vari­ous cranial sensory and 
motor nuclei and pattern generator networks. The noradrenergic system has 
not evolved, and neither the refined control of the nonexisting appendages.
1.4.8  Spinal Cord
The lamprey spinal cord has approximately 100 segments and has been 
reviewed in some detail by Robertson et al. (2021). The dorsal roots convey 

36    Chapter 1
sensory information from the segmental dorsal ganglia, and in addition, 
­there are two types of large intraspinal neurons that convey touch and pres-
sure sensation, respectively. One branch of their axons extends through the 
dorsal roots to innervate the skin. Their central branch is divided into a 
descending and an ascending branch, as in mammals. The latter joins the 
dorsal column, which terminates in the dorsal column nucleus, which in 
turn forms the medial lemniscal pathway that forwards information to the 
thalamus (Suryanarayana et al., 2020, 2022). The axons of the motoneurons 
exit through the ventral roots to target the segmental muscle fibers. The 
ventral funiculus contains the large axons of the reticulospinal neurons that 
allow fast corrections, while the lateral funiculus contain thinner axons from 
the lateral part of the brainstem and spinoreticular projections. The lamprey 
ner­vous system is unmyelinated, and therefore some axons have a large dia­
meter that increases the speed of transmission along the axon.
Vertebrates from fish to mammals have an LMC that controls the mus-
cles of the forelimbs and hindlimbs, respectively, and an MMC that controls 
the neck and trunk muscles (Dasen & Jessell, 2009; see figure 1.11). The 
lamprey, with no appendages, has only an MMC. The motor neurons are 
subdivided into ­those that control the dorsal and ventral parts of the myo-
tome and the slow muscle fibers separately (Teräväinen & Rovainen, 1971). 
They have somewhat dif­fer­ent extensions of the dendritic arbor that reach 
from the cell body to the larger part of the lateral and ventral funiculus, 
but not into the dorsal columns. Their membrane properties are typical for 
motoneurons in general. The spinal cord contains the neuronal networks 
under­lying locomotion, composed of excitatory glutamatergic interneurons 
with ipsilateral projections to motoneurons and crossed inhibitory commis-
sural interneurons (which ­will be dealt with further in chapter 2). As in other 
vertebrates, the central canal is lined with liquor-­contacting cells that (at least 
in the lamprey) sense any deviation of pH from neutral; and when activated, 
they release somatostatin (SST), causing an inhibition of the motor cir­cuits 
that reduces motor activity and thereby contributes to the restoration of a 
neutral pH (Jalalvand et al., 2016, 2022). It seems likely that ­these homeo-
static pH-­controlling mechanisms of cells around the central canal also exist 
in other vertebrates, but that remains to be shown.

37    The Vertebrate Motor Repertoire and the Evolution of the Brain
In conclusion, the lamprey spinal cord is designed in a similar way to that of 
other vertebrates, except that it lacks an LMC and has no appendages to control. 
The LMC, with motoneurons and interneurons, is well developed in the next 
phyloge­ne­tic group to appear some 420 million years ago, the elasmobranchs/
skates (Jung et al., 2018). The lamprey ner­vous system is unmyelinated, but 
axons can have a thin membranous sheath around the axonal membrane.
1.4.9  The Lamprey in an Evolutionary Perspective: Before and ­After
From the forebrain to the spinal cord, all essential features exist at the lam-
prey stage of vertebrate evolution, and thus they are assumed to have existed 
when the lamprey line of evolution became separate from that leading to 
Lampreys
Rays
Teleosts
Amphibians
Reptiles
Mammals
Birds
420 mya
560 mya
No ﬁns
Fins and LMC
Legs and 
LMC
Undulatory locomotion
MMC
lamprey, ﬁsh, salamander, and snakes
MMC
LMC
ﬁns or limbs 
Locomotion with ﬁns/limbs
rays to mammals
Amphioxus
Figure 1.11
Vertebrate evolution from amphioxus to mammals, with the time indicated when the dif­fer­ent 
groups became separate from the line of evolution leading up to mammals. The paired append-
ages emerged in elasmobranchs together with the LMC. At the bottom are the LMC, impor­tant 
for locomotion with paired appendages, and the MMC, critical for the control of the entire body 
and undulatory locomotion. LMC, lateral motor column; MMC, medial motor column; mya, million 
years ago. From Grillner and El Manira (2020).

38    Chapter 1
mammals more than 500 million years ago (Kumar & Hedges, 1998). Of 
course, the number of neurons is small in all parts of the lamprey ner­vous 
system compared to most other vertebrates, and therefore the behavioral 
repertoire is much more ­limited. The data summarized ­here and in greater 
detail in other sources (e.g., Suryanarayana et al., 2021a, 2022; Grillner & 
Robertson, 2016), show that beyond any reasonable doubt, the outline, the 
blueprint of the vertebrate ner­vous system, had evolved early in vertebrate 
phylogeny. This finding is also supported by molecular/ge­ne­tic studies of 
transcription ­factors and precursors expressed in the lamprey brain (Suga-
hara et al., 2021a; Lamanna et al., 2022), which further demonstrate the 
conserved structure of the lamprey ner­vous system.
The difference between the lamprey brain and that of the preceding 
phyloge­ne­tic stages, the tunicates and the amphioxus, a cephalochordate, 
is dramatic. The amphioxus has a spinal cord, a vestigial brainstem, and a 
pos­si­ble telencephalic domain, the pars anterodorsalis, with glutamatergic, 
GABAergic, and dopaminergic neurons. It remains to be ascertained if this 
presumptive telencephalic domain, in the dorsal locus of the hypothalamus 
alar plate, is equivalent to the corresponding vertebrate prosomere (Lacalli, 
2022; Puelles & Rubinstein, 2015). ­There is, however, no evidence of major 
forebrain structures, such as the thalamus and the midbrain structures in ver-
tebrates. Between the comparatively ­simple organ­ization of the amphioxus 
ner­vous system and the lamprey with a blueprint of the vertebrate ner­vous 
system, a radical, complex evolution must have taken place. We may never 
learn the details of this astounding development since they remain hidden 
and possibly are absent in fossil rec­ords.

2.1  INTRODUCTION
From a general description of the motor repertoire of vertebrates and the 
motor networks that exist in dif­fer­ent parts of the brainstem and spinal cord 
provided in chapter 1 and collectively referred to as the “motor infrastruc-
ture” (figure 1.6 in chapter 1; also see Grillner, 2003), I ­will now move to the 
next analytical level by discussing the intrinsic function of ­these networks. 
How does each of them do its job? They achieve this by combining a battery 
of synaptic, cellular, and molecular building blocks and forming a network, 
as ­will be discussed next.
To understand a neuronal network is more complex than one would 
think at first sight. One needs first to define the dif­fer­ent groups of neu-
rons that are essential for generating the motor pattern concerned, and 
then discover how they talk to each other. Excitation is mostly mediated by 
glutamate synapses that act via a subset of α-­amino-3-­hydroxy-5-­methyl-
4-­isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate (NMDA) 
receptors that can induce a variety of postsynaptic effects and lead to dif­fer­
ent forms of short-­term plasticity. Inhibition is mediated mostly by glycine 
in the networks of the spinal cord, although γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA) is 
also used in the dorsal horn. In the brainstem, it is a mix between GABA and 
glycine, and in the forebrain, it is exclusively GABA. It is critical to define 
the connectivity and synaptic interaction among the neurons to reach a firm 
understanding. If one fi­nally has obtained the wiring diagram of the network 
EXECUTION OF MOVEMENT: A PALETTE 
OF CPGS AND MOTOR CENTERS FROM 
MIDBRAIN TO SPINAL CORD
2

40    Chapter 2
and the properties of the synapses, one is off to a good start but still far from 
having sufficient information.
The membrane properties are also very impor­tant to consider since neu-
rons have very dif­fer­ent properties. Some may have pacemaker or plateau 
properties; ­others can be interneurons that faithfully relay the information 
from their input structures. Some may respond with pronounced spike fre-
quency adaptation, and still ­others may display spontaneous activity. The 
properties that each cell has depends on which specific combination of ion 
channels is expressed—­namely, subtypes of Na+, K+, Ca2+ and calcium-­ and 
sodium-­dependent K+ channels (see Grillner, 2003). Furthermore, the shape 
of the soma-­dendritic tree contributes to the pro­cessing that takes place 
at dif­fer­ent parts of the dendritic tree, such as plateau potential or synap-
tic plasticity. When one has so many dif­fer­ent ­factors that covary, detailed 
simulation is a very useful complementary tool in conjunction with a precise 
experimental analy­sis (see the discussion that follows). ­These microcircuits 
subserving many dif­fer­ent functions are sometimes referred to as “motor 
primitives” (see the definitions of ­these terms in section 1.3.1 of chapter 1) 
and are to a large degree evolutionarily conserved (i.e., pre­sent during ver-
tebrate phylogeny).
In this chapter, we ­will discuss a number of ­these microcircuits, how they 
become activated, their modes of operation, and what is known about their 
intrinsic functions. I ­earlier made the analogy of an orchestra represented by 
the vari­ous microcircuits, while the forebrain corresponds to the conductor, 
which controls the activity of each member of the orchestra.
2.2  CPG NETWORKS PRODUCING LOCOMOTOR,  
RESPIRATORY, AND CHEWING MOVEMENTS  
AND RELATED BE­HAV­IORS
In all vertebrates, networks producing the rhythmic motor activity under­
lying locomotion and respiration exist in the spinal cord and in the brain-
stem. ­These networks contain the information required to activate the 
muscles taking part in the step cycle or the respiratory motion, and they are 
activated in an appropriate sequence. ­These networks are often referred to as 

41    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord
“central pattern generator (CPG) networks.” Most vertebrate groups swal-
low the food directly; only mammals have evolved a chewing CPG network, 
located in the brainstem.
2.2.1  Cellular and Synaptic Mechanisms for Burst Generation
What are the cellular and synaptic mechanisms that are used to generate a 
rhythmic burst activity such as in the CPGs discussed ­here (Grillner et al., 
2005)? Consider a population of excitatory neurons that display recurring 
burst activity (figure 2.1). Essentially, the depolarizing phase can be supported 
by synaptic glutamatergic interactions between the excitatory neurons, com-
bined with mechanisms that tend to promote depolarizing plateaus.
Figure 2.1a shows an example of how the vari­ous cellular mechanisms 
can support rhythmic activity. With an excitatory background drive from 
neurons that initiate burst activity, the neurons become depolarized, and the 
voltage-­dependent properties of NMDA channels or per­sis­tent Na+-­channels 
­will boost the depolarization that can be maintained during a plateau.
The plateaus would depend on voltage-­dependent NMDA channels 
and per­sis­tent Na+-­channels. Why does the depolarization-­phase during the 
burst not just continue? This can be accounted for by a gradual accumulation 
Voltage-dependent NMDA
LVA-Ca2+
Na+ channels/persistant Na+
Background excitation
Phasic E-IN excitation
KCa (NMDA, LVA), KNa
KCa (E-IN - spike frequency adaptation)
NMDA channel closure
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Sensory stretch receptors
-
+
A
B
Input
NMDA, AMPA
Burst
microcircuit
Figure 2.1
A. Several ­factors contribute to the initiation, maintenance, and termination of the depolarizing 
phase. In addition to conventional synaptic, voltage-­dependent NMDA receptors, low-­voltage-­
activated Ca2+ channels (LVA-­Ca2+) and Na+ channels might be activated. Ca2+enters the cell 
through ­these channels, activates KCa channels, and initiates a progressive hyperpolarization 
leading to closure of the NMDA channels. The initiation of depolarization is facilitated by activation 
of ipsilateral excitatory stretch receptors, whereas its termination is partially a result of activation 
of contralateral inhibitory stretch receptors. E-­IN, excitatory interneuron. Dashed line indicates the 
resting membrane potential. B. Schematic repre­sen­ta­tion of a burst-­generating cir­cuit.

42    Chapter 2
of Ca2+ and Na+ intracellularly, which leads to a progressive activation of cal-
cium-­ and sodium-­dependent potassium channels (KCa and KNa), which ­will 
repolarize the cell membrane. As the membrane becomes hyperpolarized, the 
NMDA and per­sis­tent Na+-­channels ­will close, and the neurons ­will become 
silenced for a period ­until the hyperpolarization declines, and a new burst 
­will start due to the background excitatory drive. The postburst hyperpolar-
ization can also lead to an activation of hyperpolarization-­activated depolar-
izing currents, such as Ih and low-­voltage activated Ca2+-­currents, which ­will 
induce a postinhibitory rebound that ­will promote the depolarization and 
the initiation of a new burst. The synaptic excitatory interaction among the 
neurons in the population ascertains that they remain synchronized. The 
molecular and synaptic mechanisms mentioned ­here form a toolbox that can 
be utilized in a variety of cir­cuits within the central ner­vous system.
2.2.2  The Respiratory CPG Contributing to Breathing and Related 
Orofacial Be­hav­ior
Respiration is critical for all creatures, and always served by a CPG network 
(figure 2.2). In mammals, breathing is characterized by an active inspiration, 
followed by an expiration that may be passive at low rates of breathing (recoil 
of the rib cage), but at higher rates, ­there is an actively controlled expiration.
The core of the respiratory CPG is the pre-­Bötzinger complex (pBC), 
a group of neurons located ventrally in the brainstem at the level of the XII 
cranial nerve nucleus. If the pBC is inactivated, respiration stops (Del Negro 
et al., 2018; Ashhad & Feldman, 2020). The pBC consists of a mixture of 
inhibitory glycinergic and subgroups of excitatory glutamatergic neurons. 
One of the glutamatergic subgroups coexpresses somatostatin (SST). The 
network can produce rhythmic burst activity when inhibition is blocked, 
and thus it can operate without inhibition. The SST-­negative excitatory neu-
rons form a network that, through mutual excitation within the population, 
is thought to generate the rhythm, and ­after a burst, the neurons become 
refractory, start to be active again due to their inherent excitability, and gen-
erate a burst through mutual excitation. They excite the SST-­positive neu-
rons in the pBC, which in turn activate downstream neurons that activate 
the inspiratory motoneurons supplying the diaphragm and the intercostal 

muscles. The inhibitory neurons are thus not needed for burst generation to 
occur, but they nevertheless take an active part and slow the burst generation.
How is the expiratory phase generated? The lateral parafacial (pFl) 
nucleus, located rostral and ventral to the pBC, is responsible, and when 
active, it drives the expiratory motoneurons. The pBC provides inhibition 
of the pFl during each burst, ascertaining that an alternation with the pFl 
­will occur (figure 2.2). The pFl ­will not be active at low rates of breathing, 
but it starts to contribute as the metabolic demand increases, resulting in an 
active expiration (Del Negro et al., 2018).
Vocalization
Speech
Emotions
Swallowing
Sighing
Lung receptors
Chemoreceptors
(O2 - CO2)
Inspiration
Expiration
Pre-Bötzinger
pFl
nonSST
SST
Figure 2.2
Organ­ization of the respiratory network generating inspiratory and expiratory movements. The 
pre-­Bötzinger complex contains one population of cells that generates the burst pattern that 
does not express somatostatin (nonSST), a set of output neurons expressing somatostatin 
(SST), and a set of inhibitory neurons. Expiration is generated by the lateral parafacial nucleus 
(pFl). Red represents glutamatergic neurons and blue represents inhibitory neurons.
43    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

44    Chapter 2
Recent data (Anderson et al., 2016) suggest that ­there is a third group of 
neurons that are active at the interface between the inspiratory and expira-
tory phase, constituting the postinhibitory complex (PiCo). This group of 
neurons are located close to the pBC, but in a somewhat more dorsal and ros-
tral location. It is argued that pro­cesses such as swallowing, vocalization, and 
speech, which need to halt the breathing temporarily, act via the PiCo. The 
PiCo was not included in figure 2.2 since the connectivity is as yet unclear.
The respiratory CPG ticks on at a rate de­cided by the metabolic demands 
as signaled by chemoreceptors in a brainstem nucleus and in the periphery, 
but it is subject to a variety of influences, and the CPG is sensitive to all 
inputs. For the cycle-­to-­cycle regulation, vagal afferents signaling the expan-
sion of the lungs during each inspiration ­will act on the CPG and help 
terminate the inspiration at the appropriate time (Clark & von Euler, 1972).
Several times an hour, ­humans, as well as rodents and other mammals, 
sigh without noticing. The sigh consists of a deep and long-­lasting inspira-
tion, the purpose of which is to expand the lungs and fill alveoli that may 
have collapsed. This is controlled by a small set of 200 neurons in the nearby 
retrotrapezoid nucleus that release ­either of two neuropeptides, neuromedin 
B or gastrin-­releasing peptide (Li et al., 2016). They activate peptidergic 
receptors on cells within the pBC and induce a sigh. A knockout of the recep-
tors abolishes sighing without affecting other aspects of breathing. Sighing 
occurs at very low rate, and the mechanism by which the activity of the sigh-­
inducing peptidergic neurons are controlled is not yet known.
In anticipation of the metabolic needs, breathing is also increased 
directly when a locomotor command is turned on to initiate locomotion, 
which is before the ­actual needs for more oxygen has been manifested both 
in mammals and the lamprey (DiMarco et al., 1983; Gariépy et al., 2012). 
Emotional ­factors also affect the rate of breathing, and it can become shallow 
or combined with a deep breath as part of an emotional state. Furthermore, 
one can hold one’s breath for some time voluntarily ­until the metabolic 
drive takes over, and also voluntarily increase the rate of breathing. During 
vocalization or speech, the airflow is controlled actively by an action on the 
respiratory CPG and by the vocal cords in the larynx.

The respiratory CPG in the lamprey has a very similar design to that of 
the pBC regarding the excitatory interaction with both AMPA and NMDA 
receptors, and a cholinergic and peptidergic contribution. Essential parts of 
the rhythm-­generating network ­were thus pre­sent early in vertebrate phylog-
eny and appears to have been evolutionarily conserved (Cinelli et al., 2013; 
Missaghi et al., 2016).
In conclusion, the respiratory CPG ascertains that the metabolic 
demands are met, but it is sensitive to a variety of behavioral demands that 
can instantaneously modify each breath, both in duration and amplitude as 
for instance during speech.
2.2.2.1  Relation between respiration and chewing, licking,  
swallowing, and other patterns of orofacial be­hav­ior
The respiratory pBC interact with and is affected by several neural cir­cuits that 
control licking, chewing and vibrissae movements, as summarized in figure 2.3. 
In rats, the basic rate of breathing is around 2 Hz, while rhythmic licking occurs at 
5–7 Hz and continues while breathing, but the frequency of licking is modulated 
45    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord
pBC
respiration
Licking
Chewing
Whisking
(vibrissae)
Sighing
(peptides)
Swallowing
–
Vocalization
speech
Figure 2.3
The pre-­Bötzinger complex (pBC) interacts with three related rhythmic CPGs (light blue), and is 
also inhibited by the cir­cuits generating swallowing, sighing, and vocalization, including speech.

46    Chapter 2
somewhat in each respiratory cycle. The licking involves rhythmic opening of 
the jaw and an alternating protrusion and retraction of the tongue, and it is 
controlled by a CPG located in the intermediate reticular formation dorsomedial 
to the pBC (Wiesenfeld et al., 1977; Travers et al., 1997). The tongue can also 
be directed to the left or right, as in a reaching movement, and rodents can be 
trained to respond in a direction-­specific manner with the tongue (see chapter 5).
The related CPG for chewing operates at around 4 Hz, when active, and 
it is located in the pons, near the trigeminal motor nucleus, with part of the 
circuitry in the intermediate reticular formation and adjacent parvocellular 
reticular formation just dorsal to the licking CPG area (Moore et al., 2014). 
Neurons in ­these areas include premotor interneurons to the jaw closure and 
opener motoneurons, respectively, and can display rhythmic bursting when 
activated (Dellow & Lund, 1971; Kolta et al., 2007; Moore et al., 2014). 
Chewing is characterized by alternation between the jaw opening (digastric 
muscle) and closing (masseter muscle) and involves tongue movements, which 
­will redistribute the food in the mouth while chewing. However, ­there are 
many variations in chewing movements—­one can chew mostly on the left 
or the right side or in a grinding fashion. This has led to a proposal of a CPG 
composed of a palette of local interacting CPGs (figure 2.4) like that of the 
mammalian locomotor CPG. The detailed connectivity of the CPG is only 
partially understood, but the rhythmic activity of neurons of the trigeminal 
sensorimotor cir­cuit is reported to depend on per­sis­tent Na+-­channels that 
operate at low extracellular Ca2+.
In addition to the neurons in the chewing CPG network, astrocytes 
appear to play an impor­tant role in pattern generation. When activated 
by glutamate, the local astrocytes can release a calcium chelator, S100beta, 
which lowers the extracellular levels of Ca2+, which promotes the activa-
tion of per­sis­tent Na+-­channels, and thereby the rhythmic activity in the 
network (Morquette et al., 2015; Condamine et al., 2018; Slaoui Hasnaoui 
et al., 2020). The contribution of this mechanism is shown by the fact that 
rhythmicity is blocked when the action of S100beta is blocked by antibod-
ies specific to S100beta. This provides an impor­tant demonstration of a 
dynamic interaction between astrocytes and neurons in the control of chew-
ing network function. Since the normal function of astrocytes is to regulate 

the local extracellular space, such as for glutamate, any interference with 
astrocyte function ­will likely lead to changes in network function. However, 
the pre­sent demonstration of the effect of S100beta is more specific.
When the food has been chewed, it is brought to the posterior part of the 
oral cavity and swallowing is initiated. It starts by closure of the respiratory 
tract and inhibition of respiratory and chewing movements, and then the 
CPG
Descending control
Sensory feedback
Motoneurons
Opening muscles
Closing muscles
Patterns of
mastication
Figure 2.4
A conceptual scheme of the masticatory control system. Included is the variability observed in 
jaw movements, which can emphasize activity on one side of the mouth or the other. The CPG 
is driven from the brainstem and cortical areas and is thought to have a number of modules, 
which allow dif­fer­ent emphases on the activation of dif­fer­ent muscle groups, as discussed in 
this chapter in the context of the locomotor CPG. ­There is similarly a sensory control indicated, 
which can affect both the CPG level and the motoneurons. Courtesy of James Lund.
47    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

48    Chapter 2
swallowing CPG is activated (Jean, 1990, 2001). This CPG, located along 
the nucleus tractus solitarius, produces a sequence of muscle contractions that 
­will bring the food bolus down to the esophagus and then forward it to the 
ventricle through the gastric sphincter, a pro­cess that takes several seconds. To 
allow the food to pass downward, the distal motoneurons are inhibited, while 
more proximal muscles in sequence propel the food forward. The CPG can 
operate without sensory input, but the sensory input can halt the swallowing 
pro­cess, as when a fish bone has been ingested. The pro­cess of swallowing can 
be reversed as in vomiting, with inhibition of breathing and activation of the 
abdominal muscles (Jean, 2001; Lang et al., 1993).
Yet another respiration-­associated be­hav­ior comprises the rhythmic move-
ments of the whis­kers, particularly in rodents. The whisking movements are 
controlled from a CPG located dorsomedial to the pBC in the ventral part 
of the intermediate reticular formation (Kleinfeld et al., 2014; Moore et al., 
2013, 2014), mediated via the facial nerve to the muscles moving the vibrissae. 
The whisking CPG can operate in­de­pen­dently but input from the pBC often 
makes the two rhythms become synchronous (see figure 2.3). The whisking 
be­hav­ior has become an impor­tant experimental model since the input from 
the individual vibrissae are represented in separate compartments within the 
“barrel cortex” and provides discrete input to the striatum and other parts of 
the cortex. The whisking provides spatial information regarding the immediate 
surroundings pro­cessed at many levels of the ner­vous system from the cortex 
to the midbrain, which is particularly impor­tant in animals that move around 
in dark environments, like many rodents.
In conclusion, the brainstem contains a set of orofacial CPGs that con-
trol vari­ous aspects of feeding, such as chewing, licking, and swallowing, 
which all interact in one way or another with the respiratory pBC. The 
whisking CPG also belongs to this category. The networks are mostly located 
in close association with each other in the lower brainstem and form a center 
for the control of orofacial movements.
2.2.3  The Brainstem–­Spinal Cord Control of Locomotion
In section 1.2 of chapter 1, I discussed the many versions of locomotion that 
occur among vertebrates, from fish to primates. What is common among 

them is that in all cases, a CPG network extending within the spinal cord 
generates the motor pattern under­lying locomotion in a specific species. 
Moreover, the CPG does not work in isolation; it receives continuous infor-
mation from a variety of sensors that adapt the movements to external events 
as the animal moves through a complex terrain or swims in ­water currents 
(Grillner & El Manira, 2020).
Lamprey/fish CPGs involve the entire spinal cord and can generate 
forward undulatory locomotor movements that can easily be reversed, as in 
backward swimming (Grillner et al., 1976). For tetrapods, each limb and the 
trunk are coordinated, the movements of each limb can be controlled in­de­
pen­dently, and the coordination between them can be varied from walk and 
trot to gallop. Even animals with a spinal transection can perform walking 
and galloping movements on a treadmill directly ­after a spinal transection 
if noradrenergic agonists are administered, or in the chronic spinal state 
(Forssberg & Grillner, 1973; Andersson et al., 1981; Rossignol et al., 2006).
2.2.3.1  Supraspinal command centers for locomotion
In all the vertebrates investigated, locomotion can be elicited by stimula-
tion of an area referred to as the “mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR)” 
(Shik et al., 1966; Ryczko et al., 2016), located in the transition between the 
mesencephalon and the pons. This area contains several neuronal structures, 
and it has been unclear for a long time which of them are the most impor­
tant. Recent studies in the mouse have shown that neurons in the cunei-
form nucleus make impor­tant contributions, and the effects are mediated to 
the spinal cord CPGs via neurons in the lateral paragigantocellular nucleus 
(LPGi) (Kiehn, 2016; Roseberry et al., 2016; Capelli et al., 2017; Caggiano 
et al., 2018; Ferreira-­Pinto et al., 2021). Direct spinally projecting neu-
rons from the MLR do not elicit locomotion when activated selectively, but 
instead they cause body lengthening and rearing (Ferreira-­Pinto et al., 2021). 
However, with concurrent activation of locomotion, this may be part of an 
integrated be­hav­ior leading to stiffening of the body. The pedunculopontine 
nucleus (PPN) is also located within the area of the MLR and its choliner-
gic neurons may contribute to locomotor control, particularly exploratory 
movements. The MLR thus forms an impor­tant integrated center for the 
49    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

50    Chapter 2
control of both locomotion and rearing. In the lamprey, the MLR similarly 
activates locomotion through bilateral effects on reticulospinal neurons 
(Ryczko et al., 2016). ­There is also an area within the diencephalon that 
elicits locomotion, called the diencephalic locomotor region (DLR), which 
contains neurons projecting to the lower brainstem, corresponding most 
likely to the zona incerta in mammals and the ventral thalamic area in the 
lamprey (Orlovsky, 1969; El Manira et al., 1997). ­These two areas, MLR and 
DLR, can thus be used by dif­fer­ent forebrain structures to initiate locomo-
tion in many contexts, such as escape or foraging.
2.2.3.2  The intrinsic function of locomotor CPGs
It has long been known that the CPG in mammals can produce the full 
motor pattern under­lying the four phases of the step cycle (Grillner & Zang-
ger, 1975). The next-­level question was to find out how the spinal CPG actu-
ally produces the motor pattern. To understand a microcircuit, one needs 
to know the following:
•	
The identity of the neurons, which are part of the CPG
•	
Their membrane properties
•	
The synaptic interaction—­transmitters and receptor subtypes
•	
How the CPG is activated
This seems straightforward, but in real­ity, it is a very demanding task. 
Therefore, we de­cided in the late 1970s to use the lamprey for the experiments, 
instead of a mammal. The lamprey belongs to the oldest group of now-­living 
vertebrates, and the lamprey spinal cord is more accessible, has much fewer 
neurons, and can be maintained in vitro, while the locomotor CPG can be 
turned on experimentally.
2.2.3.3  The lamprey locomotor CPG
The lamprey spinal cord turned out to be a good choice. It is thin (only 
200–300 μm in depth), a natu­ral slice, and could be used in vitro, and 
therefore methodologically advantageous (figure 2.5). Equally impor­tant, 
the locomotor pattern could be induced by electrical stimulation of the MLR 
or pharmacologically. We could then study the locomotor CPG in action 
­under in vitro conditions, and ­after some years, conclude that populations 

of excitatory premotor interneurons (EINs) in each segment represent the 
core of the burst-­generating cir­cuit. The EINs in turn activate ipsilateral 
motoneurons and glycinergic commissural interneurons (CINs) that inhibit 
contralateral interneurons and motoneurons (figure 2.6b; see also Buchanan & 
Grillner, 1987). The locomotor burst activity was initiated by the locomotor 
command acting via the excitatory reticulospinal neurons from the dif­fer­ent 
brainstem nuclei that activated the CPG by targeting both EINs and CINs 
through activation of both NMDA and AMPA receptors (Ohta & Grillner, 
1989; figure 2.6c). The burst activity ­will be facilitated by the activation of 
the voltage-­dependent NMDA receptors that contribute to the depolarizing 
plateau (Wallén & Grillner, 1987; Alford & Williams, 1989). The burst 
termination depends on the cellular properties of the CPG neurons and 
is accounted for by a gradual intracellular accumulation of Ca2+ and Na+, 
leading to a progressive activation of calcium-­ and KNa-­channels, which ­will 
hyperpolarize the EINs (figure 2.5d; El Manira et al., 1994; Wallén et al., 
The suction mouth
Dorsal view of the spinal cord
A
B
C
Midline
Lateral margin
Swimming Adult Lamprey (Lampetra ﬂuviatilis)
Neurons
Giant RS Axons
Figure 2.5
A. The lamprey has a thin (200–300­μm), flattened spinal cord that is well suited for imaging 
and electrophysiology, and the larger neurons are vis­i­ble ­under the microscope. B. The lamprey 
is a jawless vertebrate with a sucker mouth. C. The lamprey swims with an undulatory wave 
propagated along the body.
51    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

52    Chapter 2
2007) and inactivate other voltage-­dependent pro­cesses. The burst ­will then 
be followed by a hyperpolarizing phase when they become refractory, and 
subsequently due to the depolarizing drive from the locomotor command, 
they again become depolarized, and the voltage-­dependent NMDA chan-
nels open and contribute to the initiation of the next burst. The CPG can 
generate burst activity even when the glycinergic inhibition is inactivated, as 
is the case for the respiratory CPG (as discussed previously) and the mam-
malian locomotor CPG (Cangiano & Grillner, 2005; Grillner & El Manira, 
2020). Normally, however, the commissural interneurons are responsible for 
the reciprocal inhibition that results in alternating activity between the left 
and the right sides.
When the cells within the CPG and their synaptic interactions had been 
characterized, it was still difficult to know if the experimental findings could 
account for the network operation. One way to test if the experimental find-
ings can indeed produce the locomotor pattern is to use simulations based 
on detailed information of the neuronal and synaptic properties established 
experimentally. In this case, we simulated the segmental CPG in a realistic 
way to test if the model network can reproduce the biological function. 
Figures 2.6a and 2.6c show an example, with a model of the EINs at the 
cellular level with appropriate morphology, expression of ion channels, and 
afterhyperpolarization, and each model neuron is reproducing in detail their 
biological counterpart (current, frequency relation ­etc). A population of 
model EINs (figure 2.6b) ­were then connected with each other and driven 
by excitation from the brainstem mediated via NMDA and AMPA recep-
tors (figure 2.6c,d). The intrinsic cellular mechanisms that contribute to 
burst termination are illustrated in figure 2.6e. One could then show that 
the model network could reproduce the activity of the biological network 
and generate burst activity in the same broad frequency range (0.2–10 Hz) 
as the biological network (figure 2.6g).
What we have discussed so far is only the fast synaptic interaction via 
ionotropic glutamate, glycine, and GABA receptors. In addition, modu-
latory metabotrobic receptors activated by 5-­HT, GABA (GABAB), and 
glutamate (metabotropic glutamate receptors [mGluRs]), and peptides 
can fine-­tune CPG activity by acting on molecular components of the cells 

Mathematical model of network nerve cell
A
C
Na+
Kd
K+(Na+)
s K+(Ca2+)
f K+(Ca2+)
NMDA Ca2+
Inward current
Outward current
Burst terminating mechanisms
Action potential
Postsynaptic potential
Synapse
Mixed EPSP
Mixed
NMDA
AMPA
–70 mV
B
D
E
Unit CPG of EINs
Lamprey CPG
F
0 mV
–50 mV
0.5 s 
Left
Coordination in one segment -
simulation 
R
L
E
I
I
E
L
R
M
M
E
E
E
E
I
I
I
I
Cell geometry
Hodgkin-Huxley
formalism:
Na, K (IA, DR),
KCa, KNa, Ca
(N,T)-channels
G
Early AHP
late
Right
Figure 2.6
The lamprey segmental network—­cellular properties explored in simulations of the lamprey 
spinal locomotor networks. A, C. The morphology of the CPG neurons is captured using a 
five-­compartment model consisting of an initial segment, a so­ma, and a dendritic tree. Active ion 
currents are modeled using a Hodgkin-­Huxley formalism. Both ion channels involved in spiking 
be­hav­ior (Na+, K+) and slower Ca2+ or potassium-­dependent pro­cesses (KCa, KNa) are modeled 
based on available data. Spike frequency can be regulated by the AHP. B. Shows the con-
nectivity within the spinal CPG (red glutamatergic neurons, blue glycinergic inhibitory neurons, 
and green motoneurons). D. Fast synaptic transmission is included in the form of excitatory 
glutamatergic (AMPA and voltage-­dependent NMDA) and inhibitory glycinergic inputs. E. Main 
ionic membrane and synaptic currents considered to be impor­tant during activation within the 
CPG network. Slower pro­cesses can cause spike frequency adaptation, such as Ca2+ accu-
mulation during ongoing spiking and resulting activation of KCa (see also the discussion in this 
chapter). F. Unilateral CPG activity can be evoked in local networks of EINs. This basic EIN 
network can sustain the rhythm seen in ventral roots in vitro during evoked locomotor activity. 
The left–­right alternating activity requires the presence of contralateral inhibition provided by 
glycinergic interneurons (as discussed in this chapter). G. Simulation of the segmental network 
in operation. Abbreviations: E/EINs, excitatory interneurons; EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic 
potential; I, inhibitory interneurons; M, motoneurons.
53    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

54    Chapter 2
within the CPG, such as ion channels (Grillner, 2003). For instance, the 
presence of 5-­HT markedly facilitates regular rhythmic activity in the loco-
motor CPGs, extending from the lamprey to mammals. Although this rep-
resents an impor­tant aspect of CPG function and could be the subject of a 
book of its own, we ­will not discuss this impor­tant aspect of neuromodula-
tion further in this context (Grillner, 2003).
2.2.3.4  Generation of the undulatory wave: Intersegmental  
coordination in the lamprey
So far, we have considered the burst-­generating capacity on the segmental 
level, whereas in real­ity, the lamprey spinal cord has 100 segments, all of 
which are coordinated so that a wave from head to tail pushes the animal for-
ward during swimming, with a fixed phase lag between each of the segments 
(figure 2.7). When the lamprey or fish swims, the speed is increased mainly 
by increasing the frequency of swim cycles, in the case of the lamprey from 
around 0.2 to 10 Hz, and in the case of a trout, up to 25 Hz from head to 
tail(!). The phase lag between each of the segments in the lamprey is around 
1 ­percent of the cycle duration, regardless of ­whether it is very short or long, 
with the result that the phase lag along the body ­will remain the same at low 
or high speed. The speed of the traveling wave along the body, however, ­will 
Forward
Backward
Cycle 
duration
Cycle 
duration
Control
Rostral inhibition
lag
lag
Figure 2.7
Intersegmental coordination during swimming in lamprey. An undulatory wave is transmitted along 
the body from head to tail, while it is reversed during backward swimming. ­There is a correspond-
ing delay in the activation of the muscle segments, as well as the direction of the wave. In the iso-
lated spinal cord, the head-­to-­tail wave can be generated, and the wave can be reversed by adding 
excitation to the most caudal segments or (conversely) inhibiting the most rostral segments.

increase inversely to the duration of the swim cycle. The under­lying neural 
network depends on the same components as in the segmental CPG, with 
the addition that the inhibitory commissural neurons have long, interseg-
mental, descending axons that make synapses over perhaps 20 segments, 
while the EINs have briefer intersegmental axonal branches (not more than 
5–6 segments), as indicated in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.8 shows that a network, incorporating the intersegmental net-
work from head to tail consisting of 10,000 neurons (100/segment), can 
generate activity with the appropriate phase lag along the spinal cord (Kozlov 
et al., 2009, 2014). Equally impor­tant, if the excitability of the first few 
segments ­were increased, the phase lag along the entire spinal cord could 
increase to even more than 2 ­percent, corresponding to two undulatory 
waves over the entire body. Conversely, if the same segments ­were inhibited 
to some degree, so that they would have a lower excitability than the remain-
ing part of the spinal cord, the wave reversed in direction over the entire 
spinal cord, resulting in a tail-­to-­head direction, corresponding to backward 
swimming. By changing the excitability of a few rostral segments gradually, 
the phase lag can be graded from 2 ­percent to −2 ­percent. The normal range 
would be from 1 ­percent to −1 ­percent, but during rapid changes of speed, 
the phase lag can vary over some cycles.
One impor­tant take-­home message is that by tinkering with the excit-
ability of just a few segments of a large network, one can affect the operation 
of the entire network. Another impor­tant conclusion was that the variability 
observed in each population was an impor­tant design feature. When we 
designed the model network, we also included the variability in cellular 
properties that had been observed experimentally. For example, somewhat 
smaller interneurons would have higher input re­sis­tance and be recruited 
first when depolarized, and conversely large neurons would join somewhat 
­later during each burst. When variability existed, the network operated in 
a very stable manner over a large frequency range, whereas if all neurons in 
each population had identical properties (an average neuron), the network 
produced a less stable rhythm in a narrow frequency range. It is intuitively 
easy to realize that a gradual recruitment and derecruitment of neurons dur-
ing each burst ­will result in a more stable rhythm. Thus, the variability in 
55    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

56    Chapter 2
Head
Tail
F
Current (nA)
Frequency (Hz)
B
C
Left
Rostral
Caudal
Midline
Right
E
E
I
E
I
I
D
E
A
Simulated current injection
seg. 1
10
100
+
−
Increased
phase lag
Decreased
or reversed
phase lag
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.5
1
1.5
Figure 2.8
Full-­scale simulation of the spinal locomotor network of lamprey with 10,000 neurons in the 
spinal locomotor network. A. The morphology of neurons was similar to their biological counter­
parts, and they ­were simulated with the variability observed experimentally. B. The density 
of neurons within part of the neuronal pool. C. Organ­ization of the synaptic connections in 
transverse and longitudinal views of the spinal cord. Caudally directed projections dominate. 
Excitatory (E) neurons proj­ect ipsilaterally (i.e., their axons do not cross the midline), and inhibi-
tory (I) neurons proj­ect contralaterally. D. Mean firing rate (thick line) as a function of the somatic 
current injection. The shaded area shows maximum variation of the spike frequency in the 
simulated population. E. The magnitude of the intersegmental phase lag varies continuously 
with changes of the excitability in a few rostral segments. A lowering of excitability reverses 
the phase lag to backward swimming in all segments, while a neutral stage leads to the normal 
forward phase lag, and an enhanced excitability increases the phase lag to values greater than 
normal. F. The overall activity in the simulated spinal cord during locomotion. Each dot signifies 
the activity of one neuron. The color code in this image is blue for hyperpolarized, red for firing 
neurons, and yellow for depolarized but not yet firing neurons. Note that when one side is active, 
the other is inhibited, and the overall activity corresponds to the phase lag observed in vivo.

cellular properties of a class of neurons is not a ­mistake of nature, but rather 
a design feature.
2.2.3.5  Simulation of ­actual swimming and steering
So far, we have considered the activity at the network level, but the network 
in turn controls a body that interacts with the surrounding world (in this 
case, the viscoelastic properties of ­water). To include ­these properties in the 
simulations, we performed a simulation of a lamprey-­shaped body with seg-
mental muscles with appropriate viscoelastic properties controlled from the 
network by the segmental output from motoneurons (Ekeberg & Grillner, 
1999; Kozlov et al., 2009, 2014). Moreover, the ­water environment has been 
included. Figure 2.9 shows the outline of the lamprey and the rostrocaudal 
excursions of its swimming movement, very close to the natu­ral movements 
of the lamprey (Williams et al., 1989).
­These simulations ­were very instructive in bridging the gap between the 
neural network activity and ­actual be­hav­ior, such as swimming as the speed of 
RS
output
Motor
output
Head
Tail
turn 150 ms
A
B
C
Figure 2.9
Electrical and mechanical dynamics in the model. A. Phasic and tonic components of reticulo-
spinal (RS) and motor outputs from the right side. An output signal of neuron population is the 
firing frequency computed by leaky integrators with time constant equal to the cell membrane 
time constant. Timing of the turn command is shown by the horizontal bar. B, C. Shape of the 
body during forward swimming and a lateral turn caused by activation of the turn command in 
tectum. Modified from Kozlov et al. (2014).
57    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

58    Chapter 2
movement increased (Grillner et al., 2007; Kotaleski et al., 1999). Moreover, 
we simulated steering left and right by adding excitatory drive to the network 
on ­either side by incorporating the crossed and uncrossed outputs from the 
tectum to reticulospinal neurons, which could make the motoneurons on 
one side somewhat more active and induce a turning movement. The more 
excitation that was added, the deeper the resulting turning movement would 
become (Kozlov et al., 2014). With the increased activity on one side, ­there 
was a corresponding attenuation of the activity on the contralateral side.
2.2.3.6  Propriospinal control of the locomotor CPG by  
stretch receptor neurons: Biology and simulation
Stretch-­receptor neurons located along the margin of the spinal cord sense the 
lateral undulations during swimming since the spinal cord is displaced in each 
swim cycle. ­These neurons (also called “edge cells”) have fine ramifications 
in the lateral margin that sense mechanical distortion. They are of two types: 
one is glutamatergic and excites ipsilateral CPG neurons, and the other is 
glycinergic and inhibits contralateral neurons (Grillner et al., 1984; Di Prisco 
et al., 1990). If passive, locomotor-­like movements are imposed on the iso-
lated spinal cord during fictive locomotion, the locomotor activity becomes 
entrained at frequencies that can be both somewhat lower or higher than the 
original rest rate when no movements ­were imposed (Grillner et al., 1981).
As described previously, when the swimming movements ­were simulated, 
the introduction of the edge cells in the control scheme of the local CPG does 
not affect locomotor movements. However, if the locomotor movements ­were 
challenged (e.g., with unpredicted ­water currents and higher ­water speeds), 
the feedback became impor­tant. A simulated lamprey without edge cells can-
not ­handle the perturbations and cannot move forward as planned, whereas 
with the sensory feedback, it can indeed compensate and move forward (see 
figure 2.10).
2.2.3.7  The segmental locomotor CPG in zebrafish
­Later work in the zebrafish has shown that EINs can be subdivided into three 
groups (subgroups of the genet­ically defined V2a interneurons, as shown in 
figure 2.11) (Song et al., 2018, 2020). One group activates slow motoneu-
rons and is responsible for slow swimming. Another activates intermediate 

motoneurons/muscle fibers, and a third activates the very fast motoneurons 
that innervate muscle fibers required during escape swimming. The slow 
EINs have membrane properties conducive to generating rhythmic activ-
ity, and they mutually excite each other and weakly excite the intermediate 
type of EINs. They also excite each other, as well as the slow EINs, thereby 
ascertaining synchronous burst activity in all active EINs.
The intermediate type of EINs is recruited, with a stronger descending 
drive from the brainstem, and fast EINs are involved only transiently during 
escape. The zebrafish spinal locomotor CPG is currently the best-­characterized 
No sensory feedback
Sensory feedback
Sensory
Sensory
M
M
SR-E
SR-E
SR-I
SR-I
E
E
E
E
I
I
I
I
A
B
C
Figure 2.10
The segmental CPG network is indicated together with stretch-­receptor neurons (i.e., edge cells) 
that sense the locomotor movement. A. One excitatory stretch receptor subtype acting on the 
ipsilateral side of the CPG and a contralateral that inhibits contralateral CPG neurons. B. The 
swimming lamprey model is coordinating its swimming perfectly well without sensory feedback, 
but when it meets an area in which the ­water is rapidly moving ­toward the lamprey, it is unable to 
cope with the perturbation (gray area). C. The sensory feedback (stretch receptors) is included 
in the network, and it is then able to swim through the perturbed area. Abbreviations: E, excit-
atory interneurons; I, inhibitory interneurons; M, motoneurons, SR-­E, excitatory stretch receptor 
neurons; SR-­I, inhibitory stretch receptor neurons. Modified from Ekeberg and Grillner (1999).
59    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

60    Chapter 2
vertebrate CPG. The sensory control of the segmental CPG is from receptors 
that sense the lateral movements of the body located at the margin of the spinal 
cord and connected to intervertebral ligaments (Picton et al., 2021). An inacti-
vation of ­these sensory propriospinal neurons affects the locomotor movements, 
which become slower, and their amplitude tends to become larger, showing that 
the proprioceptive control is an integral part of the locomotor network. The 
basic design of ­these cir­cuits in the zebrafish resembles ­those of the lamprey, and 
their stretch receptor neurons that interact directly with the locomotor CPG.
2.2.3.8  The mammalian locomotor CPG
The mammalian limb CPG, with its four phases, has been more difficult to 
crack. The neonatal mouse preparation that generates mostly flexor-­extensor 
alternation, however, has allowed an analy­sis of some interneurons and how 
they interact (Goulding, 2009; Kiehn, 2016). The categories of interneurons 
in the spinal cord can be genet­ically defined in subgroups from dorsal to ven-
tral, as shown in figure 2.12a (Jessell, 2000). The alternation between flexors 
and extensors is produced by the genet­ically defined V1 and V2b inhibitory 
Figure 2.11
The modular zebrafish CPG. As described in this chapter, the excitatory V2a interneurons are 
further subdivided into three modules, each controlling fast (blue), intermediate (green), and slow 
(red) motoneurons and muscle fibers. Each module consists of excitatory interneurons, some of 
which also have gap junctions in their synapse on motoneurons (as indicated by the resistor in the 
drawing). The gap junctions play an impor­tant role in providing feedback between motoneurons 
and interneurons, thereby amplifying the chemical synaptic transmission when depolarized. To 
the left, it indicates that at slow speeds, the slow (red) module is recruited, and with increasing 
speed the intermediate (green) and the fast (blue), respectively. Courtesy of Abdel El Manira.

interneurons. If both types are inactivated, the alternation dis­appears and flex-
ors and extensors become synchronous, while the bursting continues. The 
bursting pro­cess itself does thus not require inhibition (Rancic & Gosgnach. 
2021; Grillner & Kozlov, 2021).
­There are three types of excitatory interneurons: V2a interneurons, a 
non-­V2a population called Shox2 subpopulation, and HB9 (Homeobox). 
The Shox2 interneurons are rhythmically active in phase with ­either flexors 
or extensors. They are electrically coupled, may contribute to generating 
the rhythmic burst activity, and are thought to excite the V2a interneurons, 
which in turn activates the motoneurons (figure 2.12c; Dougherty et al., 
2013; Ha & Dougherty, 2018). Inactivation of selected types of interneu-
rons has not yet resulted in conclusive answers.
pd1
pd2
pd3
pd4
pd5
pd6
p0
p1
p2
pMN
p3
V0d
V1
V2a
V3
dI6
Lamprey CPG
Mouse CPG
A
B
C
V0v
V2b
MN
V2a
Shox2
V0v
V0d
MN
MN
MN
V2a
Shox2
V0d
MN
I-IN
I-IN
E-IN
E-IN
E-IN
E-IN
V0v
Figure 2.12
Schematic repre­sen­ta­tion of the precursor groups in the developing vertebrate spinal cord and 
the lamprey and mouse CPG. A. The spinal cord is subdivided into six dorsal and five ventral 
progenitor domains (pds), giving rise to dif­fer­ent interneuron populations and motoneurons. To 
the right are indicated the classes of neurons referred to in the text in the context of locomotion. 
The color code is blue for inhibitory, red for excitatory interneurons, and green for motoneurons. 
B. The lamprey CPG with the same color code. C. The mouse CPG. Courtesy of Abdel El Manira.
61    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

62    Chapter 2
Thus, we do not yet fully understand the pro­cess of generating the burst 
activity in the mammalian locomotor CPG, nor the next-­level prob­lem of 
how the four-­phase locomotor pattern of the limb is produced. One ­factor to 
consider is that each population of interneurons needs to be further divided 
into subgroups that supply individual groups of motoneurons. For instance, 
the inhibitory neurons that supply the ankle extensors are not the same as 
­those supplying the knee extensors. ­There is thus a further fractionation 
within each subpopulation that needs to be considered, which makes the 
analyses more demanding.
The coordination between the left and right hindlimbs and forelimbs 
can shift between walking, trotting, or galloping. A very in­ter­est­ing finding 
regarding the coordination between the limbs is that two sets of crossed 
interneurons, the V0d and V0v, are engaged (figure 2.12c), one during walk-
ing and the other during trotting. Knocking out ­either of them ­will make the 
mice unable to trot or walk, respectively (Talpalar et al., 2013).
2.2.3.9  The unit burst generator concept for the locomotor CPG:  
A versatile organ­ization
The locomotor CPG needs to be versatile and be able to contribute to walk-
ing forward and backward and adapt a ­whole variety of modifications of the 
locomotor pattern. The alternative of having, instead, one CPG for each 
pos­si­ble variation of locomotion seems unattractive and costly (e.g., in terms 
of the number of neurons needed).
The CPGs for each of the four limbs can be combined in dif­fer­ent ways 
to account for the dif­fer­ent gaits (figure 2.13a). The next-­level question is to 
consider ­whether the limb CPG could be further subdivided into unit CPGs 
that could be recombined to generate the types of coordination required, 
such as backward, forward, or sideways locomotion (figure 2.13b).
An impor­tant experimental finding was that the ability to generate 
rhythmic activity is distributed locally over the entire spinal cord, as shown 
with optoge­ne­tic activation of glutamatergic interneurons. Unilateral burst-
ing can be produced in one segment, and one can even elicit bursting exclu-
sively in ­either flexor or extensor motoneurons (Hägglund et al., 2013). 
­These findings agreed with ­earlier, less detailed findings in the cat by Grillner 

(1981, 1985), which showed that bursting could be distributed in dif­fer­ent 
parts of the spinal cord, and furthermore that ­either flexors or extensors 
could be active in isolation. ­These studies therefore suggested a conceptual 
model of a flexible CPG organ­ization, in which each group of synergists at 
a given joint ­were controlled by a unit CPG. The diagram in figure 2.13b 
shows the concept, with one burst-­generating unit CPG for the hip extensors 
(HE) and another for the hip flexors (HF) and the same for the knee, ankle, 
and foot. At each joint, the unit CPGs for flexors and extensors are recipro-
cally connected, while the connectivity between the joints could be varied. 
For forward locomotion, the extensor unit CPGs work together, while for 
backward locomotion, hip and knee extensors inhibit each other, as the 
phase relation between the hip and lower limb ­will need to change between 
forward and backward locomotion. This organ­ization can also generate the 
­actual motor pattern, with the knee flexors being active before other flexors, 
as they are responsible for the liftoff at the end of the support phase by letting 
the ankle flexor (AF) and hip flexor (HF) unit CPGs inhibit the knee flexor 
(KF) unit CPG. In that way, the KFs become active before the other flexors. 
The brief toe extensor, the extensor digitorum brevis (EDB), is also a muscle 
that ­will have a burst at touchdown before the other extensors.
To further explore this network configuration, we simulated the network 
(Grillner & Kozlov, 2021) in an unorthodox way. We used as unit CPGs 
the segmental populations of EINs (see figure 2.5b, showing the lamprey 
CPG) that are known to have the ability to generate burst activity in isola-
tion, and then connected them as indicated in the scheme. The simulations 
in figure 2.13c show that the burst pattern resulted in a pattern similar to 
that observed experimentally, with alternation between flexors and extensors 
in the hip and ankle, but with the knee flexors active at the transition from 
extensor to flexor activity (i.e., liftoff phase) and in the other transition, and 
similarly with EDB, which is also active particularly when the foot is placed 
on the ground. This shows that the pattern of activity matches that of the 
normal locomotor pattern, at least for the first approximation.
As the speed of locomotion increases, the support phase is shortened 
markedly, while the flexion phase remains rather constant in animals as well 
as ­humans (Goslow et al., 1973; Grillner et al., 1981). We simulated this 
63    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

64    Chapter 2
condition with the same network by gradually increasing the excitatory drive 
to the extensor-­unit CPGs, while letting the drive to the flexor-­unit CPGs 
remain similar. As can be seen in figure 2.14a, the simulation produced a 
constant flexion phase, while the duration of the extension phase shortened 
dramatically. Thus, this network configuration can reproduce this impor­tant 
aspect of the adaptation to speed pre­sent in mammals and other tetrapods.
What about versatility? Can the network be made to generate the 
backward-­walking motor pattern? If the connectivity is changed so the 
mutual excitation between hip and knee extensor in forward locomotion is 
Supraspinal command
MLR
DLR
hind
limb
hind
limb
fore
limb
fore
limb
HE
HF
KE
KF
AE
AF
FE
FF
EDB
Unit CPG organization
forward locomotion
HE
HF
KE
KF
AE
AF
FE
FF
EDB
1 s
Simulation
forward locomotion
HE
HF
KE
KF
AE
AF
FE
FF
EDB
A
B
C
Figure 2.13
Systems of interacting unit CPGs—­intralimb coordination—­forward locomotion. A. The diagram 
to the left shows the four limb CPGs of a tetrapod and pos­si­ble modes of coordination (in 
phase or alternation for the forelimbs and hindlimbs, respectively). The CPGs are turned on by 
the descending drive from the MLR or the DLR. B. Within each limb CPG, ­there is most likely a 
further subdivision in unit CPGs controlling the synergists at one joint, such as hip (H), knee (K), 
ankle (A), and foot (F) extensors (E) or flexors (F). The extensor digitorum brevis (EDB) has a par­
tic­u­lar pattern. The normal pattern of activity results from the interaction between the unit CPGs at 
vari­ous joints. The advantage is that the unit CPGs may be recombined as in backward or forward 
walking, in the same way as with the limb CPGs that can be recombined in the vari­ous gaits. Circles 
indicate inhibition, and forks/triangles excitation. C. Exploratory simulation of locomotor activity, with 
a network arranged as in the diagram in which each unit CPG is designed in a similar way to the 
lamprey unit CPGs consisting of 100 excitatory interacting neurons and the interaction between 
the 9-­unit CPGs arranged as in B. The output of the model network captures essential features of 
the locomotor output. Modified from Grillner and Kozlov (2021).

replaced by reciprocal inhibition and the excitation between hip and ankle 
flexors is also removed (figures 2.14b and 2.14c), alternation between the hip 
and knee extensors is produced, which would correspond to the coordina-
tion required for backward locomotion.
The unit CPG organ­ization of the locomotor network would thus account 
for the flexibility of the motor pattern and allows a subtle control compared to 
just forward and backward locomotion. It allows for utilizing part of the unit 
CPG organ­ization for other movements such as wiggling the big toe or perform-
ing isolated ankle or knee movements, as I wrote in Grillner (1985). In planning 
for movements around individual joints, one can argue that the simplest solution 
would be to use the relevant part of the infrastructure available in the locomo-
tor CPG organ­ization. This most likely applies to the evolutionarily conserved 
HE
HF
KE
KF
AE
AF
FE
FF
EDB
Unit CPG organization
backward locomotion
HE
HF
KE
KF
AE
AF
FE
FF
EDB
HE
HF
KE
KF
AE
AF
FE
FF
EDB
Simulation
backward locomotion
1 s
2000
1500
1000
500
500
1000 1500 2000 2500
0
0
hip ext
hip ﬂex
Cycle duration (ms)
Burst duration (ms)
Forward locomotion
A
B
C
Figure 2.14
Systems of interacting unit CPGs—­intralimb coordination—in backward locomotion. A. The 
graph shows that the flexion phase can be kept constant at dif­fer­ent cycle durations, while the 
extension phase can vary markedly when the excitatory drive to the extensor-­unit CPGs is varied, 
although the drive to the flexor-­unit CPGs is kept constant. B. Note that the connectivity pat-
tern between the hip-­unit CPGs and the lower-­limb-­unit CPGs has been modified. Weakened 
synaptic projections are shown with thin lines. C. Same repre­sen­ta­tion of the motor pattern to 
the muscles as in figure 2.11 during simulated backward locomotion. The image below indicates 
the activity in individual interneurons. Abbreviations: AE, ankle extensor; AF, ankle flexor; EDB, 
extensor digitorum brevis; FE, foot extensor; FF, foot flexor; HE, hip extensor; HF, hip flexor; KE, 
knee extensor; KF, knee flexor. Modified from Grillner and Kozlov (2021).
65    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

66    Chapter 2
rhythmic scratch reflexes performed by the hindlimbs, as well as the forelimb 
self-­grooming movements (Grillner & El Manira, 2020). Rather than design-
ing a new microcircuit at the spinal level, when producing the spinal aspect of 
reaching, grasping, or hand-­to-­mouth coordination, it would seem likely that 
parts of the available spinal machinery is reused. As discussed next, the dif­fer­ent 
groups of neurons in the brainstem, such as the lateral rostral medulla (latRM) 
are impor­tant to consider in this context, but the pro­cessing at the spinal level is 
only partially known. This view is reinforced by the observations of Hägglund 
et al. (2013), which reported that fractions of the locomotor pattern can be 
induced by local activation of glutamatergic interneurons along the spinal cord.
2.2.3.10  Escape reactions
It is critical for all vertebrates to react to impending threats by escaping (see 
also section 2.4). In most mammals, escape ­will result from an activation of 
one compartment of the periaqueductal gray (PAG) and downstream MLR, 
and in lower vertebrates most likely through the griseum centrale, the analo-
gous structure to PAG. Escape reactions in fish consist of an initial C-­shaped 
bend of the body to change direction, followed rapidly by escape swimming 
at maximal frequency. It can be elicited through the Mauthner cells, which 
proj­ect monosynaptically to contralateral motoneurons (Faber et al., 1989). 
Recent findings in zebrafish show that Mauthner cells also activate a specific 
subset of cholinergic V2a interneurons that selectively target the fast sub-
type of motoneurons by gap junctions located on the axon hillock, thereby 
bypassing the dendrites and so­ma of motoneurons, resulting in a minimal 
delay (Guan et al., 2021). ­These interneurons amplify the escape reaction 
markedly, and their ablation eliminates the escape command reaction.
2.3  A BRAINSTEM CENTER FOR COORDINATION OF  
REACHING AND GRASPING MOVEMENTS IN THE LATERAL 
RETICULAR MEDULLA
To be able to reach ­toward and grasp an object, mostly with the forelimbs, is 
an impor­tant part of the tetrapod motor repertoire. Thus, a mouse can reach 
­toward a pellet and then grasp it and bring it to the mouth. This pattern of 

be­hav­ior is served by innate circuitry located in the brainstem and spinal 
cord. As so often is the case, it has been long assumed that reaching depended 
exclusively on projections from the motor cortex to the spinal cord.
Recent experiments from the Arber laboratory (Esposito et al., 2014; Ruder 
et al., 2021), however, have shown that in the mouse, a group of neurons in 
the lateral rostral medulla (latRM) serves as a center for reaching and grasping 
coordination (figure 2.15). One set of neurons in the latRM proj­ects directly to 
67    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord
Figure 2.15
Center in the latRM coordinating reaching grasping coordination. It contains one population of 
cells that elicit reaching, another that via the MdV population controls the hand movements in 
grasping, and a third (MdD) that elicits hand-­to-­mouth movements. LatRM, lateral rostral medulla; 
MdD, medullary reticular formation dorsal part; MdV, medullary reticular formation ventral part.

68    Chapter 2
the spinal cord, and their selective activation leads to a reaching movement that 
is not combined with other types of movements. Some of ­these neurons have a 
bias ­toward the direction of the reaching movement (e.g., lateral versus medial).
Another set of latRM neurons proj­ects to the ventral part of the nearby 
brainstem medullary reticular formation ventral part (MdV). This nucleus 
proj­ects directly to motoneurons and interneurons in the spinal cord that 
enable the paw to open as the first part of a grasping movement. Activation 
of MdV elicits part of a grasping movement, and an activation of the two 
together presumably produces a reach-­to-­grasp movement. Fi­nally, a third 
group of neurons in the latRM elicits a hand-­to-­mouth movement acting 
through neurons in the dorsal part of the brainstem—­namely, medullary 
reticular information (MdD). The three types of neurons are activated in suc-
cession: reaching, followed by grasping, and then retracting (to the mouth). 
Older work in the cat had shown that the execution of the reaching com-
mand at the spinal level is mediated by a group of propriospinal neurons in 
segments C3–­C4, while the grasping signals are mediated at the segmental 
level (Alstermark et al., 2007; Alstermark & Isa 2012; Pivetta et al., 2014) 
and several descending pathways excite this group of C3–­C4 neurons.
Taken together, this means that latRM and related groups of neurons form 
a command center in the brainstem–­spinal cord for eliciting all aspects of this 
impor­tant be­hav­ior that is reaching, grasping, and bringing objects such as a 
piece of food to the mouth. This is somewhat analogous to the locomotor com-
mand centers in the mesencephalon. The next-­level question is which parts of the 
ner­vous system determine when the reach-­grasp infrastructure should be called 
into action. The recent demonstration of massive projections from the output 
nucleus of the basal ganglia, substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) (McElvain 
et al., 2021), to this part of the reticular formation may suggest that the basal gan-
glia is involved. Projections from the motor cortex are also impor­tant to consider.
2.3.1  Cortical Neurons Involved in Reaching
It has long been known that in primates and cats, neurons in the motor cor-
tex are activated during reaching (Georgopoulos et al., 1986; Georgopoulos, 
1986; Yakovenko & Drew, 2015). In the primate experiment, the monkey 
was sitting in a chair with the hand pointing to a central position, and when 

any one of eight lights arranged in dif­fer­ent directions around the center ­were 
turned on, the monkey should reach out ­toward the light. Neurons in the 
arm area of the motor cortex ­were recorded during each reaching movement. 
­These neurons that ­were active during reaching ­were broadly tuned, but for 
each of the eight directions, the population vector of the neurons pointed in 
the appropriate direction (see figure 2.16). The neurons ­were also activated, 
but to a lesser degree, with movements to nearby directions. When reaching 
movements in the opposite direction ­were performed, they ­were instead inhib-
ited. By recording from populations of neurons, the direction of the reaching 
69    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord
–500
0
500
1000
–500
0
500
1000
90º
0º
270º
225º
180º
–500
0
500
1000
–500
0
500
1000
–500
0
500
1000
–500
0
500
1000
–500
0
500
1000
–500
0
Movement
onset
500
1000
Figure 2.16
Individual cortical neurons are broadly tuned to the detection of movement. Raster plots show 
the firing pattern of a single neuron of movements in eight directions. A monkey was trained to 
move a ­handle to eight locations, represented by light-­emitting diodes, arranged radially in one 
plane around a central starting position. Each row of tics in each raster plot represents activity 
in a single trial. The rows are aligned at zero time (the onset of movement). The center diagram 
shows the directions of the eight movements. The cell fires at relatively high rates during move-
ments made in directions ranging from 90 to 250 degrees. From Georgopoulos et al. (1982).

70    Chapter 2
movement performed could be in­de­pen­dently predicted. The cortical neurons 
are thus activated when the monkey performs reaching movements. Moreover, 
they are in a broad sense specific for the direction of the reaching movement. 
Many of the neurons in the motor cortex proj­ect to the basal ganglia (striatum), 
brainstem, and some do so to the spinal cord. It seems likely that the latRM 
command center for reaching/grasping is also pre­sent in monkeys (figure 2.15). 
If so, one would assume that the reaching neurons in the motor cortex impinge 
on the monkey latRM and could thereby elicit a reaching-­grasping movement 
sequence. Another likely input to the latRM would be from the output nuclei 
of the basal ganglia, such as the SNr (McElvain et al., 2021), which proj­ect to 
this general region. This level of control ­will be further discussed in chapters 4 
and 5, considering the role of the forebrain in controlling movement.
A further sophistication takes place when ­handling food, which requires 
interactions between the grasping paw and oral pro­cessing. When a mouse 
has grasped a piece of food, it can further ­handle the object by an interaction 
between the forelimb paw and the mouth, like removing the envelope of a 
seed before eating it. In another example, a mouse fed a piece of spaghetti ­will 
use both paws to orient it so it can be ingested effectively (An et al., 2022; 
Mohan et al., 2019). This complex pro­cess involves pyramidal neurons in 
two related orofacial motor areas in the frontal lobe, and it would seem likely 
that they act through or interact with the neurons in the latRM.
As noted in chapter 1, in reaching/grasping movements, the rodent and 
­human strategy for performing the movements is very similar, which has led 
to the conclusion that the under­lying neural cir­cuits would be conserved 
(Sacrey et al., 2009). Since this be­hav­ior is pre­sent in all tetrapods, a pro­
cessing center like that of the rodent latRM may be pre­sent in vertebrates 
ranging from frogs to primates.
2.3.2  Timing of Reaching Movements Requires the Ability to Predict 
the Location of a Moving Target
­There are, however, many demanding types of pro­cessing under­lying the tim-
ing of a reaching movement ­toward a moving object, so that the paw/hand 
reaches the object at the appropriate time. To achieve this, one cannot aim the 
reaching ­toward the ­actual location of a moving object at time zero, but rather 

predict the location of the object when the reaching movement has been com-
pleted. Consider, for instance, when responding to a serve in tennis, one needs 
to make an unconscious prediction of the trajectory of the ball and position 
the arm extended with the racket in an appropriate position. This ability to 
make predictions is critical for all animals when (for instance) hunting for prey. 
Even fish make such timing predictions when attacking prey. A pike waits in 
one place for small fish to pass by, and then it aims at the ­future location of the 
fish at the precise moment when it can attack the victim (Kashin et al., 1977).
­Human neonates reach out with their arms ­toward colored objects pass-
ing close by, and at week 36, they are close to the reaching quality and preci-
sion of the adult. They then can make a prediction of where the object should 
be located when they can capture it (von Hofsten & Lindhagen, 1979). This 
ability to predict the location of a moving object is clearly an impor­tant part 
of the behavioral repertoire of vertebrates, from fish to ­humans, and critical 
for many types of movement control.
2.4  THE PAG CHANNELS COMMANDS FROM THE  
HYPOTHALAMUS AND AMYGDALA
2.4.1  The PAG: A Command Region for Vocalizations, Escape, 
­Freezing, Lordosis, Maternal Be­hav­ior, and Pain Relief
In mammals, the area around the aqueduct that extends between the fourth and 
the third ventricle is referred to as the “periaqueductal gray (PAG)” (Vieira et al., 
2011; Faull et al., 2019; Subramanian et al., 2021). In birds, fish, and lampreys, 
it is called the griseum centrale (Wullimann et al., 1996; Dubbeldam & den 
Boer-­Visser, 2002; Olson et al., 2017). This is a comparatively large area, and in 
­humans, it extends over 25 mm, and in the cat over 8 mm. It is subdivided into 
many compartments, each of which can trigger dif­fer­ent emotionally tainted 
responses. ­These compartments are or­ga­nized in a columnar structure. In the 
cat, part of the PAG elicits howling and hissing sounds as a sign of aggression, 
while another area elicits mewing, a sign of positive emotion (Subramanian 
et al., 2016, 2021).
In many species, including rodents, both escape and freezing responses 
can be elicited. The dorsomedial and dorsolateral PAG (together known as 
71    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

72    Chapter 2
dPAG) elicits escape be­hav­ior, while the ventrolateral PAG (vlPAG) elicits 
the freezing be­hav­ior. Both occur as response to fear, an immediate appar-
ent threat leads to escape, while a more distant potential threat may lead to 
a freezing response ­after a risk assessment. ­There is a reciprocal inhibitory 
relation between the dPAG and vlPAG (Lefler et al., 2020). Escape and freez-
ing cannot occur at the same time. The dPAG receives major input from the 
cholecystokinin (cck)–­expressing neurons within the premammillary nucleus 
(PMd-­cck), which in turn receives input from a variety of structures, includ-
ing other hypothalamic nuclei and limbic structures (Comoli et al., 2000; 
Wang et al., 2021). Activation of the dPAG or PMd-­cck reduces or blocks 
the escape response (figure 2.17). In addition, the dPAG receives input from 
the amygdala, superior colliculus (SC), and cortex (Lefler et al., 2020). Input 
from all areas that can trigger the escape reaction is thus mediated via dPAG. 
In parallel, ­there is also suppression of pain perception, which may function 
from the perspective that when an individual has escape as the priority, pain 
should be suppressed.
The lateral PAG (lPAG) mediates attack be­hav­ior and aggression. 
Optoge­ne­tic activation of the lPAG triggers attack be­hav­ior, and it receives 
dense projections from the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), a structure 
known to elicit attack be­hav­ior. Activation of ­either structure is efficient, 
and inhibition of the lPAG markedly reduces the effect of the VMH, and 
dPAG
CNF/MLR
PMd-cck
Cortex
Amygdala
Superior 
colliculus
LPGi
Locomotor
CPG
Escape
SNr
Figure 2.17
The escape reaction is coordinated from the dPAG. The dPAG elicits locomotion via the cunei-
form nucleus (CNF), which in turn activates the lateral paragigantocellular nucleus (LPGi), which 
targets the spinal locomotor CPGs. The premammillary cck-­expressing neurons in hypothalamus 
provides a major input to the dPAG, as does the cortex, the amygdala, and the medial parts of 
the SC.

it is thought that the activation of the lPAG represents the motor aspect of 
aggression and the emotional aspect is conveyed via other projections of 
VMH (Lin et al., 2011; Falkner et al., 2014; Lo et al., 2019). As a medical 
student many years ago, I was shown a sweet and purring cat with an elec-
trode implanted in its hypothalamus. When stimulated, ­there was a radical 
change, and the cat was transformed into a scary creature with hair and tail 
raised, looking around and then attacking a cork. When the stimulation 
ended, the cat sat down, looked around, and gave an impression of being 
surprised and wondering why it had acted as it did. ­After some minutes, it 
became again the friendly, purring cat that it was a plea­sure to interact with. 
This was so impressive that more than 50 years ­later, I can recall the images, 
and perhaps the demonstration contributed to my interest in becoming a 
neurophysiologist.
Moreover, other compartments of the PAG can trigger lordosis be­hav­
ior, part of the sexual be­hav­ior of female rats as studied by Pfaff and col-
leagues (e.g., Pfaff, 2017). Neurons in the VMH increase their level of 
activity when subjected to enhanced levels of estrogen. The VMH proj­ects 
to neurons within the PAG that can mediate lordosis be­hav­ior via descend-
ing pathways from the lateral vestibular nucleus and medullary reticular 
formation, which in turn activate motor neurons that supply the dorsal 
trunk muscles. The lordosis reflex is triggered by sensory input from the 
skin in the pudendal region and adjacent skin areas that proj­ects back to 
PAG via spinoreticular neurons and triggers the be­hav­ior. Only ­under the 
influence of VMH/estrogen ­will the PAG trigger a lordosis reflex as part of 
the female sexual act.
Yet another aspect of the PAG is its role in controlling the motor aspects 
of maternal be­hav­ior, such as pup grooming in mice. The be­hav­ior originates 
from GABAergic neurons in the medial preoptic area (MPOA) that enhance 
their activity during maternal be­hav­ior (Kohl et al., 2018). It proj­ects to GABA­
ergic interneurons within PAG. Activity in MPOA neurons ­will thus inhibit 
the GABA interneurons within PAG and thereby produce disinhibition of the 
glutamatergic PAG projection neurons responsible for mediating the down-
stream motor be­hav­ior. Blockade of the transmission from the MPOA to the 
PAG-­projecting neurons reduces maternal pup grooming markedly.
73    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

74    Chapter 2
The PAG can thus issue commands for many forms of integrated motor 
patterns that affect respiration during vocalization, whole-­body movements, 
such as escape or freezing, or specific reflexes to the dorsal trunk muscles, 
as during the lordosis be­hav­ior or maternal be­hav­ior (figure 2.18). It is, 
therefore, not surprising that dif­fer­ent compartments of PAG receive specific 
input from a variety of structures, partially overlapping and partially specific. 
They include the GABAergic central nucleus of the amygdala, the infe-
rior colliculus and SC, the prefrontal, visual, auditory, and motor cortices, 
the premammillary nucleus, the VMH, and a variety of other inputs. The 
medial habenula proj­ects to the interpeduncular nucleus (IPN) and can also 
elicit freezing. The IPN proj­ects to the griseum centrale (PAG) in lamprey 
and zebrafish (Olson et al., 2017; Cherng et al., 2020). On the output side, 
­there is the cuneiform nucleus, which may trigger escape locomotion, the 
respiratory structures in the medulla, the parabrachial complex, the cervical 
spinal cord, and reticulospinal and vestibulospinal pathways.
A similar type of control center, located close to but not within the PAG, is 
the pontine micturition center (also called “Barrington’s point”). It consists of a 
subgroup of glutamatergic neurons that proj­ect to micturition-­related neurons 
in the sacral spinal cord. They express the corticotropin-­releasing hormone, 
and when activated optoge­ne­tically, they elicit micturition (Hou et al., 2016). 
They receive input from the hypothalamus, olfactory bulb, cortex, brainstem 
nuclei, and spinal neurons affected by volume receptors from the bladder.
In conclusion, the PAG represents a conserved structure subdivided 
into compartments, each of which can trigger dif­fer­ent integrated patterns 
Escape
Freezing
Fight
Vocalization
Sexual behavior
Maternal behavior
P
A
G
Figure 2.18
Dif­fer­ent nuclei in the hypothalamus act on selected compartments of PAG, which in turn medi-
ate the activation of downstream motor centers that elicit the patterns of be­hav­iors shown ­here.

of be­hav­ior, such as escape/freezing, aggression, specific vocalizations, the 
lordosis reflex, and maternal be­hav­ior, each with a distinct behavioral 
significance.
2.4.2  The Hypothalamus Controls Most Aspects  
of Be­hav­ior Impor­tant for Survival
As discussed in the preceding section, the hypothalamus controls most 
aspects of be­hav­ior that are of fundamental importance for survival. They 
include defense (freezing, escape, or fight), ingestive (fluid and food intake), 
and reproductive be­hav­ior, including maternal and paternal be­hav­ior, all of 
which represent innate circuitry that can be complemented with learned 
aspects. Moreover, the hypothalamus controls the endocrine system and 
regulates the diurnal rhythm.
The execution of ­these patterns of be­hav­ior or functions relies on pro-
jections to the PAG and downstream motor centers or glands. However, 
information concerning the downstream commands is also transmitted by 
ascending branches to the forebrain via the thalamus and a smaller projection 
directly to the striatum (Swanson, 2000). Many of the downstream com-
mands are mediated via the PAG, which receives input from both the cortex 
and the SNr of the basal ganglia (McElvain et al., 2021; figures 2.17 and 
2.18), and ­there is thus a possibility for the forebrain to control ­whether the 
hypothalamic commands ­will be transmitted to downstream motor centers 
or prevented to do so through gating.
The many subtypes of neurons of the medial hypothalamic cell columns 
are involved in the control of defensive, reproductive, and ingestive aspects of 
be­hav­ior. They comprise, from rostral to caudal, the medial preoptic nucleus, 
anterior hypothalamic nucleus, descending paraventricular, ventromedial 
and premammillary nuclei, and mammillary body.
The paraventricular descending nucleus is involved in the control of 
thirst and the initiation of drinking be­hav­ior. The regulation of ­water intake 
depends on the activation of hypothalamic osmoreceptors in the subfornical 
organ and of volume receptors in the circulatory system. Stimulation of this 
hypothalamic area leads to ingestion of ­water, as long as the stimulation con-
tinues, as first seen in the goat (Andersson, 1953). Moreover, the stimulation 
75    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

76    Chapter 2
leads to a desire to obtain ­water, and the animal searches actively for ­water 
and is prepared to remove the lid of a bucket to obtain it (Andersson, 1953; 
Swanson, 2000; Zimmerman, 2020). The paraventricular nucleus proj­ects 
to the PAG and a variety of downstream motor centers in the midbrain and 
brainstem and sends collaterals to the thalamus. To obtain ­water, ­there is a 
need to first activate the locomotor centers and then, when finding the ­water, 
position oneself in front of the bucket and fi­nally activate the oral machinery 
to drink. The hypothalamic machinery thus activates an integrated neural 
machinery consisting of several motor cir­cuits, acting one ­after the other, to 
satisfy the urge to obtain ­water.
The regulation of food intake is served by other cir­cuits, primarily in 
the arcuate nucleus responsive to circulating agents that sense the need for 
food intake, such as leptin from adipose tissue and ghrelin from the gut, 
as well as information mediated via the vagal afferents and blood glucose 
levels. Hunger leads to foraging, which requires each species to search for 
its preferred food, remember the location of places in which it is likely to 
find food, explore and ultimately hunt for prey, or more peacefully find a 
location for grazing.
Another impor­tant aspect of life for most species is to identify a situation 
that is risky in terms of survival. For many species, the ability to suddenly 
freeze and remain motionless can be an effective strategy since many preda-
tors have difficulty to detect an object that does not move. We discussed in 
the previous section that neurons in the VMH proj­ect to a freezing compart-
ment within the PAG that mediates freezing through downstream motor 
centers. If the predator comes too close, the strategy changes, and an escape 
at maximal speed is instead initiated via another part of PAG or, as the last 
alternative, an aggressive encounter occurs. For freezing/escape, two sub-
types of interneurons in the VMH are engaged, one with estrogen receptors 
and another with ste­roidogenic ­factors (Kunwar et al., 2015; Lo et al., 2019; 
Stagkourakis et al., 2020; Falkner et al., 2020). Female sexual be­hav­ior is 
also mediated via estrogen-­responsive neurons in the VMH, as discussed 
previously (Pfaff, 2017; Karigo et al., 2021).
The neuroendocrine control from the hypothalamus includes the release 
of oxytocin and vasopressin from the posterior part of the hypophysis and 

control of the release of hormones from its anterior lobe. This control system 
includes the paraventricular, anterior periventricular and arcuate nuclei, and 
part of the supraoptic nucleus (Swanson, 2000). They act ­either directly or 
via the adrenal gland, thyroid, and the ovaries or testicles. Clearly the release 
of hormones (e.g., sex and stress-­related hormones) has a major impact on 
be­hav­ior. The diurnal rhythm, and thus the need to sleep during part of the 
day or night, is controlled from the suprachiasmatic nucleus.
The hypothalamus is a conserved structure throughout vertebrate phy-
logeny, and even though it only constitutes a ­limited part of the ner­vous 
system, it controls most aspects of be­hav­ior impor­tant for survival, including 
the endocrine system. But it does not operate in isolation, as its output can 
be controlled by the forebrain input to the PAG.
2.4.3  The Downstream Control of Be­hav­ior through  
the Amygdala: Fear Responses
The amygdala is considered as one main node for mediating fear responses 
in vertebrates from fish to ­humans (LeDoux, 2012; Janak and Tye, 2015; 
Adolphs & Anderson, 2018). The amygdala is not considered to mediate the 
subjective sensation of fear, which is thought to arise in other networks of 
the brain (LeDoux, 2012), but rather to mediate the efferent manifestations 
of fear, such as escape and freezing. Fear conditioning, as with an auditory 
cue followed by a painful stimulus, elicits ­after some ­trials a fear response 
when only the auditory cue is provided. ­These learned fear responses are 
mediated by the amygdala, as well as innate fear responses. The amygdala is 
a telencephalic nucleus with a large excitatory basolateral (BLA) part, which 
includes the lateral (LA), the basal, and the basomedial parts. It receives its 
major input from the sensory thalamus, the auditory and other sensory cor-
tices, and the prefrontal cortex, all of which proj­ect to the LA. BLA in turn 
proj­ects to the ventral striatum and prelimbic areas (Janak & Tye, 2015). In 
addition, BLA proj­ects to the central nucleus (Ce) of the amygdala, which is 
GABAergic and acts on downstream centers in the midbrain and brainstem.
The fear responses are elicited through the PAG and vari­ous down-
stream centers and result in escape or freezing, autonomic effects on respi-
ration, blood pressure and heart rate, as well as endocrine effects. The Ce 
77    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

78    Chapter 2
acts through inhibition of GABAergic interneurons in PAG, which leads 
to a disinhibition of the PAG output neurons. Neurons in the ventrolateral 
part of PAG elicit the freezing response, and a more intense Ce activation 
can elicit escape reactions via the dorsolateral part of PAG. The effects are 
mediated via PAG neurons through projections to the medulla and then 
further to motoneurons (Tovote et al., 2016). The Ce neurons are divided 
into subtypes with specific molecular markers, which allows a more refined 
control of dif­fer­ent aspects of be­hav­ior that are defensive as well as appetitive, 
although the details have yet to be elucidated. The basomedial nucleus of the 
amygdala acting via subtypes of neurons within the Ce can inhibit freezing 
responses (Adhikari et al., 2015) and is also thought to decrease the level of 
anxiety in mice. When this nucleus is activated, mice become bolder than 
in the control situation and walk freely on open surfaces that they would 
other­wise avoid (Tye et al., 2011).
2.5  INTEGRATION OF INNATE MOTOR PROGRAMS IN DAILY 
LIFE: SKILLED ASPECTS OF THE CONTROL OF MOTION
In the wild, most animals rely on the palette of innate motor programs 
available to them and are able to recruit them in an appropriate sequence 
for foraging, feeding, navigation, or escape and adapt them to the specific 
needs of the animal and to the surrounding environment (also discussed 
in chapter 5). It is impor­tant to realize that innate motor patterns (e.g., for 
locomotion) are flexible and modifiable. When considering the locomotor 
circuitry, for instance, one must consider not only the spinal CPGs with 
their sensory inputs, but also the corticospinal modulation for precision 
walking and other contributing structures as the cerebellum (Grillner & El 
Manira, 2020). One can walk forward, backward, or sideways, and at a low 
pace or ­running, while adapting to the environment. One can also learn 
new modifications of gait, such as walking with high heels, which is trouble-
some at first, or imitating the walk of Charlie Chaplin (Grillner & Wallén, 
2004). This is not only a ­human trait, but many mammals have this capacity. 
Consider, for instance, ­horses that can be trained to modify their gait in a 
precise, reproducible way for dressage competitions. Another example, the 

respiratory CPG ticks on at rest in an appropriate frequency and depth of 
breath, but it can be controlled at ­will. One can hold one’s breath for many 
seconds or modify the pattern of breathing voluntarily. During speech, the 
respiratory pattern is modulated. In a large number of vertebrates, vocaliza-
tion is produced by controlling the respiratory flow.
In tennis, the player runs rapidly ­toward the ball, combined with reach-
ing out with the racket to hit it. This is essentially using the innate motor 
infrastructure for locomotion and reaching and adapt it to the specific 
dynamics of tennis. One clearly learns some aspects of playing tennis, such 
as interpreting the trajectory of the ball and placing the racket appropriately 
to send the ball back to a location where it cannot be reached by the oppo-
nent. With regard to the movement aspect of tennis, one learns to fine-­tune 
the reaching movements and adapt them to the ever-­changing situation 
that occurs with each shot. Another aspect of tennis is the serve, in which 
the situation is radically dif­fer­ent ­because now the player is in control. A 
naive player has a large variability with each trial, whereas ­after training, 
the trajectory of the racket is almost exactly reproducible from trial to trial 
(Dhawale et al., 2017). This can be interpreted as fine-­tuning of the innate 
reaching cir­cuits to be able to gradually perform a dynamically reproduc-
ible movement. The basic motor infrastructure is available, but the timing 
of recruiting the specific aspects of the motor circuitry is a task in which the 
forebrain (and possibly the cerebellum) plays the crucial role.
2.5.1  In­de­pen­dent Fin­ger Movements
A ­limited number of species, including ­humans, have the ability to control 
the movement of the individual fin­gers precisely and coordinate them in 
a delicate way, such as when playing the piano. All fin­gers are not equal, 
however; the thumb and index fin­ger have the most versatility. One exqui-
site example of learned motor patterns is handwriting. To write individual 
letters, we have learned to coordinate mostly the thumb and index fin­ger to 
control the movements of the pen and shape the letters. This is an example 
of how the innate circuitry to control the individual fin­gers is recruited in 
a precise way to produce a skilled motor pattern—­that is, learning how to 
sequence the fin­gers in a precise way in relation to each other with separate 
79    A Palette of CPGs and Motor Centers from Midbrain to Spinal Cord

80    Chapter 2
remembered programs for each letter. We also have the possibility to, de 
novo, form entirely new movement patterns, such as when painting a scene 
on a canvas. This is based on our selective control of innate motor cir­cuits 
for in­de­pen­dent fin­ger control.
The main message of this section is that ­humans have a very rich motor 
infrastructure at their disposal, extending from whole-­body movements to 
in­de­pen­dent fin­ger movements in primates, and ­these building blocks can 
be recruited to design more complex movements. A skilled movement can be 
produced by combining distinct innate components in a well-­timed sequence 
and tinkering with the amplitude of the vari­ous components, ­whether for 
playing tennis or grasping an object. ­These novel integrated motor patterns 
that can be perfected through training represent new skilled motor programs. 
They are put together by innate components from the motor infrastructure, 
and learned parts include the specific timing and fine-­tuning.
During vertebrate evolution, ­there are species that essentially use their 
innate motor repertoire throughout life, learning to associate external signals 
with reward or threat and to adapt the motor patterns to external demands. 
In mammals, particularly primates, the motor apparatus becomes more ver-
satile and available for learning new sequences, as in the impressive motor 
repertoire of the ­human hand.
2.6  CONCLUSION
The purpose of this chapter has been to illustrate the richness of vari­ous 
microcircuits and command structures that are available in the midbrain-­
brainstem–­spinal cord that can be called upon by the forebrain, including 
the hypothalamus, to control most aspects of animals’ behavioral repertoire, 
­whether fish or primate. Dif­fer­ent cir­cuits are required for the execution of 
movements, generating rhythmic activity such as respiration, chewing and 
locomotion, cir­cuits for swallowing, arm–­hand coordination, vocalization, 
maternal be­hav­ior, and many other activities. Together, they form a motor 
infrastructure from which a ­great variety of movements can be recruited and 
integrated, resulting in purposeful and perfected motor sequences.

3.1  INTRODUCTION
The tectum of the midbrain roof, in mammals called the “superior collicu-
lus (SC),” is concerned with information from the immediate surround-
ing space—­the egocentric space. This is mainly based on vision, but other 
senses, such as hearing, electrosensation in some fish, or the whis­kers in 
rodents, also contribute to the pro­cessing in the tectum (Sparks, 1986). 
­These cir­cuits dynamically store information on where in the surrounding 
three-­dimensional (3D) space a salient stimulus, a friend, a foe, or some-
thing edible is located, and can direct the gaze to the spot of interest and 
elicit orienting movements of head and body in the same direction. Con-
versely, if the object should be avoided, for instance to prevent a collision 
with a branch of a tree or a fellow pedestrian, an evasive movement can be 
elicited.
Movements in the egocentric space that depend on the dynamic input 
to the tectum/SC are controlled in a way that differs markedly from that of 
memory-­based navigation depending on a maplike spatial memory required 
to find the remembered location of places for foraging or finding the way 
back to the nest. This type of memory utilizes the hippocampus and other 
parts of the brain. The latter type of navigation ­will be considered in chap-
ters 4 and 5.
THE VERTEBRATE SOLUTION FOR 
ACTION IN THE EGOCENTRIC SPACE: 
MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION IN THE 
TECTUM/SUPERIOR COLLICULUS
3

82    Chapter 3
3.2  MULTISENSORY REPRE­SEN­TA­TION OF THE  
SURROUNDING SPACE IN THE TECTUM/SC
3.2.1  Retinotopic Map in the Tectum/SC
In all groups of vertebrates, vision is represented in a retinotopic manner in 
the most superficial layer of the tectum/SC. ­There is thus a map of the sur-
rounding visual space in the tectum/SC (figure 3.2a). The information that 
originates from the ret­ina is already prepro­cessed within the ret­ina before it 
reaches the tectum/SC. In the zebrafish, ­there are at least 20 discrete catego-
ries of ret­i­nal ganglion cells that each forward dif­fer­ent types of information 
of small edible objects or alarming stimuli in which the perceived object 
increases rapidly in size (see figure 3.1; Robies et al., 2014; Isa et al., 2021). 
The latter two types of ret­i­nal afferents terminate in the superficial layer of 
tectum but at somewhat dif­fer­ent depths. Furthermore, the information for-
warded to the tectal area corresponding to the anterior visual field may receive 
information about preylike objects and navigation, while ­those in the posterior 
visual field are more concerned with stimuli representing a potential threat.
In mammals, ­there are more than 30 subtypes of ret­i­nal ganglion cells 
that are defined functionally and by specific molecular or ge­ne­tic markers 
(Shekhar & Sanes, 2021). In the lamprey, representing the oldest group of 
vertebrates, six subtypes of ret­i­nal ganglion cells have been identified mor-
phologically, four of which proj­ect to the tectum with a differential projec-
tion pattern. The highest density is in the ret­i­nal area corresponding to the 
anterior visual space. The remaining two ret­i­nal ganglion cells proj­ect to 
the pretectum and are involved in the dorsal light response and visual escape 
reactions (Jones et al., 2009; Ullén et al., 1997).
How is the information pro­cessed in the retinotopic map (figure 3.2)? 
Salient stimuli ­will directly activate a ­limited set of excitatory neurons within 
the retinotopic map, and at the same time, they activate inhibitory interneurons 
(figure 3.2b; Kardamakis et al., 2015) that ­will inhibit other tectal neurons with 
a brief delay, locally over the entire visual map. Figure 3.2c shows that a local 
stimulation of the ret­ina leads to a strong activation of only one part of the 
tectal map followed by inhibition, while in all other parts of the ret­ina, only 
inhibition is evoked. If a distinct visual stimulus is recorded from somewhere 

83    The Vertebrate Solution for Action in the Egocentric Space
Prey-like objects
Big objects
Dimming
Moving edges
Saliency/tracking
Binocular detection
Hunting
ITNs
NI
Escape
nMLF
RS 
RGCs
Pt Th
Modulation
ITNs
NI
HypTh
Raphe
SM
SO
SFGS
SGC
SAC
Tegmentum
PVL
Figure 3.1
A schematic repre­sen­ta­tion of the larval zebrafish’s tectal inputs and outputs, illustrating the 
role of the tectum in receiving and integrating information from diverse sources. The inputs are 
strongly spatial—­shading of a circle at the top and of the periventricular cellular layer (PVL) in 
the tectum—­and differ depending on ­whether a small stimulus (prey seen by the right eye) or 
a large, looming stimulus (left eye) is presented. The pro­cessing of preylike stimuli (left tectum, 
since all ret­i­nal ganglion cell axons cross the midline) results in hunting be­hav­ior, while loom-
ing stimuli (right tectum) trigger escape responses. Inputs from vari­ous cell types and brain 
regions are color coded to indicate the stimulus properties that they encode (see legend at 
the top). Dif­fer­ent types of information are delivered selectively to dif­fer­ent laminae of the tectal 
neuropil. Abbreviations: HypTh, hypothalamus; ITNs, intertectal neurons; NI, nucleus isthmi; 
nMLF, nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus; Pt, pretectum; PVL, periventricular cell 
layer; RGCs, ret­i­nal ganglion cells; RS, reticulospinal neurons; SAC, stratum ­album centrale; 
SFGS, stratum fibrosum et griseum superficiale; SGC, stratum griseum centrale; SM, stratum 
marginale; SO, stratum opticum; Th, thalamus. From Isa et al. (2021).

84    Chapter 3
Anterior
Posterior
Dorsal
Ventral
Type IV: Forward swimming, no eye 
and neck movements
Type III: Downward shifts of both eyes 
and downward body bending
Type I: Orienting response, eye movements,
neck bending and locomotion
Electrosensory
system
MRRN/Brainstem
OLA
OLA
Retina
SL
IntL
DL
SNr/GPi
coBP
iBP
Contralateral retina
Lateral
inhibition
Lateral
inhibition
Avoidance   
Orienting
Tectum
RSs
Motoneurons
Pallium
A
B
C
D
E
Retina
stim
Anterior
Ventral
Electrode
Optic tectum
Optic nerve
Retina
Lens
L1
Light stimulation
Light stimulation
Local
(L1)
Global
(L1+L2+L3)
L2
L3
–68 mV
–68 mV
20 mV
1 s
Contra
ipsi
0.5 s
10 mV
V
A
D
P
V
A
D
P
V
A
D
P
V
A
D
P
Posterior
Dorsal
–65 mV
–20 mV
Feedforward
inhibition
Surround
inhibition
Figure 3.2
Structure and circuitry of the lamprey tectum. A. Color-­coded schematic ret­ina for the contralat-
eral eye (left). Photo­graph of the lamprey brain (right), showing the location of the color-­coded 
ret­i­nal input. The posterior ret­i­nal input terminates in the rostral tectum, the anterior ret­i­nal input 
terminates in the caudal tectum, and the ventral and dorsal ret­i­nal inputs terminate in the medial 
and lateral tectum, respectively. B. Drawing of the lamprey head and brain with the circuitry lead-
ing to orienting and avoidance responses. On the upper left, the tectal circuitry is represented, 
with the ipsilateral projecting neurons (iBPs) under­lying avoidance reaction and the contralat-
erally projecting neurons (coBPs) responsible for orienting responses. ­These neurons receive 
monosynaptic input from ret­i­nal afferents and GABAergic interneurons. The output layer has 
input from both the pallium (cortex) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr). C. Stimula-
tion of the ret­ina in one quadrant leads to excitation in tectal neurons in the specific retinotopic 
projection area in the tectum, while stimulation in all other parts of the ret­ina instead leads to a 
strong inhibition mediated by the tectal GABAergic interneurons. The red traces are recorded 

85    The Vertebrate Solution for Action in the Egocentric Space
in the surrounding space, it ­will suppress other weaker stimuli that may reach 
the tectum si­mul­ta­neously from other parts of the visual field. If two salient 
stimuli from two points of the ret­ina arrive at the same time, ­there may be 
a rivalry, and the stronger one ­will take over. This scenario is illustrated in 
figure 3.2e. When one focal light source is activated, it leads to a strong 
activation of neurons in its target area (mauve trace). However, if other light 
sources are turned on at the same time, the excitatory response is entirely 
suppressed when the light is on, and ­after it is terminated, a postinhibitory 
rebound excitation occurs, as can be seen in the recorded traces. This circuitry 
in the tectum is thus designed to identify the location of salient stimuli in the 
egocentric space and direct the gaze and orienting movements to this area 
(as discussed next).
3.2.2  Visual and Electrosensory Afferents from the Same Point  
in Space Converge onto the Same Tectal Output Neuron:  
Multisensory Integration in the Lamprey Tectum
In the lamprey, visual information is transmitted monosynaptically from 
the ret­i­nal ganglion cells to the apical dendrites of the output cells, each 
of which has the cell body located in the deep tectal layer (figures 3.3a–­c; 
Kardamakis et al., 2016). The dendrites of ­these cells transcend all layers 
of the tectum. The lamprey has cutaneous receptors that sense the electric 
with a holding potential of –65 mV, and the blue traces at –20 mV, when the inhibition can be 
seen clearly. ­There is thus a power­ful lateral inhibition. D. Diagram illustrating the convergence 
between the ret­i­nal and the electrosensory inputs activated from the same point in space. At the 
distal dendrites, the ret­i­nal afferents form synapses, while the electrosensory afferents target 
the same dendrite, but closer to the cell so­ma. The tectal output neuron targets the ­middle 
rhombencephalic reticular nucleus (MRRN), located in the brainstem. E. Shows recordings 
from a lamprey eye–­brain preparation in which the tectal output neurons can be patched, while 
the eye is illuminated with local brief light pulses (blue area) or globally with light in all parts of 
the ret­ina. The neuron illustrated is excited by the local light (L1), while ­there is no response 
when the entire ret­ina is illuminated (global). This illustrates the strong surround inhibition also 
shown in (B). ­There is, however, a postinhibitory rebound. Abbreviations: A, anterior; coBP, 
contralaterally projecting neuron; D, dorsal; DL, deep layer; iBP, ipsilaterally projecting neuron; 
IntL, intermediate layer; OLA, octavolateral area; P, posterior; RSs, reticulospinal neurons; SL, 
superficial layer; V, ventral. Modified from Jones et al. (2009) and Kardamakis et al. (2015).
Figure 3.2 (continued)

86    Chapter 3
D
A
Local
Gabazine
injection
OT
B
SL
IntL
DL
Retina Octavolateral Nissl 
Optic
nerve
Octavo-
lateral area
Lateral 
line nerve
SL
IntL
DL
rec
Visual
Electrosensory
C
Control
Peak
Termination
Visual and
electrosensory
50 µV
20 mV
Stimulation (10 Hz)
–69 mV
OT
OLA
Both
30 pA
50 ms
0 mV
–65 mV
Stimulation (single)
Both
Electrosensory
Visual
(with QX-314)
E
F
G
OT
50 µV
100 ms
0.0
1/2
1.0
Normalized responses
Both
Electrosensory
Visual
****
rec
OT
H
I
J
OT
Figure 3.3
Visual and electrosensory signals summate in the deep layer of the lamprey optic tectum when 
originating from the same location in space and counteract if from dif­fer­ent parts of space. 
A. Schematic of the lamprey brain showing the visual (blue) and electrosensory (red) afferents 
targeting the optic tectum (OT). B. Photomicrograph of the OT in a transversal view showing the 
ret­i­nal afferents reaching the most superficial layers (red), and the octavolateral (OLA) fibers inner-
vating the intermediate layers (green). C. Morphology of an output neuron in the deep layer retro-
gradely labeled following a tracer injection in the ­middle rhombencephalic reticulospinal nucleus 
(MRRN) and filled intracellularly with neurobiotin while performing whole-­cell recordings. Output 
cells extend their dendrites to the intermediate and superficial layers where the electrosensory and 
the visual inputs enter and terminate, respectively. D. Experimental settings for performing extracel-
lular recordings during multisensory integration in the optic tectum. Dorsal view of the preparation, 
including the brain, eyes, and electrosensory areas (depicted by the skin patches), while driving 
output activity with light and electrical stimuli that are spatiotemporally aligned in the immediate 
surrounding. E. Rectified local field potentials obtained from visual, electrosensory, and bimodal 
sensory activation. F. Output neuron responses to sensory stimulation (train of 4 pulses at 10 Hz) 
of the optic tectum (blue traces), OLA (red traces), and bimodal (black traces) from rest at −69 mV. 
G. Inhibitory and excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) elicited by visual, electrosensory, and 
bimodal stimulation in an output cell recorded in a voltage clamp at 0 mV to show inhibitory cur-
rents, and at −65 mV (equilibrium for chloride-­mediated GABAergic inhibition) to show excitatory 
currents. Drop lines show the onsets of excitatory and inhibitory currents. H–­J. Spatially misaligned 

87    The Vertebrate Solution for Action in the Egocentric Space
fields surrounding the head. Information from ­these receptors enters the 
brain via the octavolateral nerve and is transmitted to brainstem nuclei 
and then relayed to the tectum. The electrosensory information is also 
arranged in a spatial map calibrated to the visual map (figure 3.3b). If a 
visual stimulus is activated in a specific spot and an electrosensory stimu-
lus is activated from the same spot, they facilitate each other (figure 3.3e), 
resulting in a more prominent activation. Also, at the level of the single 
neuron, the two stimuli summate (figures 3.3f and 3.3g), as demonstrated 
using both current clamp and voltage clamp. The excitatory currents from 
the visual and electrosensory traces summate (lower trace, black) and the 
inhibitory currents that have a longer latency (upper set of traces) also 
summate. However, if the two stimuli instead ­were elicited from dif­fer­ent 
locations in space, they instead inhibit each other (see figures 3.3h and 
3.3i). This means that visual and octavolateral stimuli from the same point 
in space facilitate each other, but from dif­fer­ent points, they counteract 
each other.
When the visual and the electrosensory stimuli originate from the 
same spot in space, they ­will thus converge onto the very same output 
neuron. Whereas the visual afferents form synapses on distant dendrites, 
the electrosensory synapses are located closer to the cell body, still on the 
same dendrites (figure 3.3b), and the synaptic inputs from the two sources 
­will summate. Thus, the signal from the two senses is pro­cessed by the 
same output neurons. From this, one can conclude that tectal neurons are 
designed to identify only the location of salient stimuli and do not care 
stimuli give rise to response reduction. We applied spatially disparate visual and electrosensory 
stimuli while recording responses in the contralateral optic tectum (J). Local field potentials in 
response to electrosensory stimulation (red trace) ­were drastically reduced when a dif­fer­ent 
location of the tectal map was visually stimulated (blue trace). The responses when combining 
both sensory modalities are shown in black. The yellow traces on top show the rectified signals. 
Histogram showing the normalized responses for electrosensory activation (red), before and ­after 
si­mul­ta­neously stimulating a visual off-­region (black) (I). Abbreviations: OLA, octavolateral; OT, 
optic tectum; rec, extracellular recording electrode; SL, superficial layer; IntL, intermediate layer; 
DL, deep layer. Modified from Kardamakis et al. (2016).
Figure 3.3 (continued)

88    Chapter 3
about the sense from which the information originated, a true multisen-
sory integration.
3.2.3  Auditory Contribution to Location in Egocentric Space:  
The Barn Owl Is the Champion
Sound travels comparatively slowly compared to light, and the difference 
between when the sound reaches the first and the second ear can be used to 
compute the location of the sound source, mostly in two dimensions. How-
ever, some species excel in this capacity, such as the barn owl. It can locate 
prey, such as a vole, from several meters or feet away with high precision, even 
when it is pitch dark, as reported in the classic studies of Mark Konishi and 
Eric Knudsen (Knudsen & Konishi, 1978; Knudsen, 1982; Carr & Konishi, 
1990). This requires location in three dimensions, which is achieved by an 
asymmetric placement of the ears (with one ear somewhat higher than the 
other). In general, the information from the auditory hair cells in the cochlea is 
transmitted to the brainstem, and the pro­cessed information is then transmit-
ted to a layer of the tectum/SC just below the visual layer. ­Here, a map of the 
surrounding space is formed based on auditory input, which is aligned with 
the visual spatial map. Vision and hearing complement each other regarding 
the spatial location, and they are tightly calibrated (Meredith & Stein, 1986; 
Stein & Stanford, 2008; Jay & Sparks, 1984). In mammals, the auditory 
information is also pro­cessed in the adjacent inferior colliculus.
3.2.4  Tectal Integration of Vision and the Heat-­Sensing  
Pit Organ of the Rattlesnake
To identify the location of warm-­blooded prey in the surrounding space, 
the rattlesnake and related species have evolved a heat-­sensing pit organ on 
the head. It is innervated by heat-­sensitive afferents in the trigeminal nerve, 
which via a relay in the brainstem are projecting to the tectum. Dif­fer­ent 
thermosensitive afferents spatially arranged in the sensory epithelium of the 
pit can be activated, depending on where the heat source is located in the sur-
rounding space. This information is projected to the tectum and represented 
in a maplike form. This heat map is in register with the visual map, and they 
complement each other (Hartline et al., 1978; Newman & Hartline, 1981). 
Individual tectal neurons receive excitatory input from both retinotectal and 

89    The Vertebrate Solution for Action in the Egocentric Space
heat afferents. Again, location is what ­matters for the tectum, rather than 
which sense is the origin of the activation.
In conclusion, the tectum/SC is designed to locate salient stimuli in the 
surrounding space and adds the inputs from the available senses to identify 
the location of the object of interest. Multisensory integration occurs at the 
single-­neuron level. The spatial maps can be formed by input from the ret­
ina, the cochlea, electrosensation, or thermosensation as discussed ­here, but 
somatosensation or input from the vibrissae can also take part.
3.3  THE TECTUM/SC CONTROL OF EYE, ORIENTING,  
AND EVASIVE MOVEMENTS
3.3.1  Orienting and Evasive Movements Elicited by Dif­fer­ent  
Sets of Tectal/SC Neurons
The motor map in the deep output layer of the tectum/SC is aligned with the 
visual map in terms of spatial coordinates for the orienting movement. In 
the lamprey, ­these output neurons have a broad dendritic arbor, usually with 
two stem dendrites, which extend to the superficial layer where the axons of 
ret­i­nal ganglion cells terminate with synapses onto the dendrites, activating 
both α-­amino-3-­hydroxy-5-­methyl-4-­isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and 
N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate (NMDA) receptors. ­These synapses are located on tectal 
neurons receiving input predominantly from the anterior visual field, and they 
send their axons to the contralateral brainstem and make monosynaptic excit-
atory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) on reticulospinal neurons. An activation 
of this set of tectal neurons lead to an orienting movement of the head and body 
­toward the visual stimulus (Kardamakis et al., 2015; Suzuki et al., 2019). The 
orienting movements are elicited by slowly expanding, nonthreatening stimuli.
In mice, the output layer of the tectum/SC consists of neurons, express-
ing the paired-­like homeodomain transcription ­factor Pitx2, which are 
involved in the control of orienting movements of the head with dif­fer­ent 
orientations in three dimensions. The neurons concerned with the orienta-
tion of the head in a specific direction are clustered in modules (Masullo 
et al., 2019; Wilson et al., 2018). The tectal/SC output layer is thus in real­ity 
composed of a large number of discrete modules, each specifying a certain 

90    Chapter 3
head orientation, in register with the sensory maps in the superficial layer. 
Most likely, this organ­ization is pre­sent in other vertebrate groups.
The other type of tectal output neuron is instead concerned with evasive 
movements, and it has only one stem dendrite that also extends to the visual 
layer. It is activated by fast-­expanding, looming stimuli, which are generally 
perceived as threatening in most vertebrates. Their axons proj­ect to ipsilateral 
reticulospinal neurons, and, when activated, an evasive movement in the oppo-
site direction ­will take place and the head and body ­will move away from the 
stimulus. In contrast to the orienting tectal neurons, the evasive tectal neurons 
are distributed over the entire visual field, which is to be expected since threat-
ening stimuli can originate from any direction. It should also be appreciated 
that as an animal moves around in a complex terrain (e.g., a bird flying through 
the fo­liage of a tree, or a pedestrian walking on a busy street with ­others), it 
­will have to make constant evasive corrections of the movement trajectory to 
avoid collisions. The ability to make fast evasive corrections is thus biologically 
a very impor­tant function for practically all living creatures.
In the lamprey, tectal orienting and evasive neurons have dif­fer­ent mem-
brane properties. The former has a lower threshold for activation by sensory 
stimuli than the evasive tectal neurons (Kardamakis et al., 2015; Suzuki 
et al., 2019). A weak sensory stimulus, like a slowly looming one, ­will then 
only activate orienting neurons but ­will be the subthreshold for the evasive 
neurons, and thus only an orienting movement ­will be elicited. A stronger 
sensory stimulus, however, ­will activate the evasive neurons and lead to 
activation of an evasive movement that ­will override the orienting response.
In rodents, the organ­ization is similar, with the medial area of the SC 
representing the upper visual field eliciting freezing/escape and the anterior 
lower visual area representing the lateral tectum/SC area, from which orient-
ing be­hav­ior can be elicited as needed, for instance during foraging (Dean 
et al., 1989; Sahibzada et al., 1986).
3.3.2  Eye Movement and Eye-­Head Coordination
In the lamprey tectum, low-­threshold stimulation in the area corresponding 
to the anterior visual field elicits coordinated eye movements, so that if the 
ipsilateral eye moves forward, the contralateral eye moves backward, and 

vice versa. With a somewhat larger stimulus strength, orienting movements 
and often locomotor movements ­will be induced (Saitoh et al., 2007). In 
the anterior part of this tectal area, small-­amplitude movements are elicited, 
while more caudally, the eye movements become larger. The output from 
the tectum/SC is most likely conveyed via the horizontal and vertical gaze 
center in the brainstem and midbrain, respectively. The basic organ­ization 
of the eye motor nuclei and the dif­fer­ent eye muscles are conserved from the 
lamprey to primates (Fritzsch et al., 1990). In a caudal tectal area, locomo-
tion is generated without eye and orienting movements, and in an area close 
to the caudal midline, large-­amplitude struggling movements can be elicited, 
accompanied by large-­amplitude synchronized eye movements.
­These results from the lamprey agree with ­those from other vertebrate 
groups. In primates with the eyes oriented forward, an additional group of 
neurons have been identified that become activated during reaching ­toward 
objects in the surrounding environment (Philipp & Hoffman, 2014; Cooper & 
McPeek, 2021). ­These neurons are located in the lateral posterior part of the SC 
in an area related to the anterior visual field and can possibly be regarded in the 
context of orienting movements. This type of neurons has not been identified 
in other vertebrates, but that does not necessarily mean that they do not exist.
3.3.3  Visuomotor Coordination through the  
Tecto/SC-­Thalamo-­Cortical Link: Blindsight
In all vertebrates, the cortex and the pallium, its counterpart in lower verte-
brates, proj­ect to the tectum/SC. Motor areas, such as the frontal eye field 
(FEF) in the frontal lobe, have monosynaptic projections to the tectal output 
neurons and can thus utilize the tectal circuitry to initiate movements of the 
eye/head from the cortex. The cortex may also facilitate subthreshold sensory 
stimuli from the ret­ina or other senses and thereby initiate movement. In 
mammals and other groups, however, ­there are also projections from the 
visual areas in the cortex that target the sensory layers in the tectum/SC.
In addition to the motor commands issued from the tectum/SC to motor 
centers, a very extensive projection from the tectum/SC targets neurons in the 
thalamus (in mammals, the pulvinar nucleus), with further projections to 
the higher-­order visual areas that are impor­tant for visuomotor coordination. 
91    The Vertebrate Solution for Action in the Egocentric Space

92    Chapter 3
The pulvinar is separate from the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), which 
sends information to the primary visual area (V1). The information conveyed 
from the tectum/SC to the cortex can be regarded as prepro­cessed visuomotor 
data related to the ongoing activity in the tectum/SC and the commands issued 
to dif­fer­ent motor centers from the tectum/SC (see figure 3.4). Importantly, 
tectal output neurons that target the brainstem may also have axonal projections 
directed to the thalamus, testifying that they mediate efference copy informa-
tion to the thalamus and then the cortex (Capantini et al., 2017).
In ­humans, other primates, and other mammals, lesions of the V1 cause 
blindness in terms of object recognition. Individuals with such lesions can, 
although not consciously, become aware of perceiving an object like a ball 
being thrown ­toward them and then grab the ball or avoid being hit. This 
is called “blindsight” (Weiskrantz et al., 1974; Kato et al., 2011; Isa et al., 
2021). This finding, and other pieces of evidence indicate that this tecto-­
thalamo-­parietal projection is of critical importance for all forms of visuo-
motor coordination. Even a complex interaction with dynamically moving 
objects in the environment can thus be handled without a conscious percep-
tion of the moving object, presumably through the tecto-­thalamic pathway 
LGN
Pulvinar
Thalamus
V1
Visuomotor
Eye, orienting movements
evasive movement
SC
Cortex
Retina
Figure 3.4
Interactions between the ret­ina and the superior colliculus, thalamus, and cortex. Abbreviations: 
LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus; SC, superior colliculus; V1, primary visual area.

to the cortex (see chapter 5). This most likely suggests that the tectum/SC 
pro­cessing is used extensively for the planning of visuomotor commands at 
the cortical level, even when V1 is intact (Beltramo & Scanziani, 2019; see 
also chapter 5).
3.3.4  Salient Stimuli in the Tectum/SC Activate the  
Dopaminergic Neurons in the SNc
In both lampreys and mammals, ­there are projections from the tectum/SC 
to the SNc. Figures 3.5a and 3.5b show that both visual and electrosensory 
stimuli activate dopamine neurons in the SNc, and the graph in figure 3.5c 
shows that the more intense the stimulus is, the stronger the activation of 
SNc becomes. The salient stimuli that activate the tectum/SC are transmit-
ted to the SNc and leads to a burst of activity in the dopamine neurons 
(Redgrave & Gurney 2006; Pérez-­Fernández et al., 2017), which proj­ect not 
only to the striatum, but also to the mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR) 
93    The Vertebrate Solution for Action in the Egocentric Space
A
SNc
rec
rec
B
Visual 
Electrosensory
100 ms
500 ms
C
3.5
Normalized responses
Looming speed (m/s)
(Saliency)
0
50 µV
50 µV
**** (one-way ANOVA)
1.75
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Vision and
other senses
Tectum/SC
SNc
MLR
Striatum
D
Figure 3.5
SNc respond to sensory stimuli. A. Schematic of the preparation used for applying visual (blue) 
and electrosensory (violet) stimuli while recording SNc activity (left), which was reached through 
the ventricle, as shown in the transverse section (right). B. Local field potentials ­were recorded 
in the SNc in response to both brief electrosensory stimulation (left) and flashes of light (right). 
C. Plot illustrating the increase of SNc activity in parallel with increasing looming expansion 
speeds (shown ­here as increases in dia­meter), as reflected by the amplitudes normalized to the 
maximal response (mean ± SEM). D. Diagram illustration of how sensory stimuli reach the SNc. 
Abbreviations: MLR, mesencephalic locomotor region; rec, recording; SC, superior colliculus; 
SNc, substantia nigra pars compacta. Modified from Pérez-­Fernández et al. (2017).

94    Chapter 3
and back to the tectum/SC (Comoli et al., 2003; Ryczko et al., 2016; Pérez-­
Fernández et al., 2014, 2017; see the diagram in figure 3.5d). This organ­
ization is characteristic of all the vertebrates that have been investigated.
Dopamine activity often precedes a spontaneously initiated movement 
(da Silva et al., 2018) and, by acting on D1 dopamine receptors (D1Rs), 
it ­will facilitate movement through an action on the striatum, but also by 
lowering the threshold for activation of the MLR (Ryczko et al., 2016). With 
regard to the action on the tectum/SC, the output neurons that express D1Rs 
in the tectum/SC are facilitated, and thereby the visuomotor reflexes to eye 
muscles are also facilitated. Salient stimuli ­will thus, if sufficiently promi-
nent, activate dopamine neurons, which in turn ­will facilitate the pro­cessing 
within the tectal microcircuitry (see Pérez-­Fernández et al., 2017).
3.3.5  Projections from Dif­fer­ent Areas of the Cortex  
to Separate Zones in the SC
A recent study in the mouse showed that the SC can be divided into four 
zones based on the input from dif­fer­ent parts of the cortex (Benavidez et al., 
2021; see figure 3.6). The most lateral zone receives input from the somato-
sensory and motor cortices, while the centrolateral area receives input from 
gaze-­related cortical areas such as the FEF, with the axons terminating directly 
on the output neurons of the SC. ­These SC areas also receive input from ret­
i­nal afferents activated from the anterior visual field, from which orienting 
moments are activated in other species. The output from ­these two SC zones 
is related to eye-­head coordination and orienting be­hav­iors, such as foraging.
The medial and centromedial areas of the SC are related to the upper 
visual field and are thought to pro­cess potentially threatening stimuli and 
to mediate defensive or aggressive be­hav­ior. The medial SC area receives 
input from the V1 that targets the superficial layers of the SC, while the 
centromedial area receives input from the higher-­order visual areas and the 
ventromedial hypothalamus.
Figure 3.6 also displays the projection pattern from the cortex to the 
striatum, showing that the dorsolateral and ventral part of the striatum cor-
responds to that received by the two lateral SC areas, while the dorsomedial 
striatum receives cortical input from the same areas as the two medial SC areas. 
This organ­ization is also conserved in the output nucleus of the basal ganglia, 

substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr), in the thalamus, and even with regard 
to input from the hypothalamus. From figure 3.6, it is clear that the forebrain 
and SC are or­ga­nized in one set of areas related to the anterior lower visual 
field (blue-­green in figure 3.6) that control such movements as foraging and 
gazing. On the other hand, the upper visual field is represented in connected 
areas from the cortex to the medial SC and is focused on detecting potential 
threats and responding by escape or aggression (yellow-­red color).
3.3.6  The Basal Ganglia Control the Output from the Tectum/SC  
by Releasing Movements through Disinhibition
As first described by Hikosaka and Wurtz (1983), the SNr contains tonically 
active GABAergic neurons, which ­under resting conditions inhibit all tectal/
cortex
Striatum
Thalamus
Substantia nigra
Superior colliculus
Hypothalamus
Cortico-basal ganglia circuit
PF
SNr
VMH
ZI
m
cl
cm
l
l
m
c
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
l
m
d
v
c
vl
dm
dm
dl
vm
vl
m
as
tr/II
ul
ACAd
ACAv
RSPv
RSPd
RSPagl
VIS
PTLp
AUD
SSP
MOp
MOs
Cortico-tectothalamic circuit
M
L
V
D
Figure 3.6
Topographic organ­ization of the connectivity of the mouse SC. The four zones of the SC 
are connected ­either unidirectionally or bidirectionally with the cortex, parafascicular thalamic 
nucleus (PF), zona incerta (ZI), ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), and SNr. Plus and minus 
signs indicate excitatory or inhibitory projections, respectively. A directional compass can be 
seen at the bottom right. Redrawn and modified from Benavidez et al. (2021).
95    The Vertebrate Solution for Action in the Egocentric Space

96    Chapter 3
SC output neurons. The basal ganglia ­will thus be able to prevent any out­
going actions from the tectum/SC. It is only when the SNr neurons become 
inhibited from the striatum that tectal/SC neurons become disinhibited and 
ready to send out commands for eye, orienting, or evasive movements (see 
chapter 4).
The neurons of the SNr are or­ga­nized so that the vari­ous parts of the SC 
are controlled separately (McElvain et al., 2021), with the most lateral SNr 
neurons projecting to the lateral part of SC, and ­those targeting the medial 
SC originating from the medial SNr. Moreover, the cellular properties of 
the SNr neurons projecting to the vari­ous parts of the SC differ in terms of 
rest rate and the shape of the action potential.
3.4  CONCLUSION
The tectum/SC contains multisensory spatial maps that detect where a 
salient stimulus is located within the surrounding space and use the aligned 
motor maps to elicit saccadic and orienting head-­neck movements ­toward 
the salient points. The anterior lower visual field is concerned with orient-
ing movements, while the upper visual space is concerned with potentially 
threatening stimuli and can trigger evasive movements and defensive or 
aggressive patterns of be­hav­ior. The rodent SC can be subdivided into four 
areas; the two lateral ones deal with the control of gaze and orienting move-
ments, whereas the two medial ones are concerned with defense and aggres-
sion. Each of ­these areas receives specific projections from both the neocortex 
and the SNr. In addition to motor actions, the SC forwards pro­cessed infor-
mation to the thalamus that is further relayed to sensory visuomotor areas in 
the parietal lobe. Salient stimuli in the SC also activate dopamine neurons 
in the SNc. The tectum/SC is evolutionarily conserved from the lamprey to 
mammals and plays a central role in the control of be­hav­ior in all vertebrates.

Nothing happens ­until something moves.
—­Albert Einstein
4.1  OVERVIEW: THE RELATION BETWEEN THE CORTEX  
AND THE BASAL GANGLIA
In the previous chapters, we have dealt with the vari­ous cir­cuits in the mid-
brain, brainstem, and spinal cord that can execute the many aspects of the 
complete integrated motor be­hav­ior of the dif­fer­ent vertebrates. With the 
analogy used ­earlier, they correspond to the members of an orchestra playing 
dif­fer­ent instruments, or the keys of a piano. We now move on to consider 
the forebrain, which takes the role of the conductor of the orchestra or the 
pianist pressing the keys of the piano.
Let us once more remember the quote from C. S. Sherrington: “All 
the brain can do is to move ­things, ­whether whispering or felling a forest,” 
and thereby the fundamental role of the motor systems. The forebrain is in 
control of which microcircuits to activate in a given situation, when playing 
tennis, walking, or just talking.
The forebrain includes the ce­re­bral cortex (which is discussed further 
in chapter 5), the basal ganglia including the dopamine system, and the 
thalamus conveying information from our senses regarding what happens 
around us informing both the cortex and the basal ganglia (figure 4.1). The 
hypothalamus (discussed already in chapter 2) can also be considered as 
THE ROLES OF THE BASAL GANGLIA: 
FOR INITIATION OF MOVEMENT 
AND MOTOR LEARNING
4

98    Chapter 4
part of the forebrain, as it plays an impor­tant role in the control of instinc-
tive be­hav­iors such as escape reactions, aggression, and foraging and several 
autonomic and endocrine cir­cuits that affect be­hav­ior. The hypothalamic 
nuclei also utilize the microcircuit keyboard of downstream motor centers, 
including the periaqueductal gray (PAG).
The motor centers in the midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord are directly 
or indirectly ­under tonic inhibitory control from the basal ganglia output 
nuclei (figure 4.1) ­under resting conditions. Consequently, all ­these centers 
­will be difficult to activate ­unless they are relieved from this inhibition. The 
evolutionary rationale for this is presumably that it is impor­tant to ascer-
tain that the motor cir­cuits ­will remain inactive ­until called into action in 
order to avoid conflicting motor programs being recruited at the same time. 
A removal of the inhibition (known as “disinhibition”) from the basal ganglia 
is generally required to activate a specific motor center. The basal ganglia cir­
cuits operate based on information received from the cortex, thalamus, and 
dopamine and serotonin systems in order to determine ­whether a motor center 
should be selected for action. The disinhibition from the basal ganglia may be 
Cortex
Basal ganglia
Action
Selection
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Motor centers
PAG
Figure 4.1
Control of motor be­hav­ior. The basal ganglia receive input from the cortex and thalamus and 
target vari­ous motor centers. The cortex also receives input from the thalamus and sends 
information directly to the motor centers (dark blue). The control of escape be­hav­ior is through 
projections from the hypothalamus to the PAG.

99    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
complemented by direct excitation from the cortex to specific motor centers 
(figure 4.1).
The relative role of the cortex and the basal ganglia in dif­fer­ent behav-
ioral contexts is somewhat ambiguous and ­will vary ­under dif­fer­ent condi-
tions. Arber and Costa (2018) suggested that cortex would broadcast a wish, 
while the basal ganglia would determine ­whether the wish may be fulfilled.
In mammals, such as rodents, rabbits, and cats, removal or inactivation 
of the neocortex in young animals with the rest of the brain left intact has 
surprisingly ­little effect on the standard motor repertoire. Such “decorti-
cated animals” ­will walk around, perform exploratory movements, search 
for food and ­water, eat, and go through phases of sleep and active be­hav­ior 
(figure 4.2; see also Bjursten et al., 1976). They can live for years in a labo-
ratory environment. This means that the pro­cess of initiation of patterns 
of be­hav­ior adapted to the needs of the animal ­will be handled primarily 
by the basal ganglia ­under ­these conditions with input from the thalamus, 
Cat without neocortex can:
A
B
C
- make exploratory movements
- get hungry or thirsty - search for food and eat
- remember the location of the food in a T-maze
- ﬁnd the way out of a complex maze
- display aggresive behaviour towards other cats
Cortex
Basal ganglia
Action
Selection
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Motor centers
PAG
Figure 4.2
A cat without the neocortex. From Bjursten et al. (1976).

100    Chapter 4
but not the cortex. Basic drives from hypothalamic cir­cuits to the PAG and 
downstream motor centers may also contribute to actions such as foraging. 
However, without the cortex, they ­will have difficulty in interpreting signals 
from the surrounding world and often react with “sham rage” and attack 
without obvious reason.
The Ölveczky laboratory (Kawai et al., 2015) showed that a learned 
be­hav­ior such as a double lever press at a fixed time interval, a demanding 
task for a rat, could be produced with the same precision ­after removal 
of the frontal motor areas. The motor cortex was thus not needed for the 
initiation and execution of this well-­learned motor sequence. However, the 
motor cortex was required during the learning period; if it ­were removed 
before the training, the rat could not learn the task. To perform the task, the 
thalamic input to the striatum was required and the dorsolateral part of the 
striatum had to remain intact, whereas the dorsomedial part of the striatum 
was not required. ­There is thus an intricate interaction between the cortex 
and striatum in the learning phase, and ­these parts of the brain are required 
for the ability to learn the task.
Transection of the corticospinal axons in monkeys, leaving the rest of the 
cortical control of the basal ganglia, midbrain, and brainstem intact, leads to 
a loss of in­de­pen­dent fin­ger movements, but all other parts of the motor rep-
ertoire remain largely intact (Porter, 1987; Lawrence & Kuypers, 1968a,b). 
However, dynamic tasks requiring visual interaction with moving objects or 
fine manipulation of objects may be more dependent on pro­cessing within 
the cortex and input from the ret­ina via the superior colliculus (SC). Also, 
precision movements with in­de­pen­dent fin­ger movements in primates, such 
as playing the piano or knitting, may depend on the direct corticospinal 
projections to motoneurons.
Hypothalamic nuclei act directly via the PAG to elicit escape, freezing, 
and defense reactions (see figure 4.1 and figure 7.1 in chapter 7). ­These 
are reactions that require a rapid response for survival, and therefore may 
initially bypass the controlling action of the basal ganglia and cortex. In this 
chapter, we ­will discuss the details of the basal ganglia and their interaction 
with other parts of the forebrain and downstream motor centers.

101    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
4.1.1  Specific Tasks for the Forebrain in the Control of Motion
It is impor­tant to consider the main tasks of the forebrain in the context of 
controlling our movement repertoire. They can be summarized as follows:
•	
To select, initiate, and terminate movements that we know well, such as 
saccadic eye movements, walking, or reaching for an object. The motor 
programs for ­these movements are readily available and do not need 
learning. Nevertheless, ­there is always a need for calibration to changing 
body dimensions and adaptation to the surrounding environment.
•	
Another ­factor that needs to be considered is the amplitude of the move-
ment in a movement such as reaching, and the definition of the target 
(e.g., for a pianist, ­whether to press the keys ­gently or forcefully).
•	
Learned movements like habits, in which a motor sequence is stored, can 
be recruited whenever needed. This can be the ­simple cases, such as how 
to ­handle the keys when opening the door to your home, or more complex 
sequences, which often combine a set of innate programs into a habit.
•	
The pro­cess of learning new sequences, such as hitting a tennis serve. The 
initial ­trials are quite variable with ­little success, and ­after training, a very 
reproducible motor pattern can be produced. Similarly, when ­children 
learn to write, they form each letter with high variability at first, but ­after 
a learning pro­cess, a distinct shape for each letter is formed. As Bern­stein 
(1967) was the first to point out, the overall shape of an “A” remains very 
similar regardless of ­whether it is written with a pencil or on the black-
board, although the dimensions can differ with ­orders of magnitude, and 
completely dif­fer­ent sets of muscles are used to form the letter.
In this chapter, we ­will discuss the pro­cessing in the basal ganglia that 
underlies the control of motion on the cellular, network, and systems levels. 
We ­will focus initially on the mechanisms that allow se­lection, initiation, 
and termination of movement.
4.2  BASAL GANGLIA: ORGAN­IZATION
The basal ganglia are evolutionarily conserved and had evolved in the oldest 
group of vertebrates, the lamprey, to control basic aspects of motor be­hav­ior 

102    Chapter 4
(Grillner & Robertson, 2016; Grillner, 2021). The basal ganglia play a major 
role in controlling both the initiation of movement and for learning new 
patterns of coordination. They operate through the control of genet­ically 
defined cir­cuits in the midbrain, brainstem, and (indirectly) the spinal 
cord. Copies of the information sent to the brainstem motor centers are 
also reported back to the cortex via the thalamic nuclei. The main functions 
can be summarized as follows:
•	
The basal ganglia contribute to the release of vari­ous motor acts through 
disinhibition, such as saccadic eye movements.
•	
The basal ganglia take part in the se­lection between the many motor 
programs/microcircuits at the level of the striatum, leading to the release 
of a specific motor be­hav­ior.
•	
The basal ganglia are thought to control the amplitude of a selected 
movement (i.e., should you hit the piano key lightly or with full strength, 
as in a Stravinsky piece).
•	
The basal ganglia allow one to learn, store, and recall new motor 
sequences, such as playing a piece on the piano, or the more trivial 
motor sequences used in everyday life, such as tying your shoelaces. 
­Here, one compares habits stored in a long-­term perspective and more 
flexible, goal-­directed patterns of be­hav­ior.
•	
Dysfunction of the basal ganglia can lead to hypokinesia, as in Parkin-
son’s disease, with difficulty to initiate movements or perform complex 
motor sequences, or conversely, hyperkinesia with excessive movement 
initiation, as in Huntington’s disease or L-­DOPA-­ induced dyskinesia.
Next, we ­will review how the basal ganglia perform their many roles, 
what is known, and what remains enigmatic or unknown to date. We ­will 
first discuss the structure and function of the cir­cuits within the basal ganglia. 
Subsequently, we ­will integrate this information and consider how the many 
functions of the basal ganglia have been solved, or what is currently the most 
reasonable interpretation of the basic mode of interpretation of ­these roles.
An overview of the ­human and rodent basal ganglia with the vari­ous 
subnuclei is shown in figure 4.3. The striatum, the input stage of the basal 
ganglia, receives afferents from the cortex and thalamus. In primates, it is 

103    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
subdivided into the caudate nucleus and the putamen, which corresponds 
to the rodent dorsal striatum. In rodents, the axons from the cortex that run 
via the capsula interna to the brainstem do not subdivide the striatum into 
two discrete parts, the caudate and putamen. The dorsal striatum in rodents 
is mostly subdivided into dorsolateral (DLS) and dorsomedial (DMS) parts 
with dif­fer­ent inputs and functions. The DLS is often referred to as the 
“somatomotor striatum,” with input from the motor and somatosensory 
th
lv
Caudate
nucleus
Putamen
GPe
GPi
STN
SNr
SNc
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
Internal capsule
Striosomes
Matrix
A
B
C
D
cingulate cortex
limbic, amygdala
visual areas
goal-directed behavior
VTA/SNc - reward
Dorsolateral striatum (DLS)
Dorsomedial striatum (DMS)
motor and sensory cortex
motor control
habit formation
SNc - salient stimuli
DMS
DLS
E
Rodent
dSTR
GPe
GPi
STN
SNr
SNc
Figure 4.3
The basal ganglia subnuclei in the ­human and rodent brain. A. The location of the basal ganglia 
subnuclei at the level of the thalamus. B. A sagittal view of the brain showing the shape of the 
caudate-­putamen. C. Schematic of the striatum, indicating the matrix and striosome compart-
ments. D. Horizontal view of the rodent brain, indicating the subnuclei shown in relative sizes. 
E. Subdivision of the dorsomedial striatum (DMS) and dorsolateral striatum (DLS) and the functions 
ascribed to them, shown schematically. Abbreviations: dSTR, dorsal striatum; GPe, globus pallidus 
externa; GPi, globus pallidus interna; lv, lateral ventricle; SNc, substantia nigra pars compacta; SNr, 
substantia nigra pars reticulata; STN, subthalamic nucleus; VTA, ventral tegmental area.

104    Chapter 4
parts of the cortex, and the DMS as the associate branch of the striatum, 
with input from associate areas of the cortex (figures 4.3d and 4.3e). The 
most caudal part of the dorsal striatum is now often considered a separate 
ele­ment, referred to as the “tail striatum” (Valjent & Gangarossa, 2021), with 
input from the visual and auditory cortex and amygdala (Reig & Silberberg, 
2014; Znamenskiy & Zador, 2013). ­There is also the ventral striatum, which 
is smaller than the dorsal striatum and is comprised of the nucleus accum-
bens and the olfactory tubercle, with input from the limbic and olfactory 
systems, respectively.
Furthermore, the striatum is subdivided into a larger matrix volume and 
a much smaller striosomal, “patchy” part (figure 4.3c)—­these two compart-
ments have dif­fer­ent functions (Graybiel & Ragsdale, 1978). The matrix is 
involved in the se­lection of action and the control of motion and be­hav­ior 
in general, whereas the striosomal part controls the level of activity in the 
dopamine neurons in substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc), and presumably 
an evaluation of action (as discussed next).
The striatum is a large structure. In the mouse, it contains 850,000 
GABAergic neurons and in the rat ­there are 1,350,000 neurons (Boyes & 
Bolam, 2007) on one side of the brain, out of which 95 ­percent are striatal 
projection neurons (SPNs). The SPNs are subdivided into one half (dSPNs; 
direct pathway striatal projection neurons) projecting directly to the output 
compartment, substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr; direct pathway), and the 
much smaller globus pallidus interna (GPi; direct pathway); and the other 
half is the globus pallidus externa (GPe; indirect pathway), indirect pathway 
striatal projection neurons (iSPNs). In addition, 5 ­percent of the interneu-
rons can exert a major effect on the operation of the striatum (figure 4.4a). 
­There are three major subtypes: cholinergic interneurons (ChINs; orange 
color), fast-­spiking interneurons (FS; green), and low-­threshold-­spiking 
interneurons (LTS; mauve). In addition, ­there are several other smaller 
groups with less well known functions, such as the tyrosine hydroxylase-­
expressing (TH) interneurons, 5-­HT3-­expressing types, and neurogliaform 
types (gray area in figure 4.4b). The connectivity between SPNs and the three 
interneuron subtypes is outlined in figure 4.4c.

105    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
4.2.1  Interaction within the Basal Ganglia:  
Direct and Indirect Pathways
The interactions among the main compartments of the basal ganglia are sum-
marized in figure 4.5, providing a functional scheme. The output stage, the 
SNr and GPi, consists of spontaneously active GABAergic neurons that receive 
inhibitory input directly from the striatum via dSPNs and is therefore referred 
to as the “direct pathway.” The axons of the SNr/GPi in turn proj­ect to motor 
centers in the midbrain and brainstem and send collaterals to the thalamus that 
provide information to the cortex and striatum. The direct pathway dSPNs 
express dopamine D1 receptors and substance P and inhibit the spontaneously 
active SNr/GPi neurons, thereby disinhibiting a specific motor center and 
facilitating the initiation of movement.
ACh
ChATT
TAN
LTS
TH
CR
NPY
5-HT3R
diverse
PV
FS
GABA
striatal 
inter-
neurons
ChIN
LTS
FS
dSPN
iSPN
A
B
C
SOM/NOS
NPY
dSPN
iSPN
IN
Figure 4.4
Striatal interneurons and the striatal microcircuit. A. Diagram showing the relative proportions of 
indirect and direct SPNs and interneurons. B. Each subtype of striatal interneurons identified by 
their neurotransmitter expression (inner circle), other molecular markers (­middle circle), and electro-
physiological properties (outer circle) are represented in the circular plot. The group shown in gray is 
a diverse group ­here labeled as “diverse.” Redrawn and modified, with permission, from Burke et al. 
(2017). C. The striatal microcircuit with the connectivity between the SPNs and their input from FS, 
LTS, and ChIN interneurons. Abbreviations: ACh, acetylcholine; ChAT, choline-­acetyl transferase; 
ChIN, cholinergic interneuron; CR, calretinin; dSPN, direct pathway striatal projection neuron; FS, 
fast-­spiking interneuron; GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid; 5-­HT3R, serotonin type-3 receptor; IN, 
interneurons iSPN, indirect pathway striatal projection neuron; LTS, low-­threshold-­spiking inter-
neuron; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; NPY, neuropeptide Y; PV, parvalbumin; SOM, somatostatin; 
SPN, striatal projection neuron; TAN, tonically active neuron; TH, tyrosine hydroxylase.

106    Chapter 4
The indirect pathway has an opposite effect of that of the direct pathway. 
It originates with the iSPNs, which inhibit spontaneously active GPe neu-
rons (the prototypic subtype) that in turn target neurons in the SNr/GPi. It 
thus reaches the SNr/GPi indirectly (therefore the name). The net result is 
that the iSPN inhibition of the spontaneously active GPe neurons ­will lead 
to a disinhibition of the SNr/GPi and ­will thus produce enhanced activity, 
and thereby further inhibition of the downstream motor centers, an effect 
opposite to that of the direct pathway. In addition, iSPN-­induced inhibition 
of GPe ­will reduce the inhibition of the subthalamic neurons (STNs) and 
 SNr/GPi
Cortex/pallium
STN
Thalamus
Striatum
DA
Hyperdirect  pathway
Indirect “no go” pathway
GPe 
Saccades
Locomotion Posture
Swallowing
Basal ganglia
dSPN
iSPN
Dopamine
GABA
Glutamate
D2/Enk
D1/SP
SNc
Direct “go” pathway
SC/MLR/DLR
Figure 4.5
The organ­ization of the basal ganglia. The striatum consists of GABAergic neurons, as do 
the GPe, GPi, and SNr. The SNr and GPi represent the output level of the basal ganglia and 
proj­ect via dif­fer­ent subpopulations of neurons to the superior colliculus (SC), the mesence-
phalic (MLR), and diencephalic (DLR) locomotor command regions (as previously discussed) 
and other brainstem motor centers, as well as back to the thalamus with efference copies of 
information sent to the brainstem. The dSPNs that target the SNr/GPi express the dopamine 
D1 receptor (D1) and substance P (SP), while the iSPNs express the dopamine D2 receptor 
(D2) and enkephalin (Enk). The indirect loop is represented by the GPe, STN, and output level 
(SNr/GPi)—­the net effect being an enhancement of activity in ­these nuclei. Also indicated is 
the dopamine input from the SNc (green) to the striatum and brainstem centers.

107    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
thereby cause enhanced activity of the glutamatergic STNs that enhances the 
activity of the SNr/GPi. The STN also receives excitation from the cortex 
and thalamus, referred to as the “hyperdirect pathway,” which ­will act to 
terminate motor activity by exciting SNr/GPi neurons, as ­will the indirect 
pathway (see also figure 4.16).
The striatum also receives a strong dopamine innervation from the 
SNc, whereas the other subnuclei within the basal ganglia receive less dense 
dopamine input. Further, dSPNs express excitatory D1 receptors, whereas 
iSPNs instead have inhibitory D2 receptors and thus the direct and indirect 
pathways ­will be affected in opposite ways by increased dopamine activity. 
In addition, the SNc targets the downstream motor centers and can directly 
influence the excitability of ­these centers.
The dopamine system consists of the SNc, which targets the DLS, while 
the adjacent ventral tegmental area (VTA) targets the DMS and ventral 
striatum (accumbens). The striatum is much larger than the other basal 
ganglia nuclei. The GPe has only 1.7 ­percent of the neurons in the striatum, 
the SNr/GPi contains 1 ­percent, STN 0.5 ­percent, and SNc 0.3 ­percent 
(rat; Oorschot, 1996). The exact proportions have not been described for 
other groups, but the relative differences between the striatum and other 
structures most likely apply. The organ­ization of the basal ganglia is evolu-
tionarily conserved, and the scheme described ­here applies to both mam-
mals and lampreys, and and perhaps all other vertebrates as well (Grillner & 
Robertson, 2016).
4.2.2  The SNr/GPi: The Output Level of the Basal Ganglia Controls 
Downstream Motor Centers and Provides an Efference Copy Back  
to the Cortex and Striatum
We ­will first consider the output targets of the basal ganglia in the mid-
brain, brainstem, and thalamus. A characteristic of the SNr/GPi is that the 
GABAergic neurons are spontaneously active ­under resting conditions and 
thereby continuously inhibit their downstream motor centers. The evolu-
tionary rationale for this is presumably to ascertain that motor centers should 
remain inactive ­until they are specifically called into action. A recent study 

108    Chapter 4
in the mouse has shown that the SNr targets no fewer than 42 downstream 
structures in the midbrain and brainstem (McElvain et al., 2021) and is pre-
sumably able to control many of them individually. By selectively inhibiting 
a subpopulation of SNr/GPi neurons involved in the control of a specific 
motor program, the downstream motor center is released from inhibition 
and then recruited to action. This disinhibition can be complemented by 
excitation from other sources, such as the cortex.
McElvain et al. (2021) extended ­earlier findings from the cat and pri-
mates showing that SNr neurons affect the control of saccadic eye movements 
generated from the SC, the control of locomotion and swallowing, and other 
brainstem centers (Takakusaki, 2008; Hikosaka & Wurtz, 1983: Grillner et al., 
2005). Figure 4.6 shows some of the specific targets of the SNr and the vari­ous 
compartments such as the lateral SC, which affect the orienting movements of 
head and body and the related eye movements, while the medial part relates to 
threatening stimuli and elicit escape and defense reactions mediated via PAG. 
The motor centers in the medullary and pontine reticular formation control 
orofacial movements, reaching, grasping, hindlimb movements, and muscle 
tone. The SNr is thus in the position to control in­de­pen­dently the activity in 
each of ­these motor centers and to determine ­whether to remain inhibited or 
be called into action. ­These motor centers from the midbrain to the spinal cord 
represent a large part of the motor repertoire of most vertebrates, which shows 
how central the SNr is to the control of movements.
McElvain et al. (2021) also showed that all SNr neurons that target down-
stream motor centers have a collateral to dif­fer­ent portions of the thalamus, 
the motor thalamus, and the parts of the parafascicular (PF) nucleus within 
the intralaminar thalamic nuclei (figures 4.6 and 4.7). The latter proj­ects back 
to the striatum and the cortex. Subpopulations of SNr proj­ect to compart-
ments within the PF, which in turn target separate parts of the striatum. This 
means that both the striatum and cortex receive specific information about 
the commands sent to downstream motor targets. The collateral information 
sent via the thalamus to the cortex and striatum provides what is often referred 
to as an “efference copy” or a corollary discharge. This information about cur-
rent motor commands to downstream motor centers is naturally of critical 
importance for planning the next phase of the movement. In much of the 

109    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
current lit­er­a­ture, the loop back from the SNr to the cortex is still viewed as if 
the ultimate motor command would be issued from the cortex, but to a large 
degree, this appears incorrect and instead provides impor­tant feedback to the 
cortex and striatum to be used for further planning (see Grillner et al., 2020).
4.2.3  Striatum, the Input Structure of the Basal Ganglia,  
Receives Modular Input from Dif­fer­ent Parts of the Cortex
The striatum, the input structure, is the main pro­cessing center of the basal 
ganglia, and it is much larger than other compartments of the basal gan-
glia. In contrast to the spontaneous activity of the SNr/GPi, the SPNs are 
PPN
Midbrain 
RF
Motor 
thalamus
Intralaminar
thalamus
ZI
Inferior colliculus
Medullary RF
Lateral SC
Central SC
Pontine RF
Dorsal raphe
Medial SC
Diencephalon
Common collateral targets
Gross behavioral function
Defense and locomotor
(PAG, CnF)
Orofacial and head orientation,
reaching
Oculomotor
Hindlimb and muscle tone
Modulatory
(5-HT)
Defense and locomotor
(PAG, CnF)
Orofacial and head orientation
SNr
Striatum
STN
GPe
Figure 4.6
Summary of SNr output pathways. Each SNr population proj­ects to functionally distinct brain-
stem regions and send collaterals to brainstem nuclei and a set of common target regions. All 
the populations of projections demonstrate a distinct one-­to-­many projection pattern. Redrawn 
and modified from McElvain et al. (2021).

110    Chapter 4
hyperpolarized and ­silent at rest and designed to have a high threshold for 
activation ­because they express potassium channels of the inward rectifier 
type (Kir), which keeps them hyperpolarized at rest. When the SPNs become 
depolarized by input from the cortex, for instance, the Kir channels ­will be 
closed, and then the SPNs become much easier to activate.
The activation of striatal neurons is in turn primarily driven by excit-
atory glutamatergic input from the cortex and thalamus. Studies on primates 
and carnivores have shown that dif­fer­ent parts of the cortex target dif­fer­ent 
areas within the striatum, but a recent detailed study by Foster et al. (2021) 
in the mouse has uncovered a degree of precision that was unanticipated 
and shows very precise modular organ­ization. Figure 4.8a shows that the 
Cortex
Striatum
SNr
pf
Eye
Posture Locomotion.......
Efference copy
Motor thalamus
Figure 4.7
Schematic repre­sen­ta­tion of the basal ganglia’s downstream control of motor structures in the 
midbrain-­brainstem, with specific efference copy information transmitted back via the thalamus 
to the cortex and striatum. Subpopulations of neurons in the cortex proj­ect to subpopulations 
in the striatum, which in turn inhibit discrete groups of neurons in the SNr (Foster et al., 2021). 
Each circle indicates groups of neurons. Note that the upstream axonal branches to the motor 
thalamus and the PF nucleus forward efference copies about the specific activity in the output 
channels. Only the direct pathway connectivity between the striatum and SNr is included in this 
scheme. McElvain et al. (2021)’s contribution is that the SNr is subdivided into subpopulations 
with specific motor targets and that each conveys an efference copy to dif­fer­ent parts of the 
motor thalamus or PF, and further to the cortex and striatum.

111    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
somatomotor parts of the cortex, representing the primary and secondary 
motor cortex and the corresponding sensory areas, are subdivided into areas 
representing the forelimb, trunk, hindlimb, and orofacial areas, and each 
of them proj­ect to correspondingly well defined discrete modules within 
the DLS (figures 4.8a, 4.8b, and 4.3e) and the ventral parts of the dorsal 
striatum. Figure 4.8b shows the dorsal striatum with the areas for the trunk 
(tr), lower limb (ll), upper limb (ul), and large areas for the inner and outer 
parts of the mouth (mi amd mo).
The direct pathway neurons from the different parts of the DLS target 
specific parts of the SNr (figure 4.8a) and maintain the same degree of subdivi-
sion, as does the indirect pathway that proj­ects with maintained specificity to 
the GPe, and then to the appropriate compartments in the SNr, which appear 
somewhat less specific. The DLS is involved specifically in the control of move-
ments and include learned motor sequences (referred to as “habits”). ­These 
sequences are stored and become almost hardwired and difficult to modify.
The same type of specific connectivity is maintained for the associative 
areas of the cortex (shown in mauve and green in figure 4.8a), which proj­ect 
to the DMS and the direct and indirect projections to the medial parts of 
the SNr and GPe, respectively. The DMS receives input from the prefrontal 
and limbic areas, and the ventral striatum from the hippocampus and limbic 
areas. The DMS and ventral striatum are thought to pro­cess information of 
a more cognitive and emotional nature. In primates, goal-­directed be­hav­ior 
is controlled by the DMS and the corresponding rostral parts of the basal 
ganglia (i.e., learned motor sequences that can easily be modified as time 
passes or the external conditions change, such as if one item is rewarding for 
a period and then instead becomes punishing).
The collaterals of the SNr proj­ect to the PF nucleus in the thalamus 
with a maintained modular organ­ization, and then back to the same areas of 
the cortex and striatum (not shown in figure 4.8a), so that the information 
concerning the SNr commands to downstream motor centers are signaled 
back to the part of the cortex that “talks” with the corresponding module in 
the striatum. This shows that the cortex and the vari­ous compartments of the 
basal ganglia are subdivided into an intrinsic modular organ­ization. ­There is 
well-­organized feedback from the SNr to the ventromedial thalamus, which 

112    Chapter 4
DLS
DMS
A
Cortex
Striatum
Nigra
Pallidum
Talamus
Trunk
SSp-tr
CPi.dl.d (tr)
CPi.dl.imd (II)
CPi.vl.imv (ul)
CPi.vl.v (m/i)
CPi.vl.vt (m/o)
CPi.dm.dl
SNr.v
SNr.ll
SNr.orb
SNr.m
SNr.d
SNr.dm
PF.tr/ll
PF.ul
PF.m
PF.a
PF.lim
PF.vs
GPe.1
vm.v
vm.vm
vm.cvm
vl.vt
(m/o)
vl.vt
(m/i)
vl.imv (ul)
dl.imd (ll)
dl.d (tr)
dm.dl
dm.d
dm.dm
dm.im
dm.cd
vl.cvl
GPe.20
GPe.18
GPe.12
GPe.3
GPe.4
GPe.23
GPe.9
GPe.17
GPe.16
GPe.15
GPe.6
CPi.dm.d
CPi.dm.dm
CPi.dm.im
CPi.vm.vm
CPi.vm.v
CPi.vm.vcvm
ACB.c
SSp-II
MOp-tr
MOs-tr
SSp-bfd tr
MOp-II
MOs-II
SSp-bfd II
SSp-uI
MOp-uI
MOs-uI
SSp-bfd uI
SSp-m/o
MOp-m/o
MOs-m/o
SSp-bfd m/o
GU
SSs caudal
VISC rostral
RSPv
ACAv
ACAd
PTLp cdl lat
PTLp rostral
MOs-fef
VISam
VISal
PTLp cdl md
ENTm
RSPagl
RSPd
VISl
VISp
VISpm
AUDp
ORBm
PL dorsal
AUDv
ECT
TEa caudal
TEa rostral
ILA
PL ventral
PL dorsal (L6)
Ald
Alp
Alv
PERl
PIR
VISC caudal
MOs r pole 1
SSp-m/i
MOp-m/i
MOs-m/i
SSs rostral
Lower
limb
Upper
limb
Inner
mouth
Outer
mouth
Sub-
icular
Postero-
lateral
Sensory associative
Medial associative
Somatic sensorimotor
Corticocortical subnetworks
Lateral associative
Anterolateral
B
Figure 4.8
Alignment between dif­fer­ent parts of the cortico–­basal ganglia–­thalamic loop. A. In the cor-
tex, two medial associative subnetworks of exteroceptive sensory areas, two lateral associative 
subnetworks of interoceptive limbic areas, and five somatic sensorimotor subnetworks of body 
regions proj­ect into largely distinct striatal subnetworks, whose outputs form the more parallel 
indirect (striatopallidal) pathway and the more convergent direct (striatonigral) pathway. The pal-
lidal domains send convergent projections to the same nigral domains targeted by their input 
striatal domains. The nigral domains then proj­ect to six regions of the PF thalamus, which in turn 
are interconnected with the originating cortical regions. B. A section through the dorsal striatum 
showing the compartments within the striatum and color-­coded as in A. For the DLS, the mod-
ules for the trunk (tr), lower limb (ll), upper limb (ul), and two ventrolateral areas for the mouth, the 
inner (mi) and the outer (mo). Abbreviations: Cortical areas: A, associative cortex; ACA, anterior 
cingulate area; AI, agranular insular; AUD, auditory; DMS, dorsomedial striatum; DLS, dorsolateral 
striatum; ECT, ectorhinal; ENT, entorhinal; GU, gustatory; ILA, infralimbic area; MOp, primary 
motor cortex; MOs, secondary motor cortex; PERI, perirhinal; PIR, piriform; PL, prelimbic; PTLp, 
posterior parietal association; RSP, retrosplenial; SSp, primary somatosensory cortex; SSs, sec-
ondary somatosensory cortex; TEa, temporal association; VIS, visual; VISC, visceral. Striatal areas: 
ABCc, core of the nucleus accumbens; CP, caudoputamen; CPc, caudal CP; CPi, intermediate 
CP; CPr, rostral CP. Thalamic areas: PF, parafascicular nucleus; PF.a, associative PF; PF.lim, limbic 
PF; PF.m, mouth PF; PF.tr/ll, trunk/lower limb PF; PF.ul, upper limb PF; PF.vs, ventrostriatal PF. 
Nigral areas: SNr.d, dorsal SNr; SNr.dm, dorsomedial SNr; SNr.ll, lower limb SNr; SNr.m, medial 
SNr; SNr.orb, orobrachial SNr; SNr.v, ventral SNr. Modified from Foster et al. (2021).

113    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
is also subdivided into specific modules (not indicated in figure 4.8) and then 
proj­ect back to the sensory and motor areas of the cortex.
The input to the striatum from the nuclei in the thalamus represents 
around 40 ­percent of the excitatory input to the striatum (Doig et al., 2010). 
The PF is the largest nucleus and is subdivided into specific somatomotor, 
associative, and limbic compartments projecting to the dorsolateral, ventral, 
and associative (dorsomedial) parts of the striatum, respectively (Mandel-
baum et al., 2019), as well as back to the cortex in an orderly fashion. The 
PF is critical to the per­for­mance of learned motor programs (Wolff et al., 
2022; Dhawale et al., 2021) and receives input from a variety of subcortical 
structures and the cerebellum (Grillner et al., 2020).
4.2.4  Synaptic Properties of Cortical and Thalamic Neurons Targeting 
Striatal Projection Neurons
Starting from the detailed anatomy of the basal ganglia, it is now time to discuss 
the next level of granularity of cell types and connectivity. The neurons that 
target the striatum are illustrated in figure 4.9. The efferent pyramidal tract (PT) 
neurons, also referred to as “corticobulbar” or “corticospinal,” originate from 
d/i SPNs
ChINs
FS
LTS
Thalamus
PPN - 
glutamate
PPN - ACh
?
Cortex
Pallium/cortex
Striatum
Motor centres
Thalamus
DA
Hist
5-HT
PT
IT
Depressing 
synapse
Facilitating synapse
ipsi
Contra
modulatory input
A
B
Figure 4.9
Input to neuronal subpopulations in the striatum. A. Many cortical/pallial axons that target the 
brainstem and spinal cord (PT-­type) give off collaterals to neurons within the striatum. ­There is 
a subset of pyramidal neurons that have intratelencephalic axons projecting to the contralateral, 
as well as the ipsilateral cortex/pallium (IT-­type), which also target the striatum. B. Cortical and 
thalamic neurons target both direct and indirect striatal projection neurons (dSPNs/iSPNs) and 
the ChINs, FS, and LTS interneurons. The glutamatergic pedunculopontine (PPN) neurons only 
proj­ect to the interneurons, whereas the cholinergic PPN target the dSPNs/iSPNs. The red 
dashed arrow from the cortex to ChINs indicates a variable and weak effect.

114    Chapter 4
layer 5 in the cortex and target motor structures in the midbrain, brainstem, 
and spinal cord. Their axons course through the striatum on their way down-
ward and give off collateral synapses on the two types of SPNs and several 
of the interneurons as well. PT neurons provide a major source for excitation of 
the striatal neurons. In addition, the corticospinal subpopulation of neurons 
sends off collaterals to the dorsolateral sensorimotor area of the striatum (Nel-
son et al., 2021; Filipovic et al., 2019). PT neurons activate both the dSPNs 
and iSPNs, but the dSPNs get twice as large excitatory synaptic current as 
iSPNs. Moreover, the corticospinal neurons appear to be subdivided into two 
populations—­one that preferentially targets dSPNs and one that targets iSPNs.
Equally impor­tant is another class of neurons in layer 5, the intratelence-
phalic (IT) neurons, which proj­ect bilaterally within the cortex and in addi-
tion to the striatum, but do not extend farther downstream. Each IT neuron 
has a very extensive area of termination within the striatum that includes a 
significant part of the DLS, while the PT neurons have much smaller but 
very dense focal areas of termination within the DLS (figure 4.10). Both IT 
and PT neurons make monosynaptic glutamatergic synapses on the spines of 
SPNs, but in contrast to the PT neurons, the IT neurons provide equal exci-
tation to both types of SPNs. An activation of IT neurons ­will thus enhance 
the excitation in a broad area of the dorsal striatum, while PT neurons ­will 
target one or several focal areas with a dense synaptic innervation.
To investigate how PT and IT neurons affect be­hav­ior, mice ­were trained 
to manipulate a joystick along a path to obtain a reward, while the activity 
of IT or PT neurons could be recorded or manipulated optoge­ne­tically. A 
blockade of IT neurons led to a disruption of the movement, whereas inac-
tivation of PT neurons had only a modest effect (Park et al., 2022). This is 
a very impor­tant finding, in that the IT neurons that have no downstream 
projections except to the striatum nevertheless exert the most prominent 
effect on the per­for­mance of the movement, whereas PT-­neurons, which also 
target the downstream motor centers, have less effect on the motor be­hav­ior. 
The behavioral prominence of the effects of IT neurons may relate to the fact 
that their axonal termination field is much broader than that of PT neurons 
(figure 4.10), but also that they excite PT neurons at the cortical level, and 
a blockade of IT ­will indirectly affect the activity level of the PTs.

115    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
It is in­ter­est­ing to note that the termination area of the thalamic PF neu-
rons is broad, similar to IT neurons, and ­there are three subtypes projecting 
to the dif­fer­ent parts of the dorsal striatum (DLS, DMS, and limbic part) 
(Mandelbaum et al., 2019; Ellender et al., 2013; Doig et al., 2010). The 
synapses are formed on the spines of SPNs, but also on the dendritic shafts, 
and they activate preferentially N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate (NMDA) receptors. 
Another interlaminar nucleus, the central lateral (CL) instead terminates in 
a similar way as do the PT neurons with focused terminations on the spines 
of the SPNs and with a lower ratio of NMDA to α-­amino-3-­hydroxy-5-­
methyl-4-­isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA). CL cells give rise to larger EPSPs 
and are more efficient in activating SPNs than are PF neurons.
The PF nucleus is by far the largest, and it receives massive input from 
many sources, such as the cerebellar output nuclei, SNr, in an ordered 
Figure 4.10
Terminal fields of PT and IT neurons in the striatum. The PT neurons are depicted in red and 
the IT neurons in blue. Note the extensive bilateral terminal arborizations of one IT neuron. 
Source: Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

116    Chapter 4
fashion (see figure 4.7), SC, PPN, brainstem reticular nuclei, and cortex. 
The PF neurons that proj­ect to the cortex (e.g., motor areas) also receive 
input from the same cortical areas. Moreover, the striatal targets of ­these PF 
neurons also receive input from the cortical areas targeted by the PF-­cortical 
axons, forming an intricate, well-­structured, cortico-­thalamic-­striatal net-
work (figure 4.7). The PF neurons projecting to DLS respond to salient 
stimuli, such as unexpected auditory, visual, and somatosensory stimuli. 
PF neurons projecting to the limbic and associate areas contribute to atten-
tion pro­cessing and behavioral switching. Inactivation of ­these parts of PF 
disrupts attention pro­cessing.
In figure 4.9b, the striatal inputs from the vari­ous types of neurons are 
summarized. The cortex and thalamus activate both types of SPNs, while 
the ChINs are targeted mainly from the thalamus, but they also receive 
some input from the cortex (Johansson & Silberberg, 2020; Morgenstern 
et al., 2022). The LTS interneurons are activated exclusively from the cor-
tex, and the FS interneurons from both structures. An additional input to 
the striatum is from the PPN, which has two parts (Martinez-­Gonzalez 
et al., 2011). One, using glutamate as the neurotransmitter, targets only the 
striatal interneurons and is thereby able to provide strong inhibition of the 
entire striatum through GABAergic action. The other, the cholinergic part 
of the PPN, proj­ects to SPNs and might act through nicotinic or muscarinic 
receptors, or through both. They complement the ChINs, and it should be 
recalled that the cholinergic innervation of striatum is very extensive and 
nearly as dense as the dopaminergic innervation, and yet the cholinergic 
cells in the striatum represent only 1 ­percent of the total number of cells 
(Burke et al., 2017).
In conclusion, the cortex and thalamus provide the bulk of the excit-
atory input to SPNs. The SPNs also receive excitation from the cholinergic 
PPN, while the glutamatergic input of the PPN targets only the interneurons 
of striatum. Moreover, the thalamic CL neurons are similar to cortical PT 
neurons, having patchy, focused terminations and larger synaptic effects 
compared to PF neurons, which resemble cortical IT neurons, with a broad 
termination field, and provide smaller synaptic effects.

117    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
4.3  SYNAPTIC INTERACTION WITHIN THE STRIATUM
To analyze the synaptic interaction within the striatum, as well as the proper-
ties of the predominantly GABAergic synapses, the method of simultaneous 
recordings of pairs or triplets of interacting neurons is preferred, though it 
is demanding (Planert et al., 2010).
The connectivity ratio between the two types of SPNs, FS and LTS, and 
the ChINs differs when the neurons are less than 50 μm (red) or 100 μm (blue) 
apart (figure 4.11a; Planert et al., 2010; Taverna et al., 2008). It is impor­tant 
Active
module
300 µm
(µm)
Inhibited area
Cortex/thalamus
SPN
SPN
FS
5 mV
100 ms
–75 mV
A
B1
B2
C
Plateau potential
ChIN
LTS
FS
dSPN
iSPN
5%
20%
14%
28%
13%
36%
23%
26%
7%
6%
4%
89%
67%
GABA
Muscarinic
Nicotinic
58%
Connection
probability
50 100
Stimulation 
period
Figure 4.11
Striatal microcircuit. A. Connectivity ratio between the two types of SPNs, the fast-­spiking interneu-
rons (FS), the low-­threshold-­spiking interneurons (LTS) and the cholinergic interneurons (ChINs). 
Connection probabilities within and between neuronal subtypes are shown by respective arrows; 
numbers in red correspond to connection probabilities for a somatic pair at a distance of 50 μm, 
while numbers in blue correspond to 100 μm. B1. Cortical and thalamic inputs to the distal den-
drites of SPNs, while FS neurons target primarily the so­ma, where action potentials are initiated. B2. 
A circle indicating the area that is inhibited from an active module. C. Somatic potential response 
to spatiotemporal clustered synaptic input, demonstrating the model’s ability to trigger NMDA-­
dependent plateau potentials to reproduce experimental findings. From Hjorth et al. (2020).

118    Chapter 4
to appreciate that the synapses that the SPNs make with other SPNs are made 
on the distal dendrites. The distal dendrites are an impor­tant target since this is 
where the synaptic input from the cortex and thalamus targets the dendrites of 
SPNs (figure 4.11b1). This means that the excitation may be shunted through 
the surround inhibition from the nearby SPNs and affect the so­ma of the cells 
to a much lesser extent. A strong synaptic activation of the dendrites may also 
result in NMDA-­activated plateau potentials, which are impor­tant in that 
they provide an enhanced depolarizing drive, but they also are vital to synaptic 
plasticity (figure 4.11c). Also, the plateau potential would be counteracted by 
SPN-­induced lateral inhibition (Du et al., 2017).
When the SPNs within one discrete module are activated, they ­will inhibit 
and target the distal dendrites in the surrounding SPNs in an area extending 
over 300 μm (figure 4.11b2). This means a form of lateral inhibition and that 
excitatory synaptic input to SPNs in this area ­will be counteracted if the SPNs in 
a discrete module within the striatum is activated—­a form of “winner takes all.”
In contrast, FS interneurons form synapses on the so­ma of SPNs and 
therefore effectively influence the spike generation and represent a form of 
feed-­forward inhibition onto SPNs (figure 4.11b1). The FS interneurons are 
activated from both the thalamus and cortex, and the very same FS inter-
neuron inhibits both types of SPNs (Planert et al., 2010). The connectivity 
ratio even within 100 μm is very high, and FS interneurons are electrically 
coupled with each other (Hjorth et al., 2009; Klaus et al., 2011).
4.3.1  LTS: Regulator of Synaptic Plasticity?
LTS interneurons are GABAergic and releasing nitric oxide, and they are spon-
taneously active at rest and target the spines of distal dendrites of SPNs and 
ChINs (Frost Nylén et al., 2021). They receive excitation from the cortex, but 
disynaptic inhibition from the thalamus via a GABAergic interneuron (Dorst 
et al., 2020). An in­ter­est­ing finding is that the LTS interneurons also tar-
get dopaminergic axons within the striatum and exert presynaptic inhibition 
via GABAB receptors (figure 4.12c). During learning, the LTS interneurons 
reduce their level of activity, which reduce the GABAergic presynaptic inhibi-
tion of the dopaminergic axons as well, which thus ­will enhance dopamine 
release (Holly et al., 2019) and thereby promote learning. It is in­ter­est­ing to 

119    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
note that ­there is a complementary effect of the reduced presynaptic inhibi-
tion of dopamine axons with the reduced inhibition of SPN dendrites, both 
of which may facilitate learning. On the other hand, the resting activity or an 
enhanced LTS discharge would counteract the induction of undue learning—­
under many conditions, such as initiation of standard motor programs, ­there 
is no need for learning, of course. The LTS could thus serve as a regulator of 
synaptic plasticity in the striatum, regulating the release of dopamine from its 
axonal terminals.
4.3.2  ChINs: A Major Contributor to Striatal Function  
through Nicotinic and Muscarinic Receptors
The ChINs are large aspiny neurons (figure 4.12b) representing only 1 ­percent 
of the cells in the striatum. Nevertheless, they form a very dense network of 
A
C
GABA
ChIN
ChIN
ChIN
Nicotinic
ChIN
dSPN
M1
M4
D
E
AChE
Cortex
Dopamine
ChIN
LTS
GABAB
+
+
+
+
Thalamus
–
Striatum
Nicotinic
Thalamus
Cortex
B
ChIN
Figure 4.12
The ChINs. A. Acethylcholineesterase staining of the rodent striatum. B. Reconstruction of an 
intracellular neurobiotin-­filled ChIN with the somata shown in black, dendrites in blue, and the 
axon in red. C. LTS receive direct input from the cortex and indirectly from the thalamus via a 
GABAergic interneuron. The LTS in turn target dopaminergic axons, which are also targeted 
by ChINs. D. ChINs activate a subtype of GABAergic interneurons via nicotinic receptors. 
E. ChINs activate d/iSPNs via M1 receptors on mainly the somata and M4 receptors specifically 
on the dendritic spines of dSPNs.

120    Chapter 4
cholinergic terminals in the dorsal striatum (figure 4.12a)—­almost as dense 
as that of the dopamine terminals (Bolam et al., 1984; Mesulam et al., 1984; 
Wilson et al., 1990; Assous, 2021). They are spontaneously active at a low rate, 
and therefore they are often referred to as “tonically active interneurons.” They 
are potently activated from the thalamus, and to a variable degree from the 
cortex. Cortical and thalamic afferents to the striatum express presynaptic nico-
tinic receptors that may facilitate the synaptic transmission. The ChIN axonal 
terminals form synapses with the terminals of dopaminergic axons within the 
striatum that express nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptors (Rice & Cragg, 
2004; figure 4.12b). An optoge­ne­tic activation of ChINs leads to a release of 
dopamine via the dopaminergic terminals and represents a local mechanism 
within the striatum that can regulate the release of dopamine. In this context, 
it is in­ter­est­ing to note that the LTS are instead inhibited from the thalamus via 
an interneuron, as discussed previously. The net effect leads to an abolition of 
LTS-­induced presynaptic GABAB inhibition on dopamine axons, and thus it 
results in an enhanced dopamine release (figure 4.12b). Considering that the 
effects from the thalamus, ChINs and LTS complement each other, with one 
adding presynaptic excitation and the other, when inhibited, reducing the pre-
synaptic inhibition. The net result being that more dopamine is released, which 
can potentiate learning. In addition to the presynaptic nicotinic receptors, many 
striatal interneurons express nicotinic receptors, but that does not include SPNs.
Acetylcholine also activates muscarinic G-­protein-­mediated receptors. 
They are of two types: the M1 (also M3 and M5), which provide net exci-
tation; and the M2/M4, which are inhibitory (see ­table 4.1). The M2/M4 
receptors provide presynaptic inhibition of corticostriatal and thalamostria-
tal afferents. An activation of ChINs, ­either directly or from the thalamic PF 
nucleus, leads to reduced efficacy of the cortico/thalamic input to SPNs, and 
thus the presynaptic M2/4 effects dominate over a pos­si­ble nicotinic effect 
(Assous, 2021; Ding et al., 2010). M1 receptors are expressed on both types 
of SPNs and on LTS, which would act in concert with the direct glutama-
tergic effects that thalamic afferents exert on both types of SPNs.
The ChINs interact in a network, and they tend to be synchronously active 
at low rates. The under­lying network mechanism appears to be that ChINs 

121    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
activate a subtype of GABAergic interneurons (partially the TH-­subtype; 
figure 4.12d; Dorst et al., 2020) via nicotinic receptors that provides strong 
inhibition of the local ChIN population. When they become active ­after the 
transient inhibition, they tend to fire close to each other, given the background 
of tonic discharge. The resulting synchronous bursting ­will be reinforced by the 
disynaptic inhibitory action. It also means that an excitatory input to all or part 
of the ChINs leads to a synchronous burst, followed by a pause in the entire 
network of cholinergic neurons.
The ChINs have a reciprocal relation to the activity of dopamine neu-
rons. When a burst in dopamine neurons occurs as with a salient stimulus 
or in a reward situation, the ChINs become ­silent for the duration of the 
dopamine burst (Raz et al., 1996; Goldberg & Reynolds, 2011). The exact 
mechanism of the silencing of ChINs is not fully understood, but ChINs 
have inhibitory D2 receptors that could contribute to this effect.
The silencing of ChINs is most likely impor­tant in the context of syn-
aptic plasticity in the following way. The tonic activation of ChINs and M4 
receptors on dSPNs ­under resting conditions leads to a reduced ability of 
­Table 4.1
ACh, DA, and GABA receptor expression on striatal neurons and terminals
dSPN
iSPN
FS
LTS
ChIN
Corticostriatal  
terminals
Thala-
mosttriatal  
terminals
Dopaminergic  
terminals
Metabotropic
M1
+
+
+
M2/M4
+
+
+S
+
+
+
D1
+
+
+
D2
+
+
+
+
+
GABAB
+*
+*
+
+
+
Ionotropic
nAChR
+
+
+
+
*Mainly presynaptic in the striatum (Lacey et al., 2005), GPe, and GPi/SNr.
Abbreviations: S, extrasynaptic. nAChR, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. + sign indicates the presence of a 
receptor subtype in a given type of neuron or presynaptic terminal.

122    Chapter 4
dopamine (via D1 receptors) to enhance the level of cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (AMP) and cellular effects farther downstream (figure 4.12e; Nair 
et al., 2015, 2019; Lindroos et al., 2018), being impor­tant in the context 
of synaptic plasticity. By transiently inhibiting the ChINs, and thereby the 
activation of M4 receptors, the dopamine effect on the D1 receptors ­will be 
markedly potentiated, and therefore ­there is the possibility of an induction of 
synaptic plasticity in the corticostriatal synapse (Bruce et al., 2019; Reynolds 
et al., 2022). The actions of M4 and D1 receptors are thus antagonistic at the 
molecular level in the corticostriatal synaptic transmission. The continuous 
activation of M4 receptors ­under resting conditions thus counteracts the 
induction of synaptic plasticity, which may well be an impor­tant function, 
together with the LTS effects discussed ­here, in not promoting plasticity and 
learning when not called for.
In Parkinson’s disease, the complex relation between the dopaminergic 
and cholinergic systems also becomes manifest. With a lack of dopamine, 
the cholinergic system appears to further enhance Parkinsonian symptoms, 
and in the pre-­DOPA era, muscarinic antagonists such as atropine ­were used 
as a medi­cation, but they had unfortunately prominent side effects. The 
un­balanced cholinergic drive may lead to an enhanced inhibition (M4) of 
corticostriatal excitation to the striatum, and a lack of inhibition of ChINs 
during salient or reward situations with a lack of dopamine bursts may also 
contribute to the symptoms.
In conclusion, ChINs provide a very dense network of axonal terminals 
within the entire striatum that is almost as dense as that of dopaminergic 
terminals. ChINs act through both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors and 
counteract some of the dopaminergic effects on synaptic plasticity. ­There 
is a reciprocal relation between the activity of SNc cells and ChINs; when 
dopamine neurons provide a burst, it leads to a pause in ChIN activity.
4.3.3  The Dopamine System Signals Salient Stimuli,  
Reward, or Lack of Reward
The dopamine system is ancient and the connectome in figure 4.13 of the 
afferents and efferents of the SNc/VTA applies surprisingly to both mam-
mals and lampreys, although they represent two phyloge­ne­tically extreme 

123    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
groups among vertebrates (Grillner & Robertson, 2016). Dopamine neurons 
receive input from the SC (salient stimuli), the lateral habenula, the pedun-
culopontine nucleus, and the cortex/pallium. The most prominent output 
from the SNc/VTA is to the striatum, but ­there is also a less dense dopami-
nergic supply to other structures of the basal ganglia, to downstream motor 
centers in the SC, and to locomotor command centers (Pérez-­Fernández 
et al., 2014, 2017; Ryczko et al., 2020). The latter aspects mean that the 
motor centers in the midbrain/brainstem ­will be primed by the dopamine 
activity before the motor manifestation of the basal ganglia has had time to 
become manifested. They ­will thus increase the excitability in ­these motor 
centers before further control from the basal ganglia becomes apparent. 
The dSPNs, LTS, and FS depend on D1 receptors, while iSPNs and ChINs 
express D2 receptors, as do the presynaptic terminals of corticocortical and 
thalamocortical axons and dopaminergic neurons (see ­tables 4.1 and 4.2).
Lateral pallium/cortex
Striatum
GPe
SNr/GPi
DA
SNc/VTA
STN
Tectum/SC
Motor programs
Sensory
information
D1 direct
MLR
DLR
“salience”
pathway
D2 indirect
PPN
LHb
Figure 4.13
The SNc connectome in lampreys and mammals. The efferent and afferent connectivities of the 
SNc is virtually identical in lampreys and mammals. Thus, the dopaminergic neurons within SNc 
proj­ect to the same structures in the basal ganglia as in mammals and the same midbrain motor 
centers. The input to SNc is similarly identical from the striatum, STN, cortex/pallium, PPN, and 
the lateral habenula. From Pérez-­Fernández et al. (2014).

124    Chapter 4
The dopamine system plays a very impor­tant role in transmitting the 
reaction to salient stimuli to the motor apparatus, but also the reaction to an 
expected or unexpected reward or the converse, the reaction to a predicted 
reward that did not occur (see figure 4.14). Dopamine neurons are tonically 
active at rest and become further activated by salient stimuli detected in the 
surroundings or in the reward situation, and conversely become depressed 
if an expected reward is not received.
The SNc particularly targets the sensorimotor part of the dorsal stria-
tum, the DLS in rodents, and the caudal part of the putamen, which corre-
sponds to the DLS in primates. This part of the striatum has an exceptionally 
high degree of dopamine innervation, and even a single SNc dopamine 
neuron in ­humans may support as much as more than a million synapses 
(Diederich et al., 2020). This finding presumably provides an explanation 
for why ­these neurons are particularly vulnerable in Parkinson’s disease due 
to the excessive energy demand on a single neuron.
Salient stimuli activate the SNc, and whenever a mouse engages in a 
bout of locomotor activity, it is preceded by a burst in the dopamine neurons 
(da Silva et al., 2018), which enhances the excitability in dSPNs broadly 
in the DLS through D1 receptors, while iSPNs are inhibited through D2 
receptors within the DLS (figure 4.14). This ­will contribute to the initia-
tion of the motor act, which ­will be determined by concurrent inputs from 
the cortex or thalamus that define the specifics of which striatal neurons 
­Table 4.2
Dopamine receptors expressed on neuronal  
subtypes within the basal ganglia
Striatum
GPe/STN
Substantia nigra
dSPN	 D1
Prototypic  D2
SNr  D1
iSPN	
D2
Arkypallidal ?
SNc  D2
FS	
D1
STN        D1/D5
LTS    D1
ChINs  D2
Note: Question mark ­after “Arkypallidal” means that the 
receptor subtype is unknown.

125    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
become activated and the motor act elicited through downstream cir­cuits. 
An optoge­ne­tic activation of dopamine neurons in SNc increases the likeli-
hood of a locomotor burst being initiated. In contrast, if dopamine neurons 
are activated during an already ongoing movement, ­there ­will be no effect 
on the movement. The timing of the SNc burst is thus impor­tant in relation 
to the initiation of movement. The global dopamine activation of DLS ­will 
affect a large part of the striatum, while the specific input from the cortex/
thalamus determines which specific module within the striatum is activated, 
and what movement is produced. Enhanced activity in the ChIN popula-
tion may also signal the transition to a locomotor state (Howe et al., 2019).
­There is also a form of learning that occurs within the DLS that relates 
to habits (as discussed next); that is, networks producing specific patterns 
D1
D2
Cortex
SPNs
_
+
Direct
pathway
Indirect
pathway
Promote
action
Suppress
action
Reinforce
DA
D1
D2
Cortex
SPNs
Net
disfac
Net
disinh
Direct
pathway
Indirect 
pathway
Promote
action
Suppress
action
DA
Dopamine activity
Reward
+
_
Absence of expected reward
A
B
Figure 4.14
The effects of enhanced or decreased dopamine activity on the direct and indirect pathways 
through the basal ganglia. A. Enhanced dopamine activity excites the striatal projection neurons of 
the direct pathway that express dopamine receptors of the D1 subtype, while it inhibits ­those of the 
indirect pathway through their D2 receptors. B. Illustrates the opposite situation, with decreased 
dopamine activity that removes excitation from the direct pathway and reduces the inhibition of 
the indirect pathway, and thereby it indirectly increases the net excitation of SNr and the resulting 
inhibition of downstream motor centers.

126    Chapter 4
of motor coordination that are stored within the DLS. Whenever they are 
formed, the network’s under­lying habits are difficult to change and consid-
ered as almost permanent. They may relate to specific patterns of coordina-
tion that we do in our daily life when we open the door to the basement, 
for instance.
The dopamine neurons in the SNc and VTA are not a homogenous 
group, and ­there are seven distinct genet­ically determined subtypes of dopa-
mine neurons in the VTA/SNc that have specific projection patterns (Tiklova 
et al., 2019) and can be activated ­under vari­ous situations. Some dopamine 
neurons coexpress glutamate, and ­others γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
(Granger et al., 2017; Papathanou et al., 2018; von Twickel et al., 2019), 
which may complement the action of dopamine. VTA neurons respond in 
reward situations, but also to the absence of a predicted reward. VTA neurons 
are clustered into subgroups responding to dif­fer­ent sensory or cognitive 
stimuli in addition to reward (Engelhard et al., 2019). Certain neurons also 
respond to aversive stimuli. The SNc neurons respond to salient stimuli, but 
also to rewards. Several types of dopamine neurons located within the VTA 
innervate the DMS, the ventral striatum, and the frontal lobe. The DMS 
receives input from the prefrontal lobe and the association areas of the cortex 
and is engaged in goal-­directed be­hav­ior (see section 4.4.4.1), in which the 
be­hav­ior is more adaptable, as if a reward occurs during a movement in one 
direction for a while, and some time ­later, a movement in a dif­fer­ent direction 
­will be rewarded. Fi­nally, the ventral striatum receives input from the limbic 
system and hippocampus.
4.3.4  The 5-­HT System Provides an Evolutionarily Conserved  
Projection to the Dorsal Striatum and Contributes to Impulse Control
The serotonergic (5-­HT) dorsal raphe proj­ects to the striatum, but the inner-
vation is less dense than that of the dopamine system. The 5-­HT system is 
conserved from lampreys to primates (Grillner & Robertson, 2016) and 
appears to function in conjunction with the dopamine system. The 5-­HT 
neurons are activated at the initiation of be­hav­ior and in a reward situation 
(as dopamine) and tend to remain active throughout the entire be­hav­ior, 
whereas the dopamine neurons tend to elicit short initial bursts before and 

127    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
at the onset of be­hav­ior. In a behavioral choice situation, increased activity 
of 5-­HT neurons ­will lead to a maintained attempt to wait for a potential 
reward rather than abandoning a test session (Miyazaki et al., 2014; Fonseca 
et al., 2015; Iigaya et al., 2018). This can be regarded as improved impulse 
control, a very impor­tant quality in everyday life (not least for ­humans).
4.4  INTEGRATED FUNCTION OF THE BASAL GANGLIA
4.4.1  The GPe and the STN Control Activity in the SNr/GPi
From the modulator systems of dopamine and 5-­HT, we ­will now discuss 
the roles of two critical comparments of the basal ganglia—­the intrinsic 
nuclei of GPe and STN. The GPe represents the second-­largest part of the 
basal ganglia ­after the striatum but has only 1.7 ­percent of the cells of the rat 
striatum. The STN is even smaller, with only 0.5 ­percent of the number of 
striatal cells (Oorschot, 1996). Therefore, the STN that excites the SNr/GPi 
inhibits movement, and conversely, lesions in the STN can cause involuntary 
movement. The STN has mainly projection neurons and is divided into 
three parts: a motor part with input from the cortical motor areas targeting 
the SNr/GPi and concerned with the control of limb and eye movements, 
a limbic part, and a cognitive part with input from the limbic and cogni-
tive areas, respectively (DeLong et al., 1985; Steiner et al., 2019; Haynes & 
Haber, 2013; Grillner et al., 2020). The cognitive part of STN targets the 
most medial part of the SNr/GPi that is also the target of the DMS and the 
ventral pallidum. Deep brain stimulation as a treatment of the symptoms 
of Parkinson’s disease often target the STN, and it is then critical that the 
correct compartment of the STN is stimulated (Bergman et al., 1990, 1994); 
if not, ­there can be unfortunate emotional or cognitive side effects of the 
stimulation (as discussed further ­later in this chapter).
The neurons within both the STN and GPe are all rhythmically active 
at rest, which means that they have the advantage that their activity can be 
modulated in both enhanced and depressed directions. This is impor­tant 
when judging the mode of operation of ­these nuclei. The most common 
cell group in GPe is the GABAergic prototypic neurons (expressing Nkx2.1, 

128    Chapter 4
Lhx6, and often PV) that are part of the indirect pathway. The connectivity 
between neurons within the GPe and STN is encapsulated in figure 4.15. 
When the iSPNs become activated, they inhibit the prototypic cells, which 
reduce the inhibition exerted on the tonically active neurons within the 
SNr/GPi (disinhibition), which in turn increases their firing rate and further 
inhibits downstream motor centers (figure 4.16). Since the prototypic cells 
also inhibit the excitatory cells in the STN, and as part of the indirect loop, 
this disinhibition of STN, also results in an enhancement of SNr/GPi activ-
ity. Thus, the direct action of the prototypic cells on the SNr/GPi and the 
indirect action via the STN complement each other (figure 4.16).
What is counterintuitive, however, is that the STN excite the prototypic 
cells, which would lead to inhibition of the SNr and a promotion of action. 
However, this may relate to an intricate balance between the prototypic 
neurons and STN and short-­term plasticity in the synapses (Lindahl et al., 
2013). The gain in this STN-­prototypic connection is reduced by dopa-
mine and is increased in Parkinsonian experimental models, which may be 
impor­tant for the development of Parkinsonian symptoms like tremor (see 
section 4.5).
Thalamus
Cortex
iSPNs
PPN
Striatum
GPe
GPi/SNr
STN
arky
“stop cells”
proto
DA
Indirect
pathway
Hyperdirect
pathway
dSPNs IN
GABA
Glutamate
pf
(thalamus)
Figure 4.15
Prototypic and arkypallidal GPe neurons. Schematic showing the connectivity of the prototypic 
and arkypallidal “stop cells” in GPe. Note that the arkypallidal cells proj­ect back to all the sub-
populations of striatal cells.

129    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
The second main type of GPe neuron is the arkypallidal neuron (FoxP2), 
which is spontaneously active at a low rate and inhibited by the proto-
typic cells (figures 4.15 and 4.16). When the indirect pathway is activated, 
GPe neurons ­will thus become disinhibited. The arkypallidal neurons are 
GABAergic and proj­ect back to the striatum with a massive and extensive 
network of terminals. A direct projection from the motor cortex provides a 
very efficient activation of the arkypallidal neurons, and they become acti-
vated behaviorally as the mouse terminates an action (Karube et al., 2019; 
Mallet et al., 2012, 2016; Cui et al., 2021; Abecassis et al., 2020; Ketzef & 
Silberberg, 2021). They are, therefore, referred to as “stop cells,” and they 
inhibit parts of the striatum very efficiently. When the direct pathway is 
Direct pathway
action
Indirect pathway
depression
Hyperdirect pathway
stop
Cortex
dSPN
SNr
Motor
target
Cortex
iSPN
SNr
Motor
target
Net excitation
(disinhibition)
Net inhibition
Net inhibition
Cortex
STN
SNr
Motor
target
GPe
(proto)
+
+
+
+
_
_
_
_
_
_
GPe
(arky)
(stop cells)
Cortex
+
GPe
(arky)
(stop cells)
striatum
(d/iSPN)
Inhibit striatum
Figure 4.16
The direct, indirect, and hyperdirect pathways. Striatal projection neurons of the direct pathway 
(dSPNs) directly target the output level (SNr) and enhance the excitability of brainstem motor 
targets through disinhibition and thus promote action. SPNs of the indirect pathway (iSPNs) ­will 
inhibit the spontaneously active GPe, which in turn disinhibit SNr, thus increasing the inhibition of 
downstream motor targets. The hyperdirect pathway proj­ects to the glutamatergic STN, which in 
turn targets SNr, which ­will then inhibit the motor targets. To the right is shown the pathway from 
the cortex to the stop cells in GPe that proj­ects back broadly to the striatum and act to inhibit 
striatal cir­cuits.

130    Chapter 4
activated, which promotes action, the stop cells instead become inhibited 
from the axons of dSPNs, which agrees well with their role to counteract 
action (Ketzef & Silberberg, 2021).
The STN excites SNr/GPi neurons, and enhanced STN activity ­will 
thus cause further inhibition of downstream motor centers. STN neurons 
receive excitation from both the thalamic PF nucleus and strong activation 
from the motor cortex (see figure 4.15). The latter is part of the pathway 
from the cortex via the STN to the SNr/GPi, referred to as the “hyperdirect 
pathway” (Nambu et al., 1996, 2002). STN neurons also excite the stop cells 
(arkypallidal neurons; Ketzef & Silberberg, 2021). This action is synergistic 
with that of the hyperdirect pathway, but on the other hand, the action of 
STN on the prototypic cells ­will inhibit SNr neurons (!). The STN neurons 
and the prototypic cells target the so­ma of SNr neurons, which means that 
they directly affect the spike-­initiation zone of SNr neurons through direct 
excitation or disinhibition, and thus emphasizes the priority of inhibition 
of action. In contrast, the inhibitory synapses of dSPNs that mediate action 
are located on the distal dendrites of SNr neurons (Smith & Bolam, 1991).
The GPe also contains a separate set of neurons that has input from the 
dSPNs of the DMS. ­These neurons have an exclusive target: the PF nucleus 
of thalamus that is outside the basal ganglia, in contrast to other structures 
that target the SNr/GPi and STN. The GPe-­PF neurons proj­ect back to both 
the striatum and cortex—­thereby bypassing the ordinary output route of the 
basal ganglia (Lilascharoen et al., 2021) and conveying information back to 
­these structures (figure 4.15). The neurons within the GPe-­PF pathway are 
impor­tant for conveying information regarding goal-­directed be­hav­ior and 
when a rewarded be­hav­ior is switched to another goal, as well as the capacity 
to switch to another action outcome.
In summary, the interactions among the components of the pathways 
considered ­here are shown in figure 4.16. The direct pathway is the only one 
that promotes action, while the other three ­will in dif­fer­ent ways counteract 
action or balance the action pathway. This emphasizes the importance of 
controlling the initiation of action and the need for precise control of the 
termination of action and ascertaining that unplanned movements ­will not 
be released through the basal ganglia circuitry.

131    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
4.4.2  The Dorsolateral and Dorsomedial Striatum: Separate Roles
The DLS is generally described as the somatomotor part of the striatum 
with input from somatosensory and motor areas of the neocortex involved 
in the control of movements. In contrast, the DMS part is more related 
to goal-­directed be­hav­ior of the cognitive/limbic nature with input from 
the visual and association areas of the cortex, sometimes referred to as the 
“associative branch” of the dorsal striatum. The two areas, although they 
contain the same general types of SPNs and interneurons, express dif­fer­ent 
molecular markers. In the DMS, Crym AS is found, while the DLS instead 
expresses GPR155 (Märtin et al., 2019), which may relate to the functional 
role of DMS and DLS and their input from separate parts of the cortex. The 
number of neurons in the dorsal striatum in one hemi­sphere is calculated 
to be 850,000 in the mouse (1,350,000 in the rat), and somewhat less than 
half of ­these belong to the DLS. The dividing line between the population of 
DLS and DMS is rather distinct in the spatio-­molecular map of the striatum.
The dif­fer­ent parts of the DLS receive convergent input from the motor 
and somatosensory areas of the cortex, but separately in a topographic man-
ner from the forelimb, trunk, hindlimb, and orofacial areas (see figure 4.8b), 
which then become represented in the compartments within the DLS and 
farther downstream in specific sections of the SNr and GPe. The DLS most 
likely controls movements that are part of the standard repertoire of innate 
movements such as turning, reaching, and similar motor patterns. In addi-
tion, learned movements referred to as “habits” are controlled from the DLS. 
­These are learned movements adapted to a specific situation, such as opening 
a special door or learning how to perform a motor pattern in a sport like 
hitting a serve in tennis. The role of DMS, the associate part of the striatum, 
relates to goal-­directed and more flexible patterns of be­hav­ior that can be 
modified due to changing conditions and depend on input from sensory 
associate parts of the cortex and the limbic system (see figure 4.8).
4.4.3  Habits and Goal-­Directed Be­hav­ior in Primates:  
Striatal Pro­cessing
Now, let us consider the integrated action of the basal ganglia in relation to 
learned motor patterns, in par­tic­u­lar what was shown in the very informative 

132    Chapter 4
experiments performed by Kim and Hikosaka (2015). The researchers 
trained monkeys to associate a few of 100 fractal visual patterns, unknown 
to them initially, with a reward. They responded by making a saccadic eye 
movement ­toward the fractal pattern associated with a reward. When the 
rewarded pattern came up, dSPNs would fire and downstream SNr neurons 
would become inhibited, leading to disinhibition of the SC (figure 4.17). 
Conversely, if a nonrewarded fractal pattern ­were presented, the indirect 
pathway would be activated. They showed that the monkeys could remem-
ber the rewarded specific fractal patterns over many months. This depended 
on neurons in the caudal part of the tail of the caudate nucleus, correspond-
ing to the caudal extension of the rodent striatum, caudal to the DLS, which 
GPe(c)
CDt
SC
Association
cortex
Visual/temp.
cortex
Rostral 
basal ganglia
Dopamine neurons
Caudal
basal ganglia
Voluntary
behavior
Automatic 
behavior
Gaze orienting (saccades)
Quick learning
Short-term memory
Flexible value
Slow learning
Long-term memory
Stable value
CDh
GPe(r)
SNc
(r-v-m)
SNr
(r-v-m)
SNr
(c-d-l)
SNc
(c-d-l)
Figure 4.17
Parallel pathways for goal-­directed be­hav­ior conveyed via the head of the caudate nucleus 
(CDh) and habitual be­hav­ior produced through the tail of the caudate nucleus (CDt). The CDt 
and CDh receive input from dif­fer­ent cortical regions, and both target the SC to elicit saccadic 
eye movements, although through separate channels and via separate output neurons of the 
basal ganglia in SNr. Moreover, separate parts of the SNc supply the two cir­cuits. Abbreviations: 
CDh, head of the caudate nucleus; CDt, tail of the caudate nucleus; c-­d-­l, caudal-­dorsal-­lateral; 
GPe(c), caudal part of GPe; GPe(r), rostral part of GPe; r-­v-­m, rostral-­ventral-­medial. Modified 
and redrawn, with permission, from Kim and Hikosaka (2015).

133    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
receives input from visual and auditory areas. ­These caudate neurons proj­ect 
to the lateral part of SNr.
If the monkey ­were subjected to a situation in which the reward instead 
changed ­after a period of time, it had to learn to change strategy and adapt 
to the new situation. This goal-­directed be­hav­ior is instead mediated by 
neurons in the head of the caudate nucleus corresponding to the DMS in 
rodents (figure 4.17), which proj­ect to SNr neurons in the medial part of the 
SNr. Note that dif­fer­ent parts of the caudate nucleus are involved in habitual 
versus goal-­directed be­hav­ior, as are dif­fer­ent parts of the SNr. Moreover, 
dif­fer­ent sets of dopamine neurons are engaged in the two conditions.
One impor­tant contribution of the basal ganglia circuitry is to facilitate 
the ability to combine individual movements into a sequence in which the 
vari­ous components join each other in a seamless fashion. Parkinsonian 
patients lose this ability to integrate the movements into one sequence. 
Instead, they have to perform each movement one at a time. For instance, 
if asked to pick up an apple on the floor and place it on a shelf in front of 
her/him, the patient has to bend down, grasp the apple, straighten up again, 
take a step forward, reach out with the hand, and place the apple on the shelf 
(Johnels et al., 2001). Thus, only one motor program can be performed at 
a time, whereas a healthy individual ­will perform the sequence in an inte-
grated ­whole. Such a sequence is often referred to as “a chunk” or “chunking” 
(Graybiel, 1998; Graybiel & Grafton, 2015).
4.4.4  Habits and Goal-­Directed Be­hav­ior in Rodents:  
Contribution of DMS and DLS
To unravel the intrinsic function of the striatum, it is critical to rec­ord neu-
rons during ongoing be­hav­ior. Most studies, ­whether in primates or rodents, 
have investigated this activity during specific learned be­hav­iors, followed 
by rewards, to obtain reproducible conditions. In much fewer studies, the 
motor pattern is self-­induced and remains an open field. The latter type of 
movements is also impor­tant for understanding how standard movements 
such as locomotion, steering, and orofacial movements are initiated. Many 
studies, particularly older ones, simply classify the neurons located in the 

134    Chapter 4
dorsal striatum and active during a certain be­hav­ior just as striatal neurons 
or putative SPNs and FS. More recent studies separate striatal neurons into 
iSPNs and dSPNs, and the most complete studies also mention ­whether 
they are located in the DMS or DLS. Given the recent realization that even 
neurons in the DLS with input from the motor cortex have subareas for 
trunk, hindlimb and forelimb, and orofacial areas, a more detailed localiza-
tion ­will be impor­tant in the ­future. Next, I ­will give a few examples from 
the DLS and DMS.
Jin et al. (2014) recorded neurons in the striatum of mice that learned to 
rapidly perform five lever presses in sequence to receive a reward. Presumed 
SPNs could be subdivided into three types that respond when the sequence 
started, ­stopped, or had sustained activity during the “chunk” or conversely 
sustained inhibition. The same subdivision occurred with a similar but not 
identical distribution, also in the SNr and GPe. They further subdivided 
SPNs into the two subtypes. The dSPNs could be start/stop subtypes or have 
sustained activity, whereas the iSPNs ­were often active at start/stop, but many 
became inhibited and few had sustained activity. Taken together, it suggests 
that dSPNs become active during the be­hav­ior or in the transition from inac-
tivity to action and back. The iSPNs are also active, particularly at the onset, 
but many are inhibited during the movement. The results agree with the view 
that dSPNs promote action and iSPNs inhibit action. The reservation is that 
we have no knowledge of where in the striatum ­these neurons ­were located.
In a subsequent study by Tecuapetla et al. (2016), the activity of dSPNs 
and iSPNs in the DLS was manipulated optoge­ne­tically, while the mice per-
formed a lever-­pressing sequence with eight presses before getting the reward. 
When ­either type of SPNs ­were activated or inhibited before the initiation 
of the first lever press, the initiation was delayed. The more intense the light, 
the longer the delay would be. This means that an un­balanced and unspe-
cific activation or inhibition of ­either type of SPNs within the DLS led to a 
marked delay in the onset of action. Regarding the iSPNs, at high intensity, 
the initiation of movement would be aborted. The optoge­ne­tic interference in 
DLS, however, ­will affect a heterogenous group of SPNs, of which some ­were 
presumably involved in the normal initiation of the be­hav­ior. In contrast, 
activation of dSPNs during ongoing be­hav­ior increased the number of lever 

135    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
pressings, while iSPNs reduced the lever-­pressing or abolished the sequence 
altogether. Inhibition of dSPNs could lead to a slowing of the lever pressing.
Another example is the experiments by the Ölveczsky laboratory (Kawai 
et al., 2015; Wolff et al., 2022; Dhawale et al., 2021). They trained rats to 
press a lever twice at a fixed interval of 700 ms to receive a reward, a task that 
is demanding for them. A rat could learn the task only if its motor cortex 
was intact. However, if the motor cortex and a large area of the surrounding 
frontal lobe became lesioned ­after a task was learned, the rodent could still 
perform the task perfectly well at the first attempt ­after the lesion. Clearly, the 
motor cortex was needed in the learning phase, but not for the execution of 
the learned motor pattern. If, however, the DLS itself was lesioned, the animal 
was unable to perform the task. In contrast, if the DMS was lesioned, ­there 
was no effect on the per­for­mance of the movement. Similarly, if the thalamo-­
striatal PF nucleus, providing part of the thalamo-­striatal input to DLS, was 
lesioned, the movement could not be performed. Thus, the PF and DLS are 
required for the execution of this learned motor task ­under all conditions, but 
the motor cortex is needed only during learning.
The single lever press is like a reaching movement, and in the learning 
phase, the rodent starts to perform two lever presses, but that takes too long. 
During the training phase, the rat gradually develops a movement trajectory 
with specific kinematics, initially variable but subsequently crystallized to 
a fixed movement pattern to reach the 700-ms boundary. To investigate if 
neurons within the DLS contribute to the timing of aspects of the movement, 
populations of SPNs ­were recorded during the be­hav­ior. It could be shown 
that dif­fer­ent groups of SPNs ­were active in relation to specific aspects of the 
movement trajectory that ­were required to perform the double-­lever press 
within 700 ms. The SPN discharge pattern when learned does not change if 
the motor cortex is inactivated. This indicates that the learned motor pattern 
is stored within the DLS and specifies the detailed kinematic structure of the 
movement.
­After the DLS or the thalamic PF nucleus ­were lesioned, the rat 
attempted to perform the motor pattern that was previously rewarded but 
was now only able to generate the initial movement pattern produced before 
the training with single-­lever pressing. Even ­after intense training, the rat 

136    Chapter 4
was unable to recover the complex learned motor pattern without ­either the 
DLS or the PF. This ­simple lever pressing resembles reaching and is most 
likely coordinated by a subset of neurons at the medullary level (Ruder et al., 
2021; see also chapter 2 of this book).
­There was an early view that when learning a task, the DMS was initially 
involved and information was ­later transferred to the DLS, becoming a 
habit. It is now shown that in the initial learning phase, both the DLS and 
DMS are involved, but the pattern of SPN activity differs in that more neu-
rons in the DMS become inhibited, while most neurons in the DLS become 
excited. The pattern of activity in the DLS is then crystalized to neurons that 
are active at start and stop, during sustained activity during the sequence of 
lever presses, and to neurons that instead become suppressed. ­After learning, 
the pattern of activity in the DLS and DMS remains very similar, but not 
identical (Vandaele et al., 2019).
4.4.4.1  Goal-­directed be­hav­ior in rodents
When recording SPNs in the DMS in a push-­pull paradigm, the reward 
occurred in a probabilistic way and could change with the push-­pull direc-
tion. Nonomura et al. (2018) (see also figure 4.18) reported that dif­fer­ent 
populations of SPNs ­were activated in the push or pull direction, respec-
tively. Moreover, optoge­ne­tically identified dSPNs (electrophysiology) that 
­were active during a pull movement continued firing when the reward was 
delivered but ­stopped immediately if no reward appeared. Conversely, iSPNs 
had some initial activity when the movement started, followed by no activ-
ity. When the reward signal appeared, they had low activity, but with no 
reward, ­there was instead a marked increase. Thus, dSPNs encoded reward 
outcomes, whereas iSPNs encoded a nonreward outcome. ­After a series of 
mostly no rewards, the rodent is assumed to change strategy from push to 
pull, or vice versa. The enhanced activity in dSPNs ­after the reward predicts 
that the rodent ­will maintain the same strategy as before, whereas the activity 
in iSPNs with enhanced activity in the case of a nonreward—­signals that 
it may be time to change strategy. A partial explanation of this asymmetry 
may be related to the effect of dopamine, which in the reward situation ­will 
boost dSPNs through the activation of D1 receptors, whereas the iSPNs in 

137    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
the nonreward situation become disinhibited through lack of activation of 
the inhibitory D2 receptors.
Weglage et al. (2021) reported a somewhat similar experimental situa-
tion, but with dif­fer­ent results. The mouse had to make a choice in the center 
port (with a nose-­poke) and was then ­free to choose one of the two side 
ports with a probabilistic chance to be rewarded (similar to the experiments 
SNr/GPi
Cortex
SNc
Striatum
push
pull
iSPN
dSPN
dSPN
iSPN
Thalamus
Reward
Reward
No reward
No reward
dSPN
iSPN
Signals
reward
Actual
reward
0
0
0
0
GO
Signals
reward
Actual
reward
GO
A
B
C
Spikes/s
Spikes/s
1.5 s
0.5
1.0
1.5 s
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.5
5
15
5
10
GPe
GPe
 STN
 STN
Figure 4.18
The activity of striatal projection neurons of the direct and indirect pathways during a goal-­directed 
push-­pull task. A. The activity pattern of a direct pathway striatal projection neuron (dSPN) during 
a push-­pull task. The red trace shows a correct response (reward), and the blue trace an incorrect 
response (no reward). Upon the GO signal, the neuron becomes activated and remains so ­until a 
sound signal of ­whether the response ­will lead to a reward. The ­actual reward occurs with a further 
delay. Note that ­after the reward signal, the level of activity remains high, while when ­there is no 
reward, the activity drops immediately. Redrawn from traces in figure 2F in Nonomura et al. (2018). 
B. The corresponding data for an indirect pathway neuron (iSPN). Note that directly ­after the GO 
signal, ­there is a marked increase of activity that rapidly dies down, while ­after the no reward signal, 
­there is a marked increase from baseline. Redrawn from traces in figure 2K in Nonomura et al. 
(2018). C. Simplified scheme of the basal ganglia with input from the cortex, thalamus, and SNc to 
the striatum. The intrinsic nuclei of the indirect pathway are indicated. The synaptic connectivity is 
indicated in blue for inhibitory neurons and red for excitatory neurons (STN, cortex, and thalamus). 
Two separate populations of dSPNs and iSPNs control the push and pull motions, respectively. The 
action is mediated by the basal ganglia output nuclei SNr and GPi to the downstream motor cir­cuits.

138    Chapter 4
by Nonomaru et al. 2018). The movements ­were monitored, as well as the 
activity in dSPNs, iSPNs from the matrix area, and SPNs from the strio-
somal area, through Ca2+ imaging and expression of GCaMP6. The activity 
was recorded through a head-­mounted microscope with the lens within the 
DMS. They concluded that dSPNs, iSPNs, and SPNs from the striosomal 
area all share a similarly complete repre­sen­ta­tion of the entire action space, 
including task-­ and phase-­specific signals of action values and choices. The 
three types of neurons responded in a very similar way. The fact that the strio-
somal SPN activity is similar is very surprising, given that they are thought 
to report the evaluation and control of dopamine neurons. ­These results 
contrast with ­those of Nonomura et al. (2018), which show that dSPNs 
and iSPNs convey separate types of specific information. The experimental 
situation is somewhat dif­fer­ent (nose-­poke versus push-­pull actions), and 
the GCaMP6 recordings with a lens inserted in the brain instead of electro-
physiological recordings. Somehow the DMS neurons recorded in the two 
experimental situations responded in a very dif­fer­ent way, for unknown 
reasons perhaps related to the experimental design.
In conclusion, enhanced activity of the dSPNs within the DLS relates 
to the initiation and maintenance of the movement, while the iSPNs may 
be active initially but then drop out. In the DMS, the activity is more 
complex, presumably related to the goal-­directed and flexible nature of the 
response pattern. In some settings, the dSPNs signal maintained activity 
­after a reward had been received and a maintained strategy, while iSPNs 
instead increase their activity ­after the “no reward” signal, indicating a change 
of strategy.
4.4.5  Value-­Based Evaluation of Action through the Control  
of Dopamine Activity
Mammals, including ­humans, reach perfection through training by combin-
ing microcircuits to develop entirely new motor programs. This includes a 
progressive improvement, ­whether we learn to write individual letters or 
perform whole-­body movements like learning to serve in tennis. From a high 
variability of the initial attempts, we perfect the movements so they become 
very reproducible. In ­doing so, we have formed an intrinsic template for 

139    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
the motor coordination, and in this context, the basal ganglia take central 
importance. This requires that we evaluate the vari­ous ­trials as better or 
worse, and ­after a few or many attempts, the motor program has crystalized. 
The evaluation is mediated to the basal ganglia via the dopamine neurons—­
when bursting, a reward is signaled that can promote the motor pattern just 
performed (as discussed next). Reduced dopamine activity instead has the 
opposite effect. Most likely, the 5-­HT system also contributes (Miyazaki 
et al., 2014). For movement control, the DLS and the SNc take center stage.
The striatum has two compartments (figure 4.3c), as noted ­earlier. 
The matrix part deals with the control of action, and the striosomal part is 
engaged in the control of the level of activity in the dopamine neurons in 
the SNc and VTA (figure 4.19a). The striosomes are thought to provide a 
value-­based motivational signal related to reward, lack of expected reward, 
aversive signals, or saliency, and they serve to evaluate how successful a move-
ment has been (Crittenden et al., 2017). It receives input from parts of the 
pregenual anterior cingulate cortex, caudate orbitofrontal cortex, and the 
thalamic intralaminar nucleus, but not from the large PF nucleus (Amemori 
et al., 2021). Microstimulation of ­these regions induced pessimistic decision-­
making by the monkeys, supporting the idea that the focal activation of 
­these regions induces an anxietylike state that leads to an activation of the 
striosomes. This is in accordance with the fact that activation of striosomes 
inhibits the dopamine neurons (figure 4.19). Ontoge­ne­tically, the striosomes 
represent the first part of the striatum to develop, and striosomes are evo-
lutionarily conserved from lampreys to mammals (Stephenson-­Jones et al., 
2013; Grillner & Robertson, 2016).
The striosomes, as well as many other structures, influence the level of 
activity in the dopamine neurons (figure 4.19b) as follows:
•	
The dSPNs in the striosomes inhibit dopamine neurons in the SNc.
•	
The iSPNs in the striosomes proj­ect to a subset of spontaneously active 
glutamatergic GPi neurons that target the lateral habenula (LHb) and 
are referred to as “habenula projecting GP neurons” (GPh; Stephenson-­
Jones et al., 2013, 2016). A subpopulation of LHb neurons proj­ects 
directly to dopamine neurons in the SNc, but mainly through an 

140    Chapter 4
inhibitory relay (RMTg). Another LHb subpopulation target 5-­HT 
neurons in the raphe nucleus, also through RMTg. An increased LHb 
activity ­will thus reduce the dopamine and 5-­HT activity, but a silenc-
ing of the LHb ­will instead result in an increased level of dopamine 
activity—­that is, a reward (Hu et al., 2020).
•	
Neurons in the lateral hypothalamus signal aversive stimuli and activate 
LHb neurons with an inhibitory impact on the dopamine neurons (Laz-
aridis et al., 2019; Lecca et al., 2017).
Cortex
thalamus
Striosomes
matrix
GPh
LHb
DA
DP
GPe
STRIATUM
Cortex
Thalamus
Evaluation
MLR
tectum/sup coll
Motion
STN
Thalamus
Thalamus
RMTg
DP
GPi
SNr
Cortex
dSPN
iSPN
dSPN
iSPN
DA
GPh
LHb
Cortex/thalamus
LHyp
Striosomes
Cortex
Sup coll
PPN
A
B
Reward
absence of 
expected reward
aversion
Figure 4.19
Overview of the basal ganglia/habenular cir­cuits under­lying the control of motion and evaluation. 
A. The lower motion cir­cuit corresponds to the cir­cuits detailed in figure 4.5. The dSPNs in the 
matrix compartment target the GPi and SNr, as well as brainstem motor centers, and send a 
collateral response back to the thalamus (the lower part of the diagram). Also indicated is the 
indirect pathway via the GPe and STN. The evaluation cir­cuit, in the upper part of the diagram, 
shows the lateral habenula (LHb), which targets the dopamine (DA) neurons both directly and 
indirectly via the GABAergic rostromedial tegmental nucleus (RMTg). The LHb receives input 
from the glutamatergic habenula-­projecting globus pallidus (GPh). The GPh receives excita-
tion from the cortex and thalamus, whereas it receives inhibition from iSPNs in the striosome 
compartment. Dopamine (DA) neurons are inhibited by striosomal dSPNs and send projections 
to the mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR) and optic tectum/SC (sup coll). The color code 
is blue for GABAergic, red for glutamatergic, and green for dopaminergic neurons. B. Neural 
mechanisms affecting the DA neurons. Same abbreviations as in A, except for PPN, peduncu-
lopontine nucleus, and LHyp, lateral hypothalamus.

141    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
•	
The tectum/SC mediates salient stimuli to the dopamine neurons in 
SNc (Comoli et al., 2003; Pérez-­Fernández et al., 2017).
•	
The PPN, with input from the SNr and many other structures, target 
the SNc.
•	
Dopamine neurons in the SNc receive input from the cortex.
This list tells us that reward, disappointment, and aversive stimuli are 
being transmitted via the dopamine cells and can originate from many parts 
of the ner­vous system. Moreover, if it should affect learning, the signal needs 
to be transmitted quickly to the neural structures that possibly ­will be modi-
fied through learning.
As discussed previously, the input from the limbic cortex ­will activate 
the striosomes that affect dopamine neurons directly, but also the GPh and 
the LHb and then the dopamine neurons. This is most likely of par­tic­u­
lar importance for the evaluation pro­cess (Stephenson-­Jones et al., 2012b, 
2013, 2016; Lecca et al., 2017; Lazaridis et al., 2019; Amemori et al., 2021). 
The striosomes exert direct inhibition of the dopamine neurons and via 
another part inhibit GPh, which ­will result in disinhibition of the LHb. The 
net result in this case is also inhibition of the dopamine neurons. At rest, 
the GPh, LHb, and dopamine neurons are spontaneously active so that they 
can be modulated to ­either increase or decrease the level of activity. The net 
effect of activation of the striosomes from the limbic cortex would thus be 
reduced activity of the dopamine neurons, such as occurs in an unsatisfac-
tory movement. However, both the GPh and LHb receive external input 
from the cortex, and the LHb from the lateral hypothalamus that can further 
affect the dopamine neurons and even counteract the striosome net effect. 
The activation of striosomes has been considered as part of a “pessimistic 
decision-­making network in primates” consisting of the frontal cortex and 
striosomes (Amemori et al., 2021). For a successful life, ­whether we are talk-
ing about rodents or ­humans, a critical evaluation of the surrounding world 
may be more impor­tant than being overly optimistic.
However, the dopamine neurons also receive a power­ful excitatory input 
from the tectum/SC, through which salient visual or auditory stimuli acti-
vate dopamine neurons in the SNc (Pérez-­Fernández et al., 2017; Comoli 

142    Chapter 4
et al., 2003). A study by da Silva et al. (2018) has shown that when a mouse 
initiates a bout of locomotor activity, it is practically always preceded by a 
burst of dopamine activity, perhaps initiated by a salient stimulus that has 
created interest in exploring the origin of the stimulus. Salient stimuli, as 
well as a reward, can activate neurons in the SNc that innervate the DLS. For 
the VTA, the reward aspect may be more prominent. It affects the DMS, the 
ventral striatum, and the prefrontal cortex. This can occur through the exci-
tation of dopamine neurons directly from the cortex, PPN, and other struc-
tures or inhibition of the LHb, thereby disinhibiting dopamine neurons. The 
information conveyed to the dopamine neurons should be value-­based and 
relevant for ­either a reward or the converse, absence of an expected reward.
4.4.6  Reinforcement Learning and Synaptic Plasticity
A common view is that the basal ganglia contribute to motor learning through 
reinforcement learning. In the context of the basal ganglia, for instance, a 
command from the motor cortex can activate a subset of neurons in the stria-
tum that is then further conveyed to downstream motor centers, producing 
a movement such as a tennis serve. The success is evaluated by cir­cuits in the 
limbic cortex and pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (as discussed previously) 
that can control the level of activity in dopamine neurons. If the result was 
evaluated as successful, the precise neural circuitry used to elicit the move-
ment, such as a direct pathway (see figure 4.19a), is thought to be reinforced 
through long-­term potentiation (LTP) by the dopamine innervation of the 
matrix compartment. If the coordination is instead judged as unsatisfactory 
(striosomes), the dopamine activity is inhibited, which in turn may promote a 
modification of the striatal circuitry employed through long-­term depression 
(LTD). The dopamine signal is sometimes referred to as the “critic,” echoing 
the jargon used in the context of robot control.
The dopamine signal can act on all sites within the striatum in which 
dopamine receptors are expressed, but it ­will influence the cir­cuits active at 
the very moment concerned. One specific site often considered is the cortico-­
striatal synapses of the dSPNs and iSPNs, through which cortex exerts its 
action. If a cortical command is evaluated as successful, it ­will be followed ­after 
a very short interval by a dopamine burst that ­will facilitate this synapse (LTP), 

143    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
particularly if paralleled by an inhibition of the resting cholinergic activity by a 
pause in the ChIN activity. The cholinergic M4 receptor activation counteracts 
the potentiating effect of dopamine via D1 receptors (Nair et al., 2019); there-
fore, the concurrent pause in the ChIN activity is impor­tant for learning to 
occur. The dopamine action outlasts the presence of dopamine extracellularly 
by hundreds of milliseconds due to the intracellular pro­cessing initiated by 
dopamine (Hunger et al., 2020), which is impor­tant in the context of synap-
tic plasticity. The presynaptic depression of synaptic transmission (LTD) in 
corticostriatal axons depends on an activation of D2 receptors combined with 
a reduction of the activity in cholinergic M1 receptors (Wang et al., 2006).
The plastic changes of synaptic transmission in the microcircuit con-
cerned occur due to a receptor-­ and voltage-­induced Ca2+ entry, together with 
G-­protein-­dependent cascades induced by dopamine or other modulators. In 
the cortico-­striatal synapse of SPNs, the Ca2+ level increase, leading to LTP 
that occurs via NMDA receptors or Ca2+ permeable AMPA receptors. As 
impor­tant as LTP is the converse pro­cess that reduces the synaptic strength, 
which is LTD that can be induced by endocannabinoids acting presynapti-
cally and also needs postsynaptic activation of L-­type calcium channels and 
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR1s); see Grillner et al. (2020).
In conclusion, reinforcement learning requires a cir­cuit that evaluates 
­whether an action has been successful or not. This can be provided by the 
limbic and cingulate cortex acting through the striosomes-­GPh–­lateral haben-
ula to control the level of dopamine activity that can ­either be facilitated or 
depressed (see the previous discussion and figure 4.18b). The dopamine sys-
tem acts through modifying the synaptic strength in the striatal microcircuits 
that are responsible for the movement (matrix area) evaluated, ­whether acting 
through LTD or LTP.
4.5  DYSFUNCTION OF THE BASAL GANGLIA: PARKINSON’S 
AND HUNTINGTON’S DISEASES AND OTHER CONDITIONS
The importance of the basal ganglia for the overall function of the brain 
becomes clear when one considers the many neurological and psychiatric dis-
orders that are caused by its dysfunction. The most prominent is Parkinson’s 

144    Chapter 4
disease, which affects 1 ­percent of the population over the age of 60. Initially, 
it can be treated pharmacologically with dopamine agonists, but it progres-
sively becomes very debilitating. Many hyperkinesias also involve the basal 
ganglia and provoke a serious medical condition, such as the devastating 
Huntington’s disease, which is inherited and gives rise to involuntary move-
ments, other dystonias, and hemiballismus; Tourette’s syndrome, featuring 
coordinated integrated motor patterns such as vocalizations and tics that can 
be triggered in a stereotypic fashion; and obsessive-­compulsive disorders, in 
which an individual may have the compulsion of performing a ritual over and 
over again, such as ­whether the oven is on or not (Graybiel & Rauch, 2000). 
Attention deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD) is another syndrome of this 
type; it affects the motor system, attention span, and impulse control. Some 
psychiatric disorders are also dependent on dysfunction of the basal ganglia, 
particularly the ventral striatum. Many psychopharmacological drugs act on 
D2 receptors, affecting iSPNs and the GPe. Recreational use of drugs is linked 
to the ventral striatum, but compulsive drug taking is thought to depend on 
the dorsolateral striatum.
In the basal ganglia, only the direct pathway promotes action (which is 
compromised in Parkinson’s disease), whereas the indirect and hyperdirect 
pathways and the GPe stop cells (see figure 4.16) all counteract movement. 
­These latter pathways are, in one way or another, involved in the genera-
tion of hyperkinesia. ­Here, we ­will focus on two opposing disorders—­the 
hypokinetic Parkinson’s disease and the hyperkinetic Huntington’s disease.
4.5.1  Parkinson’s Disease
The Parkinsonian patient suffers from symptoms of all parts of the motor 
system, ranging from postural control to skilled precision movements (Red-
grave et al., 2010). Patients tend to bend the body forward and walk with 
short steps, not lifting the feet as in normal walking (referred to as “a shuf-
fling gait”) and have general slowness of movement, called “bradykinesia” 
(figure 4.20a). The amplitude of the movements is often reduced; remarkably, 
single cell recordings in the GPi and STN of behaving monkeys performing 
movements of dif­fer­ent amplitudes documented a systematic relation of cell 
activity to movement amplitude (Georgopoulos et al. 1983). This finding is 

145    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
keeping with the prediction that underper­for­mance of ­these areas would result 
in reduction of movement amplitude. Saccadic eye movements may have a 
shortened amplitude, and when a Parkinson’s patient is writing, the letters 
are smaller than usual (micrographia). The movement control may be further 
affected by tremor in the fin­gers (pill-­rolling tremor) and ­later in the hands and 
arms (Gironell et al., 2018), which may even prevent the patient from eating 
or holding a glass of ­water without spillage. ­These patients have difficulty in 
initiating a new movement, such as walking, recruiting habitual movements, 
or forming new habits (Redgrave et al., 2010; Schwab et al., 1954). In more 
severe cases, freezing of movement can occur, in which the patient is unable 
to continue, such as when walking through a door. Also, the facial expressions 
connected with vari­ous emotions are affected, and the patients may appear 
to have no emotions, but only the motor repre­sen­ta­tion of the emotions may 
have been incapacitated. This condition is called “hypomimia,” or having a 
A
B
Figure 4.20
The characteristic motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. A. Woodcut repre­sen­ta­tions of front 
and side views of a man with Parkinson’s disease. From Paul de Saint-­Leger’s 1879 doctoral 
thesis, as cited and published by Gowers (1886; also see figure 14.5). B. Parkinson’s disease–­
prone systems are characterized by hyperbranching axons, regardless of the neurotransmit-
ters. ­Because hyperbranching neurons proj­ect to broad brain areas, the related symptoms are 
multifaceted. Each dot represents neuronal groups, with projecting axons indicated by arrows. 
Of note, nonmotor symptoms transmitted by dopaminergic VTA are also included, although 
disease susceptibility is much higher in SNc than VTA neurons, reflecting the distinctive physi-
ology, bioenergetic control mechanisms, and higher numbers of varicosities in the SNc. From 
Diederich et al. (2019).

146    Chapter 4
“mask face.” As mentioned previously, Parkinson’s patients have difficulty with 
gracefully forming a sequence of motor subprograms into an integrated ­whole. 
Thus, when asked to pick up an apple and put it on a shelf in front of him or 
her, each step (i.e., bend down, reach out to grab the apple, stand up, take a few 
steps forward, reach out to the shelf, and release the grip of the apple) is per-
formed one at a time, and not as one unbroken motion (Johnels et al., 2001).
The motor symptoms that occur in Parkinson’s disorder are due primar-
ily to degeneration of the dopamine neurons that supply the somatomotor 
part of the striatum (called “putamen” in primates), but several nonmotor 
symptoms are now also acknowledged, such as cognitive, mood, and sleep 
disorders (Goetz, 2011; Carlsson, 1964, 2001). A single ­human dopamine 
neuron in the SNc that supplies the putamen forms a remarkable num-
ber of synapses (varicosities)—­over 1 million, which is more than in other 
mammals (see figure 4.20b; Diederich et al., 2020). This may account for 
why the dopamine neurons in ­humans are more vulnerable than ­those of 
other vertebrates, given the high energy demand to supply all the metabolic 
pro­cesses required to maintain the function of all parts of the dopamine 
neurons, mitochondria, signaling pathways, 1 million synapses, and the 
sodium-­potassium pump that maintains the membrane potential. The SNc 
neurons supplying the motor part of the putamen form a larger number of 
synapses than ­those of VTA, supplying the associative and emotional parts of 
the striatum. This can explain why the somatomotor part of the striatum is 
the first to suffer in Parkinson’s disease. ­Later, other parts of the striatum are 
affected, which leads to a variety of nonmotor symptoms in ­these patients. 
Except for experimental models, Parkinson’s disease is not known to occur 
in animals other than ­humans (i.e., in veterinary medicine), and it can be 
noted that in rodents, the SNc neurons have “only” one-­third of the number 
of varicosities as do ­humans (Bolam & Pissadaki, 2012) This may explain 
why the dopamine neurons last throughout the normal life of animals.
The preceding discussion shows how impor­tant the basal ganglia (and 
especially the striatum) are for the normal operation of the motor system. 
Disorders of the basal ganglia affect all aspects of movement control (i.e., the 
amplitude of movement, the recruitment of motor programs, coordination 
between motor programs, as well as motor learning). This illustrates not only 

147    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
that the basal ganglia are of central importance in themselves, but also that 
the dysfunction of one specific component, the dopamine neurons of the 
SNc, is sufficient to make the system virtually break down.
Why does dopamine deficiency in the putamen lead to the Parkinson’s 
symptoms? ­Under normal conditions, an initiation of movement is preceded 
by a dopamine burst. This ­will increase the excitability of dSPNs in general via 
D1 receptors. If at the same time ­there is a cluster of dSPNs involved in the 
control of a given type of movement, excited from the cortex/thalamus, the 
dopamine burst facilitates the recruitment of this specific movement via down-
stream actions. Without dopamine, as in Parkinson’s disease, it ­will be more dif-
ficult to initiate the movement. In addition, the activation of the inhibitory D2 
receptors on iSPNs is also lacking, which ­will enhance the inhibitory action of 
the indirect pathway at the downstream level via the GPe and SNr. The lack of 
excitation of dSPNs via D1 receptors and the absence of D2-­induced inhibition 
of iSPNs can account for several of the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease with 
the effects on recruitment of dif­fer­ent movements and the reduced amplitude 
of ­these movements being recruited. In rodent Parkinson’s disease models, the 
dSPN activity has been showed to be reduced, while the iSPN activity instead 
is increased, further confirming the reasoning given ­here (Parker et al., 2018) 
and explaining why the Parkinsonian brain has more difficulty to initiate a 
movement with precision.
In addition to the direct effects produced by the lack of dopamine, 
the dopamine denervation of the dorsal striatum affects the striatal cir-
cuitry itself. The distal dendrites of SPNs degenerate, the number of spines 
decreases, and the dendritic branches are shortened, and thereby they lose 
synapses that receive input from the cortex and thalamus (Villalba & Smith, 
2018). This ­will further reduce the ability to activate striatal microcircuits 
(i.e., dSPNs) and thereby reduce the ability to induce movement. A total of 
80 ­percent of the synaptic input to SPNs is located on the distal branch of 
each dendrite (Hjorth et al., 2020). It is somewhat surprising that the den-
drites of the thalamic PF nucleus also are reduced in length. The PF provides 
a very large part of the thalamic input to SPNs.
Although the focus correctly is on the role of the dopamine system in the 
pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease, ­there is also decreased innervation of the 

148    Chapter 4
striatum from both the noradrenergic locus coeruleus and the serotoninergic 
raphe nucleus. Although less attention has been given to ­these two modula-
tory systems and their role for the striatal circuitry, their decreased innerva-
tion of the striatum may well also contribute to the Parkinson’s symptoms, 
although the dopamine innervation of striatum is much denser than ­either 
that of 5-­HT or noradrenaline.
4.5.2  Pathogenesis of Parkinson’s Disease
So far, we have discussed the symptoms and damage to the SNc that occurs 
with Parkinson’s disease. The question now is what pathophysiological 
mechanism underlies this disorder. ­There are two mechanisms that may 
complement each other: one concerned with mitochondrial dysfunction and 
the other related to accumulation of alpha-­synuclein in protein aggregates 
called “Lewy bodies.”
In the autosomal recessive form of hereditary Parkinson’s disease, muta-
tions occur in the parkin-­gene expressed in dopamine neurons (Mizuno 
et al., 2001). This gene is impor­tant for mitochondrial function. It was ­later 
shown that mutations can occur in the mitochondrial DNA of Parkinso-
nian patients, which may influence mitochondrial function. A conditional 
knockout of the mitochondrial transcription ­factor A in dopamine neurons 
induced a progressive Parkinsonian syndrome in mice (the “MitoPark mouse 
model”; Ekstrand et al., 2007). González-­Rodrígues et al. (2021) developed 
a conditional knockout of the Ndufs2 gene belonging to the mitochondrial 
complex. They could show that symptoms emerge gradually, as in Parkin-
son’s disease, and that the striatal dopamine axons degenerate first, with no 
release of dopamine in the dorsal striatum (day P30), while the dopamine 
cell bodies remain intact. This was accompanied by a reduced ability to 
perform associative learning tasks that are thought to rely on dopamine-­
dependent synaptic plasticity. Also, fine motor tasks ­were incapacitated. At 
this stage, the dopamine cell bodies in the SNc still survive, but a variety of 
changes occur with expression of ion channels with reduced pace-­making 
and action potential duration, presumably to reduce energy expenditure. 
Gradually, more extensive symptoms emerge. At p60, the rearing be­hav­ior 
is affected and bradykinesia develops. Only when the dopamine cell bodies 

149    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
degenerate (P100) do gross deficits in gait and other characteristics become 
apparent. González-­Rodrígues et al. (2021) consider the possibility that the 
soma-­dendritic release of dopamine affects the operation of the SNr that 
expresses D1 receptors (Zhou et al., 2009).
In Parkinson’s disease, SNc neurons contain Lewy bodies, which con-
tain a synaptic protein called alpha-­synuclein (Spillantini et al., 1997). As 
proposed by Braak et al. (2003) and shown in several ­later studies (e.g., Anis 
et al., 2021), alpha-­synuclein aggregations can be transported along the 
vagal nerve from the enteric mucosa to the brainstem, along unmyelinated 
axons from the lower brainstem, and then gradually to the raphe nucleus 
and locus coeruleus, which become affected and give rise to diffuse nonmo-
tor symptoms. This is a pro­cess that takes place over several years. Fi­nally, 
when the alpha-­synuclein aggregations reach the level of the SNc, they are 
taken up by the dopamine neurons; the most vulnerable of the SNc neurons 
die first and motor symptoms emerge in the form of clinical Parkinson’s 
disease. This unexpected hypothesis has gained support from a variety of 
experiments (Anis et al., 2021; Rietdijk et al., 2017; Braak et al., 2003), but 
it is not accepted by all. It should also be remembered that the symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease can vary significantly, presumably related to which parts 
of the basal ganglia that are affected by the dopamine denervation.
In conclusion, mitochondrial dysfunction in dopamine neurons can 
give rise to Parkinson’s disease in ­humans (Parkin) and in experimental mod-
els. Since SNc dopamine neurons supplying the putamen have a particularly 
high metabolic demand, they would be more vulnerable than other dopa-
mine neurons. Alpha-­synuclein aggregations occur in dopamine neurons in 
Parkinson’s disease and likely contribute to neuronal degeneration. It is not 
clear yet if ­there is a potential link (­whether direct or indirect) to the energy 
supply of dopamine neurons.
4.5.3  Therapy for Parkinson’s Disease
With the discovery of dopamine as a transmitter and the fact that a deple-
tion of dopamine gives rise to Parkinsonian symptoms and dopamine was 
depleted in the SNc in patients with Parkinson’s disease, the idea of giving 
the dopamine precursor L-­DOPA to patients was a natu­ral first treatment 

150    Chapter 4
step (Carlsson, 1964). It turned out that L-­DOPA could markedly reduce 
the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, particularly during the first several 
years, and ever since, it has been a first-­line medi­cation, together with dopa-
mine agonists.
In the early 1970s, when I was lecturing to the medical students on 
motor control together with my colleague Göran Steg, a professor of neu-
rology at Gothenburg, we used to give a demonstration of a Parkinsonian 
patient who had volunteered to take part. He would enter the room without 
having taken his morning L-­DOPA; thus he moved slowly and had severe 
hand tremor, and when asked to drink a glass of ­water, he was shaking so 
much that he spilled most of the ­water. He then took his L-­DOPA in front 
of the audience, left the lecture hall, and came back an hour ­later. He now 
walked rapidly and then drank a glass of ­water with no difficulty or tremor! I 
believe most of our students remembered the demonstration for many years.
L-­DOPA therapy meant a remarkable pro­gress for the patients, but it 
then turned out that it also had prob­lems. The level of DOPA in the blood of 
the patient would vary substantially over the day, which also meant that the 
L-­DOPA levels would vary markedly as well, as would the dopamine levels 
in the striatum. Therefore, the severity of the motor symptoms varied too. 
They could switch from hypokinesia to hyperkinesia and back again over a 
few hours. The solution has been to refine the administration of L-­DOPA so 
that similar L-­DOPA levels would be maintained throughout the day. This 
has been achieved to some degree by phar­ma­ceu­ti­cal means, via slow-­release 
packaging or administering L-­DOPA with miniature pumps.
The oscillating L-­DOPA/dopamine levels had additional severe side 
effects, in that the dopamine peaks would lead to L-­DOPA-­induced dyskine-
sia (Cenci, 2017). As the dopamine degeneration in the striatum proceeds, the 
fluctuations increase, and ­after 4–5 years, it is relatively common that dyski-
nesias develop, worsening as Parkinson’s disease progresses. L-­DOPA is trans-
formed into dopamine not only in the few remaining dopamine terminals, 
but also in 5-­HT terminals in the striatum. The dyskinesias may involve facial 
expressions (e.g., tics) and hand-­arm movements and can be very disturbing 
for the patient (and to some degree for ­family, friends, and colleagues as well). 
The origin of the dyskinesia prob­ably relates to synaptic plasticity changes 

151    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
that occur through LTP in the corticostriatal and thalamostriatal synapses. If 
a motor pattern from the cortex is elicited from a group of corticostriatal axons 
while the dopamine level is high, synaptic plasticity could be induced, which 
would potentiate the synaptic transmission from ­these specific axons. The next 
time, the threshold for eliciting the motor pattern ­will have been reduced, and 
in a final step, a pathologically low threshold has been reached and a dyskinetic 
movement can be triggered without the intention of the patient. L-­DOPA 
dyskinesias represent a major prob­lem for Parkinsonian patients, but they may 
also develop L-­DOPA-­induced nonmotor symptoms that affect emotions and 
impulse control and cause hallucinations involving other cir­cuits of the basal 
ganglia, such as the ventral striatum.
Another way to counteract the Parkinsonian symptoms has been to inter-
fere with the subthalamic nucleus (STN). Lesions of the hyperactive STN 
have been used to counteract the Parkinsonian symptoms by reducing the 
excitation of the SNr (Bergman et al., 1990). It was therefore counterintuitive 
that stimulation of STN also would diminish the symptoms of Parkinson’s 
disease (Benabid et al., 2009; Benazzouz et al., 1993). This is now a well-­
established method that has successfully reduced the symptoms in hundreds 
of thousands of patients, particularly at a stage when L-­DOPA is less effective. 
High-­frequency deep brain stimulation (DBS) is required, and one pos­si­
ble explanation for the effect is that it generates tonic STN activity, thereby 
abolishing the strong STN oscillations that contribute to the symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease. Furthermore, the DBS may lead to fatigue in the STN 
synapses, thereby reducing the excitatory drive onto the SNr. It is critical that 
the DBS electrode is placed in the small somatomotor part of STN rather than 
in the cognitive or emotional parts, which can have unfortunate side effects, 
including personality changes.
Lesions in the motor thalamus have also been used in ­earlier periods to 
reduce Parkinsonian symptoms. Such lesions markedly reduced hand-­arm 
oscillations, including tremor, but had ­little or no effect on other symptoms 
such as gait control and posture (Duval et al., 2006). This indicates that ­these 
movements depend mainly on downstream control via brainstem cir­cuits 
and do not require thalamo-­cortical/striatal feedback, and it is also note-
worthy that no cognitive or emotional symptoms ­were reported by removal 

152    Chapter 4
of feedback from the output nuclei of the basal ganglia (Duval et al., 2006; 
Grillner et al., 2013).
In primate and rodent Parkinson’s disease models, epidural continuous 
stimulation of the spinal cord has also been found to relieve the symptoms of 
experimental Parkinson’s disease (Fuentes et al., 2009; Santana et al., 2014). 
Why would this happen? Epidural stimulation ­will activate dorsal root affer-
ents, and primarily the dorsal column. This ­will most likely lead to an unspe-
cific activation of several brainstem nuclei via the dorsal column nuclei and 
affect the thalamus. The thalamo-­striatal nuclei could then be activated to 
some degree, which would in an unspecific way enhance the overall excit-
ability of the sensorimotor part of the dorsal striatum. Every­thing ­else being 
equal, this could presumably to some degree compensate for the lack of D1 
excitation of dSPNs due to denervation of the dopamine neurons, as well 
as facilitating the initiation of movement. Epidural spinal cord stimulation 
has been used in the context of other disorders and has recently also been 
explored in Parkinson’s disease patients (Samotus et al., 2018).
4.5.4  Huntington’s Disease: A Hyperkinetic Inherited Disorder
Huntington’s disease is a devastating congenital and comparatively rare 
disease (with an incidence of 5 cases out of 100,000 in the United States 
and Eu­rope), a hyperkinetic progressive disorder caused by a pathologi-
cally increased number of cytosine-­adenine-­guanine (CAG) repeats in the 
HTT-­gene that code for the protein huntingtin. The larger the number of 
repeats, the ­earlier the symptoms ­will occur, usually when the patient is in 
the late thirites or forties. ­There is currently no causal therapy for Hunting-
ton’s disorder, but on the experimental level, dif­fer­ent forms of gene therapy 
are considered that could possibly affect the expression of the HTT-­gene 
(Cheong et al., 2021).
The disease is progressive, and in the early phase, involuntary, sud-
den, often well-­coordinated movements occur. They may include the limbs 
(chorea), fin­gers (athetosis), or trunk (hemiballismus). The movements can 
involve several muscle groups, often in unusual and somewhat bizarre com-
binations, including facial muscles. In the ­later phases of the disease, severe 
­mental symptoms and dementia develop and akinesia may occur. The disease 

153    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
is characterized by a progressive degeneration of the striatum, particularly the 
putamen, but also the ce­re­bral cortex, and a certain reduction in striatal vol-
ume can be detected many years before clinical symptoms become manifest 
(Crittenden & Graybiel, 2011). In addition, neurons in the hypothalamus 
have recently been shown to degenerate, which can account for some of the 
nonmotor symptoms that appear (Henningsen et al., 2021).
The initial degeneration in the striatum affects in par­tic­u­lar the iSPNs 
that are at the origin of the indirect pathway, also referred to as the “NoGo” 
pathway, which results in a reduced ability to suppress movements (Caboche 
et al., 2017; Parievsky et al., 2017). This can clearly contribute to the motor 
symptoms that occur in dif­fer­ent parts of the body. As the degeneration 
continues, dSPNs also become affected and akinetic symptoms may occur. 
Striatal interneurons are reported to be unaffected (Caboche et al., 2017; 
Parievsky et al., 2017). Huntington’s disease in the early phase illustrates 
what happens if the neural systems that act to stop or suppress movements 
are damaged. It emphasizes the impor­tant role of the ner­vous system in 
balancing the precise initiation and termination of a movement episode.
In conclusion, dysfunction of the basal ganglia ­causes severe prob­lems 
with initiating and regulating the amplitude of movements and combining 
movements into an integrated ­whole, as in Parkinson’s disease. Conversely, 
in hyperkinetic disorders such as Huntington’s, dystonia and other condi-
tions, unintended movements of the fin­gers, hand, arm, trunk, and face (e.g., 
tics) can be triggered, out of the conscious control of the individual. This 
illustrates the fundamental role of the basal ganglia in the control of be­hav­ior 
with regard to both initiation and termination of movement.
4.6  THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE BASAL GANGLIA  
TO THE SE­LECTION OF ACTION AND THE CONTROL  
OF MOVEMENT AMPLITUDE
I base my current interpretation of the basal ganglia on older research, and 
more impor­tant, on a number of recent studies demonstrating a detailed 
organ­ization of the dorsal striatum and SNr (e.g., McElvain et al., 2021; 

154    Chapter 4
Foster et al., 2021; Dhawale et al., 2021), which ­were not available when 
many of the older views ­were formulated. The relevant facts are as follows:
•	
The striatum, the input to the basal ganglia contains 100 times more 
neurons than the output level SNr/GPi. The intermediate-­level GPe has 
only 1.7 ­percent of that of the striatum.
•	
In the somatomotor part of the striatum, ­there is an orderly arrangement 
with discrete compartments for the trunk, hindlimbs, forelimbs, outer 
and inner part of the orofacial region, eye, and orienting movements 
(Foster et al., 2021; DeLong et al., 1985).
•	
Each of ­these DLS compartments proj­ect in turn via dSPNs to dif­fer­
ent compartments within the much smaller SNr/GPi. The SNr in turn 
contain subpopulations of neurons that proj­ect to 42 discrete popula-
tions of neurons in the motor centers of the midbrain and brainstem 
(McElvain et al., 2021).
•	
SNr/GPi neurons are spontaneously active at rest and inhibit the vari­
ous downstream motor centers. An activation of a subset of dSPNs ­will 
inhibit a group of SNr neurons, and thereby release the specific motor 
center from SNr inhibition.
•	
The iSPNs that are localized in the same microregion as the dSPNs proj­
ect to the prototypic cells in the GPe, which in turn proj­ect to the same 
subpopulation of SNr neurons that are the target of the local dSPNs. 
The net effect of the iSPNs is an inhibition of the spontaneously active 
prototypic neurons in the GPe, resulting in a disinhibition of SNr neu-
rons, the converse effect of an activation of dSPNs.
•	
All downstream-­projecting SNr neurons also have a collateral to the PF 
nucleus in the thalamus that forward information to the matrix portion 
of the striatum, the cortex, and other thalamic nuclei.
•	
Each of the SNr populations provides efference copy information that 
is propagated with maintained specificity to the striatum and cortex. 
The striatum/cortex is thus informed about the downstream commands 
issued from the SNr.
•	
The PPN is also the target of the SNr collaterals, but in this case, they 
converge without specificity on PPN neurons. This means that it signals 

155    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
the overall activity in the SNr. The larger the number of SNr neurons 
that are inhibited when action is initiated, the more PPN ­will become 
activated through disinhibition. This means that ­there is an enhanced 
PPN-­induced excitation of striatal interneurons (as previously discussed), 
most of which are inhibitory, that provide negative feedback to striatal 
SPNs.
•	
Each bout of locomotor activity is preceded by a dopamine burst that 
­will excite dSPNs and inhibits iSPNs.
•	
Dopamine neurons in the SNc are spontaneously active at rest, acti-
vated by salient stimuli, and modulated by reward and by absence of 
reward.
•	
Dopamine denervation as in Parkinson’s disease leads to the following:
°	
Reduced amplitude of movement, such as saccadic eye movements 
or handwriting (micrographia), a learned movement
°	
Difficulty to initiate movement, ­whether whole-­body-­movements 
such as locomotion or fine, precise movements
°	
Difficulty in gracefully forming a sequence of motor subprograms 
into an integrated ­whole, such as when grabbing a ball thrown at 
you or just picking up an apple from the ground
°	
Difficulty in learning new movement or habits
•	
Degeneration of iSPNs, as in Huntington’s disorder, leads to hyperkine-
sia, an inability to control involuntary movements of the fin­gers, hands, 
arms, and trunk, and facial expressions (e.g., tics) since the indirect 
pathway is inactivated.
•	
An inactivation/lesion of the somatomotor part of the STN leads to 
hyperkinesia due to a reduced excitation of the SNr.
•	
A learned movement such as a double-­lever pressing, with an interval 
near 700 ms, leading to a reward, requires the motor cortex during the 
learning period, while when learned, the task can be performed ­after 
lesions of the motor cortex and surrounding cortical areas. However, 
the DLS and thalamic input from PF are always required. Lesions of 
­either structure lead to the inability to perform the task, although a rat 
can still perform single-­lever presses. Lesions of the DMS do not affect 
the per­for­mance of this task.

156    Chapter 4
The conclusions to be drawn are as follows:
•	
The DLS (caudal putamen) contains a detailed sensorimotor map for 
the control of the trunk (rearing, posture), hindlimb, forelimb, orofacial 
area, and oculomotor and orienting movements. This motor map is 
aligned with the SNr motor map and the downstream motor circuitry.
•	
The DLS is impor­tant for the ­actual per­for­mance of learned motor 
patterns, whereas the motor cortex is required only during the learning 
period. ­These learned motor patterns can be very stable, often referred 
to as “habits.”
•	
The DMS receives input from the limbic and associate parts of the cortex 
and has a more adaptive response pattern, as invoked in probabilistic 
tasks when a reward is given only in a proportion of the test. For exam-
ple, the condition when a reward is given can change periodically, and a 
push movement may be rewarded for a period of time and subsequently 
a pull movement is rewarded instead.
•	
Whole-­body movements such as locomotion and escape reactions also 
can be elicited from the DMS.
•	
The dorsal striatum is concerned with the control of both the initiation 
of action and the amplitude of movement. Studies in behaving monkeys 
have documented orderly relations between cell activity and the amplitude 
of arm movements in GPe, GPi, and STN (Georgopoulos et al., 1983).
4.6.1  How Does the Striatum Contribute to the Se­lection of Actions 
and the Amplitude of Movements?
Take, for instance, saccadic eye movements in primates. They are triggered 
by visual input to dSPNs in the caudate tail, which inhibits neurons in the 
lateral part of the SNr and in turn disinhibits the lateral part of the SC, from 
which the saccadic eye movements are triggered (Hikosaka & Wurtz, 1983).
Given the detailed sensorimotor input to the compartmental organ­
ization of the rodent DLS, it seems likely that subsets of dSPN neurons acti-
vated in the forelimb or trunk area of the DLS ­will inhibit the corresponding 
SNr compartments. ­These in turn are able to elicit forelimb or rearing move-
ments of the trunk by utilizing the midbrain and brainstem microcircuits 

157    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
discussed previously. ­Here, iSPNs are often initially coactivated with dSPNs, 
but their activity ­will fade away but be able to terminate a movement. For 
instance, prob­ably the vari­ous DLS motor areas, such as the forelimb part, 
are further subdivided into reach and grasp areas corresponding to the med-
ullary areas that control reach and grasp.
If the DLS forelimb area would receive excitation from the cortex/thala-
mus, perhaps due to a salient stimulus, the dSPNs also receive additional 
excitation via D1 receptors due to the dopamine burst that accompanies a 
salient stimulus. This could be sufficient to further activate the dSPNs and 
potentially elicit a downstream motor act.
What about amplitude control? A stronger activation of a set of dSPNs 
activating a given movement, every­thing ­else being equal, ­will elicit stronger 
inhibition of the SNr and larger-­amplitude movement. Sometimes se­lection 
of action and amplitude control have been considered as two alternative roles 
of the basal ganglia, but this illustrates that the basal ganglia can serve both 
functions, and it can be noted that in Parkinson’s disease, both amplitude 
and initiation of movement are compromised, as already discussed.
What about se­lection between stimuli that could elicit a movement? 
If ­there are two competing stimuli, both of which could elicit a movement 
through two dif­fer­ent sets of dSPNs, what is the mechanism used by striatal 
cir­cuits to select one over the other? ­There is a form of surround inhibition 
via local axon collaterals between SPNs that target the distal dendrites of 
the SPNs that are where the input synapses from the cortex and thalamus 
are located (figure 4.11b). The axonal arbors of SPNs extend over 250 μm 
in all directions around each SPN. This ­will mean that if one set of SPNs 
is activated before another set with input from other sources in the cortex, 
the latter ­will already be ­under inhibitory barrage on their dendrites and the 
excitation received ­will be shunted and have less impact. This would mean 
that the first set ­will be released, while the second would be suppressed.
This form of surround inhibition would contribute to the se­lection of 
action within a dia­meter of around 0.7 mm. The trunk, hindlimb, and orofa-
cial areas are of similar size (Foster et al., 2021), which means that the axonal 
arbors of a group of activated dSPNs would be able to provide surround inhi-
bition of a large part of an area such as the striatal forelimb compartment. 

158    Chapter 4
If two concurrent stimuli occur within the same area, it would promote the 
one that is activated the most strongly—­a kind of “winner take all.”
This form of local surround inhibition can thus contribute to the 
se­lection of a motor action within one striatal module within the DLS, 
such as the forelimb or hindlimb area, but not between other areas of the 
striatum. One needs, however, to consider that many other mechanisms 
are at play within the striatum and can affect SPN excitability and ­whether 
an action is selected. For instance, the thalamic input can provide direct 
excitation to selected SPNs, and also mediate synaptic effects via choliner-
gic and GABAergic interneurons in the striatum. The modulator systems 
(dopamine, 5-­HT and histamine) and the actions from the cholinergic and 
glutamatergic inputs from the PPN can also profoundly affect the excitabil-
ity of SPNs and determine ­whether dSPNs ­will generate action potentials 
and thus determine ­whether downstream centers ­will be affected. ­These 
mechanisms ­will clearly contribute to the se­lection pro­cess, but as yet they 
have not been analyzed in sufficient detail.
4.6.2  Is Disinhibition of the Brainstem Targets of the SNr/GPi  
Sufficient to Elicit Discrete Movements, or Is Complementary  
Excitation Needed from Other Structures, Such as the Motor Cortex?
The purpose of the tonic inhibition from SNr/GPi of all the midbrain–­
brainstem motor centers ­under resting conditions is most likely to keep 
all the motor centers ­under control so that they do not become active by 
accident. This happens, for instance, in the vari­ous hyperkinesias, as in Hun-
tington’s disorder, when the indirect pathway is not in operation.
As has been noted ­here, the SNr/GPi represents only 1 ­percent of the 
neurons in the striatum, this means that while the dorsal striatum in the 
mouse has 850,000 neurons, the SNr would be expected to have only 8,500 
neurons, given the same proportions as in the rat. Given that ­there are 42 
brainstem motor targets, it means around 200 neurons per target if each 
target had its own group of SNr neurons. However, some SNr neurons col-
lateralize to several targets. McElvain et al. (2021) subdivide SNr into eight 
major subgroups, but more subgroups most likely exist, although each target 
may not have its own SNr subgroup.

159    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
Given that a ­limited number of SNr neurons are available for one down-
stream target, it may mean that the control may not be sufficiently specific, at 
least for precise movements. If one considers saccadic eye movements, they 
can be directed with ­great precision in many directions, and it seems likely 
that the SNr neurons assigned to this type of control cannot be as precise as 
required for each potential saccade. This would open up the possibility that 
SNr control can be of the permissive type, at least for some types of move-
ment. The SNr neurons projecting to the lateral part of the SC could each 
cover a ­limited area of the collicular region controlling eye movements, and 
excitation from ret­i­nal afferents or the frontal eye field (FEF) in the cortex 
could provide the detailed control of the specifics of the saccade.
One may also ask why the ratio between the striatum and the SNr/
GPi is the remarkable 100:1. One possibility would be that striatal cells 
involved with one specific SNr target could be heterogenous and contain 
several striatal subpopulations with dif­fer­ent sensorimotor inputs requiring 
dif­fer­ent sensory pro­cessing, but in each case, they are channeled through 
the same SNr output stage.
4.6.3  Striatal Control of Innate and Learned Movements
Much of the movement repertoire is innate, as discussed in ­earlier chapters, 
such as saccadic eye movements or whole-­body movements such as locomo-
tion, but they nevertheless have adapted over time to the development of body 
shape and weight as the individual grows (Grillner & Wallén, 2004). As we 
have discussed in chapters 2 and 3, many learned movements are formed by 
recombining innate microcircuits at the brainstem/midbrain level. The basal 
ganglia contribute to the learning by providing the combination of tasks. A 
­simple example of a learned be­hav­ior is a rat pressing a lever arm twice at a 
fixed time interval. The execution of pressing the lever arm most likely cor-
responds to a reaching movement being of an innate nature, but the learning 
corresponds to the precise timing. The learned motor program is stored in 
the DLS, and the motor cortex is required only in the initial learning phase. 
When the memory has been consolidated, it depends on the DLS, and the 
motor cortex can be inactivated without having an effect on the rat’s ability 
to perform the task (Dhawale et al., 2021).

160    Chapter 4
The pro­cess of learning within the basal ganglia is presumably through the 
general format of reinforcement learning (see the discussion in section 4.4.6). 
The dopamine neurons signal ­whether the movement has been a success (i.e., 
receiving a reward) or not. A movement being trained must generally be 
repeated many times before achieving perfection. Consider, for instance, a 
child when learning to form individual letters the first year in school or a new 
tennis player trying to perform a serve as opposed to an experienced player. 
During the learning pro­cess, a modification is introduced between each trial 
(Dhawale et al., 2021) that leads to a dopamine reward if the per­for­mance 
was better than in the previous trial, or a decreased dopamine level if the per­
for­mance was worse. If the reward is low between each trial, the imposed vari-
ability is high, but if the reward is high between ­trials, the variability is kept 
low. In this way, LTP or LTD can be elicited within the striatal subnetwork 
engaged in the task, including input from cortico-­striatal and thalamo-­striatal 
axons. The superimposed changes in variability make for faster learning than 
being without the imposed changes, and this applies to both the biological 
system and to reinforcement learning in technical applications.
For the rat trained to do a double-­lever press at a fixed interval (Dhawale 
et al., 2021), we know that the DLS is required, and from Foster et al. (2021), 
we know that ­there is a forelimb compartment in the DLS in which the pro­
cessing takes place. The forelimb area in the mouse has the approximate size 
of a cube with a side of 0.7 mm, which would correspond to around 32,000 
neurons altogether. This area thus contains around 16,000 dSPN neurons that 
proj­ect to the central lateral aspect of the SNr, where the neurons concerned 
with the forelimbs are located. In proportion (i.e., 1 ­percent), this should cor-
respond to roughly only 320 neurons (McElvain et al., 2021)!
4.7  THE ORGAN­IZATION OF THE BASAL GANGLIA  
IS CONSERVED FROM LAMPREYS TO PRIMATES
We have discussed the evolutionary aspect on the brain separately (in chapter 1), 
but ­here, we consider only some aspects of this topic by comparing the basal 
ganglia of lampreys with that of mammals. To our surprise, we established that 
the lamprey has all the orga­nizational features of the mammalian basal ganglia 

161    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
(Stephenson-­Jones et al., 2011; Grillner & Robertson, 2016). ­There is thus a 
striatum with input from the cortex (pallium) and thalamus, a subdivision in 
the matrix and striosome compartments, and a conserved dopamine system. 
­There are a GPe, STN, SNr, and GPi, and they have similar downstream targets 
and backprojections to the thalamus in the lamprey as in mammals.
Details of the similarities are listed in ­table 4.3, regarding cell types, 
transmitters, neuropeptides, and connectivity. In the lamprey, the input to 
the striatum from the cortex/pallium has both PT-­ and IT-­like cell types, and 
the striatum contains all the ele­ments of the direct pathway, involving dSPNs 
projecting to the SNr/GPi. All the components of the indirect pathway, 
with iSPNs expressing D2 receptors, are also pre­sent. Regarding the striatal 
­Table 4.3
Comparison of the lamprey and mammalian basal ganglia
Lamprey
Mammals
Input to striatum
cortical IT-­type
+
+
cortical PT-­type
+
+
thalamus
+
+
dopamine
+
+
5-­HT
+
+
histamine
+
+
Striatal spiny projection neurons (SPN)
D1R/SP
+
+
D2R/Enk
+
+
spiny dendrites
+
+
Kir
+
+
GABA
+
+
DARPP32
+
+
rest hyperpol.
+
+
Striatal interneurons
cholinergic
+
+
fast spiking (FS)
+
+
subtypes of INs
?
+
Note: INs, interneurons; rest hyperpol., hyperpolerized at rest
Lamprey
Mammals
Output pathway SNr/GPi
spontaneous activity
+
+
direct input D1R/SP SPN
+
+
GABA
+
+
Parvalbumin
+
+
Indirect loop
GPe
+
+
direct input from
D2R/Enk SPN
+
+
GABA
+
+
subthalamic nucleus
+
+
glutamate
+
+
spontanous activity
+
+
Ih
+
+

162    Chapter 4
interneurons, cholinergic and FS interneurons have been identified in the 
lamprey, but ­whether some of the newly identified mammalian interneurons 
exist is still unknown. The arkypallidal stop cells in the mammalian GPe have 
not been identified in the lamprey.
Furthermore, the lamprey SNc has the same input and output structures 
as in rodents and the same type of dopamine receptors (see figure 4.13). 
Dopamine denervation ­causes similar hypokinetic symptoms in both types 
of animal (Thompson et al., 2008). The SNc neurons are also activated by 
salient visual (or other) stimuli (Pérez-­Fernández et al., 2017).
­Table 4.3 compares the properties of dif­fer­ent components of the basal 
ganglia in lampreys and mammals. Except for cholinergic and FS inter­
neurons, it is unclear if the other subtypes of interneurons recently demon-
strated in mammals are pre­sent in lampreys. The plus sign indicates the 
presence of a function.
As in mammals, the striatum is subdivided into a number of discrete 
modules (figure 4.21), connected to specific compartments of the SNr that in 
turn control individual motor programs (e.g., eye movement; see figure 2.21). 
During vertebrate evolution, the number of such modules has increased with 
a gradually more varied movement repertoire, but the basic design of each 
module has remained virtually the same.
Although the detailed organ­ization of the lamprey’s basal ganglia is similar 
to that of mammals, a major difference is that the number of neurons is ­orders 
of magnitude less in lampreys than in mammals. Moreover, we do not know 
if the striatum is subdivided into a dorsal and a ventral striatum and if the 
dopamine neurons can be subdivided into an SNc and a VTA subpopulation, 
although we have labeled them as a putative SNc. However, at the output level, 
­there is both an SNr and a GPi, and they provide tonic inhibition to down-
stream targets. It thus appears that all basic features of the basal ganglia ­were 
in­ven­ted early in vertebrate evolution before the evolutionary lines leading to 
mammals became separate from the lamprey line some 500 million years ago.
In conclusion, we note that the conserved structure and function of the 
basal ganglia suggest that this structure is essential for the control of be­hav­
ior and the design of this control system has proved so efficient that it has 
been maintained throughout vertebrate phylogeny (i.e., some 500 million 

163    The Roles of the Basal Ganglia: For Initiation of Movement and Motor Learning
years). The basal ganglia are involved in almost all aspects of movement 
control and the se­lection of which specific motor program ­will be active at 
any given point of time. The striatum is or­ga­nized in discrete modules for 
dif­fer­ent parts of the body, each of which affects specific modules within the 
SNr (output of the basal ganglia) that target dif­fer­ent midbrain–­brainstem 
motor centers and can promote action through disinhibition (permissive). 
This is an intricate neural machinery that provides both control of action 
(matrix) and evaluation of the success of individual movements (striosomes), 
with the latter being an impor­tant prerequisite for motor learning, which 
represents a critical aspect of basal ganglia function.
The basal ganglia function in close interaction with the parts of the 
cortex, and they represent two mutually dependent parts of the forebrain 
machinery. Together they control the motor infrastructure of the microcir-
cuits in the midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord (discussed in chapter 2). 
We ­will learn more about the parts of the cortex in chapter 5.
Pallium/cortex, thalamus 
& dopamine system
Locomotion
Eye movement
Steering
Feeding
D1
D2
GPi
GPe
STN
SNr
Figure 4.21
Conceptual scheme of a modular organ­ization of the basal ganglia, with one module for each 
type of motor program. Each module would contain the D1R and D2R projection neurons and 
the components of the direct and indirect pathway GPi (includes SNr), GPe, and STN. Each 
module would be activated if sufficient drive occurs from neurons in the pallium/cortex and 
thalamus. The responsiveness of the modules would be determined by the tonic dopaminergic 
drive. Whereas the lamprey has a ­limited behavioral repertoire, mammals (and particularly pri-
mates) have a varied and versatile motor repertoire.


5.1  INTRODUCTION
The most rostral part of the vertebrate ner­vous system, the cortex/pallium, 
contains a motor, a visual, and a somatosensory area in lampreys as well as 
mammals (Ocana et al., 2015; Suryanarayana et al., 2020, 2021a). This 
strongly suggests that ­there is a common basic neural organ­ization in all 
vertebrates, but the number of neurons in each part of the cortex/pallium 
differs by ­orders of magnitude, which also applies to mice and ­humans. Dur-
ing evolution, however, new cir­cuits have been needed, with the addition 
of limbs from lampreys to jawed vertebrates, and from mice to primates.
The appendages ­were mostly used for steering or positioning, as in 
water-­living animals, but on land they became used for locomotion. The 
interaction with the environment was mostly through the jaws, ­whether in 
foraging or fighting. Further elaboration of the visuomotor coordination 
was required when the forelimbs became used for reaching and grasping 
(birds such as the osprey use their hindlimbs), an ability that is particularly 
developed in primates, where delicate control of the hand has evolved along 
with in­de­pen­dent control of the fin­gers. This has allowed primates (includ-
ing ­humans) to finely manipulate objects in the vicinity (­whether food or 
tools), and ultimately in ­humans for creating arts and crafts.
One impor­tant role for the ce­re­bral cortex is to pro­cess information 
about the surrounding world through the primary and associate sensory 
areas for vision, hearing, and somatosensory information with a retinotopic, 
tonotopic, or somatosensory repre­sen­ta­tion of the body. ­These areas are 
THE ROLE OF THE CORTEX IN THE 
­CONTROL OF MOVEMENT
5

166    Chapter 5
impor­tant for the conscious perception of surrounding events. A bilateral 
lesion of V1 results in blindness in nonhuman primates as well as ­humans. 
The cortical pro­cessing of sensory information is impor­tant for movement 
control ­because our movements, ­whether locomotion or reaching, always 
relate to the surrounding world. The somatosensory repre­sen­ta­tion is very 
extensive for the hand and oral area, while it is comparatively small for the 
trunk and lower limbs. The ­human hand is a refined sensorimotor organ that 
can detect subtle changes in the quality of the fine structure of the objects 
that it is exploring. It is a unique, with a remarkable versatility that allows 
­humans to manipulate objects and learn to play the piano or the violin, for 
instance, by generating rapid sequences of precise fin­ger movements. In 
school, ­humans learn to write letters of the alphabet, ­whether in Chinese or 
Swedish, which is a complex task for a child.
The motor repre­sen­ta­tion in the ­human motor cortex, shown in the 
well-­known illustration by Penfield and Rasmussen (1950; see figure 5.1), 
was based on data from awake patients undergoing surgery in which the 
cortex was stimulated. This emphasizes the priority given to the repre­sen­ta­
tion of the hands and fin­gers. The repre­sen­ta­tion of a single fin­ger appears 
to be larger than that of the trunk and leg combined. Similarly, the repre­
sen­ta­tion of the mouth area (including the tongue) is very large. ­These two 
regions include the areas of fine motor coordination. The latter is required 
for speech, with rapid transition in shape of the oral cavity, tongue, and lips 
as each phoneme is expressed in a dynamic sequence. The adjacent sensory 
repre­sen­ta­tion of the body in S1 has a similar distorted distribution of the 
body surface.
The ability to communicate by discrete, mostly innate sounds is wide-
spread among vertebrates. Many primates have developed a more elaborate 
set of sounds, but only ­humans are born with the ability to rapidly learn a 
language spoken in the surrounding environment, or even sign language. 
Speech requires learning both the syntax of the language and vocabulary, 
and fi­nally be able to pronounce words accurately and in the appropriate 
sequence. Specific areas of the cortex are assigned to the interpretation of 
spoken words (Wernicke’s area) and the motor aspect of language (Broca’s 
area), but other parts of the brain are also involved. To utter words requires 

167    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
precise control of the flow of air and the shape of the oral cavity and dynamic 
control of the position of the tongue and lips.
In this discussion, our focus ­will be on the sensorimotor repre­sen­ta­tions 
in the cortex, how they interact, their intrinsic function and role, and how 
they are integrated with other parts of the forebrain and downstream cen-
ters for precise control of the motor repertoire. In the context of this book, 
Toes
Ankle
Knee
Hip
Trunk
Shoulder
Elbow
Wrist
Hand
Little
Ring
Middle
Index
Thumb
Neck
Brow
Eyelid and eyeball
Face
Lips
Jaw
Tongue
Swallowing
M
a
s
ti
c
a
ti
o
n
S
a
li
v
at
io
n
V o
c a
l i z
a t
i o
n
Figure 5.1
Repre­sen­ta­tion of the ­human M1. Note the large repre­sen­ta­tion of the hand, oral cavity, and 
tongue—­representing fine motor control. Areas for the trunk. lower leg, and forehead, which do 
not involve any fine control, are represented with much smaller areas. Adapted from Penfield 
and Rasmussen (1950).

168    Chapter 5
however, we ­will not be considering the fascinating areas of perception and 
consciousness, ­whether in primates or other vertebrates.
5.2  SOMATOSENSORY AND VISUOMOTOR  
COORDINATION CRITICAL IN THE PREPARATORY  
PHASE AND THE TRANSITION BETWEEN DIF­FER­ENT  
COMMANDS IN A MOTOR SEQUENCE
5.2.1  Vision, together with Cutaneous Sensation, Are Required  
for Precise Hand Control
To grasp a glass of ­water in front of you appears to be a ­simple task, but it 
requires a series of commands that involve dif­fer­ent parts of the brain (Johans-
son & Flanagan, 2009). One needs to reach for the glass, orient and preshape 
the hand to the ­actual form of the glass, smoothly let each fin­ger make contact 
with the glass, and contract the fin­ger muscles around the glass, lift it with-
out slipping (figure 5.2), and then move the glass to the mouth. The initial 
reach and hand orientation require visuomotor coordination and a prediction 
of the approximate weight of the glass. The next phase, the grasping of the 
object, is to a large degree a sensorimotor event. The tips of all the fin­gers have 
FA-1 Meissner
SA-1 Merkel
FA-2 Pacini
SA-2 Rufﬁni
!
Figure 5.2
The ­human hand grasping a glass or holding a raspberry. The fingertips have a very high density 
of slow-­adapting (SA; Merkel) and fast-­adapting (FA; Meissner) receptors, and the palm of the 
hand has another set of mechanoreceptors (Pacini and Ruffini). Maintaining a hold on a glass 
involves both the fingertips and the palm, while for holding a delicate structure like a raspberry, 
only the fingertips are involved.

169    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
an exceptionally high density of fast-­ and slow-­adapting receptors, which is 
required for registering even minimal contact with an object (Meissner recep-
tors) and for recording the pressure exerted by the fingertips when holding an 
object (Merkel receptors). The skin of the inner hand has another set of recep-
tors, the fast vibration–­sensitive Pacini receptors and the slow-­adapting Ruffini 
receptors (figure 5.2). The receptors on the fingertips are critical and provide 
information on how firm the grip is, and the receptors within the hand are 
impor­tant for securing the hand’s grasp around the glass. If the prediction of 
weight is correct and the sensory feedback appropriate, the glass can be brought 
to the mouth. This requires pro­cessing in the parietal lobe, the somatosensory 
and motor cortex, and downstream centers in the brainstem and spinal cord. 
Even more delicate is the regulation of the force of the fin­ger grip—if you try 
to grasp a structure like a raspberry and exert too much force, you ­will crush 
it, but too ­little and you ­will drop it.
If the intention is to lift an object from point A to point B, but you 
have to circumvent an obstacle while ­doing so, visual information and the 
control of gaze become impor­tant. The eyes are directed initially to point A, 
and as the lift starts, the gaze is redirected to the obstacle to ascertain that 
the trajectory of the hand ­will avoid a collision. Even before the hand reaches 
the position of the obstacle, the gaze is again redirected to the final location. 
In this task, the trajectory is determined by using the anticipatory control 
mediated through the control of the gaze (Johansson & Flanagan, 2009).
5.2.2  The Sensory Repre­sen­ta­tion in Somatosensory  
and Other Areas Are in Dynamic Equilibrium
The sensory repre­sen­ta­tion from the skin, such as the receptors in the hand, 
is transferred via ascending pathways and the thalamus to the somatosensory 
repre­sen­ta­tion in the cortex (S1). Parts of the body are represented in a map-
like way in S1, located just caudal to M1 in the parietal lobe. The hand and 
fin­gers have an extensive repre­sen­ta­tion (figure 5.1), whereas the adjacent 
forearm has a much smaller repre­sen­ta­tion, but the areas are in dynamic 
equilibrium. If the forearm was anesthetized by applying a local anesthetic 
cream, the two-­point discrimination on the fingertips increased a good deal 
(Björkman et al., 2009). When monitoring the sensory area in S1 with brain 

170    Chapter 5
imaging via functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the sensory 
hand area had also increased significantly.
How can one account for this finding? The organ­ization of the sensory 
cortical columns in the cortex consists of excitatory PT neurons and inhibi-
tory interneurons that also mostly interact in a “horizontal” plane in the 
layered cortex within the same layer of the neocortex. If the forearm part of 
the S1 receives no sensory input, the neurons in this area can become avail-
able for input from neurons in the nearby hand area, which accounts for the 
fMRI finding of an enlarged hand area. The remarkable finding is that this 
results in an enhanced perception of the sensory information from the hand 
with a better two-­point discrimination, and this effect is manifested directly 
­after forearm anesthesia. This must mean that the connectivity used for the 
hand area to expand into forearm area exists normally, but without impact 
due to the concurrent stronger input from the forearm area.
Similar results have been obtained in the sensory barrel cortex in the rodent. 
In both the auditory and visual cortices, parts of the tonotopic and retinotopic 
areas of one part can expand if adjacent areas are not receiving input (Buono-
mano & Merzenich, 1998). In a sense (so to speak), ­there is thus a competition 
between the compartments in the sensory areas for pro­cessing units.
5.2.3  Visuomotor Coordination—­a Dynamic Pro­cess
If you think about it, visuomotor coordination is amazing. It is critical for most 
types of movement, such as locomotion, reaching, and grasping, or when using 
tools, like riding a bicycle or driving a car. Most likely, the initial pro­cessing of 
the point in space or object that we like to interact with or the trajectory to fol-
low is pro­cessed at an early stage. Subsequently, the parts of the body that ­will 
be used for the task in question have to be determined (see also figures 5.5–5.7).
Consider an approaching object, like a ball that you want to catch. This 
requires rapid calculation of the trajectory of the ball and being able to extend the 
arms and position the hands in the appropriate spot at just the right moment. 
The motor command needs to consider not only precise timing, but also the 
visuomotor details concerning joint ­angles extending from the eyes to the hand 
via the arm, neck, and head. This demanding pro­cessing takes place in the 
visuomotor centers in the temporal, parietal, and frontal lobes (Georgopoulos, 

171    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
1986; Strick et al., 2021; Nakajima et al., 2019). To arrive at accurate and pre-
cise motor command, a wealth of information needs to be considered regard-
ing the position of the vari­ous parts of the body in relation to each other (and, 
of course, the surrounding world) and to the object, the ball to catch, and its 
trajectory in time. The time delay, called “reaction time,” is surprisingly small, 
ranging in the simplest case from 0.1 to 0.2 s to somewhat longer times, when 
more complex decisions must be made. The reaction time includes pro­cessing, 
decisions, and the coordination of the body with well-­timed motor commands.
The motor areas in the frontal lobe in mammals represent the motor-­
related parts of the neocortex and act via direct projections to the midbrain, 
brainstem, and spinal cord and, equally impor­tant, indirectly via the striatum 
(Strick et al., 2021; Lemon, 2008; Kaas et al., 2022). For the cortically initiated 
movements to become behaviorally relevant, they must be adapted to the sur-
rounding environment perceived through the senses, especially vision (see fig-
ure 5.7). If one reaches for an object, clearly vision is indispensable, but when 
moving in a dark environment, hearing is helpful and haptic information can 
be impor­tant, particularly in rodents, with the whis­kers being critical when 
moving along dark under­ground passages. In mammals, visual information 
from the ret­ina via the thalamus reaches the primary visual area (V1), which 
is impor­tant for object recognition.
In vertebrates, visual information reaches the cortex/pallium via two 
ave­nues: (1) from the ret­ina via the tectum/superior colliculus (SC) to the 
thalamus (pulvinar) and then to visuomotor areas in the temporal and pari-
etal lobes (Isa et al., 2021); and (2) from the ret­ina via the thalamus (lateral 
geniculate nucleus, or LGN) to the visual areas in the cortex. Although 
both pathways exist, the former, which provides prepro­cessed information 
in the tectum, appears to be the major pathway for visuomotor coordina-
tion in most vertebrates, including mammals, except for primates, where the 
pathways via V1 takes on a more prominent role (see Kaas et al., 2022, and 
chapter 3 of this book). Lesions of the tectum in most mammals give rise to 
severe deficits in visuomotor coordination, whereas lesions to the primary 
visual areas (V1) have very ­limited effects (Kaas et al., 2022). In contrast, the 
converse is true in primates, and lesions of V1 make a primate blind. More 
prominent projections have evolved from V1 to the higher-­order visuomotor 

172    Chapter 5
areas in the temporal and parietal lobes and further to the frontal lobe–­what 
has been referred to as the “movement-­related dorsal stream.”
It is remarkable that part of this visuomotor machinery nevertheless is 
in operation in blind individuals. ­After a lesion of V1 leading to blindness, 
a person can nevertheless catch a ball thrown at them, a phenomenon called 
“blindsight” (Weiskrantz et al., 1974). ­These individuals then use visual infor-
mation regarding salient objects moving near them, and they can remarkably 
­either avoid or grasp the object with appropriate visuomotor coordination. 
Note that this happens even though the individual is not consciously aware of 
the object that is approaching. This ability depends primarily on pro­cessing of 
visual information gated through the SC and thalamus directly to the higher-­
order visual areas in the dorsal stream, and then further to the motor centers 
in the frontal areas (Isa et al., 2021). Individuals with vision, ­whether ­humans 
or other mammals, most likely also use this pro­cessing route for visuomotor 
coordination, although primates also have a prominent contribution chan-
neled via V1.
5.2.4  The Dorsal Stream for Visuomotor Control in Primates
In primates, visual information from V1 is pro­cessed along two main path-
ways (Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982)—­the ventral stream to the temporal 
lobe for object recognition, sometimes called the “what stream,” and a dorsal 
stream via the temporal and parietal lobes to the motor areas in the frontal 
lobe, called the “where pathway.” To guide our movements and enable us to 
interact with objects in the environment, an elaborate pro­cess needs to take 
place within the dorsal stream. This information is then forwarded to the 
premotor areas in the frontal lobe.
Visual input from the V1 and via the pulvinar nucleus in the thalamus 
(from SC) provides spatial and motion information regarding the location of 
objects around us and our own movements to an area within the temporal 
lobe named V6 (primates), in which visual motion in the entire visual field 
is recorded (figure 5.3). From V6, two main “where pathways” originate, the 
dorsomedial and the dorsolateral streams (Galletti and Fattori, 2018). The lat-
ter pathway analyzes the location of objects in focus for our interest in relation 
to our own movements. Several compartments, including MT and MST (see 

173    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
figure 5.3), within this dorsolateral stream pro­cess dif­fer­ent aspects of motion 
in the visual field. For instance, V6/MT analyzes the central foveal aspect (only 
pre­sent in primates; Kaas et al., 2022). The dorsomedial stream (V6a, MIP, 
VIP) is focused on the spatial location of objects to allow a skilled reaching 
and grasping of them. Somatosensory and proprioceptive information is also 
integrated with visual information at the level of the parietal lobe. The degree 
of activity in V6a neurons, for instance, depends on the orientation of the hand 
in relation to an object or the shape of the object.
The dorsomedial pathway proj­ects to the dorsal premotor area just in 
front of the motor cortex, while the dorsolateral pathway talks primarily to 
the ventral premotor area. This elaborate pro­cessing in the centers within 
the temporal and parietal lobes is indispensable for the motor centers in the 
frontal lobe, without which they would be unable to steer the movement of 
the hands and fin­gers in a meaningful way. In primates, the precise interaction 
with objects is most elaborate through the control of their individual fin­gers. 
We have mentioned mostly reaching and grasping in this discussion, but in 
real life, visuomotor coordination often involves all parts of the body (consider, 
for instance, playing tennis). Most vertebrates have an elaborate visuomotor 
control that may involve the entire body (consider, for instance, cats, dogs, and 
birds). One cannot help being impressed by a seagull catching food thrown 
to it, in midair with ­great precision, or a dog that catches a bone thrown to it.
Dorsolateral stream
Dorsomedial stream
PMd
PMv
MT
MST
V6a
MIP
VIP
V6
V1
V2
V3
Figure 5.3
The dorsolateral and dorsomedial visual streams forwarding information from the V1–­V3 visual 
areas that feed information to V6, which provides input via the dorsolateral stream to the dorsal 
premotor area in the frontal lobe and via the dorsomedial stream to PMv. Abbreviations: MIP, 
­middle intraparietal area; MST, medial superior temporal area; MT, ­middle temporal area; PMd, 
dorsal premotor area; PMv, ventral premotor area; VIP, ventral intraparietal area.

174    Chapter 5
5.2.5  Visuomotor Coordination during Walking Depends  
on Cortical Pro­cessing
When you move around and correct your step to go onto the curb of a 
sidewalk or try to kick a soccer ball, you need to estimate the distance to the 
object and the time it ­will take to hit the ball or lift the foot to the sidewalk. 
Marigold and Drew (2017) analyzed this type of coordination by recording 
neurons in the posterior parietal lobe of the cat. They had the cat walk on a 
treadmill while an object appeared on the ­belt at some distance away, and 
the cat had to lift one paw to overcome the obstacle. They identified two 
types of neurons—­one that became active at a fixed distance to the object, 
and gradually increased its firing level ­until the point at which the correction 
of the limb trajectory had to be made, and another that became active at a 
certain time before the correction of the paw movement had to be made. 
When they increased the speed with which the object was approaching the 
cat, the distance neurons would always start firing at the same distance to the 
approaching proj­ect, and the timing neurons at the time that was required 
to make contact. This is clearly critical information needed for a precisely 
timed action. This information is then forwarded to the premotor areas in 
the frontal lobe to determine which action should be chosen for the cor-
rective movement (Nakajima et al., 2019). ­These two types of neurons are 
thought to extract this information from the optic flow, and it is of course 
necessary for the cat to identify the obstacle. The corrections are mediated to 
the spinal cord via the corticospinal tract, and lesions of this pathway render 
the cat unable to place the limb correctly in a complex terrain (Liddell & 
Phillips, 1944; Beloozerova & Sirota, 1986).
In conclusion, the control of the versatile hand depends entirely on 
information from the tactile receptors on the fingertips and hand in order to 
grasp an object in an optimal way. Visual input is critical for preshaping the 
hand before grasping and to avoid obstacles that would impede the planned 
movement trajectory. The visual input depends on information (1) mediated 
directly via the thalamus to V1 and subsequently to the dorsal stream and 
premotor cortex (PM), and (2) prepro­cessed information of salient stimuli 
in the SC that is mediated via the pulvinar nucleus to the higher-­order visual 

175    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
areas in the temporal and parietal lobes, and then to the premotor areas. The 
latter information underlies blindsight, the ability of blind individuals to 
react to moving objects.
5.3  THE MOTOR AREAS IN THE FRONTAL LOBE  
OF PRIMATES AND OTHER VERTEBRATES
The presence of motor areas in the frontal lobes had been established in 
the end of the nineteenth ­century in mammals, including monkeys, apes, 
and ­humans (Lemon & Sherrington, 1917; Penfield & Rasmussen, 1950; 
Phillips & Porter, 1977; Lemon, 2008; Strick et al., 2021). The frontal lobe of 
primates contains several motor areas, but ­there are fewer of them in nonpri-
mate mammals (see figure 5.4; Strick et al., 2021). The motor cortex (M1) is 
the largest motor area and is divided into subpopulations of pyramidal tract 
(PT) neurons, each concerned with the control of the hindlimb, trunk, fore-
limb, and orofacial muscle groups (see figure 5.1). The repre­sen­ta­tion is the 
largest in areas involved in precision control, like for the hand and oral cavity 
with jaws and the tongue, and much less to the trunk, although it represents 
more than half of the body mass. In primates, the motor repre­sen­ta­tion in M1 
is prominent, but ­there are several additional motor areas, which all proj­ect to 
M1, but also to the brainstem and spinal cord. They include the ventral and 
dorsal premotor areas just rostral to M1, areas on the medial wall of cortex, 
the supplementary motor area, and three cingulate motor areas. In addition, 
­there is a special motor area for gaze control, the frontal eye field (FEF), which 
is located just in front of the premotor areas.
In addition to M1, rodents have a smaller but similar motor repre­sen­
ta­tion within the frontal lobe, called M2; the somatosensory repre­sen­ta­tion 
S1, just caudal of M1; and another repre­sen­ta­tion, referred to as S2 in the 
parietal lobe. The motor repre­sen­ta­tions on the medial wall of the cortex 
(anterior cingulate sulcus) are absent in rodents and in primates related to 
anticipation, attention, and motivation. In rodents, the M2 may correspond 
to the dorsal premotor area of primates, but indications also suggest that 
­there are similarities to the supplementary motor area (Strick et al., 2021).

176    Chapter 5
Rat
M1
M2
Skeletomotor
Skeletomotor
Skeletomotor
Skeletomotor
Monkey
Human
SMA
CMAr
CMAv
CMAd
CS
PMv
PMd
5
M1
Monosynaptic
Disynaptic
PMd
PMv
CS
5
M1
FEF
FEF
SMA
CCZ
RCZ
S1
Figure 5.4
Organ­ization of cortical outputs to the spinal cord in rodents, macaque monkeys, and ­humans. 
Pathways with monosynaptic access to motoneurons are in red, and pathways with disynaptic 
access to motoneurons are in purple. The ce­re­bral cortex of the rat has only disynaptic access to 
motoneurons. This output originates largely from M1, but it also includes smaller contributions from 
M2 and S1. The ce­re­bral cortex of ­humans and some monkeys has monosynaptic and disynaptic 
access to motoneurons. The monosynaptic output originates mainly from new M1, a caudal region 
of M1 that is largely buried in the central sulcus. New M1 influences motoneurons that innervate 
proximal muscles, as well as ­those that innervate distal muscles. Old M1, a more rostral region of 
M1, is the origin of disynaptic output to motoneurons. In addition, substantial disynaptic outputs 

177    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
5.3.1  The Motor Cortex (M1)
Projections from the motor areas in the cortex to motoneurons in the spinal 
cord are mostly disynaptic via interneurons, and they exist in all mammals. 
In addition, a monosynaptic corticospinal linkage from M1 to the forelimb 
motoneurons controlling the hand and arm has evolved in ­humans, apes, 
and some monkeys such as macaques, but not in animals such as marmosets 
or squirrel-­monkeys. The latter only have the ancient disynaptic pathway, as 
seen in cats and rodents (Strick et al., 2021). The new monosynaptic pathway 
in M1 originates from an area just caudal to the old disynaptic M1, which is 
retained in primates. The monosynaptic corticomotoneuronal pathway (CM) 
is directed specifically to the motoneurons controlling the hand and its fin­gers, 
as well as the proximal arm muscles (Lemon, 2008; Phillips & Porter, 1977).
Neurons in the M1 are activated during reaching movements in dif­fer­
ent three-­dimensional (3D) directions, as shown in the monkey by Apostolos 
Georgopoulos and colleagues (Georgopoulos et al., 1982, 1988; Schwartz et al., 
1988). The monkey was asked to point to a central location and subsequently 
instructed by a light at any of the eight surrounding points to reach ­toward this 
point (figure 5.5). Each M1 neuron activated in the task was broadly tuned 
to a preferred reaching direction and inhibited by reaching in the opposite 
direction (Georgopoulos, 1986). However, the neurons are broadly tuned and 
activated, but to a lesser degree by reaching directions around the preferred 
direction, which is illustrated in figure 5.5. If the contribution of each of many 
originate from multiple premotor areas in the frontal lobe and from a subfield of area 5. One of the 
major features that distinguish the primate motor system is the proliferation of output pathways 
from the ce­re­bral cortex, especially from the motor areas on the medial wall of the hemi­sphere 
(supplementary motor area, rostral cingulate motor area, dorsal cingulate motor area, and ventral 
cingulate motor area). The caudal cingulate zone of ­humans is comparable to the CMAd and 
CMAv of monkeys. The rostral cingulate zone of ­humans is comparable to the CMAr of monkeys. 
The medial wall of the hemi­sphere is shown in mirror image. Abbreviations: 5, area 5; CCZ, caudal 
cingulate zone; CMAd, dorsal cingulate motor area; CMAr, rostral cingulate motor area; CMAv, 
ventral cingulate motor area; CS, central sulcus; FEF, frontal eye field; M1, primary motor cortex; 
M2, secondary motor cortex; PMd, dorsal premotor area; PMv, ventral premotor area; RCZ, rostral 
cingulate zone; S1, primary somatosensory cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area. Redrawn and 
modified from Strick et al. (2021).
Figure 5.4 (continued)

178    Chapter 5
recorded neurons ­were averaged, it was found that as a population, the active 
neurons formed a population vector, a population code that pointed accurately 
in the direction of the reaching action that was performed (Georgopoulos et al., 
1982, 1988; Schwartz et al., 1988). The degree to which ­these neurons proj­ect 
primarily to the spinal cord or to brainstem centers like the reaching subset of 
neurons in the medulla is not known (Ruder et al., 2021).
­These center-­out reaching tasks are subdivided into two parts: a first ballis-
tic part and a ­later phase close to the target in which visual feedback can be used 
to fine-­tune the trajectory (Suway and Schwartz, 2019). If the monkeys are 
asked to generate a more complex shape like an ellipse, they subdivide the task 
into two components around each maximal curvature, and fi­nally when draw-
ing a figure-­eight, they instead use four components, again centered around 
each peak curvature (Schwartz, 2007). The visual information to the neurons 
in M1 is mediated via both the dorsolateral and dorsomedial streams in the 
parietal lobe and then via both the dorsal and ventral premotor areas to M1.
Neurons in the head region of M1 proj­ect to the midbrain-­brainstem 
and can take an active part in the control of the motoneurons in the many 
Figure 5.5
The 3D response of a M1 neuron while a monkey is performing a reaching movement from the 
central position to each of the eight pos­si­ble positions in each corner of the cube. Note the 
large response when pointing to the lower left and the inhibition in the upper right, the opposite 
direction. Courtesy of Schwartz et al. (1988).
PNI183
–1000
–500
0
M
500
1000

179    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
cranial motor nuclei, and equally impor­tant, they affect the many motor cen-
ters in the brainstem. Just as impor­tant, the M1 activates other descending 
pathways as the reticulospinal pathways in the pons and medulla. Kably and 
Drew (1998a,b) investigated the M1 projection to reticulospinal neurons 
in the cat. The cells from the M1 forelimb area are mainly fast-­conducting 
neurons—­one third of which projecting only to the spinal cord, another 
third giving off collaterals to the pontomedullary reticular formation to 
activate reticulospinal neurons, and the last third projecting exclusively to 
reticulospinal neurons. The reticulospinal neurons are activated from the 
M1 during locomotion, particularly when a cat needs to compensate for an 
obstacle (a visuomotor compensation). This means that the effects elicited 
by cortical projections to the spinal cord are complemented by reticulospinal 
neurons that ­will further assist in a successful correction of the movement. 
They also receive complementary input from the cerebellum and other brain-
stem centers (Matsuyama et al., 2004). Neurons in the PM also proj­ect to 
the reticular nuclei, but their axons are slow-­conducting.
5.3.2  The Supplementary Motor Area Can Induce a Sense of Volition
The supplementary motor area (SMA; figure 5.4) is located on the medial 
side of the hemi­sphere, just in front of the dorsal premotor area. It is viewed 
as being upsteam of M1. Much interest has been linked to this structure since 
SMA neurons are activated prior to movements and ­earlier than the M1, and 
the possibility that it plays a role in the initiation of movements (Nachev 
et al., 2008; Roland et al., 1980a, b). ­These studies showed that if you ask a 
person to perform a movement, both the SMA and MI become activated, 
but if the individual is asked to think about performing the movement, but 
does not actually perform it, only the SMA was strongly activated; the M1 
remained virtually ­silent. If the SMA and pre-­SMA areas are stimulated 
weakly, the patient reports the urge to move but with no actual movement. A 
stronger stimulus leads to movement, which the patient reports as if initiated 
by himself or herself, and thus as volitional. This contrasts with stimulation 
of the MI, which is perceived as externally imposed (Fried et al., 1991, 2017) 
and thus not voluntary. SMA can thus induce a sense of owner­ship of the 
movement elicited—­a sense of volition.

180    Chapter 5
Unilateral lesions of the SMA can lead to difficulties in bimanual coor-
dination. For instance, ­after this type of lesion, the left and right hands tend 
to perform the same movement rather than complementing each other as 
would normally occur. However, if the callosal fibers between the two SMAs 
­were transected, the bimanual deficit dis­appeared, although a certain clum-
siness remained (Brinkman, 1984). In ­humans, acute lesions of SMA ­after 
an operation to reduce the effects of epilepsy can lead to a transient loss of 
control of the contralateral arm movements, referred to as “motor neglect,” 
and ­later to reduced bimanual dexterity.
The SMA proj­ects to M1, to spinal cord interneurons, extensively to the 
striatum, and to the subthalamic nucleus (STN). The SMA receives promi-
nent feedback from the output nuclei of the basal ganglia via the thalamus 
(Nambu et al., 1996).
To summarize, the SMA is upstream of M1, and its activity is related to 
the initiation of be­hav­ior and to the bilateral coordination of hand movements. 
It has extensive projections to the basal ganglia and direct projections to the 
spinal cord as well as to M1. Movements initiated by the stimulation of SMA 
in ­humans induce a sense of owner­ship of the movement—­a sense of volition.
5.3.3  The Dorsal and Ventral Premotor Areas, Including Broca’s Area
The area just in front of the M1 and lateral to the SMA is referred to as the 
“premotor area” and is usually subdivided into dorsal and ventral motor areas 
(PMd and PMv; see figure 5.4). The premotor area can be distinguished 
both through having dif­fer­ent cytoarchitectonic properties and by having 
neurons with more complex be­hav­ior than the M1 neurons. While the latter 
neurons are active just before and during a given movement, the premotor 
neurons ­were active for longer periods before the movement, indicating that 
they play a role in the planning of movement. Neurons in the PM are het-
erogenous. They receive prominent input from the parietal lobe, the SMA, 
and the prefrontal cortex, and they have strong efferent connections to the 
M1, striatum, reticulospinal nuclei, and spinal cord interneurons (Strick 
et al., 2021; Schwartz, 2007; Nakajima et al., 2019). Neurons in the PM 
also proj­ect to the reticular nuclei, but their axons conduct more slowly than 
­those from the M1.

181    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
Neurons in the PMd are active during reaching and discrete subpopu-
lations are active when the reaching movements have a dif­fer­ent orienta-
tion (Cisek & Kalaska, 2005). Neurons in the caudal part of the PMv are 
influenced by a broad repertoire of sensory stimuli such as vision, hearing, 
and tactile stimuli, mostly related to the peripersonal space. Neurons in the 
ventral part of PMv are instead concerned with the control of the hand, 
grasping objects and hand-­to-­mouth coordination. Some of the neurons in 
this region have become well known as “mirror neurons,” as described by 
Rizzolatti (di Pellegrino et al., 1992; Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2010). ­These 
neurons are thus active if the monkey opens a peanut to eat it, but also if the 
monkey observes the experimenter opening a peanut with the intention to 
eat it. The motor act and its intent are thus mirrored in ­these neurons. Mirror 
properties are also pre­sent in neurons in the parietal lobe that proj­ect to PMv.
Broca’s area in the left hemi­sphere of ­humans partially overlaps with 
the PMv in nonhuman primates. Lesions of this area lead to dif­fer­ent forms 
of expressive motor aphasia (i.e., the inability to express words and sen-
tences and also to communicate through sign language). Patients under-
stand spoken language and can read, but they have trou­ble forming words 
and sentences. Lesions to the corresponding area in the right hemi­sphere 
(in right-­handers) lead to defects in the prosody, the emotional modula-
tion of sentences that provides a major aspect of communication. Broca’s 
area receives major input from the prefrontal cortex and the temporal lobe, 
and it is activated during speech in imaging studies, often along with other 
areas. The precise role of Broca’s area in speech production remains elusive 
and may relate to working memory for syntactic and phonological structure 
(Friederici, 2002).
From the evolutionary perspective, the presence of mirror neurons in 
monkeys in the rostral part of PMv that overlaps with the location of Broca’s 
area is of potential interest, as mirror neurons in this area respond to gestures 
and the meaning of a motor act (e.g., watching somebody manipulating a 
peanut). This can possibly be extended to the understanding of gestures as 
used by apes. Broca’s area is activated by ­humans using sign language, so it 
could be argued that the understanding and execution of gestures in monkeys 
and apes may be regarded as constituting a precursor of ­human language.

182    Chapter 5
5.3.4  The FEF: Saccades and Attention to Salient Stimuli
The FEF is located in the frontal lobe (Bruce et al., 1985; figure 5.4) just rostral 
to the PMd, and it contains relatively large pyramidal neurons in layer 5, which 
proj­ect to the output layer of the superior colliculus (SC) and the gaze centers 
in the midbrain–­brainstem. The FEF receives extensive input from the V1 via 
the visual centers in the dorsal visual stream (see figure 5.3). Within the FEF, 
the visual input forms a somewhat distorted retinotopic map. A salient visual 
stimulus from a given area in the visual field activates a subset of neurons within 
the retinotopic map in the FEF, and if neurons within this area are activated, a 
saccade ­will be generated to direct the eye to this point in the visual field.
The retinotopic map of the FEF is aligned with that of the SC (see chap-
ter 3). Saccades can be generated in­de­pen­dently from both the SC and the FEF, 
although the FEF proj­ects directly to the output layer of the SC. The saccades 
are formed by the combined action of the downstream vertical and horizontal 
gaze centers, which are located in the mesencephalon and pons, respectively, 
which in turn activate the appropriate motor neurons to the eye muscles. ­After 
a lesion in ­either the FEF or the SC, saccades can still be generated, but not if 
both structures are inactivated (Isa et al., 2021). FEF and SC can thus in­de­pen­
dently generate the command for the gaze centers to produce an appropriate 
activation of the vertical and horizontal gaze centers. Normally, however, they 
most likely work in concert since FEF proj­ects to the output layer of the SC.
The FEF have traditionally been linked to the motor aspect of saccade 
generation, but now it is also thought of as a center for selective attention. 
When a salient stimulus occurs somewhere in the visual field, this informa-
tion is efficiently transmitted through the dorsal stream to the retinotopic 
map in the FEF, from which a command to elicit a saccade is generated 
to allow the eye/brain to inspect the salient stimulus (Isa et al., 2021). As 
discussed in chapter 3, express saccades, which have a shorter latency, can 
also be elicited at high levels of attention. ­These are most likely elicited by 
direct ret­i­nal projections to the SC, and then to the brainstem gaze centers.
­There is another structure, the basal ganglia, that is critical for the genera-
tion of saccadic eye movements (see chapter 4). ­Under resting conditions, the 
substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) output neurons of the basal ganglia are 
tonically active and keep the SC output neurons inhibited, which are the same 

183    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
neurons that FEF efferents converge on (Hikosaka & Wurtz, 1983; Kim & 
Hikosaka, 2015). FEF proj­ects massively to the striatum and is therefore able 
to exert a fine control over the SNr inhibition of the SC. When the command 
for a saccadic eye movement is initiated, the direct pathway striatal projection 
neurons become activated, which inhibits the neurons within SNr that proj­ect 
to the SC (chapter 4). This leads to a removal of inhibition from the output 
neurons of the SC that mediate the saccade to the downstream motor center, 
and thereby a facilitation of the saccade-­generating circuitry.
In conclusion, in the FEF, ­there is a retinotopic map from which saccadic 
eye movements to vari­ous points in the surrounding environment can be elic-
ited. ­There are projections from the FEF to the gaze centers in the midbrain 
and brainstem, as well as to the output cells of the SC from which saccadic 
eye movements can be elicited. The FEF are also linked to the mechanisms of 
selective attention, and when a salient object appears in the visual field, the 
first ­thing that normally happens is to elicit a saccade so that the projection 
of the object is brought into the fovea centralis of the ret­ina, the area with the 
highest visual acuity.
5.3.5  Long-­Lasting Focal Electric Stimulation of the Parietal Cortex, 
M1, and Premotor Areas Uncovers Separate Functionally Interacting 
Domains Controlling Vari­ous Aspects of Integrated Motor Be­hav­ior
The traditional way of studying the effect of microstimulation of the M1 is 
to use brief stimuli to observe twitches in specific muscle groups or synaptic 
potentials in the motoneurons. Therefore, it has been pos­si­ble to address the 
specificity of dif­fer­ent areas in the M1 and at the same time evaluate if the 
linkage to motoneurons was disynaptic, as in most mammals studied, or 
partially monosynaptic, as in ­humans, apes, and some monkeys. Graziano 
and colleagues (Graziano & Aflalo, 2007; Graziano, 2016) instead used a 0.5­s 
stimulation and could then elicit integrated arm movements such as reaching 
to grasp, hand to mouth, the orientation of the arms in dif­fer­ent positions, 
chewing, and defensive reactions (figure 5.6).
­These findings and the relation to the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) as 
part of the dorsal stream have been further analyzed in considerable detail 
by the Kaas’s laboratory in a series of studies (Stepniewska et al., 2014, 2018, 

Climbing/leaping
Reach to grasp
Hand in lower space
Manipulate in
central space
Chewing/licking
Hand to mouth
Defence
Figure 5.6
Long-­lasting stimuli of the M1 leads to area-­specific integrated movements. Intracortical stimula-
tion for 500 ms evoked complex, ethologically meaningful actions. Dif­fer­ent actions ­were evoked 
from dif­fer­ent cortical zones. Hand-­to-­mouth actions involved shaping the hand into a grip posture, 
orienting the grip ­toward the head, moving the hand to the mouth regardless of starting position, 
opening the mouth, and turning the head to align the mouth to the hand. Defensive actions involved 
closing the eyes, pursing the skin around the eyes, folding the ear against the head, turning the 
head, shrugging the shoulder, turning the torso, and raising the hand to a blocking posture. 
Reaching involved movements of the torso, shoulder, and arm to proj­ect the hand, pronation of 
the forearm to orient the hand, and postures of the hand as if to preshape for grasping. Climbing 
and leaping postures involved bilateral positions of the legs and arms, with the feet and hands 
partly curled as if in preparation to grasp branches, and sometimes deflection of the tail as if to 
maintain balance during locomotion. Hand-­in-­lower-­space actions involved postures of the arm 
that brought the hand to the space near the feet or laterally to the side of the feet and often brought 
the hand to a palm-­down posture as though to brace the body’s weight against the ground. 
Manipulation in central space involved complex positions of the wrist and fin­gers that resembled 
typical actions during the manipulation of objects, and often movements of the arm that brought 
the hand to the central space in front of the chest or stomach where monkeys typically manipulate 
acquired objects. Chewing and licking movements ­were evoked from the classical primary motor 
oral area. Redrawn and modified from Graziano (2016).

185    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
2020; Kaas et al., 2022). The caudal part of the PPC has mostly visual input, 
while the rostral PPC is multisensory and includes somatosensory input. 
The studies ­were able to show that the rostral PPC contains seven separate 
domains, each involved with specific aspects of be­hav­ior. From lateral to 
medial in the PPC, ­there are separate domains for the face, defensive arm 
movements, grasping, hand-­to-­mouth movements, a defensive area, reach-
ing, and most medially a climbing and ­running domain including forelimbs 
and hindlimbs (whole-­body movements). They showed that neurons within 
each of ­these domains projected to separate areas within both the PM and 
the M1, in which the corresponding be­hav­ior could be elicited by micro-
stimulation (see figure 5.7a). Conversely, if the domains within the PM or 
M1 ­were inhibited by injection of a γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonist, 
the behavioral effect of the PPC microstimulation was blocked, suggesting 
that the PPC effects ­were channeled through the PM and M1 domains. The 
caudal PPC with visual input proj­ects to the FEF. This organ­ization can be 
regarded as further parcellation of the PPC as part of the dorsal stream that 
has become subdivided into functional compartments or domains, in which 
each talks with the corresponding domains in the PM and M1.
V1
V2
MT
SMA
Reach
Defense
Grasp
Hand-to-body/mouth
Hindlimb+forelimb
Face defense
Eyemovements
PPCr
PPCc
M1
PMd
PMv
Defense
Reach
Hand to 
body?
Face?
Dorsal
Posterior
Grasp
A
B
Striatum
Figure 5.7
Functionally related subdivisions for visuomotor coordination in the posterior parietal, premotor, 
and motor cortices and striatum. Abbreviations: M1, primary motor area; MT, medial temporal 
area; PMd, dorsal premotor area; PMv, ventral premotor area; PPCc, caudal posterior parietal 
cortex; PPCr, rostral posterior parietal cortex; SMA, somatomotor area; V1, primary visual area; 
secondary V2, visual area. Redrawn and modified from Kaas et al. (2022).

186    Chapter 5
Neurons within the domains of the PPC, PM, and M1 proj­ect to the 
dorsal striatum and the functional subdivisions are maintained (figure 5.7b) 
so that separate rostrocaudal columns of cells are activated by reaching, 
defensive reactions, grasping, and other actions. This shows how linked the 
cortical cir­cuits are to each other, to the basal ganglia, and to downstream 
motor centers. Whereas the basal ganglia work through disinhibition of 
downstream motor centers, the cortical domains can provide direct excita-
tion of ­these motor centers (see also chapter 4).
5.3.6  The Projection Pattern from the Motor Areas of the Frontal  
Lobe to the Midbrain and Brainstem
In the lamprey motor area in the dorsal pallium (corresponding to the 
neocortical motor area), ­there are monosynaptic projections to the output 
neurons of the tectum/SC, the midbrain tegmentum, the reticulospinal pro-
jections, and other brainstem motor areas (Ocana et al., 2015). This is in 
princi­ple the same projection pattern as in mammals, but it has ­orders of 
magnitude fewer projection neurons. It suggests that this basic organ­ization 
of the motor projections from the cortex has been conserved throughout 
vertebrate phylogeny.
In mammals, the FEF proj­ects directly to the output neurons of the 
SC and can thereby induce precise eye movements in specific directions 
(see chapter 3) via the horizontal and vertical gaze centers. This is impor­
tant for our ability to rapidly direct the gaze to any salient point in the 
surroundings—­selective attention. In parallel, we have the FEF effects 
exerted via the basal ganglia, leading to disinhibition (Hikosaka & Wurtz, 
1983) of the SC that together control the gaze. ­These cir­cuits ­will contribute 
to the related orienting movements of the head/body and conversely visually 
evoked evasive movements that are needed to avoid a collision or a threaten-
ing stimulus (Kardamakis et al., 2015).
A given PT neuron may give off collaterals to many targets on its pas-
sage downstream, which may include the thalamus, midbrain, and brainstem 
structures. Very power­ful monosynaptic projections from the frontal motor 
areas target the vari­ous reticulospinal neurons in the pons and medulla that 
mediate postural and locomotor corrections, and also target the medullary 

187    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
centers for reaching and grasping. Other parts of the motor areas target the 
chewing central pattern generator (CPG), and ­others control the tongue and 
the licking CPGs (see chapter 2), as well as the jaw muscles. PT neurons also 
proj­ect to the nucleus ruber in the mesencephalon, which contains not only 
the rubrospinal projections, but also subsets of neurons projecting to the infe-
rior olive and to the medullary centers for reaching (Fidelin & Arber, 2022).
5.3.7  The Specific Role of the Corticospinal Tract: Effects of Lesions
In a very influential study by Lawrence and Kuypers (1968a, b), the research-
ers made a selective lesion of the corticospinal pathway at the lower brainstem 
level, leaving the cortical control of the brainstem intact. They ­were then able 
to show that the monkeys ­were able to move around with ease, climbing on 
the cage walls with no distinct motor deficits, except for the control of the 
individual fin­gers. They failed at a task of picking up a peanut from a small 
hole that required a grip with two fin­gers, such as between the index fin­ger 
and the thumb. The monkeys did not recover this ability. The possibility to 
in­de­pen­dently control the fin­gers may rely preferentially on the CM pathway 
and allow the versatility of the primate (and in par­tic­u­lar the ­human hand). 
The monkeys ­were still able to flex or extend the fin­gers together to grab or 
release objects.
Subsequently, in ­these studies, a selective lesion of the spinal cord was 
added that removed the descending control from the rubrospinal pathway 
and some lateral reticulospinal projections. The result was more dramatic—­the 
monkeys lost in­de­pen­dent control of the hand in relation to the arm, but they 
could still locomote and climb. When eating, they had to use the ­whole arm as 
a unit and extend it to grab food and bring it to the mouth by flexing the limb. 
That is, a corticospinal lesion led to an inability to use the fin­gers in­de­pen­
dently, while ­after the rubrospinal and reticulospinal lesions, they ­were unable 
to individualize hand control and thus had to rely on a coarse, whole-­limb 
synergy that was very similar to that used in the forelimb during locomotion.
A dif­fer­ent pertinent set of experiments was done in the cat. ­After a 
lesion of the pyramidal tract (Liddell & Phillips, 1944), cats readily moved 
around when walking on a flat surface, but they failed miserably when they 
had to place the limbs accurately, as when walking on a ladder. To place the 

188    Chapter 5
paws accurately on the rungs of the ladder requires good visuomotor coor-
dination, and an intact corticospinal tract. Recordings from PT neurons 
show that they are strongly modulated during precision walking in contrast 
to overground locomotion or when an obstacle impedes the trajectory of 
the limb during walking (Beloozerova & Sirota, 1986; Drew et al., 2008). 
The visually related input to the PT neurons in the motor cortex originates 
from neurons in the parietal lobe. The accurate foot-­placement command 
depends on cortical modulation of the locomotor-­related signals from the 
spinal locomotor generator. Drew et al. (2008) also showed that the same 
PT neuron was activated both when correcting the foot position in precision 
walking and in an in­de­pen­dent reaching task ­toward a visually identified 
object (Yakovenko & Drew, 2015). ­Under ­these conditions, the same PT 
neuron is thus recruited for the same type of movement performed in two 
very dif­fer­ent functional contexts.
Georgopoulos and Grillner (1989) argued that many arboreal species, 
such as squirrel monkeys and squirrels, throwing themselves from branch to 
branch during locomotion with ­great precision and visually evoked reaching 
movements needed during locomotion, may be the evolutionary origin of 
the well-­controlled in­de­pen­dent reaching movements that ­humans use in 
everyday life to grasp objects. The capacity to reach out and grasp objects 
varies widely among rodents, cats, squirrels, and primates, and of course, 
the need for precision walking is also variable. In mammals in general, the 
corticospinal disynaptic linkage is most likely responsible for precision walk-
ing and reaching. In primates that have evolved the direct CM coupling, the 
area for the disynaptic control has remained unchanged, presumably serving 
all types of control except that of in­de­pen­dent fin­ger movements.
In conclusion, a selective lesion of the corticospinal tract in primates and 
cats leads to deficits in fine control of the fin­gers in monkeys and precision 
walking in cats, whereas the rest of the motor control remains relatively unaf-
fected. The forebrain control of the midbrain and brainstem is thus sufficient 
to coordinate most of the motor repertoire, even without direct corticospinal 
projection. In primates, this includes the projections to the spinal cord from 
the M1, as well as the projections from the premotor, supplementary, and 
cingulate areas.

189    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
5.4  NEOCORTICAL ORGAN­IZATION AT THE CELLULAR  
LEVEL AND THE INTERACTION BETWEEN THE FRONTAL 
MOTOR AREAS, STRIATUM, AND DOWNSTREAM  
MOTOR TARGETS
5.4.1  Cellular and Columnar Organ­ization of the Neocortex
The neocortex has six layers and is divided into ontoge­ne­tically defined minicol-
umns with few neurons (Rakic, 2008). ­These minicolumns do not match the 
functionally defined cortical column, which may include several minicolumns. 
Vernon Mountcastle was the first to show that individual cortical columns in 
the somatosensory cortex have discrete innervation fields, such that the cells in 
one column are activated only by a specific cutaneous area, or even cutaneous 
sensory modality, and adjacent columns have a distinctly dif­fer­ent sensory input 
(Mountcastle et al., 1957). The extrinsic input to a column originates from the 
thalamus and targets layers 3–4 from short-­ and long-­range projections within 
the cortex. The pro­cessing within a column is then signaled to efferent target 
areas within the cortex, striatum, and other downstream centers. In the visual 
area, ­these findings ­were further developed by David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel 
(1969), who established the presence of orientation columns (which respond 
to the orientation of an object as it is moved) and a more elaborate pro­cessing 
of the visual scene with simple, complex, and hypercomplex cells, providing 
information on the qualities of objects. This work has then been carried further 
with definition of color and ocular dominance columns.
Initially, it was assumed that the neocortex consists of several ste­reo­
typed pro­cessing columns with the same cellular composition. It has now 
become clear that the functional columns can vary in size (e.g., the rodent 
barrel cortex), neuronal density, and expression of ligands and metabotropic 
receptors in vari­ous neocortical areas. Moreover, the cortex varies markedly 
between species and the depth of the cortical layers is larger in primates 
than mice (Jones, 2000; DeFelipe et al., 2002; Herculano-­Houzel et al., 
2008). Nevertheless, the general organ­ization within the neocortex is at first 
approximation ste­reo­typed with vari­ous types of excitatory pyramidal neu-
rons in the layers, a varied subset of GABAergic interneurons, and intrinsic 
connectivity within the column.

190    Chapter 5
The fast dynamic interaction within a column at the millisecond level 
is handled by glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic transmission, but the 
responsiveness within a column can also be markedly modified by modulatory 
input, acting with a longer delay, mediated by metabotropic receptors. ­There 
is a varied and rich innervation of dif­fer­ent parts of the neocortex by dopa-
minergic, 5-­HT, noradrenergic, and cholinergic neurons that can change the 
intracolumnar pro­cessing markedly. The contribution of each column to 
the operation of the brain is determined by its projections within and beyond 
the cortex.
For the motor cortex, the efferent neurons are located in layer 5, which 
contains the PT neurons, which target downstream motor centers and the 
striatum; and the intratelencephalic (IT) neurons, which proj­ect to the ipsilat-
eral and contralateral striatum and within the cortex. Both IT and PT neurons 
have extensive apical dendrites that reach the uppermost molecular layer, and 
they can sample information at all layers of the neocortex. They also have local 
axonal arbors. PT neurons can excite other PT neurons in the vicinity, while 
IT neurons can excite both PT and other IT neurons. The input from the 
thalamus mainly targets layer 4, but also layer 3, and is forwarded to layer 2, 
and then to layer 5. Layer 6 contains neurons that proj­ect to the thalamus, and 
it emphasizes the dynamic interaction with the thalamus (input/output) and 
contributes to the operation of the thalamus in terms of how much informa-
tion is transferred to the cortex and striatum from the thalamus—­partially a 
gating function. The long-­range interaction within the cortex is mediated via 
the molecular layer. It is noteworthy that impor­tant pro­cessing occurs in layer 
1 within the tips of the apical dendrites, far from the so­ma of the PT and IT 
neurons, which contributes to complex/cognitive functions such as the percep-
tual thresholds in the somatosensory cortex (Takahashi et al., 2016). Inhibiting 
the apical dendrites of the barrel cortex (activated from the whis­kers) increases 
the perceptual threshold to sensory stimulation, while a depolarization instead 
lowers the threshold. ­These data clearly show a prominent role for the pro­
cessing within the apical dendrites.
Most neurons within the cortex are excitatory and glutamatergic (80–
90 ­percent), and the remainder represent many subtypes of GABAergic inter-
neurons specialized for dif­fer­ent roles, such as the basket, tufted, Martinotti, 

191    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
and chandelier cells (Markram et al., 2004; Peng et al., 2021). They impinge 
on parts of the somatodendritic membrane of IT and PT neurons and have 
vari­ous membrane properties. It is, however, beyond the scope of this book to 
discuss the cortical microcircuits and their respective roles in dif­fer­ent sensory, 
association, and motor cortices in detail. It could be a very in­ter­est­ing subject 
for a separate treatise, however.
5.4.2  Cellular Organ­ization of the Motor Areas: PT and IT Projections
The motor areas in the frontal lobe target the spinal cord directly via corti-
cospinal pathways (PT neurons), and act via ramifications on cir­cuits in the 
striatum, thalamus, midbrain, and brainstem, which in turn generate dif­fer­ent 
patterns of be­hav­ior (figure 5.8). The direct corticospinal projections have been 
studied the most, often disregarding the equally impor­tant pro­cessing cir­cuits 
in the midbrain and brainstem that are engaged in the control of oculomo-
tor, masticatory, respiratory, and orofacial cir­cuits, and ­those for vocalization/
sound production, including speech. In addition, ­there are relays to the spinal 
Cortex
Basal 
ganglia
Motor center
Thalamus
PT
IT
–
+
A
B
Figure 5.8
Connectivity between cortical PT and IT neurons. A. Schematic repre­sen­ta­tion of the connectivity 
showing that PT neurons can target neurons at many levels, while IT neurons excite PT neurons 
and have a massive projection to the striatum. Color-­coding: excitatory neurons (red) and inhibitory 
neurons (blue). B. Illustrates one example of a reconstructed PT neuron, showing extensive ramifi-
cations within the cortex, to the striatum (red) and further to the thalamus, midbrain, and brainstem.

192    Chapter 5
cord via the midbrain/brainstem level, such as the cortico-­reticulospinal or 
cortico-­rubrospinal pathways.
The motor areas of the cortex operate in parallel via two dif­fer­ent ave­
nues (figure 5.8) as follows:
•	
Via direct projections from the pyramidal tract neurons (PT), located in 
the cortical layer 5b, to the striatum, and the downstream motor centers 
in the midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord.
•	
Via the intratelencephalic neurons (IT) in layer 5a of the same motor 
areas of the cortex as PT neurons, that proj­ect massively to the striatum 
(see chapter 4). Each IT neuron has a broad termination area. In con-
trast to PT neurons, IT neurons have extensive axonal projections to 
the contralateral side (see figure 4.10) and ramify extensively bilaterally 
in the striatum and cortex.
•	
IT neurons excite PT neurons, but ­there is no reciprocal connection. 
IT neurons can thus exert a major effect on the excitability of striatum, 
and at the same time on PT neurons. IT neurons do not proj­ect further 
downstream. The basal ganglia, via its output level, the SNr and globus 
pallidus interna (GPi), ­will then act on downstream motor centers at the 
midbrain-­brainstem level to ­either disinhibit or inhibit (see figure 5.8).
­These two pathways may then act in concert. While the PT neurons excite 
a given motor center directly, the basal ganglia act through disinhibition of 
the same motor center, mediated via SNr/GPi. Both pathways can thereby 
promote the same action (see chapter 4). This general organ­ization applies 
throughout vertebrate phylogeny, as established in two evolutionary extreme 
vertebrate groups, the lamprey and mammals (Ocana et al., 2015; Grillner 
et al., 2020).
5.4.3  ­Simple and Complex Reaction Time in ­Humans and Rodents
When a ­human is asked to press a button as a response to a flash of light 
or an auditory signal, the minimal latency between signal and the mechani-
cal response is a bit over 0.1 s. This reaction time is the required minimal 
pro­cessing time, which includes the perception of the signal. This provides 
identification that the subject must recruit the motor system to activate the 

193    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
appropriate motoneurons and then send the signal to the muscles and make 
them contract and press the button. If ­there is a choice between two signals 
and a requirement to press one or the other button depending on the signal, 
the reaction time becomes much longer and more complex. The more complex 
the task, the longer the required time ­will be, presumably due to a longer deci-
sion time. Figure 5.9a illustrates how the choice rection time varies with the 
number of choices and age. For an eight-­year-­old, the choice reaction time is 
more than three times that of adults (!!), and ­there is a progressive shortening 
­until the teens. Since the length of the reaction time cannot be reduced by 
training, it means that an eight-­year-­old would require three times longer to 
evaluate a pos­si­ble threatening situation, such as in a traffic situation when a 
car approaches.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
adult
14 yrs
10 yrs
8 yrs
Choice reaction time (s)
Number of choices
2
4
6
8
Sensory
input
Sensory
input
Delay
Planning
PT-neuron
Execution
PT-neuron
Execution
Delay
Execution
A
B
Discharge frequency
Figure 5.9
Choice reaction time and age in ­humans and motor planning in mice. A. The choice reaction 
time from two to eight choices is increasing dramatically. It is represented versus the age of the 
subjects from 8 to 10 to 14 years of age, and adults. It is noteworthy that at the age of 8, the 
reaction time is approximately three times that of the adult, which has impor­tant implications 
when considering ­children in urban traffic situations. Modified from Grillner (2012). B. During the 
planning of a movement in the mouse as a response to a stimulus of the vibrissae, the planning 
type of PT neuron in the tongue motor area in the frontal lobe starts to be active during this phase 
with sensory activation. The activity is maintained or increases during a delay period (without 
sensory stimulus) when the mouse must hold the intention to move in working memory. Fi­nally, 
when the signal to execute comes, the planning neurons are silenced, while a dif­fer­ent set of 
execution neurons become activated. Redrawn based on results from Economo et al. (2018).

194    Chapter 5
It is critical to consider the neural bases for the reaction time and the deci-
sion pro­cess, which have been addressed in monkeys and mice with dif­fer­ent 
strategies. In both cases, ­there has been a choice between one or several signals 
to respond to, and then the animal must hold the decision for several seconds 
and then receiving a go signal ­after which the animal executes the response—­
right or wrong. One in­ter­est­ing experimental model has been developed by 
the Svoboda laboratory (Economo et al., 2018; Daie et al., 2021; Peron et al., 
2020; Finkelstein et al., 2021). In ­these studies, they trained mice to move 
the tongue to the left by activating one set of vibrissae (whis­kers), or move the 
tongue to the right when activating another set of vibrissae. They identified 
two sets of PT neurons in dif­fer­ent parts of layer 5 in the part of the frontal cor-
tex that controls tongue movements. The first set was active during the period 
in which the animals made the decision and was then remembering the deci-
sion ­until they received the go signal, resulting in the response (figure 5.9b). 
­These neurons increased their discharge gradually ­until the go signal arrived. It 
was noted that distractors that could perturb the decision ­were more efficient 
in the early period, and the more time that passed, the more robust was the 
decision during the planning phase. When the go signal came, another set of 
neurons became active that ­were responsible for the execution of the tongue 
movement by activating the brainstem licking CPG. The two types of neurons 
­were in the same general location in the tongue motor area. The first set of PT 
neurons was engaged in the planning phase and interacted primarily with the 
thalamus. The other set was engaged in the execution of the tongue movement.
One in­ter­est­ing question was asked subsequently: what happens during 
the planning phase with the increase in discharge of the planning neurons and 
the progressively increasing robustness of the decision of the choice that had 
been made? The sensory input comes via the barrel cortex, the special part of 
the somatosensory cortex that deals with input from the dif­fer­ent vibrissae, 
with one barrel for each major vibrissa. Did the robustness develop in the 
barrel cortex or in the tongue motor cortex? Svoboda and colleagues elegantly 
analyzed this by introducing light-­sensitive molecules (channel-­rhodopsin 
(ChR)) into the input layer of the barrel cortex, and by weak stimuli, they 
could train the mouse to respond to brief light pulses to the barrel cortex with 
tongue movements in the preferred direction. In this way, they reduced the 

195    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
cir­cuit to the barrel cortex and the tongue motor area, and they showed that the 
progressive robustness of the decision during the planning phase took place in 
the motor area. The exact circuitry and cellular mechanisms involved are not 
yet clear, although a reverberating cir­cuit between the neurons active in the 
planning phase, some of which proj­ect to the thalamus and presumably back, 
would appear to be plausible candidates. Cellular properties such as plateau 
potentials could contribute as well and excitatory interaction within nearby 
neurons in the cortex reinforcing the plateau.
5.4.4  Top-­Down Analyses of Motor Actions in ­Humans:  
“Voluntary Control”
All movement that are self-­initiated must be classified as volitional/volun-
tary, ­whether playing the piano, tightrope walking, or just leisurely walking 
along a street, although the origin of the command may be in dif­fer­ent parts 
of the ner­vous system (Grillner & Wallén, 2004). As we discussed ­earlier 
about the supplementary cortex, an activation of the SMA in ­humans can 
lead to an urge to move, and with stronger stimulation, a movement occurs 
that the patient perceives as a self-­initiated, voluntary movement. In con-
trast, stimulation of the M1 (Fried et al., 1991, 2017) is perceived by the 
subject as an externally imposed movement. This is thus a marked step in the 
analyses of voluntary movement that a stimulation of neurons in the SMA 
can induce a feeling that the ­human subject actually perceives the movement 
elicited, as a volitional movement determined by himself or herself rather 
than the stimulation of the SMA. Similarly, a stimulation of the FEF leads 
to a saccade that can be perceived as voluntary and related to attention.
When ­humans speak, several motor-­related cortical areas are engaged 
such as the M1, SMA, PM, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), superior tem-
poral gyrus, subthalamic neurons, striatum, and Broca’s area (Zaccarella 
et al., 2021). ­There are many aspects that need to be generated in speech 
from forming appropriate sentences and recall the appropriate words and 
pronounce them in a way that is understood by ­others. Some areas are con-
cerned with syntax and phonemes.
The smallest building blocks are the pronunciations of the vowels. 
Recordings of single neurons in the ­human cortex from patients explored 

196    Chapter 5
for epileptic surgery or subjects of deep-­brain stimulation have been very 
informative (Tankus et al., 2012, 2021). Neurons in the medial part of the 
frontal lobe ­were found to be engaged in the control of the shape of the oral 
cavity, including the position of the tongue. The pronunciation of the vowels 
“i,” “u,” “e,” and “a” is based on inducing distinctly dif­fer­ent positions of the 
tongue within the mouth—­for instance, “i” requires the tip of the tongue to 
be close to the teeth, whereas “a” requires the tongue to be in a posterior posi-
tion in the mouth. Tankus et al., (2012) could show that discrete neurons 
­were strongly activated for the pronunciation of each of the vowels. ­There 
­were thus discrete populations of neurons coding for each vowel, suggest-
ing that ­there are discrete vowel command units in the brain that can be 
recruited as we speak. They presumably act via the brainstem microcircuits 
for tongue control (compare figure 5.9b). ­These vowel-­related neurons may 
even be activated if one observes the letter in writing, testifying to the link 
between execution of an action and the perception of the same function.
The link between which cir­cuits in the brain are activated as we perform 
a movement, as opposed to when we just observe the movement was dis-
cussed in relation to mirror neurons in section 5.3.3. Another more complex 
task in a similar context involves the following experiments (de Manzano 
et al., 2020). A naive subject was asked to learn to play a ­simple tune on the 
piano. As the training was done, one could via magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) observe that an area within the PM was activated. When the tune was 
presented to the subject ­later, the same frontal area was activated even though 
the subject had not attempted to play it. This was specific to the tune that 
the subject had learned to play on the piano, not to other pieces of ­music. 
Again, it seems that the perception of a given tune activates the same area in 
the cortex as was engaged when playing the melody.
In conclusion, the frontal lobe contains some neurons that give rise to 
higher-­level control and the subjective feeling that an activation of ­these 
neurons leads to the perception of the individual that the movement is per-
formed at ­will. We also have mirror neurons and the pro­cessing in Broca’s 
area and beyond that give rise to the spoken word and writing that we are as 
yet far from understanding.

197    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
5.5  MOTOR CAPACITY ­AFTER LESIONS TO THE NEOCORTEX, 
INCLUDING THE MOTOR CORTEX
The most radical experiments of inactivation of the neocortex, resulting 
in a “striatal animal,” ­were performed on a variety of mammals such as 
rabbits, rodents, and cats in the 1960s and 1970s. ­These striatal animals 
could be maintained in the laboratory for periods of months and years and 
their behavioral capacity investigated. Bjursten et al. (1976) studied cats 
(see figure 4.2 in chapter 4), in which the entire neocortex was removed 
a few weeks ­after birth. As they grew up, the decorticated kittens played 
with their littermates and ­were fed by their ­mothers, and no clear differ-
ence in motor proficiency was observed. However, ­after some months, their 
interaction with other cats declined and they appeared uninterested in their 
surroundings. They could react aggressively against other cats and display 
growling or hissing, the characteristic vocalizations of the cat. They would 
move around, remember the location of food, and eat and drink normally. 
Their movement repertoire was not dif­fer­ent from that of other cats, and 
they ­were able to explore their environment and even find their way out of a 
labyrinth. Female striatal cats impregnated by intact males displayed normal 
reproductive motor patterns. As a result, they gave birth to kittens that they 
nursed appropriately, including feeding over a period of several weeks, and 
the kittens gained weight as usual. Even a complex pattern of be­hav­ior like 
maternal be­hav­ior can thus be performed successfully without the neocortex. 
This maternal be­hav­ior depends primarily on hypothalamic cir­cuits, as ­later 
shown in rodents (Kohl et al., 2018; see also chapter 2)
­These striatal cats, without any trace of cortex, could thus generate most 
of the normal behavioral repertoire when it comes to motor coordination. 
They would walk, assume dif­fer­ent characteristic postures, eat, drink, groom 
themselves, sleep, and express the normal reproductive and maternal be­hav­
iors and as kittens, they play well with their littermates. Less information is 
available about what they ­were unable to do. As adults, they are described 
as passive, uninterested, and indifferent to what happens around them, not 
reacting to external stimuli, such as when somebody is entering the room, 
which cats normally do. Their “cognitive ability” is clearly reduced. They 

198    Chapter 5
could discriminate between light and dark and utilize this information for 
navigation in a labyrinth, presumably based on information from the SC or 
pretectum in interaction with the striatum. They most likely lacked object 
vision and the refined sensory pro­cessing that takes place in the sensory and 
higher-­order cortices. Although ­these striatal animals display an advanced 
behavioral motor repertoire without the neocortex, it seems likely that a 
detailed analy­sis of their movements would uncover some specific deficits.
Another set of experiments from the Ölvezcky laboratory with lesions 
of the frontal motor areas demonstrates the intricate interaction between 
the motor cortex and striatum (Dhawale et al., 2021). The rats ­were trained 
to press a lever twice with a fixed time interval. ­After training, the rats per-
formed the task well, and if the frontal motor areas ­were inactivated, they 
performed it equally well. If the motor cortex was lesioned before the train-
ing, however, they could not learn the task. Thus, the motor cortex was 
critical in the learning period, but not for the per­for­mance of the motor task, 
which depended on cir­cuits in the dorsolateral striatum. The motor cortex 
presumably played an instructive role during the learning period.
In conclusion, what ­these experiments show is that with the neocortex 
absent, but with the basal ganglia and hypothalamus remaining intact, a large 
part of the standard motor repertoire of an advanced mammal such as the cat 
can be performed through downstream motor centers. Clearly, movements 
adapted to the needs of the cat can be initiated and carried out. This impressive 
subcortical neural machinery can be used to generate the improvised motor 
repertoire of the intact cat, such as hunting for prey or balancing itself.
5.5.1  Stroke in ­Humans
Lesions of specialized areas of the cortex often lead to lasting handicaps in 
­humans. For instance, bilateral lesions of the V1 in the visual cortex result 
in blindness, lesions of Broca’s area on the left side (in right-­handers, and the 
reverse in left-­handers) lead to an inability to form the sounds required for 
speech, and lesions of the adjacent arm area result in difficulties in writing. 
Lesions in the area on the right side corresponding to Broca’s area cause an 
inability to create an appropriate prosody, resulting in a monotonous voice that 
lacks modulation. This means that the emotional content of the voice is lost, 

199    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
which often can be as impor­tant as the spoken words themselves. However, 
with lesions of this type, the patients are still able to understand spoken and 
written language.
With vascular lesions in the brain, as with a stroke, it is generally the case 
that they include not only the cortex, but also subcortical structures such as the 
striatum, other parts of the basal ganglia, and the many fiber bundles in the 
capsula interna. The well-­known motor symptoms such as paralysis or deficits 
in the arm and leg movement that occur ­after stroke are thus in most cases 
not due to a pure cortical lesion, but the net result of a lesion that includes the 
under­lying subcortical areas. They thus include a deficit in the forebrain control 
of cir­cuits in the midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord. In nonhuman primates 
(as discussed previously), the direct projection to the spinal cord is concerned 
primarily with delicate fin­ger movements, while most other movements 
can be executed via cir­cuits in the midbrain–­brainstem and other descending 
pathways.
Fortunately, strokes can now, at least in major medical centers, be treated 
(if detected very early) by removing blood clots through intravascular cath-
eterization. This impressive development has rescued many patients from a 
lifelong handicap and saved large costs for society. If, however, a motor deficit 
occurs ­after stroke, training should start as early as pos­si­ble, and it is impor­
tant to compensate as much as pos­si­ble for the lost control. The rationale is 
that the patient should learn to use part of the redundant circuitry available 
and learn to recruit cir­cuits that previously had not been used to achieve the 
vari­ous motor synergies used to control the arm, hand, and fin­gers.
Recently developed computer-­based rehabilitation schemes in which 
the patients must actively try to perform an action turns out to be more suc-
cessful than just training a given set of movements to train, as in traditional 
physical therapy. A virtual real­ity–­based training protocol using the “Reha-
bilitation Gaming System” (Ballester et al., 2019; Maier et al., 2019) appears 
to be efficient. The investigator/doctor can follow the pro­gress of the patient 
via the internet and ­will have the ability to modify the task gradually based 
on the per­for­mance of the patient. The gaming aspect may also increase the 
motivation of the patient, who can monitor the gradual improvement.

200    Chapter 5
5.6  CORTICAL CONTROL OF ROBOTIC ARMS VIA THE 
BRAIN-­MACHINE INTERFACE ­AFTER SPINAL CORD INJURY
Andrew Schwartz has over several de­cades analyzed the pattern of neural activ-
ity in the monkey M1 and related areas, while the monkey was performing 
not only reaching tasks (see figure 5.10) but other movements along vari­ous 
trajectories (Schwartz, 1994). The pattern of activity was then interpreted in a 
population vector algorithm (as discussed previously), in which the population 
vector could predict the direction of the movement along the path.
With this background, Velliste et al. (2008) took the bold step of record-
ing large numbers of neurons and using this neuronal activity to control a 
robotic arm via a brain-­machine interface. The monkey was first trained to 
move the robotic arm with a joystick and grasp a piece of food, which served 
as a reward (Velliste et al., 2008), while the neural activity in the M1 was 
recorded (more than 100 neurons). In the next step, the arms ­were prevented 
from moving (see figure 5.10) and the monkey could thus recruit a neural 
pattern like the one it had used in the joystick experiments and control the 
robotic arm that had a shoulder, elbow joint, and gripper as a “hand” that 
could be rotated to grasp a piece of food. This entailed that the monkey 
1111
0101
0111
y
x
z
Figure 5.10
Behavioral paradigm in an embodied control setup. Each monkey had its own arms restrained 
(inserted up to the elbow into horizontal tubes, as shown at bottom), and a prosthetic arm was 
positioned next to its shoulder. Spiking activity was pro­cessed (boxes at top right) and used 
to control the 3D arm velocity and the gripper aperture velocity in real time. Food targets ­were 
presented at arbitrary positions (top left). Redrawn and modified from Velliste et al. (2008).

201    The Role of the Cortex in the ­Control of Movement
visually identified the location of the food, moved the arm in 3D, and, when 
the gripper was located appropriately, ­were able to grasp the food and bring it 
to the mouth. The commands directed to the robot arm ­were based entirely 
on the neural activity in the motor part of the monkey’s cortex.
With this remarkable result, they went ahead and applied the same 
thinking to two volunteers with a high spinal cord injury (tetraplegia) who 
could not move their arms (Downey et al., 2016). Both could learn to con-
trol a similar robot arm with the neural activity recorded with a grid of 
implanted electrodes. In a video I saw, one of the subjects used the robot 
arm to grasp a bar of choco­late and bring it to her mouth and successfully 
took a bite out of it. ­After this, she said smilingly, “One small nibble for a 
­woman—­one ­giant bite for . . .”—­most certainly “for science,” paraphrasing 
Neil Armstrong’s words when taking his first step on the Moon.
5.7  CONCLUDING REMARKS: THE NEOCORTEX  
AND THE CONTROL OF MOVEMENT
The telencephalon is critical for our interpretation of the world around us and 
how we interpret and respond to events—­the cognitive aspects in primates, 
as well as in other vertebrates. The neocortex has par­tic­u­lar importance in the 
context of visuomotor coordination mediated from the V1 via the tempero-­
parietal dorsal stream to the premotor and motor areas of the frontal lobe and 
in parallel with the contribution of the SC via the thalamus (pulvinar) to this 
pro­cessing in the dorsal stream. In the posterior parietal lobe, ­there is mul-
tisensory integration subdivided into discrete functional modules related to 
reaching, grasping, hand-­to-­mouth, defense, eye movements, and whole-­body 
movements, The output from ­these modules is forwarded to the correspond-
ing areas in the motor and PM cortices and further to the striatum, still with 
maintained subdivisions into the same functional modules.
The motor areas of the cortex in the frontal lobe are engaged in the 
control of the many aspects of movement, including speech and precision 
movements. They have projections to the numerous motor cir­cuits at the 
midbrain, brainstem, and spinal cord levels that together represent the behav-
ioral repertoire of a species or an individual (i.e., the motor infrastructure). 

202    Chapter 5
The cortical motor areas act through direct projections via the pyramidal 
neurons (PT) in layer 5 to the motor centers but, equally impor­tant, also 
through massive projections to the striatum via both PT and intracortical 
projections (IT) that acts through disinhibition of downstream motor cen-
ters via the basal ganglia output neurons. Essentially, the functions of the 
neocortical motor areas and the basal ganglia are intertwined and comple-
ment each other. Cortical projections act via direct excitation and through 
the basal ganglia by disinhibition of the vari­ous motor centers.

6.1  INTRODUCTION
The role of the cerebellum is dif­fer­ent from that of the forebrain, in that lesions 
of the cerebellum cause a major deterioration of the quality of coordination. 
However, ­humans and other vertebrates with major cerebellar lesions can still 
initiate movement, but the perfection is lost. The coordination breaks down 
when walking, the precision of reaching and hand movements are lessened, 
and even speech may become slurred. A traditional test is to ask the patient to 
move the index fin­ger to the nose. The movement is initiated, but as the fin­ger 
gets closer to the nose, the fin­ger starts to oscillate, unable to target the nose 
with accuracy.
Without the cerebellum, movements can still be initiated due to the 
forebrain control, but without the required precision (Ito, 1984). ­There are 
essentially no clear cognitive deficits. The focus of this book is on the forebrain 
control of initiation and se­lection of be­hav­ior and the midbrain to spinal 
cord cir­cuits for the execution of movement, but it is impor­tant to include an 
account of the role and function of the cerebellum.
6.2  THE CEREBELLAR CIRCUITRY
The cerebellum, with its characteristic organ­ization, exists in all vertebrates 
(Eccles et al., 1967; Ito, 1984; Voogd, 1969; Oscarsson, 1976), except the 
lamprey (Lamanna et al., 2022), which belongs to the oldest group of liv-
ing vertebrates. The neurons in the cerebellum are densely packed, and it is 
THE CEREBELLUM: CONTRIBUTES TO 
THE PERFECTION OF COORDINATION
6

204    Chapter 6
estimated that the cerebellum has the same number of neurons as the much 
larger ce­re­bral cortex (Ito, 1984, 1989, 2002; Eccles et al., 1967). The cerebel-
lar cortex is divided into distinct longitudinal zones, each with specific input 
and output channels to the cerebellar nuclei (Oscarsson, 1976; Voogd, 1969). 
All the parts of the ner­vous system communicate with the cerebellum, from 
the neocortex to the caudal tip of the spinal cord. The input and output are 
arranged with specific areas for dif­fer­ent functions and dif­fer­ent parts of the 
body are represented in an orderly fashion. In a schematic way (see figure 6.1), 
the vestibular input targets the flocculus, the input from the spinal cord targets 
the medial and anterior parts of cerebellum (vermis), while the input from the 
brainstem-­midbrain level is located somewhat more laterally at an intermedi-
ate level, and that from the ce­re­bral cortex targets the lateral parts, the neo-
cerebellum (figure 6.1). The cerebellum receives detailed information from 
proprioceptors, exteroceptors such as cutaneous and pain afferents, vision, and 
hearing. This information is continuously updated and concerned with the 
motor commands issued (efference copy; Ito, 1984; Orlovsky et al., 1999). The 
Cerebellum
vermis
Neo-
cerebellum
Intermediate
Cortex
Striatum
Dentate
Interpositus
Fastigial
Vestibular
nucleus
Vestibulospinal
Red nucleus
rubrospinal
Thalamus
Brainstem
reticulospinal
Neocortex
Midbrain
Spinal cord
brainstem
Flocculus
Figure 6.1
Schematic of the afferent and efferent projections of the compartments of the mammalian cer-
ebellum. The compartments of the cerebellum, neocerebellum, intermediate, and vermis have 
dif­fer­ent output channels, the dentate, the interpositus, and the fastigial nuclei, respectively. 
They in turn proj­ect in an ascending direction via the thalamus or in a descending direction via 
the vari­ous descending pathways. For details see figure 6.3.

205    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
cerebellum can therefore be regarded as a dynamic store­house of information 
of every­thing that is ­going on in the motor system at a given point of time.
The only output cells of the cerebellum are the large Purkinje cells, which 
have a very extensive fanlike (flat) dendritic tree, and they are positioned one 
­after the other in columns of cells (Eccles et al., 1967). Perpendicular to the 
orientation of the dendritic tree, ­there are bundles of parallel fibers, the axons 
of the granule cells, that pass through a sequence of dendritic trees with the 
potential to form synapses on them (figure 6.2). The fact that the cerebellar 
Purkinje cells, the output of a major part of the central ner­vous system, ­were 
inhibitory and GABAergic rather than excitatory came as a shock to the 
neuroscience community, when Masao Ito reported this in the late 1960s 
(Ito and Yoshida, 1966; Ito, 1972). Now the cerebellum is joined by the basal 
ganglia, amygdala, and other structures as providing output control through 
inhibition and disinhibition, while the cortical output, superior colliculus 
(SC), most descending pathways, and all the sensory afferents have an almost 
exclusively excitatory output. Ito, at this early stage, also wrote The Cerebel-
lum as a Neuronal Machine with Eccles and Szentagothai (Eccles et al., 1967) 
emphasizing the repetitive neuronal design with parallel cir­cuits.
6.2.1  Climbing and Mossy Fibers Play Distinctly Dif­fer­ent Roles
The input to the cerebellum is conveyed via two input channels (figure 6.2):
1.	 The granule cells, which continue as parallel fibers in the cerebellar cortex, 
are numerous, and thousands of parallel fibers impinge on the dendrites 
of a single Purkinje cell. Each granule cell receives specific input from only 
a few mossy fibers (as discussed next) that form very extensive synapses on 
the granule cells and elicit large excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) 
such that the activation of only a few mossy fibers can lead to an action 
potential in the granule cell. Each granule cell receives input only from 
mossy fibers, mostly with very similar function (e.g., a small part of the 
skin), and thus carry a very precise type of information (Ekerot and Jörntell, 
2008; Jörntell and Ekerot, 2011). In addition to Purkinje cells, parallel 
fibers activate two types of inhibitory interneurons: the Golgi cells, which 
provides inhibitory feedback to the granule cells; and the basket cells, 

206    Chapter 6
which provide lateral inhibition to Purkinje cells located laterally to ­those 
activated from the local parallel fibers (Eccles et al., 1967; Ito, 1984, 1989).
2.	 The climbing fibers originating from the inferior olive. In contrast to granule 
cells, only one climbing fiber innervates a single Purkinje cell, and its axonal 
arbor is distributed over the entire dendritic surface of the cell (Ito, 1984). 
The climbing fiber activation depolarizes the dendritic arbor of the Pur-
kinje cell and leads to a prominent depolarization that can induce a plateau 
potential in parts of the dendritic tree, which ­will promote a long-­lasting 
depolarization and synaptic plasticity (Ekerot and Oscarsson, 1981; Ekerot 
and Kano, 1985). The climbing fibers are mediating an error message to 
the Purkinje cells and activate the entire dendritic tree and can give rise to 
Mossy ﬁber
Granule cell
Inferior olive
Purkinje cell
Cerebellar 
nuclei
Climbing 
ﬁber
ml
pcl
gl
Error
message
Figure 6.2
Schematic repre­sen­ta­tion of the cerebellar circuitry. The cerebellar cortex has three layers: a 
granule cell layer (gl), a Purkinje cell layer (pcl), and a molecular layer (ml), in which the parallel 
fibers from the granule cells extend their axons. The inhibitory (blue) Purkinje cells form synapses 
on the cerebellar nuclei, which also receive excitation from the collaterals of the mossy fibers that 
has extensive synaptic terminals on the granule cells. The climbing fibers have very extensive 
terminals on the entire dendritic tree of the Purkinje cell. The cell bodies of the climbing fibers 
are located in the inferior olive.

207    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
synaptic plasticity in the parallel fiber synapses that provide input to the 
Purkinje cells at the same time as the climbing fiber signal arrives.
The error message can be from a wound, for instance, as if one hurts a foot, 
causing a pain response that activates the climbing fibers (Ekerot et al., 1987). 
If occurring during a movement, it ­will induce changes of the movement to 
minimize pain (e.g., limping). For eye movements, a ret­i­nal slip over the ret­ina 
­will produce blurring of vision and a climbing fiber response (Ito, 1972, 1984).
The inferior olive is divided into many discrete modules, each with 
specific input from a given part of the spinal cord, brainstem, or cortex 
(Oscarsson, 1968, 1976). Within each module, the local inferior olive neu-
rons are connected through gap junctions (Llinás, 2013) and thus tend to 
become synchronized.
6.2.2  The Organ­ization of the Cerebellar Cortex and the Output Targets
The cerebellar cortex is subdivided into longitudinal zones with specific 
inputs (Oscarsson, 1968, 1976; Voogd, 1969; Apps et al., 2018) that further 
subdivide the vermal, intermediate, and lateral parts of the cerebellum into 
functional stripes. In the vermal and intermediate parts (figure 6.1), further-
more, ­there are small microregions that have specific inputs from groups of 
climbing fibers and sets of parallel fibers that impinge on the Purkinje cells. 
Together, they form what is called a “micromodule” (De Zeeuw, 2021). Each 
micromodule is thought to control a discrete muscle group, somewhere in 
the body, via downstream pathways to the motor neurons. ­There are numer-
ous micromodules, side by side. Micromodules appear to be of two kinds—­
those in which Purkinje cells have a high resting rate and then reduce their 
activity during learning, and another group of cells with a low rest rate that 
instead increase their activity during learning (De Zeeuw, 2021).
The output from the lateral part of the cerebellar cortex, the neocerebel-
lum, is channeled via the dentate nucleus to the thalamus, and then to the 
basal ganglia and cortex (figure 6.1). ­There are major connections to the motor 
areas of the frontal lobe, as well as to other parts of the cortex. As noted ­earlier, 
the entire neocortex proj­ects via the lateral reticular nucleus as mossy fibers 
to the new lateral parts of the cerebellar cortex, and ­there is thus a reciprocal 
interaction.

208    Chapter 6
The intermediate part of the cerebellar cortex proj­ects to the interpositus 
nucleus, which in turn proj­ects to the thalamus and the red nucleus in the 
mesencephalon, while the medial part of cerebellum, the vermis, targets the 
fastigial nucleus. Findings by Fujita et al. (2020) have revealed that ­there is 
a very detailed compartmental and functional organ­ization with input from 
specific parts of the cerebellar cortex to five division of the fastigial nucleus 
(figure 6.3). The vermal area (yellow) proj­ects to a posturomotor section of the 
fastigial nucleus, which is concerned with the control of reaching/grasping, 
locomotion, posture, and cardiorespiratory cir­cuits. ­There is an oromotor area 
(pink) in a more lateral compartment of the cerebellar cortex, which controls 
the yaws, and that represents a major control area for exploration, feeding, and 
defense. It also includes whisking and arousal. ­These two areas contain large 
neurons considered to mediate rapid responses and online control. A third 
area (blue), juxtaposed with the oromotor area, is concerned with orienting 
responses and targets the SC and is involved in eye/head movement. This 
area also proj­ects to the thalamostriatal neurons and to the periaqueductal 
gray (PAG; threats). Surrounding the posturomotor area, ­there is a positional-­
autonomic area (green) involved in the coupling between movement and 
autonomic functions (respiration, circulation). Fi­nally, an area (mauve) with 
somewhat dif­fer­ent characteristics, referred to as “vigilance,” is related to defen-
sive arousal, freezing, and the control of dopamine neurons in the substantia 
nigra pars compacta (SNc), which is associated with salience/reward and moti-
vation. The fastigial neurons in the last three areas are somewhat smaller than 
in the first two, suggesting a more modulatory role. All ­these compartments 
contain glutamatergic projection neurons, but ­there are also GABAergic neu-
rons within the fastigial nucleus.
The inferior olive projections are also divided into five compartments, 
which proj­ect to the corresponding areas in the fastigial nucleus and the 
cerebellar cortex. They receive input from the fastigial nucleus, the spino-­
olivary pathways, and many other structures related to the operation of the 
five fastigial compartments.
Not only do the dentate and interpositus nuclei proj­ect to certain tha-
lamic nuclei, but also many of the functional compartments in the fastigial 
nucleus target the thalamic nuclei related to motor function. The thalamic 

209    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
F1R
F1
rDLP
F2
F3 F4
Oromotor (F1rDLP)
Posturomotor (F1R)
Brainstem - reach/grasp (MdV)
Posture (LVN, ret.sp)
Locomotion (LPGi)
Spinal cord
Cardiorespiratory
Oromotor/premotor (N. V and VII)
Trigemomotor activity
Whisking
Arousal
Positional autonomic (F3)
Airway control
Locomotion-respiration coupling
Posturo-autonomic
Orienting response (F2)
Superior colliculus
Eye/head mocement
Thalamostriatal (PF)
Threat (lPAG)
Vigilance (F4)
Defensive arousal
Hippocampal activation
Salience-reward (SNc)
Freezing (vlPAG)
Cortical arousal
Fastigial
nucleus
Inferior olive
Cerebellar cortex
MAO
Beta
a
b
c
d
Cr I
Cr II
Sim
I
II
III
IV
V
VIc
VIab
VII
VIII
X
IXab
IXc
Figure 6.3
Modular cir­cuit connections of excitatory fastigial projection neurons provide cir­cuit substrates 
for coordinating five broad organismal functions. Schematics summarize cerebellar modular cir­
cuit connections that link distinct types of fastigial nucleus neurons with specific neurons in the 
inferior olive, cerebellar cortex, and downstream brain regions. Projection targets of each fastigial 
nucleus cell type are indicated in dif­fer­ent colors (as described in the text). Specific functions 
associated with each collection of projection targets are indicated; proposed broad organismal 
functions of each module are encircled above. To show the distribution of Purkinje cells associ-
ated with each module, a flat map of the mouse cerebellar cortex with vermis lobules is indicated 
numerically. Inferior olive subnuclei of the caudal medial accessory olive (MAO) are denoted as 
a, b, c, d, and beta. Circles around each fastigial nucleus cell type indicate its relative size and 
parasagittal position. Abbreviations: Cr I, Crus I; Cr II, Crus II; lPAG, lateral periaqueductal gray; 
LPGi, lateral paragigantocellular nucleus; LVN, lateral vestibular nucleus; MdV, medullary reticular 
nucleus, ventral; N. V, trigeminal nucleus; N. VII, facial nucleus; PF, parafascicular thalamic nucleus; 
ret. sp., reticulospinal nuclei; Sim, simplex lobule; SNc, substantia nigra pars compacta; vlPAG, 
ventrolateral periaqueductal gray. Modified with permission from Fujita et al. (2020).

210    Chapter 6
nuclei forward information to the ce­re­bral cortex, including the frontal lobe 
and to the striatum. The fact that ­there is a major efficient transmission 
from the cerebellar nuclei to the intralaminar nuclei in the thalamus, and 
further to the striatum, has been appreciated only during the last several 
years (Bostan & Strick, 2018; Caligiore et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2014; but 
see, however, Strick et al., 2009). This is a very efficient disynaptic transmis-
sion from the cerebellar nuclei to the striatum. This connection most likely 
provides impor­tant information to the striatum since the thalamic input 
to the striatum represents no less than 40 ­percent of its excitatory input, 
with the remainder coming mainly from the vari­ous parts of the cortex (see 
chapter 4). What types of movement-­specific information that is provided to 
the striatum from the cerebellum is not yet clear, but since the cerebellum is 
considered impor­tant for the timing of events (Llinás, 2013; Tsutsumi et al., 
2020), this could well be an impor­tant aspect of the interaction between 
­these two structures engaged in the control of movement.
In conclusion, ­there is an intricate and precise organ­ization of the fas-
tigial nucleus related to function (i.e., posturomotor, oromotor, orienting 
movements, positional autonomic, and vigilance), with specific projections 
to structures in the spinal cord, brainstem, midbrain, thalamus, and inferior 
olive (Fujita et al., 2020). Each of ­these fastigial compartments receives input 
from its own territory in the cerebellar cortex, to which the vari­ous parts of the 
inferior olive proj­ect (figure 6.3). ­These findings emphasize the fine granularity 
of the pro­cessing that takes place within the modules of the cerebellum at the 
input level, the cerebellar cortex and nuclei, and the projections of the climbing 
fiber from the inferior olive to the Purkinje cells and cerebellar nuclei.
6.3  SPINAL CORD INTERACTION WITH THE CEREBELLUM: 
LOCOMOTION AND OTHER MOVEMENTS
The locomotor movements engaging all parts of the body are among the 
most complex since they need to be adapted to a wide variety of conditions, 
speeds, terrains, and objects of locomotor activity (e.g., foraging or escape). 
It is therefore critical that all the cir­cuits involved be optimally calibrated, 
which is a task for the cerebellum (Orlovsky, 1972a,b,c; Orlovsky et al., 

211    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
1999). ­There are four major pathways that forward dif­fer­ent types of infor-
mation to the cerebellum from the spinal cord concerned with locomotion, 
but also other rhythmic motor activities (figure 6.4):
1.	 The dorsal spinocerebellar tract (DSCT) originates from the lumbar spi-
nal cord and forwards information from proprioceptors such as muscle 
spindles and Golgi tendon organs, which become activated during each 
step when walking, as well as during other movements (figure 6.4). 
The DSCT neurons therefore become rhythmically active during loco-
motion (Arshavsky et al., 1972) and forward impor­tant information 
regarding the ­actual phase of the movement of the limb within the step 
cycle (hip joint ­angle) and the length of the limb (dynamic distance 
between the foot and the hip joint). The DSCT keeps the cerebellum 
continuously informed of the exact configuration of the hindlimb and 
­whether it is flexed or extended, which is of par­tic­u­lar importance when 
the limb makes contact with the ground at the end of the swing phase 
(Orlovsky et al., 1999; Grillner & El Manira, 2020). This provides 
dynamic information regarding the ­actual ongoing movements, which 
is transmitted to the cerebellum via the DSCT, which terminates as 
mossy fiber terminals on the granule cells in the cerebellar posturomotor 
area (figure 6.3). They continue as parallel fibers in the cerebellar cortex 
to synapse onto the dendrites of the Purkinje cells (see figure 6.2). The 
mossy fibers elicit large unitary EPSPs on the granule cells (Ekerot and 
Jörntell, 2008), and they may each receive only a few afferent DSCT 
fibers and can therefore forward very specific proprioceptive informa-
tion to the Purkinje cells.
2.	 The ventral spinocerebellar pathway (VSCT) forwards information 
regarding the commands issued by the central pattern generator net-
work (CPG) for locomotion in the spinal cord (Arshavsky et al., 1978a, 
1984). VSCT neurons are activated parallel to the commands to the 
flexor muscles. The VSCT also terminates as mossy fibers on a separate 
set of granule cells from that of the DSCT. The VSCT provides a copy 
of the commands issued to flexor motor neurons in each step cycle. This 
is referred to as an “efference copy.”

212    Chapter 6
3.	 The spino-­reticulo-­cerebellar pathway (SRCP) provides efference copy infor-
mation regarding the CPG commands to the extensor muscles (Arshavsky 
et al., 1978b, 1984). The spinoreticular information is relayed in the lateral 
reticular nucleus and continued as mossy fibers, to terminate on the granule 
cells, and then via parallel fibers to the Purkinje cells. Also, propriospinal 
neurons in the cervical spinal cord, involved in reaching movements have 
collateral that provides efference copy information to the lateral reticular 
nucleus and cerebellum via mossy fibers (Azim et al., 2014). The combined 
information forwarded to the anterior lobe of the cerebellum (posturomotor 
area) from the spinal cord cir­cuits is concerned with both the commands 
issued from the extensor and the flexor part of the spinal CPGs through the 
Cerebellum
Spinal cord
Motoneurons
Feed back
VSCT, mossy ﬁbers
(efference copy)
DSCT, mossy ﬁbers
Spinoolivary tract,
climbing ﬁbers
(error)
CPG
Basal ganglia
MLR
Reticulospinal
(LGCi)
Locomotor drive
Vestibulospinal
Rubrospinal
Reticulospinal
Figure 6.4
Interaction between the cerebellum and the locomotor CPG. The cerebellum receives input from 
the moving limb through the DSCT, efferent CPG commands via the VSCT, and error information 
through the spino-­olivary tract. The cerebellum provides compensatory adaptations through the 
vestibulospinal, rubrospinal, and reticulospinal pathways. Abbreviations: LGCi, lateral paragigan-
tocellular nucleus; MLR, mesencephalic locomotor region. From Grillner and El Manira (2020).

213    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
VSCT and SRCP, and equally impor­tant, with the ­actual movements that 
are produced and conveyed through the DSCT. This information is thus 
able to evaluate if the CPG commands issued have resulted in the antici-
pated movement or if some perturbation may have occurred (figure 6.4).
4.	 The spino-­olivo-­cerebellar pathway forwards information of the error mes-
sage type to the inferior olive, which consists of olivocerebellar neurons, 
each of which terminates as a climbing fiber on a few selected Purkinje 
cells (figure 6.2). At rest, the olivary neurons have a very low rest rate (e.g., 
1 Hz), but if an intense activation occurs (e.g., from local pain afferents), 
they become strongly activated and provide an intense discharge over an 
extended period (Yanagihara & Udo, 1994). The climbing fibers, when 
activated, produce a complex spike due to massive activation of the den-
dritic tree of the Purkinje cell, while parallel fiber activation leads only to 
a conventional, ­simple spike. If a climbing fiber burst occurs, this leads 
to a massive Ca2+ entry into the Purkinje cell dendrites, and a synaptic 
plasticity is induced in the parallel fiber synapses that are activated. The 
under­lying activation of sets of protein kinases and phosphatases has been 
described in many reviews (Ito, 2002) and ­will not be dealt with ­here.
6.3.1  Pro­cessing in the Cerebellum and Downstream  
Control of Spinal Cir­cuits
The input from the DSCT, VSCT, and SRCP is fed into the anterior lobe of 
the cerebellum, and during locomotion, each of ­these pathways is rhythmi-
cally active and activates its own set of granule cells/parallel fibers (Arshavsky 
et al., 1972, 1978a, 1984; Orlovsky et al., 1999). The DSCT is signaling how 
the step proceeds within each step cycle based on proprioceptive information, 
while the VSCT and SRCP become activated along with the flexor and extensor 
commands from the CPG, respectively. This is mirrored in the parallel fiber 
activity and the subsequent excitation provided to the Purkinje cells that ­will 
become rhythmically active. The GABAergic Purkinje cells represent the only 
output of the cerebellum.
In the medial part of the cerebellum, the posturomotor area (spinocer-
ebellum), Purkinje cells target the fastigial nucleus, which activates reticulo-
spinal neurons, and Deiters’s nucleus, the origin of the fast vestibulospinal 

214    Chapter 6
tract, providing monosynaptic excitation to extensor motoneurons (see also 
figures 6.3 and 6.4). In the intermediate part of the cerebellum, the Purkinje 
cells target the interpositus nucleus, which proj­ects to the red nucleus, the origin 
of the rubrospinal pathway, and to the thalamus. The net result is that during 
locomotion, vestibulospinal, rubrospinal, and reticulospinal neurons become 
rhythmically active. The last two operate with the flexors, while the vestibu-
lospinal pathway is active with the extensors (Orlovsky, 1972a,b,c; Orlovsky 
et al., 1999). This means that the cerebellar output reinforces the activity of the 
spinal CPG during ongoing locomotion.
If the cerebellum is inactivated, the modulation of all three descending 
pathways dis­appears, which means that that the modulation of the activity 
of the vari­ous pathways depends entirely on the input from the cerebellum 
(Orlovsky et al 1972a,b,c; Orlovsky et al., 1999). The rubrospinal and reticu-
lospinal inputs remain active without modulation, but with a lower overall 
frequency of discharge. In contrast, the vestibulospinal input is active at a 
higher resting rate when the cerebellum is inactivated than when it is intact, 
which relates to the fact that the vestibulospinal neurons have direct input 
from the inhibitory GABAergic Purkinje cells.
A perturbation of the locomotor activity (e.g., by delaying the transition 
from the support to the swing phase) ­will cause a change in cerebellar activity 
and the activity of the descending pathways. This means that efference copy 
information from the CPG, mediated via the VSCT and SRCP, is critical. 
Interference with the motion of the lower part of the leg has no or ­little impact 
on the cerebellar activity. The modulation of the locomotor activity through the 
descending pathways does contribute to the overall motor activity since lesions 
or cooling of the anterior cerebellar cortex leads to altered movement amplitude 
(Yanagihara & Udo, 1994; Orlovsky et al., 1999; Grillner & El Manira, 2020).
6.3.2  Cerebellar Learning and Motor Coordination during Locomotion
The cerebellum can adapt movements over longer periods through a form of 
learning. This is an error-­driven pro­cess mediated through the climbing fibers, 
through which movements (­whether eye or locomotor) can be modified. A 
wound in the foot leads to a limping motor pattern to minimize the pain 
(Ekerot et al., 1987), which most likely is a cerebellar adaptation. In another 

215    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
example, when a ­human or a mammal is asked to walk on two ­belts ­going at 
dif­fer­ent speeds, one for the left leg and another for the right leg, a modified 
motor pattern with a complex adaptation regarding both temporal and spatial 
adaptations occurs (Darmohray et al., 2019). Recordings of the climbing fibers 
in the anterior cerebellar lobe show that an enhanced climbing fiber activity 
­will occur, particularly in the touchdown phase of the limb movement, repre-
senting the most critical phase of the limb trajectory in each step cycle. Lesions 
of the anterior lobe led to an inability to learn the new adapted motor pattern. 
Any sudden perturbations occurring during locomotion ­will lead to a marked 
increase in climbing fiber activity, providing an error signal.
6.4  THE CEREBELLUM AND THE VESTIBULO-­OCULAR AND 
OPTOKINETIC REFLEXES: CALIBRATION OF MOTOR ACTION
6.4.1  The Vestibulo-­Ocular Reflex
Our ability to rapidly focus on salient stimuli through rapid eye movements 
(saccades), bringing the object of interest into the fovea centralis, the area of 
ret­ina with the highest density of photoreceptors, is essential for everyday life. 
The ret­i­nal afferents proj­ect to a retinotopic map in the SC (see chapter 3) and 
via the thalamus to the visual areas in the cortex. The eye movements are due 
to the activation of neurons in the SC and the frontal eye field (FEF) and are 
related to attention (see chapter 5). To maintain the gaze at the same point 
while the head is moving requires rapid compensation. For example, if you 
are ­running with your head moving up and down in each step cycle or when 
being transported in a ­horse and carriage, the head ­will move up and down 
in an unpredictable way, which would cause the vision to become blurred, if 
not for compensatory eye movements. The movement of the head in space, 
however, is constantly monitored by a vestibular apparatus (i.e., a semicircular 
canal), which provides well-­calibrated corrective signals in all planes to activate 
the appropriate combination of eye muscles to counterrotate the eye so that the 
focus on the object is maintained by keeping the image within the fovea cen-
tralis. For our survival, this aspect of vision, which allows for rapidly inspecting 
salient stimuli, friend or foe, is critical. Maintaining the gaze is handled by the 
vestibulo-­ocular reflex that is pre­sent in all vertebrates (Wibble et al., 2022).

216    Chapter 6
The basic organ­ization of the vestibulo-­ocular reflex is provided by ves-
tibular afferents connected to vestibular interneurons that impinge on the 
motoneurons (figure 6.5) that activate the eye muscles, which have the fastest 
muscle fibers in the body, to provide rapid correction of eye position. Take, 
for instance, a rapid horizontal movement to the right, which would require 
a counterrotation to the left of both eyes but with opposing eye muscles 
(lateral rectus on one side, and medial on the other).
It follows that the vestibulo-­ocular reflex needs to be precise, and not over-
compensate or undercompensate, a calibration task for which the cerebellum 
is required. If you wear new glasses or are subject to even larger deviations by 
seeing the world through prisms, the vision gets blurred. This ­will give rise to 
an increased activity in the climbing fibers, resulting in an error signal that 
acts on the level of the Purkinje cell dendrites and readapts the strength of the 
parallel fiber synapses onto the Purkinje cells located in the vestibular part of 
the cerebellum, the flocculus. That the climbing fibers act as error detectors 
Flocculus
pc
Granular
cell
vest.
affer.
vest.
ncl.
MN
0
Eye
LTD
Climbing ﬁber
(error)
Parallel 
ﬁber
Figure 6.5
Schematic repre­sen­ta­tion of the vestibulo-­ocular reflex and its adaptation through the cerebellum 
(flocculus). The vestibular afferents activate granular cells that continue as parallel fibers and make 
synapses onto the Purkinje cells (pc). Ret­i­nal afferents activated by a ret­i­nal slip provides an error 
message forwarded by the inferior olive as a climbing fiber message that elicits a massive depolar-
ization of the Purkinje cell dendritic tree. This leads to an accompanying Ca2+ entry with effects on 
downstream protein kinases leading to a modification of the parallel fiber synapses onto the Pur-
kinje cell (LTD), but only the synapses that are activated concurrently with the climbing fiber input. 
Abbreviations: MN, motor neurons; vest. ncl., vestibular nuclei; vest. affer., vestibular afferents.

217    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
and can modify the gain of the parallel fiber synapses was first conceived by 
Ito (1972) and is still one of the main princi­ples of cerebellar function. The 
climbing fiber activation leads to calcium ions entering the dendrites of Pur-
kinje cells, which in turn activates a complex set of protein kinases that can 
elicit long-­term depression (LTD) of the parallel fiber synapses that become 
activated by the vestibular input in conjunction with the climbing fiber activity 
(Ito, 2002). This ­will result in a modified degree of activation of the GABAer-
gic Purkinje cells, and therefore a modified gating of the transmission in the 
vestibular nuclei. However, additional plasticity (LTP or LTD) occurs in other 
synapses, notably in ­those of the mossy fibers that provide collateral activation 
of the floccular target neurons through cerebellar Golgi interneurons, on the 
cells of the dif­fer­ent output nuclei, and in the cerebellar cortex (Lisberger, 
2021; De Zeeuw, 2021).
It is easy to understand how impor­tant the vestibulo-­ocular reflex is 
in everyday life and for survival, and therefore why an accurate cerebellar 
mechanism for recalibration is crucial.
6.4.2  The Optokinetic Reflex
The optokinetic reflex also provides another mechanism for stabilizing the 
vision. If the head remains in a stable position, while the object being looked 
at moves over the ret­ina rather than remains in a stable position, it is referred 
to as a “ret­i­nal slip” (Lisberger, 2021). This gives rise to a ret­i­nal afferent 
response via the pretectum and the vestibular nuclei and the gaze centers 
that activates the eye muscles. This is a conserved subcortical cir­cuit in which 
the optokinetic reflex converges partially on the same neuronal optokinetic 
response over the ret­ina (Wibble et al., 2022). It has a much longer latency 
than the vestibulo-­ocular reflex with its very short latency. One can easily 
convince oneself of the marked difference by holding a fin­ger in front of 
oneself while rapidly rotating the head. Through the vestibulo-­ocular reflex, 
one can maintain a stable image of the fin­ger even at high head velocities. 
In contrast, if you instead move the fin­ger back and forth, keeping the 
head stationary, one loses the image at a very modest speed of rotation! 
Whereas the optokinetic reflex is subcortical (Wibble et al., 2022), a reoc-
curring ret­i­nal slip leads to a climbing fiber response and the same type of 

218    Chapter 6
cerebellar recalibration takes place as outlined for the vestibulo-­ocular reflex 
(Ito, 1984). This ­will help to recalibrate the optokinetic reflex, and thereby 
eye movement.
6.5  PARALLEL FIBER SYNAPSES ONTO PURKINJE CELLS: 
ACTIVE AND ­SILENT SYNAPSES—­PLASTICITY
The parallel fiber synapse onto Purkinje cells and cerebellar interneurons can 
both be downregulated as in LTD or upregulated as in long-­term potentia-
tion (LTP). LTP can occur when parallel fibers are stimulated in an LTP 
protocol, while climbing fiber activation tends to cause LTD (see, De Zeeuw, 
2021). In the anterior lobe of the cerebellum, the skin surface is represented 
in certain sagittal zones so that each Purkinje cells may have very ­limited 
input from one digit or a very localized skin area ­limited to a few cubic cen-
timeters. Light cutaneous activation is sufficient to activate the receptive field 
(Jörntell and Ekerot, 2011). The activation is then mediated by a discrete 
set of mossy fibers/parallel fibers, leading to an activation of Purkinje cells.
Of all the synapses that impinge on the dendritic tree of a Purkinje cell, 
most remain ­silent, but they can be awakened within minutes. A brief electri-
cal repeated stimulus of the surrounding skin areas, with trains of 5 minutes, 
elicits a marked expansion of the receptive field within minutes, particularly 
when combined with climbing fiber input. The receptive field can then be 
markedly expanded from a very small area to include the ­whole limb. This is 
due to synaptic plasticity in the synapses between parallel fibers and the Pur-
kinje cells and interneurons (Jörntell and Ekerot, 2011). This example shows 
that the potential receptive field is flexible and subject to modification due to 
the input being received from climbing and parallel fibers (De Zeeuw, 2021). 
The implication is also that, of the many parallel fibers that impinge on a Pur-
kinje cell, only a few have active synapses from a given area; but with specific 
additional climbing fiber input, other synapses can be recruited, resulting in 
a modified receptive field. A given Purkinje cell thus has the potential to serve 
dif­fer­ent innervation fields that depend on changes in the gains of the vari­ous 
parallel fiber synapses. It is estimated that perhaps only 2.5 ­percent represent 
active parallel fiber synapses and the rest remain ­silent, but with the potential 

219    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
to be recruited rapidly into action (Jörntell and Ekerot, 2011). Each Purkinje 
cell thus has the potential to add or subtract new active synapses.
6.6  THE CEREBELLUM’S ROLE FOR LEARNING TO  
ASSOCIATE TWO RELATED BUT IN­DE­PEN­DENT  
PRO­CESSES: CONDITIONED REFLEXES
One aspect of learning involves the calibration and optimization of the per­for­
mance of vari­ous types of movements, which is clearly an impor­tant aspect of 
motor control and for which the cerebellum plays a key role. Another action 
is to learn to associate two in­de­pen­dent pro­cesses with each other. An air puff 
to the eye is perceived as unpleasant, leading to a blink reflex. If the air puff is 
preceded by an auditory signal, an association is formed between the two 
stimuli so that the auditory signal elicits a blink reflex before the air puff is 
presented (McCormick & Thompson, 1984 a, b; Thompson & Krupa, 1994; 
Jirenhed et al., 2017). This depends on pro­cesses in a specific microregion of 
the cerebellar C3 zone. The climbing fibers become activated by the air puff, 
which in turn affects the Purkinje cell, which then can lead to synaptic plastic 
changes in the parallel fibers activated by the auditory input (Boele et al., 2010; 
Thompson & Krupa, 1994; Jirenhed et al., 2017). Plasticity at the level of 
the dentate nucleus also contributes (McCormick & Thompson, 1984 a, b).
6.7  MODELING AND SIMULATION OF THE  
CEREBELLAR CIRCUITRY
The stereotypic circuitry over the entire cerebellar cortex, with specific input 
for each ­little part of the cerebellum and conserved circuitry and output 
structure, suggests that the computation in each specific part of cerebellum is 
similar. It depends essentially on the input provided to the cerebellar micro-
circuits, and the output effects are a function of the efferent connections. 
Marr (1969) and Albus (1971) each made a conceptual model of cerebellar 
learning, which caused Ito (1972) to suggest, based on detailed experimen-
tation, essentially the current hypothesis of cerebellar function (Lisberger, 
2021). The climbing fiber input is considered as the error signal, and the 

220    Chapter 6
learning is conceived to occur in the parallel fiber input based on the work 
on the vestibulo-­ocular reflex. Additional layers of understanding have been 
added since 1972, however (e.g., Kawato & Gomi, 1992; Kawato et al., 
1987, 2021; Tokuda et al., 2017), considering the interaction between the 
cerebellum and the visuomotor control via the neocortex controlling bio-
logically based hominoid robots. Their visuomotor coordination was even 
sufficient for the robot to successfully play ping-­pong. Detailed data-­driven 
modeling of the Purkinje cells with their extensive dendritic tree, role in 
plasticity, and the related cellular microcircuits have provided impor­tant 
insights (Zang et al., 2020; de Schutter, 1994). The detailed simulation of 
the integrated cerebellar machinery is currently performed in the laboratory 
of Egidio d’Angelo and studies are looking at how it can be used to control 
downstream motor centers (e.g., Bares et al., 2019).
6.8  CONCLUDING REMARKS: THE OVERALL ROLE  
OF THE CEREBELLUM
To summarize, lesions of the cerebellum lead to a lack of precision in the 
movements that are performed; although they can be initiated, the move-
ments are generally slower and less coordinated than normal. The cerebellum 
receives input from all parts of the ner­vous system conveyed via afferents ter-
minating as mossy fibers onto granule cells, providing very detailed informa-
tion on what is ­going on in any cir­cuit from the spinal cord to the neocortex. 
Each of the numerous modules (microzones) of the cerebellum most likely 
does its own ­thing, so ­there is an extensive parallel pro­cessing. This informa-
tion is forwarded by numerous granule cells through the parallel fibers to the 
Purkinje cells. A common princi­ple is that information is forwarded on events 
mediated from proprioceptors in muscles and joints or other types of recep-
tors, which can be compared with the central commands for execution of 
specific movements (what is referred to as “efference copies”). For locomotion, 
dif­fer­ent pathways to the cerebellum signal the flexor and extensor commands 
being issued, compared with information on how the movements actually 
proceed. The cerebellum is thus a dynamic store­house providing information 
on what is happening in each corner of the ner­vous system.

221    The Cerebellum: Contributes to the Perfection of Coordination
The most impor­tant function of the cerebellum is to help correct move-
ments when ­there is a dysfunction, such as when the vestibulo-­ocular reflex 
needs to be recalibrated, if one gets new glasses, or locomotor movements need 
to be modified due to a wound that activates pain receptors. The error message 
is transmitted through neurons in the inferior olive via climbing fibers that 
activate Purkinje cells, which in turn can change the gain in the parallel fiber 
synapses onto the Purkinje cells. The climbing fiber acts through excitation 
of the entire dendritic tree of the Purkinje cells, which can induce synaptic 
plasticity in the parallel fiber synapses and thereby recalibrate the movements. 
Cerebellar cir­cuits can also learn to associate two in­de­pen­dent events with each 
other, such as with conditioned reflexes (Jirenhed et al., 2017).


In the preceding chapters of this book, I have explained how I interpret 
and where we, the neuroscience community, stand in terms of our under-
standing of how the brain can make us move. We now have a much deeper 
understanding of how movement is controlled than when I started as a PhD 
student, but ­there are still formidable challenges ahead.
We have discussed the evolution of the many dif­fer­ent classes of move-
ments. All basic features—­the blueprint—of the vertebrate ner­vous system 
had already evolved at the point when lampreys diverged from the evolution-
ary line leading to mammals some 500 million years ago. Essential features 
of the vertebrate ner­vous system ­were at this time already pre­sent, such as 
the sensory and motor areas of the cortex/pallium, the basal ganglia with 
the dopamine system, the midbrain, and cir­cuits in the tectum for detection 
of salient stimuli in the surrounding space. The many microcircuits in the 
brainstem and spinal cord ­were also pre­sent, but new ones have evolved to 
­handle ele­ments such as the control of the appendages.
From very small brains such as that of the lamprey, the number of neu-
rons has progressively increased, and with that the potential for more sophis-
ticated pro­cessing. For instance, the number of cortical columns in ­humans 
are ­orders of magnitude larger than that of the mouse. Many animals have a 
special niche in which their motor be­hav­ior is much more impressive than 
that of ­humans. Consider, for instance, a monkey swinging from tree to tree 
and a squirrel jumping from one branch to another, excelling in outstanding 
visuomotor control, or a passerine balancing happily on a thin branch of 
a tree while the wind is blowing. What is characteristic of motion control 
COMMENTS ON WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED 
AND THE CHALLENGES AHEAD
7

224    Chapter 7
in the primate (including ­humans), however, is the versatility of the motor 
system and the possibility for endless combinations. Think about the ­human 
hand and the large numbers of configurations in which the fin­gers can be 
used, such as when one carries fragile objects to the ­table, writes, or performs 
even more skilled actions like ­those of a goldsmith or a pianist. The most 
astounding and unique ­human achievement through evolution is that of 
developing speech and the cognitive underpinning for language.
7.1  “TO MOVE OR NOT TO MOVE,” A QUESTION  
ANSWERED BY THE BASAL GANGLIA IN CLOSE  
INTERACTION WITH THE CORTEX
In the introductory text of this book, I wrote that the motor infrastructure 
(Grillner, 2003) of preformed cir­cuits such as ­those of locomotion, reaching, 
and oculomotor control are like the members of an orchestra responsible for 
the execution, while the forebrain corresponds to the conductor, determining 
when each motor program should be called into action. I use the term “fore-
brain” ­because I believe that the cortex and basal ganglia function together as 
an integrated whole—­one is not understandable without the other, although 
they play complementary roles (figure 7.1). The following scenario would 
seem the most likely, based on what is now known (at least to me).
The input to the forebrain is via the thalamus, which distributes infor-
mation from all the senses, the midbrain, and the microcircuits in the brain-
stem and spinal cord to the vari­ous areas of the cortex and striatum. In 
mammals, the neocortex pro­cesses information from their surroundings in 
a very elaborate way. Most of our movements depend on interactions with 
objects around us and require a visual analy­sis of the precise conditions 
required to grasp an object or perform action. When in contact, an inter-
pretation of the haptic information from the hand (chapter 5) is needed to 
maintain the grip and not to lose contact. During locomotion, we similarly 
orient our movements in relation to the environment based mostly on visual 
information. Although some pro­cessing may take place at the midbrain 
level, the task of the cortex in this context is to interpret the surrounding 
world and forward this information to the frontal lobe and to the striatum 
for pos­si­ble action and reaction.

225    Comments on What We Have Learned and the Challenges Ahead
Each part of the neocortex proj­ects to its specific target area within the 
striatum (Foster et al., 2021). For instance, the motor areas in the frontal 
lobe communicate with specific motor areas in the forelimb, hindlimb, or 
orofacial areas in the dorsolateral striatum, while the associate and limbic 
cortices target other areas in the dorsomedial or ventral striatum. Thalamo-­
striatal afferents contribute to around 40 ­percent on the input to the striatum 
regarding brainstem and cerebellar activity (chapter 4).
For all everyday motor activities, such as initiating saccadic eye move-
ments, locomotion, or reaching for an object, the decision pro­cess is most 
likely based on cortical or thalamic inputs that target the relevant parts of 
the striatum, such as the forelimb area. If the input to the striatum is strong 
enough (perhaps amplified by dopamine action), and if ­there are no compet-
ing actions, it may lead to an activation of the striatal projection neurons, 
which in turn inhibit the appropriate subset of substantia nigra pars reticulata 
(SNr) neurons. This leads to disinhibition of downstream motor centers and 
allows an action to be initiated (chapters 4 and 5). The decision thus appears 
to depend on an initiation pro­cess that originates in the cortex, thalamus, 
or other structures but is completed within the striatum. The cortical input 
to the striatum is in part conveyed via the pyramidal neuron (PT) in layer 
5, which is all divided into subgroups depending on target areas and which 
types of movement they elicit. One would expect that the PT neurons that 
activate a given group of striatal cir­cuits that promotes a certain action of a 
given muscle group also provide direct excitation of the same group of neu-
rons at the brainstem level. This would suggest that the combined action of 
the forebrain in the control of movement is to allow movement through the 
disinhibition via the basal ganglia cir­cuit and aided by direct excitation from 
PT neurons—­a push-­pull arrangement or a dance in which the cortex and 
basal ganglia complement each other.
In this pro­cess, dopamine plays an impor­tant role. The initiation of move-
ment is often preceded by a burst in dopamine neurons, perhaps prompted 
by a salient event that ­will affect the excitability within the striatum. That 
dopamine is central in the decision pro­cess is clear from the difficulties to 
initiate movements that occur in Parkinson’s disease and dopamine-­depleted 
animals, and conversely the hyperkinesia that result from excessive dopamine 
levels that can occur with ­factors such as L-­DOPA medi­cation.

226    Chapter 7
7.2  THE MAJOR ORGA­NIZATIONAL BUILDING  
BLOCKS OF MOTION
Figure 7.1 summarizes in a cartoonlike fashion how one can view the motor 
system in a very schematic way. Instinctive be­hav­ior (chapters 2 and 3), such 
as escape (freezing and aggression), foraging (food and fluid intake), and repro-
ductive be­hav­iors (pairing and maternal be­hav­ior), can be triggered from the 
hypothalamus and channeled through the compartments of the periaqueduc-
tal gray (PAG) before activating the downstream motor cir­cuits. In the basal 
ganglia, the SNr has an inhibitory effect on the PAG, all the downstream 
microcircuits in the midbrain–­brainstem, and the motor centers that control 
the spinal cord via descending pathways. In an emergency, such as escape, the 
excitation may override the SNr inhibition ­unless the basal ganglia/substantia 
nigra pars compacta (SNc) cir­cuit has not had the time to lift the inhibition.
7.3  THE ROLE OF THE CEREBELLUM: THE PERFECTION  
OF COORDINATION
Not included in figure 7.1 is the cerebellum, since it plays a dif­fer­ent role from 
that of the cir­cuits described in the previous section, which are concerned with 
PAG
Forebrain
Basal 
ganglia
Cortex
Hypothalamus
Downstream
motor centers
-escape
-foraging
-reproduction
-locomotion
-reaching
-oculomotor
-orienting
-respiration
-......
Figure 7.1
Organ­ization of the major building blocks of the vertebrate motor system. Color-­coding: blue 
is inhibitory and red excitatory.

227    Comments on What We Have Learned and the Challenges Ahead
the initiation and execution of dif­fer­ent movements. ­After lesions have been 
made in the cerebellum, movements can still be initiated, but the quality is 
degraded (chapter 6). The cerebellum receives information from all parts of the 
ner­vous system and serves as a dynamic store­house of what happens in each part 
of the ner­vous system, from the caudal tip of the spinal cord to any part of the 
neocortex. The cerebellum can through its efferent connections fine-­tune the 
activity of most motor cir­cuits through a form of motor learning. Error signals 
from the cir­cuits that have a suboptimal function are mediated via the inferior 
olive to the cerebellum, ­whether we are concerned with vestibulo-­ocular reflexes 
(ret­i­nal slip), locomotion, or any other motor pattern (including speech). The 
cerebellum is crucial for the overall per­for­mance of the motor system, as it 
contributes to the perfection and fine-­tuning of the movements.
To summarize, the cortex and the basal ganglia in close interaction 
determine which specific movements should be recruited at any point of 
time, while the execution is mostly controlled by cir­cuits ranging from the 
midbrain to the spinal cord level. The fine-­tuning of each type of movement 
is one major task of the cerebellum.
7.4  SOME CHALLENGES AHEAD
7.4.1  Visuomotor Coordination
In our everyday lives, ­humans interact with objects around us—­grab a cup 
of coffee, press the ­handle of a door, or unlock the door with a key. ­These are 
­simple tasks, but they all usually depend on vision to identify the object we 
need to interact with, positioning the hands or feet appropriately to perform 
the motor action. We know that ­there is a need for visuomotor transformation 
and part of the dorsal stream in the cortex is involved, and some neurons may 
respond to a preferred preshaping of the hand before actually grasping. How-
ever, the details of ­these visuomotor transformations are yet to be understood.
7.4.2  Combining Dif­fer­ent Forms of Motion into an Integrated,  
Harmonious Whole
A ballet dancer onstage or a tennis player on the court combines a variety of 
movements dynamically, and one motor pattern merges into another in a 

228    Chapter 7
seamless way. We may be able to account for each individual part of the motor 
pattern, but how the brain is able to combine them into a graceful ­whole is still 
a mystery. The same applies to a cheetah trying to hunt down prey. We know 
that the basal ganglia contribute since Parkinsonian patients lose the ability to 
combine movements and are forced to perform one motor pattern at a time 
(chapter 4). How the basal ganglia is able to ­handle this remains to be discovered.
7.4.3  Motor Learning
Our understanding of how learning in the motor system occurs is ­limited. In 
the cerebellum, we know that the vestibulo-­ocular reflex and other networks 
can be recalibrated through the interaction between the climbing and parallel 
fibers, and two in­de­pen­dent pro­cesses can be associated, as in conditioned 
reflexes. Changes in synaptic strength can be induced in many parts of the ner­
vous system through long-­term potentiation (LTP) and long-­term depression 
(LTD), building blocks for motor learning. In the basal ganglia, in interaction 
with the dopamine system, reinforcement learning is most likely an impor­tant 
princi­ple. The next level of understanding of how and where the learned motor 
microcircuits are stored and recruited is rather foggy, although we know that 
certain structures of the ner­vous system need to operate in order to remember 
or recall certain memories, but not how this occurs.
7.4.4  ­Human Speech and Language
The most spectacular ­human motor repertoire is connected to language and 
speech motor control. We know which areas of the ­human brain that are 
involved when considering dif­fer­ent aspects of language: Wernicke’s area for 
understanding what is said, and Broca’s area in the left hemi­sphere for the 
motor aspect of the spoken word, with the prosody contributing on the cor-
responding area of the right side of the brain (chapter 5). Many parts of the 
cortex are involved in speech, but our knowledge is for the most part ­limited 
to which areas of the cortex are involved, and with only some knowledge of 
neurons in the frontal lobe that are specific to dif­fer­ent vowels. Each vowel 
is produced by the tongue having a specific position in the oral cavity. A 
fair bit of knowledge is available about the biomechanics of speech, includ-
ing how we can produce the phonemes in rapid succession. The essential 
question of the neural mechanisms used for learning to talk are actually not 

229    Comments on What We Have Learned and the Challenges Ahead
understood and at this point are only described phenomenologically, with 
no understanding of the intrinsic microcircuit mechanisms. Imaging tech-
niques with ultrahigh resolution regarding both temporal and spatial resolu-
tion can further advance our knowledge, but still only on a mesoscopic level.
Over a period of several years, the language ability develops, from the 
babbling of the baby to the formation of individual words and then of sen-
tences in the infant to fi­nally the ability to speak fluently in one, two, or sev-
eral languages. A native En­glish speaker can have a vocabulary ranging from 
10,000 to 65,000 words. However, we have very ­little knowledge of how this 
all happens, how words are stored, how they readily are recruited when talk-
ing, and how we can match the corresponding words of dif­fer­ent languages 
to each other. Furthermore, how we easily apply the grammatical rules of the 
specific language that we are currently speaking is not understood.
­These questions cannot be addressed easily in animal models. The most 
relevant example may be birdsong. In most cases, young male birds hear the 
song while in the nest. ­Later, when their hormones indicate that it is time 
to start singing, they begin to attempt to do so, and gradually improve their 
ability. Most birds have some form of innate template and readily learn the 
song of their own species. However, by exposing young birds to another type 
of song, they can within limits learn that new song. Some species, such as the 
mockingbird and the parrot, can pick up many sounds from the surrounding 
world, including ­human words, and they learn by imitation. Nevertheless, 
­there is a quantum leap in the complexity between birdsong and language, 
although in both cases ­there is a phase of learning by imitation—­hearing a 
sound and then being able to perform a coordinated motor act that produces 
the sound just heard. The message conveyed by the birdsong is twofold: to scare 
away other males and to attract females. ­Human language, on the other hand, 
has more sophisticated content. In addition, the birds, like other vertebrates, 
have a series of innate sounds used for communication, such as warning calls.
7.4.5  One Ultimate Question Is Concerned with the Aspect  
of Volition in the Control of Movement
We all have the ability on the spur of the moment to initiate a movement 
of the index fin­ger or a sidestep without any external reason—we just know 

230    Chapter 7
that we somehow like to do that, and we have no idea of how this happens. 
We noted in chapter 5 that when the supplementary motor cortex was stimu-
lated, the resulting arm movement was perceived by the patient as if he or 
she chose to move the arm. In contrast, if the motor cortex was stimulated, 
it was perceived as an unexpected jerk. As we have seen in this text, we have 
a fair understanding of the neural infrastructure that underlies the execution 
of movement. However, the neurobiology of the neural mechanisms ­behind 
what we perceive as voluntary is still unknown, and I anticipate that ­these 
mechanisms exist in other mammals as well.
To conclude, the brain offers a number of in­ter­est­ing, fundamental, 
and challenging prob­lems. Some are close to being solved, and ­others have 
remained more remote. As neuroscientists, we do not run the risk of being 
out of work, and we can enjoy the marked pro­gress of the preceding de­cades 
and look forward to an exciting ­future for neuroscience.

Abecassis, Z. A., Berceau, B. L., Win, P. H., Pamukcu, A., Cherian, S., Hernandez, V. M., Chon, 
U., Lim, B. K., Kim, Y., Justice, N. J., Awatramani, R., Hooks, B. M., Gerfen, C. R., Boca, S. M., & 
Chan, C. S. (2020). Npas1(+)-­Nkx2.1(+) Neurons are an integral part of the cortico-­pallido-­cortical 
loop. J. Neurosci., 40, 743–768.
Adhikari, A., Lerner, T. N., Finkelstein, J., Pak, S., Jennings, J. H., Davidson, T. J., Ferenczi, E., 
Gunaydin, L. A., Mirzabekov, J. J., Ye, L., Kim, S. Y., Lei, A., & Deisseroth, K. (2015). Basomedial 
amygdala mediates top-­down control of anxiety and fear. Nature, 527, 179–185.
Adolphs, R., & Anderson, D. J. (2018). The neuroscience of emotion—­A new synthesis. Prince­ton 
University Press.
Albus, J. S. (1971). A theory of cerebellar function. Math Biosci., 10, 25–61.
Alford, S., & Williams, T. L. (1989). Endogenous activation of glycine and NMDA receptors in 
lamprey spinal cord during fictive locomotion. J. Neurosci., 9, 2792–2800.
Alstermark, B., & Isa, T. (2012). Cir­cuits for skilled reaching and grasping. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 
35, 559–578.
Alstermark, B., Isa, T., Pettersson, L. G., & Sasaki, S. (2007). The C3-­C4 propriospinal system in 
the cat and monkey: A spinal pre-­motoneuronal centre for voluntary motor control. Acta. Physiol. 
(Oxf.), 189, 123–140.
Amemori, S., Graybiel, A. M., & Amemori, K. I. (2021). Causal evidence for induction of pes-
simistic decision-­making in primates by the network of frontal cortex and striosomes. Front. 
Neurosci., 15, 649167.
An, X., Matho, K., Li, Y., Mohan, H., Xu, X. H., Whishaw, I.Q., Kepecs, A., & Huang, J. (2022). 
A cortical cir­cuit for orchestrating oromanual food manipulationcoordinates food ­handling and 
manipulation. BioRxiv. doi:10.1101/2022.12.03.518964.
Anderson, T. M., Garcia, A. J., 3rd, Baertsch, N. A., Pollak, J., Bloom, J. C., Wei, A. D., Rai, 
K. G., & Ramirez, J. M. (2016). A novel excitatory network for the control of breathing. Nature, 
536, 76–80.
References

232    References
Andersson, B. (1953). The effect of injections of hypertonic NaCl-­solutions into dif­fer­ent parts of 
the hypothalamus of goats. Acta Physiol. Scand., 28, 188–201.
Andersson, O., Forssberg, H., Grillner, S., & Wallen, P. (1981). Peripheral feedback mechanisms 
acting on the central pattern generators for locomotion in fish and cat. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol., 
59, 713–726.
Anis, E., Xie, A., Brundin, L., & Brundin, P. (2021). Digesting recent findings: Gut alpha-­
synuclein, microbiome changes in Parkinson’s disease. Trends. Endocrinol. Metab., 33(2), 
147–157.
Apps, R., Hawkes, R., Aoki, S., Bengtsson, F., Brown, A. M., Chen, G., Ebner, T. J., Isope, P., 
Jörntell, H., Lackey, E. P., Lawrenson, C., Lumb, B., Schonewille, M., Sillitoe, R. V., Spaeth, L., 
Sugihara, I., Valera, A., Voogd, J., Wylie, D. R., & Ruigrok, T. J. H. (2018). Cerebellar modules 
and their role as operational cerebellar pro­cessing units: A consensus paper [corrected]. Cerebel-
lum, 17, 654–682.
Arber, S., & Costa, R. M. (2018). Connecting neuronal cir­cuits for movement. Science, 360, 
1403–1404.
Arshavsky, Y. I., Berkinblit, M. B., Fukson, O. I., Gelfand, I. M., & Orlovsky, G. N. (1972). 
Recordings of neurones of the dorsal spinocerebellar tract during evoked locomotion. Brain Res., 
43, 272–275.
Arshavsky, Y. I., Gelfand, I. M., Orlovsky, G. N., & Pavlova, G. A. (1978a). Messages conveyed 
by descending tracts during scratching in the cat. I. Activity of vestibulospinal neurons. Brain 
Res., 159, 99–110.
Arshavsky, Y. I., Orlovsky, G. N., Pavlova, G. A., & Perret, C. (1978b). Messages conveyed by 
descending tracts during scratching in the cat. II. Activity of rubrospinal neurons. Brain Res., 159, 
111–123.
Arshavsky Yu, I., Gelfand, I. M., Orlovsky, G. N., Pavlova, G. A., & Popova, L. B. (1984). Origin 
of signals conveyed by the ventral spino-­cerebellar tract and spino-­reticulo-­cerebellar pathway. 
Exp. Brain. Res., 54, 426–431.
Ashhad, S., & Feldman, J. L. (2020). Emergent ele­ments of inspiratory rhythmogenesis: Network 
synchronization and synchrony propagation. Neuron, 106, 482–497 e484.
Assous, M. (2021). Striatal cholinergic transmission. Focus on nicotinic receptors’ influence in 
striatal cir­cuits. Eur. J. Neurosci., 53, 2421–2442.
Azim, E., Jiang, J., Alstermark, B., & Jessell, T. M. (2014). Skilled reaching relies on a V2a pro-
priospinal internal copy cir­cuit. Nature, 508, 357–363.
Ballester, B. R., Maier, M., Duff, A., Cameirao, M., Bermudez, S., Duarte, E., Cuxart, A., Rodri-
guez, S., San Segundo Mozo, R. M., & Verschure, P. (2019). A critical time win­dow for recovery 
extends beyond one-­year post-­stroke. J. Neurophysiol., 122, 350–357.
Bareš, M., Apps, R., Avanzino, L., Breska, A., D’Angelo, E., Filip, P., Gerwig, M., Ivry, R. B., 
Lawrenson, C. L., Louis, E. D., Lusk, N. A., Manto, M., Meck, W. H., Mitoma, H., & Petter, 

233    References
E. A. (2019). Consensus paper: Decoding the contributions of the cerebellum as a time machine. 
From neurons to clinical applications. Cerebellum, 18, 266–286.
Beloozerova, I. N., & Sirota, M. G. (1986). Activity of neurons of the motor-­sensory cortex of 
the cat during natu­ral locomotion while stepping over obstacles. Neirofiziologiia, 18, 546–549.
Beltramo, R., & Scanziani, M. (2019). A collicular visual cortex: Neocortical space for an ancient 
midbrain visual structure. Science, 363, 64–69.
Benabid, A. L., Chabardes, S., Torres, N., Piallat, B., Krack, P., Fraix, V., & Pollak, P. (2009). 
Functional neurosurgery for movement disorders: A historical perspective. Prog. Brain. Res., 175, 
379–391.
Benavidez, N. L., Bienkowski, M. S., Zhu, M., Garcia, L. H., Fayzullina, M., Gao, L., Bowman, 
I., Gou, L., Khanjani, N., Cotter, K. R., Korobkova, L., Becerra, M., Cao, C., Song, M. Y., 
Zhang, B., Yamashita, S., Tugangui, A. J., Zingg, B., Rose, K., Lo, D., Foster, N. N., Boesen, 
T., Mun, H. S., Aquino, S., Wickersham, I. R., Ascoli, G. A., Hintiryan, H., & Dong, H. W. 
(2021). Organ­ization of the inputs and outputs of the mouse superior colliculus. Nat. Commun., 
12, 4004.
Benazzouz, A., Gross, C., Feger, J., Boraud, T., & Bioulac, B. (1993). Reversal of rigidity and 
improvement in motor per­for­mance by subthalamic high-­frequency stimulation in MPTP-­treated 
monkeys. Eur. J. Neurosci., 5, 382–389.
Bergman, H., Wichmann, T., & DeLong, M. R. (1990). Reversal of experimental parkinsonism 
by lesions of the subthalamic nucleus. Science, 249, 1436–1438.
Bergman, H., Wichmann, T., Karmon, B., & DeLong, M. R. (1994). The primate subthalamic 
nucleus. II. Neuronal activity in the MPTP model of parkinsonism. J. Neurophysiol., 72, 507–520.
Bern­stein, N. (1967). The coordination and regulation of movements. Pergamon.
Björkman, A., Weibull, A., Rosen, B., Svensson, J., & Lundborg, G. (2009). Rapid cortical reor-
ganisation and improved sensitivity of the hand following cutaneous anaesthesia of the forearm. 
Eur. J. Neurosci., 29, 837–844.
Bjursten, L. M., Norrsell, K., & Norrsell, U. (1976). Behavioural repertory of cats without ce­re­bral 
cortex from infancy. Exp. Brain. Res., 25, 115–130.
Boele, H. J., Koekkoek, S. K., & De Zeeuw, C. I. (2010). Cerebellar and extracerebellar involve-
ment in mouse eyeblink conditioning: The ACDC model. Front. Cell. Neurosci., 3, 19.
Bolam, J. P., & Pissadaki, E. K. (2012). Living on the edge with too many mouths to feed: Why 
dopamine neurons die. Mov. Disord., 27, 1478–1483.
Bolam, J. P., Wainer, B. H., & Smith, A. D. (1984). Characterization of cholinergic neurons in 
the rat neostriatum. A combination of choline acetyltransferase immunocytochemistry, Golgi-­
impregnation and electron microscopy. Neuroscience, 12, 711–718.
Bostan, A. C., & Strick, P. L. (2018). The basal ganglia and the cerebellum: Nodes in an integrated 
network. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 19, 338–350.

234    References
Boyes, J., & Bolam, J. P. (2007). Localization of GABA receptors in the basal ganglia. Prog. Brain 
Res., 160, 229–243.
Braak, H., Del Tredici, K., Rub, U., de Vos, R. A., Jansen Steur, E. N., & Braak, E. (2003). Staging 
of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging, 24, 197–211.
Brinkman, C. (1984). Supplementary motor area of the monkey’s ce­re­bral cortex: Short-­ and long-­
term deficits ­after unilateral ablation and the effects of subsequent callosal section. J. Neurosci., 
4, 918–929.
Brodin, L., Buchanan, J. T., Hokfelt, T., Grillner, S., & Verhofstad, A. A. (1986). A spinal projec-
tion of 5-­hydroxytryptamine neurons in the lamprey brainstem; evidence from combined retro-
grade tracing and immunohistochemistry. Neurosci. Lett., 67, 53–57.
Brodin, L., Hökfelt, T., Grillner, S., & Panula, P. (1990). Distribution of histaminergic neurons 
in the brain of the lamprey Lampetra fluviatilis as revealed by histamine-­immunohistochemistry. 
J. Comp. Neurol., 292, 435–442.
Bruce, C. J., Goldberg, M. E., Bushnell, M. C., & Stanton, G. B. (1985). Primate frontal eye fields. 
II. Physiological and anatomical correlates of electrically evoked eye movements. J. Neurophysiol., 
54, 714–734.
Bruce, N. J., Narzi, D., Trpevski, D., van Keulen, S. C., Nair, A. G., Rothlisberger, U., Wade, 
R. C., Carloni, P., & Hellgren Kotaleski, J. (2019). Regulation of adenylyl cyclase 5 in striatal 
neurons confers the ability to detect coincident neuromodulatory signals. PLoS Comput. Biol., 
15(10), e1007382.
Buchanan, J. T., & Grillner, S. (1987). Newly identified “glutamate interneurons” and their role 
in locomotion in the lamprey spinal cord. Science, 236, 312–314.
Buonomano, D. V., & Merzenich, M. M. (1998). Cortical plasticity: From synapses to maps. 
Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 21, 149–186.
Burke, D. A., Rotstein, H. G., & Alvarez, V. A. (2017). Striatal local circuitry: A new framework 
for lateral inhibition. Neuron, 96, 267–284.
Caboche, J., Vanhoutte, P., Boussicault, L., & Betuing, S. (2017). Cellular and molecular mecha-
nisms of neuronal dysfunction in Huntington’s disease. In H. Steiner & K. Y. Tseng (Eds.), Hand-
book of basal ganglia structure and function (pp. 889–906). Academic Press.
Caggiano, V., Leiras, R., Goni-­Erro, H., Masini, D., Bellardita, C., Bouvier, J., Caldeira, V., 
Fisone, G., & Kiehn, O. (2018). Midbrain cir­cuits that set locomotor speed and gait se­lection. 
Nature, 553, 455–460.
Caligiore, D., Pezzulo, G., Baldassarre, G., Bostan, A. C., Strick, P. L., Doya, K., Helmich, R. C., 
Dirkx, M., Houk, J., Jörntell, H., Lago-­Rodriguez, A., Galea, J. M., Miall, R. C., Popa, T., Kishore, 
A., Verschure, P. F., Zucca, R., & Herreros, I. (2017). Consensus paper: ­Towards a systems-­level 
view of cerebellar function: The interplay between cerebellum, basal ganglia, and cortex. Cerebel-
lum, 16, 203–229.

235    References
Cangiano, L., & Grillner, S. (2005). Mechanisms of rhythm generation in a spinal locomotor 
network deprived of crossed connections: The lamprey hemicord. J. Neurosci., 25, 923–935.
Capantini, L., von Twickel, A., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2017). The pretectal connectome in 
lamprey. J. Comp. Neurol., 525, 753–772.
Capelli, P., Pivetta, C., Soledad Esposito, M., & Arber, S. (2017). Locomotor speed control cir­cuits 
in the caudal brainstem. Nature, 551, 373–377.
Carlsson, A. (1964). Evidence for a role of dopamine in extrapyramidal functions. Acta. Neuroveg. 
(Wien), 26, 484–493.
Carlsson, A. (2001). A paradigm shift in brain research. Science, 294, 1021–1024.
Carr, C. E., & Konishi, M. (1990). A cir­cuit for detection of interaural time differences in the 
brain stem of the barn owl. J. Neurosci., 10, 3227–3246.
Cenci, M. A. (2017). Molecular mechanisms of l-­DOPA-­induced dyskinesia. In H. Steiner & 
K. Y. Tseng (Eds.), Handbook of basal ganglia structure and function (pp. 857–871). Academic Press.
Chen, C. H., Fremont, R., Arteaga-­Bracho, E. E., & Khodakhah, K. (2014). Short latency cerebel-
lar modulation of the basal ganglia. Nat. Neurosci., 17, 1767–1775.
Cheong, R. Y., Baldo, B., Sajjad, M. U., Kirik, D., & Petersen, A. (2021). Effects of mutant 
huntingtin inactivation on Huntington disease–­related behaviours in the BACHD mouse model. 
Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol., 47, 564–578.
Cherng, B. W., Islam, T., Torigoe, M., Tsuboi, T., & Okamoto, H. (2020). The dorsal lateral 
habenula-­interpeduncular nucleus pathway is essential for left-­right-­dependent decision making 
in zebrafish. Cell Rep., 32, 108143. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1016​/­j​.­celrep​.­2020​.­108143
Cinelli, E., Mutolo, D., Contini, M., Pantaleo, T., & Bongianni, F. (2016). Inhibitory control of 
ascending glutamatergic projections to the lamprey respiratory rhythm generator. Neuroscience, 
326, 126–140.
Cinelli, E., Robertson, B., Mutolo, D., Grillner, S., Pantaleo, T., & Bongianni, F. (2013). Neu-
ronal mechanisms of respiratory pattern generation are evolutionary conserved. J. Neurosci., 33, 
9104–9112.
Cisek, P., & Kalaska, J. F. (2005). Neural correlates of reaching decisions in dorsal premotor cortex: 
Specification of multiple direction choices and final se­lection of action. Neuron., 45, 801–814.
Clark, F. J., & von Euler, C. (1972). On the regulation of depth and rate of breathing. J. Physiol., 
222, 267–295.
Comoli, E., Coizet, V., Boyes, J., Bolam, J. P., Canteras, N. S., Quirk, R. H., Overton, P. G., & 
Redgrave, P. (2003). A direct projection from superior colliculus to substantia nigra for detecting 
salient visual events. Nat. Neurosci., 6, 974–980.
Comoli, E., Ribeiro-­Barbosa, E. R., & Canteras, N. S. (2000). Afferent connections of the dorsal 
premammillary nucleus. J. Comp. Neurol., 423, 83–98.

236    References
Condamine, S., Lavoie, R., Verdier, D., & Kolta, A. (2018). Functional rhythmogenic domains 
defined by astrocytic networks in the trigeminal main sensory nucleus. Glia, 66, 311–326.
Cooper, B., & McPeek, R. M. (2021). Role of the superior colliculus in guiding movements not 
made by the eyes. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci., 7, 279–300.
Crittenden, J. R., & Graybiel, A. M., (2011). Basal ganglia disorders associated with imbalances 
in the striatal striosome and matrix compartments. Front. Neuroanat., 5, 59.
Crittenden, J. R., Lacey, C. J., Weng, F. J., Garrison, C. E., Gibson, D. J., Lin, Y., & Graybiel, 
A. M. (2017). Striatal cholinergic interneurons modulate spike-­timing in striosomes and matrix 
by an amphetamine-­sensitive mechanism. Front. Neuroanat., 11, 20.
Cui, Q., Du, X., Chang, I. Y. M., Pamukcu, A., Lilascharoen, V., Berceau, B. L., Garcia, D., Hong, 
D., Chon, U., Narayanan, A., Kim, Y., Lim, B. K., & Chan, C. S. (2021). Striatal direct pathway 
targets Npas1(+) pallidal neurons. J. Neurosci., 41, 3966–3987.
Daie, K., Svoboda, K., & Druckmann, S. (2021). Targeted photostimulation uncovers cir­cuit 
motifs supporting short-­term memory. Nat. Neurosci., 24, 259–265.
Darmohray, D. M., Jacobs, J. R., Marques, H. G., & Carey, M. R. (2019). Spatial and temporal 
locomotor learning in mouse cerebellum. Neuron, 102, 217–231 e214.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals. John Murray.
Dasen, J. S., & Jessell, T. M. (2009). Hox networks and the origins of motor neuron diversity. 
Curr. Top. Dev. Biol., 88, 169–200.
da Silva, J. A., Tecuapetla, F., Paixao, V., & Costa, R. M. (2018). Dopamine neuron activity before 
action initiation gates and invigorates ­future movements. Nature, 554, 244–248.
Dean, P., Redgrave, P., & Westby, G. W. (1989). Event or emergency? Two response systems in the 
mammalian superior colliculus. Trends Neurosci., 12, 137–147.
DeFelipe, J., Alonso-­Nanclares, L., & Arellano, J. I. (2002). Microstructure of the neocortex: 
Comparative aspects. J. Neurocytol., 31, 299–316.
Dellow, P. G., & Lund, J. P. (1971). Evidence for central timing of rhythmical mastication. 
J. Physiol., 215, 1–13.
Del Negro, C. A., Funk, G. D., & Feldman, J. L. (2018). Breathing ­matters. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 
19, 351–367.
DeLong, M. R., Crutcher, M. D., & Georgopoulos, A. P. (1985). Primate globus pallidus and 
subthalamic nucleus: Functional organ­ization. J. Neurophysiol., 53, 530–543.
de Manzano, O., Kuckelkorn, K. L., Ström, K., & Ullén, F. (2020). Action-­perception coupling 
and near transfer: Listening to melodies ­after piano practice triggers sequence-­specific repre­sen­ta­
tions in the auditory-­motor network. Cereb. Cortex., 30, 5193–5203.
de Schutter, E. (1994). Modelling the cerebellar Purkinje cell: Experiments in computo. Prog. 
Brain Res., 102, 427–441.

237    References
De Zeeuw, C. I. (2021). Bidirectional learning in upbound and downbound microzones of the 
cerebellum. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 22, 92–110.
Dhawale, A. K., Smith, M. A., & Olveczky, B. P. (2017). The role of variability in motor learning. 
Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 40, 479–498.
Dhawale, A. K., Wolff, S. B. E., Ko, R., & Olveczky, B. P. (2021). The basal ganglia control the 
detailed kinematics of learned motor skills. Nat. Neurosci., 24, 1256–1269.
Diederich, N. J., Surmeier, D. J., Uchihara, T., Grillner, S., & Goetz, C. G. (2019). Parkinson’s 
disease: Is it a consequence of ­human brain evolution? Mov. Disord., 34, 453–459.
Diederich, N. J., Uchihara, T., Grillner, S., & Goetz, C. G. (2020). The evolution-­driven signature 
of Parkinson’s disease. Trends Neurosci., 43, 475–492.
DiMarco, A. F., Romaniuk, J. R., von Euler, C., & Yamamoto, Y. (1983). Immediate changes in 
ventilation and respiratory pattern associated with onset and cessation of locomotion in the cat. 
J. Physiol., 343, 1–16.
Ding, J. B., Guzman, J. N., Peterson, J. D., Goldberg, J. A., & Surmeier, D. J. (2010). Thalamic 
gating of corticostriatal signaling by cholinergic interneurons. Neuron, 67, 294–307.
di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding motor 
events: A neurophysiological study. Exp. Brain. Res., 91, 176–180.
Di Prisco, G. V., Wallén, P., Grillner, S. (1990). Synaptic effects of intraspinal stretch receptor 
neurons mediating movement-­related feedback during locomotion. Brain. Res., 530, 161–166.
Doig, N. M., Moss, J., & Bolam, J. P. (2010). Cortical and thalamic innervation of direct and 
indirect pathway medium-­sized spiny neurons in mouse striatum. J. Neurosci., 30, 14610–14618.
Dominici, N., Ivanenko, Y. P., Cappellini, G., d’Avella, A., Mondi, V., Cicchese, M., Fabiano, A., 
Silei, T., Di Paolo, A., Giannini, C., Poppele, R. E., & Lacquaniti, F. (2011). Locomotor primitives 
in newborn babies and their development. Science, 334, 997–999.
Dorst, M. C., Tokarska, A., Zhou, M., Lee, K., Stagkourakis, S., Broberger, C., Masmanidis, S., 
& Silberberg, G. (2020). Polysynaptic inhibition between striatal cholinergic interneurons shapes 
their network activity patterns in a dopamine-­dependent manner. Nat. Commun., 11, 5113.
Dougherty, K. J., Zagoraiou, L., Satoh, D., Rozani, I., Doobar, S., Arber, S., Jessell, T. M., & 
Kiehn, O. (2013). Locomotor rhythm generation linked to the output of spinal shox2 excitatory 
interneurons. Neuron, 80, 920–933.
Downey, J. E., Weiss, J. M., Muelling, K., Venkatraman, A., Valois, J. S., Hebert, M., Bagnell, J. A., 
Schwartz, A. B., & Collinger, J. L. (2016). Blending of brain-­machine interface and vision-­guided 
autonomous robotics improves neuroprosthetic arm per­for­mance during grasping. J. Neuroeng. 
Rehabil., 13, 28.
Drew, T., Andujar, J. E., Lajoie, K., & Yakovenko, S. (2008). Cortical mechanisms involved in 
visuomotor coordination during precision walking. Brain Res. Rev., 57, 199–211.

238    References
Du, K., Wu, Y. W., Lindroos, R., Liu, Y., Rozsa, B., Katona, G., Ding, J. B., & Kotaleski, J. H. 
(2017). Cell-­type-­specific inhibition of the dendritic plateau potential in striatal spiny projection 
neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 114, E7612–­E7621.
Dubbeldam, J. L., & den Boer-­Visser, A. M. (2002). The central mesencephalic grey in birds: 
Nucleus intercollicularis and substantia grisea centralis. Brain Res. Bull., 57, 349–352.
Duval, C., Panisset, M., Strafella, A. P., & Sadikot, A. F. (2006). The impact of ventrolateral 
thalamotomy on tremor and voluntary motor be­hav­ior in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Exp. 
Brain Res., 170, 160–171.
Eccles, J. C., Ito, M., & Szentágothai, J. (1967). The cerebellum as a neuronal machine. Springer.
Economo, M. N., Viswanathan, S., Tasic, B., Bas, E., Winnubst, J., Menon, V., Graybuck, L. T., 
Nguyen, T. N., Smith, K. A., Yao, Z., Wang, L., Gerfen, C. R., Chandrashekar, J., Zeng, H., 
Looger, L. L., & Svoboda, K. (2018). Distinct descending motor cortex pathways and their roles 
in movement. Nature, 563, 79–84.
Ekeberg, O., & Grillner, S. (1999). Simulations of neuromuscular control in lamprey swimming. 
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci., 354, 895–902.
Ekerot, C. F., & Jörntell, H. (2008). Synaptic integration in cerebellar granule cells. Cerebellum, 
7, 539–541.
Ekerot, C. F., & Kano, M. (1985). Long-­term depression of parallel fibre synapses following 
stimulation of climbing fibres. Brain Res., 342, 357–360.
Ekerot, C. F., & Oscarsson, O. (1981). Prolonged depolarization elicited in Purkinje cell dendrites 
by climbing fibre impulses in the cat. J. Physiol., 318, 207–221.
Ekerot, C. F., Oscarsson, O., & Schouenborg, J. (1987). Stimulation of cat cutaneous nocicep-
tive C fibres causing tonic and synchronous activity in climbing fibres. J. Physiol., 386, 539–546.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., O’­Sullivan, M., Chan, A., Diacoyanni-­Tarlatzis, I., Heider, K., Krause, 
R., LeCompte, W. A., Pitcairn, T., Ricci-­Bitti, P. E., Scherer, K., Tomita, M., & Tzavaras, A. (1987). 
Universals and cultural differences in the judgments of facial expressions of emotion. J. Pers. Soc. 
Psychol., 53, 712–717.
Ekstrand, M. I., Terzioglu, M., Galter, D., Zhu, S., Hofstetter, C., Lindqvist, E., Thams, S., Berg-
strand, A., Hansson, F. S., Trifunovic, A., Hoffer, B., Cullheim, S., Mohammed, A. H., Olson, 
L., & Larsson, N. G. (2007). Progressive parkinsonism in mice with respiratory-­chain-­deficient 
dopamine neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 1325–1330.
Ellender, T. J., Harwood, J., Kosillo, P., Capogna, M., & Bolam, J. P. (2013). Heterogeneous proper-
ties of central lateral and parafascicular thalamic synapses in the striatum. J. Physiol., 591, 257–272.
El Manira, A., Pombal, M. A., & Grillner, S. (1997). Diencephalic projection to reticulospinal 
neurons involved in the initiation of locomotion in adult lampreys Lampetra fluviatilis. J. Comp. 
Neurol., 389, 603–616.
El Manira, A., Tegner, J., & Grillner, S. (1994). Calcium-­dependent potassium channels play a criti-
cal role for burst termination in the locomotor network in lamprey. J. Neurophysiol., 72, 1852–1861.

239    References
Engelhard, B., Finkelstein, J., Cox, J., Venkatraman, A., Valois, J. S., Hebert, M., Bagnell, J. A., 
Schwartz, A. B., & Collinger, J. L. (2019). Specialized coding of sensory, motor and cognitive 
variables in VTA dopamine neurons. Nature, 570, 509–513.
Esposito, M. S., Capelli, P., & Arber, S. (2014). Brainstem nucleus MdV mediates skilled forelimb 
motor tasks. Nature, 508, 351–356.
Faber, D. S., Fetcho, J. R., & Korn, H. (1989). Neuronal networks under­lying the escape response 
in goldfish. General implications for motor control. Ann. NY Acad. Sci., 563, 11–33.
Falkner, A. L., Dollar, P., Perona, P., Anderson, D. J., & Lin, D. (2014). Decoding ventromedial 
hypothalamic neural activity during male mouse aggression. J. Neurosci., 34, 5971–5984.
Falkner, A. L., Wei, D., Song, A., Watsek, L. W., Chen, I., Chen, P., Feng, J. E., & Lin, D. 
(2020). Hierarchical repre­sen­ta­tions of aggression in a hypothalamic-­midbrain cir­cuit. Neuron, 
106, 637–648 e636.
Faull, O. K., Subramanian, H. H., Ezra, M., & Pattinson, K. T. S. (2019). The midbrain periaq-
ueductal gray as an integrative and interoceptive neural structure for breathing. Neurosci. Biobehav. 
Rev., 98, 135–144.
Ferreira-­Pinto, M. J., Kanodia, H., Falasconi, A., Sigrist, M., Esposito, M. S., & Arber, S. (2021). 
Functional diversity for body actions in the mesencephalic locomotor region. Cell, 184, 4564–4578 
e4518.
Fidelin, K., & Arber, S. (2022). Anatomical and functional organ­ization of red nucleus cir­cuits. Paper 
presented at FENS (Paris).
Filipovic, M., Ketzef, M., Reig, R., Aertsen, A., Silberberg, G., & Kumar, A. (2019). Direct path-
way neurons in mouse dorsolateral striatum in vivo receive stronger synaptic input than indirect 
pathway neurons. J. Neurophysiol., 122, 2294–2303.
Finkelstein, A., Fontolan, L., Economo, M. N., Li, N., Romani, S., & Svoboda, K. (2021). Attrac-
tor dynamics gate cortical information flow during decision-­making. Nat. Neurosci., 24, 843–850.
Fonseca, M. S., Murakami, M., & Mainen, Z. F. (2015). Activation of dorsal raphe serotonergic 
neurons promotes waiting but is not reinforcing. Curr. Biol., 25, 306–315.
Forssberg, H., & Grillner, S. (1973). The locomotion of the acute spinal cat injected with clonidine 
I.V. Brain Res., 50, 184–186.
Foster, N. N., Barry, J., Korobkova, L., Garcia, L., Gao, L., Becerra, M., Sherafat, Y., Peng, B., Li, 
X., Choi, J. H., Gou, L., Zingg, B., Azam, S., Lo, D., Khanjani, N., Zhang, B., Stanis, J., Bowman, 
I., Cotter, K., Cao, C., Yamashita, S., Tugangui, A., Li, A., Jiang, T, Jia, X., Feng, Z., Aquino, S., 
Mun, H. S., Zhu, M., Santarelli, A., Benavidez, N. L., Song, M., Dan, G., Fayzullina, M., Ustrell, 
S., Boesen, T., Johnson, D. L., Xu, H., Bienkowski, M. S., Yang, X. W., Gong, H., Levine, M. S., 
Wickersham, I., Luo, Q., Hahn, J. D., Lim, B. K., Zhang, L. I., Cepeda, C., Hintiryan, H., & 
Dong, H. W. (2021). The mouse cortico-­basal ganglia-­thalamic network. Nature, 598, 188–194.
Freud, S. (1878). Uber spinalganglien und ruckenmak des petromyzon. Sber. Akad. Wiss., 77, 
81–167.

240    References
Fried, I., Haggard, P., He, B. J., & Schurger, A. (2017). Volition and action in the ­human brain: 
Pro­cesses, pathologies, and reasons. J. Neurosci., 37, 10842–10847.
Fried, I., Katz, A., McCarthy, G., Sass, K. J., Williamson, P., Spencer, S. S., & Spencer, D. D. 
(1991). Functional organ­ization of ­human supplementary motor cortex studied by electrical stimu-
lation. J. Neurosci., 11, 3656–3666.
Friederici, A. D. (2002). ­Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence pro­cessing. Trends Cogn. 
Sci., 6, 78–84.
Fritzsch, B., Sonntag, R., Dubuc, R., Ohta, Y., & Grillner, S. (1990). Organ­ization of the six motor 
nuclei innervating the ocular muscles in lamprey. J. Comp. Neurol., 294, 491–506.
Frost Nylén, J., Hjorth, J. J. J., Grillner, S., & Hellgren Kotaleski, J. (2021). Dopaminergic and 
cholinergic modulation of large scale networks in silico using snudda. Front. Neural Cir­cuits., 15, 
748989.
Fuentes, R., Petersson, P., Siesser, W. B., Caron, M. G., & Nicolelis, M. A. (2009). Spinal cord 
stimulation restores locomotion in animal models of Parkinson’s disease. Science, 323, 1578–1582.
Fujita, H., Kodama, T., & du Lac, S. (2020). Modular output cir­cuits of the fastigial nucleus for 
diverse motor and nonmotor functions of the cerebellar vermis. Elife, 9.
Fukson, O. I., Berkinblit, M. B., & Feldman, A. G. (1980). The spinal frog takes into account the 
scheme of its body during the wiping reflex. Science, 209, 1261–1263.
Galletti, C., & Fattori, P. (2018). The dorsal visual stream revisited: Stable cir­cuits or dynamic 
pathways? Cortex, 98, 203–217.
Gariépy, J. F., Missaghi, K., Chevallier, S., Chartre, S., Robert, M., Auclair, F., Lund, J. P., & 
Dubuc, R. (2012). Specific neural substrate linking respiration to locomotion. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA, 109, E84–­E92.
Garwicz, M., Christensson, M., & Psouni, E. (2009). A unifying model for timing of walking onset 
in ­humans and other mammals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 106, 21889–21893.
Georgopoulos, A. P. (1986). On reaching. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 9, 147–170.
Georgopoulos, A. P., DeLong, M. R., & Crutcher, M. D. (1983). Relations between par­ameters of 
step-­tracking movements and single cell discharge in the globus pallidus and subthalamic nucleus 
of the behaving monkey. J. Neurosci., 3, 1586–1598.
Georgopoulos, A. P., & Grillner, S. (1989). Visuomotor coordination in reaching and locomotion. 
Science, 245, 1209–1210.
Georgopoulos, A. P., Kalaska, J. F., Caminiti, R., & Massey, J. T. (1982). On the relations between 
the direction of two-­dimensional arm movements and cell discharge in primate motor cortex. J. 
Neurosci., 2, 1527–1537.
Georgopoulos, A. P., Kettner, R. E., & Schwartz, A. B. (1988). Primate motor cortex and ­free arm 
movements to visual targets in three-­dimensional space. II. Coding of the direction of movement 
by a neuronal population. J. Neurosci., 8, 2928–2937.

241    References
Georgopoulos, A. P., Schwartz, A. B., & Kettner, R. E. (1986). Neuronal population coding of 
movement direction. Science, 233, 1416–1419.
Gironell, A., Pascual-­Sedano, B., Aracil, I., Marin-­Lahoz, J., Pagonabarraga, J., & Kulisevsky, J. 
(2018). Tremor types in Parkinson disease: A descriptive study using a new classification. Parkinsons 
Dis., 2018, 4327597.
Goetz, C. G. (2011). The history of Parkinson’s disease: Early clinical descriptions and neurological 
therapies. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med., 1, a008862.
Goldberg, J. A., & Reynolds, J. N. (2011). Spontaneous firing and evoked pauses in the tonically 
active cholinergic interneurons of the striatum. Neuroscience, 198, 27–43.
González-­Rodríguez, P., Zampese, E., Stout, K. A., Guzman, J. N., Ilijic, E., Yang, B., Tkatch, T., 
Stavarache, M. A., Wokosin, D. L., Gao, L., Kaplitt, M. G., Lopez-­Barneo, J., Schumacker, P. T., 
& Surmeier, D. J. (2021). Disruption of mitochondrial complex I induces progressive Parkinson-
ism. Nature, 599, 650–656.
Goslow, G. E., Jr., Reinking, R. M., & Stuart, D. G. (1973). The cat step cycle: Hind limb joint 
­angles and muscle lengths during unrestrained locomotion. J. Morphol., 141, 1–41.
Goulding, M. (2009). Cir­cuits controlling vertebrate locomotion: Moving in a new direction. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 10, 507–518.
Gowers, W. R. (1886). A manual of diseases of the ner­vous system II. J. & A. Churchill.
Granger, A. J., Wallace, M. L., & Sabatini, B. L. (2017). Multi-­transmitter neurons in the mam-
malian central ner­vous system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 45, 85–91.
Gray, J. (1968). Animal locomotion (the world naturalist). Littlehampton Book Ser­vices Ltd.
Gray, L. A., O’Reilly, J. C., & Nishikawa, K. C. (1997). Evolution of forelimb movement patterns 
for prey manipulation in anurans. J. Exp. Zool., 277, 417–424.
Graybiel, A. M. (1998). The basal ganglia and chunking of action repertoires. Neurobiol. Learn. 
Mem., 70, 119–136.
Graybiel, A. M., & Grafton, S. T. (2015). The striatum: Where skills and habits meet. Cold Spring 
Harb. Perspect. Biol., 7, a021691.
Graybiel, A. M., & Ragsdale, C. W., Jr. (1978). Histochemically distinct compartments in the 
striatum of ­human, monkeys, and cat demonstrated by acetylthiocholinesterase staining. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 75, 5723–5726.
Graybiel, A. M., & Rauch, S. L. (2000). ­Toward a neurobiology of obsessive-­compulsive disorder. 
Neuron, 28, 343–347.
Graziano, M. S. A. (2016). Ethological action maps: A paradigm shift for the motor cortex. Trends 
Cogn. Sci., 20, 121–132.
Graziano, M. S. A., & Aflalo, T. N. (2007). Mapping behavioral repertoire onto the cortex. Neuron, 
56, 239–251.

242    References
Grillner, S. (1981). Control of locomotion in bipeds, tetrapods, and fish. In V. Brooks (Ed.), 
Handbook of physiology (pp. 1179–1236). American Physiological Society.
Grillner, S. (1985). Neurobiological bases of rhythmic motor acts in vertebrates. Science, 228, 
143–149.
Grillner, S. (2003). The motor infrastructure: From ion channels to neuronal networks. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci., 4, 573–586.
Grillner, S. (2012). Fundamentals of motor systems. In L. R. Squire, D. Berg, F. E. Bloom, S. du 
Lac, A. Ghosh, & N. C. Spitzer (Eds.), Fundamental neuroscience (pp. 600–612). Elsevier.
Grillner, S. (2021). Evolution of the vertebrate motor system—­From forebrain to spinal cord. 
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 71, 11–18.
Grillner, S., Halbertsma, J., Nilsson, J., & Thorstensson, A. (1979). The adaptation to speed in 
­human locomotion. Brain Res., 165, 177–182.
Grillner, S., Hellgren, J., Menard, A., Saitoh, K., & Wikstrom, M. A. (2005). Mechanisms for 
se­lection of basic motor programs—­Roles for the striatum and pallidum. Trends Neurosci., 28, 
364–370.
Grillner, S., & Kozlov, A. (2021). The CPGs for limbed locomotion-­facts and fiction. Int. J. Mol. 
Sci., 22.
Grillner, S., Kozlov, A., Dario, P., Stefanini, C., Menciassi, A., Lansner, A., & Hellgren Kotaleski, 
J. (2007). Modeling a vertebrate motor system: pattern generation, steering and control of body 
orientation. Prog. Brain Res., 165, 221–234.
Grillner, S., & Lund, S. (1968). The origin of a descending pathway with monosynaptic action on 
flexor motoneurones. Acta. Physiol. Scand., 74, 274–284.
Grillner, S., & El Manira, A. (2020). Current princi­ples of motor control, with special reference 
to vertebrate locomotion. Physiol. Rev., 100, 271–320.
Grillner, S., Markram, H., De Schutter, E., Silberberg, G., & LeBeau, F. E. (2005). Microcircuits 
in action—­from CPGs to neocortex. Trends Neurosci., 28, 525–533.
Grillner, S., McClellan, A., & Perret, C. (1981). Entrainment of the spinal pattern generators for 
swimming by mechano-­sensitive ele­ments in the lamprey spinal cord in vitro. Brain Res., 217, 
380–386.
Grillner, S., Perret, C., & Zangger, P. (1976). Central generation of locomotion in the spinal 
dogfish. Brain Res., 109, 255–269.
Grillner, S., & Robertson, B. (2016). The basal ganglia over 500 million years. Curr. Biol., 26, 
R1088–­R1100.
Grillner, S., Robertson, B., & Kotaleski, J. H. (2020). Basal ganglia—­a motion perspective. Compr. 
Physiol., 10, 1241–1275.
Grillner, S., Robertson, B., & Stephenson-­Jones, M. (2013). The evolutionary origin of the verte-
brate basal ganglia and its role in action se­lection. J. Physiol., 591, 5425–5431.

243    References
Grillner, S., & Wallén, P. (2004). Innate versus learned movements—­a false dichotomy? Prog. 
Brain Res., 143, 3–12.
Grillner, S., Williams, T., & Lagerbäck, P. A. (1984). The edge cell, a pos­si­ble intraspinal mecha-
noreceptor. Science, 223, 500–503.
Grillner, S., & Zangger, P. (1975). How detailed is the central pattern generation for locomotion? 
Brain Res., 88, 367–371.
Guan, N. N., Xu, L., Zhang, T., Huang, C. X., Wang, Z., Dahlberg, E., Wang, H., Wang, F., 
Pallucchi, I., Hua, Y., El Manira, A., & Song, J. (2021). A specialized spinal cir­cuit for command 
amplification and directionality during escape be­hav­ior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 118(42), 
e2106785118.
Ha, N. T., & Dougherty, K. J. (2018). Spinal shox2 interneuron interconnectivity related to func-
tion and development. Elife, 7, e42519.
Hägglund, M., Dougherty, K. J., Borgius, L., Itohara, S., Iwasato, T., & Kiehn, O. (2013). Optoge­
ne­tic dissection reveals multiple rhythmogenic modules under­lying locomotion. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA, 110, 11589–11594.
Hartline, P. H., Kass, L., & Loop, M. S. (1978). Merging of modalities in the optic tectum: Infrared 
and visual integration in rattlesnakes. Science, 199, 1225–1229.
Haynes, W. I., & Haber, S. N. (2013). The organ­ization of prefrontal-­subthalamic inputs in pri-
mates provides an anatomical substrate for both functional specificity and integration: Implications 
for basal ganglia models and deep brain stimulation. J. Neurosci., 33, 4804–4814.
Henningsen, J. B., Soylu-­Kucharz, R., Bjorkqvist, M., & Petersen, A. (2021). Effects of excitotoxic-
ity in the hypothalamus in transgenic mouse models of Huntington disease. Heliyon, 7, e07808.
Herculano-­Houzel, S., Collins, C. E., Wong, P., Kaas, J. H., & Lent, R. (2008). The basic nonuni-
formity of the ce­re­bral cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 12593–12598.
Higurashi, Y., Maier, M. A., Nakajima, K., Mo­rita, K., Fujiki, S., Aoi, S., Mori, F., Murata, A., & 
Inase, M. (2019). Locomotor kinematics and EMG activity during quadrupedal versus bipedal 
gait in the Japa­nese macaque. J. Neurophysiol., 122, 398–412.
Hikosaka, O., & Wurtz, R. H. (1983). Visual and oculomotor functions of monkey substantia nigra 
pars reticulata. IV. Relation of substantia nigra to superior colliculus. J. Neurophysiol., 49, 1285–1301.
Hjorth, J. J. J., Blackwell, K. T., & Kotaleski, J. H. (2009). Gap junctions between striatal fast-­
spiking interneurons regulate spiking activity and synchronization as a function of cortical activity. 
J. Neurosci., 29, 5276–5286.
Hjorth, J. J. J., Kozlov, A., Carannante, I., Frost Nylén, J., Lindroos, R., Johansson, Y., Tokarska, 
A., Dorst, M. C., Suryanarayana, S. M., Silberberg, G., Hellgren Kotaleski, J., & Grillner, S. 
(2020). The microcircuits of striatum in silico. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 117, 9554–9565.
Holly, E. N., Davatolhagh, M. F., Choi, K., Alabi, O. O., Vargas Cifuentes, L., & Fuccillo, M. V. 
(2019). Striatal low-­threshold spiking interneurons regulate goal-­directed learning. Neuron, 103, 
92–101 e106.

244    References
Hou, X. H., Hyun, M., Taranda, J., Huang, K. W., Todd, E., Feng, D., Atwater, E., Croney, D., 
Zeidel, M. L., Osten, P., & Sabatini, B. L. (2016). Central control cir­cuit for context-­dependent 
micturition. Cell, 167, 73–86 e12.
Howe, M., Ridouh, I., Allegra Mascaro, A. L., Larios, A., Azcorra, M., & Dombeck, D. A. (2019). 
Coordination of rapid cholinergic and dopaminergic signaling in striatum during spontaneous 
movement. Elife, 8, e44903.
Hu, H., Cui, Y., & Yang, Y. (2020). Cir­cuits and functions of the lateral habenula in health and 
in disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 21, 277–295.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1969). Anatomical demonstration of columns in the monkey 
striate cortex. Nature, 221, 747–750.
Hunger, L., Kumar, A., & Schmidt, R. (2020). Abundance compensates kinetics: Similar effect of 
dopamine signals on D1 and D2 receptor populations. J. Neurosci., 40, 2868–2881.
Iigaya, K., Fonseca, M. S., Murakami, M., Mainen, Z. F., & Dayan, P. (2018). An effect of sero-
tonergic stimulation on learning rates for rewards apparent ­after long intertrial intervals. Nat. 
Commun., 9(1), 2477.
Isa, T., Marquez-­Legorreta, E., Grillner, S., & Scott, E. K. (2021). The tectum/superior colliculus 
as the vertebrate solution for spatial sensory integration and action. Curr. Biol., 31, R741–­R762.
Ito, M. (1972). Neural design of the cerebellar motor control system. Brain Res., 40, 81–84.
Ito, M. (1984). The cerebellum and neural control. Raven Press Books Ltd.
Ito, M. (1989). Long-­term depression. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 12, 85–102.
Ito, M. (2002). The molecular organ­ization of cerebellar long-­term depression. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 
3, 896–902.
Ito, M., & Yoshida, M. (1966). The origin of cerebral-­induced inhibition of Deiters neu-
rones. I. Monosynaptic initiation of the inhibitory postsynaptic potentials. Exp. Brain Res., 
2, 330–349.
Iwaniuk, A. N., & Whishaw, I. Q. (2000). On the origin of skilled forelimb movements. Trends 
Neurosci., 23, 372–376.
Jalalvand, E., Alvelid, J., Coceano, G., Edwards, S., Robertson, B., Grillner, S., & Testa, I. (2022). 
ExSTED microscopy reveals contrasting functions of dopamine and somatostatin CSF-­c neurons 
along the lamprey central canal. Elife, 11, e73114.
Jalalvand, E., Robertson, B., Tostivint, H., Wallen, P., & Grillner, S. (2016). The spinal cord has 
an intrinsic system for the control of pH. Curr. Biol., 26, 1346–1351.
Janak, P. H., & Tye, K. M. (2015). From cir­cuits to behaviour in the amygdala. Nature, 517, 
284–292.
Jay, M. F., & Sparks, D. L. (1984). Auditory receptive fields in primate superior colliculus shift 
with changes in eye position. Nature, 309, 345–347.

245    References
Jean, A. (1990). Brainstem control of swallowing: Localization and organ­ization of the central pat-
tern generator for swallowing. In A. Taylor (Ed.), Neurophysiology of the jaws and teeth (pp. 294–321). 
MacMillan.
Jean, A. (2001). Brain stem control of swallowing: Neuronal network and cellular mechanisms. 
Physiol. Rev., 81, 929–969.
Jessell, T. M. (2000). Neuronal specification in the spinal cord: Inductive signals and transcriptional 
codes. Nat. Rev. Genet., 1, 20–29.
Jin, X., Tecuapetla, F., & Costa, R. M. (2014). Basal ganglia subcircuits distinctively encode the 
parsing and concatenation of action sequences. Nat. Neurosci., 17, 423–430.
Jirenhed, D. A., Rasmussen, A., Johansson, F., & Hesslow, G. (2017). Learned response sequences 
in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 114, 6127–6132.
Johansson, R. S., & Flanagan, J. R. (2009). Coding and use of tactile signals from the fingertips 
in object manipulation tasks. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 10, 345–359.
Johansson, Y., & Silberberg, G. (2020). The functional organ­ization of cortical and thalamic inputs 
onto five types of striatal neurons is determined by source and target cell identities. Cell Rep., 30, 
1178–1194 e1173.
Johnels, B., Ingvarsson, P. E., Steg, G., & Olsson, T. (2001). The Posturo-­Locomotion-­Manual 
Test. A ­simple method for the characterization of neurological movement disturbances. Adv. Neu-
rol., 87, 91–100.
Jones, E. G. (2000). Microcolumns in the ce­re­bral cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 5019–
5021.
Jones, M. R., Grillner, S., & Robertson, B. (2009). Selective projection patterns from subtypes 
of ret­i­nal ganglion cells to tectum and pretectum: Distribution and relation to be­hav­ior. J. Comp. 
Neurol., 517, 257–275.
Jörntell, H., & Ekerot, C. F. (2011). Receptive field remodeling induced by skin stimulation in 
cerebellar neurons in vivo. Front. Neural Cir­cuits, 5, 3.
Jung, H., Baek, M., D’Elia, K. P., Boisvert, C., Currie, P. D., Tay, B. H., Venkatesh, B., Brown, 
S. M., Heguy, A., Schoppik, D., & Dasen, J. S. (2018). The ancient origins of neural substrates 
for land walking. Cell, 172, 667–682 e615.
Kaas, J. H., Qi, H. X., & Stepniewska, I. (2022). Escaping the nocturnal bottleneck, and the 
evolution of the dorsal and ventral streams of visual pro­cessing in primates. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. B. Biol. Sci., 377(1844), 20210293.
Kably, B., & Drew, T. (1998a). Corticoreticular pathways in the cat. I. Projection patterns and 
collaterization. J. Neurophysiol., 80, 389–405.
Kably, B., & Drew, T. (1998b). Corticoreticular pathways in the cat. II. Discharge activity of 
neurons in area 4 during voluntary gait modifications. J. Neurophysiol., 80, 406–424.

246    References
Kalueff, A. V., Stewart, A. M., Song, C., Berridge, K. C., Graybiel, A. M., & Fentress, J. C. 
(2016). Neurobiology of rodent self-­grooming and its value for translational neuroscience. Nat. 
Rev. Neurosci., 17, 45–59.
Kardamakis, A. A., Pérez-­Fernández, J., & Grillner, S. (2016). Spatiotemporal interplay between 
multisensory excitation and recruited inhibition in the lamprey optic tectum. Elife, 5, e16472.
Kardamakis, A. A., Saitoh, K., & Grillner, S. (2015). Tectal microcircuit generating visual se­lection 
commands on gaze-­controlling neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 112, E1956–1965.
Karigo, T., Kennedy, A., Yang, B., Liu, M., Tai, D., Wahle, I. A., & Anderson, D. J. (2021). 
Distinct hypothalamic control of same-­ and opposite-­sex mounting behaviour in mice. Nature, 
589, 258–263.
Karube, F., Takahashi, S., Kobayashi, K., & Fujiyama, F. (2019). Motor cortex can directly drive the 
globus pallidus neurons in a projection neuron type-­dependent manner in the rat. Elife, 8, e49511.
Kashin, S. M., Malinin, L. K., Orlovsky, G. N., & Poddubny, A. G. (1977). Be­hav­ior of some 
fishes during hunting (in Rus­sian). Zoological Journal, 56, 1328–1338.
Kato, R., Takaura, K., Ikeda, T., Yoshida, M., & Isa, T. (2011). Contribution of the retino-­tectal 
pathway to visually guided saccades ­after lesion of the primary visual cortex in monkeys. Eur. J. 
Neurosci., 33, 1952–1960.
Kawai, R., Markman, T., Poddar, R., Ko, R., Fantana, A. L., Dhawale, A. K., Kampff, A. R., & 
Olveczky, B. P. (2015). Motor cortex is required for learning but not for executing a motor skill. 
Neuron, 86, 800–812.
Kawato, M., Furukawa, K., & Suzuki, R. (1987). A hierarchical neural-­network model for control 
and learning of voluntary movement. Biol. Cybern., 57, 169–185.
Kawato, M., & Gomi, H. (1992). The cerebellum and VOR/OKR learning models. Trends Neu-
rosci., 15, 445–453.
Kawato, M., Ohmae, S., Hoang, H., & Sanger, T. (2021). 50 years since the Marr, Ito, and Albus 
models of the cerebellum. Neuroscience, 462, 151–174.
Ketzef, M., & Silberberg, G. (2021). Differential synaptic input to external globus pallidus neu-
ronal subpopulations in vivo. Neuron, 109, 516–529 e514.
Kiehn, O. (2016). Decoding the organ­ization of spinal cir­cuits that control locomotion. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci., 17, 224–238.
Kim, H. F., & Hikosaka, O. (2015). Parallel basal ganglia cir­cuits for voluntary and automatic 
behaviour to reach rewards. Brain, 138, 1776–1800.
Klaus, A., Planert, H., Hjorth, J. J., Berke, J. D., Silberberg, G., & Kotaleski, J. H. (2011). 
Striatal fast-­spiking interneurons: from firing patterns to postsynaptic impact. Front. Syst. Neu-
rosci., 5, 57.
Kleinfeld, D., Deschenes, M., Wang, F., & Moore, J. D. (2014). More than a rhythm of life: 
Breathing as a ­binder of orofacial sensation. Nat. Neurosci., 17, 647–651.

247    References
Knudsen, E. I. (1982). Auditory and visual maps of space in the optic tectum of the owl. J. Neu-
rosci., 2, 1177–1194.
Knudsen, E. I., & Konishi, M. (1978). A neural map of auditory space in the owl. Science, 200, 
795–797.
Kohl, J., Babayan, B. M., Rubinstein, N. D., Autry, A. E., Marin-­Rodriguez, B., Kapoor, V., 
Miyamishi, K., Zweifel, L. S., Luo, L., Uchida, N., & Dulac, C. (2018). Functional cir­cuit archi-
tecture under­lying parental behaviour. Nature, 556, 326–331.
Kolta, A., Brocard, F., Verdier, D., & Lund, J. P. (2007). A review of burst generation by trigeminal 
main sensory neurons. Arch. Oral Biol., 52, 325–328.
Kotaleski, J. H., Lansner, A., & Grillner, S. (1999). Neural mechanisms potentially contributing 
to the intersegmental phase lag in lamprey. II. Hemisegmental oscillations produced by mutually 
coupled excitatory neurons. Biol. Cybern., 81, 299–315.
Kozlov, A., Huss, M., Lansner, A., Kotaleski, J. H., & Grillner, S. (2009). ­Simple cellular and 
network control princi­ples govern complex patterns of motor be­hav­ior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 
106, 20027–20032.
Kozlov, A. K., Kardamakis, A. A., Hellgren Kotaleski, J., & Grillner, S. (2014). Gating of steering 
signals through phasic modulation of reticulospinal neurons during locomotion. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA, 111, 3591–3596.
Kumar, S., & Hedges, S. B. (1998). A molecular timescale for vertebrate evolution. Nature, 392, 
917–920.
Kunwar, P. S., Zelikowsky, M., Remedios, R., Cai, H., Yilmaz, M., Meister, M., & Anderson, D. J. 
(2015). Ventromedial hypothalamic neurons control a defensive emotion state. Elife, 4.
Lacalli, T. (2022). An evolutionary perspective on chordate brain organ­ization and function: 
Insights from amphioxus, and the prob­lem of sentience. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci., 
377(1844), 20200520.
Lacey, C. J., Boyes, J., Gerlach, O., Chen, L., Magill, P. J., & Bolam, J. P. (2005). GABA(B) recep-
tors at glutamatergic synapses in the rat striatum. Neuroscience, 136, 1083–1095.
Lamanna, F., Hervas-­Sotomayor, F., Oel, A., Jandzik, D., Sobrido-­Cameán, D., Martik, M. L., 
Green, S. A., Brüning, T., Mössinger, K., Schmidt, J., Schneider, C., Sepp, M., Murat, F., Smith, 
J. J., Bronner, M. E., Rodicio, C., Barreiro-­Iglesias, A., Medeiros, D. M., Arendt, D., & Kaess-
mann, H. (2022). Reconstructing the ancestral vertebrate brain using a lamprey neural cell type 
atlas. bioRXiv. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1101​/­2022​.­02​.­28​.­482278
Lang, I. M., Sarna, S. K., & Dodds, W. J. (1993). Pharyngeal, esophageal, and proximal gastric 
responses associated with vomiting. Am. J. Physiol., 265, G963–­G972.
Lawrence, D. G., & Kuypers, H. G. (1968a). The functional organ­ization of the motor system in 
the monkey. I. The effects of bilateral pyramidal lesions. Brain, 91, 1–14.
Lawrence, D. G., & Kuypers, H. G. (1968b). The functional organ­ization of the motor system in 
the monkey. II. The effects of lesions of the descending brain-­stem pathways. Brain, 91, 15–36.

248    References
Lazaridis, I., Tzortzi, O., Weglage, M., Martin, A., Xuan, Y., Parent, M., Johansson, Y., Fuzik, 
J., Furth, D., Fenno, L. E., Ramakrishnan, C., Silberberg, G., Deisseroth, K., Carlen, M., & 
Meletis, K. (2019). A hypothalamus-­habenula cir­cuit controls aversion. Mol. Psychiatry, 24, 
1351–1368.
Lecca, S., Meye, F. J., Trusel, M., Tchenio, A., Harris, J., Schwarz, M. K., Burdakov, D., Georges, 
F., & Mameli, M. (2017). Aversive stimuli drive hypothalamus-­to-­habenula excitation to promote 
escape be­hav­ior. Elife, 6, e30697.
LeDoux, J. (2012). Rethinking the emotional brain. Neuron, 73, 653–676.
Lefler, Y., Campagner, D., & Branco, T. (2020). The role of the periaqueductal gray in escape 
be­hav­ior. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 60, 115–121.
Lemon, R. N. (2008). Descending pathways in motor control. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 31, 195–218.
Lemon, S. S. F., & Sherrington, C. S. (1917). Observations on the excitable cortex of the chim-
panzee, orangutan and gorilla. Q. J. Exp. Physiol., 11, 135–222.
Li, P., Janczewski, W. A., Yackle, K., Kam, K., Pagliardini, S., Krasnow, M. A., & Feldman, J. L. 
(2016). The peptidergic control cir­cuit for sighing. Nature, 530, 293–297.
Liddell, E. G. T., & Phillips, C. G. (1944). Pyramidal section in the cat. Brain, 67, 1–9.
Lilascharoen, V., Wang, E. H., Do, N., Pate, S. C., Tran, A. N., Yoon, C. D., Choi, J. H., Wang, 
X. Y., Pribiag, H., Park, Y. G., Chung, K., & Lim, B. K. (2021). Divergent pallidal pathways 
under­lying distinct Parkinsonian behavioral deficits. Nat. Neurosci., 24, 504–515.
Lin, D., Boyle, M. P., Dollar, P., Lee, H., Lein, E. S., Perona, P., & Anderson, D. J. (2011). 
Functional identification of an aggression locus in the mouse hypothalamus. Nature, 470, 
221–226.
Lindahl, M., Kamali Sarvestani, I., Ekeberg, O., & Kotaleski, J. H. (2013). Signal enhance-
ment in the output stage of the Basal Ganglia by synaptic short-­term plasticity in the direct, 
indirect, and hyperdirect pathways. Front. Comput. Neurosci., 7, 76. doi: 10.3389/fncom​
.2013.00076.
Lindroos, R., Dorst, M. C., Du, K., Filipovic, M., Keller, D., Ketzef, M., Kozlov, A. K., Kumar, A., 
Lindahl, M., Nair, A. G., Pérez-­Fernández, J., Grillner, S., Silberberg, G., & Hellgren Kotaleski, J. 
(2018). Basal Ganglia neuromodulation over multiple temporal and structural scales-­simulations 
of direct pathway MSNs investigate the fast onset of dopaminergic effects and predict the role of 
Kv4.2. Front. Neural Cir­cuits, 12, 3, doi: 10.3389/fncir.2018.00003.
Lisberger, S. G. (2021). The rules of cerebellar learning: Around the Ito hypothesis. Neuroscience, 
462, 175–190.
Llinás, R. R. (2013). The olivo-­cerebellar system: A key to understanding the functional signifi-
cance of intrinsic oscillatory brain properties. Front. Neural Cir­cuits, 7, 96.
Lo, L., Yao, S., Kim, D. W., Cetin, A., Harris, J., Zeng, H., Anderson, D. J., & Weissbourd, B. 
(2019). Connectional architecture of a mouse hypothalamic cir­cuit node controlling social be­hav­
ior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 116, 7503–7512.

249    References
Maier, M., Ballester, B. R., Duff, A., Duarte Oller, E., & Verschure, P. F. M. J. (2019). Effect of 
specific over nonspecific VR-­based rehabilitation on poststroke motor recovery: A systematic meta-­
analysis. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, 33, 112–129.
Mallet, N., Micklem, B. R., Henny, P., Brown, M. T., Williams, C., Bolam, J. P., Nakamura, 
K. C., & Magill, P. J. (2012). Dichotomous organ­ization of the external globus pallidus. Neuron, 
74, 1075–1086.
Mallet, N., Schmidt, R., Leventhal, D., Chen, F., Amer, N., Boraud, T., & Berke, J. D. (2016). 
Arkypallidal cells send a stop signal to striatum. Neuron, 89, 308–316.
Mandelbaum, G., Taranda, J., Haynes, T. M., Hochbaum, D. R., Huang, K. W., Hyun, M., Umadevi 
Venkataraju, K., Straub, C., Wang, W., Robertson, K., Osten, P., & Sabatini, B. L. (2019). Distinct 
cortical-­thalamic-­striatal cir­cuits through the parafascicular nucleus. Neuron, 102, 636–652 e637.
Marigold, D. S., & Drew, T. (2017). Posterior parietal cortex estimates the relationship between 
object and body location during locomotion. Elife, 6.
Markram, H., Toledo-­Rodriguez, M., Wang, Y., Gupta, A., Silberberg, G., & Wu, C. (2004). 
Interneurons of the neocortical inhibitory system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 5, 793–807.
Marr, D. (1969). A theory of cerebellar cortex. J. Physiol., 202, 437–470.
Märtin, A., Calvigioni, D., Tzortzi, O., Fuzik, J., Wärnberg, E., & Meletis, K. (2019). A spatio-
molecular map of the striatum. Cell Rep., 29, 4320–4333 e4325.
Martinez-­Gonzalez, C., Bolam, J. P., & Mena-­Segovia, J. (2011). Topographical organ­ization of 
the pedunculopontine nucleus. Front. Neuroanat., 5, 22.
Masullo, L., Mariotti, L., Alexandre, N., Freire-­Pritchett, P., Boulanger, J., & Tripodi, M. (2019). 
Genet­ically defined functional modules for spatial orienting in the mouse superior colliculus. Curr. 
Biol., 29, 2892–2904 e2898.
Matsuyama, K., Mori, F., Nakajima, K., Drew, T., Aoki, M., & Mori, S. (2004). Locomotor role 
of the corticoreticular-­reticulospinal-­spinal interneuronal system. Prog. Brain Res., 143, 239–249.
McCormick, D. A., & Thompson, R. F. (1984a). Cerebellum: Essential involvement in the clas-
sically conditioned eyelid response. Science, 223, 296–299.
McCormick, D. A., & Thompson, R. F. (1984b). Neuronal responses of the rabbit cerebellum dur-
ing acquisition and per­for­mance of a classically conditioned nictitating membrane-­eyelid response. 
J. Neurosci., 4, 2811–2822.
McElvain, L. E., Chen, Y., Moore, J. D., Brigidi, G. S., Bloodgood, B. L., Lim, B. K., Costa, R. M., 
& Kleinfeld, D. (2021). Specific populations of basal ganglia output neurons target distinct brain 
stem areas while collateralizing throughout the diencephalon. Neuron, 109, 1721–1738 e1724.
Meredith, M. A., & Stein, B. E. (1986). Spatial ­factors determine the activity of multisensory 
neurons in cat superior colliculus. Brain Res., 365, 350–354.
Mesulam, M. M., Mufson, E. J., Levey, A. I., & Wainer, B. H. (1984). Atlas of cholinergic neurons 
in the forebrain and upper brainstem of the macaque based on monoclonal choline acetyltransfer-
ase immunohistochemistry and acetylcholinesterase histochemistry. Neuroscience, 12, 669–686.

250    References
Missaghi, K., Le Gal, J. P., Gray, P. A., & Dubuc, R. (2016). The neural control of respiration in 
lampreys. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol., 234, 14–25.
Miyazaki, K. W., Miyazaki, K., Tanaka, K. F., Yamanaka, A., Takahashi, A., Tabuchi, S., & Doya, 
K. (2014). Optoge­ne­tic activation of dorsal raphe serotonin neurons enhances patience for ­future 
rewards. Curr. Biol., 24, 2033–2040.
Mizuno, Y., Hattori, N., Mori, H., Suzuki, T., & Tanaka, K. (2001). Parkin and Parkinson’s disease. 
Curr. Opin. Neurol., 14, 477–482.
Mohan, H., An, X., Musall, S., Mi­tra, P. P., Churchland, A. K., & Huang, J. Z. (2019). Pyramidal 
neuron types and cortical networks, encoding sensorimotor activity coordinating hand-­mouth 
synergy. Society for Neuroscience Abstract, 227, 15.
Moore, J. D., Deschenes, M., Furuta, T., Huber, D., Smear, M. C., Demers, M., & Kleinfeld, D. (2013). 
Hierarchy of orofacial rhythms revealed through whisking and breathing. Nature, 497, 205–210.
Moore, J. D., Kleinfeld, D., & Wang, F. (2014). How the brainstem controls orofacial be­hav­iors 
comprised of rhythmic actions. Trends Neurosci., 37, 370–380.
Morgenstern, N. A., Isidro, A. F., Israely, I., & Costa, R. M. (2022). Pyramidal tract neurons 
drive amplification of excitatory inputs to striatum through cholinergic interneurons. Sci. Adv., 
8(6), eabh4315.
Morquette, P., Verdier, D., Kadala, A., Fethiere, J., Philippe, A. G., Robitaille, R., & Kolta, A. (2015). 
An astrocyte-­dependent mechanism for neuronal rhythmogenesis. Nat. Neurosci., 18, 844–854.
Mountcastle, V. B., Davies, P. W., & Berman, A. L. (1957). Response properties of neurons of cat’s 
somatic sensory cortex to peripheral stimuli. J. Neurophysiol., 20, 374–407.
Nachev, P., Kennard, C., & Husain, M. (2008). Functional role of the supplementary and pre-­
supplementary motor areas. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 9, 856–869.
Nair, A. G., Castro, L. R. V., El Khoury, M., Gorgievski, V., Giros, B., Tzavara, E. T., Hellgren-­
Kotaleski, J., & Vincent, P. (2019). The high efficacy of muscarinic M4 receptor in D1 medium 
spiny neurons reverses striatal hyperdopaminergia. Neuropharmacology, 146, 74–83.
Nair, A. G., Gutierrez-­Arenas, O., Eriksson, O., Vincent, P., & Hellgren Kotaleski, J. (2015). 
Sensing positive versus negative reward signals through adenylyl cyclase-­coupled GPCRs in direct 
and indirect pathway striatal medium spiny neurons. J. Neurosci., 35, 14017–14030.
Nakajima, T., Fortier-­Lebel, N., & Drew, T. (2019). Premotor cortex provides a substrate for the 
temporal transformation of information during the planning of gait modifications. Cereb. Cortex., 
29, 4982–5008.
Nambu, A., Takada, M., Inase, M., & Tokuno, H. (1996). Dual somatotopical repre­sen­ta­tions in 
the primate subthalamic nucleus: Evidence for ordered but reversed body-­map transformations 
from the primary motor cortex and the supplementary motor area. J. Neurosci., 16, 2671–2683.
Nambu, A., Tokuno, H., & Takada, M. (2002). Functional significance of the cortico-­subthalamo-­
pallidal “hyperdirect” pathway. Neurosci. Res., 43, 111–117.

251    References
Nelson, A., Abdelmesih, B., & Costa, R. M. (2021). Corticospinal populations broadcast complex 
motor signals to coordinated spinal and striatal cir­cuits. Nat. Neurosci., 24, 1721–1732.
Newman, E. A., & Hartline, P. H. (1981). Integration of visual and infrared information in 
bimodal neurons in the rattlesnake optic tectum. Science, 213, 789–791.
Nieuwenhuys, R., & Nicholson, C. (1998). Lampreys, petromyzontoidea. In R. Nieuwenhuys, 
H. J. T. Donkelaar, and C. Nicholson (Eds.), The central ner­vous system of vertebrates (pp. 397–495). 
Springer.
Nonomura, S., Nishizawa, K., Sakai, Y., Kawaguchi, Y., Kato, S., Uchigashima, M., Watanabe, M., 
Yamanaka, K., Enomoto, K., Chiken, S., Sano, H., So­ma, S., Yoshida, J., Samejima, K., Ogawa, 
M., Kobayashi, K., Nambu, A., Isomura, Y., & Kimura, M. (2018). Monitoring and updating 
of action se­lection for goal-­directed be­hav­ior through the striatal direct and indirect pathways. 
Neuron, 99, 1302–1314 e1305.
Ocana, F. M., Suryanarayana, S. M., Saitoh, K., Kardamakis, A. A., Capantini, L., Robertson, B., 
& Grillner, S. (2015). The lamprey pallium provides a blueprint of the mammalian motor projec-
tions from cortex. Curr. Biol., 25, 413–423.
Ohta, Y., & Grillner, S. (1989). Monosynaptic excitatory amino acid transmission from the pos-
terior rhombencephalic reticular nucleus to spinal neurons involved in the control of locomotion 
in lamprey. J. Neurophysiol., 62, 1079–1089.
Olson, I., Suryanarayana, S. M., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2017). Griseum centrale, a homo-
logue of the periaqueductal gray in the lamprey. IBRO Rep., 2, 24–30.
Oorschot, D. E. (1996). Total number of neurons in the neostriatal, pallidal, subthalamic, and 
substantia nigral nuclei of the rat basal ganglia: A stereological study using the cavalieri and optical 
disector methods. J. Comp. Neurol., 366, 580–599.
Orlovsky, G. N. (1969). Spontaneous and induced locomotion of the thalamic cat. Biofizika, 14, 
1154–1162.
Orlovsky, G. N. (1972a). Activity of rubrospinal neurons during locomotion. Brain Res., 46, 99–112.
Orlovsky, G. N. (1972b). Activity of vestibulospinal neurons during locomotion. Brain Res., 46, 
85–98.
Orlovsky, G. N. (1972c). The effect of dif­fer­ent descending systems on flexor and extensor activity 
during locomotion. Brain Res., 40, 359–371.
Orlovsky, G. N., Deliagina, T. G., & Grillner, S. (1999). Neuronal control of locomotion. From 
mollusc to man. Oxford University Press.
Oscarsson, O. (1968). Termination and functional organ­ization of the ventral spino-­olivocerebellar 
path. J. Physiol., 196, 453–478.
Oscarsson, O. (1976). Spatial distribution of climbing and mossy fibre inputs into the cerebellar 
cortex. In O. Creutzfeldt (Ed.), Afferent and intrinsic organ­ization of laminated structures in the 
brain (pp. 34–42). Springer-­Verlag.

252    References
Papathanou, M., Creed, M., Dorst, M. C., Bimpsidis, Z., Dumas, S., Pettersson, H., Bellone, 
C., Silberberg, G., Lüscher, C., & Wallén-­Mackenzie, A. (2018). Targeting VGLUT2 in mature 
dopamine neurons decreases mesoaccumbal glutamatergic transmission and identifies a role for 
glutamate co-­release in synaptic plasticity by increasing baseline AMPA/NMDA ratio. Front. Neu-
ral Cir­cuits, 12, 64.
Parievsky, A., Moore, C., Kamdjou, T., Cepeda, C., Meshul, C. K., & Levine, M. S. (2017). 
Differential electrophysiological and morphological alterations of thalamostriatal and corti-
costriatal projections in the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis., 108, 
29–44.
Park, J., Phillips, J. W., Guo, J. Z., Martin, K. A., Hantman, A. W., & Dudman, J. T. (2022). 
Motor cortical output for skilled forelimb movement is selectively distributed across projection 
neuron classes. Sci. Adv. 8(10), eabj5167.
Parker, J. G., Marshall, J. D., Ahanonu, B., Wu, Y. W., Kim, T. H., Grewe, B. F., Zhang, Y., Li, 
J. Z., Ding, J. B., Ehlers, M. D., & Schnitzer, M. J. (2018). Diametric neural ensemble dynamics 
in parkinsonian and dyskinetic states. Nature. 557(7704):177–182.
Penfield, W., & Rasmussen, T. (1950). The ce­re­bral cortex of man: A clinical study of localization of 
function. Macmillan.
Peng, H., Xie, P., Liu, L., Kuang, X., Wang, Y., Qu, L., Gong, H., Jiang, S., Li, A., Ruan, Z., Ding, 
L., Yao, Z., Chen, C., Chen, M., Daigle, T. L., Dalley, R., Ding, Z., Duan, Y., Feiner, A., He, P., 
Hill, C., Hirokawa, K. E., Hong, G., Huang, L., Kebede, S., Kuo, H. C., Larsen, R., Lesnar, P., Li, 
L., Li, Q., Li, X., Li, Y., Li, Y., Liu, A., Lu, D., Mok, S., Ng, L., Nguyen, T. N., Ouyang, Q., Pan, 
J., Shen, E., Song, Y., Sunkin, S. M., Tasic, B., Veldman, M. B., Wakeman, W., Wan, W., Wang, 
P., Wang, Q., Wang, T., Wang, Y., Xiong, F., Xiong, W., Xu, W., Ye, M., Yin, L., Yu, Y., Yuan, J., 
Yuan, J., Yun, Z., Zeng, S., Zhang, S., Zhao, S., Zhao, Z., Zhou, Z., Huang, Z. J., Esposito, L., 
Hawrylycz, M. J., Sorensen, S. A., Yang, X. W., Zheng, Y., Gu, Z., Xie, W., Koch, C., Luo, Q., 
Harris, J. A., Wang, Y., & Zeng, H. (2021). Morphological diversity of single neurons in molecu-
larly defined cell types. Nature, 598, 174–181.
Pérez-­Fernández, J., Kardamakis, A. A., Suzuki, D. G., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2017). Direct 
dopaminergic projections from the SNc modulate visuomotor transformation in the lamprey 
tectum. Neuron, 96, 910–924 e915.
Pérez-­Fernández, J., Stephenson-­Jones, M., Suryanarayana, S. M., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. 
(2014). Evolutionarily conserved organ­ization of the dopaminergic system in lamprey: SNc/VTA 
afferent and efferent connectivity and D2 receptor expression. J. Comp. Neurol., 522, 3775–3794.
Peron, S., Pancholi, R., Voelcker, B., Wittenbach, J. D., Olafsdottir, H. F., Freeman, J., & Svoboda, 
K. (2020). Recurrent interactions in local cortical cir­cuits. Nature, 579, 256–259.
Pfaff, D. W. (2017). How the vertebrate brain regulates be­hav­ior. Harvard University Press.
Philipp, R., & Hoffmann, K. P. (2014). Arm movements induced by electrical microstimulation 
in the superior colliculus of the macaque monkey. J. Neurosci., 34, 3350–3363.

253    References
Phillips, C. G., & Porter, R. (1977). Corticospinal neurones. Their role in movement. Monogr. 
Physiol. Soc., 34, v–­xii, 1–450.
Picton, L. D., Bertuzzi, M., Pallucchi, I., Fontanel, P., Dahlberg, E., Bjornfors, E. R., Iacoviello, 
F., Shearing, P. R., & El Manira, A. (2021). A spinal organ of proprioception for integrated motor 
action feedback. Neuron, 109, 1188–1201 e1187.
Pivetta, C., Esposito, M. S., Sigrist, M., & Arber, S. (2014). Motor-­circuit communication matrix 
from spinal cord to brainstem neurons revealed by developmental origin. Cell, 156, 537–548.
Planert, H., Szydlowski, S. N., Hjorth, J. J., Grillner, S., & Silberberg, G. (2010). Dynamics of 
synaptic transmission between fast-­spiking interneurons and striatal projection neurons of the 
direct and indirect pathways. J. Neurosci., 30, 3499–3507.
Porter, R. (1987). The Florey lecture, 1987. Corticomotoneuronal projections: Synaptic events 
related to skilled movement. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci., 231, 147–168.
Puelles, L., & Rubenstein, J. L. (2015). A new scenario of hypothalamic organ­ization: Rationale of 
new hypotheses introduced in the updated prosomeric model. Front. Neuroanat., 9, 27.
Rakic, P. (2008). Confusing cortical columns. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 12099–12100.
Rancic, V., & Gosgnach, S. (2021). Recent insights into the rhythmogenic core of the locomotor 
CPG. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 22.
Raz, A., Feingold, A., Zelanskaya, V., Vaadia, E., & Bergman, H. (1996). Neuronal synchroniza-
tion of tonically active neurons in the striatum of normal and parkinsonian primates. J. Neuro-
physiol., 76, 2083–2088.
Redgrave, P., & Gurney, K. (2006). The short-­latency dopamine signal: a role in discovering novel 
actions? Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 7, 967–975.
Redgrave, P., Rodriguez, M., Smith, Y., Rodriguez-­Oroz, M. C., Lehericy, S., Bergman, H., Agid, 
Y., DeLong, M. R., & Obeso, J. A. (2010). Goal-­directed and habitual control in the basal ganglia: 
Implications for Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 11, 760–772.
Reig, R., & Silberberg, G. (2014). Multisensory integration in the mouse striatum. Neuron, 83, 
1200–1212.
Reynolds, J. N. J., Avvisati, R., Dodson, P. D., Fisher, S. D., Oswald, M. J., Wickens, J. R., & 
Zhang, Y. F. (2022). Coincidence of cholinergic pauses, dopaminergic activation and depolarisa-
tion of spiny projection neurons drives synaptic plasticity in the striatum. Nat. Commun., 13(1), 
1296.
Rice, M. E., & Cragg, S. J. (2004). Nicotine amplifies reward-­related dopamine signals in striatum. 
Nat. Neurosci., 7, 583–584.
Rietdijk, C. D., Perez-­Pardo, P., Garssen, J., van Wezel, R. J., & Kraneveld, A. D. (2017). Exploring 
Braak’s hypothesis of Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurol., 8, 37.
Rizzolatti, G., & Sinigaglia, C. (2010). The functional role of the parieto-­frontal mirror cir­cuit: 
Interpretations and misinterpretations. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 11, 264–274.

254    References
Robertson, B., Sengul, G., Wallén, P., & Grillner, S. (2021). The cyclostome spinal cord. In C. 
Watson, G. Sengul, and G. Paxinos (Eds.), The mammalian spinal cord. (pp. 213–237), Elsevier.
Robles, E., Laurell, E., & Baier, H. (2014). The ret­i­nal projectome reveals brain-­area-­specific visual 
repre­sen­ta­tions generated by ganglion cell diversity. Curr. Biol., 24, 2085–2096.
Roland, P. E., Larsen, B., Lassen, N. A., & Skinhoj, E. (1980a). Supplementary motor area and 
other cortical areas in organ­ization of voluntary movements in man. J. Neurophysiol., 43, 118–136.
Roland, P. E., Skinhoj, E., Lassen, N. A., & Larsen, B. (1980b). Dif­fer­ent cortical areas in man 
in organ­ization of voluntary movements in extrapersonal space. J. Neurophysiol., 43, 137–150.
Roseberry, T. K., Lee, A. M., Lalive, A. L., Wilbrecht, L., Bonci, A., & Kreitzer, A. C. (2016). 
Cell-­type-­specific control of brainstem locomotor cir­cuits by Basal Ganglia. Cell, 164, 526–537.
Rossignol, S., Dubuc, R., & Gossard, J. P. (2006). Dynamic sensorimotor interactions in locomo-
tion. Physiol. Rev., 86, 89–154.
Rovainen, C. M. (1974). Synaptic interactions of reticulospinal neurons and nerve cells in the 
spinal cord of the sea lamprey. J. Comp. Neurol., 154, 207–223.
Ruder, L., Schina, R., Kanodia, H., Valencia-­Garcia, S., Pivetta, C., & Arber, S. (2021). A func-
tional map for diverse forelimb actions within brainstem circuitry. Nature, 590, 445–450.
Ryczko, D., Auclair, F., Cabelguen, J. M., Dubuc, R. (2016a). The mesencephalic locomotor region 
sends a bilateral glutamatergic drive to hindbrain reticulospinal neurons in a tetrapod. J. Comp. 
Neurol., 524, 1361–1383.
Ryczko, D., Cone, J. J., Alpert, M. H., Goetz, L., Auclair, F., Dube, C., Parent, M., Roitman, 
M. F., Alford, S., & Dubuc, R. (2016b). A descending dopamine pathway conserved from basal 
vertebrates to mammals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 113, E2440–2449.
Ryczko, D., Gratsch, S., Alpert, M. H., Cone, J. J., Kasemir, J., Ruthe, A., Beausejour, P. A., 
Auclair, F., Roitman, M. F., Alford, S., & Dubuc, R. (2020). Descending dopaminergic inputs to 
reticulospinal neurons promote locomotor movements. J. Neurosci., 40, 8478–8490.
Sacrey, L. A., Alaverdashvili, M., & Whishaw, I. Q. (2009). Similar hand shaping in reaching-­for-­
food (skilled reaching) in rats and ­humans provides evidence of homology in release, collection, 
and manipulation movements. Behav. Brain Res., 204, 153–161.
Sahibzada, N., Dean, P., & Redgrave, P. (1986). Movements resembling orientation or avoidance 
elicited by electrical stimulation of the superior colliculus in rats. J. Neurosci., 6, 723–733.
Saitoh, K., Menard, A., & Grillner, S. (2007). Tectal control of locomotion, steering, and eye 
movements in lamprey. J. Neurophysiol., 97, 3093–3108.
Samotus, O., Parrent, A., & Jog, M. (2018). Spinal cord stimulation therapy for gait dysfunction 
in advanced Parkinson’s disease patients. Mov. Disord., 33, 783–792.
Santana, M. B., Halje, P., Simplicio, H., Richter, U., Freire, M. A. M., Petersson, P., Fuentes, R., 
& Nicolelis, M. A. L. (2014). Spinal cord stimulation alleviates motor deficits in a primate model 
of Parkinson disease. Neuron, 84, 716–722.

255    References
Schwab, R. S., Chafetz, M. E., & Walker, S. (1954). Control of two simultaneous voluntary motor 
acts in normals and in parkinsonism. AMA Arch. Neurol. Psychiatry, 72, 591–598.
Schwartz, A. B. (1994). Direct cortical repre­sen­ta­tion of drawing. Science, 265, 540–542.
Schwartz, A. B. (2007). Useful signals from motor cortex. J. Physiol., 579, 581–601.
Schwartz, A. B., Kettner, R. E., & Georgopoulos, A. P. (1988). Primate motor cortex and ­free arm 
movements to visual targets in three-­dimensional space. I. Relations between single cell discharge 
and direction of movement. J. Neurosci., 8, 2913–2927.
Shekhar, K., & Sanes, J. R. (2021). Generating and using transcriptomically based ret­i­nal cell 
atlases. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci., 7, 43–72.
Sherrington, C. S. (1906). The integrative action of the ner­vous system. Yale University Press.
Sherrington, C. S. (1924). Prob­lems of muscular receptivity. Nature, 113, 892–894.
Shik, M. L., Severin, F. V., & Orlovskii, G. N. (1966). Control of walking and ­running by means 
of electric stimulation of the midbrain. Biofizika, 11, 659–666.
Slaoui Hasnaoui, M., Arsenault, I., Verdier, D., Obeid, S., & Kolta, A. (2020). Functional con-
nectivity between the trigeminal main sensory nucleus and the trigeminal motor nucleus. Front. 
Cell Neurosci., 14, 167.
Smith, Y., & Bolam, J. P. (1991). Convergence of synaptic inputs from the striatum and the glo-
bus pallidus onto identified nigrocollicular cells in the rat: A double anterograde labelling study. 
Neuroscience, 44, 45–73.
Song, J., Dahlberg, E., & El Manira, A. (2018). V2a interneuron diversity tailors spinal cir­cuit 
organ­ization to control the vigor of locomotor movements. Nat. Commun., 9(1), 3370.
Song, J., Pallucchi, I., Ausborn, J., Ampatzis, K., Bertuzzi, M., Fontanel, P., Picton, L. D., & El 
Manira, A. (2020). Multiple rhythm-­generating cir­cuits act in tandem with pacemaker properties 
to control the start and speed of locomotion. Neuron, 105, 1048–1061 e1044.
Sparks, D. L. (1986). Translation of sensory signals into commands for control of saccadic eye 
movements: Role of primate superior colliculus. Physiol. Rev., 66, 118–171.
Spillantini, M. G., Schmidt, M. L., Lee, V. M., Trojanowski, J. Q., Jakes, R., & Goedert, M. 
(1997). Alpha-­synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature, 388, 839–840.
Stagkourakis, S., Spigolon, G., Liu, G., & Anderson, D. J. (2020). Experience-­dependent plastic-
ity in an innate social be­hav­ior is mediated by hypothalamic LTP. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 117, 
25789–25799.
Stein, B. E., & Stanford, T. R. (2008). Multisensory integration: current issues from the perspective 
of the single neuron. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 9, 255–266.
Stein, P. S. (2008). Motor pattern deletions and modular organ­ization of turtle spinal cord. Brain 
Res. Rev., 57, 118–124.
Steiner, L. A., Barreda Tomas, F. J., Planert, H., Alle, H., Vida, I., & Geiger, J. R. P. (2019). Connectiv-
ity and dynamics under­lying synaptic control of the subthalamic nucleus. J. Neurosci., 39, 2470–2481.

256    References
Stephenson-­Jones, M., Ericsson, J., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2012a). Evolution of the basal 
ganglia: Dual-­output pathways conserved throughout vertebrate phylogeny. J. Comp. Neurol., 
520, 2957–2973.
Stephenson-­Jones, M., Floros, O., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2012b). Evolutionary conserva-
tion of the habenular nuclei and their circuitry controlling the dopamine and 5-­hydroxytryptophan 
(5-­HT) systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 109, E164–­E173.
Stephenson-­Jones, M., Kardamakis, A. A., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2013). In­de­pen­dent cir­
cuits in the basal ganglia for the evaluation and se­lection of actions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 110, 
E3670–­E3679.
Stephenson-­Jones, M., Samuelsson, E., Ericsson, J., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2011). Evolu-
tionary conservation of the basal ganglia as a common vertebrate mechanism for action se­lection. 
Curr. Biol., 21, 1081–1091.
Stephenson-­Jones, M., Yu, K., Ahrens, S., Tucciaarone, J. M., van Huijstee, A. N., Mejia, L. A., 
Penzo, M. A., Tai, L.-­H., Wilbrecht, L., & Li, B. (2016). A basal ganglia cir­cuit for evaluating 
action outcomes. Nature, 539, 289–293.
Stepniewska, I., Gharbawie, O. A., Burish, M. J., & Kaas, J. H. (2014). Effects of muscimol 
inactivations of functional domains in motor, premotor, and posterior parietal cortex on complex 
movements evoked by electrical stimulation. J. Neurophysiol., 111, 1100–1119.
Stepniewska, I., Pirkle, S. C., Roy, T., & Kaas, J. H. (2020). Functionally matched domains in 
parietal-­frontal cortex of monkeys proj­ect to overlapping regions of the striatum. Prog. Neurobiol., 
195, 101864.
Stepniewska, I., Pouget, P., & Kaas, J. H. (2018). Frontal eye field in prosimian galagos: Intracorti-
cal microstimulation and tracing studies. J. Comp. Neurol., 526, 626–652.
Strick, P. L., Dum, R. P., & Fiez, J. A. (2009). Cerebellum and nonmotor function. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci., 32, 413–434.
Strick, P. L., Dum, R. P., & Rathelot, J. A. (2021). The cortical motor areas and the emergence of 
motor skills: A neuroanatomical perspective. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 44, 425–447.
Subramanian, H. H., Arun, M., Silburn, P. A., & Holstege, G. (2016). Motor organ­ization of 
positive and negative emotional vocalization in the cat midbrain periaqueductal gray. J. Comp. 
Neurol., 524, 1540–1557.
Subramanian, H. H., Balnave, R. J., & Holstege, G. (2021). Microstimulation in dif­fer­ent parts 
of the periaqueductal gray generates dif­fer­ent types of vocalizations in the cat. J. Voice. 35, 804.
e9–804.e825.
Sugahara, F., Murakami, Y., Pascual-­Anaya, J., & Kuratani, S. (2021a). Forebrain architecture and 
development in cyclostomes, with reference to the early morphology and evolution of the vertebrate 
head. Brain Behav. Evol., 1–13.
Sugahara, F., Pascual-­Anaya, J., Kuraku, S., Kuratani, S., & Murakami, Y. (2021b). Ge­ne­tic mecha-
nism for the cyclostome cerebellar neurons reveals early evolution of the vertebrate cerebellum. 
Front. Cell Dev. Biol., 9, 700860.

257    References
Suryanarayana, S. M., Pérez-­Fernández, J., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2020). The evolution-
ary origin of visual and somatosensory repre­sen­ta­tion in the vertebrate pallium. Nat. Ecol. Evol., 
4, 639–651.
Suryanarayana, S. M., Pérez-­Fernández, J., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2021a). The lamprey 
forebrain—­Evolutionary implications. Brain Behav. Evol., 1–16.
Suryanarayana, S. M., Pérez-­Fernández, J., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2021b). Olfaction in 
lamprey pallium revisited-­dual projections of mitral and tufted cells. Cell Rep., 34, 108596.
Suryanarayana, S. M., Robertson, B., & Grillner, S. (2022). The neural bases of vertebrate motor 
behaviour through the lens of evolution. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci., 377, 20200521.
Suryanarayana, S. M., Robertson, B., Wallén, P., & Grillner, S. (2017). The lamprey pallium pro-
vides a blueprint of the mammalian layered cortex. Curr. Biol., 27, 3264–3277 e3265.
Suway, S. B., & Schwartz, A. B. (2019). Activity in primary motor cortex related to visual feedback. 
Cell Rep., 29, 3872–3884 e3874.
Suzuki, D. G., Pérez-­Fernández, J., Wibble, T., Kardamakis, A. A., & Grillner, S. (2019). The role 
of the optic tectum for visually evoked orienting and evasive movements. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA, 116, 15272–15281.
Swanson, L. W. (2000). Ce­re­bral hemi­sphere regulation of motivated be­hav­ior. Brain Res., 886, 
113–164.
Takahashi, N., Oertner, T. G., Hegemann, P., & Larkum, M. E. (2016). Active cortical dendrites 
modulate perception. Science, 354, 1587–1590.
Takakusaki, K. (2008). Forebrain control of locomotor be­hav­iors. Brain Res. Rev., 57, 192–198.
Talpalar, A. E., Bouvier, J., Borgius, L., Fortin, G., Pierani, A., & Kiehn, O. (2013). Dual-­mode 
operation of neuronal networks involved in left-­right alternation. Nature, 500, 85–88.
Tankus, A., Fried, I., & Shoham, S. (2012). Structured neuronal encoding and decoding of ­human 
speech features. Nat. Commun., 3, 1015.
Tankus, A., Lustig, Y., Fried, I., & Strauss, I. (2021). Impaired timing of speech-­related neurons in the 
subthalamic nucleus of Parkinson disease patients suffering speech disorders. Neurosurgery, 89, 800–809.
Taverna, S., Ilijic, E., & Surmeier, D. J. (2008). Recurrent collateral connections of striatal medium 
spiny neurons are disrupted in models of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci., 28, 5504–5512.
Tecuapetla, F., Jin, X., Lima, S. Q., & Costa, R. M. (2016). Complementary contributions of 
striatal projection pathways to action initiation and execution. Cell, 166, 703–715.
Teräväinen, H., & Rovainen, C. M. (1971). Fast and slow motoneurons to body muscle of the sea 
lamprey. J. Neurophysiol., 34, 990–998.
Thompson, R. F., & Krupa, D. J. (1994). Organ­ization of memory traces in the mammalian brain. 
Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 17, 519–549.
Thompson, R. H., Ménard, A., Pombal, M., & Grillner, S. (2008). Forebrain dopamine depletion 
impairs motor be­hav­ior in lamprey. Eur. J. Neurosci., 27, 1452–1460.

258    References
Tiklová, K., Björklund, A. K., Lahti, L., Fiorenzano, A., Nolbrant, S., Gillberg, L., Volakakis, N., 
Yokota, C., Hilscher, M. M., Hauling, T., Holmstrom, F., Joodmardi, E., Nilsson, M., Parmar, M., 
& Perlmann, T. (2019). Single-­cell RNA sequencing reveals midbrain dopamine neuron diversity 
emerging during mouse brain development. Nat. Commun., 10(1), 581.
Tokuda, I. T., Hoang, H., & Kawato, M. (2017). New insights into olivo-­cerebellar cir­cuits for 
learning from a small training sample. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 46, 58–67.
Tovote, P., Esposito, M. S., Botta, P., Chaudun, F., Fadok, J. P., Markovic, M., Wolff, S. B., Ramak-
rishnan, C., Fenno, L., Deisseroth, K., Herry, C., Arber, S., & Luthi, A. (2016). Midbrain cir­cuits 
for defensive behaviour. Nature, 534, 206–212.
Travers, J. B., Dinardo, L. A., & Karimnamazi, H. (1997). Motor and premotor mechanisms of 
licking. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., 21, 631–647.
Tsutsumi, S., Chadney, O., Yiu, T. L., Baumler, E., Faraggiana, L., Beau, M., & Hausser, M. 
(2020). Purkinje cell activity determines the timing of sensory-­evoked motor initiation. Cell Rep., 
33(12), 108537.
Tye, K. M., Prakash, R., Kim, S. Y., Fenno, L. E., Grosenick, L., Zarabi, H., Thompson, K. R., 
Gradinaru, V., Ramakrishnan, C., & Deisseroth, K. (2011). Amygdala circuitry mediating revers-
ible and bidirectional control of anxiety. Nature, 471, 358–362.
Ullén, F., Deliagina, T. G., Orlovsky, G. N., & Grillner, S. (1997). Visual pathways for postural 
control and negative phototaxis in lamprey. J. Neurophysiol., 78, 960–976.
Ungerleider, L. G., &Mishkin, M. (1982). Two cortical visual systems. In D. J. Ingle, M. A. 
Goodale, and R. J. W. Mansfield (Eds.), Analy­sis of visual be­hav­ior (pp. 549–586). MIT Press.
Valjent, E., & Gangarossa, G. (2021). The tail of the striatum: From anatomy to connectivity and 
function. Trends Neurosci., 44, 203–214.
Vandaele, Y., Mahajan, N. R., Ottenheimer, D. J., Richard, J. M., Mysore, S. P., & Janak, P. H. 
(2019). Distinct recruitment of dorsomedial and dorsolateral striatum erodes with extended train-
ing. Elife, 8, e49536.
Velliste, M., Perel, S., Spalding, M. C., Whitford, A. S., & Schwartz, A. B. (2008). Cortical control 
of a prosthetic arm for self-­feeding. Nature, 453, 1098–1101.
Vieira, E. B., Menescal-­de-­Oliveira, L., & Leite-­Panissi, C. R. (2011). Functional mapping of 
the periaqueductal gray ­matter involved in organ­izing tonic immobility be­hav­ior in guinea pigs. 
Behav. Brain. Res., 216, 94–99.
Villalba, R. M., & Smith, Y. (2018). Loss and remodeling of striatal dendritic spines in Parkinson’s 
disease: From homeostasis to maladaptive plasticity? J. Neural Transm. (Vienna), 125, 431–447.
von Hofsten, C., & Lindhagen, K. (1979). Observations on the development of reaching for 
moving objects. J. Exp. Child Psychol., 28, 158–173.
von Twickel, A., Kowatschew, D., Saltürk, M., Schauer, M., Robertson, B., Korsching, S., Walkow-
iak, W., Grillner, S., & Pérez-­Fernández, J. (2019). Individual dopaminergic neurons of lamprey 

259    References
SNc/VTA proj­ect to both the striatum and optic tectum but restrict co-­release of glutamate to 
striatum only. Curr. Biol., 29, 677–685 e676.
Voogd, J. (1969). The importance of fiber connections in the comparative anatomy of the mamma-
lian cerebellum. In R. Llinás (Ed.), Neurobiology of cerebellar evolution and development (pp. 493–
514). AMA ERF Institute for Biomedical Research.
Wallén, P., & Grillner, S. (1987). N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor-­induced, inherent oscillatory 
activity in neurons active during fictive locomotion in the lamprey. J. Neurosci., 7, 2745–2755.
Wallén, P., Robertson, B., Cangiano, L., Low, P., Bhattacharjee, A., Kaczmarek, L. K., & Grillner, 
S. (2007). Sodium-­dependent potassium channels of a Slack-­like subtype contribute to the slow 
afterhyperpolarization in lamprey spinal neurons. J. Physiol., 585, 75–90.
Wang, W., Schuette, P. J., Nagai, J., Tobias, B. C., Cuccovia, V. R. F. M., Ji, S., de Lima, M. A. X., 
La-­Vu, M. Q., Maesta-­Pereira, S., Chakerian, M., Leonard, S. J., Lin, L., Severino, A. L., Cahill, 
C. M., Canteras, N. S., Khakh, B. S., Kao, J. C., & Adhikari, A. (2021). Coordination of escape and 
spatial navigation cir­cuits orchestrates versatile flight from threats. Neuron, 109, 1848–1860 e1848.
Wang, Z., Kai, L., Day, M., Ronesi, J., Yin, H. H., Ding, J., Tkatch, T., Lovinger, D. M., & 
Surmeier, D. J. (2006). Dopaminergic control of corticostriatal long-­term synaptic depression in 
medium spiny neurons is mediated by cholinergic interneurons. Neuron, 50, 443–452.
Weglage, M., Warnberg, E., Lazaridis, I., Calvigioni, D., Tzortzi, O., & Meletis, K. (2021). Com-
plete repre­sen­ta­tion of action space and value in all dorsal striatal pathways. Cell Rep., 36, 109437.
Weiskrantz, L., Warrington, E. K., Sanders, M. D., & Marshall, J. (1974). Visual capacity in the 
hemianopic field following a restricted occipital ablation. Brain, 97, 709–728.
Whishaw, I. Q., & Coles, B. L. (1996). Va­ri­e­ties of paw and digit movement during spontaneous 
food ­handling in rats: postures, bimanual coordination, preferences, and the effect of forelimb 
cortex lesions. Behav. Brain Res., 77, 135–148.
Whishaw, I. Q., Pellis, S. M., & Gorny, B. P. (1992). Skilled reaching in rats and ­humans: evidence 
for parallel development or homology. Behav. Brain Res., 47, 59–70.
Wibble, T., Pansell, T., Grillner, S., & Pérez-­Fernández, J. (2022). Conserved subcortical pro­cessing 
in visuovestibular gaze control. Nat. Commun., 13, 4699.
Wiesenfeld, Z., Halpern, B. P., & Tapper, D. N. (1977). Licking be­hav­ior: Evidence of hypoglossal 
oscillator. Science, 196, 1122–1124.
Williams, T. L., Grillner, S., Smoljaninov, V. V., Wallën, P., Kashin, S., & Rossignol, S. (1989). 
Locomotion in lamprey and trout: The relative timing of activation and movement. J. Exp. Biol., 
143, 559–566.
Wilson, C. J., Chang, H. T., & Kitai, S. T. (1990). Firing patterns and synaptic potentials of identi-
fied ­giant aspiny interneurons in the rat neostriatum. J. Neurosci., 10, 508–519.
Wilson, J. J., Alexandre, N., Trentin, C., & Tripodi, M. (2018). Three-­dimensional repre­sen­ta­tion 
of motor space in the mouse superior colliculus. Curr. Biol., 28, 1744–1755 e1712.

260    References
Wolff, S. B. E., Ko, R., & Ölveczky, B. P. (2022). Distinct roles for motor cortical and thalamic 
inputs to striatum during motor learning and execution. Sci. Adv. 8(8). doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
abk0231.
Wullimann, M. F., Rupp, B., & Rei.chert, H. (1996). Neuroanatomy of the zebrafish brain: A 
topographic atlas. Birkhäuser.
Yakovenko, S., & Drew, T. (2015). Similar motor cortical control mechanisms for precise limb 
control during reaching and locomotion. J. Neurosci., 35, 14476–14490.
Yanagihara, D., & Udo, M. (1994). Climbing fiber responses in cerebellar vermal Purkinje cells 
during perturbed locomotion in decerebrate cats. Neurosci. Res., 19, 245–248.
Zaccarella, E., Papitto, G., & Friederici, A. D. (2021). Language and action in Broca’s area: Com-
putational differentiation and cortical segregation. Brain Cogn., 147, 105651.
Zang, Y., Hong, S., & De Schutter, E. (2020). Firing rate-­dependent phase responses of Purkinje 
cells support transient oscillations. Elife, 9, e60692.
Zhou, F. W., Jin, Y., Matta, S. G., Xu, M., & Zhou, F. M. (2009). An ultra-­short dopamine path-
way regulates Basal Ganglia output. J. Neurosci., 29, 10424–10435.
Zimmerman, C. A. (2020). The origins of thirst. Science, 370, 45–46.
Znamenskiy, P., & Zador, A. M. (2013). Corticostriatal neurons in auditory cortex drive decisions 
during auditory discrimination. Nature, 497, 482–485.

Note: Page numbers followed by f indicate figures, and page numbers followed by t indicate 
­tables.
Index
Acetylcholine, 120
Active/silent synapses, 218–219
ADHD. See Attention deficit hyperactive 
disorder (ADHD)
Aggression, 73, 95, 96
Air puff, 219
α-­amino-3-­hydroxy-5-­methyl-4-­
isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA), 39, 
45, 115
Alpha-­synuclein aggregations, 149
AMPA. See α-­amino-3-­hydroxy-5-­methyl-4-­
isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)
AMPA receptors, 51, 52, 89
Amphibians
locomotion, 6
patterns of coordination, 21t
reaching, grasping, 9
Amphioxus, 38
Amplitude of movements, 156–158
Amygdala
basomedial nucleus, 78
fear responses, 77–78
Ankle movements, 65
Antelope, 19, 19f
Anurans, 6
Arber laboratory, 67
Arcuate nucleus, 75
Arkypallidal stop cells, 128f, 129, 130, 162
Ascending branch, 36
Associative branch of dorsal striatum, 131
Astrocytes, 46–47
Athetosis, 152
Attention deficit hyperactive disorder 
(ADHD), 144
Auditory information, 88
Avoidance movements, 16–17
Backward locomotion, 65f
Backward swimming, 54f
Ballet dancer, 227–228
Barn owl, 88
Barrel cortex, 48, 170, 189, 194
Barrington’s point, 74
Basal ganglia, 101–163
basic facts, 154–156
caudate nucleus, 103
close interaction with parts of cortex, 163
cortex/basal ganglia functioning together as 
integrated ­whole, 224
cortico-­basal ganglia-­thalamic loop, 112f
diagram (organ­ization of basal ganglia), 
106f

262    Index
Basal ganglia (cont.)
direct pathway, 105, 112f, 129f, 130
disinhibition, 95–96, 158–159, 163
downstream control of motor structures, 
110f
dysfunction, 102, 143–144
functions, 102
GPe, 127
­humans, 103f
hyperdirect pathway, 107, 129f, 130
indirect pathway, 106, 112f, 129f
input structure (see Striatum)
integrated function, 127–143
lamprey, 160–163, 161t
mammals/lamprey, compared, 163t
motor learning, 228
organ­ization, 101–116
overview, 163t
promoting action/counteracting move-
ment, 144
putamen, 103
reinforcement learning, 142–143, 160
rodents, 103f
se­lection of be­hav­ior, 30, 31f
se­lection of motor programs, 23f, 24
structure of, maintained throughout verte-
brate phylogeny, 162
subthalmic nucleus (STN), 127
summary/conclusion, 162–163
value-­based evaluation of action, 138–142
Basket cells, 205–206
Basolateral amygdala (BLA), 77
Basomedial amygdala, 78
Birds
birdsong, 229
griseum centrale, 71
innate sounds for communication (warn-
ing calls), 229
locomotion, 7
maturation at birth, 19
patterns of coordination, 21t
reaching, grasping, 11–12
vocalization, 14
Birdsong, 14, 229
BLA. See Basolateral amygdala (BLA)
Blindsight, 92, 172
Blink reflex, 219
Body scheme, 4
Bradykinesia, 144, 148
Brain
in­ter­est­ing, fundamental and challenging 
prob­lems, 230
size, 19
Brainstem, 35
Breathing, 42–45, 79
Broca’s area, 181, 196, 228
Burst-­generating cir­cuit, 41f
Burst-­generating unit CPG, 63
Burst generation, 41–42
Cambrian explosion, 27
Caudal cingulate zone, 177f
Caudal posterior parietal cortex (PPCc), 185, 
185f
CDh. See Head of caudate nucleus (CDh)
CDt. See Tail of caudate nucleus (CDt)
Center-­out reaching tasks, 178
Central lateral (CL), 115
Central nucleus (Ce), 77–78
Central pattern generator (CPG), 21, 22. See 
also CPG networks and motor centers
Central SC, 109f
Cerebellum, 34, 79, 203–221
active/silent synapses, 218–219
associating two in­de­pen­dent events, 219
basket cells, 205–206
climbing fibers, 206–207, 206f, 214, 215, 
216–217
compartments, 204f
conditioned reflexes, 219
dorsal spinocerebellar tract (DSCT), 211
error message, 206–207, 206f, 216f, 219, 
221
fastigial nucleus, 208, 209f

263    Index
Golgi cells, 205
granule cells, 205–206
index-­finger-­to-­nose test, 203
inferior olive, 206f, 207, 208, 209f
intermediate part, 204f, 207, 208
layers, 206f
locomotion, 210–216, 220
micromodule, 207
modeling/simulation of ce­re­bral circuitry, 
219–220
mossy fibers, 206f, 207, 217, 220
most impor­tant function, 221
motor learning, 228
neocerebellum, 204f, 207
optokinetic reflex, 217–218
plasticity, 218–219
Purkinje cells, 205, 206f, 218–219
spinal cord, 210–216
spino-­olivo-­cerebellar pathway, 213
spino-­reticulo-­cerebellar pathway (SRCP), 
212–213
summary/conclusion, 220–221
ventral spinocerebellar pathway (VSCT), 
211
vermis, 204f, 207, 208
vertebrates (except lamprey), 203
vestibulo-­ocular reflex, 215–217
Cerebellum as a Neuronal Machine, The (Ito 
et al.), 205
Ce­re­bral cortex. See Cortex
Challenges ahead
combining dif­fer­ent forms of motion into 
integrated ­whole, 227–228
­human speech and language, 228–229
motor learning, 228
visuomotor coordination, 227
volition in control of movement, 229–230
Chaplin, Charlie, 78
Chewing, 46–47, 184f
Choice reaction time (mice), 193f
Cholinergic interneurons (ChINs), 117f, 
118–122
Chorea, 152
Chunk/chunking, 133, 134
CIN. See Commissural interneuron (CIN)
“Cir­cuits,” 21
CL. See Central lateral (CL)
Climbing fibers, 206–207, 206f, 214, 215, 
216–217
Climbing/leaping, 184f
coBP. See Contralaterally projecting neuron 
(coBP)
Commissural interneuron (CIN), 51
Conditioned reflexes, 219, 228
Contralaterally projecting neuron (coBP), 84f
Control of movement, 26f, 229–230
Corollary discharge of information, 108
Cortex, 165–202
basal ganglia/cortex functioning together as 
integrated ­whole, 224
Broca’s area, 181
cellular organ­ization of motor areas (PT/IT 
projections), 191–192, 202
climbing/leaping, 184f
control of fine motor skills, 23f
cortico-­basal ganglia-­thalamic loop, 112f
corticospinal tract, 187–188
defensive actions, 184f
direct excitation of downstream motor 
centers, 186
frontal eye field (FEF), 182–183
hand-­in-­lower-­space actions, 184f
hand-­to-­mouth actions, 184f
lamprey (pallium), 27–28, 29f
learning phase, 100, 135
manipulation in central space, 184f
mirror neurons, 181
motor cortex (M1), 166, 167f, 175, 
177–179
neocortex (see Neocortex)
premotor area (PMd and PMv), 180–181
projection pattern, 186
reaching/grasping, 184f
reaction time, 171, 192–195

264    Index
Cortex (cont.)
removal/inactivation of neocortex, 99, 99f
robotic arms, 200–201
sensory repre­sen­ta­tion in dynamic equilib-
rium, 169–170
speech, 166–167
stroke, 198–199
summary/conclusion, 201–202
supplementary motor area (SMA), 
179–180
vertebrates, 25–26
visuomotor coordination (see Visuomotor 
coordination)
“what” stream/“where” pathway, 172
Cortical columns, 223
Cortico-­basal ganglia-­thalamic loop, 112f
Corticobulbar neurons, 113
Corticospinal neurons, 113, 114
Corticospinal tract, 187–188
CPG. See Central pattern generator (CPG)
CPG networks and motor centers, 39–80
amygdala, 77–78
breathing, 42–45, 79
burst generation, 41–42
chewing, 46–47
dynamically reproducible movements, 79
fear responses, 77–78
feeding, 48
female sexual be­hav­ior, 76
fine-­tuning, 52, 79, 80
fin­ger movements, 79–80
food intake, 76
foraging, 76
handwriting, 79
innate motor programs in daily life,  
78–79
licking, 45–46
locomotion, 48–66 (see also Locomotion)
masticatory control system, 47f
PAG (see Periaqueductal gray (PAG))
painting, 80
piano playing, 79
reaching and grasping, 66–71
respiratory CPG, 42–45
sighing, 44
skilled motor patterns, 79, 80
survival, be­hav­iors impor­tant for, 75–77
swallowing, 47–48
walking, ­running, 78
whisking movements, 48
Cranial nerves, 34
Critic, 142
Crym AS, 131
Cuneiform nucleus, 74
Cyclostomes, 3
D1 receptors, 94, 122
D2 receptors, 123
d’Angelo, Egidio, 220
Darwin, Charles, 15, 16f
Decorticated animals, 99
Deep brain stimulation (DBS), 127, 151
Defensive actions, 96, 100, 184f. See also 
Aggression
Descending branch, 36
Diencephalic locomotor region (DLR), 50, 
124
Direct pathway, 105, 112f, 129f, 130
Direct striatal projection neuron (dSPN), 31f, 
104, 106f, 136, 137f, 139, 157
Disinhibition, 95–96, 98, 129f, 154, 
158–159, 163
Distal dendrites, 118
Distance neurons, 174
Diurnal rhythm, 75, 77
DLR. See Diencephalic locomotor region 
(DLR)
DLS. See Dorsolateral striatum (DLS)
DMS. See Dorsomedial striatum (DMS)
DMTN. See Dorsomedial telencephalic 
nucleus (DMTN)
Dobzhansky, T. G., 3
Dopamine, 225
Dopamine deficiency, 146–147

265    Index
Dopamine neurons, 24–25, 93–94, 146–149, 
155, 160, 225
Dopamine system, 107, 122–126
Dorsal premotor area (PMd), 180–181
Dorsal raphe, 109f
Dorsal spinocerebellar tract (DSCT), 211
Dorsal striatum, 156
Dorsolateral striatum (DLS), 103, 103f, 111, 
124, 131, 133–136, 156
Dorsomedial and dorsolateral PAG (dPAG), 
71–72, 72f
Dorsomedial striatum (DMS), 103f, 104, 
111, 131, 133–136, 138, 156
Dorsomedial telencephalic nucleus (DMTN), 
29f
Double lever press, 100, 159, 160
Downstream motor centers, 186, 198, 220, 
226f
dPAG. See Dorsomedial and dorsolateral PAG 
(dPAG)
DSCT. See Dorsal spinocerebellar tract 
(DSCT)
dSPN. See Direct striatal projection neuron 
(dSPN)
Dynamically reproducible movements, 79
EDB. See Extensor digitorum brevis  
(EDB)
Edge cells, 58
Efference copy, 108, 109f, 211, 214, 220
Egocentric space, 81. See also Tectum/SC
EIN. See Excitatory premotor interneuron 
(EIN)
Einstein, Albert, 97
Elasmobranchs. See also Shark
cerebellum, 34
locomotion, 5, 5f
patterns of coordination, 21t
Elephants, 19
Emotions, 15–16, 16f
Endocannabinoids, 143
Epidural spinal cord stimulation, 152
EPSC. See Excitatory postsynaptic current 
(EPSC)
EPSPs. See Excitatory postsynaptic potentials 
(EPSPs)
Error message, 206–207, 206f, 216f, 219, 221
Escape and freezing, 71–72, 74, 76, 90, 95, 
100
Escape reaction, 66, 72f, 98f
Evasive movements, 90, 96
Everyday motor activities, 225
Excitation, 39
Excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC), 86f
Excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs), 89
Excitatory premotor interneuron (EIN), 51, 
53f, 58–59
Execution of movements, 21–24. See also 
CPG networks and motor centers
Expiration, 43f
Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals, 
The (Darwin), 15
Extensor digitorum brevis (EDB), 63, 64f
Eye. See Vision
Facial expressions, 15–16, 16f
Fastigial nucleus, 208, 209f
Fast-­spiking (FS) interneurons, 116, 117f, 
118
Fear conditioning, 77
Fear responses, 77–78
Feeding, 13, 48
FEF. See Frontal eye field (FEF)
Female sexual be­hav­ior, 76
Fine-­tuning, 52, 79, 80, 178, 227
Fin­ger movements, 11, 26, 79–80, 100
5-­HT system, 54, 126–127, 139
Flexion reflex, 22
Flight, freeze, or fight, 9
Flocculus, 204f, 216f
Food intake, 76
Foot placement, 9–13
Foraging, 76, 81, 90, 95, 100
Forebrain, 79, 97, 101, 224, 226f

266    Index
Forward locomotion, 64f
FoxP2, 129
Freezing. See Escape and freezing
Freud, Sigmund, 27
Frog
latRM, 70
locomotion, 6
reaching, grasping, 9–10
Frontal eye field (FEF), 91, 94, 182–183
FS. See Fast-­spiking (FS) interneurons
­Future directions in research. See Challenges 
ahead
GABAergic neurons, 73, 74, 84f, 95, 105, 107, 
118
γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA), 39
Gap junction, 60f, 66
Gazing, 95
GCaMP6, 138
Globus pallidus externa (GPe), 104, 127,  
129f
Globus pallidus interna (GPi), 24, 31f, 104, 
106f, 107–109
Glutamate, 46, 47
Glutamatergic part of globus pallidus (GPh),  
31f
Goal-­directed be­hav­ior
primates, 111, 131–133
rodents, 136–138
Golgi cells, 205
GPe. See Globus pallidus externa (GPe)
GPe-­PF pathway, 130
GPh. See Glutamatergic part of globus palli-
dus (GPh); Habenula projecting globus 
pallidus (GPh)
GPi. See Globus pallidus interna (GPi)
GPR155, 131
Granule cells, 205–206
Grasping. See Reaching/grasping
Griseum centrale, 32, 71. See also Periaqueductal 
gray (PAG)
Grooming, 12
Habenula projecting globus pallidus (GPh), 
139, 140f, 141
Habits
defined, 131
goal-­directed be­hav­ior in primates, 
131–133
goal-­directed be­hav­ior in rodents, 133–138
learned motor patterns, 156
Hand, 166, 168–169, 168f, 224
Hand-­in-­lower-­space actions, 184f
Hand movements, 80
Hand-­to-­mouth actions, 184f
Hand-­to-­mouth movements, 66, 67f
Handwriting, 79
HB9 (Homeobox), 61
Head of caudate nucleus (CDh), 132f
Hearing, 88
Heat map, 88
Heat-­sensing organ pit, 88
Hemiballismus, 152
Hissing sounds, 71
Hodgkin-­Huxley formalism, 53f
Holding one’s breath, 79
Homeobox (HB9), 61
Horse, 13, 78
Howling and hissing sounds, 71
HTT-­gene, 152
Hubel, David, 189
­Humans
arts and crafts, 165
basal ganglia subnuclei, 103f
blindsight, 92
caudal cingulate zone, 177f
combining dif­fer­ent forms of motion into 
integrated ­whole, 227–228
cortical columns, 223
cortical outputs to spinal cord, 176–177f
everyday motor activities, 225
facial expressions, 15–16, 16f
hand, 166, 168–169, 168f, 224
maturation at birth, 18, 18f
motor cortex (M1), 166, 167f

267    Index
motor infrastructure, 80
motor neglect, 180
painting, 80
progressive improvement, 138
reaching/grasping movements, 70
reaction time, 192–195
rostral cingulate zone, 177f
sighing, 44
speech (see Speech)
stroke, 198–199
versatility of motor system/possibility of 
endless combinations, 224
vocabulary (En­glish speaker), 229
volitional/voluntary movement, 195–196
volition in control of movement,  
229–230
walking, ­running, 78
Huntington’s disease, 152–153
chorea, athetosis, hemiballismus, 152
hyperkinesia, 102, 155
NoGo pathway, 153
progressive nature of disease, 152
striatum, 153
Hyperbranching axons, 145f
Hyperdirect pathway, 107, 129f, 130
Hyperkinesia, 102, 144, 155
Hyperpolarization-­activated depolarizing 
currents, 42
Hypokinesia, 102
Hypomimia, 145
Hypophysis, 32
Hypothalamic nuclei, 100
Hypothalamus, 32
be­hav­ior impor­tant to survival, 75–77
controlling aspects of animals’ behavioral 
repertoire, 80
diurnal rhythm, 75
food intake, 76
forebrain, 97–98
­human be­hav­iors, 74f
medial hypothalamic cell columns, 75
neuroendocrine control, 76–77
summary/conclusion, 77
ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) 72, 
73, 76
iBP. See Ipsilateral projecting neuron (iBP)
Imitation, 229
Immediate surrounding space, 33–34, 81, 
82–89
In­de­pen­dent fin­ger movements, 11, 26, 
79–80, 100
Index-­finger-­to-­nose test, 203
Indirect pathway, 106, 112f, 129f
Indirect striatal projection neuron (iSPN), 
31f, 104, 106f, 136, 137f, 139, 154
Inferior colliculus, 109f
Inferior olive, 206f, 207, 208, 209f
Inhibition, 39
Innate vs. learned movements, 1
Inspiration, 43f, 44
Intratelencephalic (IT) neurons, 114, 115f, 
190–192, 202
Ipsilateral projecting neuron (iBP), 84f
iSPN. See Indirect striatal projection neuron 
(iSPN)
IT neurons. See Intratelencephalic (IT) neurons
Ito, Masao, 205
Jaws, 13–14
Kaas’s laboratory, 183
Kir channels, 110
Knee movements, 65
Knitting, 100
Knudsen, Eric, 88
Konishi, Mark, 88
LA. See Lateral amygdala (LA)
Lamprey
backward swimming, 54f
basal ganglia, 31f, 160–163, 161t
brainstem, 34
cerebellum, 203

268    Index
Lamprey (cont.)
dopamine receptors, 162
evolutionary perspective (before and ­after), 
37–38
generation of undulatory wave, 54–57
griseum centrale, 32, 71 (see also Periaque-
ductal gray (PAG))
hypothalamus, 32
interpeduncular nucleus (IPN), 74
jawless vertebrate with sucker mouth, 51f
­limited behavioral repertoire, 163f
locomotion, 5, 5f
locomotor CPG, 50–54
multisensory integration in tectum, 85–87
olfaction and vision, 34
olfactory cortex, 28
optic tectum, 86–87f
pallium, 27–28, 29f
patterns of coordination, 21t
ret­i­nal ganglion cells, 82
SNc connectome, 123f
spinal cord, 35–37, 50, 51f
spinal locomotor network, 56f
stretch receptor neurons, 58, 59f
substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc), 162
surrounding space, 33
swimming, 54, 54f, 57–58
tectal orienting and evasive neurons, 90
tectum, 84–85f
thalamus, 32
visual and electrosensory signals, 86–87f
Language and speech. See Speech
Lateral amygdala (LA), 77
Lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), 92, 92f
Lateral habenula (LHb), 31f, 139–141
Lateral motor column (LMC), 5, 36, 37f
Lateral PAG (lPAG), 72, 73
Lateral parafacial (pFl) nucleus, 43
Lateral reticular medulla (LatRM), 66–71
Lateral SC, 108, 109f
LatRM. See Lateral reticular medulla (LatRM)
L-­DOPA, 149–151
Leaping, 184f
Learned movements, 101
Learning phase (learning period), 100, 135
Lewy bodies, 148, 149
LGN. See Lateral geniculate nucleus  
(LGN)
LHb. See Lateral habenula (LHb)
Licking, 45–46, 184f
LMC. See Lateral motor column (LMC)
Local surround inhibition, 157–158
Locomotion
backward, 65f
cerebellum, 210–216, 220
CPG networks and motor centers, 48–66
edge cells, 58
escape reactions, 66
forward, 64f
intrinsic function of locomotor CPGs, 50
lamprey, generation of undulatory wave, 
54–57
lamprey, locomotor CPG, 50–54
lamprey, spinal locomotor network, 56f
lamprey, stretch receptor neurons, 58,  
59f
lamprey, swimming, 54, 54f, 57–58
mammals, locomotor CPG, 60–62
reaching cir­cuits, 12
supraspinal command centers, 49–50
unit burst generator concept, 62–66
vertebrates, 5–9
zebrafish, segmental locomotor CPG, 
58–60
Long-­term depression (LTD), 142, 143, 217, 
218, 228
Long-­term potentiation (LTP), 142, 143, 
218, 228
Lordosis be­hav­ior, 73
Low-­threshold-­spiking (LTS) interneurons, 
104–105, 117f, 118–120
lPAG. See Lateral PAG (lPAG)
LTD. See Long-­term depression (LTD)
LTP. See Long-­term potentiation (LTP)

269    Index
LTS. See Low-­threshold-­spiking (LTS) inter-
neurons
L-­type calcium channels, 143
M1 (motor cortex), 166, 167f, 175, 177–179
M1 receptors, 120
M2, 175
M2/M4 receptors, 120
M4 receptors, 121, 122
Macaque monkeys, 176–177f. See also 
Primates
Mammals
auditory information, 88
basal ganglia, 30, 31f
breathing, 42
chewing CPG network, 41
cortex, 25
escape reactions, 66
execution of movements, 22
hypothalamus, 32
jaws, 13–14
locomotion, 7–8
maturation at birth, 18–19, 19f
motor areas of frontal lobe, 171
PAG (see Periaqueductal gray (PAG))
patterns of coordination, 21t
progressive improvement, 138
projection pattern, 186
pulvinar nucleus, 91
reaching, grasping, 10–11
removal/inactivation of neocortex, 99,  
99f
ret­i­nal ganglion cells, 82
sighing, 44
SNc connectome, 123f
superior colliculus, 33 (see also Tectum/SC)
versatile behavioral repertoire, 163f
versatile motor apparatus, 80
Manipulation in central space, 184f
MAO. See Medial accessory olive (MAO)
“Mask face,” 146
Masticatory control system, 47f
Maternal be­hav­ior, 73
Matrix, 104, 138, 163
Maturation and plasticity, 17–20
Mauthner cells, 66
MdV. See Medullary reticular formation 
(MdV)
Medial accessory olive (MAO), 209f
Medial habenula, 74
Medial hypothalamic cell columns, 75
Medial motor column (MMC), 5, 36, 37f
Medial preoptic area (MPOA), 73
Medial SC, 108, 109f
Medullary reticular formation (MdV), 68
Medullary RF, 109f
Meissner receptors, 168f, 169
Merkel receptors, 168f, 169
Mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR), 22, 
49, 50, 93, 94, 140
Metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR1), 
143
Mewing, 71
mGluR1. See Metabotropic glutamate recep-
tor (mGluR1)
Mice
activation of striatal neurons, 110
basomedial nucleus of amygdala, 78
choice reaction time, 193f
connectivity of mouse SC, 95f
crossed interneurons (V0d and V0v), 62
fine motor control, 11
food ­handling, 70
GABAergic neurons, 105
locomotor activity, 124, 142
MitoPark mouse model, 148
mouse cerebellar cortex, 209f
mouse CPG, 61f
neurons in cuneiform nucleus, 49
neurons in dorsal striatum, 131
nose-­poke, 137–138
Parkinsonian syndrome, 148
pup grooming, 73
reaching, 66–67

270    Index
Mice (cont.)
SNr, 24, 108
superior colliculus—­zones, 94
tactile sensors, 17
tectum/SC, 89
Microcircuits, 22
Micrographia, 145, 155
Micromodule, 207
Midbrain roof. See Tectum/SC
­Middle rhombencephalic reticular nucleus 
(MRRN), 85f, 86f
Minicolumns, 189
Mirror neurons, 181, 196
MitoPark mouse model, 148
MLR. See Mesencephalic locomotor region 
(MLR)
MMC. See Medial motor column (MMC)
Mockingbird, 229
Monkeys, 176–177f. See also Primates
Mossy fibers, 206f, 207, 217, 220
Motor be­hav­ior, 98f, 101
Motor cortex (M1), 166, 167f, 175, 177–179
Motor infrastructure, 39, 80
Motor learning, 228
Motor map, 17, 89
Motor neglect, 180
Motor primitives, 2, 22, 40
Mountcastle, Vernon, 189
Mouse. See Mice
Movement-­related dorsal steam, 172
Movement repertoire, 159
MPOA. See Medial preoptic area (MPOA)
MRRN. See ­Middle rhombencephalic reticu-
lar nucleus (MRRN)
Mudskipper, 6
Multisensory spatial maps, 88, 96
Na+ channels, 41, 41f, 42
Neocerebellum, 204f, 207
Neocortex
cellular and columnar organ­ization, 189–191
minicolumns, 189
removal/inactivation, 25, 99, 99f, 197–199
visuomotor coordination, 201
“Networks,” 21
Neurons, 40
NMDA. See N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate (NMDA)
NMDA channels, 41, 41f, 42
NMDA receptors, 51, 52, 89, 115
N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate (NMDA), 39, 45, 115
NoGo pathway, 153
Nose-­poke, 137–138
Olfactory cortex, 29f
Olvezcky laboratory, 25, 100, 135, 198
Optic tectum, 86–87f
Optokinetic reflex, 217–218
Orchestra and its conductor, 2f, 40, 224
Orientation columns, 189
Orienting movements, 89–90
Orienting response, 208, 209f
Orofacial movements, 13–14
Oromotor area, 208, 209f
Pacini receptors, 168f, 169
PAG. See Periaqueductal gray (PAG)
Pain relief (suppression of pain perception), 
72
Painting, 80
Pallium, 27–28, 29f. See also Cortex
Parafascicular (PF) nucleus, 108, 110f, 111, 
113, 115–116, 129f
Paraventricular nucleus, 75, 76
Parkinson’s disease, 144–152
alpha-­synuclein aggregations, 149
bradykinesia, 144, 148
deep brain stimulation, 127, 151
dopamine deficiency, 146–147
effects of dopamine denervation, 155
epidural spinal cord stimulation, 152
excessive energy demand on single neuron, 
124
hyperbranching axons, 145f
hypokinesia, 102

271    Index
hypomimia, 145
integrating movements in one sequence, 
133
L-­DOPA, 149–151
pathogenesis, 148–149
pill-­rolling tremor, 145
prevalence, 144
progressively debilitating, 144
shuffling gait, 144
STN-­prototypical connection, 128
striatum, 146
subthalmic nucleus (STN), 151
therapy, 149–152
Parrot, 229
Pars anterodorsalis, 38
pBC. See pre-­Bötzinger complex (pBC)
Pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN), 49, 113f, 
116, 154–155
Periaqueductal gray (PAG)
aggression, 73
compartments, 71
defined, 71
dPAG, 71–72
escape and freezing, 66, 71–72
griseum centrale, 71
importance, 226f
integrated motor patterns, 74, 74f
lordosis be­hav­ior, 73
lPAG, 72, 73
maternal be­hav­ior, 73
pain relief (suppression of pain percep-
tion), 72
summary/conclusion, 74–75
vlPAG, 72
vocalization, 14
Pessimistic decision-­making, 139, 141
pFl. See Lateral parafacial (pFl) nucleus
PF nucleus. See Parafascicular (PF) nucleus
Piano playing, 79, 100
PiCo. See Postinhibitory complex (PiCo)
Pill-­rolling tremor, 145
Pitx2, 89
Plasticity, 218–219
Plateau potentials, 195
PM. See Premotor area (PM)
PMd. See Dorsal premotor area (PMd)
PMD-­cck, 72
PMv. See Ventral premotor area (PMv)
Pontine micturition center, 74
Pontine RF, 109f
Positional-­autonomic area, 208, 209f
Posterior parietal cortex (PPC), 183, 185, 
185f
Posterior parietal lobe, 201
Postinhibitory complex (PiCo), 44
Posture, 4–5
Posturomotor area, 208, 209f, 213
PPC. See Posterior parietal cortex (PPC)
PPN. See Pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN)
pre-­Bötzinger complex (pBC), 42, 45f
Premotor area (PM), 180–181
Primates. See also ­Humans
activation of striatal neurons, 110
arboreal locomotion, 5f
basal ganglia, 102–103
blindsight, 92
dorsal stream for visuomotor control, 
172–173
eye movements, 91
fin­ger movements, 11, 26, 100
goal-­directed be­hav­ior, 111, 131–133
locomotion, 5f, 8
motor areas in frontal lobe, 175–188
Parkinson’s disease models, 152
pessimistic decision-­making, 141
reaching, 68
saccadic eye movements, 156
SNc and DLR, 124
versatile behavioral repertoire, 163f
versatility of motor system/possibilities of 
endless combinations, 80, 224
Projection pattern, 186
PT neurons. See Pyramidal tract (PT) neurons
Pulvinar nucleus, 91, 92

272    Index
Purkinje cells, 205, 206f, 218–219
Push-­pull task, 136–137, 137f
Putamen, 103, 146
Pyramidal tract (PT) neurons, 113–114, 
115f, 175, 188, 190–192, 202
Rats. See Rodents
Rattlesnake, 88
Reaching/grasping, 184f
center-­out reaching tasks, 178
cortical neurons involved in reaching, 68–70
CPG networks and motor centers, 66–71
lateral reticular medulla (LatRM), 66–71
predicting location of moving target, 70–71
reusing spinal machinery, 66
timing of reaching movements, 70–71
vertebrates, 9–13
Reaction time, 171, 192–195
Rehabilitation Gaming System, 199
Reinforcement learning, 142–143, 160
Reptiles
locomotion, 7
patterns of coordination, 21t
reaching, grasping, 9
Research challenges. See Challenges ahead
Respiration, 14
Respiratory CPG, 42–45
Rest hyperpol, 161t
Ret­i­nal ganglion cells, 82
Ret­i­nal slip, 217, 227
Retinotopic map
frontal eye field (FEF), 182, 183
how information is pro­cessed?, 82
saccadic eye movements, 183
tectum/SC, 17, 82, 86f
Rhythmic burst activity, 41–42
RMTg. See Rostromedial tegmental nucleus 
(RMTg)
Robotic arms, 200–201
Rodents
acetylcholinesterase staining of striatum, 120f
barrel cortex, 170, 189
basal ganglia subnuclei, 103f
cortical outputs to spinal cord, 176–177f
dorsal striatum, 103
double lever press, 100, 159, 160
escaping/freezing, 71
freezing/escape, 90
goal-­directed be­hav­ior, 133–138
latRM, 70
licking, 45–46
lordosis be­hav­ior, 73
M1, M2, S1, S2, 175
motor action, 10
neurons, 104
neurons in dorsal striatum, 131
orienting be­hav­ior, 90
Parkinson’s disease models, 152
push-­pull task, 136–137, 137f
reaching/grasping, 70
reaction time, 192–195
removal/inactivation of neocortex, 25
sighing, 44
single lever press, 135–136
SNc and DLS, 124
superior colliculus, 96
tactile sensors, 17
tectum, 81
tongue, 46
whis­kers, 48
Rostral cingulate zone, 177f
Rostral posterior parietal cortex (PPCr), 185, 
185f
Rostromedial tegmental nucleus (RMTg), 
140, 140f
Ruffini receptors, 168f, 169
­Running, 78
S1, 175
S2, 175
S100beta, 46, 47
Saccades, 182
Saccadic eye movements, 156, 159, 182–183
Sacculus, 34

273    Index
Salamander, 5f, 6
SC. See Superior colliculus (SC)
Scratch reflex, 22, 66
Self-­grooming movements, 66
Sexual be­hav­ior, 76
Shark, 5–6
Sherrington, C. S., 1, 4, 97
Shox2 interneuron, 61
Shuffling gait, 144
Sighing, 44
Silent/active synapses, 218–219
Single lever press, 135–136
Skilled motor patterns, 79, 80
SMA. See Supplementary motor area (SMA)
Snake, 7
SNc. See Substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc)
SNc connectome, 123f
SNr. See Substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr)
SNr/GPi, 105, 106f, 107–109, 154, 158, 159
Soma-­dendritic tree, 40
Somatomotor striatum, 103
Somatostatin (SST), 36, 42
Songbird, 14
Spatial maps, 87–89, 96
Speech
challenges ahead, 228–229
mechanics of uttering words, 166–167
vertebrates, 14–15
Spinal cord
cerebellum, 210–216
lamprey, 50, 51f
protective reflexes, 22
spinal locomotor CPGs, 48–65
vertebrates, 35–37
Spinocerebellum, 213. See also Posturomotor 
area
Spino-­olivo-­cerebellar pathway, 213
Spino-­reticulo-­cerebellar pathway (SRCP), 
212–213
SRCP. See Spino-­reticulo-­cerebellar pathway 
(SRCP)
SST. See Somatostatin (SST)
STN. See Subthalmic nucleus (STN)
Stop cells, 128f, 129, 130
Stretch receptor neurons, 58, 59f
Striatal animals, 197–198
Striatal cats, 197–198
Striatonigral pathway, 112f. See also Indirect 
pathway
Striatopalladial pathway, 112f. See also Direct 
pathway
Striatum. See also Basal ganglia
acetylcholinesterase staining, 120f
amplitude of movements, 156–158
associative branch of dorsal striatum, 131
ChINs, 118–122
cortical and thalamic neurons targeting 
SPNs, 113–116
defined, 109
dopamine innervation, 107
dopamine system, 122–126
dorsal, 156
dorsolateral striatum (DLS), 131
dorsomedial striatum (DMS), 131
5-­HT system, 126–127
innate and learned movements, 159–160
input structure of basal ganglia, 109
lamprey, 31f
LTS interneurons, 113f, 116–119
matrix part, 104, 139
modular input from dif­fer­ent parts of 
cortex, 109–113
neurons, 154
Parkinson’s disease, 146
se­lection of motor programs, 24, 25. 
156–158
SNr/GPi, 106f, 107–109, 154, 158
somatomotor, 103, 154
striatal interneurons and striatal microcir-
cuit, 105f
striatal microcircuit, 117f
striatal projection neurons (SPNs), 104
striosomal part, 104, 139
striosomes, 139–141

274    Index
Striatum (cont.)
synaptic interaction, 117–127
tail, 104
ventral, 104, 111, 144
Striosomes, 139–141, 163
Stroke, 198–199
Substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc), 24, 
31f, 123f, 124–126
Substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr), 24, 31f, 
95, 106f, 107–109
Subthalmic nucleus (STN), 127, 151
Superior colliculus (SC), 33, 81. See also 
Tectum/SC
Supplementary motor area (SMA), 179–180, 
230
Suppression of pain perception, 72
Surrounding space, 33–34, 81, 82–89
Surround inhibition, 157–158
Survival, be­hav­iors impor­tant for, 75–77
Svoboda laboratory, 194
Swallowing, 47–48
Swimming, 54, 54f, 57–58
Synaptic plasticity, 142–143
Tail of caudate nucleus (CDt), 132f
Tail striatum, 104
Talking. See Speech
Tecto/SC-­thalamo-­cortical link, 91–93
Tectum, 33, 81. See also Tectum/SC
Tectum/SC, 81–96
auditory contribution to location, 88
barn owl, 88
blindsight, 92
disinhibition, 95–96
dopamine neurons in SNc, 93–94
evasive movements, 90
eye movement and eye-­head coordination, 
90–91
lamprey, 84–85f
mice, zones in SC, 94
multisensory integration, lamprey,  
85–87
multisensory spatial maps, 88, 96
optic tectum, lamprey, 86–87f
orienting movements, 89–90
rattlesnake, 88
retinotopic map, 82
summary/conclusion, 89, 96
surrounding space, 33, 81, 82–89
vertebrates, 33–34
visual and electrosensory signals, lamprey, 
86–87f
visuomotor coordination, 91–93
zebrafish, 83f
Teleosts
locomotion, 5f, 6
patterns of coordination, 21t
Tennis, 79, 101, 138, 227–228
Tetrapods
brainstem, 34
grooming, 12
reaching and grasping, 66, 70
walk, trot, gallop, 49
Thalamo-­striatal afferents, 225
Thalamo-­striatal nuclei, 152
Thalamus, 32, 75, 91, 97
Timing neurons, 174
Tongue
chewing, 46
reaching movement, 46
Tonically active interneurons, 120
Tourette’s syndrome, 144
Training, 79, 80
Unexpected jerk, 230
Unit burst generator concept, 62–66
Unit CPG organ­ization
backward locomotion, 65f
forward locomotion, 64f
locomotor network, 65
Utriculus, 34
V0d, 61, 62
V0v, 61, 62

275    Index
V2a interneurons, 58, 60f, 61, 66
Ventral premotor area (PMv), 180–181
Ventral spinocerebellar pathway (VSCT), 
211
Ventral striatum, 104, 111, 144
Ventral tegmental area (VTA), 24, 126, 142
Ventrolateral PAG (vlPAG), 72
Ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), 72, 
73, 76
Vermis, 204f, 207, 208
Vertebrates
basal ganglia, 30, 31f
blueprint of ner­vous system, 38
brainstem, 35
cerebellum, 34
communicating, 166
cranial nerves and the senses, 34
emotions, 15–16, 16f
evolution, 37f
execution of movements, 21–24
eye, orienting, and avoidance movements, 
16–17
flight, freeze, or fight, 9
hypothalamus, 32
locomotion, 5–9
major building blocks of motor system,  
226f
maturation and plasticity, 17–20
motor infrastructure, 23f
orofacial movements, 13–14
posture, 4–5
range of motor be­hav­iors, 3–4
reaching, grasping, foot placement, 9–13
respiration, 14
se­lection of motor programs, 24
speech, 14–15
spinal cord, 35–37
tectum/SC, 33–34
thalamus, 32
visual information reaching cortex, 171
vocalization, 14–15, 79
whole-­body movements, 3, 4–20
Vestibular afferents, 216, 217f
Vestibulo-­ocular reflexes, 17, 215–217
Vibrissae, 45, 45f, 48
Vigeland, Gustav, 15, 16f
Vigilance, 208, 209f
Vision
blink reflex, 219
eye movement and eye-­head coordination, 
90
hand control, 168–169
interactions between ret­ina and superior 
colliculus, 92f
multisensory integration, lamprey, 85–87
optic tectum, lamprey, 86–87f
optokinetic reflex, 217–218
orienting movements, 89–90
rapid correction of eye position, 216
ret­i­nal ganglion cells, 82
ret­i­nal slip, 217, 227
retinotopic map, 82
saccadic eye movements, 159
vertebrates, 16–17
vestibulo-­ocular reflex, 215–217
vestibulo-­ocular reflexes, 17
visual map, 89
Visual map, 89
Visuomotor coordination
challenges ahead, 227
distance neurons/timing neurons, 174
dorsal stream for visuomotor control, 
172–173
dynamic pro­cess, 170–172
functionally related subdivisions, 185f
neocortex, 201
tecto/SC-­thalamo-­cortical link (blindsight), 
91–93
walking, 174
vlPAG. See Ventrolateral PAG (vlPAG)
VMH. See Ventromedial hypothalamus 
(VMH)
Vocabulary (En­glish speaker), 229
Vocalization, 14–15, 79

276    Index
Volitional/voluntary movement, 195–196
Vowel-­related neurons, 196
VSCT. See Ventral spinocerebellar pathway 
(VSCT)
VTA. See Ventral tegmental area (VTA)
Walking, 78, 174
Wernicke’s area, 166, 228
“What” stream/“where” pathway, 172
Whisking movements, 48
Whole-­body movements, 3, 4–20
Wiesel, Torsten, 189
Wiggling the big toe, 65
Wildebeest, 19, 19f
Wiping reflex, 22
Zebrafish
griseum centrale, 74
interpeduncular nucleus (IPN), 74
maturation and plasticity, 20
Mauthner cells, 66
ret­i­nal ganglion cells, 82
segmental locomotor CPG, 58–60
tectal inputs and outputs, 83f

