Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The Best Answers 
to the Smartest, 
Strangest, and 
Most Difficult 
Questions Kids 
Always Ask
THE
TOP50
Questions
K I D S  A S K
3rd through 5th Grade
“If you value good sense, and you need some advice  
that works—in the heat of a tricky moment with your kid  
and long-term, too—this is the parenting guide for you.”
—Sarah Smith, editor-in-chief of Kiwi magazine
DR. SUSAN
BARTELL
America’s #1 Family Psychologist
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Praise for The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask  
(3rd through 5th Grade)
“If you’ve ever been stumped by a question your child 
has asked you, this book will help. Dr. Bartell identi-
fies the ‘hot-button’ questions that consistently come up 
and actually provides the best possible answers to those 
questions so parents don’t have to come up with them on 
their own on the spur of the moment.”
—Elisa Ast All, cofounder, iParenting Media, and 
executive editor of Disney Mom & Family Portfolio
“Finally, a book that answers all those questions we 
parents go in a cold sweat about! Dr. Susan tackles the 
tough ones such as money, shyness, siblings, and reli-
gion. Plus, we get the psychology behind it all to better 
understand our kids. You’ll find yourself using this book 
every day.”
—Pam Atherton, journalist and host of 
A Closer Look radio talk show
“Tremendous, reassuring wisdom in an easy to access 
format!”
—Grace Housholder, editor of Great Fort Wayne 
(Indiana) Family magazine
www.Ebook777.com

“Bill Cosby was correct—kids do say the darndest things. 
They also ask the darndest questions. What a stroke of 
brilliance to have captured these questions and then to 
provide parents with the best way to respond to each. 
Dr. Susan Bartell has once again found a way to offer 
sensible, succinct, and straightforward advice in yet 
another amazing book.”
—Sara Dimerman, Psych. Assoc., child and 
family therapist, author of Character Is 
the Key and Am I a Normal Parent?
“Dr. Susan is highly gifted at helping parents and kids 
connect from the heart. This book honors our innate 
wisdom, supports us in nurturing our kids’ emotional 
growth, and empowers us to be the parents we were 
meant to be.”
—Renee Peterson Trudeau, life balance 
expert/coach and author of The Mother’s 
Guide to Self-Renewal: How to Reclaim, 
Rejuvenate and Re-Balance Your Life
“If you value good sense, and you need some advice that 
works—in the heat of a tricky moment with your kid and 
long-term, too—this is the parenting guide for you.”
—Sarah Smith, editor-in-chief of Kiwi magazine

“The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask is an insightful guide on 
the issues and concerns every parent and child faces. It’s 
a must-read guide that both moms and dads should keep 
at their bedside.”
—Allison O’Connor, founder and editor 
of SingleMindedWomen.com
“Dr. Susan Bartell is the go-to person for all questions 
kids ask. No one is better qualified or more in touch with 
this age group to lend her expertise to a book that aids 
parents in improving communication with their ever-
curious children.”
—Renee Raab Whitcombe, author of 
Look Who’s Going to Be a Big Sister and 
Look Who’s Going to Be a Big Brother
“As a mother of three, I know the many questions kids 
ask and how often parents can be caught off guard. But 
helping dispel fears and concerns is a cornerstone of par-
enting a child. Dr. Susan Bartell breaks it all down in a 
straightforward yet lighthearted manner to help parents 
master this very important skill.”
—Danielle Sullivan, managing editor 
of NY Metro Parents

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
“Dr. Susan Bartell has done it again! She takes the 
toughest questions that kids ask us parents and gives 
us clear steps to figure out how we’ll answer before the 
questions are asked. Using her recommendations will 
deepen communication and understanding between 
children and parents.”
—Nancy Gruver, founder of New Moon 
Girl Media and author of How to Say It to Girls
“Easy-to-implement parenting advice in bite-sized, easy-
to-read pieces. Dr. Bartell states the question, uncovers 
the meaning, and suggests how to respond.”
—Lucy Banta, managing editor of 
New Jersey Family and Raising Teens
www.Ebook777.com

 
the
top50
Questions
k i d s  a s k
3rd through 5th Grade


 
  
 
the
top50
Questions
k i d s  a s k
3rd through 5th Grade
The Best Answers 
to the Smartest, 
Strangest, and 
Most Difficult 
Questions Kids 
Always Ask
dr. susan bartell

Copyright © 2010 by Susan Bartell
Cover and internal design © 2010 by Sourcebooks, Inc.
Cover design by Cyanotype Book Architects
Cover images © TRanger/iStockphoto.com; DanielBendjy/iStockphoto.com; 
ktmoffitt/iStockphoto.com; BDoty/iStockphoto.com; Maica/iStockphoto.com; ​
peeterv/iStockphoto.com
Sourcebooks and the colophon are registered trademarks of Sourcebooks, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by 
any electronic or mechanical means including information storage and retrieval 
systems—except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles or 
reviews—without permission in writing from its publisher, Sourcebooks, Inc.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative informa-
tion in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understand-
ing that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other 
professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, 
the services of a competent professional person should be sought.—From a 
Declaration of Principles Jointly Adopted by a Committee of the American 
Bar Association and a Committee of Publishers and Associations
All brand names and product names used in this book are trademarks, reg-
istered trademarks, or trade names of their respective holders. Sourcebooks, 
Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor in this book.
Published by Sourcebooks, Inc.
P.O. Box 4410, Naperville, Illinois 60567-4410
(630) 961-3900
Fax: (630) 961-2168
www.sourcebooks.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bartell, Susan.
  The top 50 questions kids ask (3rd through 5th grade) : the best answers to the 
smartest, strangest, and most difficult questions kids always ask / Susan Bartell.
       p. cm.
  1.  Children’s questions and answers.  I. Title. 
  HQ784.Q4B37 2010
  649’.124—dc22
2009039240
Printed and bound in the United States of America.
VP  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
For my children, Max, Gillian, and Mollie.
You started asking questions as soon as you 
could talk, and I hope you never stop!
For every child and parent with 
whom I have ever worked.
Your questions have taught me how to help 
kids be happy, and I am deeply grateful.
www.Ebook777.com


Contents
Acknowledgments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xv
Chapter One: Nag, Nag, Nag  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter Two: The World Outside  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 23
Chapter Three: Who’s in Charge? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 49
Chapter Four: “I’m Scared”  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 73
Chapter Five: So, What Can You Really  
Tell Me about God? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 95
Chapter Six: Sibling Stuff .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Chapter Seven: Money, Money, Money .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . 143
Chapter Eight: Growing Up So Fast .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 167
Chapter Nine: Just between You and Me .  .  .  .  . . . . . 197
Chapter Ten: One Last Question  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 225
About the Author  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227


Acknowledgments
This book could not have been written without the hun-
dreds and hundreds of questions that were submitted by 
parents from every state and from countries as far away 
as England and Australia, and as close as Jamaica and 
Canada. I thank each one of you for responding to my 
request for questions and even more so for forwarding 
my request to other moms and dads. Your children’s 
questions really were a window into your lives—some 
made me cry, others let me see the exasperation that all 
kids can evoke, and a few were so funny I laughed until I 
cried. Whether or not I used your question, each submis-
sion helped to inform and shape my writing, so you have 
my deepest gratitude. 
Once again, I want to thank my editor at Sourcebooks, 
Sara Appino. This is our second project together, and 

xiv   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Sara continues to prove herself to be insightful, clear-
thinking, and hard-working. I appreciate her advocacy 
of my work and her enthusiastic personality.
As with every book I write, I consider having the op-
portunity to write a luxury that I wouldn’t have been 
able to achieve without the support of my family. My 
children, Max, Gillian, and Mollie, are my constant 
cheering team—I couldn’t be a luckier mom, and I love 
you to the moon, to the stars, to Brooklyn, and back 
again.
My parents and my mother-in-law, aside from telling 
me (and anyone else who will listen) how proud they are 
of me, offer consistent, practical help with anything and 
everything—whenever I ask. I am truly grateful to have 
your support, and I love you.
If you know me at all, you will realize that my last 
thank-you always goes to my husband Lewis. This is 
because if I started with him, there wouldn’t be space 
for anyone else on the page. We always work together 
as a team to support each other’s important life projects, 
and this one is no exception. Lew, I don’t have the words 
to thank you for your continued dedication to me and to 
our family. You are my never-ending love.
Susan Bartell, PsyD
March 2010

Introduction
If your child is anything like mine, questions are being 
fired at you constantly throughout the day, beginning 
with, “What can I have for breakfast?” with no end in 
sight until, “Can I stay up for ten more minutes?” I bet 
sometimes your child doesn’t even wait for an answer 
to one question before moving on to the next one. And 
I’m sure that sometimes a single question is repeated 
so many times, it makes you want to scream. (After 
about the twentieth time asked, I actually think it’s 
okay to scream, if for no other reason than simply to 
break the cycle of asking. I mean, you’re only human, 
right?) But keep reading, because right away in Chapter 
One we’ll talk about simple, easy ways to reduce—even 
eliminate—relentless, nagging questions.
The questions upper-elementary-age kids ask aren’t 

xvi   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
simply annoying and exhausting (although sometimes 
they are very much that). In fact, as they develop, older-
elementary-age children very often ask questions as a 
way to let you know their concerns, interests, worries, 
and fears. The key is to really pay attention to your 
child’s questions. As parents we often wish we could 
see into our children’s minds, to know what they are 
thinking and feeling. By listening hard to your child’s 
questions, you can very frequently do just that. You can 
even learn how to respond to certain questions in the 
right way so that you will encourage further important, 
intimate conversation, rather than shutting it down. 
Throughout The Top 50 Questions, I will show you how 
to help your child turn one single question into an entire 
conversation about a topic that is worrying, frustrating, 
or confusing him. You can become an expert—as good 
as any psychologist—at getting your child to open up 
and talk about everything that is on his mind.
At this stage of development, your child is also be-
ginning to flex some muscles of independence, and the 
questions she asks will reflect this. Therefore, some of 
your child’s questions will be feisty and challenging, 
making you wonder what happened to your sweet little 
one. But this is a natural part of growing up. As your 
child becomes a “big kid” in school, she also starts to feel 
confident enough to stand up to you once in a while—
and question your authority in small ways. By respond-
ing to her challenging questions smoothly, rather than 

Introduction   xvii
antagonistically, you will find that your relationship 
with your child will continue to grow stronger and more 
intimate, rather than becoming locked in friction.
You’ll be interested to know that the questions in 
The Top 50 Questions are all real questions from parents 
just like you, from all over the United States and even 
other parts of the world. In fact, I received hundreds and 
hundreds of questions in response to an online request 
that I generated. You’re probably wondering how I 
decided which questions to include and which ones to 
leave out. Actually, it was quite a simple decision. Just 
as there are predictable physical growth patterns that 
occur during the later elementary years, the emotional 
changes in your child’s life will also take a predictable 
path, and this will be reflected in the types of questions 
he or she asks. Based on this, many of the submissions 
I received from parents had similar responses. In fact, I 
very seriously considered naming this book “What’s for 
Dinner?” and 49 Other Questions Kids Ask, since this 
was, by far, the most commonly submitted question by 
parents of upper-elementary-age kids.
The selection process for The Top 50 Questions was 
based on which questions I received most frequently from 
parents with children in the third to fifth grade range. It 
was that simple—and that complicated. I have to admit, 
there were some questions that I absolutely loved—they 
made me laugh, cry, or think really hard, but because 
they didn’t reflect the norm, I couldn’t include them. But 

xviii   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
if you submitted questions, and now you are reading this 
book and don’t see your child’s question, don’t think for 
a second I didn’t consider yours. I read each and every 
question, and struggled mightily with which ones to 
include. Every question touched me.
As with physical growth, the range of “normal” for 
emotional, social, cognitive, and academic growth is 
huge, which is why The Top 50 Questions covers third all 
the way through fifth grade—one child may ask a ques-
tion in third grade, but another child may not be ready 
to ask the very same question until fifth grade. Both are 
normal, regular kids. In fact, if you haven’t read it yet, I 
definitely suggest you pick up The Top 50 Questions Kids 
Ask (Pre-K through 2nd Grade). It’s a great basis for this 
book, even if you don’t have a child in that age range 
any more. You’d be surprised how many older kids are 
still asking questions from their earlier years. So it would 
be wonderful for you not only to understand why your 
child is asking these questions, but to really know how to 
answer them in a way that would satisfy your child.
Of course, some children can actually be much less or 
much more sophisticated than their peers when it comes 
to asking questions or, in fact, any other area of emo-
tional development. When this happens, a parent may 
begin worrying that a child’s behavior seems to be too 
different from the way other children are behaving. If 
this seems to describe your child—if you have any con-
cerns that your child is somehow “behind” or even too 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction   xix
far ahead developmentally, cognitively, or socially—it’s 
important not to ignore it. Speak to your child’s medical 
doctor, your child’s teacher, the school counselor, or a 
child psychologist or social worker. If there is a problem, 
then the earlier you address it, the better it is for your 
child—and for you.
By taking a quick glance at the Table of Contents, 
you will see that the questions are divided into nine 
chapters. I have chosen these chapters carefully to rep-
resent the most important areas of emotional and cogni-
tive development for children in the upper elementary 
school grades. As you read The Top 50 Questions, these 
chapters will make sense to you. You will find yourself 
nodding in agreement as you see your child reflected in 
the questions (even if you didn’t submit a single one of 
them). Then as you begin to understand the best ways 
to respond to each question, it will again make sense 
and will feel natural and easy for you. In fact, none of 
this is going to feel like hard work. Your child is asking 
you the questions anyway—you will simply need to 
learn how to tweak your responses so that you answer 
in a way that will actually strengthen and deepen your 
relationship with your child and also reduce your own 
frustration. By responding differently, you will begin 
to decrease the “nag, nag, nag” factor and understand 
your child just a little bit better than you did before you 
began reading. Sounds good, right? Well, I think we are 
ready to begin.
www.Ebook777.com

xx   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
As always, I love to hear from those who read my books, 
so feel free to email me at DrSusan@DrSusanBartell.
com. Send me more questions too, if you like, and maybe 
the next book will include yours.
Happy answering!
Dr. Susan

1
Nag, Nag, Nag
As your child’s language grows more proficient, her 
ability to ask all types of questions greatly improves. 
However, along with this, her aptitude for nagging 
becomes more sophisticated as well—lucky you! The 
late elementary grades often represent the peak of the 
“nagging” years, because as your child becomes more in-
volved in her social life, the influence of peers sways her 
to nag you for privileges and material items that prior to 
now she might not even have known existed.
An older child may also nag when she’s angry with 
you. She knows that yelling at a parent is not socially 
appropriate and that you probably (hopefully) would 
not tolerate it. But at this age, she realizes that nagging 
will also push your buttons and drive you crazy (perhaps 
even more so!), just in a slightly less egregious manner.

2   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Last, and perhaps most important, your child recog-
nizes that nagging will often get her exactly what she 
wants—as long as she is persistent.
Now that you understand a little bit about how 
nagging works, let’s take a look at the most frequently 
“nagged” questions, uncover their real meaning, and 
learn the very best responses to them. By the end of this 
chapter, you’ll be an expert on nagging and how to get 
your child to do it less often—I promise.
#1: What’s for dinner?
As I explained in the introduction, this was the most 
frequently submitted of all questions. I received it from 
every corner of the country in a variety of versions. 
The submission that made me laugh the most came 
from Tara, mom of Alec and Christian (both age 9) and 
Eugenie (age 4). When she submitted the question, she 
added, “This question annoys me because of the look 
of disappointment they have on their faces before they 
even hear the answer.” I still chuckle every time I read 
her comment!
So why do children ask this question over and over 
again, and what is the best strategy to respond to it in a 
way that might break the cycle?

Nag, Nag, Nag   3
Uncovering the Meaning
When your child asks this question, he could have one of 
several different agendas. Of course, off the top, it may 
just be sheer curiosity. But this is the least likely reason 
of all.
Like Tara’s kids, he may want to ensure that he 
won’t be disappointed by the meal selection. If he finds 
that he is disappointed, he wants to have ample time 
to begin a campaign to either change the night’s menu 
or suggest an alternative. He likely realizes that getting 
you to prepare a second choice might take a great deal 
more nagging!
On a more serious note, your child may also ask the 
question as a way to check with you to see whether it 
is a “sit-down” night or a casual “take-out” night. In 
many busy homes the dinner meal is the only time that 
a family gathers to sit together, not only to eat but to 
share a few minutes of time at the end of a hectic day. 
Your child may feel that he does not get enough of these 
meals, but doesn’t know how to articulate this. Instead, 
he prepares himself for another rushed dinner meal, by 
asking in advance, “What’s for dinner?”
Another reason your child may ask this question is 
to gauge the level of order (or disorder) in your home. 
In some families, meals are flung together at the last 
minute, amid homework, activities, running around, 
and bath time. It can be disillusioning to a very hungry 
child to not know what’s for dinner and also to not know 

4   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
when dinner will be offered. A child may ask this ques-
tion over and over each day in an attempt to prompt 
the adult in charge to become motivated to push dinner 
preparation to the top of the priority list.
Since food—especially dinner—seems to be such an im-
portant issue, what is the best way to respond to this ques-
tion? Jump right to the next section, and you’ll find out.
The Best Way to Respond
One very easy way to alleviate your child’s need to ask 
this question every day is to make a dinner menu for 
each night of the week. Children love routine, so as long 
as you and the rest of your family don’t get bored, you 
can offer the same menu each week so your child knows 
exactly what to expect—no surprises. Post the menu in 
the kitchen for everyone to see.
I recommend preparing the menu with your child or 
children. Discuss the importance of eating healthily and 
making sure each meal includes enough protein and veg-
etables. Allow your child to offer suggestions for what 
meals should be included on the weekly menu—and 
make sure to include them.
If you tend to be a very busy, frequent fast-food family, 
with lots of eating on the run, try to cut back or at least 
opt for healthier fast foods, eaten together as a family. 
Fast food is one of the main contributors to overweight 
kids (and parents) in Western culture. If this is difficult 
for you to do, check out my book Dr. Susan’s Fit and 

Nag, Nag, Nag   5
Fun Family Action Plan. It will teach you exactly how 
to feed your kids more healthily.
In addition, studies show that when families eat 
together regularly, teens are significantly less likely to 
smoke, drink, and use drugs. Since it won’t work to sud-
denly tell your teen that you want to start having family 
meals, you need to start making it a family habit now 
before your child reaches adolescence.
Many parents ask me whether they should give their 
children a choice or make them eat what has been pre-
pared. If you have prepared a meal that you know your 
child enjoys (especially if he helped create the menu), 
then it is acceptable not to offer another choice—no 
matter how many times he nags. However, if you know 
your child doesn’t like what you have prepared (or if two 
of your children like it but the third doesn’t), I’d rec-
ommend offering that child another option. You don’t 
have to make another full meal, but a sandwich, eggs, 
or even a bowl of cereal with fruit is a good alternative. 
No one forces adults to eat food they don’t like, and I 
don’t believe a child should be forced to do so either. 
The only exception to this is when you have a very picky 
eater who needs help learning to eat a larger variety of 
foods. In this case, your child needs frequent exposure to 
small amounts of one food at a time. This requires great 
patience on your part, but is well worth the effort.
If you’ve assessed that your child is asking this ques-
tion because your home is chaotic and dinner time is 

6   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
erratic, it is time to make a change—not only for the sake 
of dinner, but because it is not healthy for your child 
to feel that his life is unpredictable and without order. 
Begin by assessing whether you and your child(ren) are 
juggling too many activities, whether you have com-
petent child care, or perhaps whether you need to seek 
professional help to support the changes you want to 
make. Start to change by planning dinner for the same 
time every day. Perhaps you can cook and freeze some 
meals on the weekends; maybe you need to purchase 
easy-to-prepare foods like cut-up vegetables. Once you 
have dinner time running more smoothly, then move to 
the next area. Before you know it, you’ll find that you 
have your home in better control and your child won’t 
be asking this question nearly as often.
#2: Can we get a dog? 
(Or: Can we get a cat? Can I get a horse?)
“Natalie (age 9) and Jackson (age 12) ask their father and 
me this question at least three times a week,” offered their 
mother, Holly, shaking her head in resignation. “They 
promise they will do everything to take care of it. I’ve 
almost given in at least five times, but not quite yet. But 
I have to admit, I don’t think I’ll last much longer!”
Many pets have been purchased based on a child’s 
well-intentioned promise that she will take care of it. 

Nag, Nag, Nag   7
Pets have also been brought home because a child ex-
presses interest, and a parent becomes convinced that it 
will be good for the child to have an animal to care for. 
How well does this work out? Let’s explore the issue.
Uncovering the Meaning
Think back­—do you remember thinking what it would 
be like to be a parent, how much fun it would be, that 
you would have the perfect child, that it would at all 
times be the most wonderful and joyful experience of 
your life? And then you became a parent for real. No 
one could have actually prepared you for it, right?
Just as you could not have begun to imagine what 
it was like to be a parent before your child arrived, 
your child can really only think about the “fun” part 
of owning a pet. This is true no matter how much you 
explain, prepare, and tell your child what it would really 
be like to have to take care of an animal.
She may spend the afternoon with a friend’s pet and 
see how much fun it is and come home wanting one. She 
may even be a real animal lover and truly want one of 
her own.
Despite all of this, it is important for you to know that 
when a child wants a pet badly enough, she will promise 
you anything in order to get one—and she won’t be 
fibbing at the time she makes the promise! She will truly 
believe that she will feed, walk, bathe, play with, and 
otherwise care for the dog, cat, or other animal.

8   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
But you also need to know that your child does 
not yet have the cognitive ability to really think well 
enough into the future, or to be self-reflective enough to 
know whether she has the ability to sustain this level 
of responsible behavior. You may want to believe her 
when she promises, with great conviction, that she will 
be supremely committed to the new pet. You may ac-
tually believe that she’s capable of doing all that she is 
promising. But, when your child asks you this question 
again and again and again, and then makes all kinds of 
promises, the truth is that neither you nor your child can 
be sure that she is capable of actually following through 
on these promises.
She might be able to follow through, but it is also pos-
sible that you will be the one taking care of the new pet. 
This is something about which you need to be absolutely 
crystal clear before you give your child a response. So 
what is the best way to respond to this question?
The Best Way to Respond
Your response should depend on whether you want a 
pet and whether you would be willing to take care of 
it, assuming that your child completely fails to follow 
through on any of her promises.
If you are an animal lover and are happy to feed, walk, 
train, and otherwise take care of your new dog, then go 
right ahead and get one. Begin teaching your child how 
to care for the new pet by giving her age-appropriate 

Nag, Nag, Nag   9
pet-related duties, without overwhelming her (despite 
the fact that she may have promised to do everything). 
She is much more likely to be consistent in feeding the 
dog once a day or walking it twice on the weekends, 
than if she is expected to feed it twice a day or walk it 
every single day. By offering her a small task that she 
can complete, she will feel accomplished and you won’t 
feel annoyed or disappointed.
However, if you are not an animal lover and you 
have no desire to feed, clean up after, train, pay for, or 
otherwise take care of a pet, it is imperative that you 
respond to your child’s question each and every time by 
saying no.
I will reiterate that a child this age is not capable of 
taking full responsibility for a pet, and I assure you that 
at least part of this task will fall to you within days of 
the adorable animal entering your home. This will lead 
to stress, resentment, anger, and fights between you and 
your child. This is not the way to teach a child responsi-
bility, nor is it fair to the animal that did not enter your 
home voluntarily. In addition, your child is certainly not 
capable of assuming the financial burden of having a 
pet. This is something you need to be willing to incur 
without any resentment toward your child.
A great way for both you and your child to “try out” 
the possibility of having a pet would be to borrow one 
from a friend for several days or longer and see how 
it feels to take care of it. I’d recommend “adopting” 

10   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
an animal from a friend or relative for more than just 
a weekend, so that the “honeymoon effect” will have a 
chance to wear off and your family can really see how it 
feels to take care of a pet.
#3: What time are you coming home? 
(Or: What time is Daddy coming home?)
Hector’s work hours are somewhat erratic. He ex-
plained, “Every single day after school, my kids, Angelo 
(age 8) and Edwin (age 6½), call me at work and start 
asking—or should I say nagging—when I will be home 
from work. Since I don’t come home at exactly the same 
time every day, it’s frustrating.”
It can be distracting, feel like pressure, and, for some 
parents, induce feelings of guilt when you hear this 
particular nagging, whining question—usually over 
the phone, in a message left on your voicemail, or via 
text message or email. For some parents it also evokes 
sparks of resentment—usually when the question comes 
while you’re trying to carve out a little bit of social or 
personal time.
If your child asks this question so often that it feels 
like nagging, there is a reason for it, so let’s explore 
the different reasons and also the best possible ways to 
respond to your child.

Nag, Nag, Nag   11
Uncovering the Meaning
To begin, it is possible that your child is simply curious 
as to when you will be home, and there is nothing more 
to it than that. However, if your child keeps asking even 
after you have given an answer, this is not likely the 
reason he is asking.
Rather, your child may be asking because, like 
Hector, you have erratic hours and he is unsure when he 
will see you. This unpredictability can be disconcerting 
for a child. Not only does he want to have time with you, 
but he also may need help with homework, or to chat 
about social or other issues.
Although separation issues are less common in the older 
elementary grades, your child may have the remnants of 
one from earlier years, and this question could reflect his 
anxiety about being away from you for too long.
A child may also ask this question because he does 
not feel satisfied with the childcare provider with whom 
he has been left. The person could be too strict, unpleas-
ant, or apathetic. Perhaps there is disorder when you’re 
not home, or maybe siblings are mean to each other.
Another reason that your child may ask you this 
question frequently could be that you are out or away 
excessively. Do you work exceptionally long hours and 
frequently go out socially? Perhaps you are not spending 
enough time with your child. It can be difficult to be self-
reflective enough to really take a good look at this issue. 
But if your child is very frequently asking you when or 

12   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
what time you will be home, it could be a “red flag” that 
you’re not at home enough with your child.
The Best Way to Respond
One of the best ways to minimize the number of times 
this question is nagged at you is to tell your child when 
you will be home before he has a chance to ask. For 
example, each day, after school, make a quick call home 
and tell your child what time you expect to be home 
that day. If your estimate changes, call back and let him 
know. While this may seem inconvenient, it will go a 
long way toward building an excellent relationship with 
your child. Take a quick look into the future with me. 
When your child becomes a teen, if you expect him to tell 
you when he will be late coming home (and where he is), 
it is much more likely that he will do so if you show him 
the same respect for several years as he is growing up.
This technique also works well if your child has sepa-
ration anxiety. Knowing your schedule will reduce his 
worry and free him to focus on things other than trying 
to figure out when you will be home.
If, while asking you when you will be home, your child 
also complains about the baby-sitter or the situation at 
home, it may be time to reassess your child care. A happy 
child is less likely to complain or to miss you while you 
are out. A child in the upper elementary grades can be an 
excellent reporter. Take the time to talk to your child in 
detail about how he likes the baby-sitter, what he thinks 

Nag, Nag, Nag   13
is positive and negative, and what makes him always 
ask what time you will be home and complain about you 
being away. Try to be objective about your childcare pro-
vider—particularly if it is a grandparent who takes care 
of your child or children. It may be a convenient situation 
for you, and it may have worked when your children were 
younger, but it may not be great any more. It is difficult to 
change childcare situations, but if your child’s reasons for 
being unhappy are legitimate, it is time to reevaluate.
Last, if your child asks you this question frequently 
because, you recognize, you are out too much, then 
perhaps it is time to respond by saying, “I will be home 
very soon, and tomorrow night I am not going out at 
all. We will have the whole evening together. You can 
choose what we should do.”
But how should you respond when your child asks this 
question no matter what—even though you spend a lot 
of time with him? All you want is a couple of hours alone 
or with friends, without being nagged to come home. In 
this case, respond with a variation of the following: “I’m 
out with my friends having fun, just like you get to do 
with your friends. I will be home in three hours. You are 
being taken care of, so please don’t call me again. But if 
you do, I’m not going to answer my phone. If there’s an 
emergency, you should leave me a message. I will check 
the message and call back. If it is a real emergency—for 
example, the baby-sitter collapses—you should call 911 
before calling me. I love you, and I’ll see you later.” (This 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
14   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
last bit of advice is important information to give to any 
child old enough to operate a phone.) Then hang up, and 
don’t answer another call.
#4: What are we doing next? 
(Or: What are we doing today?)
“Emma and Dylan (both 9) wake up every Saturday 
morning and ask, ‘What are we doing today?’” reported 
their mother, Robin. “Then, throughout the day—and 
the weekend—they ask, ‘What are we doing next?’ It 
drives me crazy. It’s as though it’s never enough.”
I hear this question everywhere. Not only was it one 
of the most commonly submitted questions, but I hear 
it as kids greet their parents after school, at the end of 
a busy day, while standing in line at the supermarket, 
yes, even in my very own kitchen from the mouths of my 
eleven-, thirteen-, and fifteen-year-old children.
Uncovering the Meaning
Many parents become exasperated when a child asks this 
question. It makes them feel like their child is ungrate-
ful: “We’ve just finished a wonderful, fun-filled activity 
and she is asking, ‘What’s next?’ I can’t believe it!”
But the truth is, kids—even teens—do not ask this ques-
tion because they are unappreciative of or undervalue the 
activity they just experienced. Rather, they do not yet have 
www.Ebook777.com

Nag, Nag, Nag   15
the ability to regulate their own intake of “fun and games.” 
Therefore, once your child is feeling excited, she will want 
to continue this level of excitement, even if it isn’t in her 
best interest. This will prompt her to ask, “What’s next?” 
It is similar to a child wanting to stay up late even when 
she is exhausted. It is your job to help her calm down and 
realize that there doesn’t have to be a “next” activity.
Sometimes a child will ask the question because you 
have scheduled many chores or mundane activities, but 
you haven’t given her a schedule. Her question is simply 
to try and get a plan for what her day will look like as the 
day unfolds. After all, she has little control over the day. 
Unless you tell her, she needs to keep asking.
Your child may ask you the question, “What are we 
doing today?” for a similar reason. For example, if you 
are not a family that plans activities in advance, your 
child may ask in order to force you to think about or-
ganizing your day. Perhaps she doesn’t want to spend 
the whole day doing nothing—especially on a weekend 
day. By asking you the question, she probably thinks 
that there is a slightly better chance that you will do 
something, rather than doing nothing. Is she right? If she 
is, you should probably use this nagging question as an 
indication that it is time to make a change.
The Best Way to Respond
This question often frustrates and annoys parents so 
much that their first response is to yell. So begin by taking 

16   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
a deep breath. Getting angry because you believe your 
child is unappreciative will not help her to understand 
that it is time to either focus on enjoying the activity in 
which she is engaged, or take some time to calm down 
and relax after completing an exciting activity. A response 
that would help your child to transition might be similar 
to the following: “We have had such a fun time today. 
Why don’t you tell me three things that you really loved 
about what we just did? Then we will be going home to 
have dinner, have a bath, and it will be time for bed.”
When your child frequently asks you at the beginning 
of the day for the day’s agenda, it means it is time to 
share it with her. If you have a plan, tell your child what 
will be happening, in order. If you don’t have a plan, 
make one with your child. It doesn’t have to be detailed, 
but it should be anchored by one or two activities or 
chores so that she knows what to expect.
#5: Where is mY                 [fill in 
the blank]?
“Mom, where is my sneaker/lacrosse stick/brush/math 
book/game/sneaker/pen/lunch box/baseball mitt/did I 
say sneaker? This is all I hear all day long from Austen 
and Drew (both age 10).” Cindi, the boys’ mother, shook 
her head in exasperation. “I’m not sure how they get 
through the day without losing themselves!”

Nag, Nag, Nag   17
Why can’t your child keep track of his belongings? 
It seems simple enough, doesn’t it? But for so many 
kids, misplacing and outright losing their stuff is a 
constant battle, and the established pattern is that your 
child relies on you to find it for him. So where is that 
pesky sneaker?
Uncovering the Meaning
By the later elementary years, your child is old enough to 
keep track of his belongings, so why is he always nagging 
you to help him find them? There could be a few differ-
ent reasons for this.
To begin, perhaps you make it too easy for him to rely 
on you because whenever he asks you this question, you 
immediately rush to help him look for the missing item, 
rather than insisting that he look for it himself.
It’s also possible that you haven’t taught him how to 
be organized, or maybe you don’t role-model it in your 
home. Ask yourself the following questions. If you can’t 
answer yes to most of them, you are not role-modeling 
an organized home environment for your child; it is 
therefore not surprising that he is always asking you 
this question.
Is your home generally clean and tidy (no dishes 
• 
piled in the sink, dirty laundry lying around, toys 
everywhere)?
Is your home usually free of clutter (surfaces aren’t 
• 
piled up with papers and magazines)?

18   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Can you find your things when you need them?
• 
Do you pick up after yourself and teach your child 
• 
to do the same?
Do you put your belongings away and teach your 
• 
child to do the same?
Even if your home is generally tidy and organized, 
it is possible that your child has difficulty in this area. 
Some children have a notable—even clinically diag-
nosable—problem with organization, which results 
in them not only losing things, but also forgetting to 
bring home schoolwork, having very messy rooms, 
desks, and school bags, and even having academic dif-
ficulties. The older elementary grades are very often 
the time that these difficulties are first seen in school. 
Therefore, if your child has trouble with losing things 
and with organization in all areas of his life, it is a 
good idea to speak to your child’s teacher and to the 
school psychologist.
The Best Way to Respond
In all cases, it is important to make sure that your child’s 
space is clutter-free and organized. Then, teach him the 
necessary skills to begin learning how not to lose his be-
longings. This includes making sure that he puts things 
away after using them and that he has an organized area 
to keep his things. It also means teaching him to look for 
things himself so he doesn’t rely on you to do it for him. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Nag, Nag, Nag   19
He will be less likely to lose things carelessly if he knows 
that he will have to find them himself. The best response 
to this question is therefore a version of the following: 
“You need to look for your sneaker yourself. Think 
about where you last had it, and begin there. I’m sure 
when you look for a while you’ll find it. Let me know 
when you do; I’ll be in the den.”
#6: Can I get a cell phone?
Wendi and Greg are nagged relentlessly by Alyssa (age 
9), who is apparently “dying” for a cell phone. And it 
seems they are not alone. Wendi explains, “Alyssa says 
that everyone has a phone except her. But that can’t 
be true, because I know at least ten other nine-year-
olds who don’t have one yet, and plenty of older kids 
as well. I also know lots of kids her age who do have a 
cell phone, so I’m not sure when the best time is to give 
her one.”
We live in an ever-advancing technological age and 
our kids are even more advanced than we are. So how 
do you best respond to this question? Is peer pressure 
a legitimate reason to give your child a cell phone, or 
should you be guided by something a little more scien-
tific? Keep reading and you’ll find out.
www.Ebook777.com

20   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Uncovering the Meaning
For the most part, an elementary-school-age child’s desire 
for a cell phone has very little to do with being practical 
and everything to do with being “cool.” She desires a cell 
phone for one or more of the following reasons:
An older sibling has a phone.
• 
Several of her friends have phones.
• 
It’s another great piece of technology with fun 
• 
games and ringtones.
She wants to be in touch with her friends when 
• 
she’s not with them.
As long as you are aware that these are the reasons 
that your child wants a phone, it is not necessarily a bad 
idea to get her one, as long as you are doing it for a reason 
that is important to you and not for one of the above 
reasons. Does this sound strange? Let’s keep going, and 
soon it will make sense.
No matter what your child’s age, you do not need 
to give her a cell phone until you feel that it would 
be beneficial for her to have one. On the other hand, 
if you feel that having one at eight or nine years old 
would be helpful, then there is no need to wait. Some 
reasons that you may want to give your child a phone 
right now include the following:
You work and your child is in an after-school 
• 
program, and you want to be able to reach her 
during the day.

Nag, Nag, Nag   21
She’s alone on the bus for a short period of time, 
• 
and knowing that she has a phone makes you 
more comfortable.
She’s on a travel sports team and you want her to 
• 
be able to call you from away games.
You frequently travel for work, and giving her 
• 
a cell phone will make it easier for you to stay in 
touch with her when you’re away.
The Best Way to Respond
As you can see, I do not believe that there are hard and 
fast rules for how to respond to this question. You should 
give your child a phone when it is best for you and your 
family that your child should have a phone. We live 
in a technologically sophisticated time, and there is no 
reason for you or your child not to take advantage of 
this. Indeed, pay phones are scarce, and no one even 
knows how to use them anymore.
However, along with the privilege of a cell phone 
comes the responsibility. So, much as you give your 
child rules about crossing the street and about Internet 
safety, once you answer this question by saying, “Yes, 
you can get a cell phone,” it is important to teach your 
child that the cell phone comes with rules, including 
the following:
Do not give your number to anyone you don’t know.
• 
Do not download anything to your phone without 
• 
permission (this requires giving out your number).

22   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Only call and text as often as your parents allow 
• 
you to—going over the allotted minutes should 
result in a consequence.
Never use your phone during school hours, unless 
• 
it is an emergency.
It is also important to understand that giving a child 
a cell phone can change the way she interacts with the 
people in her world. It is your job to make sure that the 
phone doesn’t have a negative effect on her social inter-
actions or ability to be independent. For example, I have 
known homesick children who, while at a sleepover, 
have called their parents from their cell phones instead 
of telling the “sleepover” parents they are feeling home-
sick. While this seems okay on the surface, in reality it 
deprives that child of having to try to work through the 
homesickness with the adult in charge. I’ve also known 
children who call their parents from playground fights 
to ask for help.
When your child’s cell phone offers her so much access 
to you that it interferes with her ability to work through 
the struggles of her everyday life—like a sleepover or an 
argument with a peer—the cell phone is harming rather 
than helping. In this case, you need to decide whether 
your child should have only limited access to her phone.

The World  
Outside
2
By third grade and above, your child is accustomed to 
school, and unless he is having a particular difficulty, his 
social and school lives have probably begun to take on a 
predictable rhythm. By now you are able to observe your 
child’s personality and tell if he is outgoing or shy, slightly 
rigid or flexible, feisty or generally compliant. Each child 
is different from every other, and as your child grows—
venturing away from home and exploring his world—
these differences become more and more apparent.
One thing that most upper-elementary-age chil-
dren tend to have in common with each other is that 
they begin to question everything. No longer is your 
child a “newbie” kindergartner or first-grader, unsure 
of herself and experiencing everything as brand-new. 
Instead, she may be more willing to challenge you, her 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
24   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
friends, and possibly even a teacher. The questions she 
asks reflect this.
So hang on to your seat, because the preteen years 
are just around the corner, and the way you respond to 
your child’s questions now will help determine the type 
of communication you establish with him, as well as the 
all-important boundaries you create, which will take 
him into the older years, when real limit-testing is much 
more likely.
Now, I am sure you are ready to examine your child’s 
most pressing questions about his world and help him 
learn to negotiate his concerns as smoothly as possible. 
So let’s go!
#7: Why do I have to do long 
division/learn names of rocks/
make art with “found objects”/
[fill in your child’s complaint] 
if I don’t need it when I’m a 
grown-up? 
(Or: Why do I have to do homework?)
Lucy’s son Cheng (age 10½) gives her a hard time 
about school almost every day. Lucy says Cheng loves 
the social aspect of school and some of the academ-
ics, but he is very dismissive about some aspects of the 
www.Ebook777.com

The World Outside    25
learning process. “I’m not sure whether to laugh or be 
angry with Cheng when he makes comments to me 
like ‘I don’t see why I need to do this project; I’ll never 
need to know about the pilgrims when I’m a grown-
up,’ or ‘This is a waste of time. You use a calculator; 
why can’t I?’”
Does this sound familiar to you? If it does, you are 
not alone, and neither is Lucy. Many older-elementary-
age kids question why they have to learn certain topics, 
do homework, or even go to school at all. While these 
types of questions can be annoying to you, they are part 
of your child’s emotional development. Let me explain.
Uncovering the Meaning
In asking a version of this question, your child is begin-
ning to challenge the adult authority in her life. It might be 
disconcerting to hear me say this—you’re thinking, “Dr. 
Susan, isn’t this sort of behavior reserved for teens?”
In thinking back to the “olden days” when we were 
young, it feels like kids didn’t begin questioning authority 
until they were much older—if ever! However, I’m not 
sure that this is entirely true. It might just be our revised 
recollection of our not-actually-perfect childhoods.
However, even if it is true, it is not fair to compare 
our children with ourselves all those years ago. Our 
children live in a complex world that expects them to 
perform academically on a much higher level than we 
did at the same age, to understand technology beginning 

26   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
practically at birth, and to socialize at a faster pace than 
was ever expected of us.
In developing these skills, our children are also learn-
ing others: the ability to think much more critically than 
we ever did at their young age, to be less complacent, 
and to challenge authority several years earlier than we 
did. These are not bad skills or traits. In fact, if you take 
a look around, you’ll find that adults are achieving great 
success at much younger ages now than they were a gen-
eration or two ago.
However, the way your child expresses these aspects 
of his personality and the way you help him channel 
them are crucial in assisting him to grow into a produc-
tive and interested teen—and adult­—who values hard 
work and all that it can help him achieve. In addition, 
your response can help him learn that challenging 
authority is healthy, but it is important to do so in a 
respectful manner that is neither dismissive nor arro-
gant. In addition, a thoughtful response to this question 
will help your child learn that sometimes he needs to 
comply with authority, because he is still a child, and 
rules are rules.
The Best Way to Respond
In case you’re wondering, “Because your teacher said 
so,” is not a good answer to this question! I’m not going 
to let you blame this one on the teachers. Rather, your 
response needs to do two things:

The World Outside    27
	 1.	 Open communication with your child about his 
frustration at having to do work he doesn’t like (or 
finds difficult).
	 2.	 Help him understand that sometimes work that 
doesn’t seem important or worthwhile really is 
beneficial.
For example, you might say a version of the following: 
“I know long division is difficult for you, and if you need 
help, we can work on it together. But it is important to 
learn it. Grown-ups use division all the time when they are 
figuring out money, and you don’t always have a calcula-
tor. Also, learning how to concentrate on doing division 
step by step will help your brain practice concentrating 
really well, so that when you need to concentrate on other 
things that you really love, like learning a sequence of notes 
for a music recital, you’ll be able to do it well. But even if 
you don’t love it, you still need to work at it, because every 
part of school is important, and that means being respect-
ful of school and what your teacher asks you to do.”
You can apply this same concept to any complaint 
your child has. Explain how learning as a child will be 
useful when your child grows up, and also how it can be 
applied right now. Here’s one more example: “I know 
that art isn’t your favorite subject, but I really enjoy 
all the projects you bring home. Also, creating art with 
found objects can help you when you’re a grown-up, 
because sometimes when you’re at work and something 

28   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
isn’t going exactly the way you wanted, you have to be 
very creative and figure out how to change it into some-
thing completely different so that it works differently 
or better. That’s like ‘found art’—taking one thing and 
changing it into something different—it’s teaching your 
brain to be creative in a new way. The more you do that, 
the better you’ll be at it, and it won’t be so hard. But, 
even if you don’t like it, you need to do it respectfully 
and work hard at it, because even when you’re an adult, 
there are times when you have to do things you don’t 
like, and if you don’t do them well, you could get fired 
from your job. So I can’t wait to see the best ‘found art’ 
project you’ve ever made!”
#8: How come my friends don’t 
want to play with me?
Angela told me her daughter Bianca (age 8) was having 
a really hard time socially. “Last year everything seemed 
fine, but now Bianca doesn’t seem to be connecting with 
her friends in the same way,” explained Angela. “She 
says things like, ‘Mommy, why don’t Lindsay, Selena, 
and Randi want to play with me anymore?’”
If you haven’t experienced it yet, the social life of an 
upper-elementary-age child can become complicated—
particularly (although definitely not exclusively) within 
the world of girls.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The World Outside    29
Uncovering the Meaning
Often beginning in third grade, although sometimes 
earlier or later (remember there is a range of normal), 
children begin developing a strong sense of real 
friendship. This is wonderful! It reflects your child’s 
ability to begin understanding which other children 
are a good match for her own personality, strengths, 
and interests.
However, along with these newly developing friend-
ships, many children experience an unexpected shift in 
their social lives for which they are unprepared. In some 
instances, your child may find herself suddenly on the 
outside of a social group of which she was recently just 
a part, or she might experience the loss of a close friend 
who suddenly seems more interested in other friendships. 
This can feel like a confusing betrayal for any child.
But what triggers such social upheaval? And why 
does it happen so often?
In the upper elementary grades, children’s person-
alities and interests begin to shine through. Your child 
no longer wants to play with someone simply because 
she happens to be in the same corner of the playground 
or the same class—or because she is the child of your 
friend. She is naturally attracted to friendships with 
children with whom she feels most comfortable. For 
example, if she is athletic, she might be attracted to 
more sporty children; if she is a bit shy, perhaps she 
likes kids who are a bit on the quieter side; a private 
www.Ebook777.com

30   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
type of child might not want to be friends with one 
who tends to be more of a secret-sharer. Of course, 
there are no hard and fast rules, but your child might 
find her social circle changing because the children 
with whom she used to be friends no longer feel the 
same sense of connection to each other that they once 
did. This may be disconcerting, but it is important for 
her to learn how to adjust and make new friends, as 
long as she isn’t being bullied or teased. In addition, 
in almost all cases, a situation is two-sided, which 
means that your child is not innocent, no matter what 
she tells you.
So how do you help your child through these 
rough patches?
The Best Way to Respond
To begin, it is helpful to understand that the feelings of 
social betrayal and disloyalty in elementary school seem 
(and are!) awful for everyone while they are happening, 
but in the majority of instances, they are temporary. One 
day, two children are enemies and next week they are, 
once again, friends. Keeping this perspective will help 
you manage your child’s social upheaval in two ways. 
First, you will be able to reassure your child that things 
will soon change; and second, you will not feel nearly 
as devastated while your child is going through a rough 
social patch.
In addition, it is important to keep in mind that 

The World Outside    31
since elementary (and even middle-school) friendships 
are typically very changeable, you need to ensure that 
your friendships with parents of your children’s friends 
are not negatively impacted when the kids disagree, 
argue, or even seem to hate each other. While their 
disagreement seems to you like it will last forever, 
it most likely won’t. In fact, while you and another 
parent might still be enraged with each other over a 
dispute between your children, the children will have 
long since made up.
Two of my long-time friends, and very close friends 
themselves, Tami and Simi experienced several years 
of an on-again, off-again relationship between their 
daughters, Sydney and Rachel (now both age 13), be-
ginning in third grade, and continuing all through el-
ementary school and into middle school. They realized 
that their friendship would only survive if they were 
able to separate it from their daughters’ relationship 
with each other. They therefore developed a simple 
four-point creed that has taken them through their 
often-feuding daughters’ relationship and allowed 
them to remain close, no matter what. Their advice will 
work for any parents, and I believe all parents should 
take Simi and Tami’s advice, not only for the health of 
their own friendships, but for the emotional health of 
their children.

32   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Tami and Simi’s Creed
1. My own child will be guilty at one time or 
another—she may be innocent today, but to-
morrow she’ll probably be guilty. It’s hard to be 
objective about your child, but it’s healthier for 
your child, and it makes it easier to see the other 
parent and child’s perspective.
2. I recognize that my child will almost always leave 
out the parts that make her look bad, and she will 
always include information that makes the other 
child look really awful.
3. My child will argue with other kids 150 times (at 
least) before she graduates; so as long as we adults 
don’t bring it into our relationship, we will be able 
to help the kids resolve their issues.
4. Today two children can be enemies, but tomor-
row they will be friends. But if we adults are 
still harboring anger toward each other, it will 
ruin our friendship—even when they are already 
friends again.
As you can see, the first step in helping your child 
is for you to become objective. This may simply mean 
you need to acknowledge that your child contributed to 
an argument, and help her take responsibility for her 
part in it. If this is the case, you will need to encourage 
her to apologize to her friend and ask that her friend 

The World Outside    33
acknowledge her role as well. Remember—enemies 
today, friends tomorrow!
If it appears that the friendship is permanently 
over, you will need to help your child recognize that 
she needs to branch out and make new friends, because 
the old ones (for whatever reason) no longer want to 
be her friend. Understandably, you will feel sad for 
your child. Perhaps her old friends were not especially 
nice about ending the friendship—but they are kids, 
who may not yet know how to be sensitive about such 
things. However, feeling sorry for her will not help her. 
Rather, teaching her to cope and adjust will be much 
more useful. Therefore, explain to her that sometimes 
friendships change, not because one person is good or 
bad, but because people become different as they get 
older. You will be most helpful to your child if you 
focus on moving forward, rather than on dwelling on 
the past.
Give her suggestions for how to make new friends, 
such as, “Talk to kids in your class, on the playground, 
and in your extracurricular activities and sports; join 
a club after school. When you meet someone you like, 
ask if she would like to come over to play; exchange 
phone numbers. Before you know it, you will have a 
new friend.”
In less common instances, you might find that 
your child has consistent trouble making or keeping 
friends. If you find this to be the case, you may have 

34   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
to seek extra help or support to learn why your child 
has trouble socializing and to address the problem. 
Therefore, if your child exhibits one or more of the fol-
lowing behaviors, I strongly suggest that you speak to a 
child psychologist or other counselor specializing in the 
issues of children:
avoids social interactions, shuts down, is painfully 
• 
shy, or becomes anxious around children or adults
can interact socially with adults, but kids find her 
• 
annoying, clingy, or inappropriate
has never really had friends, is often left out, teased, 
• 
or bullied
is physically aggressive, verbally abusive, mean, or 
• 
angry toward other children
is so impulsive, loud, or overly active that it annoys 
• 
other children
tells you she doesn’t want or need friends, or 
• 
shies away from social interaction, one-on-one 
or in groups
would like to make friends, but doesn’t know 
• 
how to do it; despite you or teachers interven-
ing for a year or more now, your child still can’t 
figure out how to approach or interact with other 
kids in a way that they welcome
behaves in such a way that a teacher or school 
• 
administrator has recommended you seek 
outside help

The World Outside    35
#9: Can you buy me cookies/a 
book/poster board? I need it 
tomorrow.  
(Or: Can you help me with my project? 
It’s due in two days.)
Lisa, mother of Hunter (age 9), feels like she can never 
keep ahead of the game with her son, “I’m not sure if it is 
that Hunter doesn’t tell me things until the last minute, 
or if his teacher doesn’t tell him. But either way, I’m 
constantly running around trying to do things for him at 
the eleventh hour. It drives me crazy!”
There’s no doubt about it, as a parent you are always 
doing something for your child or children, but is the 
last-minute crisis intervention a necessity, or is there a 
way to minimize it? In fact, is it even good for your child 
that you are running around bailing him out at the last 
minute? Let’s find out.
Uncovering the Meaning
It is possible that your child’s teacher has, at the very last 
minute, asked him to provide cookies for the class, but it 
is not likely. It is more plausible that your child volun-
teered to bring said cookies into school the next day. It is 
also improbable that the teacher requested poster board, 

36   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
clay, highlighters, a particular book, or any other supply 
the day before it was due.
It is much more likely—in fact, probable—that your 
child forgot to write down or tell you about what he 
needed until the last minute and is suddenly in a panic. 
However, if you are unsure, you can always call a few 
other parents in the class to check the facts. Speaking to 
more than one parent is necessary, because your child’s 
best friend may also have forgotten.
If you frequently (or even sometimes) find your-
self baking cupcakes at midnight or running around 
searching for open stores to find exactly the right 
supply, certainly there is a pattern that has been set 
up by you and your child. This is also true if you find 
yourself working with your child on projects or study-
ing for tests at the last minute because he did not tell 
you about them in advance.
The time has come to break a pattern that is not good 
for either of you. It is a pattern that makes you frustrated 
and angry, and that is teaching your child bad habits 
that he will carry with him into adolescence and adult-
hood unless you help him change. By always bailing out 
your child at the last minute, you are teaching him that 
he doesn’t need to take responsibility for his own actions, 
that someone will always rescue him if he doesn’t do 
what he is supposed to do.
Is this the message you mean to communicate? I 
didn’t think so!

The World Outside    37
A different response will lead to your child becoming 
more responsible for his behavior, and you will find your-
self less likely to be jumping through last-minute hoops.
The Best Way to Respond
If your child rarely springs last-minute requests on you, 
it is okay to respond by saying, “I will get it for you just 
this once, but next time you ask for something at the last 
minute, I will say no and you will need to explain to your 
teacher why you don’t have it.”
However, if your child is like the many for whom 
waiting until the last minute is more of a pattern, your 
response needs to be different. Your child needs help 
learning that you are busy, and that you can’t always re-
arrange your life to meet his needs. By showing him this, 
you introduce him to an all-important life lesson: other 
people’s lives have value beyond satisfying his needs.
Most importantly, he must learn that there are con-
sequences for not doing what one is supposed to do (in 
this case, not telling you far enough in advance that he 
needed something or that he had a project/test that re-
quired preparation).
In order to give your child these critical tools, your 
response should be a variation of the following (said 
without anger, please): “I’m not going to get you the 
poster board today. I checked with a few other parents 
who all told me that the teacher told you about it last 
week. Since you didn’t tell me about it until today, you’re 

38   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
going to have to explain that to your teacher tomorrow. 
Tell her we will get it tomorrow. When I see you after 
school tomorrow, you can tell me if you have any conse-
quences for handing it in late. But you and I both know 
that if you had told me about it sooner, you would have 
had it on time. I’m sure next time you’ll remember to tell 
me when you have something due.”
An elementary-school-age child will benefit far more 
from learning this lesson than from having his supplies 
in on time. Even if your child has a test the next day, you 
can choose not to study with him at the last minute. A 
bad grade on one test in elementary school will have ab-
solutely no impact on your child’s academic future, but 
it could have a lasting, powerful, and positive impact on 
his decision to take greater responsibility for his actions 
going forward—and that will certainly have a profound 
effect on his academic performance as he enters middle 
and high school.
#10: Can I take a day off from 
school?
Dana and Troy told me that their children Madison 
(age 7), Caleb (age 9), and Skylar (age 11½) frequently 
ask to take a day off from school. Each child has a 
different reason. 
Troy began by explaining, “Caleb feels he knows all 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The World Outside    39
the work, so he thinks he can stay home and watch TV 
sometimes!” 
Then Dana added, “Madison wants to take a day off 
to stay home and spend time with me, and Skylar fakes 
being sick at least once every couple of months so she 
can try and get away with sleeping late and getting the 
day off.”
Kids want a day off from school for all kinds of 
reasons. What is your child’s reason? And what should 
you do about it?
Uncovering the Meaning
If your child asks to stay home every day, or almost 
as frequently, it means she is struggling with a serious 
issue: either one at school which is making her resistant 
to go, or one at home which is making her reluctant 
to leave. It is important to uncover this issue as soon 
as possible, because the longer you wait, the larger the 
problem will become for your child and the more dif-
ficult it will be for her to go to school each day. Some 
possible reasons a child might regularly resist going to 
school include the following:
School is very difficult for the child (speak to the 
• 
teacher to see if she is struggling academically 
and determine if further steps need to be taken to 
support her).
She is having a hard time socially (being teased, 
• 
bullied, or isolated). Don’t assume your child will 
www.Ebook777.com

40   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
tell you—she may be embarrassed. Ask her, and 
ask the teacher.
Her home life is stressful so she doesn’t want to 
• 
leave each day (for example, you’re in the middle 
of a divorce, someone is very ill, there is a great deal 
of fighting, there’s a new baby and she’s jealous).
If your child asks this question more intermittently, it 
is likely that she does it for one of several other reasons. 
For example, maybe, like Madison, she wants time alone 
with one parent. This is not an unreasonable request, es-
pecially in busy families when a child rarely gets to spend 
time alone with a parent. In this situation, I’d recommend 
considering whether your child’s request is reasonable 
and valid. A planned day off together under such a cir-
cumstance might be great for both you and our child.
On each birthday I give my children a coupon for 
a day off from school—planned in advance—to spend 
with me each year. Two of my children (my daughters) 
use the coupons each year. We have had wonderful days 
off—lunch, pottery painting, manicures, shopping! My 
son, who started high school this year, has only used 
one of his coupons—about six years ago. I think he just 
enjoys knowing he has them. I’ve told him they never 
expire; he can take a day off from work one day in the 
future if he wants to, and spend it with me.
The bottom line is that while elementary school 
is an important time in your child’s life, it is not more 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The World Outside    41
important than your child’s emotional health or your re-
lationship with your child. Therefore, if once in a while 
your child is exhausted, needs a little extra TLC, or 
wants some time with you, it is okay to consider letting 
her take a day off school, or as a compromise, go into 
school a couple of hours late so she can sleep late or you 
have breakfast with you.
The Best Way to Respond
If your child asks to stay home every day because of a 
psychological or academic issue, either at school or at 
home, it is important that you not give in. Avoiding 
dealing with the problem will only make it worse, rather 
than better. Instead, explain to your child that she needs 
to go to school and that you are going to do everything 
you can to make her feel better about going. Then make 
sure that you do so.
When your child asks you this question occasionally, 
you need to take into account all that we have just dis-
cussed. Don’t be quick to answer no. Rather, consider 
the reason your child is asking, how frequently she asks, 
and what an occasional yes might mean to her. Also, 
consider my coupon idea. Giving your child one coupon 
a year for a day off from school will put the decision in 
your child’s hands as to when she wants to use it. It will 
likely reduce how often she asks to stay home because 
now she must decide whether or not she should use her 
precious coupon.
www.Ebook777.com

42   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
#11: Can I go to A friend’s house? 
(Or: Can I have a sleepover?)
Terrance’s mother, Latanya, explained that Terrance 
(age 8) constantly asks if he can go to someone’s house 
to play. “He knows the rule is that he needs to finish 
his homework before he can go anywhere, but it is still 
the first question he asks every day when he gets off the 
school bus. It drives me crazy because it seems to be the 
most important thing in his life, even though school- 
work should be!”
Most elementary-school-age children love to be social, 
and the older they get, the more social they become. By 
the upper elementary grades, it seems to be what drives 
them. Why is this, and how much should you let it control 
your child’s life? Keep reading and you’ll find out.
Uncovering the Meaning
As children mature into the upper elementary grades, 
their social needs become more complex. No longer are 
they satisfied playing with their friends only in school or 
in a group on the playground. Instead, they want to be 
able to deepen their friendships by spending time with 
other children one-on-one or in small groups.
As a general rule, this is somewhat truer for girls than 
it is for boys. However, older-elementary-age boys also 
begin asking to spend exclusive time with peers, rather 

The World Outside    43
than wanting only to be in large groups playing ball or 
running around.
In addition to wanting to form more meaningful re-
lationships, children in the older elementary grades also 
begin to form friendship cliques—yes, the kind that are 
typically exclusive and often not especially friendly toward 
outside members. Although girls get the bad reputation 
when it comes to these cliques, they are not reserved for 
girls. I have seen boys left out of cliques—many of which 
are formed around sports prowess, knowledge of a TV 
show, or even an ability to play chess.
In addition to the clique, your upper-elementary-age 
child may also begin to explore the idea of having a 
“best friend” or several very close friends, either within 
a clique or instead of being in one. The capacity to begin 
bonding intimately in this way is, once again, more 
common with girls, but not unusual for boys. One ten-
year-old girl told me that she has “bestest friends, best 
friends, and good friends.”
Wanting to play intimately with a close friend (or 
small group of friends) or have a sleepover can serve 
many purposes. It is a way to solidify a clique, and also 
to affirm its exclusivity. As a parent you may not like the 
idea of your child being in a clique, but as long as the 
children in your child’s clique are not hurting anyone 
else’s feelings, bullying, teasing, being mean to, or belit-
tling anyone, they are entitled to be friends with whom-
ever they choose. In addition, playdates and sleepovers 

44   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
help create and affirm the bonds of best friends. They 
are a time for secrets and memories, for special codes 
and fabulous stories. They are not to be missed.
But what if they seem to be taking over?
The Best Way to Respond
Despite the fact that playing with friends is certainly 
valuable for your child’s emotional development, it 
should have its time and place.
By all means, homework, activities, and chores should 
always come first. In fact if your child asks this question, 
relentlessly, every single day, you need to have a clear un-
wavering rule that there is no socializing until absolutely 
everything else is done first. If your child keeps asking, you 
may need to change the rule so that there is no socializing 
at all during the week. Explain that you changed the rule 
because he didn’t stop nagging and that you might con-
sider changing it back to “no socializing until homework is 
done” in a couple of months if he does well this way.
In addition, it is important to set up a few guidelines 
for playdates and sleepovers. This will help you keep 
control of your child’s social life. Beginning to do this 
now is important, because it will be harder to start when 
your child is a preteen or teenager. Make an effort to set 
these guidelines now with your child.
“You need to ask me if you can make a plan with a 
• 
friend, not tell me you have already arranged it. It 
needs to be convenient for my schedule.”

The World Outside    45
“You can only have a playdate/sleepover with a 
• 
friend after I’ve confirmed it with his parent.”
“You can have a playdate/sleepover only at homes 
• 
where I feel comfortable having you go; otherwise 
your friend needs to come to our house.”
“If you give me a hard time ending a playdate 
• 
(whining, crying, nagging for more time), I will not 
let you have playdates in the future.”
#12: Do I have to invite her to my 
party?
When Maxine and her daughter Stephanie were plan-
ning Stephanie’s eleventh birthday party, Maxine 
became upset. “Steph wanted to exclude one girl in her 
class from the invitation list. I was shocked because it 
was so mean, and I didn’t think she was like that, but 
Steph said this girl is mean to her and she should be able 
to have who she wanted at her party. I didn’t let her do 
it though, and she was really angry with me. It wasn’t 
one our finest moments together!”
So, at this age, how much should you get involved? 
What’s the most important lesson your child needs to 
learn—independent decision-making, or something else?

46   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Uncovering the Meaning
You might be surprised (or maybe not) to see this ques-
tion in the top fifty. However, as you can see from the 
previous question, older-elementary-age children feel 
strongly about wanting to be able to control their own 
social lives. Choosing who to invite to a birthday party, 
or any other kind of party, is a big deal to them.
Like Stephanie, your child may feel justified in exclud-
ing a child. In fact she may even feel that this is the only 
power she has over a child who has excluded, teased, or 
bullied her. It is important not to discard these feelings, 
even though it is usually not right to exclude one child 
from an invitation list, even under these circumstances.
Your child may have other, less obvious reasons for 
asking this question. For example, you might find out 
that peers are pressuring her not to invite a particular 
child. They think the child is “weird,” and she’s afraid if 
she invites her they won’t come to the party.
The Best Way to Respond
Typically, your response should be to tell your child 
that it is not right to exclude one child, even if you don’t 
like her. Explain that, “You need to invite her, and if 
she doesn’t like you either, she probably won’t come. 
However, if she does, you should be as polite as you 
would be to any other guest.”
The only exception to this is if the child has bullied 
your child in an extreme manner. In this case it may be 

The World Outside    47
in your child’s best interest to respect her wishes and not 
extend the invitation. This will give her an opportunity 
to finally stand up to the bully. If you choose to make 
this decision, I would suggest speaking to the teacher in 
advance of sending the invitations so that, should the 
child’s parent complain to anyone other than you, the 
school is prepared with a logical explanation.
If your child’s reason for wanting to exclude one 
(or more than one) child isn’t immediately obvious, it 
is worthwhile to take the time to talk to her about it, 
rather than assume you know the reason. This offers 
an opportunity for you to find out what is going on in 
your child’s social life in a way that she may not have 
told you before now. Although you may not be able to 
give your child the quick solution she wants—since it’s 
not usually acceptable to leave out one child—at least 
you will be able to open a discussion about a healthier 
way to resolve her bad feelings, rather than not inviting 
someone to her party.


Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Who’s in 
Charge?
3
When your child was younger, disciplining her was 
probably not very complicated. She might not always 
have done what you said, but it is unlikely that she chal-
lenged your actual rules, or looked for loopholes through 
which to wiggle in order to bend and twist them. But 
now that she is older and becoming more independent 
with each passing day, it seems that discipline is a little 
less cut and dried.
Children in the upper elementary grades are excellent 
lawyers in the making. Their verbal skills, now strong 
and confident, are being well exercised—your child 
probably argues with you about all sorts of issues, but 
most notably about the manner in which you discipline 
him. As he explores his independence from you, and his 
greater investment in his social world, he will be much 
www.Ebook777.com

50   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
more likely to challenge not only how you discipline him, 
but even the very rules that you lay down. It can be an 
ongoing battle, leaving you depleted at the end of each 
day. That is, unless you learn that there are times to 
stand firm and times to compromise with your child.
Your child’s questions will help you learn to negoti-
ate this new territory in a way that will result in a peace-
ful alliance between you and your child, rather than one 
fraught with bickering and relentless nagging. Most 
importantly, in the end, you—and not your child—will 
still be in charge.
#13: How come my friends can 
see a pg-13 movie/play mature 
video games/sit in the front seat 
of the car/wear a short skirt/
[fill in the blank] and you won’t 
let me?
Anabella (age 9½) and Marco (age 11½) are always saying 
that their parents, Valerie and Santiago, are way too 
strict. “Val makes most of the rules,” explained Santiago, 
“and I support her a hundred percent because she’s a 
great mom. We are strict because we see the craziness 
that is out there. But sometimes we wonder if we’re 
going overboard, because it seems like our kids are the 

Who’s in Charge?   51
only ones not watching any of the TV shows or seeing 
any of the movies. They seem to get a lot of pressure 
from their friends. But they are good kids, so being strict 
does count for something!”
We live in a complex world, and our kids seem to 
grow up so fast. It can be confusing to know when to say 
yes and when to say no to your child, especially when 
peer pressure is playing a significant role. So let’s try 
to  understand the question, and by the end, you’ll have 
a clear response for your child, even when friends are in 
the picture.
Uncovering the Meaning
You probably thought that your child was relatively safe 
from peer pressure until at least middle school, right? 
If you did, don’t feel bad, because most parents think 
so too. But, actually, peer pressure begins practically as 
soon as your child sets foot out of the front door and into 
nursery school or kindergarten.
Although peer pressure has a bad reputation, it does 
have its merits. It teaches children the importance of be-
having socially appropriately and it also shows them the 
value of acting cooperatively in a group situation.
However, peer pressure has not earned its bad 
reputation for nothing. In the upper elementary grades, 
children often expect to be allowed do things that in 
reality are too mature for their age, and also experience 
media (TV, movies, video games, and music) that is 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
52   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
too sexually stimulating or violent. This expectation is 
caused, or at least fueled, by peer pressure. I would be 
remiss if I did not point out that of course the peer pres-
sure arises in the first place because one child becomes 
exposed to the age-inappropriate experience because 
her own parent allows it. In other words, the buck stops 
with the parent—you!
It is easy to let your child “get away” with behaviors 
that are not always in her best interest. In the short run, 
you won’t have to confront an argument, you will be the 
“good guy,” your child will be happy, and it doesn’t seem 
like such a big deal.
However, in the all-important long run, it is impor-
tant to pick and choose carefully when you decide to 
relent to peer pressure. Regardless of what other parents 
choose to allow, a child can be emotionally damaged 
when she is exposed to experiences that are too emotion-
ally mature for her developmental level. In addition, 
you may be unaware of some of the messages you are 
inadvertently sending your child.
Some examples include, but are not limited to, 
the following:
Media that includes sexually inappropriate mate-
• 
rial (TV, movies, video games) can be scary and 
sexually stimulating for your elementary-school-
age child. To drive this point home, a powerful 
study (found in the November 2008 issue of the 
journal Pediatrics) found that teenage girls who 
www.Ebook777.com

Who’s in Charge?   53
have a high level of exposure to TV shows with 
sexual content are twice as likely to become preg-
nant as those who watch few shows with this type 
of content. It is likely that the more they experi-
ence sexual media, the more “normal” it seems and 
the less risky. Your child may still be young, but 
I assure you, this media is affecting her already. 
Besides, you can’t take media away once she 
becomes a teenager. And the media affect boys 
too—impacting on their view of girls and of the 
role of sexual activity in their lives.
Scary or violent movies, TV, or even video games 
• 
can cause bad dreams or fears. Once experienced, 
it can be difficult to get rid of them.
Allowing your young child access to media that 
• 
is above the rating recommended for her age also 
sends a very mixed message to your child. It is 
hard to expect her to obey rules if you don’t. All 
media—TV, movies, video games—have ratings. 
Follow these ratings and you’ll be fine. In addi-
tion, I strongly recommend you check out www.
CommonSenseMedia.org and sign up for its weekly 
newsletter. It is the best resource I know for media-
savvy parents.
Giving in to legally prohibited behaviors before 
• 
they are legal for your child (like sitting in the front 
seat of the car before she is old enough) can give 
her the message that you don’t respect the law or 

54   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
value her safety enough. Once again, if you want 
your child to obey laws, now and in the future, you 
need to do the same.
Regardless of whether you have a boy or a girl, 
• 
giving in to clothing choices that make you un-
comfortable gives your child the message that 
you believe fitting in with the crowd is more im-
portant than dressing in a way that is appropri-
ate. It is fine for your child to wear clothes that 
you don’t like (the color or style), as long as the 
clothing doesn’t deliver a message that you don’t 
approve of—too-short skirt/too-baggy shorts/
too-tight top/underwear sticking out of jeans, etc. 
This is always a fight worth having. If you don’t 
start fighting the battles now, the war will be lost 
long before your child is a teen.
The Best Way to Respond
When you child asks to do something that “everyone else 
does,” don’t assume this to be fact. Begin by saying you are 
going to start calling all her friends to see if it is true. Many 
times, your child will say that you can’t possibly do this, 
because it would embarrass her—and this will end the 
conversation. Similarly, you can start naming her friends 
one by one, asking if each child is allowed to engage in the 
behavior in question. Again, it is likely that at least one or 
two will also have “mean, strict parents” like you.
However, even if it turns out that your child is the 

Who’s in Charge?   55
only one not allowed to sit in the front seat or watch the 
PG-13 movie, this is not a reason to give in. There will be 
many times in your child’s life that she will be forced to 
confront peer pressure far greater than this, and she will 
have to learn to have enough inner strength to withstand 
it. You need to help her to do it now because it is for the 
right reasons.
Furthermore, learning to cope with frustration, in the 
form of you saying no, is one of life’s greatest lessons. 
Your child will hear the word no many, many times in her 
life. If she does not know how to deal with this, she will 
not grow into a strong, self-sufficient adult. So, don’t feel 
guilty, don’t feel sorry for your child, and don’t give in to 
things that you don’t believe are in your child’s emotional 
best interest. She will survive. In fact, she will flourish.
On the other hand, as your child grows up, there are 
times when it is fine to compromise with your child. 
In fact, it is a good idea to look for opportunities for 
compromise, especially when you have just stood firm 
on something big. You wouldn’t want to be as flexible 
with a younger child, with whom you are still trying to 
establish rules and routines (see The Top 50 Questions 
Kids Ask (Pre-K through 2nd Grade), Question #13), 
but with a child in this age-range, it will help parent 
effectively within the rules, while still being a little flex-
ible. For example, if your child asks to stay up fifteen 
minutes later, you might say yes. If she asks if she can 
skip her bath one night, it could be a good time not to 

56   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
make a fuss about it. If she wants to play just one more 
game with you, go for it!
#14: If I do the dishes/clean 
my room/say I’m sorry/write a 
letter/pay you back, can I not be 
punished anymore?
Jordan (age 8) always tries to bargain his way out of 
the “bad behavior” consequence issued by his mother, 
Renee. Renee says that depending on the “crime,” some-
times she lets him out. “The problem is that I’m not sure 
if he really feels sorry for what he did. He’s so focused 
on getting out of the punishment that it seems like he’s 
already forgotten why he got it in the first place!”
Our children can be frustrating, but at the same time, 
we still have to stop and marvel at their impressive new 
skills, including the ability to negotiate, which we some-
times take for granted.
Uncovering the Meaning
Before becoming too frustrated by your child’s bargain-
ing and unwillingness to accept a consequence (despite 
it being earned by poor behavior), stop and think for 
a minute. It is exciting to see your child beginning to 
develop the ability to strategize, as well as his attempt to 
get you to compromise.

Who’s in Charge?   57
Once again, you can see how he is becoming not only 
more sophisticated as he gets older, but feistier too. He 
is not simply accepting your punishment. Rather he is 
looking for loopholes and strategies—for ways to modify 
the situation. He is not telling you he expects you to 
remove the punishment. No, he is old enough and smart 
enough to know better than that. Rather, he wants to 
strike a deal with you—are you willing to compromise?
It is important to ask yourself whether it is in your 
child’s best interest for you to make these types of 
deals. In most cases, it is not. By allowing your child to 
bargain his way out of a consequence or a punishment, 
you give him the message that your original punishment 
was meaningless. Over time, he will have less and less 
respect for your disciplinary techniques. He will recog-
nize that he can always (or almost always) bargain his 
way down from the original, stricter consequence into a 
compromise of his own creation. By the time he reaches 
high school (or even before), he will engage in a negative 
behavior, already having calculated this “formula for 
the consequence” in advance of “committing the crime.” 
Effectively, you will have lost complete control over 
disciplining your child.
In addition, allowing bargaining and compromise 
after you issue a fair punishment teaches your child 
that bargaining and compromise are always options 
when you do something wrong. This is simply not 
the case. There will be many times in your child’s life 

58   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
when he hurts someone’s feelings, or does something 
wrong in school or at a job, and there will be no com-
promise as to how he is treated—the friendship will 
be lost, he will have failed the class, or he will be fired 
from the job.
Your child needs to learn to face his own bad be-
havior, the failure with which it is associated, and the 
consequences it produces. You need to help him achieve 
this now on a small level, so he is prepared to cope with 
it later on when it is harder to manage emotionally.
The Best Way to Respond
When your child asks if he can do something to take 
away his punishment, your response needs to be a varia-
tion of the following: “I picked this consequence because 
it fits your behavior. You will need to stick with the con-
sequence until it is finished. I know you are not happy 
about it, but that’s the way it is. There is nothing you 
can do to change this. We are not making any deals or 
striking any bargains. That’s that.” Don’t be surprised if 
your child gets angry or upset the first time or two you 
say this, especially if he is used to you compromising in 
the past. But don’t worry, he’ll get used to it, and it will 
make him a much stronger person.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Who’s in Charge?   59
#15: Why do I have to clean my 
room if I like it messy? 
(Or: Why do I need to go to bed if I’m not 
tired?)
Despite the fact that Curtis likes things neat and tidy, 
his daughter Amber (age 10) has him stumped with this 
question. “I’m not sure whether I should make her tidy 
her room or if I should let her keep it messy. I don’t want 
to inflict my way of doing things on her, if it’s really not 
what she likes. I’m really conflicted.”
Like many parents, Curtis isn’t always sure where 
to draw the line when it comes to allowing his child 
to express her personality, independent thoughts, and 
decision-making ability. However, once you understand 
this question and how to respond to it the right way, you 
will find that answering it will be much easier.
Uncovering the Meaning
When your child asks you this or any similar “why…
if…” question, resist the urge to believe that she is simply 
being combative. Rather, you will experience the behav-
ior as a little less frustrating if you recognize that she 
is beginning to practice learning how to separate from 
you. For many children, this starts in the late elementary 
years, particularly if your child has one or more older 
siblings propelling her to grow up even faster. Arguing 
www.Ebook777.com

60   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
the opposite of what you want (you like it neat—she 
wants it messy; you want her to go to sleep—she is sud-
denly not tired; you want her to eat dinner—she’s not 
hungry), gives her some practice defining her own space 
and forming her own opinion, even if she is not really all 
that sure of herself yet.
This brings us to the next issue—should you allow 
your child to make these decisions, to express herself in 
this way? Or should you insist that she do it your way? 
The best answer to this is yes­—and yes.
By asking you this question, your child is letting you 
know that she wants some recognition as an indepen-
dent-thinking person, and you can give this to her in 
ways we will discuss in a minute.
However, your child is not old enough to know 
what time she should go to sleep, whether or not her 
clothes should be picked up off her bedroom floor, or 
what time dinner is served (if she is really not hungry, 
perhaps she’s been eating too much junk food before 
dinner). An elementary-age child may want to feel in-
dependent, but it is not in her best interest actually to 
be independent. In fact, if you allow your child to flex 
these fledgling muscles of independence too much, it will 
be scary for her. She requires clear boundaries, limits, 
and a strong sense of the rules and regulations in your 
family. Developmentally, she will respond to this very, 
very well, even if she complains about it.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Who’s in Charge?   61
The Best Way to Respond
A clear response to this question should be similar to the fol-
lowing: “You need to clean your room because that is the rule 
of the house. I know you don’t want to do it and that right 
now you like it messy. But the rule is that it needs to be tidied 
up. We can compromise a little. You can keep one corner a 
little messy, but the rest really needs to be cleaned up.”
The areas in which you can and should allow your 
child to express independence include:
choosing which clothing she wants to wear (from 
• 
an appropriate selection)
choosing her own friends (you should not  require 
• 
your child to be friends with your friends’ children 
anymore; see Chapter Two, Question #12, for more 
about this)
choosing her own extracurricular activities (but 
• 
not overscheduling herself)
involving her in the selection of weekend activities 
• 
that your family chooses
allowing her room to be a little messier than you 
• 
would choose, especially if you are a neat freak by 
all objective accounts other than your own
allowing her to participate in the selection of meals 
• 
cooked and served in your family on a weekly basis. 
She should not be forced to eat food that you know 
she consistently does not like. She should still be 
required to try new foods. Beginning in elementary 
school, some kids love to help with the cooking 
www.Ebook777.com

62   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
and become quite good at it—it gives them a great 
feeling of independence.
#16: Do I have to?
Julie, mother of Logan (age 8½), braces herself for whining 
every time she asks her son to do anything she thinks he 
won’t want to do. She explains, “Whether I ask him to pick 
up his toys, take a bath, brush his teeth, do his homework, 
bring in the groceries, be nice to his sister, go to sleep, wake 
up—you name it—it’s his favorite response. It drives me 
crazy. ‘Yes, you have to,’ I always say. ‘I wouldn’t be asking 
you to do it, if I didn’t want you to!’ It doesn’t make a dif-
ference though; he still continues to ask that question.”
I have to agree with Julie—this is an annoying ques-
tion. So what is the best way to manage it? Keep reading 
to find out.
Uncovering the Meaning
“Do I have to?” is actually a rhetorical question. In fact, 
if you think of it more like a statement than a question, 
you will find yourself less frustrated by it. Your child 
doesn’t really expect you to change your mind and tell 
him that he doesn’t have to do what you asked him to 
do. Rather, the question is his way of expressing his 
dislike for having to do it.
However, what I find especially interesting is that, 

Who’s in Charge?   63
despite the fact that most children don’t expect their 
parents to change their minds, many will not follow 
through with a task after asking this question, unless 
they receive clear, affirmative responses from their 
parents—despite having been told to complete the task 
the first time. Here is an example of a typical scenario:
Mom: “Tyler, please pick up the dirty laundry from 
your floor.” (Mom walks out.)
Tyler (age 9), screaming after her: “Do I haaaaave 
to?” (Mom doesn’t hear.)
Later that day…
Mom: “Tyler, you haven’t tidied up your room like I 
asked you!”
Tyler: “But Mom, when I asked you if I had to, you 
didn’t answer, so I didn’t think I really had to do it.”
Mom: “Tyler, you knew you were supposed to clean up.”
Tyler: “But Mom, when I asked if I had to, you didn’t 
say yes.”
Mom: “Oh boy!”
If this or a similar scenario seems familiar to you, 
you’re not alone! Older-elementary-age children are 
beginning to learn how to be manipulative in many dif-
ferent ways to get around your discipline. It is impor-
tant for you to learn these so that you can maintain the 
upper hand with your child and not lose control of the 
discipline. The technique that Tyler employed is fairly 
sneaky and smart, and it actually has a handy psycho-
logical name that can be applied to many different types 

64   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
of situations. It’s called passive-aggressive behavior and 
here’s an explanation of how it works.
When someone is angry, he can choose to express his 
anger in one of several different ways. He might yell, 
scream, or break things—this is considered an aggres-
sive response. He might tell someone verbally that he is 
angry and try to problem-solve the situation—this would 
be considered a healthy response. Or he might express 
his anger by passively, sometimes subconsciously, refus-
ing to do what he is supposed to do, all the time blaming 
the fact that he is not doing it on someone or something 
else—often the person with whom he is angry. This is 
passive-aggressive behavior.
You may see your child behaving like this at other 
times. For example, if he is angry with you for making 
him go to sleep early as a punishment, he may respond 
passive-aggressively by telling you that he doesn’t like 
the dinner you cooked; a jealous child may passive-
aggressively ruin a sibling’s birthday party by deliber-
ately having a toileting accident during the party.
Children who behave in this manner need both dis-
cipline and sympathy. In the case of this question, you 
cannot allow your child to get away with not accomplish-
ing a task simply because you did not respond affirma-
tively to the question. He needs to know that your first 
request stands, no matter what is said afterwards. This 
type of passive-aggressive behavior is unacceptable.
You may need to seek professional assistance if your 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Who’s in Charge?   65
child behaves in a more complex (perhaps less conscious) 
passive-aggressive way (like having toileting accidents). 
A child psychologist or other qualified child therapist 
can help you assess whether your child needs help to 
manage underlying psychological issues that could be 
causing him emotional distress.
If you don’t address your child’s fledgling passive-
aggressive behaviors now, there is a much greater 
chance that, as he grows up, these will become part of 
his general way of coping with and avoiding uncomfort-
able emotional situations.
People do not enjoy interacting with other adults 
who engage in passive-aggressive behaviors. Examples 
of adult passive-aggressive behaviors include:
acting in an annoying way toward someone with 
• 
whom one is angry
sulking
• 
promising to do something and then deliberately 
• 
not following through
saying something hurtful and pretending one didn’t 
• 
realize that it would upset the person
“forgetting” to do something that one promised to do
• 
never expressing anger in a healthy, productive way
• 
Therefore, the way you respond to this question 
should be with the goal of helping your child recognize 
that any negative behavior beyond the rhetorical ques-
tion is not acceptable.
www.Ebook777.com

66   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
The Best Way to Respond
When your child asks you this question (and, unlike 
Tyler’s mom, you do hear it!), your response should 
include a variation of the following: “When I ask you 
to do something, it is because I want you to do it. 
Responding with ‘Do I have to?’ makes me angry, but it 
doesn’t make me change my mind. So, yes, you still have 
to do it. Also, I would like it if you would not ask me that 
question next time I ask you to do something.”
If your child makes a habit of asking you this ques-
tion, you can institute a consequence; for example, “I’ve 
asked you several times not to ask me that question 
every time I ask you to do something. It is disrespect-
ful because it makes me feel that you don’t believe that 
I meant it the first time I asked. From now on, when 
you ask me that question, I’m going to give you an extra 
chore to do—just so you know how much I mean it when 
I ask you to do something.” Then, don’t forget to follow 
through with your consequence.
Next, if you find that your child is using this question 
in a passive-aggressive way to try to get out of fulfill-
ing tasks that you have assigned, you need to clearly 
address the issue: “You need to do what I ask you to do 
whether or not I respond to your question about whether 
you ‘have to.’ Once I’ve asked you to do something, it 
means you have to do it, even if you don’t want to or if 
you’re angry with me about it. It is sneaky and manipu-
lative to try and get out of something by pretending that 

Who’s in Charge?   67
you thought you didn’t have to do it because I didn’t 
answer that question—especially if I didn’t even hear 
you asking me. Sneaky behavior gets a negative conse-
quence.” Then issue a consequence. Your lesson will be 
taught, and hopefully you will quickly break your child 
of passive-aggressive behavior.
#17: How come you can have diet 
soda/coffee and I can’t?
Traci and Derek’s children Leigh (age 12), Spencer (age 
10½), and Reilly (age 9) are relentless in their pursuit of 
“fair” treatment. They believe they should be allowed 
to drink diet soda, especially since their parents do so. 
Derek explained, “I don’t think it’s healthy for the kids 
to drink diet soda, and I also feel that it is hypocritical to 
say no to them if one of us is drinking it.” Traci doesn’t 
completely agree with her husband. “I agree that it’s not 
great for their health, but I don’t think there is anything 
wrong with having different rules for adults and chil-
dren. Why should I have to give up diet soda?”
What do you think?
Uncovering the Meaning
When your child asks this question—about diet soda, 
coffee, R-rated movies, staying up late, or anything else 
that you are “allowed” to do or have, but you don’t permit 

68   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
your child to do or have—it represents yet another way 
she is trying to push the limits of your discipline.
At the same time, your child is legitimately trying to 
determine her behavioral and emotional boundaries as she 
grows up. It is up to you to clearly delineate these bound-
aries between adult and child, and even between older and 
younger siblings. This will result in the greatest possibility 
of reducing and even eliminating the chance that your 
child will be confused about where she stands, which could 
result in her behaving in ways that are too sophisticated, 
difficult to manage, rude toward you and other adults, and 
far more empowered as a child than is appropriate.
It is therefore perfectly appropriate and acceptable for 
you—the adult—to engage in behaviors that you do not 
allow your child to experience because she is too young.
The Best Way to Respond
The best way to respond to this question is to make it 
clear that, as an adult, there are many things you can 
and will do and that you may not permit your child to 
do. Your response might sound similar to the following: 
“I get to drink coffee because I’m a grown-up and coffee 
is a grown-up drink. One day when you’re much older, 
you’ll get to drink it too. Coffee has caffeine in it, which 
isn’t healthy for children’s growing brains, but is per-
fectly safe for adults if you only drink a couple of cups 
a day like I do. There are many things that adults get to 
do that kids can’t. But there are also lots of things that 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Who’s in Charge?   69
you can do now that you couldn’t do when you were 
younger, or that your younger sister can’t do. As you 
get older, you will get to do even more things. That’s 
the way it works. You’ll have to trust me to make the 
right decisions for you, and I won’t change my mind just 
because you don’t agree with the decision.”
When it comes to diet soda, you may have to be pre-
pared to explain to your child why it is healthy for you 
to drink diet soda, but it is not healthy for her. After all, 
the chemicals are no healthier for you than they are for 
her! However, one legitimate argument is that her brain 
is still developing while yours has finished doing so. As 
the parent, you have the prerogative to make decisions 
that are in the best interest of your child—regardless of 
whether you make these same choices for yourself.
Remember, being a parent is not about being fair in 
your child’s eyes, or about being your child’s friend. It 
is about making sure she is emotionally and physically 
healthy, now and for as long as you can leverage these 
types of choices for her.
#18: Why can’t you just leave me 
alone?
Regina says she is tired of her son Brendan (age 8) who, in 
her opinion, seems to be behaving like a teenager before 
he is even a preteen. “Brendan is constantly telling me 
www.Ebook777.com

70   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
to leave him alone,” explains Regina. “I thought that 
wouldn’t happen until he was much older. Whenever 
he gets upset or angry, those are his first words, and 
then he often stomps off to his room. Sometimes I let 
him go, because I figure if he’s so upset, I should let 
him cool down. But other times I don’t because I think 
it’s really rude. I’d like him to learn a better way to 
handle his feelings.”
Regina may not realize it, but this is a common, albeit 
annoying, question asked by many children who are upset 
or frustrated when they don’t get their way. The real 
question is what is the best way for you to respond to it?
Uncovering the Meaning
When a child is confronted with a situation he finds very 
frustrating, upsetting, or annoying, there are a couple of 
different ways he might respond. A child who has suc-
cessfully developed the ability to express his feelings will 
tell you how he feels, even if he is angry with you or 
upset with the situation. He might cry or yell a bit, but 
he will be able to express his feeling appropriately.
However, a child who has not yet learned the skill 
of frustration tolerance (which means he becomes frus-
trated or angry very easily when faced with a situation 
that upsets, angers, or frustrates him) might respond 
in one of two ways. He might act out (lose his temper, 
cry, yell, blame others, and, in an extreme situation, 
physically hurt someone). Or he might escape (leave the 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Who’s in Charge?   71
situation completely, have difficulty hearing feedback 
that might be negative, or refuse to participate any more 
in an activity). When a child has poor frustration toler-
ance, he will often ask the question, “Why can’t you just 
leave me alone?” Either he will yell the question as part 
of an acting-out temper tantrum, or he will ask it as he is 
leaving, as part of an attempt to escape a situation with 
which he doesn’t want to cope.
In either scenario, it is not in your child’s best interest 
to allow this behavior to continue. To begin, it is rude 
and disrespectful to you. In addition to that, it is es-
sential that your child learns to effectively confront and 
cope with frustration. If you allow him to run away from 
tough situations by giving in to his demand to be left 
alone, you will not teach him this critical life skill. He 
will not keep friends by telling them to leave him alone 
when they argue. He will not be able to demand that 
teachers leave him alone when he is frustrated or upset, 
particularly in the upper grades—they will think he is 
immature. He won’t be able to tell his boss one day to 
leave him alone when he’s angry—he’ll be fired! Now is 
the time to teach your child this skill and to correct this 
behavior. It will get much harder as he gets older.
The Best Way to Respond
The next time your child asks—or demands—that you 
leave him alone, your response should communicate that 
it is not acceptable for him to speak to you disrespectfully. 
www.Ebook777.com

72   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
He needs to know that you will only entertain the pos-
sibility of him being left alone if he asks politely and 
calmly, and that first you and he need to discuss why he 
wants to be left alone and then decide whether that is 
the best choice for that time. For example, your response 
may sound something like the following: “I am not going 
to answer that question, because it is disrespectful for 
you to be screaming at me to be left alone simply because 
you don’t like the fact that I have taken away the com-
puter and TV. You didn’t listen when I asked you to 
turn it off and this is the consequence. You don’t get to 
be left alone for that. First, you need to calm down and 
we can discuss it. You don’t get the electronics back and 
you don’t get to be left alone by being rude. Now, what 
can I do to help you calm down?”
Here is another example—of course, these are just to 
give you an idea of what to say; your situation and your 
child may require a slightly different approach: “First, 
you need to turn around and come back here right now. 
It is rude to leave in the middle of a conversation. You 
may not be happy that you lost the game that we were 
playing, but that is not a reason to leave. It is also not 
okay for you to yell that you want me to leave you alone. 
That is disrespectful and if you do it again, there will be 
a consequence.”

“I’m Scared”
4
As children enter the older elementary years, the fears 
of earlier childhood—separation, the dark, the doctor—
typically fade. That being said, if your child is at the 
younger end of this age range, you should take a look 
at The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (Pre-K through 2nd 
Grade). As I have explained, children’s behavior is 
always on a continuum—some older kids may still be 
asking questions in the younger categories and vice 
versa. This is perfectly normal.
In general though, as children become true “big kids,” 
inching their way closer and closer to being tweens, 
they begin taking a much more critical look at the 
world around them, seeing it with all its imperfections 
(this includes their parents’ flaws). Their fears reflect 
a feeling that not all is right with the world, and the 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
74   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
fear-driven questions that your child asks will clearly 
illustrate this.
Of course, as I offer you insights toward becoming 
more psychologically minded, it is always important to 
know when your child’s fears—and the questions they 
generate—might not be within the healthy, normal 
range. The guidelines below give you a good idea of 
when you may want to speak to a school counselor, your 
child’s doctor, a child psychologist, or other therapist 
specializing in children:
your child’s fear is interfering with her ability to 
• 
function in daily life partially or fully (for example, 
but not limited to, they prevent her from falling 
asleep or they wake her up during the night, she is 
so distracted by them that her schoolwork or social 
life is suffering)
his fear has lasted for more than a couple of weeks, 
• 
and no matter what you say or do, it has not remit-
ted even a little and may be getting worse
the fear was not precipitated by anything you can 
• 
pinpoint, or if it was, the fear has outlived the pre-
cipitant by more than a couple of weeks
your child’s fear is causing stress for the whole 
• 
family because it limits everyone’s choices, behav-
ior, and actions
you have a “gut feeling” that, compared to the fears 
• 
of other kids, your child’s fear is not healthy
www.Ebook777.com

“I’m Scared”   75
NOTE: I believe that parents should follow their 
gut feelings in almost all situations. After all, who 
knows your child better than you? So don’t ignore 
your instincts. I have experienced many situations 
in which parents have come to see me after being 
dismissed by doctors, teachers, counselors, and 
even family members who didn’t think there was 
anything wrong with their children. However, 
the parents knew something wasn’t quite right. In 
many of these situations, by respecting the parents’ 
gut feelings, and investigating further, I have found 
that the parents were correct, and I was able to 
diagnose learning or emotional difficulties that 
certainly needed to be addressed.
Now that you have an understanding about the de-
velopmental issues surrounding children’s fears, let’s 
get to the questions.
#19: Are you getting a divorce?
You might be surprised to learn that this was one of 
the most common fear-related questions submitted by 
parents of children in this age group.
Children worry about divorce and ask the question 
when their parents argue, regardless of whether there 
is any indication that their parents might be getting 

76   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
divorced. They also ask it when they have overheard 
conversations that may lead them to believe (whether or 
not it is true) that their parents may be separating or di-
vorcing. Despite the fact that divorce is so commonplace 
in the world today, it is still a significant fear of most 
children and teens. The comments from these parents 
reveal this fear:
“Every time one of us even raises our voice to one 
• 
another in anger, our oldest child, Erica (age 9), 
asks if we are getting divorced. It’s almost comical. 
But it does distract us from our argument. Perhaps 
that’s her plan!”
“The morning after Craig (age 
• 
10) overhears us 
fighting in our room at night—of course we thought 
he was asleep—he asks if we’re getting divorced.”
“I have to be careful when I gossip to my mom on 
• 
the phone because if Tyrone (age 7) or Lacey (age 11) 
hear anything, they think I’m talking about their dad 
and me, and they think we’re getting divorced.”
Uncovering the Meaning
When a child asks this question often, it is usually an 
indication that his parents are arguing or fighting too 
frequently and too intensely in front of their child—
regardless of whether divorce is actually in the cards. 
Sometimes in the midst of an argument, one partner 
will threaten to leave or will do so temporarily. This can 
understandably also trigger a child’s fear of divorce. 

“I’m Scared”   77
Clearly, in this type of scenario, the adults’ behavior is 
triggering the child’s question.
It is important for you to reflect on your family situation 
and determine whether your child’s question about divorce 
is being triggered by too much fighting among the adults. 
Living like this is stressful for a child, making it difficult 
to sleep or to focus on school and homework. Children in 
high-stress homes, filled with fighting and yelling, are less 
likely to want friends to come over and are more likely to 
be anxious, depressed, or sad, as well as angry themselves—
after all, anger is being role-modeled for them.
When a child asks this question directly after wit-
nessing an argument, in a home where arguing is not the 
norm, it is more likely that the child is worried because 
he is not accustomed to his parents fighting and fears 
that this may mean they are getting divorced.
Last, when a child accidentally overhears discussion 
of real divorce—yours or someone else’s—it is under-
standable that he will want to address his fear and clarify 
what he heard by asking the question.
The Best Way to Respond
If you are absolutely confident that you are not getting 
divorced, you should tell your child this using a varia-
tion of the following: “Grown-ups have arguments just 
like kids. Sometimes they can be loud and sound scary 
to you. But even when we have huge arguments, we still 
love each other, and we are not getting divorced.”

78   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
If you believe that you argue too frequently in your 
home, you should consider adding the following (and 
really mean it): “We are going to work really hard at 
fighting less often, especially in front of you, because we 
can see how stressful it is for you.”
If you find that, despite trying, you are not able to 
reduce your arguing, I suggest that you seek marital 
therapy with a psychologist or other counselor highly 
experienced in providing couples therapy. You would be 
surprised at how well it can work to receive help from a 
third party, expertly trained for just this purpose.
If your child overhears you having a discussion about 
someone else’s divorce and thinks it was about you, it 
is important to clarify that you were not talking about 
your family. Respecting the other family’s privacy is 
important, though. Only tell your child if the family has 
given you permission to do so.
However, if your child overhears you discussing your 
own divorce before you were ready to tell your child, you 
cannot lie. Ideally, it is best for both parents to answer 
this question together, whenever possible. Be truthful 
and simple in your response. You may not have every-
thing worked out yet because you had not been planning 
on telling him yet, but a child this age needs an answer 
containing the following elements:
Explain that although you don’t love each other 
• 
anymore, you both still love him very much and 
will continue to take care of him together as you 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
“I’m Scared”   79
have always done (to the extent that this is true, 
of course).
Be clear that it is not anyone’s fault that you are 
• 
divorcing—especially not his. Sometimes grown-
ups fall out of love, or they have lots of arguments 
and don’t get along anymore, kind of like kids who 
don’t stay friends forever.
Explain what the new living arrangements will be 
• 
and how visitation will work. If it is not worked 
out yet, do the best you can, and explain that it 
will change.
Give him a time line—to the best of your ability—
• 
for when his life will change.
#20: Is the plane going to fall? 
(Or: What happens if the engine catches 
fire? What would happen if a wing fell 
off?)
Michelle and Brian enjoy traveling with their children. 
However, their daughter Briana (age 8) becomes terribly 
anxious every time the trip involves flying. “She will 
begin to ask if we’re going to crash, if the plane is going 
to break, and if it’s going to fall, weeks before the trip. 
By the time we’re ready to leave, she’s in a panic!”
In this post-9/11 world, it doesn’t seem surprising 
that children are worried about flying (or, should I say, 
www.Ebook777.com

80   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
crashing). But in reality, kids were afraid of it long before 
that. Let’s face it, even many adults are afraid of flying 
and have been since planes were invented.
Uncovering the Meaning
Your child’s fear has a lot to do with being out of control. 
There is nothing you can personally do to prevent the 
plane you are in from crashing, and most of us don’t 
know the first thing about flying, so we don’t even know 
whether the pilot’s doing a good job or not. We don’t 
even get to meet the pilot, except via the announcement 
system. The more out-of-control a person—child or 
adult—feels, the more stressed and nervous she becomes 
about her safety. What’s more, the fear can become even 
greater for children because they know and understand 
even less about what is going on than do the adults.
Jodi, a mom I met, told me, “If the pilot sounds or-
ganized and businesslike, I feel calm, but if he sounds 
too friendly and chatty, I get worried that he’s going to 
be distracted and flaky. My husband likes chatty pilots 
because the information they give makes him feel more 
relaxed. Go figure!” Clearly, there is nothing rational in 
either of their feelings, but each is trying to wrangle a 
perception of control from the sound of the pilot’s voice 
in order to feel comforted.
One important question to ask yourself is whether 
you are transferring any of your anxiety about flying 
to your child. Kids notice their parents’ body language, 

“I’m Scared”   81
mannerisms, and levels of stress, as well as overt lan-
guage. If you are worried about flying, it is very likely 
that you will inadvertently communicate this concern to 
your child.
The real truth is that flying is actually safer than 
driving in a car. The statistics show us that you are more 
than five hundred times as likely to die in a car accident 
as in the air. In fact, between October and December 
of 2001, there were one thousand more highway fa-
talities than in the same period the year before, because 
after 9/11 so many people believed they would be safer 
driving than flying that there were simply more cars on 
the roads.
It is important to not give in to your child’s fear of 
flying, because she will find it much more difficult to 
master this fear at an older age. You also don’t want to 
let it control your family’s lifestyle. Therefore, now that 
you understand how safe it is to fly, you are ready to 
answer your child’s question with confidence.
The Best Way to Respond
Although this is not a situation in which there are any 
guarantees, I very strongly recommend you respond 
to this question by saying as clearly and forcefully as 
possible: “No, the plane is not going to fall.” If the very 
unlikely occurs—your plane crashes—and happily you 
survive, it is true that your child may confront you with 
the fact that you were not completely truthful. However, 

82   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
I am confident that this will not be top-most on your 
list of concerns, having just survived a plane crash! 
If this happens to you, please email me at DrSusan@
DrSusanBartell.com, and I will give you personal 
support for managing this unique situation.
For every other time you fly, it is important to instill 
a sense of security and safety in your child. If she asks 
you specifics (“What happens if the engine catches on 
fire or a wing falls off?”), say the following and repeat 
variations of it as many times as necessary: “Planes are 
made with very, very strong material. They fly all the 
time and get checked every time they fly. They also have 
many backup systems that get checked every time. Even 
if there were to be an emergency, the pilots are trained to 
handle it. Planes hardly ever have accidents or problems; 
in fact, they have them much, much less often than cars, 
and you go in a car, every day! We are safe. I would never 
take you on a plane if I didn’t think you would be safe.”
#21: Who will take care of me if 
you die?
“When Johnny (age 11) asked me this question, it really 
took me by surprise,” explained his dad, John Sr. “I 
didn’t even realize he worried about such heavy things, 
and to be honest—rightly or wrongly—we hadn’t even 
thought about it seriously until he brought it up.”

“I’m Scared”   83
Like John, many parents are surprised by this 
question—and are often unprepared with an adequate 
response. We find it painful to think about our own 
mortality, but luckily for us, our kids are sometimes a 
bit more practical.
Uncovering the Meaning
Preschool- and early-elementary-age kids usually worry 
about death in a more “bodily” sense. If you have read 
The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (Pre-K through 2nd 
Grade), you’ll see that the top question about death in 
this age group is, “Does it hurt when someone dies?” 
Now, in the older elementary years, a child’s fears are 
more sophisticated and perhaps more pragmatic.
As I have promised you, throughout this book I will 
offer you as many psychological insights as possible into 
child development. Here is another one: Children in this 
age group are rapidly moving out of the world of fantasy 
and make-believe, and into a developmental phase that 
reflects greater interest in the concrete, black and white 
facts of the real world. Therefore the fact that they are 
pragmatic—even when fearful—makes sense. Children 
in this stage love rules and are concerned with right and 
wrong, fair and unfair. They want to know exactly what 
to expect at all times. We will continue to discuss this 
throughout the chapter as we explore other questions. 
But for now, it’s important to know that your child is 
asking this question not only because he is fearful of 

84   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
you dying, but because he really does want to know that 
there is a plan that will be executed should you die. And 
guess what? He’s not wrong to expect this or to be privy 
to the information. Therefore, your answer can’t be, 
“Don’t worry, I’ve taken care of it.”
The Best Way to Respond
If you do have a plan, you should share it with your 
child. If it includes more than one person or a succession 
of people, make sure you explain the plan fully. If your 
child is in frequent contact with the potential guard-
ian, it’s a good idea to let this person know about your 
conversation with your child. This is because your child 
may bring it up, and the adult should be prepared to talk 
to your child about it reassuringly, if necessary, in a way 
that is consistent with what you explained.
I have known of situations when a child has been 
unhappy with his parents’ choice of guardians. Of 
course the chances of both parents dying (or otherwise 
being removed from his life) are unlikely. However it 
is not impossible. Your now practical child realizes this 
and does not want to have to risk spending many years 
with someone he doesn’t like. The thought of this can 
cause anxiety for a child, and you cannot always assume 
you know why a child doesn’t like your choice, so it’s 
important to ask. In many cases, a child’s concern is 
misplaced and can be alleviated. For example, he may 
have heard an aunt yell at her children once or twice 

“I’m Scared”   85
and be worried that she would be mean to him. When 
you remind him that you yell sometimes too—that all 
parents do—he will be calmer.
But what if his rationale for not liking your choice is 
legitimate—the aunt really is mean to her kids, but she is 
your closest relative? In some cases it is worth consider-
ing a change. Sometimes a very close friend is a better 
choice than an unpleasant relative (as long as the friend 
agrees, of course). You will need to make sure you have a 
clearly constructed, legally airtight will, in the event that 
it would have to be enforced. But if it means that your 
child would be psychologically better off, it is worth it.
If you can’t answer this question, when your child 
asks it, it is time to make a plan. Tell your child the 
following: “That is an excellent question, and since we 
haven’t figured it out yet, we need to do so right away. 
It’s a big decision. The adults will discuss it, and we will 
let you know as soon as we decide—probably in the next 
couple of weeks.”
This is not a decision for which you should solicit your 
child’s opinion. You and your child may not agree as to 
who would be the best guardian for him. He may not 
know who would manage the finances most efficiently, 
who would be the most consistent parent-figure, and 
who would actually agree to do it if asked. You need 
to follow through on making your short list, narrowing 
it down, and approaching your candidate right away. 
As soon as the person has agreed, tell your child. Then 

86   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
make a legal will immediately. This is one of the most 
important and responsible decisions you will execute as 
a parent. Without this, your child could become a ward 
of the state overnight.
#22: Would you be mad at me if…?
As we have begun to discuss in the previous section, 
older-elementary-age kids love rules and are very 
worried about what is right and what is wrong. It is for 
this reason that your child may so often check to see if 
you would be angry with her for doing something that is 
considered breaking the rules.
My daughter Mollie (age 11) will frequently watch a 
child on a TV sitcom or reality show who is behaving 
badly (having a tantrum, being rude, acting mean) and 
then turn to me and say “What would you do if we behaved 
like that?” I always respond to her by saying the following: 
“I would be angry if you behaved like that because it is 
bratty/mean/rude behavior. I might even have to punish 
you. But since I know you aren’t planning to behave like 
that, I don’t think I have to worry about it, right?” Mollie 
will laugh and agree. Sometimes she asks me what the 
punishment would be, and I tell her. However, Mollie 
is typically a very well-behaved child and a worrier, so 
in her case I downplay the possibility of consequences 
because they are very rarely necessary for her.

“I’m Scared”   87
Uncovering the Meaning
Mollie and other children in this age range want to be 
very clear about exactly what their parents’ expectations 
are for them. Most of the time your child will be afraid to 
disappoint you. Sometimes she won’t mind disappoint-
ing or angering you, but she still wants to be clear what 
the consequences will be so she can determine whether 
she is willing to test a particular boundary.
For these reasons, you need to be explicit about your 
expectations. Creating structure is important beginning 
from the time your child can walk and talk, but it is no 
more important than now, when your child’s entire per-
sonality is developmentally rule-governed. If your home 
doesn’t yet function in an orderly, rule-driven manner, 
it is time to start. This doesn’t mean a police state! But a 
few simple rules are critical to help your child feel secure 
and internally organized, which translates into a feeling 
of emotional safety:
Create a regular after-dinner-to-bedtime routine 
• 
that basically doesn’t change.
Develop a regular school-morning routine that gets 
• 
your child to school on time every day.
Ensure that homework and after-school activities 
• 
and sports are always a priority (before play, TV, 
video, and computers).
Remember that positive reinforcement for good 
• 
behavior comes before punishment for bad.
Don’t threaten if you can’t/won’t follow through.
• 

88   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
By this age cheating, lying, stealing, hitting, 
• 
kicking, punching, and spitting are not to be ac-
cepted with forgiveness, or your child will not 
learn to stop doing them. The consequence for 
these should differ depending on your child’s age 
and how many times a behavior has occurred. If 
the behaviors continue or get worse (particularly 
physical behaviors), you may want to consider 
speaking to your child’s doctor, a school counselor, 
or a child psychologist or other therapist special-
izing in kids.
The Best Way to Respond
Keeping in mind that your child is trying to understand 
the rules, it is best to respond to this question as clearly 
as possible—even if you are asked it a hundred times a 
day. Since kids this age are so concrete and factual, yours 
may not generalize from one example to the next. Just 
because you respond yes today to the question, “Would 
you be mad if I eat on the couch in the den?” it doesn’t 
mean she won’t ask you tomorrow if you would be mad 
if she ate on the carpet in the den.
Your response should include whether or not such 
a behavior would make you angry, why it would (or 
wouldn’t upset you), and, if necessary, what the con-
sequence might be. You can use my response (on page 
86) to Mollie as a template for how to respond to many 
different questions.

“I’m Scared”   89
For example, in response to the question about eating 
on the couch you might say, “Yes, I would be mad. First, 
you know that we have a rule about eating only in the 
kitchen. Second, I would not be happy if anything spilled 
on the couch. If I find that you have been eating on the 
couch, you will not be allowed to watch TV for three 
days—in any room of the house.”
#23: Are you going to get a 
ticket? 
(Or: Are you driving too fast?)
By now I bet you know exactly what I’m going to 
say—and you would be right. The reason your child 
may ask this question so often and probably seems con-
cerned about traffic safety in general is because of her 
general interest in rules—and making sure that you’re 
following them.
Following rules is why kids love board games so 
much—they are all about rules. It’s also why your child 
might get furious when someone else cheats or breaks 
the rules. “My girls panic when they see a police car,” 
explains Natalie, mother of Paige (age 9) and Elizabeth 
(age 8). “Their first questions are always, ‘Are you speed-
ing? Are you going to get a ticket?’ I always have to tell 
them to calm down; I’m not speeding.”

90   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Uncovering the Meaning
Just as your child is worried about following rules herself, 
she is equally concerned that you are following rules. 
Aside from the rules of the road, children in this age 
range are aghast and terrified at the thought of sneaking 
into a second movie without paying, expressing dissat-
isfaction with service in a store or restaurant, or even 
taste-testing a new flavor of ice cream when they know 
in advance that they are not going to buy it. Appreciate 
this innocence now, because by adolescence it might be 
long gone!
However, the rules of the road are by far the most 
predominant concern for children this age. The sudden 
presence of a police car is likely to cause you to react 
by slowing down, muttering, or otherwise inadvertently 
cuing your child that you are tense. The message is clear: 
the presence of a police officer is a big neon-flashing sign 
to “follow the rules,” not only for children, but for adults 
as well.
But when you behave like this, your child becomes 
worried that you are going to get into trouble—either 
because you haven’t been following the rules, or because 
she fears that, in the adult world, you can get in trouble 
even when you do follow the rules. Remember, learning 
about rules is still somewhat uncharted territory for your 
child, and you will have to help to reduce her fears—
particularly about the law. It’s important for her to see 
police and other law enforcement officers as a positive, 

“I’m Scared”   91
rather than negative, part of her life so that, should she 
ever need help, she is not afraid to ask for it.
Of course, you also need to ask yourself, are you driving 
too fast? Perhaps your child is scared, and rather than 
being confident enough to tell you directly, she is trying 
to let you know in this way. Self-reflection is important—
for your child’s physical and emotional safety.
The Best Way to Respond
Sometimes it is best to respond to a child’s question with 
a question. This will help you figure out what your child 
is really worried about. This is one of those times. Ask 
her the following question: “What’s making you think I 
might get a ticket?” (Or “What’s making you think that 
I’m driving too fast?”) Listen carefully to your child’s 
response to this question, asking others if you need to. 
If your child has noticed that you get panicky whenever 
you pass a police car, respond by saying, “Sometimes 
when I see a police car, I slow down just to make sure 
that I’m not speeding. But I am a careful driver, and 
people don’t get tickets for no reason. Police officers have 
special machines that monitor how fast people drive so 
they don’t pull you over by mistake.”
If your child indicates that she thinks you are speed-
ing, explain that you keep an eye on the speedometer to 
make sure you are within the speed limit. Suggest that 
she can also watch the traffic to see that most people 
travel around the same speed.

92   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
However, if you really are speeding, thank her for 
noticing, and tell her that you will begin to watch the 
speedometer more carefully from now on.
#24: What would happen if you 
lost your job?
When Camilla came home from work one night, her son 
Thomas (age 8) asked her this question. Since she had 
never expressed any concern about losing her job, she 
wasn’t sure why he was asking. “Why are you wondering 
that?” she asked Thomas. He replied, “Well, Ryan told 
us that his dad lost his job yesterday, and now they have 
to live with Ryan’s grandma. So what would happen if 
you lost your job?”
This is a common question, asked by many kids, even 
when their parents’ jobs are completely stable. As you can 
see, it might be triggered by hearing about another child’s 
parent losing his job. As with so many of the fears during 
this stage, this question reflects your child’s knowledge 
that life may not always go as planned. However, given his 
need for rules, he also wants to know that when something 
goes wrong, there will be a plan for how to handle it.
Uncovering the Meaning
This question is similar to, “Who will take care of me 
if you die?” Your child is asking it because, should this 

“I’m Scared”   93
serious event occur, he wants to know that you—the 
adult—have formulated a plan to manage it.
Although it is not necessary or even advisable for you 
to give your child a comprehensive description of your 
plan should you lose your job, it is important that you 
offer him direct, clear information that indicates that 
you don’t plan to just “wing it” should you be unfortu-
nate enough to lose your job.
Your child is less likely to ask you this question if you 
are self-employed, because at this age most kids believe 
that self-employment protects one from the perils of un-
employment. However, some kids are a bit more percep-
tive or have already experienced a family member losing 
a business, so they know better. If this is the case, your 
child may ask you, so you should be prepared.
The Best Way to Respond
If your employment is secure, your response should sound 
something like this: “It is very, very unlikely that I will 
lose my job. I have been working there for a long time, 
and there is absolutely no reason that it should happen. 
However, if I ever think it might, I will start looking for 
another job in advance. If I was to suddenly lose my job, 
I will immediately start looking for another job and find 
one as soon as possible. While I look, we might have to cut 
back on vacations, eating out, and extra treats (or realisti-
cally whatever you will have to do), but we will be fine. 
Taking care of you is my top priority, so don’t worry!”

94   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
On the other hand, we do live in an unstable eco-
nomic climate, so it is possible that your position is not 
secure. Perhaps your child’s question was even prompt-
ed by adult conversation he overheard concerning the 
economy or your job. If this is your situation, it is not 
fair to reassure your child of a sense of security that may 
be somewhat false. However, it is not beneficial to alarm 
your child. Therefore, your response should be similar to 
the following one: “Sometimes adults don’t stay in jobs 
forever because companies hire too many people and then 
have to let some go (or because they stop making enough 
money and they can’t afford to pay everyone). That is 
happening where I work. So right now I’m looking for 
a new job. I’m going to keep looking until I find one. I 
may end up staying at my job, but I may end up chang-
ing to a new one. If I suddenly lose my job because my 
company can’t pay me anymore, and it is before I find a 
new job, we might have to cut back on vacations, eating 
out, and extra treats (or realistically whatever you will 
have to do), but we’ll be fine. Taking care of you is my 
top priority, so don’t worry!”

So, What Can 
You Really Tell 
Me about God?
5
In the upper elementary years, children become ever 
more fascinated with the idea of God and religion. This 
does not mean they become more religious. In fact, when 
children reach this stage, many parents report an in-
crease in resistance to attending religious services (“It’s 
sooooo boring”) or religious school (“Can’t I skip it just 
this once?”), which often doesn’t ever abate for a number 
of different reasons we will discuss in this chapter.
Parents who believe strongly in a religious education 
often successfully resolve this resistance to (and eventual 
dislike of) religious school by choosing to send their chil-
dren to full-time parochial schools, thereby avoiding the 
issue of their children having to attend religious school in 
addition to regular school. If you have a younger child, 
you should take a look at Chapter Five, “Little Kids Can 

96   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Be Spiritual,” in The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (Pre-K 
through 2nd Grade), for a discussion about how to stem 
a dislike of religious school before it even begins.
Now, we’re ready to tackle the questions!
#25: Does God exist? 
(Or: Is there a God?)
James was impressed when his daughter Caitlyn (age 9½), 
lying in bed just before falling asleep, asked him, “Daddy, 
is there really a God?”
“I wasn’t exactly sure how to respond because it 
seemed like a deep question for such a young girl! I 
believe in God, so of course I said yes, but she didn’t 
leave it at that. ‘How do we know, Daddy? We can’t 
see God.’ She had a good point. I told her it was a big 
conversation that would have to wait until another time 
because it was time to go to sleep.”
James is right; this is a big question and a big conver-
sation. What is the best way to respond to your child’s 
all-time biggest question about the existence of God, 
beyond yes or no, in a way that will help her grow both 
emotionally and cognitively?
Uncovering the Meaning
Religious leaders, philosophers, and just plain folks like 
you and me have been struggling with this question 

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   97
since—well, since forever it seems. So it is impressive that 
your elementary-school-age child is ready to tackle it too.
The concept of God captures your child’s interest 
because it challenges her brain to think hard—is God 
real? It asks her to explore the depths of her heart and 
soul—am I a believer?
Older-elementary-age children are just beginning to 
develop the ability to think abstractly and philosophi-
cally. Although this skill will continue to grow through 
the middle-school and teen years, into adulthood, it is 
exciting to see the seedlings now.
As your child develops the skills of abstract thinking, 
she will question and challenge the status quo in many 
different arenas. On the subject of God, a clear response 
to her questions will help her become a less confused and 
more open-minded thinker. By answering her questions 
clearly, you will also help her negotiate through this con-
fusing world of “no proof and no evidence,” by guiding 
her in one of three ways:
to believe in the existence of God
• 
to not believe in the existence of God
• 
to choose what she believes for herself
• 
It is important to know that there is no right or wrong 
way to guide your child. Rather, providing a forum for 
open, nonjudgmental discussion and questioning within 
your belief system is the most important way to help her 
continue growing cognitively and emotionally.

98   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
The Best Way to Respond
I will begin by offering you one of my favorite psychologi-
cal tips—one that I learned in graduate school and that 
I use almost every single day with my patients and with 
my own children in many different situations. Before 
giving your child a response, it will be useful for you to 
find out what she thinks the answer might be. This will 
help you determine how best to answer her. Do this by 
answering a question with a question! Therefore, before 
saying anything, solicit her opinion by asking, “Do you 
think God exists?” Then wait for a response.
If you believe your child should make up her own 
mind about God’s existence, then all you have to do is 
enthusiastically validate whatever she says. But don’t 
be surprised if she changes her belief system at least 
once or twice as she goes through different stages of 
development—particularly during adolescence.
If you are more comfortable with the idea of guiding 
your child toward your own belief system, then knowing 
how your child currently feels will help you in this task. 
For example, if you believe in God, but your child says, 
“I don’t think God exists,” you will need to be armed 
with a much more comprehensive response than you 
would if your child’s beliefs are already consistent with 
your own. Nevertheless, it is important not to become 
upset, judgmental, critical, frustrated, or angry with 
your child if she does not immediately see things your 
way. You are much more likely to help her to eventually 

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   99
believe in God (or not, if this is your belief system), if 
you encourage her to do so in a supportive, patient, and 
encouraging manner.
Remember, dismissing her beliefs as trivial or wrong 
(even though they may seem so to you) is more likely 
to solidify them and push your child even further away 
from you and the ideals in which you believe.
#26: If there is a God, why do bad 
things happen? 
(Or: Why does God let wars happen? If 
God exists, why are there poor/sick/
hungry people in the world? Why does 
God let people hate each other?)
Paula shared the following touching story with me about 
her son Christopher (age 11): “Chris’s friend’s older 
brother was killed in a car accident—he was a passenger 
in a car with a drunk driver. Chris was very upset, more 
than we expected he would be. One day he asked me, 
‘Mom, how can God let someone die when they’re still 
young? Maybe there really isn’t a God.’ It was hard to see 
him struggling so much with such confusing feelings.”
It isn’t unusual for children—or even adults—to 
wonder about how a “good” God could allow tragic 
things to happen. As with the previous question, it is 

100   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
one that many great minds have pondered and tried to 
resolve. I have no intention of even trying to compete 
with such learned and scholarly religious leaders and 
philosophers. Rather, I will help you understand the psy-
chological reasons your child is beginning to ask this and 
similar questions now, and offer the best way to respond 
(always consistent with your belief system) in order to 
support your child’s cognitive and emotional growth.
Uncovering the Meaning
Younger children tend not to question the existence of 
God. Rather, they are more curious about what God 
looks like, where God is, and other similar specifics—if 
you check out The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (Pre-K 
through 2nd Grade), you’ll see what I mean. But for 
your older, now more philosophical child, it is becoming 
a whole different ball game.
For a child in the older elementary grades, the idea of 
God represents a possible “authority figure,” sort of like 
a parent. When your child asks this question, he is won-
dering (using the newly forming abstract thinking part 
of his brain) how this supposedly “good parent” could 
allow bad things to happen to people.
It’s a little scary to him to imagine that this powerful 
“parent,” who he can’t even see, might have such lever-
age over everyone—and not only over children, but even 
over adults. For some children (and adults) it is a lot eas-
ier—and even more logical—to think that perhaps God 

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   101
does not exist, because a good God, like a good parent, 
would not allow such bad things to happen.
If you do not believe in God and do not bring your 
child up to believe in God either, this is a closed case 
for you.
However, if you do believe in God and want your 
child to do so as well, this question presents a complex 
dilemma for your child and one to which you need to 
respond with respect, in order to help your child negoti-
ate the confusion he is experiencing.
Again, I remind you that I will not be tackling this 
from a deeply religious or philosophical angle. Truthfully, 
I don’t think a complex explanation is necessary in order 
to satisfy an elementary-age child. In fact, I believe it 
might scare your child.
Rather, a developmentally appropriate explanation 
that does not provoke fear will effectively help your child 
understand how the existence of God does not preclude 
bad things from happening. Your response should take into 
account that your child thinks of God as a “good parent” 
and is confused that God would disappoint or hurt his 
“children.” This offers an opportunity for you to introduce 
your child to the concept that parents create their children, 
but then children are responsible for their own actions.
The Best Way to Respond
The best way to respond to this question is with a 
version of the following: “You were born from my body, 

102   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
right? You grew in my body and I created you. But that 
doesn’t mean that I have complete control over every 
choice that you make in your life. You think for yourself 
and choose for yourself. You decide whom you are going 
to be friends with and whom you don’t like. You decide 
if you’re going to work hard in school or slack off. Well, 
it’s sort of the same with God. God created the beautiful 
earth and all the people, and then God stepped back and 
let us decide how we are going to live our lives. We choose 
to be nice to each other or not. We choose to get in a car 
with a drunk driver or not. We choose to make wars or 
not. It is not God’s fault. Sometimes sad things happen 
to people, like illness or dying from being old, because 
we are human beings and our bodies aren’t perfect. But 
most of the time, we have choices and we have to make 
good choices. People have to take responsibility for their 
own behavior—grown-ups do, and so do kids.” This last 
sentence is the most important life lesson you can teach 
your child—now and at any time, ever!
#27: Is there really a hell?
Judy and Allen’s nine-year-old twins Sierra and Macy 
are worried about hell—who can blame them! Judy ex-
plained, “Sometimes the girls are afraid to go to sleep 
at night because they are scared of having nightmares 
about hell. They can’t even articulate what exactly 

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   103
they’re afraid of—just somewhere ‘creepy’ you go when 
you die if you’ve done bad things. But they are not clear 
about how bad you need to be to end up in hell. We’ve 
told them over and over again that they are good girls 
and not to worry about it.”
Do you think there is a hell? Are you absolutely sure? 
So how do you respond to this question?
Uncovering the Meaning
For those who believe in hell—adults and children 
alike—it is not a fun concept to anticipate and surely a 
place one works hard to avoid.
But, for a child, the idea of hell can be even more fright-
ening, because even if her parents don’t believe in it, she 
may hear friends and even other adults talking about it. 
At this age your child is old enough to pay attention to and 
understand these conversations and begin thinking seri-
ously about them. In addition, the word “hell” is thrown 
about as slang so frequently that she may well wonder 
about its existence, despite what her parents tell her.
Whether or not you believe in hell, it is tempting to 
sidestep the issue and avoid answering this question 
because it is a difficult concept to explain, and poten-
tially a scary one. The problem with taking this route is 
that it won’t stop your child from wondering about hell. 
She will create her own answer to the question using 
her imagination, and she will develop a fantasy of hell, 
which is likely to be much scarier than any explanation 

104   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
you could (or should) give her. Therefore, as difficult as it 
may be, this is a question to tackle head-on, making sure 
to help your child quell any fears that may be lurking.
The Best Way to Respond
If you don’t believe in hell, you can simply say so. 
However, keep in mind that you child may still wonder 
and ask about it, given that it is such a commonly 
spoken-of concept.
If you believe in hell, or you are not sure, you can’t 
tell your child with assurance that it doesn’t exist. By 
this age it won’t take long for your child to recognize 
that your response isn’t authentic in its reflection of your 
belief system. On the other hand, you don’t want to scare 
your child, so you need to give her a response that serves 
two purposes:
	 1.	 It offers her reassurance and reduces fear and anxiety.
	 2.	 It gives her clear, easy, concrete rules that, when fol-
lowed, will ensure that she will not end up in hell.
A response to this question could be a variation of the 
following. Of course you should change your response 
so that it fits your belief system, “No one knows for ab-
solutely sure if hell exists. But if it does, a person only 
goes there if she does something very, very bad—like kill 
someone or break into someone’s house and steal some-
thing. You don’t go to hell for doing things when you’re 
a child, even if they are things that make your mom or 

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   105
dad angry. You might get into trouble for bad behavior, 
or for doing something you shouldn’t, or even for being 
rude or getting a bad grade in school because you didn’t 
study. But you don’t go to hell for those things. People 
can only go to hell for very bad grown-up behavior. 
Your job is to keep on working hard in school and being 
a good friend and a good sister and being respectful. As 
long as you work at doing all the things you are supposed 
to, you don’t have to worry about going to hell, even if 
you get into trouble sometimes.”
Including all the above factors is important, because a 
fear of hell should not be used as a way to convince your 
child to behave. This will terrify her and make her hate 
religion. It will also cause her to resent you and cause her 
to slowly grow to believe that you don’t have the ability 
to manage her behavior without holding this fear over her 
head. She will then lose respect for you, particularly if, at 
some point in her life, she decides that hell doesn’t exist.
#28: Where do Grandma and 
Grandpa go after they die?
Bridgette, mother of Toby (age 10), thought her son 
seemed more curious than upset when he asked her 
this question. But she wanted to respond in a way that 
wouldn’t upset him. She just wasn’t sure how to do this 
successfully. “I didn’t want to scare Toby, and I also 

106   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
didn’t want to tell him something I wasn’t completely 
sure about. So I told him that they go to heaven. That 
didn’t really satisfy him though, because after thinking 
about it for a second or two he said, ‘But what happens 
there?’ I was stumped!”
Children begin to think about death when they are 
very young (especially if they experience it firsthand). Of 
course, like everyone, they have fears related to death, 
and we will discuss these in Chapter Four. But as your 
child grows up, he also develops a curiosity about death, 
somewhat unrelated to being fearful. This interest is 
often particularly piqued when someone very close to 
your child dies during these years—like a grandparent. 
He might also ask this question when a beloved pet dies.
As difficult as it may be for you to discuss death (and 
what happens after death) with your child, it is impor-
tant for you to do so in order to help him sort through 
this confusing stage.
Uncovering the Meaning
As you know, children are curious about everything. 
Therefore, it is perfectly normal for your child to want 
to understand exactly what happens to a person’s body 
or soul after the person dies.
But before you launch into a big explanation, you 
need to clarify exactly what your child is asking. It isn’t 
necessary—or recommended—to give him any more in-
formation than he is specifically wondering about right 

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   107
now. For example, your child might be curious about 
what happens to a person’s body after death. If your 
response includes information about what happens to 
the soul, he may become distressed or confused with too 
much information.
The best way to ensure that you are not answering the 
wrong question or more than you should, is to go back 
to my favorite tip: answer a question with a question. 
In this case, when your child asks you his question, you 
can respond by asking, “Where do you think a person 
goes?” What he says next will tip you off as to how to 
best respond to him in a way that will offer him comfort 
as well as make sense to him.
The Best Way to Respond
As we have discussed, first you need to clarify whether 
your child is wondering where someone physically goes 
after dying or where his soul may go (given that you 
believe in heaven or an afterlife).
If your child wants to know what happens to the 
physical body of a person, it is important to be honest 
but not graphic enough to scare your child. For example, 
you might say, “When someone dies he is placed in a long 
box called a coffin, and the coffin is put in the ground 
in the cemetery and buried. A stone is put next to the 
place where the coffin is buried to remember where it is. 
We’ve driven by a cemetery before. Next time I’ll point 
one out to you, and you’ll see what I mean.” I wouldn’t 

108   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
say more than this unless your child asks questions. In 
fact, children in this age range don’t need to know infor-
mation about what a dead person looks like, whether or 
not he is dressed, how deeply he is buried, or anything 
else—even if he asks. Sometimes fulfilling this type of 
morbid curiosity can scare a child in a way that neither 
you nor he would have anticipated at the time. This sort 
of fear can linger for months or even longer. Instead of 
responding to these types of detailed questions, I would 
recommend that you say you don’t think he needs to 
know any more right now and when he is a bit older you 
can talk about it again.
When your child is more curious about what happens 
to a person’s soul or spirit after death, you will need to 
think carefully about your response. Since the concepts to 
be discussed—heaven, the soul—are already intangible, 
it is easy to slip into euphemisms when discussing these 
with your child. For example, responses like “They go 
‘up there’” or “They’re always watching you” are vague 
yet seem satisfying to you. But for an elementary-age 
child, they are actually not satisfying at all and, in fact, 
may be confusing and cause anxiety.
More than one child I have known has thought that a 
deceased grandparent was living in the attic, after being 
told by a parent that he or she was “up there”! Other chil-
dren wonder if their now-departed relatives are watching 
them take  showers, use the bathroom, or write in their 
private diaries, because they are “always watching you.”

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   109
When you talk to your child about where a deceased 
person has “gone,” the key is to be concrete and clear—
which is admittedly difficult to do about this particular 
topic. Your goal is to make sure your child feels that 
the deceased person is safe and happy, particularly if 
the ending of his or her life was less than peaceful or if 
your child is asking this question in advance of an old or 
dying person’s death.
Your explanation can certainly include the idea that 
the person is “watching over” your child, but this should 
be in a limited, rather than an intrusive (or, as my three 
kids like to say, “stalkerish”) way. Your explanation 
might be similar to the following, but of course you 
should tailor it to fit the specific needs of your family 
and your belief system: “Grandma and Grandpa go to 
heaven after they die. Heaven is a peaceful and happy 
place. They will always look down on you and be with 
you on special occasions, like your birthday and gradua-
tion, and you will have them in your heart all the time.”
#29: Why do I have to go to [fill 
in your religious service] and 
pray, even if I don’t want to?
Hillary wants the family to attend religious services 
regularly, but Laura (age 9½) complains every week. 
“She gets so indignant,” sighed Hillary, “and spends the 

110   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
entire time complaining so much that it ruins the experi-
ence for the rest of the family. She tells me she hates it, 
it’s boring, she doesn’t believe in God, no one else has to 
go—every excuse she can think of!”
Many parents wonder if it is really worth the effort 
to force their children to attend religious services when 
they are so adamantly against it. Perhaps they will come 
around when they’re a bit older? What do you think?
Uncovering the Meaning
Battles over religious observance are common between 
parents and children of all ages. In fact, if you take a 
look at The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (Pre-K through 
2nd Grade), you’ll see that I address this issue there too, 
but, of course, from a slightly different angle.
As we have been discussing throughout this book, 
your older-elementary-age child is beginning to think 
more and more independently. She may believe that 
she is old enough to make all her own choices and deci-
sions, but, of course, she is not! She may not be happy 
with all the choices you are making for her, particu-
larly if they are different from the decisions that some 
of friends’ parents make. If attending religious services 
is not popular among her peers—if most of them are 
playing soccer or hanging out on the block—she will 
resent attending even more. But, if it important to your 
family, this isn’t a good reason for her not to go! If all the 
other parents allowed their children to watch R-rated 

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   111
movies, would you? I hope not! It’s not good for your 
child’s emotional health. For this same reason, if you 
have determined that it is good for your child—and 
your family—to attend services regularly, you can and 
should make it clear to your child that you expect her to 
attend—without complaint.
In fact, you are right if you have determined that it 
is good for your child to attend religious services—prob-
ably for different reasons than you think. Research has 
shown that teens who are religious are much less likely 
to smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol, or use illegal drugs.
Sometimes a child is reluctant to attend religious 
services because both her parents are not in agreement 
about their importance. Perhaps one parent would like 
the family to attend services more regularly, but the other 
parent is not as invested. If this sounds like your family, 
it is very important that you and your partner come to a 
compromise that meets both your needs as well as meets 
the needs of your child, and that doesn’t send your child 
mixed messages.
When your family does attend religious services, 
it doesn’t yet matter if your child chooses to formally 
pray or not. At this age, she should understand that at-
tending religious services is an important family activ-
ity in which participation is required. Aside from the 
spiritual aspect of religion, there is, for children, also 
a ritualistic, habit-forming aspect of it. Very often, a 
child’s belief in God and her spirituality both develop 

112   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
after she has cultivated a core knowledge and familiar-
ity with her religion.
If your child misses the opportunity to create the 
blueprint for religious observance in elementary school, 
it likely won’t happen in middle or high school because 
you won’t suddenly be able to insist that a child of that 
age attends services with you. Therefore, if you don’t 
insist that your child goes with you, it is highly unlikely 
that her desire to do so will ever change. In addition, 
if you don’t insist that your child attends services with 
you, the message you will inadvertently be communicat-
ing is that it isn’t important to you that she attend.
If you believe in religion and you want your child to 
do so too, this is an important battle to fight. In addi-
tion, do so because it offers one more form of inoculation 
against illegal substance use and abuse as your child gets 
older, as well as a guarantee of a few moments of peace-
ful family time in our fast-paced, always stressful world.
The Best Way to Respond
Your response to this question should actually be no 
different from your response to any other question your 
child asks about a topic that is of paramount importance 
to you.
Imagine your child was asking you, “Why do I have 
to go to school if I don’t want to?” “Why do I have to go 
brush my teeth if I don’t want to?” “Why do I have to eat 
healthy food if I don’t want to?” Each of these questions 

So, What Can You Really Tell Me about God?   113
has a logical answer: “You do these things because they 
are good for your health and because it’s the rule in our 
family.” You should base your response to the question 
on this premise.
Your response may sound similar to the one that 
follows. Of course you should adapt it to fit your needs. 
In some cases it is okay to allow your child to bring 
a book to read or a quiet activity in which to engage. 
Although this isn’t technically participating, it may be a 
way to get a reluctant child to begin moving in the right 
direction. “You need to go to services because it is a very 
important part of our family life. You get to do lots of 
things that you like to do, and sometimes you have to do 
the things that I want to do because they make me and 
our family happy. You don’t have a choice about this, 
but we can talk about how to make you like it more. 
While you are there, you can pray any way you want, or 
think about anything you want that makes you feel good 
and peaceful. But you can’t complain or whine or behave 
inappropriately. If you do, there will be a consequence.”


Sibling Stuff
6
If you have more than one child, I bet you have experi-
enced sibling rivalry to one degree or another. It’s not 
fun, but in reality the competition, jealousy, teasing, and 
out-and-out wars prepare your child for the world outside 
your home, helping her develop resilience and skills for 
managing similar, inevitable social experiences. In fact, 
having siblings helps a child to adjust to sharing, being 
flexible, and relating within a peer group that much 
sooner. Of course single children learn all this too—with 
cousins and friends—it just takes a little longer and a bit 
more planning by parents to ensure regular exposure to 
other children.
As the parent of a single—or any—child, you also 
need to make sure you don’t always take the side of your 
own child when it comes to helping him negotiate sticky 

116   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
situations. This will go a long way toward enabling 
him to develop the skills he may otherwise learn as the 
member of a sibling group. You can review Chapter 
Two, Question #8, for some tips on not always taking 
your child’s side when he is in an argument or fight with 
another child.
Despite its practical utility for your child’s social 
life, sibling rivalry can be stressful for parents and chil-
dren. Notwithstanding the period after the birth of a 
second child (which represents the quintessential time 
that a child is jealous of a sibling), the older-elementary 
years are often a time when sibling rivalry peaks. This 
is because many older-elementary-age children—now 
more confident and with stronger verbal skills—are 
willing to assert their displeasure with both older and 
younger siblings far more readily than they might have 
when they were younger and less verbal.
Parents sometimes exacerbate sibling rivalry 
without even realizing it, by accidentally comparing 
siblings to each other, mixing them up, or inadver-
tently treating them “unfairly” in the eyes of their sib-
lings. It is practically impossible to escape the “it’s not 
fair’s” and “you like her more’s.” The most common 
questions that children ask on the topic of siblings all 
reflect sibling rivalry in one form or another. So let’s 
jump right in and begin to explore the issues, and come 
up with the solutions.

Sibling Stuff   117
#30: Why is she allowed to stay 
up later and I have to go to sleep 
earlier? 
(Or: Why do we have to go to sleep at the 
same time if I’m older?)
Ashley (age 8) gives her parents, Penny and Sherman, a 
hard time every night because she doesn’t understand 
why her older brother Cole (age 10) has the privilege 
of going to go to sleep an hour later than her. “It’s not 
fair!” declares Ashley. “Cole and I wake up at the same 
time every day for school. He’s not so much older than 
me—he’s also in elementary school. Why can’t we go to 
sleep at the same time?”
Bedtime is often a challenge for parents, because very 
few kids want to go to bed at the designated bedtime—no 
matter when that may be. When siblings bicker with each 
other and, more often, with you over who gets to stay up 
later, it complicates a situation that may already be fraught 
with stress and arguments. It is therefore important to learn 
to understand your children’s concerns and set guidelines 
for them so they stop feeling upset and jealous.
Uncovering the Meaning
To a child, bedtime is like a form of valuable currency. 
The later she can go to bed, the “richer” she considers 

118   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
herself. (Of course, it is not in a child’s best interest to go 
to sleep too late, so effectively setting limits in this area 
is important. If you’re still struggling with this, The Top 
50 Questions Kids Ask (Pre-K through 2nd Grade) gives 
you tips on how to do it.) It’s therefore not surprising 
that siblings will battle mightily over who gets to stay up 
later—even if it is only by a few minutes. It makes sense to 
you—an adult—that older siblings get to stay up later, but 
for children, like Ashley, it doesn’t always seem logical.
Typically, if your elementary-school-age child has a 
sibling that is much older (high-school age, for example), 
she won’t argue about having an earlier bedtime. This 
seems logical to her. She may not even argue about going 
to bed earlier than a sibling in middle school. But if her 
sibling is only a bit older than she is, or if she’s the older 
one, you already know that you have a difficult battle on 
your hands.
Nevertheless, bedtime is not your child’s decision 
to make. There are several issues to consider when es-
tablishing bedtimes for your children. The privilege of 
giving a later bedtime to an older child is one of these 
issues. But it is not the only one, and in some families 
should not even be the issue that determines the bedtime 
routine. The other factors to consider are as follows:
How much sleep each child needs (this is not age-
• 
dependent; a younger child may need less, while an 
older child might require more). You can determine 
this by how easily each child falls asleep at night 

Sibling Stuff   119
and wakes up in the morning, and then how well 
she functions during the day with a given amount 
of sleep.
In some homes it is less chaotic and more manage-
• 
able to stagger bath and bedtimes, while in others it 
is easier to put all children to bed in one quick sweep 
of hugs and kisses (especially if they share a room).
Does staggering bedtimes routines (reading, snug-
• 
gling) allow you much needed time alone with each 
child, or is this particular part of your relationship 
with your child well satisfied?
If you have several children, it is not “all or none”; 
• 
if it is best for your schedule, some bedtimes can be 
staggered and some can be together (ensuring that 
all your children will be unhappy with you!)
As you can see, although your child may think only 
about how unfair it is that she can’t stay up as late as an 
older sibling, or that she has to go to sleep at the same 
time as a younger sibling, she does not take into account 
all these other important concerns. You, on the other 
hand, need to do so, or your child will be sleep-deprived, 
and your schedule will constantly be topsy-turvy.
At the same time, though, you will find yourself 
locked in fewer battles if you acknowledge how valu-
able bedtime is to your child—remember, she considers 
it as precious as gold or gems! Pitting one sibling against 
another, at least in her eyes, makes the battle even more 

120   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
worthwhile. A form of compromise may therefore be 
necessary, in order to lessen the bickering and feelings of 
unfairness. This does not mean that you have to give up 
on what is best for your children’s health or your fam-
ily’s routine.
The Best Way to Respond
Begin by deciding what is best for your children and 
your family—whether this is staggered bedtimes or not. 
Next, build in a compromise that allows each of them to 
feel happier.
Example #1—If you decide that staggered bedtimes 
are best because you like the idea of the older child having 
a privilege, or it gives you time with each child alone, say 
to your older child: “You are allowed to go to sleep later 
because you are older, but you are not allowed to brag 
about it or hold it over your sister’s head in any way. If I 
see you do that, the privilege will be taken away.”
Say to your younger child, “You go to sleep earlier 
because you are younger, and when you are your broth-
er’s age, you will get to go to sleep later too. When he 
was your age, he went to sleep earlier. But, on weekends, 
or any night that there isn’t school the next day, you can 
go to sleep at the same time as him. If you whine and 
complain about it, I will think that you’re not being 
mature about it, and I will take away that privilege of 
staying up later on weekends.”
Example #2—If you decide that your children should 

Sibling Stuff   121
go to bed simultaneously because it makes your nighttime 
routine less complex, or because you feel that your older 
child needs the additional sleep, there is probably no need 
to say anything to your younger child. But to your older 
child, say something similar to the following: “Everyone’s 
body needs a certain amount of sleep, and it doesn’t have 
to do with how old they are. If you don’t get the amount 
you need, your brain and body will be too tired to do well 
in school or in sports or in all your other activities. Getting 
enough sleep isn’t a privilege related to being older; it is 
my job to make sure you get what you need. But, if you 
don’t complain, whine, and act immaturely about it, you 
can stay up half an hour later than your sister on the 
weekends and any days that there isn’t school the next 
day. If you do give me a hard time about it, I will take 
away that privilege because you will be letting me know 
that you aren’t acting older and more maturely.”
#31: Why does he [a younger 
sibling] get to spend so much 
time with you? 
(Or: Why does he always get to snuggle 
with you?)
Almost every day, Timothy (age 8) asks his mom, Diana, 
why his younger brother Connor (age 3½) gets to spend 

122   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
so much time with her. “I feel really guilty sometimes,” 
explained Diana. “Timmy is really jealous of the time I 
have with Connor while he is in school. I remind him 
that Connor is in school for part of the day too, and that 
all we do is run errands anyway. But it doesn’t seem to 
help. And now I’m pregnant—what is he going to do 
when there is another child also taking my attention?”
As I described in the opening of this chapter, the 
older elementary years can be the time that children 
most acutely experience sibling rivalries and jealousies. 
It is because they start to think a lot about all the differ-
ent ways that they can be jealous! This type of sibling 
jealousy is one of the most common. Let’s take a look at 
why this is, and what you can do about it.
Uncovering the Meaning
By this stage, your child is old enough—and smart 
enough—to think about what is going on at home while 
he is not there, and he knows that he doesn’t like feeling 
left out. In fact, he may have begun to experience this 
jealousy when he and his sibling were younger, but 
unless he was very verbal, he might not have been able 
to articulate his feelings well enough to explain them to 
you. (Remember, all development is on a continuum; 
some children will reach milestones earlier and some 
later. You should consider your child normal unless he is 
very far off the continuum. If you are worried, you can 
speak to your child’s doctor.)

Sibling Stuff   123
It is normal for an older sibling to feel pangs of jeal-
ousy when he has to go off to school, leaving a parent 
home with a younger child. In fact, as your older child 
becomes more and more independent, he experiences a 
conflict. He loves the feeling of growing up, but at the 
same time he misses the particular type of closeness he 
had with his mom or dad when he was much younger.
Observing this closeness between his parent and 
younger sibling (little kids spend more time with parents; 
they cuddle and snuggle more; they cry and so are com-
forted more) can make an older child feel jealous, and even 
a little worried that you love your younger child more than 
you love him. This conflict—wanting to grow up, while 
wanting to hold on to the intimacy of babyhood that he 
sees daily—is the root of the jealousy and the question. It 
is a struggle that will continue for years, reaching its peak 
during adolescence, when your child will be faced with 
the choice between childhood and adulthood. By helping 
him through it now, for the first time, you will ease his 
way when he goes through it at this later stage.
But first, ask yourself the following question: Are you 
providing enough snuggles, alone time, and comforting 
moments for your older child? Or have you inadver-
tently pushed him into the role of “big brother” now that 
you have a younger child—or perhaps even more than 
one. Do you expect him to be the “grown-up” one in your 
family? Perhaps your older child is right to be feeling that 
he is not getting enough “babying.” It is easy to allow an 

124   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
older child to slip into this role. Once we have a younger 
child, especially a baby, it is easy for our perspective to 
shift. We forget that an eight-, nine-, or even ten-year-
old child usually still needs to be hugged or cuddled, 
even when he seems so independent and grown-up—
especially when compared to a younger child.
In addition, sometimes a parent may feel a little hurt 
or rejected when an older child wants to spend more time 
with peers and on activities and less time with you. It is 
then easy to focus more attention on a younger sibling, 
who is still fully reliant on mom or dad. You may then 
accidentally push your older child into a more grown-
up role for which he may not be ready. However, your 
older-elementary-age child still needs you just as much. 
He just needs you in a slightly different way than he did 
before. His jealousy and questions tell you this.
You will be happy to know that you are not a bad 
parent if you have fallen into the trap of expecting your 
older child to grow up before he is ready to do so. It is 
easy to resolve this issue as well as address the issue of 
jealousy that provokes the question.
The Best Way to Respond
You can best help your child by showing him that he 
doesn’t have to choose between you being nurturing and 
him becoming more independent—he can and should 
have both. He needs you to show him that his jealousy is 
unwarranted, because he is able to begin growing up and 

Sibling Stuff   125
still be close to you, while his younger sibling isn’t yet 
old enough to take on the excitement of independence.
First, it is most helpful to your child if you begin 
your response by acknowledging his feelings, rather 
than denying the issue. Instead of saying, “I don’t spend 
more time with Connor; he’s in school for part of the 
day anyway,” it is better to say, “I bet you feel upset 
thinking I spend more time with Connor. I’m glad that 
you’re telling me about your feelings, so now we can do 
something about it.”
Your child will be much more likely to share his 
feelings with you—about this and anything else—if you 
acknowledge his feelings as real and valid.
Second, your goal is to show your child that there is 
a solution to the problem that will result in him feeling 
that he has more time with you while still being a “big 
kid.” Some solutions include the following:
Carving out time alone with your older child when 
• 
another adult can take your younger child(ren) (the 
other parent, relative, baby-sitter).
Taking your child out of school once in a while for 
• 
lunch while your other child is in school or with 
a sitter. This is a very effective way of making an 
older child feel special, and any elementary-school-
age child is still young enough that this won’t be 
academically disruptive, even in the oldest grades.
Giving your older child a later bedtime (see 
• 
Question #30) so that you have time together with 

126   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
no interruptions, or allowing your older child to 
stay up later than his regular bedtime once a week 
to spend special time with you.
Taking only your older child with you to run 
• 
weekend or evening errands (this is not a good 
option if you’re a single parent, unless you have 
baby-sitting help).
Going into work late once in a while to have break-
• 
fast with your older child, but sending your younger 
one(s) to school, with the sitter, or to daycare.
Grabbing small opportunities to spend time with 
• 
your child (while the baby is napping, when your 
younger child is playing with someone else or 
engaged in a TV show). Tell your child you want to 
spend this time with him.
Reminding him that you’re proud of how grown up 
• 
he is, but you still want him to snuggle and cuddle 
with you!
#32: Can we send my brother/
sister somewhere [boarding 
school/jail/to live with 
someone else]?
Carla’s daughter Mariah (age 9) gets so frustrated 
with her brothers, Oscar (age 10½) and Eddie (age 
13), that she routinely asks her mom if they can be 

Sibling Stuff   127
sent somewhere else. “I think Mariah would like to 
be an only child,” sighed Carla. “She asks me all the 
time if one or both of her brothers can go and live 
with a cousin or with one of their friends—even for a 
little while.”
In anger, kids will say all sorts of things about their 
siblings. How much of it is true, and how much is mo-
mentary frustration? And what’s the best way for you to 
respond? Should you exhibit understanding and sympa-
thy or offer a reprimand for being mean? Let’s explore 
this question to find out.
Uncovering the Meaning
There are several different reasons for a child to feel 
she would like a sibling to “go elsewhere.” If your 
child consistently expresses this type of wish about a 
sibling, it likely stems from underlying feelings of hurt, 
insecurity, or resentment. Some of the most common 
reasons for this are listed below. Of course every 
family situation is different, so your child may have 
a slightly different reason for resenting her sibling , 
including the following:
a brand-new baby who evokes jealousy
• 
an older sibling who is 
• 
very bossy and overpowering
a younger sibling who is cute and gets 
• 
a lot of attention
a twin sibling—because it can be difficult to share 
• 
one’s entire life with another person
a sibling (usually older) who bullies, teases, or torments
• 

128   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
two siblings of the same gender who make a third 
• 
feel left out or ganged up on (this may be how Mariah 
feels, especially since she is also the youngest)
a sibling who is smarter/more athletic/more 
• 
popular/thinner/better-looking 
and 
therefore 
makes a child feel inadequate (despite parental 
reassurance of the opposite)
a sibling who gets extra attention due to having a dis-
• 
ability or illness (even something relatively minor)
Once you understand the cause of your child’s nega-
tive feelings toward her sibling, it is far easier to address 
these feelings. Although it is unpleasant to hear a child 
wish that a brother or sister lived elsewhere, it is not 
helpful to address this issue in anger. Rather, if you rec-
ognize this question as a sign that your children need 
help mending their relationship with each other, you can 
facilitate this, rather than being angry that your child is 
letting you know how she feels.
The Best Way to Respond
When your child asks this question (or any variation of 
it), it is best to refrain from expressing disapproval or 
anger. Rather, you will learn a lot by asking your child 
to tell you exactly what is causing her feelings. However, 
be patient when she talks to you, because her reason may 
not be immediately clear-cut or easy to understand—
even to herself. This is because children can’t always 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sibling Stuff   129
identify the reasons for their feelings. It may take more 
than one conversation to understand your child’s feel-
ings. You may also need to spend some time observing 
your children’s interactions with each other to really 
learn what might be upsetting one child.
Although you do not want to respond to this question 
in a critical or angry way, it is appropriate to help your 
child learn to express her feelings in a manner that is 
more constructive and less hurtful to her sibling. What’s 
more, you can explain to her that wishing her sibling 
would go away is simply not a practical solution. In fact, 
she also needs to hear that she may be contributing to 
the rift between herself and her sibling. An explana-
tion similar to the following would be helpful: “I’m 
so glad that you have told me what is bothering you. 
Now, instead of you always wishing your brother would 
go away, we can do something to make you feel better 
about having a brother. We will talk to him, and we will 
all work together to make things better between you and 
him, so that you won’t feel so angry and sad. It won’t 
happen right away, but we will work on it a little at a 
time. But don’t be surprised if he says there are things he 
would like you to change too. That’s the way relation-
ships work—everyone has to compromise.”
www.Ebook777.com

130   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
#33: Why do you always get our 
names wrong? 
(Or: Should we wear name tags? Why do 
you always mix up our names? Why don’t 
you know who we are?)
Ingrid and Jim have a very busy home! They admit to 
sometimes—well, often—mixing up the names of their 
four children, Jesse (age 13), Jenna (age 10), Olivia (age 
8), and Corey (age 8). An outspoken Jenna was the 
spokesperson for the kids. “My parents always get us 
mixed up. My mom will start to call one of us and then 
halfway through realize she’s calling the wrong one and 
switch to another one and then switch again. The other 
day she called me Jesse—he’s a boy!”
This was one of the most frequently submitted ques-
tions. It came in many different forms, from parents all 
over, so if you suffer from this problem, which I have 
named Name Confusion Syndrome (NCS), you need not 
worry that perhaps you are getting senile—it is normal! 
I have to admit that my husband and I too suffer from 
NCS, exasperating our children with name mix-ups 
on occasion. However, the instance that stands out 
most in the minds of all my children (and they remind 
my husband and me of it frequently) was a few years 
ago when my husband—a more loving and dedicated 

Sibling Stuff   131
father you will never find—looked at our son Max and 
called him Sam. We do not have a Sam anywhere in our 
family—not even a pet! To this day, none of us have a 
clue where that name came from.
Uncovering the Meaning
Despite the fact that it is perfectly normal sometimes to 
mix up your children’s names, they may not see it the 
same way as you do. Furthermore if your name mix-ups 
happen more than occasionally, your children may feel 
insulted and upset by it. Consider how you would feel if 
someone close to you regularly got your name wrong—
not very happy, right?
Sometimes a child also becomes upset because he 
believes—incorrectly—that your mix-up is the result of 
more than you simply making a mistake. He jumps to 
the conclusion that there is something about him that is 
so similar to his sibling that it is causing you to confuse 
them. Since it is important to him to be seen by others as 
a unique individual, this notion is distressing to him. If 
you have twins, or even children of the same gender that 
are very close in age, this issue may become exacerbated 
because their sense of individual identity could be even 
more greatly challenged.
It is less likely for parents to confuse the names of 
children who are different genders, but when they do, 
it is even more distressing to a child. This is under-
standable, because a child might begin to wonder if 

132   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
you see a quality in him that makes you think of the 
opposite sex.
Let’s divert for a minute and consider this:
Having a strong identification with one’s own gender 
is important to a child during this stage of development 
because boys and girls tend to gravitate, each to his own 
gender. For the most part, boys play with boys and girls 
with girls. Games, activities, and toys tend to be split 
along these same lines too—this is particularly clear 
during recess at school. Birthday parties also become a 
“one gender” affair. This is a normal part of growing up 
as a child reinforces his own gender-identity and bonds 
with peers.
Of course, as with everything we discuss, the rules 
are not hard and fast—there is a range of normal. This 
means that some boys like to play with girls, and some 
girls like to play with boys. However, if you are worried 
that your child’s behavior seems to be very different 
from all the other children his age, it is a good idea to 
talk to your child’s doctor, a child psychologist, or other 
mental health professional that specializes in children.
Now back to Name Confusion Syndrome. How should 
you handle NCS so that your children will not feel that 
you don’t think they are all one child, and that you don’t 
really care about their individual identities? How are you 
supposed to manage your own normal inability to get 
their names straight? Should they wear name tags?

Sibling Stuff   133
The Best Way to Respond
I quite like the name tag idea, except that sometimes my 
children aren’t directly in front of me when I’m con-
fusing their names—I’m usually calling for them from 
another room. Perhaps I need a picture and name chart 
posted in each room—that might help!
Seriously, if your children complain that you confuse 
their names, it is possible that you too suffer from NCS. 
Admission is the first step toward recovery.
Next, you need to take three steps to reduce the stress 
your NCS may be causing your children:
	 1.	 Explain to them that your confusion has nothing 
to do with you thinking that they are in any way 
similar to each other. Give them concrete examples 
of the ways that you see them as unique.
	 2.	 Tell them that you will work toward confusing 
their names less often, but explain that you can’t 
promise that you will be able to stop doing it com-
pletely right away (or ever). Tell them that you will 
check in with them to see how you are doing.
	 3.	 Reduce your NCS by pausing for a couple of 
seconds (or more if necessary) each time you are 
about to call one of your children. Think about 
the name you are about to say, and make sure 
it is the correct name. This will dramatically 
reduce the number of mistakes you make! As 
an extra bonus, you may also find that giving 
yourself those few extra seconds also reduces 

134   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
the amount of impulsive yelling in which you 
might engage.
#34: How come you let her stay up 
later/have a cookie/watch TV/eat 
in the den/go to school late/play 
with a friend/[fill in your own] 
and you won’t let me?
Annette feels that she is always negotiating with and ex-
plaining decisions to her daughter Kayla (age 8) because 
she is jealous of her sister Vanessa (age 10½). “Kayla 
always feels I treat Vanessa more fairly,” explained 
Annette. “It’s a losing battle because no matter what I 
say or do, it’s not right!”
“It’s not fair!” is one of the battle cries of childhood. 
And it is a tough one for a parent to negotiate. It can 
sometimes be difficult to be sure if you are being fair 
and equitable with your children—especially when their 
needs seem to be completely different. So, how can you 
be sure that you are doing the right thing? Let’s figure 
it out.
Uncovering the Meaning
It is always best to begin by evaluating whether your 
child’s complaint is accurate. In some cases, a child has 

Sibling Stuff   135
a distorted view of whether her parent treats her fairly 
or not. Perhaps your child is jealous of her sibling for 
another reason. Rather than acknowledging this jeal-
ousy, she displaces it by blaming you. Maybe Kayla is 
jealous because Vanessa is becoming more social and not 
spending as much time with her. Kayla may not even be 
aware of the reason for her feelings, but knows that she 
is angry with Vanessa. Her anger comes out as a feeling 
that Vanessa is favored.
In other instances, both (or all) of your children feel 
like you’re always treating the other more fairly. This 
is a sure sign that you’re treating all of them (or none of 
them) fairly.
However, if one of your children consistently feels 
that she is treated differently from the other(s), it could 
be true. There are many reasons that you may be letting 
one child but not another engage in an activity. The 
most obvious of these (although a younger sibling may 
not like it) is that there are many things an older sibling 
gets to do that a younger sibling can’t yet do (like walk 
to school alone, have a cell phone, go to the mall—the 
list goes on). In addition, a complaint heard just as fre-
quently from older siblings is that younger siblings get 
to do things earlier in life than the older sibling did. For 
example, “How come she gets a cell phone when she’s 
ten? I didn’t get one until I was twelve.” Or “Why do you 
let her stay up until 9 p.m.? When I was her age I had to 
go to sleep at 8:30.”

136   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
The explanation (not that it will satisfy your child) 
is that for many people, parenting first children tends 
to be more “by the book.” This is neither good nor bad, 
but it does tend to be less relaxed, less flexible parenting. 
By the time a second (or third) child comes around, you 
are a more relaxed, more adaptable parent—which is 
good (unless you were too relaxed and flexible to begin 
with; kids do need structure). In addition, having more 
than one child makes it more difficult to be as rigid as 
you may have been with one child—you don’t have the 
time or energy. Your subsequent children benefit from 
this greater flexibility and more relaxed parenting. Your 
first-born sees it as “unfair.” She tends to forget that she 
was the first to “blaze the way,” experiencing practically 
everything before her younger sibling, and that she still 
has privileges that the younger child won’t get until she 
is older.
Another situation that kids often describe as unfair is 
when a parent allows a son to engage in activities that 
a daughter of a similar age is not allowed to experience 
due to a fear for her safety. Angelica (age 10) is furious 
with her parents because they won’t let her walk six 
blocks home from school. “Why can’t I walk home?” she 
demands. “You let Chase (age 14) when he was my age. 
It’s so not fair!” 
Angelica’s mom, Anna, sees the situation differently. 
“Chase is a boy. Even at ten, he was much bigger and 
stronger than Angelica. She is petite and pretty. I don’t 

Sibling Stuff   137
care what she says—crazy people are much more likely 
to abduct an adorable little girl walking alone than a ten-
year-old boy. I don’t care that to her it seems like—or 
is—a double-standard. I care about her safety.”
You might be surprised to find out that a comprehen-
sive study of missing children undertaken by the U.S. 
Department of Justice (published in 2002), does not fully 
support Anna’s perspective. To begin, although she is 
right that girls are more likely to be abducted than boys, 
it does not mean that boys are safe. In fact, of the 58,200 
children abducted by nonfamily members during the 
year of this study, only 65 percent were girls. Perhaps, 
at ten years old, Anna should not have let Chase walk 
to school alone either. In addition, no matter how much 
taller or tougher Chase may have been compared to 
Angelica, the truth is that any child, when confronted 
with a weapon, is equally vulnerable to abduction.
Here’s another interesting fact. More children (girls 
and boys) are abducted by someone with whom they are 
familiar than by a complete stranger. This emphasizes 
the critical need to teach your children not only about 
stranger danger, but also about never going anywhere 
with anyone, unless a parent or caregiver has given them 
permission to do so—even with someone they know well, 
such as a neighbor or friend, and even if that person is 
asking the child for help.
The study also revealed that teenage girls are, by far, 
the most likely victims of abduction (by sexual predators). 

138   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Practicing a double standard is, therefore, not such a bad 
idea. However, do so not when your child is young, since 
both genders are potential victims at that age, but rather 
as your daughter gets older. Your daughter may not like 
this idea, but Anna is right about this: your daughter’s 
safety is what is most important!
Yet another reason parents sometimes treat siblings 
differently has to do with their levels of maturity, or their 
developmental, social, or learning needs. For example, 
Kyle (age 7) has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), which causes him to have poor impulse control. 
His dad, Charles, definitely doesn’t want him eating in 
the den! But Charlie Jr. (age 8½) is careful, calm, and 
neat. Charles is fine with him eating in the den occasion-
ally. “It’s not fair!” exclaims Kyle. “How come he gets to 
eat in the den and I don’t?” Later that night, while their 
dad was putting them to bed, Kyle had a meltdown. 
“You’re always nicer to Charlie! How come he can do 
everything and I can’t do anything?” he cried. Charles 
felt terrible.
In situations like this, you sometimes have to meet 
the needs of your more complex child, rather than 
your easier one. At times, your easier child may not 
even realize she is compromising: the family rule can 
simply be “no eating in the den.” At other times, the 
need for concessions should be made clear: Charlie can 
be helped to be patient with Kyle, rather than getting 
mad at him whenever he knocks something over. This 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sibling Stuff   139
is part of living in a family. At the same time, in order 
to minimize the chance of resentment between siblings, 
you always need to be careful that you are not putting 
too much of a burden on one sibling to compromise for 
another sibling.
The Best Way to Respond
Begin by determining the reason for your child’s ques-
tion. This will help you address your child’s feelings. 
However, no matter what the reason for your child’s 
question, the core of your response needs to communi-
cate the following two points to your child:
	 1.	 Tell your child that in your family everyone gets 
what they need.
	 2.	 Then explain that getting what you need doesn’t 
mean you will always get the same thing as every 
other person. In fact, there will be times when your 
child and her sibling won’t get the same thing. 
This is not a reason to be jealous. It simply means 
that they don’t need the same thing right now. As 
a parent, it is important for you to believe this. It is 
your job to meet the needs of your children. Their 
needs will not be the same. While you should treat 
your children fairly, you should not feel compelled 
to treat them in exactly the same way at all times. 
For example you may say, “Kayla, I’m sorry that you 
feel I treat Vanessa better than you. However, in our 
www.Ebook777.com

140   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
family everyone gets what they need. That means some-
times you get something and Vanessa doesn’t, or she gets 
something and you don’t. That may be time spent with 
you, something bought for you, or something given to 
you. I will keep reminding you of this until you feel com-
fortable that I love both of you equally, but that doesn’t 
mean I will treat you exactly the same all the time.”
Another example may be similar to the following: 
“Angelica, I know you feel it is unfair that Chase was 
allowed to walk to school at your age. However, the cir-
cumstances were different when Chase was younger. He 
walked to school with a large group of boys every day 
and was never alone. That is not the same as you wanting 
to walk to school alone, or occasionally with another girl 
when she happens to be available. Remember, everyone 
gets what they need in our family. Right now, you need 
to walk to school with me, because that is safest for you 
right now. We can reevaluate again in a few months to 
see if there is a larger group that you can walk with.”
Here’s one more example: “Charlie, I know you would 
like to go to a baseball game, but Kyle doesn’t like base-
ball, so it’s something we need to do when we can find 
something else for Kyle to do, because he will be bored 
and restless and then we won’t have fun. Remember, 
everyone gets what they need, and I know you need to go 
to a baseball game. I’m going to do my best to get you to 
one as soon as possible, but I can’t make Kyle miserable 
in the process. So be patient, and as soon as we can find 

Sibling Stuff   141
someone to watch Kyle for the afternoon, we will get 
tickets and go.”
As you can see, it is most important that your child 
learns to be flexible and to realize that, in a family, 
being treated fairly does not always mean being treated 
the same as one’s sibling(s). This is an excellent lesson: 
throughout life, your child will confront situations where 
it will be important to feel secure in one’s place and to 
feel empathy for others, rather than jealousy or envy.


Money, Money, 
Money
7
Your child’s interest in money and its importance for pur-
chasing items she wants increases as she moves into the 
upper elementary grades. For one thing, as her arithme-
tic skills continue to improve, she learns more and more 
about how money actually works—the value of paper 
money compared to coins and the value of higher versus 
lower denominations of money. It will still be some time 
before your child truly has a grasp on all the intricacies of 
saving and spending money, but you will likely begin to 
see a great leap of understanding in these years.
In this chapter, you will see that your child’s ques-
tions reflect his greater understanding of money and the 
complexities that surround the world of purchasing and 
saving. The way you respond to these questions, and 
the way you approach giving money to your child and 

144   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
spending money on your child will help him to form his 
own understanding of the value of money. It will also 
have a dramatic impact on the way he relates to you 
about money. For example, every parent wants a child 
who is appreciative and values the money that is spent 
on him. This doesn’t happen by accident! It is directly 
connected to the way you communicate to your child 
about money.
We will discuss many issues in this chapter that will 
help you raise an appreciative, fiscally responsible child. 
For example—one I am sure will be of great interest to 
you—we will talk about how to begin giving your child 
an allowance, which, if done the correct way, will also 
dramatically increase your child’s ability to understand 
the value of money. This is one of the topics parents ask 
me about the most wherever I go, so let’s begin with the 
question that relates to it.
#35: Can I get my allowance 
early? 
(Or: Will you buy this for me, and I’ll pay 
you back? Can I have some money? Will 
you buy me…?)
Emily and Claire (both age 10) constantly ask their 
parents, Sherry and Russell, if they can get their 

Money, Money, Money   145
allowances early. Sherry explains, “There’s always 
something they want to buy—a CD, a toy, some junk 
at the pharmacy. I’m constantly advancing one of them 
allowance; it’s hard to keep track of whom I’ve given 
[allowance to] and whom I haven’t!”
Allowance is a complex matter in many homes. 
Parents are not sure at what age to start giving it, how 
much to give, and what the rules should be for receiving 
it. Should a child do chores for an allowance or receive 
it free and clear? Should you give it once a week or less 
frequently? Can your child lose her allowance for bad 
behavior? And what about the question here, asked 
often by elementary-age (and older) kids? Is it okay to 
advance your child’s allowance earlier in the week?
Let’s try and sort through all these issues, so you have 
it straight by the end of this section.
Uncovering the Meaning
ONE: It is best to begin giving your child an allowance 
when she truly starts to understand the concept of spend-
ing and saving money.
The bottom line: For most kids, this is not before six 
years of age, and for many it is closer to seven or even a 
bit older. If you do not yet give your child an allowance, 
don’t worry! It is never too late to start.
TWO: You are probably also wondering how much 
allowance to give your child, right? I bet you have heard 
the rumor that you are supposed to give $1 for each year 

146   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
of your child’s age. Actually, I—and many other profes-
sionals—do not subscribe to that theory. For one thing, 
don’t you think that $6 is a lot to give a six-year-old? 
And for some twelve-year-olds, $12 may not be enough, 
depending on what they are expected to use their allow-
ances for. Therefore, the amount you give your child 
should depend on your expectations for how your child 
will spend the allowance.
For example, if you expect your nine-year-old to use 
her allowance only for an occasional treat at the drug-
store or a pack of gum once in a while, a couple of dollars 
a week is more than enough. On the other hand, if you 
want your ten-year-old to spend her money on birthday 
gifts for friends, some of her clothes, and snacks at the 
movies, she probably needs closer to $20 a week. This 
will require her to budget (with your help) for what she 
wants and is required to purchase.
The bottom line: Your child needs a big enough allow-
ance so that she actually has enough money to spend on 
the items you expect her to pay for, within a budget, and 
still be able to save a bit for the future. If you give an al-
lowance that is too small, your child will simply become 
frustrated, and the meaning of getting an allowance—
learning to budget, save, and spend—will be missed.
THREE: Parents frequently tell me that they give 
their children allowances, but they still ask for Mom or 
Dad to give them money or buy them things. In fact, 
the constant nagging to buy, buy, buy is a good signal 

Money, Money, Money   147
that your child is ready to receive an allowance. If your 
child is already receiving one, it means that you are not 
leveraging it correctly. Keep this in mind: you should 
not make impulse or unplanned purchases for your child, 
or purchase items that you do not want to buy that she 
could buy with her own money. This is the very reason 
she receives an allowance. Below, we will discuss what 
you need to say to your child to help her see that she 
should use her own money, rather than continuing to ask 
you to buy her things.
The bottom line: Your child has an allowance so 
that you don’t constantly have to buy things for her. 
This will only happen if you actually stop purchasing 
these things.
FOUR: Another big question that I am frequently 
asked is whether a child’s allowance should be tied to 
chores. The answer is no! I know some parents may not 
like this answer because you would like your child to 
know that she cannot get money free and clear. Some 
parents are even tempted to offer their children money 
(not exactly an allowance) for getting good grades in 
school. However, there are two reasons that it is impor-
tant to give an allowance without tying it to anything:
	 1.	 A child should be expected to do chores because 
she is part of a family unit, not because she is 
being paid to do them. There should be no mon-
etary compensation for it. A child should also be 
expected to work as hard as possible in school 

148   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
because this is what is expected of her, by you 
and by her teachers. This is an integral part of 
being in a family, and of being a person of pride 
and integrity. You are not compensated for doing 
laundry, making beds, cooking dinner, or helping 
your kids with homework. Yes, you are compen-
sated for working outside of the house, but that is 
the money on which your family lives. Your child 
does not get paid by school for her hard work! You 
should not, therefore, foster a sense of entitlement 
that she should receive compensation for her hard 
work in school or at home. You should not be 
afraid to place demands on your child and you do 
not need to pay her to meet these demands. This 
is part of raising an emotionally healthy and well-
behaved child.
	 2.	 The reason you give your child an allowance is to 
begin teaching her how to use, budget, and save 
money. When she is older and gets her first job, she 
will learn about earning money. If you so choose, 
it is fine to compensate her for doing extra chores 
beyond the regular ones (washing the car, shovel-
ing snow, cleaning the garage, filing, organizing, 
stuffing envelopes, etc.).
The bottom line: Allowance and chores are to remain 
separate. Your child’s allowance is an experiment in 
using money; chores are about living in the family.

Money, Money, Money   149
FIVE: This next issue is actually connected to the 
previous one—many parents want to know if a child’s 
allowance should be docked for poor behavior. Much as 
allowance should not be connected to chores, it should 
also not be related to behavior. As tempting as it is to 
take away allowance if your child behaves badly, it 
is more appropriate to give an elementary-age child a 
consequence that is directly related to the negative be-
havior, rather than by taking away money. In reality, 
the docked allowance will not mean nearly as much to 
her as it means to you. In addition, a consequence that 
is connected to her behavior—and is immediate—will 
have a greater impact on her behavior than losing a 
couple of dollars.
The bottom line: Docking allowance should not be a 
consequence for negative behavior.
SIX: Some families—like mine—have rules for how a 
child is allowed to spend her allowance. Even though it 
is your child’s money, I believe that you should still have 
final veto power. Here are some examples of things you 
might want to consider within your domain to veto. In 
our home, allowance cannot be spent on any of these:
Junk food and soda
• 
Video/handheld games that have an inappropriate 
• 
rating
Inappropriate clothing (too suggestive, negative 
• 
message written on it, etc.)

150   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Of course, your child will want to spend her money on 
many other things that you think are a ridiculous waste 
of money. I know mine do. I do my best to talk them out 
of these, but never forbid them. Sometimes the lesson of 
money wasted is well worth it.
The bottom line: Don’t be afraid to make rules about 
how your child spends her money. You’re still the parent, 
and you still make the rules.
SEVEN: Finally! To the question asked by Emily, 
Claire, and so many other children. Is it okay to advance 
your child’s allowance before she is due to receive it? For 
the most part, I would suggest that, when your child is in 
elementary school, it is best not to advance her allowance 
on a regular basis because it will defeat the purpose of her 
learning to wait and to save—two of the main reasons you 
are giving her an allowance. I speak a great deal about 
teaching your child frustration tolerance—the ability 
to wait patiently for what she wants, without having 
a tantrum. I have spoken about frustration tolerance 
several times throughout the book, so you know that it is 
an important skill for your child to learn. If you always 
advance her allowance simply because she asks for it, you 
take away an excellent opportunity for her to practice 
frustration tolerance—waiting to purchase something 
she wants because she can’t get it immediately.
Of course, there are exceptions to this rule. If your 
child rarely asks, and the item she wants will not be 
available at a later point, you may want to consider 

Money, Money, Money   151
lending her the money until she has saved up enough. In 
this case, it is important to work out a repayment plan 
and write it down so she understands it. It will be diffi-
cult for her to remember it—especially after she already 
has the item she wants—if you don’t make it concrete 
and clear for her. I strongly suggest that you not get in a 
habit of advancing money in this manner.
Another time when it may be okay to advance money 
to your child is when she actually has the money at home 
and she can give it back to you right away. Be clear that 
you expect her to repay you as soon as she has access to 
her money, and then make sure that she follows through. 
The money may be trivial to you, but it is an important 
lesson for her.
The bottom line: Do not offer an advance on your 
child’s allowance except in rare circumstances, and then 
be clear that you expect repayment as soon as possible.
The Best Way to Respond
Now that you have a thorough understanding of how to 
give your elementary-age child an allowance, respond-
ing to this question should be simple! Here is an example 
of a possible response that might work for you: “Sorry, 
you can’t get your allowance early. You will get your 
allowance on Saturday as usual. If you like, we can go 
to the store then, and you can buy what you want. If it 
is not there anymore, you will either find something else 
or wait until next time. It’s probably a good idea to save 

152   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
some of your allowance each week, rather than spending 
it all, so you have money at the end of the week.”
Now I would like to give you a response to help you 
solve the problem of your child continuing to ask you for 
money or to buy her things, despite the fact that she gets 
an adequate allowance:
Your child: “Mom, can I have a quarter to get a 
bouncy ball from the machine in the supermarket?”
You: “Would you spend your own quarter on the 
machine?”
Your child: “No! It’s not worth it.”
You: “Right! It’s not worth it to spend my money 
either. Sorry, you can’t have a quarter.”
Here is another scenario that will help you to realize 
that when a child must spend his own money, he thinks 
much harder about whether he really wants something:
Your child: “Can you get me a remote control car?”
You: “You can use your own money.”
Your child: “But that’s a lot of money!”
You: “Yes, it is. So how come you expect me to spend 
so much of my money? If you want it, you need to save 
for it. Your birthday is coming up in a month. I’ll give 
you $15 toward it for your birthday, and you need to 
save the rest.”
Your child: “I’ll think about it. I don’t know if I want 
it for my birthday. I don’t know if I want it that much.”
The bottom line about allowances: If you want to have 
a child who truly appreciates the value of your money 

Money, Money, Money   153
and her own, you need to make your child’s allowance 
meaningful and valuable. If you buy your child whatever 
she wants in addition to giving her an allowance, your 
child will never appreciate or value money or material 
things—do not expect her to!
#36: How much money do YOU 
MAKE/DOES DADDY MAKE? 
(Or: How much did our house/car cost?)
Georgia’s son Tyler (age 9) asks her lots of personal ques-
tions about money, which she is not sure how to answer. 
She explains, “Tyler is very curious about our finances. He 
frequently asks me how much money I have in my wallet, 
how much I earn, how much the check is at a restaurant, 
and how much various things cost—our house, our car, or 
a vacation. I’m okay telling him the cost of some things, 
but not everything. Am I being too secretive?”
It is not at all unusual for a curious child to become 
interested in the cost of all sorts of items and activities. 
However, it is also perfectly normal, and in fact advis-
able, for you to figure out which information you should 
tell your child and which it is better not to share. Let’s 
explore this topic and figure out the best way to com-
municate with your child about the cost of your lifestyle 
in a way that makes him feel included, without revealing 
more than is appropriate for his age.

154   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Uncovering the Meaning
An elementary-age child is most likely asking this ques-
tion simply because he wants to gain a frame of refer-
ence about how much money grown-ups make when 
they have jobs. It is also possible that he has participated 
in or overheard conversations about how much money 
other people’s parents make, so he is curious to compare 
your income with theirs. At this stage, if you were to tell 
your child your actual income, he would have little real 
understanding of how much this means in real life (even 
if he is the smartest kid on the block!). For example, an 
eight-year-old doesn’t actually understand the real dif-
ference in spending power between $50,000, $100,000, 
and $300,000. Even if you explain it to him, it will mean 
very little. Even a ten-year-old will not be able to grasp 
this in a meaningful way. There is therefore no compel-
ling reason to tell your child your actual income.
What’s more, your income is likely private family 
business. Since a young child is not particularly good 
at keeping secrets, this is not good information to share. 
While it is fine to ask a child to keep family business 
private, your child would feel very bad if he accidentally 
divulged information that you really did not want known. 
As the adult, it is your responsibility to make sure that 
you keep it private—particularly since there is no reason 
that your child needs to know the actual numbers.
In addition to the above reasons, an elementary-age 
child is not yet ready to understand how you choose to 

Money, Money, Money   155
spend your money on big-ticket items. The amounts 
of money will be overwhelming and confusing to him. 
Perhaps, by middle or high school, you might begin to 
share certain larger expenditures with your child, as you 
think he is able to understand these. When it comes to 
smaller expenditures, you can decide on a case-by-case 
basis, depending on your child and on the situation.
The Best Way to Respond
When your child asks about your income, the best re-
sponse is similar to the following: “I (or we) make enough 
money to make sure that our family has what we need—
food, clothes, and our home. We also have enough for 
the extras that we like—things like the movies, eating 
out sometimes, and other fun stuff. You don’t need to 
worry about the exact amount of money.”
If your child insists on knowing, you might have to 
add, “That’s private grown-up information. When you 
are a grown-up and you have a job, then you will know 
how much money you make. But I’m not going to share 
my money information with you.”
When your child asks you the cost of other items, you 
can decide on an individual basis whether you want to 
share the information. Here is an example: “It cost our 
family more than $60 to eat in this restaurant—that’s more 
than $15 for each of the four of us. If you were paying for 
yourself, it would cost you nearly four weeks allowance 
because you get $4 a week. That’s a lot of money, right?”

156   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
NOTE: In the above example, you share the amount, 
but use it as a valuable lesson, giving your child perspec-
tive about the cost of eating out.
And another example: “When you buy a car, you 
have to pay for the car, for insurance, for gas, and also 
to fix your car when it needs a repair. It costs hundreds 
of dollars a month to own a car, thousands of dollars a 
year—did you know that?”
NOTE: In this example, you do not give your child an 
exact amount, but you do give a realistic ballpark, so he un-
derstands that owning a car is an expensive undertaking.
#37: Why do we have to give 
money to charity?
Douglas was surprised when his daughter Mia (age 7) 
asked him about giving money to charity. “We talk a lot 
about helping others, so I thought she understood, but I 
guess the connection was missed somehow.”
Giving money to charity is a difficult concept for 
elementary-age children. Unless you make it a real part 
of their everyday lives, it is hard for them to grasp.
Uncovering the Meaning
As your child grows through the elementary years, she 
is exposed to many new things. If your child goes to 
a reasonably decent school, one of the things she will 

Money, Money, Money   157
be exposed to is doing good deeds, giving to people 
who are in need, and helping others. It is important to 
continue to convey this message at home as well. It is 
especially important to make sure that your child un-
derstands the importance of giving money to charity. 
Sometimes this is taught in school, but not always. 
Sometimes, at school, the concept of charity is taught 
through actions and behavior—which are also very 
important. Teaching your child to give financially is 
often your job.
One way to do this is to suggest to your child that 
each week, when she gets her allowance, she should 
put a small part of it in a piggy bank to give to charity. 
As a family, you can pick the charity, and you can all 
save money and donate an amount to it each year. It is 
usually good to pick a child-centered charity or one that 
has special significance for your family, because your 
child (or children) will feel more connected to it.
I often suggest that families pick the charity to which 
they are going to contribute during the holiday season—
so that a child can feel she is giving, not just receiving, 
gifts. You can change your charity each year if you 
choose. Then, in addition to (or instead of) weekly al-
lowance money, you can also donate proceeds from bake 
sales, car washes, or other money collected or earned 
during the year. This will teach your child the value of 
giving to charity in a very real way.

158   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
The Best Way to Respond
Your response to this question should help your child un-
derstand the importance of giving money to charity, not 
just for the receiver, but also for the giver. A young child 
also needs to hear a response that includes exactly what 
the money could be used for, as she probably doesn’t truly 
understand what a very poor person might be missing 
in her or her family’s life. A complete response might 
be similar to the following: “We give money to charity 
because it is important to help other people who may not 
have enough money to buy food. Someone who doesn’t 
have enough money for food might not be able to eat 
breakfast, lunch, or dinner, or give food to their kids—in 
fact, they might be hungry all the time. They also might 
not have money for enough clothes for themselves or for 
their kids, so they would be cold in the winter, or not 
have shoes for their feet. They also might not have a 
home, so they wouldn’t have somewhere to live.”
#38: Are things you buy with a 
credit card free? 
(Or: How can you not have money if there 
are still checks in the book?)
Troy (age 8½) couldn’t figure out how his mom, Connie, 
purchased so many things with a little plastic card. 
Connie had not realized Troy’s confusion until he spoke 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Money, Money, Money   159
to her about it. “Troy apparently thought that everything 
I buy with my credit cards is free! I got a good laugh 
from that. I explained to him that you use the credit card 
and then you have to pay the bill later, but I’m still not 
sure that he really gets it.”
Buying on credit is a tough concept for kids to under-
stand—even some teenagers still don’t get it—especially 
the part about paying interest. But it is very important 
for you to begin explaining it to your child when he is in 
elementary school. Otherwise by the time he is old enough 
to apply for and receive a credit card—which could be 
as young as high school, because credit card companies 
now market heavily to high-school-age kids—he could 
find himself deep in debt, before you even know about 
or can stop it.
Uncovering the Meaning
Your elementary-age child is just beginning to gain a 
good understanding of how money is a powerful agent 
for purchasing anything and everything. He is learning to 
save, budget, and spend wisely (thanks to you enforcing a 
strict policy about how he needs to use his allowance).
But suddenly you tell him that this small piece of 
plastic works just like money. That does not make very 
much sense in his mind. How does plastic (or paper, in 
the case of checks) equal money? In fact, it sounds like it 
is even better than money, because it seems never to run 
out! In addition, you can use it to purchase items through 
www.Ebook777.com

160   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
the computer—how does that work? Even money can’t 
do that! This little plastic card seems to be very power-
ful. Your child might be wondering, “Why can’t I have 
one?” In fact, it is not unknown for older children and 
teens to “borrow” their parents’ credit cards to make 
online purchases without their parents’ permission. It 
is therefore important to include in your explanation 
about credit cards the rules for their use—including who 
is allowed to use them.
Your explanation needs to be given at a very 
simplistic level so that your child can clearly under-
stand what you are saying. This is not the time for 
a complex description of different types of interest 
rates or the difference between department store and 
regular credit cards. The basic information you want 
to impart is as follows:
If you use a credit card to buy something, it is like 
• 
borrowing money. You will need to pay the money 
back very soon after using it, so you need to make 
sure you have the actual money.
You will also have to pay interest—which is the 
• 
price that you pay for borrowing the money, so you 
need to have that money ready to pay too. If you 
don’t, the amount you owe gets bigger and bigger.
It is always better to pay with real money than 
• 
with a credit card.
You should 
• 
never use a credit card unless you have 
a job or your parent says it is okay to have one. 

Money, Money, Money   161
You should never apply for a credit card without 
permission.
You must 
• 
never borrow a parent’s credit card 
without permission. You will be punished if you 
do—it is stealing.
The Best Way to Respond
Your elementary-age child needs a clear concrete expla-
nation to really understand the way credit cards work. 
The same type of explanation is needed to understand 
the way checks work. It is a good idea to give an example 
that is directly related to your child’s life. For example: 
“Using a credit card is like borrowing money. When you 
give the credit card to the person in the store, and he 
swipes it through the machine, it tells the store that you 
are borrowing the money from the credit card company 
and that you are going to pay it back. You always have 
to pay it back. Like if you borrow money from me to buy 
a new toy, you have to pay me back the next time you 
get your allowance. But the credit card company isn’t 
your parent, so it doesn’t just lend you the money; it also 
charge you extra money for letting you borrow it. So let’s 
say I said I would let you borrow $10 for the toy, but I 
also said you had to pay me an extra $1 because I was 
letting you borrow the money—that $1 is called interest. 
You have to pay all that money back, or the credit card 
company can come and take back the stuff you bought 
with its money, and even other stuff. So, you should 

162   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
never, ever use a credit card unless you are sure you 
can pay back the money plus the interest. Some credit 
card companies let high school kids get cards, but you 
should never get a credit card when you are a kid unless 
you have my permission. And you must never borrow 
my credit card to buy anything from a store or online 
without my permission. That’s like stealing money and 
you would be punished for doing that. I would know you 
did it because every month I get a letter from the credit 
card company telling me everything that is bought with 
my card.”
#39: If you won’t buy it, can I  
ask Grandma?
Suzanne’s daughter Anna (age 10) doesn’t like to take no 
for an answer. “If my husband or I tell Anna she can’t 
have something, she immediately asks me if she can ask 
Grandma or Grandpa if they will buy it for her. I’m con-
flicted about this. Part of me says, ‘Why shouldn’t she 
have it if they don’t mind buying it?’ but the other part 
of me says, ‘Why can’t she just accept that no means no, 
and she can’t always find a way around it?’”
This is a tough call—is Anna being manipulative and 
stubborn, or is she simply being resourceful? What do 
you think? Let’s explore this question to find out.

Money, Money, Money   163
Uncovering the Meaning
It is true that a child will often try any means to get what 
she wants, even if this includes testing all limits and 
risking angering her parents. In this particular situation, 
your child is likely asking this question because of one of 
the following reasons:
In Scenario #1, you have not made clear your reason 
for saying no. Sometimes parents make rules that ap-
pear—or are—arbitrary. If you do not take the time to 
explain your reason for saying no to your child, there 
is no reason for her to understand your rationale. You 
may want her simply to accept “because I said so” as a 
reason to comply, but for many children, this is not mo-
tivating enough. We encourage our children to question 
everything in their world. We can’t therefore expect to 
say no and have them accept it without an explanation. 
They do not have to be happy with the explanation, or 
be thrilled that we are saying no, but at least it will make 
sense to them. Therefore, if your child asks if Grandma 
can buy her an item that you have denied her, it might 
be because you have not offered a clear explanation as to 
why you do not want to buy it.
In Scenario #2, your child knows full well why you 
are saying no, but she wants to push you as far as she can 
anyway. Some children are risk-takers. They are even 
willing to risk being yelled at, reprimanded, or punished 
on the outside chance that they might get what they 
want. If your child knows you well, it could be a risk 

164   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
worth taking. For example, if you tend to give in easily, 
rather than standing firm, your child may be aware that 
even a gentle nudge will get you to say yes to the sugges-
tion that perhaps her grandparents will buy her what 
you don’t want to purchase. Or perhaps she knows that 
you will feel guilty having to say no to a big purchase, 
but that the grandparents will say yes. All she has to 
do is ask, and you will give in. Or, of course, you might 
get angry and say no even more forcefully because you 
made it clear the first time that “no means no,” but she’s 
willing to take the risk.
The Best Way to Respond
In Scenario #1 your interchange with your child prob-
ably goes as follows:
You: “No, I won’t buy you the CD you want.”
Your child: “But why?”
You: “Because I said so, that’s why!”
Does this sound at all familiar? If it does, then you 
should know that your child really doesn’t understand 
why you don’t want to purchase the CD for her. It seems 
perfectly logical to her to suggest that perhaps you would 
allow her to find another person to buy it for her—this 
would alleviate you of the responsibility, and she would 
still be able to get what she wants.
It would be better for you to tell her the reason up 
front, so that it is clear to her. “I am not buying you the 
CD because it is expensive. You can save your allowance 

Money, Money, Money   165
for it if you want to—I’ll even pay for half of it if you 
like, but you’ll have to wait until you’ve saved enough. 
That’s the only way you can get it.” If she still wants to 
know if she can ask Grandma for it, your response should 
be, “No, we’ve discussed the way you can get the CD. If 
you want it, you need to save for it. Grandma buys you 
lots of things, and you can’t ask her for something just 
because I say no.”
In Scenario #2, your exchange with your child might 
be similar to the following:
You: “I won’t buy you that CD because I’m not happy 
with your behavior today, and you don’t deserve a gift.”
Your child: “But I’ll be behave better now, I promise.”
You: “Sorry, no!”
Your child: “Can I ask Grandma to buy it for me then?”
You: “No! Your behavior does not deserve a CD, 
not from me, Grandma, or anyone else! I hope we are 
clear. I will talk to Grandma and make sure she doesn’t 
say yes. And if I hear that you asked her, you will have 
a consequence.”
In this scenario, it is important that you make sure 
that the grandparent (or other parent, baby-sitter, 
or whomever your child wants to approach) does not 
undermine your efforts to discipline your child. If such 
undermining is an ongoing issue, you need to address 
it directly, because it is not healthy for your child to be 
able to have that much power.
If you find yourself typically giving in to your child 

166   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
and allowing her to ask her grandparent (or someone 
else) for items that you don’t want to buy, it is time 
to rethink this policy. It is okay to disappoint your 
child. What’s more, it is no one else’s job to take care 
of the material needs of your child, unless they do so 
voluntarily. In fact, you may be placing this person in 
an awkward position by allowing your child to ask for 
gifts more frequently than is appropriate. It is also not 
in your child’s best interest.
Remember our old friend, frustration tolerance? 
Your child needs to learn to wait patiently and to take 
no for an answer. I promise you, by teaching your child 
this skill you will have the nicest, most respectful child 
on the block!

Growing Up 
So Fast
8
With each passing year, the questions your child asks 
seem to get more and more interesting. However, the 
questions in this chapter are, I believe, some of the 
toughest ones to answer. Upper-elementary-age chil-
dren are desperate to grow up and are doing so more 
and more quickly than ever before. It is not your imagi-
nation that your child is more sophisticated than you 
were at the same age. This is fueled partially by the TV 
shows and movies that children watch. These push chil-
dren toward being older than they are. This is not only 
because of the content (see Chapter Three) but also due 
to the sophisticated manner in which children’s media 
idols dress and behave.
Children are also required to grow up faster 
because they live in a world that asks them to be more 

168   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
independent. Both parents work, they learn how to use 
a cell phone (see Chapter One for my view on this), they 
have busy social lives, and they juggle an array of activi-
ties and schoolwork that rivals the amount of work an 
adult manages—all without a PDA to assist them.
Becoming an independent, busy person at a younger 
age is not bad for your child. In fact, I think it is great! 
But it is making her grow up faster. In fact, over the 
last few years I’ve noticed that the term “tween” has 
stretched in its definition. It used to include children in 
the eleven- and twelve-year-old range. Now most defi-
nitions include children beginning at age eight. If you 
are reading this book, that includes your child. Did you 
know you already have a tween?
Having a smart, independent child means that you 
have to be prepared for questions about growing up, in-
dependence, bodies, and life, earlier than you might have 
thought you had to be prepared. So get ready for the ride 
of your life because once the questions start coming, they 
won’t stop until your child is…well, maybe never! But I’ll 
get you started right now and you’ll be ready for them.
#40: Why can’t I stay home alone?
Cassidy (age 9) recently started asking her parents if she 
could stay home alone. Ray and Kelly agree that even 
though they live in a safe neighborhood, they are not 

Growing Up So Fast   169
comfortable with this idea. Ray explained, “Cassie gets so 
annoyed when we tell her we’re not comfortable leaving 
her alone in the house (or with her eight-year-old sister). 
She’ll say, ‘Not even for half an hour in the middle of the 
day?’ When I say no, she says, ‘You treat me like I’m a 
baby! I can take care of myself. I know how to dial 911, 
I know how to cook; you just don’t trust me!’ I explain 
that we only let her cook when we are around and that 
this is different. She insists that she’s not a baby.”
It always amazes me how differently parents and kids 
perceive situations—and this discrepancy continues to 
become wider as your child inches closer to adolescence. 
The key is to learn how to compromise with your child 
in a way that maintains her safety but still allows her 
to feel a sense of autonomy. Once you figure out how to 
do it now, it will be much smoother sailing during the 
teen years.
Uncovering the Meaning
What is it that empowers your child to want to be so in-
dependent at such a young age? For one thing, the media 
has an enormous influence on your child’s desire to expe-
rience being alone. TV shows like iCarly (Nickelodeon), 
Zoey 101 (Nickelodeon), The Suite Life of Zack and 
Cody (Disney Channel), and Recess (Disney Channel), 
which are basically funny and innocuous programs that 
target elementary-age kids, and depict children and 
young teens who get into trouble, and then solve their 

170   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
problems with very little adult involvement. If you have 
never watched them, check out the shows your child is 
watching, and you’ll see what I mean.
Then, of course, there are all the real-life child and 
teen celebrities who are marketed directly to your school-
age child. Not only are they famous, but they appear to 
be living glamorous and independent lives before reach-
ing adulthood. Consider, for example, famous teens like 
Miley Cyrus (Hannah Montana), the Jonas Brothers, 
and all the stars of High School Musical, to name just 
a few. It is no wonder your child is asking for a small 
chance to test out her own skills of independence.
An older sibling, cousin, or even neighborhood friends 
who are allowed to stay alone may also influence your 
child’s desire to experience the independence of having 
the house to herself.
So, when is the right age to allow your child to stay 
home alone? I asked a number of parents. Here is a sam-
pling of their answers:
Brenda: “Twelve is the right age; a child younger 
than that just isn’t ready yet.”
Teresa: “I started leaving my son home for an hour 
or so at ten years old. Our apartment building has a 
doorman, and a friend lives right next door. He’s very 
mature, and I felt comfortable.”
Rodney: “Thirteen or fourteen is young enough. Why 
rush it? Anything could happen, and you never know if 
your child could handle it.”

Growing Up So Fast   171
Jill: “I have eleven-year-old twins—a girl and a boy. 
I’d leave my daughter alone but not my son; girls are 
much more mature and level-headed!”
Colleen: “I haven’t left my kids alone yet, and they 
are ten, twelve, and fourteen. They fight like cats and 
dogs—I would be afraid of what would happen while I 
was gone! I keep telling them that when they are mature 
enough to stop fighting, I’ll think about it.”
Ron: “When I was growing up, I let myself in to the 
house after school beginning at age nine. I want my son 
to do the same, but my wife doesn’t agree—she thinks he 
should be at least eleven.”
Tonia: “It depends on your child; some kids are more 
mature than others, and some are also less afraid to stay 
alone.”
Eva: “It really depends on your neighborhood—if you 
live somewhere quiet and safe, you can leave your child 
alone at a younger age than if you live somewhere that 
is not as safe.”
As you can see, there is definitely no one right or 
wrong answer! In fact, only two states officially regu-
late the age at which a child is not permitted to be left 
alone: Maryland (under eight years) and Illinois (under 
fourteen years). In every other state, it is left to the dis-
cretion of a parent, although some states offer strong 
guidelines. In addition, many local communities may 
have regulations as to an age at which it is acceptable 
to leave a child alone. If you are not sure how to learn 

172   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
about such guidelines, you should call your local Child 
Protective Services office. If you are not sure how to 
reach your local office, you can call Childhelp USA 
(www.childhelp.org) at (800) 4-A-CHILD (422-4453). 
They will be able to help you find the contact informa-
tion for your local office.
Aside from possible regulations or guidelines, there 
are multiple other factors to consider when thinking 
about whether your child is ready to be left alone (in ad-
dition to her asking you over and over again). To begin, 
I recommend that, at an absolute minimum, any child 
under ten is too young to be left alone, no matter how 
much she begs (notwithstanding Maryland’s law). Even 
a mature eight- or nine-year-old does not have the cogni-
tive ability, judgment, or emotional maturity to handle 
the possible problems, crises, or temptations of being 
alone at home.
Once you have established this bottom line, you need 
to feel comfortable with your child’s level of maturity. 
Can you answer yes to all of the following questions?
Does your child follow directions and rules?
• 
Does your child typically use good judgment, 
• 
rather than being someone who engages in danger-
ous, impulsive, or risky behavior?
Is your child usually truthful? Do your trust her?
• 
Can your child make an emergency phone call with 
• 
confidence? If necessary, you should role-play to 
find out.

Growing Up So Fast   173
Is your child generally responsible about important 
• 
aspects of her life (homework, chores, etc.)?
Does your child stay calm in the face of something 
• 
unexpected (the doorbell rings, she must talk to 
a stranger on the phone, she gets a small cut, the 
smoke alarm goes off, there’s a power outage)?
If you can comfortably respond yes to all of the 
above—including all aspects of the last point—your 
child may be ready to stay home alone, as long as you are 
ready for her to do so. Your comfort level may depend 
on the area in which you live as well as your own life 
experience. However, be careful not to let your own 
anxiety get in the way if all other factors point in the 
direction of giving your child a chance.
The Best Way to Respond
If your child is under ten, or younger than the age at 
which you feel comfortable leaving her home alone, 
a clear answer will be best—for both of you. Saying, 
“We’ll see” or “I’ll think about it” will only make her 
keep asking, increasing both your and her frustration. 
A response similar to the following may not make her 
happy, but at least she will know where you stand: 
“Cassie, nine is too young to stay home alone. In fact, 
I am not going to be comfortable leaving you home by 
yourself until you are at least eleven. We will discuss it 
again then. It doesn’t matter to me what other families 

174   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
do; this is our rule in our family. I can’t even promise 
you that I will be comfortable when you are eleven, but I 
definitely won’t be before that. I can promise that if you 
keep nagging me, it will make me angry, and then eleven 
won’t even be looking so good!”
Once you decide that you are ready to let your child 
stay home alone, it is best to do so for a short while 
(half an hour to an hour) for the first couple of times, to 
see how it goes. In addition, your child needs to know 
the following:
How to reach you and at least one other close rela-
• 
tive or friend, in addition to knowing how to call 
911 and communicate her full name, address, and 
phone number.
When you or another adult is expected home (if 
• 
your plans change, call your child).
Not to open the door to anyone—even someone she 
• 
knows—except with express permission from you.
To never tell a phone caller that there is no adult at 
• 
home. Teach your child either to say you are busy 
or to screen calls.
Not to touch the stove, toaster, microwave, hair 
• 
dryer, curling iron, space-heater, or any other heated 
appliances without your specific permission.
To leave immediately if there is a fire—even a 
• 
small one.
That friends are not allowed to come over without 
• 
your permission.

Growing Up So Fast   175
If your child arrives home to an empty house, to 
• 
routinely check in with you or another adult. She 
should not enter if the door is already open or if a 
window is broken, and she should leave if anything 
looks suspicious upon entering.
The rules: when to do homework; how much TV/
• 
computer/electronics are allowed, what she is 
allowed to eat, chores she is expected to do.
How to turn off your home security system and 
• 
what to do if it accidentally goes off (do you have a 
code that she will have to tell to a dispatcher?).
Once you are ready to leave your child alone, you too 
have responsibilities:
Secure all medications (other than those with 
• 
which you trust your child, such as a child’s dose of 
painkiller).
Lock up cigarettes, matches, lighters, car keys, and 
• 
alcohol. If you own a firearm, that too must be dis-
mantled and locked up separately from ammunition.
Keep flashlights handy and working in case of a 
• 
power outage, and make sure your child knows 
where they are.
Keep your home stocked with healthy food, not 
• 
junk food.
Role-play with your child—the more practice she 
• 
gets, the more likely it is that she will be able to 
handle a real emergency situation.

176   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
#41: When am I going to get hair 
under my arms/grow breasts/
need to shave?
Justin (age 10) has an older brother whom he watches 
very carefully. Justin’s mother, Jen, told me that he 
frequently asks her questions about his body. “Justin 
asks me all kinds of questions about when his body will 
change, but he is mostly interested in hair. He regularly 
asks me when he will get pubic hair. I can’t tell if he 
wants it or if he’s nervous to get it.”
It is probably a little bit of both! Many children an-
ticipate puberty with a combination of fear, anxiety, and 
a bit of excitement. In many cases, a child takes his cues 
from his parent, so it is important to approach his ques-
tions in a way that will make him feel positive rather 
than negative about the upcoming changes—especially 
since he doesn’t have any choice about them.
Uncovering the Meaning
Questions from an elementary-age child about puberty 
usually arises as the result of a child observing changes 
in a sibling or peer’s body, because of conversations 
among peers or following educational programming in 
school that addresses puberty. Sometimes a child will 
start asking questions after reading about it—perhaps 
he found a book you gave to an older sibling who was 

Growing Up So Fast   177
approaching puberty. In some cases, a child is beginning 
to experience changes in his own body.
Some children will show early interest in learning 
about puberty, while others will show very little inter-
est until they are older. Similarly, children’s bodies also 
change at different rates.
Girls usually begin to show puberty changes any-
where between eight and thirteen years old. The first 
change is usually the development of breast buds, 
which are hard lumps under each nipple. They may 
hurt a bit to the touch, and they may not be completely 
even (which could upset your daughter). Pubic and then 
underarm hair are usually the next to develop (although 
they could be first). Over the next year or two, her 
breasts will continue growing and her pubic hair will 
change, becoming coarser, and her body, hands, and feet 
will also grow. Menstruation is usually the last change 
to occur, often arriving approximately a year after the 
beginning of puberty.
Boys typically don’t enter puberty until they are 
eleven or twelve years old. The first signs are testicle 
and penis growth, and then the appearance of pubic and 
underarm hair. Boys will also have at least one growth 
spurt during adolescence (yes—that is when you are 
buying new clothes and shoes every three months!). Boys 
will also experience deepening of their voices—some, but 
not all, will experience “cracking” as their voice changes 
to a more adult voice.

178   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
While they move through puberty, both boys and 
girls can experience pimples, acne, greasy skin and hair, 
weight gain, as well as awkwardness with their bodies. 
This is a normal, albeit somewhat stressful part of 
growing up.
Talking to your child about puberty is important. In 
fact, the more relaxed and calm you are about talking to 
your child, the less awkward both you and he will feel. 
Do not assume that your child’s school is going to do the 
job for you. While some school-based programs are ex-
cellent, this is not always the case. Poorly trained consul-
tants run some. In other situations, reluctant school staff 
is forced to run the program. For example, an uncom-
fortable gym teacher may feel stressed out talking about 
puberty, but will do it if he doesn’t have a choice. It is 
unlikely that the children in his puberty program will 
leave the program feeling less anxious or less curious. 
In fact, the teacher’s anxiety may make them feel more 
nervous. Your child is likely to come home that day with 
lots of questions.
The Best Way to Respond
The best way to respond to your child’s puberty ques-
tions is to begin by being as factual and concrete as 
possible and for you to be relaxed. Using the informa-
tion above, explain to your child how puberty works. 
Understanding the facts will make him less nervous. 
Of course, you can’t give him an exact time line, unless 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Growing Up So Fast   179
you already see signs of development (which is more 
likely if you have a daughter). However, you can offer 
an estimate for when changes will occur. Make sure he 
understands that it is different for everyone and that it is 
normal to be wondering about it.
It is also important to use the real names of body 
parts and encourage him to do the same. This will signal 
to your child that you are comfortable with the topic 
and that you don’t need to hide behind silly or babyish 
names. If you have a hard time saying penis, testicles, 
vagina, breasts, or any other words you may need for 
your discussion, try saying them to yourself aloud or to 
another adult until you feel comfortable with them.
Ask your child lots of questions along the way, to be 
sure that your child understands what you are explain-
ing. An example of a response might be similar to the 
following: “Growing hair under your arms is probably 
about the second or third part of puberty for a boy. Do 
you know what puberty is? It is when your body starts 
to change—when you start to go from being a kid to 
being more grown-up. You might notice your testicles 
and your penis getting bigger. You also might start to 
notice hair growing around your penis and then under 
your arms. All of that will probably start when you are 
anywhere from eleven years old and up. It is different 
for every kid. You are normal if it starts when you are 
eleven, and you’re also normal if it doesn’t start until 
you’re thirteen. Do you understand?”
www.Ebook777.com

180   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
If you find it awkward to have frank discussions 
about puberty, there is no shame in giving your child 
a book. However, I strongly suggest that you read the 
book with your child, rather than simply giving it to him 
and letting him read it alone. It is important to have as 
much open conversation as possible. You should use the 
book as a springboard to begin conversation, rather than 
communicating to your child that the book is meant in 
place of a conversation.
#42: Am I fat?
“Shelby (age 9) seems too young to be asking about her 
weight!” worries her mother, Lesley. “I’d expect it from 
my thirteen-year-old daughter, but not at nine! It really 
upsets me.”
Lesley’s concern is understandable. After all, Shelby 
does seem too young to be experiencing body image 
pressures and worries of whether or not she is happy 
with her body. However, more and more girls these days 
are concerned about their bodies and weight at younger 
ages. Given the problems with both being overweight 
and with eating disorders among both girls and boys, 
this is an important issue. So, what does this question 
mean, and how should you handle it?

Growing Up So Fast   181
Uncovering the Meaning
There are many factors that contribute to a child asking 
this question at such a young age. The most obvious 
reason is that perhaps your child really is overweight 
and she has been teased about this in school. Clearly, 
teasing is never acceptable. However, if your child is 
overweight and she has been teased, this question cer-
tainly makes sense.
For girls, early puberty can also trigger feelings of 
being fat—especially compared to other girls who have 
not yet entered puberty. Unfortunately, teasing and peer 
pressure begin at a young age. For both boys and girls, 
teasing and comparing bodies can begin as young as 
third grade.
A child may also become concerned about her weight 
due to a steady diet of media that exposes her to very, 
very thin actresses and actors. When she becomes en-
amored with the super-skinny stars of TV shows and 
movies, it is difficult for her to keep perspective about 
what a healthy body really looks like. She begins to 
doubt her own body. Boys too experience this pressure 
because many of their media role models are tall, thin, 
and muscular—something that most elementary-age 
boys won’t be for a long time (if ever). This self-doubt 
is further increased by many of the fashions that are 
created for kids—both boys and girls. Most styles are 
cut so slim that even an average-size child feels fat when 
trying them on.

182   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
You may not have to look as far as your TV set to 
find pressure that could be negatively influencing your 
child’s body image. It is possible that without even re-
alizing it, you are communicating negative messages to 
your child that are making her feel bad about her body. 
Answer the following four questions honestly:
	 1.	 Do you criticize your own body in front of your 
child (“I hate my thighs,” “I’m so fat,” etc.) or weigh 
yourself frequently? 
	 2.	 Do you take eating healthy food to an extreme 
(eating salad and “diet” food, drinking diet soda, 
skipping meals)? You may need someone else’s 
feedback to answer this question accurately.
	 3.	 Do you spend more time exercising and talking 
about exercise than just about anything else?
	 4.	 Do you talk to your friends (in person and on 
the phone), in your child’s presence, about other 
people’s bodies (“She’s so fat,” “I can’t believe she 
gained so much weight”)?
If you answered yes to one or more of these questions, 
you could, inadvertently, be communicating disapproval 
to your child about her body. If your child knows that 
you don’t like your body, she will assume that she is not 
supposed to like hers—you are role-modeling that for 
her. If you overdo the healthy eating and/or exercise, she 
will feel inadequate compared to you, which will make 
her think that she’s fat—or wonder if you think she is fat. 

Growing Up So Fast   183
Last, if you talk critically about other people, she is sure 
to wonder if you are talking about her behind her back. 
In addition, you are teaching your child to be a gossip.
The Best Way to Respond
If your child really is overweight, you will want to resist 
the urge to focus the conversation on the child who made 
the comment. Acknowledge that it may have hurt your 
child’s feelings, but then use this as an opportunity to 
talk to your child about what she—and your whole 
family—can do to make changes toward a healthier life-
style. Your conversation may be similar to the following: 
“I’m sure it hurt your feelings to have someone call you 
fat—that’s not a nice thing to say. However, maybe it is 
time for us to talk a little about your weight, because I 
have a feeling that it bothers you too. So, we are going to 
start making some healthy changes in our family to help 
all of us become healthier. We’ll exercise more and eat 
more healthily. Then maybe you will start to feel better 
about your body.”
If you need an extra boost to help your child on the 
road to a healthier body, check out my book Dr. Susan’s 
Fit and Fun Family Action Plan to get you going with 
some great solutions for a healthier family.
When a child’s concern is related to puberty changes, 
reassurance is the best strategy. Explain that everyone’s 
body changes and that it doesn’t mean she is fat.
In addition, no matter what the reason, give her some 

184   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
language to use in case of teasing or peer pressure. You 
should practice saying the following phrases with your 
child—boys and girls. Even if your child doesn’t have 
enough courage to use them with another child, simply 
saying them to herself will help her develop stronger 
self-esteem and a better body image. Of course, using 
them when teased or pressured is the ultimate goal. For 
example, try these phrases:
“It is mean to hurt other people’s feelings.”
• 
“I’m not fat; all bodies look different.”
• 
“You’re not nice, that’s why you’re saying rude 
• 
things to me. It has nothing to do with me!”
“I’m happy the way I am; I don’t want to look 
• 
exactly like everyone else.”
“I’m healthy, and I take care of my body. Being 
• 
too skinny isn’t good for you because you need to 
eat enough.”
If you believe your child’s question is the result of 
subtle messages that you are communicating with your 
own behavior, you probably realize how important it 
will be for you to change these behaviors. Simply review 
the questions to which you answered yes in the prior 
section. You will need to change your behaviors so that 
the messages you are now sending your child include a 
strong, healthy body image and a healthier relationship 
with food and exercise. For example, you may need to 
hide the scale and stop the negative self-talk. Perhaps 

Growing Up So Fast   185
you should start eating more well-balanced meals that 
include more than diet food (this does not mean eating 
junk food). Include protein, complex carbs, fruit, and 
veggies, as well as healthy snacks. Your child needs to 
see that you eat—not that you starve yourself. In addi-
tion, exercise is important, but too much exercise will 
overstress your body and will communicate to your child 
that you prioritize this over anything else. When you are 
finished exercising, change into different clothes, so your 
child can see that you have other interests in your life.
#43: How does a baby get out of 
the mommy’s tummy? 
(Or: Does the doctor take the baby out? 
Does the baby come out of the mommy’s 
belly button? I know how babies get in, 
but how do they get out?)
Antonio (age 8) seemed shocked after asking his preg-
nant mother, Yvette, how the baby would get out of her 
tummy. “I explained to him that the baby would come 
out of my vagina. ‘That is so weird and gross,’ he said. 
‘I didn’t know it came from there!’”
Younger kids are satisfied with simple answers 
to the more typical question “where do babies come 
from?” as I explained in The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask 

186   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
(Pre-K through 2nd Grade). But your older child often 
asks much more sophisticated questions about this 
topic that typically require more complex responses—
responses that may make you squirm if you don’t feel 
equipped to answer them properly. So read this section 
carefully, and you won’t be stuck for the right answer 
to a tough question.
Uncovering the Meaning
There are many reasons your child is asking questions 
that are more detailed, about babies and probably about 
almost everything. To begin, his brain is growing in leaps 
and bounds. Extensive learning in school is fueling this 
cognitive growth. Your child is being taught to ask lots 
of questions—by his classroom teacher, by his science 
teacher, and by all the other wonderful educators in his 
life. So this is exactly what he is doing.
He may also be hearing a lot from other children 
on the playground, on the school bus, and in school. 
Children share information with each other, but this 
doesn’t mean that they share accurate information. It is 
therefore important that beginning now, at this young 
age, you have open and frank conversations with your 
child about topics that may make you feel awkward, but 
about which he is curious.
If he doesn’t get accurate information from you, he 
will continue to believe the misinformation he is receiv-
ing from other sources. Today it is about how babies 

Growing Up So Fast   187
are born—tomorrow it could be about drugs and sex. 
Opening the door of communication now—and keeping 
it open—is vitally important in your relationship with 
your child.
You therefore need to take the plunge and answer 
the tough questions. Your child is no longer satisfied 
with a simplistic response, as he might have been just a 
year or two ago. Now, each answer you give is probably 
followed by another question. He wants details! On the 
other hand, this does not mean that you have to give him 
every single detail. Rather, you need to ensure that you 
are giving your child enough information to satisfy most 
of his curiosity, but not so much that it will frighten or 
overstimulate him.
The Best Way to Respond
For example, it is appropriate and important to tell your 
child—as Yvette did—that a baby is usually born from 
a mother’s vagina. You can explain that the vagina is 
similar to a rubber band because it can stretch so the 
baby can come out, and then it returns to its regular shape 
again. Your child may find this explanation “gross” or 
“weird” at first, but he will get used to it. You can also 
add that sometimes the doctor takes the baby out of the 
mommy’s tummy—but not through the belly button (as 
many children think).
His next question will likely be, “Does it hurt?” While 
honesty is important, I would suggest that you not focus 

188   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
on this aspect of the process. It is not necessary for a 
child—especially a girl—to carry around the worry that 
childbirth is painful. There is plenty of time in the future 
to have to confront this concern. A satisfying response 
that wouldn’t alarm your child could be, “It might hurt 
a bit, but it’s worth it to have a beautiful baby.”
#44: What does Gay mean?
Carl and Darlene admitted that they weren’t sure how 
to respond when their daughter Jasmine (age 10) asked 
them this question. Carl explained, “Jasmine said that 
she heard one of the kids on the bus saying to another 
kid, ‘You’re so gay!’ She asked us what it meant. I 
bet the kids didn’t even know themselves—they just 
thought it was some kind of an insult. But we weren’t 
sure if we should give her a full explanation and explain 
why it isn’t nice to use that as an insult, or if she’s too 
young and we should just tell her it isn’t a nice thing to 
say to someone.”
Parents are often not sure when and how to explain 
“being gay” to a child. However, since it is a term that 
is frequently used among older-elementary-age kids, 
it is important to become comfortable with knowing 
when it is the right time to answer this question or a 
similar one.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Growing Up So Fast   189
Uncovering the Meaning
Many children hear the word “gay” for the first time, just 
as Jasmine did, thrown around as a vague insult among 
children—having little to do with its actual meaning, 
because even the kids using it don’t know what they’re 
saying. The kids saying it, as well as those hearing it, 
typically assume it means something like, “You’re so 
lame,” “You’re such an idiot,” or a similar mildly de-
rogatory term.
In other instances, your child might hear the word 
for the first time in a more serious setting. For example, 
perhaps she has recently overheard a conversation about 
a person who is gay, or maybe she knows someone who 
is gay, but doesn’t actually know what the word means.
Sometimes children—who can be very astute—sense 
that this is an “unusual” word, connected to a topic that 
makes some adults uncomfortable. Therefore, your child 
may not ask you the meaning of the word “gay” if she 
senses that you are an adult who is not comfortable with 
the concept of homosexuality. For example, your child 
may have asked you about the word before or brought it 
up in your presence. However, if you have ignored it or 
changed the subject, this is a cue to your child that it is 
not a subject with which you are comfortable. So don’t 
be surprised if your child is reluctant to discuss it with 
you again.
Of course, much like the previous question, it is im-
portant to be as open as possible with your child about 
www.Ebook777.com

190   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
all subjects, because as your child grows up, you want 
her to feel that she can approach you with questions 
about any subject—no matter how awkward or seem-
ingly “taboo.” It is therefore well worth it for you to work 
toward overcoming your own feelings of embarrassment 
or awkwardness about this topic, so you can talk to your 
child about it openly. Remember, not talking about it 
will not make her questions go away; she will simply seek 
answers elsewhere—answers that may not be accurate.
The Best Way to Respond
The best way to respond to this question is to be as 
simple and clear as possible. In addition, give your child 
a response that dispels any possibility that she will use 
the word “gay” in a derogatory manner, and also help 
her recognize when others are doing so. Remember that 
your child does not have any preconceived notions about 
homosexuality. Even if you have the urge to do so, this is 
not the time to place judgment or to tell your child that 
you don’t agree with being gay; it is also not the time for 
a religious conversation about homosexuality or about 
whether people choose or don’t choose to be gay. This 
will all be confusing and does not answer her question. 
Your goal is to keep the explanation as simple as pos-
sible In other words, do your best to keep your agenda 
separate from her agenda!
A great response might be similar to the follow-
ing: “Most grown-ups you know have a husband or a 

Growing Up So Fast   191
wife, a girlfriend or a boyfriend. Men date and marry 
women; girls go out with boys. Sometimes, though, men 
are attracted to other men, or women are attracted to 
other women—that is called “being gay.” A man may 
even fall in love with another man, or a woman with 
another woman. A different word that means the same 
as gay is homosexual. There are all kinds of love in the 
world—this is one kind of love. It is not okay to tease or 
make fun of people who are gay—just as you wouldn’t 
make fun of anyone else who is different from you. It 
is also not okay to use the word gay to tease or make 
fun of other people, as if being gay is a bad thing. For 
example, I never want to hear you saying, ‘That’s so 
gay,’ or ‘You’re so gay.’ If you hear someone else saying 
it, you either need to tell them to stop or you should 
ignore them. But either way, you shouldn’t do it your-
self. It’s always important to respect other people, and 
we do that by the way we behave.”
#45: What should I be when I grow 
up?
“Parker (age 9½) and Jeremy (age 7½) are always asking 
me what they should be when they grow up,” explained 
the boys’ mother, Bonnie. “Parker always says that he 
wants to be an engineer like his dad, and Jeremy—the 
shortest kid in the class—tells me he wants to be an 

192   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
NBA basketball player. How much should I be guiding 
them at this point? I don’t want to stifle their dreams, 
but I don’t want them to be unrealistic either.”
This is a very common question. In fact, you might be 
surprised to know that a child begins to wonder about 
his future beginning as early as five or six years old. 
In fact, I address it in The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask 
(Pre-K through 2nd Grade). If you have a younger child, 
you will be surprised to see the developmental difference 
between the two age groups.
The way you respond to this question can help your 
child begin exploring all the possibilities for his future and, 
at the same time, do so realistically and with confidence.
Uncovering the Meaning
It is not unusual for an elementary-age child to decide 
that when he grows up, he wants to do whatever his 
parent does—sometimes the parent of the same gender, 
but not always, particularly if one parent does not hold a 
position outside the home. The reasons for this are fairly 
simple. First, a parent’s job or profession is the one with 
which he is most familiar. The second reason involves 
a little psychology (you know I am always slipping 
it in!). Your child may, at a young age, decide that he 
wants to do whatever you do (or what his other parent 
does) because he is subconsciously concerned that, if he 
doesn’t, you will feel rejected and become upset or angry 
with him.

Growing Up So Fast   193
Of course, it is possible that this subconscious 
feeling resides completely within your child. However, 
sometimes, without even realizing it, a parent places 
expectations on a child to take over a family business, 
or to become a doctor, a lawyer, an engineer, or a police 
officer. Even prior to all of that, sometimes a parent 
inadvertently give a child a subtle message that she 
expects him to attend a certain level of college or even a 
specific college—perhaps one that the parent attended. 
Hannah (age 10), with whom I have worked for quite a 
while, told me the following: “My parents have dressed 
me in University of Pennsylvania clothes since I was 
born—I’ve seen the baby pictures! It’s where they met. 
Sweatshirts, T-shirts, sweatpants, everything! They 
haven’t exactly told me they want me to go to college 
there, but it’s obvious. But what if I can’t get in—isn’t 
it a really hard school to get into?”
Beginning at a young age, children like Hannah often 
feel a great deal of pressure to meet the unspoken expec-
tations of their parents to choose a specific path when 
they grow up. In addition, sometimes the path taken by 
an older sibling can have an impact on the choices that a 
child makes, unless a parent helps him to forge his own 
way. For example, if a child has an older sibling with a 
scientific mind who heads along the path of becoming 
premed, and then receives a lot of positive attention for 
doing so, a younger child may force himself along this 
same path, even if it is not his calling. This questioning 

194   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
of future identity can begin at a very young age, not 
because a child really knows what he wants to do, but 
because he wants to receive positive attention and ap-
proval from his parents.
What if your child is more like Jeremy—a dreamer 
whose career goal, in the real world, seems wholly un-
reachable? Should you step in and give him a reality 
check, or just let it be for now? It is not unusual for 
elementary-age children to foster fabulous dreams of 
the future. In fact, even middle-school-age children still 
hold onto fantasies that may not come true. But what 
if they do? Now is not the time to destroy your child’s 
dreams. There will be plenty of time for reality later on 
in life. However, if your child wants to be a basketball 
player, a pianist, a figure skater, or any other wonderful 
fantasy—there is nothing wrong with reminding him 
that, in order to have any hope of achieving this dream, 
he will have to practice a lot. Commitment to any activ-
ity offers excellent discipline for your child.
The Best Way to Respond
We just covered a lot of information, so when your child 
asks you this question, it is vital that you think about 
all of it before you respond. To help you, there are three 
easy rules to follow when answering this question:
	 1.	 Tell your child that he can be anything that he 
wants to be, as long as he loves it and he makes 
enough money to support himself.

Growing Up So Fast   195
	 2.	 Tell him that he doesn’t have to do what you do 
or what his other parent does—you won’t be upset 
or disappointed (this rule also applies to attending 
college, as discussed earlier).
	 3.	 Explain that he won’t have to decide what he 
wants to do until he is much older, so for now he 
should enjoy having fun and trying out different 
things he likes to do. He can also change his mind 
as many times as he wants.
You may need to answer this question several times 
more as your child grows up. In every case, be aware that 
you should not make your child feel that your dreams 
need to be his accomplishments. Allow him to explore, 
to experiment, and to discover his own strengths and 
interests along the way. As difficult as it may be for you, 
he may not attend the college you wish for (he may not 
want to or have the ability), and he may not choose the 
career path you hope he will. In fact, as your child grows 
up and eventually becomes an adult, there will be many 
times in life when you don’t see eye to eye. Offer guidance 
and support. Insist on hard work, integrity, and honesty. 
At the same time, allow for and celebrate individuality 
and creativity in all areas of life.


Just between 
You and Me
9
The older elementary years bring about change in so 
many different ways for your child. Aside from excit-
ing social and cognitive shifts, she also begins to think 
more about her relationship with you. After all, despite 
the fact that she is becoming more social, you are still 
the most important person in her life. It is not until the 
early adolescent years that your child’s peers will truly 
become the center of her universe.
Your child’s new cognitive maturity allows him to 
begin thinking beyond his everyday world. He is devel-
oping empathy and interest in the lives of others, includ-
ing a fascination with aspects of your life. In addition, his 
greater understanding of the sequence of time piques his 
curiosity about the past, and about the future. His ques-
tions reflect these developmental and cognitive changes.

198   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Parents (and even teachers) are often surprised—and 
are sometimes even dumbfounded—by the amazing 
questions kids ask (I know I am!). Yet, it pays to be 
prepared for the curve balls, because that is usually 
when a child most needs you to be ready with a clear 
and supportive response. So, before we tackle the ques-
tions, here are a few tips for how to handle any tough, 
challenging, or surprising personal questions your child 
throws at you:
Buy some time to collect your thoughts by answer-
• 
ing a question with a question (you know, my fa-
vorite psychological technique!).
It is okay if you don’t know the answer—in fact, 
• 
it helps your child see that it is fine to not know 
all the answers. If this happens, respond by saying, 
“You know, I don’t know, but I’ll find out and get 
back to you as soon as I know the answer.” Then 
find out ASAP, and report back.
Some questions have answers that are not ap-
• 
propriate for a young child to know (for example, 
the details of a murder), or that you feel are too 
personal (for example, the details of your sex 
life). In these instances, it is fine not to answer 
the question. You might say, “You are too young 
to know the answer to that question. I’ll tell you 
when you are older,” or “That’s private, so I’m 
not going to tell you the answer.” Do not cave to 
nagging or tantrums.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Just between You and Me   199
Remember that your child’s questions about body 
• 
parts, puberty, sex, or similar intimate topics 
simply reflect curiosity. Embarrassment is an 
adult emotion, so do your best to keep it out of your 
responses. When you project embarrassment in a 
conversation, your child will become embarrassed 
because you are cuing him to feel this way.
Sometimes honesty is the best policy, but not always. 
• 
Responding in a way that reflects what is emotion-
ally best for your child is always the best policy.
Now that we have established the parameters for 
facing tough questions head-on, it is time to tackle the 
questions. Remember, when you respond to your child’s 
questions about your life, and about the past and the 
future in an open and interested way, you will encour-
age a positive and genuine relationship between your 
and your child. You will then carry this relationship 
through your child’s early years and into adolescence 
and adulthood.
#46: Did you smoke/drink/use 
drugs?
Gary thought his son Tristan (age 11) would be a teenager 
before he had to confront the big questions. “Tristan and 
I were watching TV when an ad came on about parents 
www.Ebook777.com

200   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
talking to kids about drugs. He turned to me and asked, 
‘Dad, did you ever use drugs?’ I was completely taken 
by surprise!”
Like Gary, many parents believe an elementary-age 
child will not ask this question. However, many do, and 
they expect an answer! So don’t be taken by surprise and 
find yourself unprepared to respond.
Uncovering the Meaning
Effective and powerful TV campaigns against drugs, 
alcohol, and tobacco use are one of the primary reasons 
that children learn about these taboos at a young age, 
even if they don’t hear about them in other places until 
they are older. In fact, if your child has not yet asked 
you about drugs, alcohol, or cigarettes, it could be just 
around the corner! Seeing ads on TV creates a height-
ened awareness about illegal substances, which causes 
older-elementary-age children to become curious.
In addition, some elementary school curricula do 
begin discussing these topics—especially the dangers 
of smoking. Further, if you have an older child, your 
younger one is even more likely to become aware of 
the topic through conversations you may have with 
your older child. Even if you don’t have an older child, 
many children mingle with older cousins and other older 
children on the school or summer-camp bus, and in 
various other situations. They very frequently overhear 
conversations about alcohol, drugs, and tobacco. You 

Just between You and Me   201
may also have had an older relative who died from a 
smoking-related death about which you have told your 
child, because you want him to understand the dangers 
of smoking cigarettes.
You can’t protect your child forever. He will begin 
wondering, and the questions will come next. It could be 
much later—but it could be right now.
Parents who did not smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol, 
or use drugs as teens don’t fret about responding to this 
question—they can simply be honest in their responses. 
However, if you are one of the many, many parents that 
did experiment as a teen, I am sure you worry greatly about 
what to say to your child—especially a young child.
Therefore, you might be surprised to learn that 
when a young child asks this question, it is not with the 
same “ulterior motive” that a teen might have. Your 
elementary-age child is not hoping that you will say yes, 
so he can then use your response as leverage, an excuse, 
or a reason to make it okay to experiment himself—this 
is the reasoning of a much older child.
Developmentally, your young child is—through 
media, school, and your conversations—being indoctri-
nated to believe that smoking, drinking, and using drugs 
are very bad, dangerous, and scary. He is frightened by 
the thought that kids use them. In fact, when a younger 
child hears that a teen sibling was “caught” drinking or 
smoking, he often becomes distraught—not because his 
brother or sister will get in trouble, but that he or she 

202   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
might be badly injured or killed from exposure to the 
cigarettes, alcohol, or drugs.
(Needless to say, for the vast majority of children, 
this feeling does not last beyond the mid- to late-teen 
years, which is when many kids begin experimenting 
with alcohol and potentially marijuana or other drugs. 
Some also try tobacco at this time—and subsequently 
become addicted.)
Therefore, when your child asks you this question (even 
a child at the older end of this age range), he is curious and 
also probably a bit scared that you might say that when 
you were a teen you did something as bad, dangerous, and 
scary as drinking, smoking, or using drugs.
The Best Way to Respond
In responding to your child, it is important to keep in mind 
that your agenda is not exactly the same as it would be if 
a teen asked you the same question. To begin, remember 
that your child is fearful during this developmental stage. 
What’s more, he is probably not facing peer pressure, not 
feeling an internal drive to try illegal substances, and he 
probably doesn’t even have the opportunity.
Nevertheless, you still want to communicate some 
of the same information that you would share with an 
older child. To begin, it is critical that you communicate 
your strong disapproval of your child ever using drugs. 
Research consistently shows that the clearer a parent is 
in voicing his or her disapproval about a child’s potential 

Just between You and Me   203
tobacco, alcohol, or drug use, the less likely the child is to 
try it. Despite what many parents imagine, “What would 
my parents think?” is a critical part of a child or teen’s 
decision-making process and a significant deterrent 
when it comes to experimentation. You need to begin 
communicating this message in the elementary years, as 
soon as your child shows an interest in the topic.
So how do you respond to this question? To begin, it 
is not a great idea to lie, no matter how tempting. There 
is always the chance that your child may discover your 
lie later on, which could damage your relationship with 
him. Rather, while giving your child as little informa-
tion as possible (remember, you are not talking to a 
teen), you should tell your child the truth. Follow this 
with a clear and strong message that you forbid him 
from ever trying tobacco, alcohol, or drugs. In addition, 
your response should include information that is helpful 
in building your child’s self-confidence and resistance to 
peer pressure. It is beneficial to use an analogy in your 
child’s current life, so that he understands what you are 
explaining in a concrete way.
Keep in mind that you may have to have similar 
conversations many more times and that these conversa-
tions may change as your child gets older.
Your response might be similar to the following: 
“When I was a teenager, I tried alcohol. I knew it was 
the wrong thing to do because my parents had told 
me never to do it. I felt really, really guilty afterward 

204   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
because I knew that I was doing something I wasn’t 
supposed to do. Also, it tasted really disgusting. I real-
ized that I should have done the right thing rather than 
listening to my friends. Remember when William said 
to you, ‘Come on, let’s make fun of that weird kid,’ and 
you said, ‘No, that’s mean, and he’s not weird.’ Well, 
I should have stood up to my friends like that and said 
“No, I’m not trying alcohol; it’s not right! I’m going 
to listen to my parents.’ But, Tristan, you are never 
allowed to try alcohol, cigarettes, or any kind of drugs—
not ever, even when you’re a teenager. I would be very 
angry, and you will get a very big punishment if I ever 
catch you—and I will catch you! We know a lot more 
about how dangerous they all are than we did when I 
was a kid. They really hurt kids’ brains and can even 
kill you!”
It is important that you have a clear understanding 
yourself and that you articulate to your child that, no 
matter what you may have done, you are now con-
cerned about your child’s future. Your past is not actu-
ally relevant. We know much more about the dangers 
of tobacco than we ever did. In addition, alcohol is a 
gateway to marijuana and to other dangerous drugs, all 
of which are much more powerful and dangerous—even 
more  lethal—than they were when you were a teen. For 
further information about how to communicate with 
children and teens about alcohol, cigarettes, and drugs, I 
highly recommend www.theantidrug.com, a website for 

Just between You and Me   205
parents that clearly addresses just about every issue that 
they may need to know.
#47: Why did you marry Dad/Mom?
“Grace (age 8) is curious about everything,” remarked 
her mom, Rhonda. “But I was really stumped when she 
asked me why I married her dad. You see, we’re getting 
divorced, and I wasn’t sure exactly how to respond to 
this question.”
That certainly is a curve ball for Rhonda. In fact, 
there are many different reasons that your child might 
ask you this question. Let’s explore these so you are 
more prepared than she was, and also so that you get a 
little peek into the inner workings of your child’s mind, 
in order to comprehend what she is trying to learn about 
and understand as she grows up.
Uncovering the Meaning
We will begin with some of the straightforward reasons 
your child might ask you this question. One of the 
most common reasons is because she is simply curious 
about the mechanism of how marriage works. Perhaps 
she has been asked to be a flower girl in a wedding, or 
maybe a teacher is getting married. This prompts her 
to think beyond the actual event to consider the rela-
tionships involved. This is a good sign! It means your 

206   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
child is developing more advanced cognitive and social 
skills. She is curious about relationships—what exactly 
is involved: the feelings, the love, the progression of a 
relationship, the long-term commitment to each other. 
In this age-range, girls are more likely than boys to show 
this level of interest in relationships. Boys are still more 
fascinated with playing sports and games than they are 
in the intricacies of relationships. This is not a sexist 
comment; it is simply factual. Of course, this is not true 
of every boy (remember, there are ranges for all areas of 
development), but it is a strong norm. If you’re not sure 
that this is what your child is wondering about, explor-
atory questions will help you figure it out.
Your child’s question may also be prompted by 
worry. Perhaps there is a lot of arguing in your home, 
and she is concerned about your relationship with her 
other parent. Is it stable? Might you break up? She may 
be asking you the question as a way to open up the con-
versation so she can ask you why you argue so much or to 
suggest to you that you married for love, so why are you 
fighting? Children often perceive adult arguing as much 
worse than it actually is, so your child might be anxious 
about this, even if your relationship is secure. However, 
perhaps you need to consider that you are arguing too 
much in front of your child (or within her hearing).
If you frequently say negative things about your 
child’s other parent, complain about him, or put him 
down in front of your child, it could also prompt the 

Just between You and Me   207
question. Your child might begin to wonder why you 
married someone whom you don’t like, or about whom 
you are always complaining. Is this the way you want 
your child to perceive her other parent? I hope the 
answer is no! In which case, you need to immediately 
become aware of your behavior and change it.
However, if you intentionally (even subconsciously) 
want your child to perceive her other parent negatively, 
we have a much bigger problem, because it means you 
are allowing your negative feelings to interfere with 
what is best for your child. It is never in a child’s best 
interest to have one parent speak negatively about the 
other parent. In fact, it is emotionally destructive. If 
this sounds like your family, and you’re not sure that 
you can work it out yourself, perhaps you need to seek 
professional help from a child or family psychologist 
or other mental health counselor trained to work with 
families so that your child’s emotional health isn’t 
further jeopardized.
Last, maybe your child is asking this question for the 
same reason as Grace—to try to understand a divorce or 
separation. It is hard for a child to understand how her 
parents could have been so in love, then gotten married 
and had a child (or more than one), and then fallen so 
far out of love that they now want nothing more to do 
with each other. For a child in this situation, wanting 
to understand why her parents were married in the first 
place is an important question to have answered, not 

208   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
only for now, but so she can understand what not to do 
herself in the future. (In fact, it is probably an important 
question to answer for yourself, so you do not repeat the 
same mistakes again—but I digress.)
The Best Way to Respond
Clearly, the way you respond to your child’s question 
depends on the reason she is asking it. It is therefore 
important that you take the time to explore her question 
by chatting with her about it, before offering a defini-
tive answer. Answering her question with a question is 
the first thing to do. An example of a possible dialogue 
might be:
Your child: Mom, why did you marry Dad?
You: Why do you think?
Your child: I dunno (shrugs). You yell at him a 
lot so …
You: (Now you understand the reason for the ques-
tion) Do you think that I yell at him too much?
Your child: Maybe.
You: I’m glad you told me how you feel, because 
now I can work on not yelling so much at Dad. I love 
your dad, and that’s why I married him, but I do need 
to work on not getting mad so much.
Here’s another possible scenario:
Your child: Daddy, why did you and Mommy 
get married?
You: What is making you think about that right now?

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Just between You and Me   209
Your child: Now you are getting divorced, so why did 
you get married in the first place?
You: Sometimes people love each other for a while, 
even for a long time, even long enough to have kids that 
they love very, very much. But then things change and 
the grown-ups fall out of love. It’s sort of like when you 
have a really best friend, but then something happens 
and you stop being best friends—you grow apart, your 
interests change. It doesn’t always happen though. Lots 
of people get married and stay married forever.
When responding to this question, it is most important 
to remember that you first need to understand what your 
child is asking. Then, be as direct, clear, and comforting 
as possible without offering more information than your 
child truly requires in order to feel satisfied.
#48: Why are you always so 
tired?
Aidan (age 9) asks his mom, Deidre, every day why she 
is tired all the time. “I’m tired because I’m a teacher and 
I have three boys (ages 9, 11, and 14) who don’t help 
all that much. I feel like I spend my entire life running 
from work, to the supermarket, home to make dinner, 
and then out to drop off and pick up my kids from 
activities. My husband does help when he can, but he 
works really long hours—he leaves around seven in the 
www.Ebook777.com

210   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
morning and often doesn’t get home until eight at night 
or even later. Our weekends are spent going from sport 
to sport—among them the boys play soccer, football, 
hockey, baseball, lacrosse, and basketball.”
I am exhausted just listening to Deidre! And I get it, 
I really get it—and I bet you do too. There isn’t a parent 
I know—mom or dad, working full time, working part 
time, or stay-at-home—who isn’t exhausted at least some 
of the time. So how do our kids experience our tiredness? 
And what does it mean to them?
Uncovering the Meaning
This question means your child notices that you are 
tired. On one hand, this is a good thing because it is one 
more indication that he is developing a greater aware-
ness of the world beyond his own immediate needs and 
desires. It means that he might be becoming compassion-
ate about the feelings of others. On the other hand, this 
question is different than if your child asks, “Why are 
you feeling tired today?” If he asks why you are always 
tired, it means he identifies you as a tired person, or as 
someone whose life is spent being tired, rather than as 
having one occasional tired day. Your child needs to 
make sense of this.
He recognizes that it isn’t healthy to be tired all the 
time. After all, you teach him that he should go to bed on 
time so that he isn’t tired in the morning, that everyone 
needs to get enough sleep, that one’s brain and body 

Just between You and Me   211
work better when one is not tired. Since you have all but 
brainwashed him to recognize how important it is not to 
be tired, your child is searching for the reason that you 
are tired all the time.
Some parents are very vocal about the reasons they 
are tired. They talk about how much work they have, 
about how challenging it is to take care of their children, 
and how they never get a break. If you are experiencing 
stress and you are exhausted, it is definitely healthy to 
vent. However, doing so in front of your child might be 
emotionally harmful to him. For example, perhaps you 
and a friend chat while waiting for the school bus in 
the morning about how challenging it is to be a parent, 
and your child (who you think is playing ball) overhears 
you. Or maybe at the end of the day, you talk to your 
partner about what a hard day it was—stressful at work 
and then even more so at home with the kids—and your 
child (who you think is watching TV) hears the conver-
sation. Overhearing these or similar conversations—
even if they seem innocuous to you—may cause your 
child to feel guilty that he is the reason you are tired all 
the time—as if he is a burden to you. His question might 
be prompted by a need to hear you say something dif-
ferent, so he can reassure himself that it is not his fault 
you are exhausted.
Even if your child has never asked you this exact 
question, you might want to consider whether you fre-
quently complain to or around your child about being 

212   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
tired because your life is so hectic. Many children bear 
the misplaced guilty burden of feeling that it is their 
fault that their parents feel stressed, exhausted, aggra-
vated, overworked, grumpy, or miserable. It is not your 
child’s fault. You make adult choices that allow your 
own and your child’s life to become so busy that you 
are exhausted. Deidre does not have to allow her boys to 
play six sports—she and her husband can create limits in 
that area. They can also insist that their children become 
more actively involved in the household chores in order 
to alleviate some of her feeling of exhaustion. You too 
need to make choices so that you feel less tired (of course, 
this is an entire topic for another day). But until then, 
don’t pass your feelings on to your child.
There are, of course, other reasons that you might be 
tired. You should regard this question as a red flag that 
you are not functioning at an optimal level and that you 
are communicating this to your child. Depression is a 
common cause of tiredness and wanting to sleep a lot. 
Depression saps one’s energy, leaving you with an almost 
constant feeling of exhaustion. Depression can occur   
postpartum; it can be triggered by current or past sad or 
traumatic life events; it can be caused by changes in the 
seasons; or you can experience it for what seems like no 
reason at all. Some common symptoms of depression are:
exhaustion, wanting to sleep a lot, having trouble 
• 
sleeping
sadness, crying, feeling empty
• 

Just between You and Me   213
trouble concentrating, focusing, making decisions
• 
feeling worthless, guilty, helpless, hopeless
• 
eating too much, eating too little
• 
loss of interest in normal activities
• 
headaches, stomach aches, body aches
• 
thinking about death, wanting to die, thinking 
• 
about killing yourself, planning to kill yourself (if 
you have any thoughts of suicide, see a doctor or go 
to an emergency room immediately)
Other possible causes of tiredness include anemia (iron 
deficiency), untreated hypothyroidism, being overweight 
or underweight, not eating enough, or eating unhealth-
ily. Even if you think that your tiredness is caused by the 
daily grind, if it seems to be getting worse or doesn’t get 
better even when you do relax, I strongly suggest that 
you see your doctor to have a complete physical exami-
nation to rule out possible medical causes that may be 
causing or contributing to you feeling tired.
The Best Way to Respond
Your first instinct might be to say to your child, “I’m 
not tired; it’s your imagination” (or something similar). 
However, by doing so, you will invalidate what he is 
feeling and discourage him from sharing any future con-
cerns. A better response is to accept that, to your child, 
you really do appear tired and perhaps lethargic a lot of 
the time. Your first step is to stop and think about how 

214   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
you feel most of the time. Then take an objective look 
at your behavior. Consider how much you talk about 
feeling tired, exhausted, stressed, or busy, particularly in 
the presence of your child.
In addition, think about how much time you spend 
sitting or lying down, napping, resting, or relaxing, 
rather than playing with your kids or helping them with 
daily activities. Does your partner have to do “extra” to 
make up for what you are too tired to do?
When your child asks you this question, your primary 
goal is to make sure he doesn’t think that he is the reason 
that you are tired.
For example, your response should not include 
phrases like the following:
“I’m tired because being a mom is exhausting.”
• 
“I’m tired because my job is hard, but I need to do 
• 
it so I have enough money to buy you the things 
you want.”
“If I didn’t have to take you to so many activities, I 
• 
wouldn’t be so tired.”
“If you behaved better and didn’t bicker with your 
• 
sister, I wouldn’t be so exhausted.”
“If you and your brothers helped around the house, 
• 
I’d be much less tired.”
Rather, your response to him should focus on what 
you can do to help yourself. It might sound like the fol-
lowing: “It’s very observant that you notice I’m often 

Just between You and Me   215
tired. Perhaps I’m not getting enough sleep or eating 
healthily enough. I think I will go to my doctor for a 
full check-up. I’m also going to start having an earlier 
bedtime, so that I’m not so tired during the day. I always 
tell you that it’s important to have enough energy during 
the day. Well, that’s true for grown-ups too.”
It is very important that you take the necessary steps 
to address this concern. Being chronically tired will not 
only interfere with you being able to parent your child 
successfully, it will also affect you negatively in every 
other part of your life.
#49: When I’m older, can I borrow 
your shoes/have your jewelry/
share your clothes/use your 
razor OR shampoo?
Harriet’s daughter Tia (age 9) is always asking her mom 
if they will be able to share Harriet’s clothes when Tia 
is older. “Sometimes I think it’s cute, but not always,” 
explained Harriet. “She asks me so often that I wonder if 
she’s planning a takeover!”
Many parents, like Harriet, have ambivalent feelings 
about this anticipated milestone. In addition, they are 
curious about why their children are is already thinking 
about it. They look forward to the time when they will be 
able to bond with their children around “intimate” types 

216   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
of sharing like clothing. However, they also worry that 
the boundaries will not be clear. Is this an issue to address 
now, or should you wait until it becomes a reality?
Uncovering the Meaning
It is interesting that your child is thinking about sharing 
your clothes, accessories (jewelry, watches, ties, belts, 
scarves), shoes, and toiletries. Other children think even 
further into the future. For example, some parents report 
that their elementary-age kids ask if, in the future, they 
will be able to borrow (or have) their parents’ cars, brief-
cases, or kitchenware. The older of my daughters (age 
13), who loves to cook and bake, has laid eventual claim 
to one of my sets of china—she told me so at least two 
years ago!
This question indicates that your child is beginning 
to think about what it will feel like to be grown up. 
She is wondering how it would be to wear grown up 
clothes or shoes or use adult toiletries or other items. 
She is daring to picture herself older than she is right 
now—in a different body, with changed needs. Wow! 
Pretty cool, huh?
What’s more, your child is also giving you a heads-up 
that when she gets to this next, exciting stage, she is going 
to want you to be her guide, figuratively and literally. 
She is telling you that she will want you to help her “try 
on” her new role of growing up, by letting her borrow or 
have the items she will need. In other words, she wants 

Just between You and Me   217
you to equip her for her new role. In her child’s mind, she 
perceives it sort of like playing dress-up, but for real.
Now let me give you a different, slightly psychologi-
cal way of looking at this (you know me by now, I’m de-
termined to make you a psychologist!). The items your 
child wants to borrow from you might function like a 
blankie or stuffed animal, otherwise known as a transi-
tional object, helping her make the leap from childhood 
into adulthood, knowing that she is taking a little bit of 
you with her.
How do you feel about your child borrowing your 
clothes? Some parents are thoroughly excited at this 
idea—but many are not. The idea of sharing clothes, 
shoes, or any other personal items, even with one’s 
own child, creates anxious or stressful feelings for a 
great many people. For other parents, there is already a 
concern that, given your child’s personality, she would 
not take care of your possessions. For still other parents, 
they are not sure yet how they will feel about sharing 
with a child—it seems so far in the future to be making 
such a commitment. So how should you respond when 
confronted with this question?
The Best Way to Respond
To begin, for some parents, the need to resolve this 
question may not be as far into the future as you think. 
For example, some children’s feet grow very quickly, 
and you may find yourself sharing a shoe size with your 

218   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
child by fifth or sixth grade. In addition, some items, like 
shampoo, jewelry, scarves, hats, ties, socks, and other 
small items can likely be shared right now if your child 
asks and if you so choose.
It is, therefore, important for you to consider how you 
feel about the issue of sharing. I strongly recommend that 
you do not humor your child by saying, “Sure, you can 
borrow my clothes when you’re older,” with no intention 
of following through, hoping that she won’t remember. 
She will!
If sharing clothes, shoes, or jewelry is not something 
with which you are comfortable, you need to explain this 
to your child, making sure that you are clear that your de-
cision has nothing to do with her. You could also explain 
that you may let her share some things, but not others.
Your response to the question, “When I’m older, 
can I borrow your clothes?” could be as follows: “When 
you’re older, we will make sure that you have lots of cool 
teenage clothes that you really love so that you don’t 
need to borrow mine. I’ve never really liked lending my 
clothes to anyone, ever since I was a little girl, so I prob-
ably won’t lend you very much. But I bet we’ll be able to 
find a couple of things for you to borrow from me when 
you’re older. We’ll talk about it then.”
If you are not sure how you’ll feel and you don’t want 
to make a commitment to your child just yet, that’s just 
fine, even if it frustrates her because she would like you 
to just say yes.

Just between You and Me   219
Another response to the question might be similar to 
the following: “We’re going to have to wait until you’re 
older to make that decision. By then we will know if you 
still like my clothes! We will also know if they fit you 
nicely—because we may have different shapes. I will 
also see how I feel about lending them to you. I’ve never 
been comfortable lending my things, since people don’t 
always treat them well or remember to give them back. 
But when you’re older, we’ll talk about it again. I’m not 
saying yes, and I’m not saying no.”
#50: Did you have a happy 
childhood?
Julia was surprised when her daughter Ella (age 10), 
asked if Julia’s childhood had been happy. “I wasn’t 
really prepared to answer her,” explained Julia. “I didn’t 
have such a bad childhood, because I was loved, but it 
wasn’t great because my father died when I was twelve, 
and we sort of ran out of money.”
If you had a simple and perfect childhood, this ques-
tion is easy to answer. But not many parents had simple 
and perfect childhoods. If you did, then feel free to skip 
this question. I won’t be insulted, I promise! However, 
if you feel your response might be a little more compli-
cated, then keep reading.

220   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
Uncovering the Meaning
Life is complicated. A great many parents did not have 
happy childhoods. Some were mediocre, and some were 
mostly happy with periods of sadness. And of course 
there are many variations—I couldn’t possibly touch on 
them all. Where do you fit in?
Who you are as a person, and especially as a parent, 
has a great deal to do with the kind of childhood you 
experienced. Specifically, the blueprint for the type of 
parent you are now was created from the way you were 
parented. This does not mean that you are a replica of 
your own parents (although it might mean that). Rather, 
some of your parenting traits have been passed down 
from them. For example, if your parents yelled a lot, you 
are more likely to yell at your children (unless you work 
really hard to not yell at them). In addition—and even 
more importantly—the type, quality, and amount of love 
you received from your parents (and other people who 
took care of you as a child), helps formulate that parent-
ing blueprint. For example, if your mom did not show 
you much affection (didn’t tell you she loved you, didn’t 
give hugs and kisses), it might be hard for you to do so 
with your kids—because you don’t have the blueprint 
for it. But you can work hard to break the generational 
cycle and create a new blueprint by giving your child 
lots of hugs and kisses.
Of course, many other factors affect the way one behaves 
as a parent. However, barring unique circumstances, the 

Just between You and Me   221
way you were raised is probably the most powerful of all 
influences. It is important to keep this in mind as you are 
raising your own children.
Now that we understand that there is a direct rela-
tionship between your childhood and the way you parent 
your children, the question remains, how much should 
you reveal about your childhood to your child?
The Best Way to Respond
It can be tempting to “tell all,” especially if you are bitter 
and angry with your parent. However, in very many 
cases, people behave differently as grandparents than 
they did as parents. In fact, at times, a sense of remorse 
will cause the parent of a grown child to try to make 
up for having been a less than adequate parent, by 
being very attentive (either with time or financially) to 
a grandchild.
In this case, responding to the question truthfully 
will confuse your child. The loving, caring grandparent 
she knows and loves doesn’t seem capable of the awful 
things you describe. In addition, your child might feel 
that she has to choose sides: you or her grandparent.
Another consideration is whether you would like 
your child to have information that she may not be able 
to keep secret. Although your childhood might seem 
like a long time ago, if your parents are still in your 
life, then discussing a “bad” childhood is very much 
like airing dirty laundry to family and friends who 

222   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
know your parents, should your child blab about it. 
This is especially true if your current relationship with 
your parents is good or even reasonably good. Sharing 
childhood memories with your child—other than good 
ones—could open up old wounds and cause ill will. It 
is not fair or reasonable to ask an elementary-age child 
to keep such information a secret, so it is far better not 
to share such information if it might cause harm in 
any way.
Next, even if you do not think that talking about 
your sad or bad childhood experiences could harm your 
parents or their relationship with your child, consider 
the impact it might have on your relationship with your 
child. Is having this information going to make your 
child feel sorry for you? If so, it is not in your child’s 
best interest to know about it. Is it going to make your 
child feel guilty that she has a happy childhood, but you 
didn’t? If you are not sure, then it is better not to tell 
your child. Children who tend to be anxious, worriers, or 
who internalize their own and other people’s problems 
are generally not those with whom you should talk about 
having had an unhappy childhood.
Last, it is important not to use your own unhappy 
childhood as leverage when disciplining your child. 
Beginning in elementary school it will cause enormous 
resentment between you and your child, which will con-
tinue through the adolescent years. For example, when 
trying to get your child to listen to you, you wouldn’t 

Just between You and Me   223
want to say, “You know I didn’t have a dad, and you’re 
lucky that you have me, so the least you can do is listen 
when I ask you to do something.” Or “Stop asking me 
to buy you things. When I was your age, we didn’t have 
any money so we appreciated every little thing!”


One Last 
Question
10
The questions in this book offer you a very special 
opportunity to launch a lifetime of wonderful commu-
nication between you and your child—all you have to 
do is begin by answering them. However, that is just 
the beginning. Each time you answer a question, your 
child is sure to have another one, and another. I am sure 
you can see from the pages you have read that the way 
you listen, respond, and ask more questions is the key to 
becoming and staying connected with your child, now 
and for the rest of your and your child’s lives.
My last question is for you: can you imagine what it 
would be like if your child did not ask you questions?
Probably not, right? I know that I definitely can’t! It 
would be boring and mundane. It would mean that your 
child lacked curiosity or a yearning to learn. Without 

226   The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask (3rd through 5th Grade)
the questions, your days would not be filled with the 
same desire and need to challenge your child’s creativ-
ity and endless drive for a changing world. How dull it 
would be!
For this reason, I want to ask you—implore you—to 
have patience with your child when he asks you so many 
questions that you feel like your head might explode. 
Remember that this is his way of learning and commu-
nicating. Don’t forget that answering questions is part 
of the way that you can build a deep and meaningful 
relationship with your child. So please don’t become 
frustrated or annoyed.
Instead, celebrate your child’s questions—they give 
you a window into the worries and fears, through which 
you can help your child. They also represent achieve-
ment, intelligence, creativity, and social growth. Your 
child’s questions are part of the fabric of her very soul. 
Answer them with love and respect!

About the 
Author
Dr. Susan Bartell is a nationally 
renowned psychologist and author 
who has been helping children, 
teens, and families lead healthier, 
happier lives for nearly twenty 
years. Dr. Susan has appeared on 
Good Morning America, 20/20, 
and The Today Show, and is a 
frequent contributor to the New 
York Times, Parenting maga­
zine, Family Circle, WebMD, Women’s Day, Nick Jr., 
and Seventeen.
Larry Cuocci


Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Also available from  
Dr. Susan Bartell
The Top 50 Questions Kids Ask  
(Pre-K through 2nd Grade)
The Best Answers to the Toughest, Smartest, and 
Most Awkward Questions Kids Always Ask
978-1-4022-1915-3
$10.99 U.S./$12.99 CAN/£5.99 UK
Dr. Susan’s Fit and Fun  
Family Action Plan
301 Things You Can Do Today
 • Actions you can take today to make your child 
healthier!
 • Shopping lists, fast-food substitutes, and lunch 
box coupons
 • Tips to combat junk food ads, poisonous peers, 
dressing room anxiety, and the other negative 
force factors in a kid’s life
 • The 7 family patterns that make a child over-
weight: take the quiz, break the pattern! 
 • And much more 
978-1-4022-2949-7
$11.99 U.S./$14.99 CAN/£6.99 UK
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
“Finally, a book that answers all those questions we parents go in a cold  
sweat about! Dr. Susan tackles the tough ones such as money, shyness, 
siblings, and religion. Plus, we get the psychology behind it all to better 
understand our kids. You’ll find yourself using this book every day.”
—Pam Atherton, journalist and host of A Closer Look radio talk show
If you’re the parent of a seven- to eleven-year-old, there’s no doubt 
you’ve heard them already—and there are countless more to come. 
Questions! They come in all types: curious, nagging, touching, 
annoying, and downright weird. What they all have in common is that 
parents are often at a total loss for how to answer them.
You’ll learn to talk confidently with your child about the toughest of 
topics, with advice and support from expert family psychologist Dr. 
Susan Bartell. Responding to your child’s questions can be a remarkable 
parenting opportunity—if you just know the right words to say.
Who will take 
care of me if 
you die?
Why can’t  
I stay home 
alone?
Can I get a 
cell phone?
Inside you’ll find the concrete responses that will make sense to 
kids, stop the nagging, reduce your frustration, and begin healthy  
new conversations that will enrich your child’s view of the world. 
www.sourcebooks.com
Parenting
$8.99 U.S.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4022-2801-8
www.Ebook777.com

