
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 
 
 
 
 
 

Contents
Foreword..........................................................................................................ix
About the Authors..........................................................................................xi
Acknowledgments........................................................................................ xiii
Chapter 1:	 Innovation Matters.......................................................................................... 1
Chapter 2:	 Stories from the Trenches............................................................................. 7
Chapter 3:	 Innovation Is Not the Only “I”...................................................................29
Chapter 4:	 Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation.......................................................57
Chapter 5:	 Pull and Push...................................................................................................83
Chapter 6:	 Opportunities to Innovate Today............................................................103
Chapter 7:	 Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT.....................................................127
Chapter 8:	 Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow...................................................147
Chapter 9:	 Making Innovation Intentional..................................................................173
Chapter 10:	 Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value....................................205
Chapter 11:	 The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation...................................................229
Chapter 12:	 What’s Next for Me?..................................................................................253
Summary...................................................................................................... 271
Index.............................................................................................................. 279

Foreword
The role of the Chief Information Officer (CIO) has evolved ever since the 
first mention of the title over 30 years ago. Of course, the position of the IT 
leader has been around for as long again, although the job title has changed 
many times in the intervening years. While managing the IT function and 
resources, running efficient IT operations, and delivering reliable and consistent 
services were the core focus for early incumbents, achieving these objectives 
is merely expected of today’s CIO. As IT has become more embedded in 
organizational processes and practices, and the conduct of business ever 
more digitized, the CIO role has expanded considerably. Today, because IT 
offers considerable potential as a source for competitive differentiation, many 
CIOs have been given the innovation mandate. 
CIOs have always sought to innovate to reduce costs, to improve reliability 
and availability of systems, and to increase agility. Just look at the number of 
CIOs virtualizing their datacenters, automating IT service management, or 
moving their datacenters to the cloud. This kind of innovation is focused on 
the IT infrastructure: managing the technical legacy of past IT investment 
decisions. But this is only one kind of innovation—what I call “IT innovation 
of IT.” I do not mean to denigrate this kind of innovation; it is vitally important. 
Where most CIOs struggle today is with “business innovation using IT”—that 
is, driving innovation in products and services, processes, business models, 
management, and customer experience. 
One point is worth emphasizing: innovation using IT is less about the “T” and 
more about the “I.” There are two ways to win with information: exploration 
and exploitation. Exploration is about discovering new knowledge from 
available information. This knowledge can be about customers, operations, 
competitors, or other unknown unknowns. Some of this information will be 
internally generated from operations, but an increasing volume will come 
from external sources such as social media, sensors, and third-party databases. 
This information will also be of a different variety from that traditionally 
stored in corporate databases: not just structured data, but increasingly 
unstructured varieties including video and Twitter feeds. 

x Foreword
Exploitation is about seeking out opportunities to take advantage of 
information asymmetries; it is about making the invisible visible. These 
asymmetries arise when one party to a transaction, or interaction or potential 
transaction/interaction, has more or better information than the other. By 
identifying these asymmetries, an organization can leverage opportunities 
through the medium of technology to change both what it does and how it 
does it. Identifying innovative opportunities often rests on the interplay 
between exploration and exploitation. By generating new insights derived 
from exploring information, an organization may then choose to exploit any 
information asymmetries that may be revealed.
My research has found that most of the innovative ideas for using IT that 
come from the business side (as opposed to from the IT organization) tend 
to be for incremental improvements rather than real radical innovation. This 
“business-pull” innovation is generally limited by the business side’s inability to 
envision new possibilities for doing things not possible without IT.
The potentially game-changing opportunities will usually emerge from “IT-
push” innovation. These radical ideas can come from the CIO who has an 
appreciation of IT; understands the business, strategy, and competitive 
environment; and has the curiosity and entrepreneurship to identify these 
game-changing ideas. Of course, this may not be enough. To get traction for 
new ideas, the CIO must have credibility with his or her peers in the C-suite, 
the ability to communicate and influence, and the leadership capability to 
drive these ideas forward.
This book provides real guidance and practical advice for CIOs who seek to 
lead innovation using the IT in their organizations. It shows how IT can help 
drive value from innovation. It addresses the push and pull of IT innovation, 
illustrating how to innovate mindfully with IT, and it provides lots of examples 
and case studies. The authors also point to the structures and processes that 
have proved to work, as well as the organizational cultural demands to 
innovate successfully. There are sections addressing the risks associated with 
innovation and how they can be mitigated, as well as how to budget for IT 
innovation. There are numerous takeaways that won’t leave you disappointed.
Professor Joe Peppard
Cranfield School of Management, UK

c h a p t e r
1
Innovation 
Matters
The less things change, the more they remain the same.
—Sicilian Proverb
Why Innovate?
In 1986, 3.5 million people were inflicted with dracunculiasis.1 This disease, 
commonly referred to as guinea worm disease (GWD), was then known to 
have infected people in at least 20 countries. The Drancunculus nematode or 
guinea worm—often referred to as “the fiery serpent” owing to the intense 
burning pain it causes—is a spaghetti-like parasite that grows up to a meter in 
length in the subcutaneous tissue of its hosts. Spread via contaminated 
drinking water, this disease impacts impoverished and disadvantaged people 
most. The disease itself is not usually fatal, although infections resulting from 
it can be.
Even when millions of people were suffering from this disease some groups 
within the affected areas of Africa and Asia were unaffected. This anomaly was 
perplexing to epidemiologists, since all people are susceptible to the guinea 
worm once it enters the body, and the unaffected groups of people were 
1 “Progress Toward Global Eradication of Dracunculiasis, January 2005--May 2007,” Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, August 17, 2007, www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm5632a1.htm, retrieved on August 2012.

Chapter 1 | Innovation Matters
2
drinking from the same water sources as groups that were infected with 
GWD at much higher rates. How could that be?
Researchers learned that the people who had been unaffected would pour 
their drinking water through their clothing prior to consuming it. This 
prevented the parasite from entering their drinking water and left them largely 
without infection. This innovative use of an everyday item had spared these 
people not only from the painful disease, but also from the economic hardship 
that accompanied it. The story gets even better.
Since 1986, Dr. Donald Hopkins and a research team from the Carter Center 
(www.cartercenter.org) have leveraged that knowledge to create and deploy 
their own innovative programs, with amazing results. According to the 
Centers for Disease Control, there were only 391 cases of GWD in the first 
half of 2012,2 and those working to eradicate it completely are on the cusp of 
success. The Carter Center’s programs leverage the initial innovation—
filtering drinking water—and they focus on keeping infected people away from 
drinking-water sources so that the worm cannot reproduce. Innovations of 
their own, such as small filter pipes that people can carry at all times so they 
can safely drink while on the move, have helped to deliver their incredible 
results.
If you were skeptical about the value of innovation, or about whether you 
could be innovative, hopefully this example will begin to convince you that 
innovation can happen anywhere. It can happen in a multi-million dollar 
laboratory, on the banks of a river, or in your own back yard. It can be 
discovered by anyone at any time. It can make an amazing difference in the life 
of the innovator and, as in this case, in the lives of many others.
Of course, not all innovation will have as dramatic an impact as this illustration. 
But some will. While the value of an innovation that eradicates a disease is 
obvious, the fact that an innovation does not eradicate a disease does not 
mean that the innovation is not valuable. Assuming that you are likely reading 
this using an artificial light source of some sort, or perhaps in the form of an 
e-book, you will not need to look too far for evidence. (If you’re thinking, 
“Ha! I’m reading a printed copy using sunlight!”—you still have Johannes 
Gutenberg to thank for the printing press or those who came afterward and 
made improvements to mass publication.)
There are also Information Technology (IT) leaders who deserve of our 
thanks. IT leaders have delivered countless innovations that have improved 
2 WHO Collaborating Center for Research, “Guinea Worm Wrap-Up #213,” July 16, 2012, 
www.cartercenter.org/resources/pdfs/news/health_publications/guinea_worm/wrap-up/213.
pdf, retrieved on August 2012.

3
The Innovative CIO
the lives of people in many ways—ranging from the convenience of the 
automated teller machine (ATM) to social media that has helped connect long 
lost friends and family to advances in organ donor matching and other areas 
of medicine.
The achievements of many technology innovators such as Charles Babbage, 
Herman Hollerith, and Steve Wozniak are well known. The contributions of 
others, such as Alan Turing (who made great advances in computing and broke 
the Enigma code) and Hedy Lamarr (the movie actress who co-invented 
frequency-hopping spread spectrum communications that served as the basis 
for Bluetooth and modern WiFi networks) are perhaps less celebrated.
Today’s technology innovators have also delivered life saving advances. While 
visiting Parol, India, in 2009, Myshkin Ingawale witnessed the tragic passing of 
a mother and child due to post-partum anemia. He learned that anemia is 
simple to treat and that this tragedy would likely have been preventable had 
the local healthcare workers been able to diagnose the anemia. With a mission 
to “democratize healthcare” he built a portable-music-player-sized device  
(ToucHb) that can deliver a diagnosis in seconds, non-invasively, anywhere in 
the world. The University of Calgary’s Faculty of Medicine created 
ResolutionMD, an iPhone and iPad based application that enables rapid, 
remote diagnosis of stroke with the same accuracy as a medical workstation.3 
In addition to innovators such as these there are countless unsung technology 
leaders and CIOs improving lives in untold ways, both large and small.
Fortunately, the pace of information technology innovation continues to be 
rapid. Advances in hardware, social media, cloud computing, and mobile 
computing are being delivered at a breakneck pace. Hardly a day goes by 
without news of an advance in one of those areas.
None of these advances happen without innovative people. Thankfully, it 
appears we are in the presence of a bumper crop of those as well. Take for 
example, 17-year-old Brittany Wenger, winner of the Google Science Fair 
2012. Brittany created a “Global Neural Network Cloud Service for Breast 
Cancer” that combines the power of cloud computing and neural networks 
to deliver more accurate detection of breast cancer. Her noninvasive system 
delivered more than 99% accuracy in over 7 million trials.
Even from these few examples, critical lessons can be learned. First, innovation 
can and does happen everywhere. Next, innovation can come from anyone at 
any time. Third,—though far from last—as we saw in the case of the use of 
3 Marta Cyperling, “Stroke Diagnosis Using iPhone App Extremely Accurate Study Finds,” 
University of Calgary Faculty of Medicine, May 9, 2011, www.medicine.ucalgary.ca/about/
iPhone_medical_application, retrieved on August 2012.

Chapter 1 | Innovation Matters
4
clothing as a water filter, innovation does not require invention. We will 
explore of each of these further throughout the book.
Innovation Can Be Lost
Sadly, not all innovation is captured. Some is lost. Some is destroyed or 
sabotaged—intentionally or unintentionally. Sometimes people simply do not 
know what to do with an innovative idea when they encounter it. Each of 
these cases leads to the same, unfortunate outcome: opportunity lost, benefit 
lost, and competitive advantage lost.
Throughout this book, we will provide examples of various types of innovation 
from history, from current practitioners and IT leaders, and from our own 
experience. We will use each example to help you understand where 
innovation can be found and how to recognize it. We will also discuss how to 
foster innovation and how to capture it when it occurs. We will dispel some 
common innovation myths. And we will address one of the most critical 
aspects of innovation: how to ensure your organization fosters, and does not 
destroy, innovation and the innovative spirit of your team.
The importance of that last item cannot be overstated. Today many IT teams 
are suffering from a perception that they are not innovative. That they are too 
slow in their responses. That they are not nimble or agile enough to be a 
strategic weapon in today’s business climate. That they are behind the times. 
That IT is where projects go to die. That they are the office of the C-I-No or 
C-I-Slow. These labels can be as much a cause as an effect, and this perception 
(or reality) must be addressed head-on.
Innovation Is Imperative
Businesses are putting such tremendous pressure on their IT teams to 
innovate because businesses that innovate thrive and lead. Netflix provides a 
striking recent example of the benefit of continuous innovation. Their 
innovative use of technology in support of a leading-edge business model 
completely transformed their industry. Businesses that do not innovate 
atrophy, become followers, or even cease to exist. One need not look further 
than Blockbuster for an example of what happens to those who do not 
innovate and advance quickly enough.
The need to innovate with speed is clear to most any business leader today. 
In order to be valued partners to business leaders, IT leaders must be capable 
of enabling innovation and innovating on their own.

5
The Innovative CIO
Throughout the book, we will discuss innovation’s challenges and opportunities, 
and what you can do if you find yourself a victim of the negative perceptions. 
IT teams have long been innovators, and it is time for them to reclaim their 
rightful title.
Much can be done to foster innovation, and strong leadership is a key 
ingredient. Innovative leaders can create environments that enable innovative 
teams to thrive. They can take action to ensure that the benefits of innovation 
are made real when it occurs. They can remove impediments to innovation. 
IT leaders who know how to recognize and deal with these critical items will 
be well on their way to building an innovative team and becoming an Innovative 
CIO.

c h a p t e r
2
Stories from 
the Trenches
Innovation in Action and Inaction
I will not follow where the path may lead, but I will go where there is no path, 
and I will leave a trail.
—Muriel Strode
Iron rusts from disuse, stagnant water loses its purity, and in cold weather 
becomes frozen; even so does inaction sap the vigors of the mind.
—Leonardo da VInci
Though there are many definitions of the word “innovation,” for the most 
part they share several key characteristics. Most definitions of the term state 
that an innovation is the introduction of something new. They also generally 
agree that the “something” that is introduced can be a product, service, 
process, idea, technology—anything you can imagine. Another common 
characteristic is that they do not mention invention at all, or they state that 
though innovation may involve invention, invention need not be present for 
innovation to occur.
Understanding this aspect of innovation is critical. That is, innovation may 
involve invention, but innovation can also happen without it. Many times 
innovation occurs when someone—perhaps with a fresh perspective, no 
preconceptions, or no experience in a domain—sees an opportunity or 
challenge differently and applies an existing tool or process in a new way, 
context, or simply in a domain that differs from its common use. If a hard hat 

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
8
has ever spared you a splitting headache (or worse), thank Edward Bullard, an 
innovative thinker who realized that the helmets worn by World War II 
soldiers could serve another purpose.
Hopefully the previous example of an innovation in use will impress upon you 
how important it is to recognize, capture, and exploit all types of innovation. 
I recall playing with a doughboy-style hard hat given to me by my grandfather 
who worked at a steel plant. The metal hard hat had a substantial dent in its 
top, likely an indication that the hat had saved my grandfather from a serious 
injury.
So, it is imperative that you be on the lookout for all types of innovation, such 
as the following:
• 
Innovation in Use or Process
• 
Incremental Innovation
• 
Fortunate Innovation
• 
Deliberate Innovation
• 
Desperate Innovation
Innovation in Use or Process
Though frequently dismissed as not being innovative, innovation in use or 
process can deliver substantial value to a business. It is usually easy to 
implement and involves minimal training, often at minimal cost and with 
substantial returns.
In the mid-1990s, as a field engineer, I was assigned to help a very large 
corporation with the management of their distributed computing environment. 
The company offered a marquis online service, similar to the services offered 
by Google or Yahoo! today. With thousands of servers deployed, this company 
was challenged to keep their operation running smoothly and performing 
well.
Several teams had been unable to address this customer’s three main 
challenges: 
1.  Key events of interest occurred on each of their thousands of 
servers. 
2.  The size of their challenge was beyond the scale of humans 
(their employees could not manage all of the events on every 
one of the servers). 

9
The Innovative CIO
3.  State-of-the-art management software was designed for 
management servers as opposed to distributed application 
servers, had too large a footprint, and had too much of an impact 
on the performance of a non-management class machine.
We realized that the solution required a lightweight agent that could operate 
on its own and evaluate specific policies on each of the thousands of machines 
in the environment. It would also require central management and local 
autonomy and had to have a small footprint and acceptable performance. 
Simple. Except that nothing like that existed. (Solutions of this nature are 
commonplace today.)
In the end, the solution was quite straightforward. All of the components 
required to manage and respond to events, forward critical information to a 
central source (or multiple sources), “zoom in” on any “machine of interest,” 
and deploy policy from one machine to many others were already present in 
our existing products. The challenge was not that there was insufficient 
functionality—there was too much functionality. That made the products too 
resource intensive for widely distributed machines. We removed superfluous 
components (such as user interface components only required for a central 
management function) until only those things that were absolutely required in 
order to accomplish the objectives remained. These components were 
repackaged and delivered as a very lightweight solution to the customer’s 
problem.
None of the product’s code was changed, though a few minor additions were 
created. In the end, a brand-new solution to a new problem in a new domain 
had been created through the innovative use and assembly of existing 
components. Subsequently, that lightweight management technology was 
added to product offerings and served as a competitive differentiator for quite 
some time.
If you were of the belief that advances in use or process cannot be innovative, 
perhaps the previous example will help you to think otherwise. If that example 
was unconvincing, consider the changes in the use of acetylsalicylic acid 
(commonly known as aspirin) from a pure analgesic (pain killer) to a key factor 
in the prevention of heart diseases and strokes. If you’ve ever used a GPS to 
guide you safely to your destination, you’ve been the benefactor of repurposed 
military technology. Examples of the benefit of this type of innovation are 
everywhere and yet it is still often under-appreciated.

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
10
Incremental Innovation
Incremental innovation is innovation’s unsung hero. An incremental innovation 
can have just as large an impact on business value, quality of life, or revenue 
as any other type of innovation.
The March 2012 release of the third generation iPad provides a great example 
of incremental innovation. Around the time of its launch there was much 
written and said about how there were not really any compelling reasons for 
someone to upgrade from previous versions of the device. However, among 
these minor upgrades was the Retina display, which boasted 3.1 million pixels, 
four times as many as its predecessor. This display was purported to be the 
best ever for a device of this nature1.
The Retina display made the iPad much more attractive to photographers, 
who could now see much more detail in their photographs, making basic 
photo editing a practical application for the device. This upgrade also opened 
up other new markets for the device that would benefit from the sharper 
resolution, such as medical imaging. Apple, always an adept marketer, branded 
the new version of the device as “resolutionary,” and the third generation iPad 
with its incremental improvements sold three million units on the first 
weekend following its launch.
Sadly, incremental innovation is often perceived to be the runt of the 
innovation litter. Nothing could be further from the truth. If you offered to 
add a zero between the last digit of someone’s paycheck and the decimal, you 
can be sure that employee would instantly be aware of the value of “incremental 
remuneration.”
Fortunately, in addition to Apple, groups such as the Pharmaceutical Research 
and Manufacturers of America have discovered the value of incremental 
innovation. On their web site (Innovation.org), they state that innovation in 
their industry is often the result of a series of incremental improvements that 
together result in an overall improvement that delivers a significant impact. 
They also state that those incremental advances can result in better options 
for practitioners to deliver the best treatment to their patients.2
Opinions regarding the value of incremental innovation are beginning to 
change. In May 2011 at the “How Next Happens: Building our Economy 
Through Incremental Innovation” symposium, Roger Martin, Dean of the 
1 Though initially it was Apple’s claim that the iPad 3 included the best display ever on a 
mobile device others, such as DisplayMate agreed: http://www.displaymate.com/iPad_
ShootOut_1.htm.
2 http://www.innovation.org/index.cfm/InnovationToday/KeyIssues/Incremental_Innovation

11
The Innovative CIO
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto stated that Canada’s 
success and prosperity necessitate i t’s welcoming incremental innovation.3
Be diligent in your pursuit of incremental innovation and reward and promote 
it when it drives value. When someone familiar with your product says “You 
know what would be great?”; “You know what would make this even better?”; 
or “I wish this had…” pay attention. Ask questions. They may have a fantastic 
idea for an incremental innovation, and they may not even be aware that they 
do.
Incremental innovations can also fail to live up to their potential when their 
benefits are not effectively communicated, which will be discussed later in this 
chapter.
Fortunate Innovation
Overlooking fortunate innovation or “accidental innovation” can also result in 
lost opportunity. This in spite of the fact that many of us know stories of this 
type of innovation that are interesting, fascinating, or even life-saving. 
Sometimes fortunate innovation is simply that—just a fortunate turn of events 
that leads to a discovery. Thanks to a Petri dish that accidentally developed 
mold in Sir Alexander Fleming’s laboratory, penicillin was discovered. As a 
result, countless lives were saved and Fleming and Ernst Chain earned the 
1945 Nobel Prize. With similar good fortune, shareholders of the Kellogg 
Company can trace their fortunes to Will Kellogg leaving some cooked wheat 
sit too long when called to an urgent matter, accidentally inventing flaked 
cereals.
Sometimes fortunate innovation can be the result of frustration or can occur 
“in spite of” someone or something. Do you know the story of George 
Crum’s creation of the potato chip (also known as “crisps” or “wafers”)? 
Faced with what he considered to be an unreasonable patron who complained 
that his fried potatoes (“french fries”) were too thick, he cut his potatoes 
wafer thin with the objective of infuriating the customer. Instead, the customer 
loved the new creation that became known as “Saratoga Chips,” and Crum’s 
disappointment about his failed attempt to frustrate the customer was likely 
quickly replaced by happiness at the income and infamy these chips bestowed 
upon him.4
3 http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/incremental-innovation-essential-to-solving-
canadas-productivity-problem-hnhii-122597858.html; http://www.agora-event.com/
HowNextHappens/?p=1276&l=en
4 The story of George Crum’s Saratoga Chips is fairly well known. He was once featured as 
MIT’s Inventor of the Week: http://web.mit.edu/invent/iow/crum.html.

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
12
What might be called “innovative humor” may also play a role in fortunate 
innovation. Several of the innovations we have been witness to have started 
with a humorous comment, often in the midst of a very long workday (week, 
month, . . . ) or during intense brainstorming sessions. Thus, it is advised that 
you pay attention to at least some of those quips. During a brainstorming 
session I attended, someone made a one-sentence humorous comment during 
an all-hands session. In discussing the concept of data spaces, this employee 
quoted the television show Star Trek in parody and stated, “To boldly go 
where no byte has gone before.” Later during breakouts where plans and 
campaigns were to be proposed one group used that comment as the 
inspiration for a space-themed program that became one of the line of 
business’s most successful campaigns ever.
Deliberate Innovation
As strange and unusual as it may appear by now, at times innovation is 
deliberate. All right, so it’s often deliberate or at least has a deliberate 
beginning. Deliberate innovation is what many people think of when they 
think of innovation in general terms. But deliberate innovation can also include 
aspects of some of the other types of innovation that have already been 
discussed.
With deliberate innovation, a person or group sets out to solve a specific 
problem or take advantage of a new opportunity with the objective of doing 
so in an innovative way. In many cases, one of these common approaches will 
be taken: trend deconstruction, brainstorming, patent and technology 
searches, reverse engineering (ethically), focus groups, preference modeling, 
feature evolution, or even the tried-and-true suggestion box. These more 
formal methods can be used in combination or, perhaps, not at all. Deliberate 
innovation can also be born of another type of innovation (commonly 
“desperate innovation”) and then become deliberate innovation following a 
“Eureka!” moment.
In the mid-2000s, I was assigned by CA Technologies to lead a team challenged 
to address two key business issues: 1) Improve the quality of a suite of 
integrated products; 2) Decrease the time it took to bring those products to 
market. Our mission was to address those objectives through the creation of 
an integration, interoperability, and stress test lab. In the early days of the 
project, things were not going well. It was taking the team an entire week to 
run even the smallest of tests.
The assignment required the team to create computing environments that 
paralleled the very complex environments used by the world’s largest 
corporations. As you might imagine, creating these environments required an 

13
The Innovative CIO
enormous amount of effort. In fact, simply setting up a standard test 
environment took nearly an entire week. Sadly, this challenge was made more 
complex by the fact that the execution of such a test quite often invalidated 
the test environment. As a result, each execution of a specific test might 
require a complete refresh of the environment.
The team set out to purchase a solution, though they very quickly learned 
that (at that time) there was nothing that could satisfy their needs. Following 
a particularly frustrating call with one potential vendor who had been in full-
on spin mode, I drew on a whiteboard a diagram of what was needed in what 
was more or less a rant. Once the diagram was complete, and at the peak of 
my passionate plea, I pointed to almost every box on the board and named a 
software component we already made that could provide the functionality we 
needed. I concluded the rant with this remark: “And we would just have to tie 
them together and create this self-service and reservation system and I’ll bet 
CA would give us a fantastic price on all of those other components!”
The result of this deliberate approach (and the frustration) was that the team 
created one of the earliest private clouds. We did so years before cloud 
computing became mainstream, at a time when even the term was not 
commonly used. 
If not for a deliberate resolve to address the solution—and an appetite for 
frozen yogurt—that cloud may not have ever been built. For you see, following 
the rant, the meeting quickly came to a close. Fortunately, the team had a 
habit of visiting the café for frozen yogurt regularly and would socialize in the 
team stand-up area while they enjoyed their treat. Later that day while doing 
so, they continued to discuss their challenge. All the while the solution sat 
forgotten, drawn on the whiteboard in that area. And then it happened . . . 
“Wait a minute! This would actually work!”
A month later, an early version of the system was operational and two months 
following that two other teams had small versions of the system. By early 
2012 that cloud placed more than 20,000 machines at this organization’s 
disposal and has delivered millions of dollars in productivity gains, contributed 
significantly to the company’s sustainability initiatives through reduction in 
consumption and carbon emissions, and resulted in millions of dollars in 
savings in equipment, real estate, and software. In addition, many of the tools, 
techniques, and processes developed for that project have been made available 
through the company’s for-sale products and in their services.
It was through this project that I learned to keep a watchful eye out for 
innovation. Innovation can sneak up on you, and it will not always tell you it is 
there. If we had not had a yoghurt break that afternoon would we have missed 
our opportunity to leverage our innovation? Would we have missed out on its 

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
14
benefits? Thankfully we will never know. This is certainly proof that we must 
be constantly on the lookout for innovative solutions that present themselves 
this way. How many times has something like this happened to you and the 
result been a missed opportunity? Since the opportunities went unrecognized 
you may never know. 
Similar to fortunate innovation, deliberate innovation can also be born of 
challenge or frustration. One of our colleagues once invented a graphical 
installable file system for an operating platform because several people told 
him it would be impossible to do so. It became a key differentiator of the 
product his team developed.
Desperate Innovation
Most of us are familiar with the saying, “Necessity is the mother of invention.” 
There is nothing like having no other option but to succeed to drive an 
innovative solution. In fact, much of the great innovation that I have witnessed 
personally has come from some type of desperation. There is probably no 
better example of this type of innovation than “the mailbox” created to save 
the lives of the Apollo 13 astronauts.
As James Lovell, John Swigert, and Fred Haise made their journey to the 
moon, an oxygen tank ruptured and caused an explosion that blew an external 
panel off the spacecraft’s service module. While there were many innovations 
necessary in order to bring the crew safely home to earth, the mailbox is 
perhaps the best known, possibly because of a 1995 movie that recounted the 
incident.
Figure 2-1. The “mailbox” (Photo courtesy of NASA)

15
The Innovative CIO
As a result of the oxygen tank rupture, the three men were forced to occupy 
the spacecraft’s lunar module for four days. This module had been designed to 
sustain two people for a day and a half and was not equipped with carbon 
dioxide–removing canisters with sufficient capacity to support the entire crew 
for that duration.
Another section of the spacecraft, the command module, did contain enough 
lithium hydroxide canisters to sustain the crew, but there was another 
problem. The command module canisters were cube-shaped, but the lunar 
module canisters were cylindrical. The NASA engineers were challenged to 
make a cube-shaped canister fit in a hole made for a cylinder using the very 
limited set of supplies that were present on the spacecraft. Three lives 
depended upon the successful completion of a true-to-life challenge to fit a 
square peg in a round hole.
The engineers and astronauts on the ground developed a way to improvise a 
connection using items that were available in the spacecraft such as tape, 
plastic, and cardboard. That astonishing group of people innovated to create 
the life saving device that became known as the mailbox, because it was 
necessary for them to do so.
Innovation Everywhere
Though we have only begun to scratch the surface in terms of types and 
sources of innovation, our hope is that the examples discussed in this chapter 
help sharpen your senses with regard to where to look for innovation and 
how to recognize it when it occurs. Innovative leaders must be able to 
recognize and capture innovation and to foster an innovative culture.
Why spend time defining innovation? In our experience, one of the most 
common things that can kill innovation is that it can simply be ignored or go 
unrecognized, even by the innovator. It seems that people often confuse 
innovation with invention, and only look for the latter. So, knowing what to 
look for is a necessary beginning.
So Is All Innovation Good Innovation?
It could certainly be stated that not all innovation is useful. We’ve all had 
those great ideas that, following an evening’s rest, we realize are not of much 
use or are completely ridiculous.
This topic always brings to mind Michael Keaton’s character, Bill Blazejowski, 
from the 1982 movie Night Shift. The consummate “idea man,” Blazejowski 
had no shortage of “innovative” ideas. In one scene, he is lamenting the 

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
16
amount of effort it takes to make a tuna sandwich. As he walks down a 
hallway, his innovative gears begin to turn and he thinks that if tuna could be 
fed mayonnaise, then the time and effort required to prepare a tuna sandwich 
would be dramatically reduced. As the scene ends, he whips his voice recorder 
from his pocket at lightning speed and directs himself to contact a major tuna 
supplier about his idea.
Thus we can certainly concede that not all innovations will be of use in a 
corporate context. However, the creative process that produced even a 
useless innovation may itself be of benefit. It may help someone who has the 
potential to deliver useful innovative solutions to hone their innovation skills. 
Leaders must be deliberate in order to foster free thinking and an innovative 
spirit within their teams, even in cases where an idea has no practical 
application in your business context. Management and direction is obviously 
still needed (you cannot afford to have a legion of Bill Blazejowskis spending 
all day developing motorized yoga mats). It may be even more important to 
foster an innovative culture and atmosphere for younger team members. I will 
further explore this idea in Chapter 9.
Remember that an innovative idea that is not useful in the context of the 
innovator’s “day job” may actually be extremely valuable in a different context 
or somewhere else in the business. Be diligent in keeping a record of those 
“useless innovations” because sometimes they eventually have a use. It is also 
possible that an innovative or inventive idea that has no application in your 
business could be extremely useful to others, which could present an 
opportunity for revenue through licensing or royalties or might be given freely 
in a philanthropic spirit.
Innovation Killers
Innovation can happen anywhere, and innovation killers are omnipresent. 
Some of the more common innovation killers include the following:
• 
Culture 
• 
Organization
• 
The Perfectionist
• 
The Innovative Authoritarian
• 
The Protector
• 
The Downer Dog Pile
• 
Constrained Thought

17
The Innovative CIO
• 
Timing
• 
Communication 
Each of these can be as damaging as any other. A single person with the 
“innovative authoritarian” innovation illness (more later) can be as damaging 
to innovation as a dysfunctional “culture” or a lone “protector.”
Culture
Echoing Peter Drucker’s “culture eats strategy for breakfast” adage during a 
presentation to a group of aspiring leaders, Terrence Clark, general manager 
of the ecoSoftware group at CA Technologies, said “culture eats innovation 
for breakfast.” He is correct. Too often, we have witnessed a corporation’s 
culture devour innovation like Pac-Man devours those tiny dots in the classic 
arcade game. Some cultures are so skilled at this that, just as Pac-Man 
eventually learns it can also annihilate the other characters, those cultures can 
remove the innovative spirit from their people.
There are far too many aspects of culture that can kill innovation to enumerate 
them all here, so we will cover a few of the most common ones we have 
encountered.
Unhealthy Internal Competition
Unhealthy internal competition can be a major innovation killer. Yes, there is 
a place for healthy and functional types of internal competition; however, 
internal competition can also be extremely dysfunctional. Ironically, when 
internal competition becomes unhealthy, it can sometimes resemble a startup 
culture.
You may be thinking, “How can that be?” Often when we think of startup 
cultures, it is in the context of the positive—their team cohesiveness and 
“get-it-done” approach, effective and minimalistic processes, competitive 
spirit, and their ability to be nimble and adjust to challenges. But in the context 
of dysfunctional culture these, normally positive, qualities of a startup culture 
can be employed as tactics for one group within a company to compete with 
one another in unhealthy ways. In fact, quite often we have witnessed 
organizations within a company compete with one another much more 
fiercely than with their competitors. Having become smaller competitors 
with one another, they apply many of the strategies and tactics employed by 
startups to defeat one another. Competition of this nature is common 
following acquisitions. 
When unhealthy competition exists precious resources that could be directed 
toward innovation are wasted. Quite often the internal strife created by the 

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
18
unhealthy competition can lead to inaction on the part of one or more of the 
teams involved, as their resources are focused on the competition and not on 
execution and delivery. In its worst form, it can slow the progress of, or even 
bring to a standstill, the execution of innovative ideas for all teams involved. 
It may even become an impediment to teams not directly involved.
Theft of Credit
A culture that permits theft of credit for accomplishments and innovation 
rewards undesirable behavior. Creative people will quickly learn no reward or 
pleasure will come of innovation. In fact, they may consciously or subconsciously 
associate innovation with negative consequences and outcomes. As a result, 
their innovative spirit will begin to atrophy, and they will innovate outside of 
the work environment or leave the company.
Failure to Acknowledge Effort and/or Accomplishment
Failure to acknowledge effort and/or accomplishment is a close cousin of 
theft of credit. In fact, they play well together. Acknowledgement of 
accomplishment is often the best kind of fuel for a person or team’s innovation 
engine. The impact of a failure to appropriately acknowledge the contribution 
of a person or team can have a similar impact to permitting theft of credit for 
accomplishment.
Inconsistency in Rewards or Rewarding Failure
Inconsistency in rewards or rewarding failure can also suck the innovative 
spirit from a team or even an entire company. Often organizations provide 
rewards inconsistently or at a level not appropriate for the accomplishment, 
such as providing too high a reward for too little accomplishment or vice 
versa. For example, we know of a team that received a company’s highest 
achievement award for a project they had almost completed. This project had 
cost tens of millions of dollars, was years behind schedule, had been delivered 
with less functionality than intended (in fact, with less functionality than the 
system it replaced), and the work was not complete at the time the award 
was presented to the team. This award caused many employees to scratch 
their heads.
At the same time, there were other teams that had innovated on their own 
and had delivered those innovative solutions on or prior to their deadlines 
and at or under their budget allocation. Those solutions had generated 
financial gains and competitive advantages for the company, but these teams 
had not been rewarded for their work. The leaders of these teams had not 
been expecting an award for their efforts, though they did admit an 
acknowledgement would have meant a lot to their teams. After the less 

19
The Innovative CIO
successful project received the award, the leaders of the innovative teams had 
to work hard in order to maintain morale and to convince their team members 
that their own contributions were also appreciated.
Cliquetocracy
“Cliquetocracy” may be a new term to you, but we are confident that you 
have witnessed or experienced it. If you have ever seen or been part of an 
organization where the majority of the company’s discretionary perks and 
benefits (e.g., society memberships, conference participation, honors, titles, 
awards) are given to a specific group and to those known to them, you’ve 
probably been in the presence of a cliquetocracy. A cliquetocracy rewards 
people for whom they know rather than what they have accomplished. 
Though there is an important nuance.
A cliquetocracy does not necessarily reward those they know only because 
they know them. They may have a very high standard for who receives these 
rewards. In fact, everyone who receives a reward or honor may be qualified 
to receive it, but that is certainly not always the case. This presence of a 
reasonable standard for recognition is what can make a cliquetocracy difficult 
to identify. Cliquetocracies are not always easy to recognize because those 
receiving the awards can be qualified, and even widely respected.
However, a cliquetocracy can make it impossible for those unknown to the 
clique at its heart to receive any of the company’s awards or honors. What 
makes this innovation killer even more difficult to identify is that a cliquetocracy 
may not be a conscious initiative. It may simply be a bunch of well-intended 
people who happen to know each other, and the promotion of “those known” 
may be purely subconscious. The impact of a cliquetocracy can be profound, 
especially if they are well known and positioned in the organization, and if 
they have a great deal of influence.
Fear
Fear is one of the greatest culture-related innovation killers. This is often 
manifested in the form of fear of failure. If you’ve ever worked in an organization 
where you were only as good as your last failure, you know just how crushing 
this can be to creativity. 
Managers with less mature emotional intelligence who ridicule “dumb” 
suggestions and ideas and who publicly flog a reasonable effort or opinion, 
often with the objective of making themselves “the smartest person in the 
room,” are innovation assassins. These people are often adept at managing 
higher executives and can often use their culture of fear to ensure they receive 
promotions and accolades. In some cases, even those higher in an organization’s 
hierarchy can be intimidated and aid such a manager’s career advancement 

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
20
either intentionally or by their inaction. Furthermore, a culture of fear is in 
polar opposition to the “fail fast” approach used by many of today’s most 
successful organizations.
“Culture Eats Innovation for Breakfast”
Terrence Clark’s statement that “culture eats innovation for breakfast” does 
appear to be well founded. In addition to those we already discussed there are 
many other cultural elements that can have a negative impact on innovation. 
For example, we have all seen bad management practices or poor managers 
(at any level) have a negative impact on a culture. Tolerance and promotion of 
bad managers, and/or of some of the other innovation-killing personalities 
that will be discussed later in this chapter, can destroy a company if left 
uncorrected for too long. There are also cases where an industry or industry 
segment has common cultural shortcomings, often due to the latest industry 
fad in approach, management, or business discipline.
When companies have an innovation-killing culture, they will usually exhibit 
more than one of the types of innovation illness that we have discussed in this 
section. The effects of a dysfunctional culture include lost opportunity, 
irresponsible use of resources, poor morale, lost revenue, squandered 
competitive advantage, and exit of top talent. It can also impact the health and 
well-being of employees. Eventually people outside of a culturally challenged 
company learn of the company’s maladies, which can result in difficulty 
attracting new employees, especially those who are highly sought after.
Organization
In the context of deterring innovation, organization is very similar to culture. 
However, certain aspects of organizational discipline are not culture-related 
and deserve a closer look because of their negative impact on innovation.
For example, a company can have a very healthy culture and not be capable of 
capturing and/or leveraging the innovation that their employees deliver. 
Lower-level and newer managers may not recognize innovation when it 
happens. If they recognize it, they may not know what they need to do in 
order to move the innovation toward its full potential. In addition, they may 
not know how to reward an innovative employee.
These things can destroy the innovative potential of an organization even in 
the simplest of cases, such as when employees create something innovative 
that will serve their own department or line of business. Innovation can be 
much more difficult for a lower-level or new manager to recognize when the 
innovation does not provide value directly to their team. For example, a less 
experienced manager may not be aware of the function and objectives of 

21
The Innovative CIO
other groups and might be less likely to realize when something might be 
beneficial elsewhere.
Ironically, the opposite of this may also create problems. Surfacing too many 
innovative ideas, especially those that cannot help an organization to achieve 
its mission, can cause crucial and valuable innovations to be lost in the noise. 
We have participated in several innovation “jams” and competitions and in 
the delivery of systems to capture innovation. In the early days of some of 
these, there would be a deluge of ideas (hundreds of them) that were not at 
all related to any line of business. As a result, the people assigned to evaluate 
the ideas, themselves some of the company’s most innovative people, were 
sentenced to hours of reviewing mind-numbing submissions, each of which 
had to be fairly evaluated and discussed.
The Perfectionist
As you may have predicted, perfectionists are those who set an unnecessarily 
high standard for anything they deliver. These individuals may be so much of a 
perfectionist that they will not show their innovations to anyone, or in some 
cases not even speak about them, until their standard has been achieved. That 
day may never arrive.
Even the best innovations can benefit from dialogue, brainstorming, and 
feedback. As a result, the perfectionist’s innovations may deliver much less 
value, or be much less compelling or beneficial, than they might have were the 
ideas shared with others. In other cases, they may develop a “perfect” 
innovation that has no practical use or value.
In addition to killing or reducing the impact of their own innovations, 
perfectionists can have a profound impact on the innovations of others. For 
example, they can assume the role of the “protector” (discussed next) and 
apply their unrealistic standards to others. When the perfectionist is a 
manager or in a position of leadership, influence, or control, their impact can 
be far more damaging. As a manager, the perfectionist not only can recommend 
those high standards but also enforce them. So doing can lead to inaction or 
poor execution, or can kill the innovative spirit and morale of their team.
The Innovative Authoritarian
In the context of innovation killers, the innovative authoritarian can come in 
two flavors: “successful innovator” and “founder of the feast.” The presence 
of either flavor results in constrained innovation and thinking throughout the 
leader’s span of control.

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
22
The “successful innovator” is someone who has been involved in the delivery 
of one or more successful innovations. Due to previous success, this person 
has either been promoted or hired into an organization to drive the same 
sort of innovative spirit throughout that organization. Once established, these 
leaders begin to micro-manage teams, projects, and individuals. They constrain 
thought (more later in this chapter) and rather than reproduce the environment 
that made them successful innovators, they try to manage the innovation (in 
a sense, they attempt to reproduce their innovation). In some cases, their 
actions may be subconscious, but in others, they believe they are “smarter” 
than the members of their team.
Depending upon their span of control and influence, this type of management 
can destroy a team or company’s innovative spirit. Truly innovative people will 
become extremely frustrated. The best of them will be among the first to 
leave. We have witnessed more than one such leader cause significant damage 
to an organization that in some cases took the affected company years to 
recover from. I had a programming professor with a similar blind spot. When 
the professor asked, “How would you solve the following problem?”—what 
he meant was, “How would I solve the following problem?”
The “founder of the feast” has a more specific blind spot. This person may 
have created a new product or service. As a result of this success, the 
“founder” has been promoted, and someone else is now responsible for the 
care and feeding of that particular innovation. Furthermore, the newly 
appointed leader of the team now responsible for the maintenance, 
advancement, and further innovation of the “founder’s” creation now reports 
to the “founder.”
Though it is the founder’s responsibility to help set direction for the team, he 
is often subconsciously compelled to “strongly guide” the team and its new 
leader with regard to how each of the objectives must be accomplished. In 
reality, the creative freedom the founder had enjoyed and that enabled him to 
innovate is no longer available to the team and its new leader.
Had he been faced with the same environment, the founder would have been 
miserable and much less effective, perhaps ineffective. He has become the 
innovation killer, but likely has no idea that is the case.
I myself have been a “founder of the feast.” I knew from the beginning it would 
be difficult, and that I would have a strong bias to have things done my way. 
That system was “my baby.” I knew what it could and should become. So I 
told the new team leader he was free to cry foul, directly and without fear of 
repercussion, any time I started to do the work for him.
Even though I was conscious of this from the outset it wasn’t easy. Early on 
there were some frustrating times for both of us. I didn’t always catch myself, 

23
The Innovative CIO
but he held me to my word and we are both thankful he did. In the end they 
added some amazing innovations that I am confident I would never have led 
them to.
The Protector
Protectors believe it is their mission to protect the company, and/or their 
team, from all things that might bring harm. While that “mission” is not by 
necessity an innovation killer, the protector manifests the mission in ways that 
can stifle the most innovative of personnel. They see only the downside of any 
proposal (from anyone). As part of a team, they can make it impossible to 
brainstorm, as they instinctively attack details of any proposal long before it is 
necessary or productive to do so.
As a stakeholder, the protector can unintentionally become a voracious 
resource consumer resulting in a significantly negative impact on productivity 
and morale. Not only will they not tolerate failure or experimentation, they 
will bring the heat of the organization upon anyone who does not pay homage 
to their demands. Often the protector exhibits the behaviors of a bully. 
I had an encounter with a protector that may help to aid understanding. I had 
been away from my desk carrying out my duties. When I returned I noticed 
an instant message from [the protector]. At the same time I noticed an e-mail 
from the same person had just arrived in my inbox. The e-mail was a scathing 
account of how I had been unresponsive to [the protector’s] needs and how 
our team was unfit to serve their organization. It had been sent to senior 
executives in both of our organizations. The e-mail was sent five minutes after 
the instant message.
Ironically, protectors can be so unpleasant to work with, and so potentially 
career damaging to others, the result of their involvement is often inaction by 
people unwilling or afraid to deal with them. When that happens it further 
aggravates the protector, who most often has no idea they are the root cause 
of their own frustration.
The Downer Dog Pile
The “downer dog pile” is one of the most fascinating and potentially destructive 
phenomena we have encountered. Most people have witnessed this innovation 
killer, and many of you have likely been active participants. 
It often starts in a group setting following the statement of an objective or a 
creative idea. For a very short period of time, people contribute to the idea 
(“plus” it) and then someone states a reason why the idea won’t work. 

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
24
Sometimes someone will have a remedy to the first stated objection, but—
whether or not that is the case—another objection or impediment is soon 
presented. Others follow until there is a deluge of impediments and a 
metropolis of innovation-killing, energy-consuming walls.
It becomes a bit like the gang tackle that is often bestowed upon the winning 
goal scorer at a sporting event. The objective of the gathering has somehow 
changed from making something new happen to finding reasons why it can’t 
be done as participants metaphorically pile barriers on top of one another. 
Though the dog pile is a metaphor the person responsible for the idea may 
feel somewhat like they are actually being gang tackled. At this point the 
team’s objective has shifted from promoting to destroying their idea. Or so it 
would appear.
We have witnessed many cases where those with an execution bias and/or 
passion for solving problems (i.e., puzzles) became very excited about an idea. 
Sadly, this early buy-in often manifests itself in a way that creates the impression 
that they are not supportive of the idea or worse, that their intent is to 
ensure its demise. How does their positive intent come to be perceived as 
unsupportive? In an attempt to help advance the idea, their execution and 
puzzle-solving biases activate and they immediately begin to think about how 
the new idea or objective could be accomplished. Unfortunately by the time 
someone asks them a question, they are five phases into mental preparation 
and thinking about how to overcome a potential obstacle they feel they may 
encounter later on. Sadly, it is this potential roadblock that is often surfaced 
when that person speaks or is asked a question, long before it needed to be 
addressed, and before it had been thought through completely. This can have 
the unintended consequence of initiating a downer dog pile. In addition, it can 
send the wrong message to the others, especially if senior businesspeople are 
present.
This “thinking aloud” is potentially destructive and can often have the 
unfortunate side effect of “sucking the energy out of a room.” People can 
become exhausted dealing with what appears to be a barrage of questions or 
“artificial roadblocks,” and this can contribute to an IT organization’s reputation 
of being the “Department of No” or the “Office of the CI-No.”
I had a “life-changing” encounter with this combination morale and career 
killer when I was invited to participate in a 360-degree review with a senior 
business leader and his team. The exercise was intense, though very positive. 
We sat in a circle and those present took turns receiving feedback from 
everyone else. We had performed a written 360-degree review prior to the 
session, so we were somewhat prepared for what we were about to receive. 
But not really . . . 

25
The Innovative CIO
When it came to my turn, the feedback was generally very positive with one 
exception. Over and over again, from people in vastly different positions with 
vastly different backgrounds, who had vastly different personalities, I heard 
the same thing. I was “that guy.” I was the lead dog on a downer dogsled. I was 
crushed. That was not who I was, though it certainly was what I was. Not only 
did I know that this was not my intention, I knew it was a potential career 
killer. And it certainly must have been limiting my effectiveness.
It turns out that I was the person who, when asked about a new initiative 
about which everyone was excited, was five steps into implementation in my 
mind and when asked about it posed a question about a possible constraint. 
Fortunately I was able to discover that during the exercise, and the difference 
it has made to my effectiveness has been remarkable.
Constrained Thought
It can be extremely difficult to realize when a person or team is suffering from 
constrained thinking because they are usually unaware of it. It is not easy to 
recognize one’s own biases, especially since they are often subconscious. The 
symptoms of constrained thought can be the same as those described for a 
person or group possessing the  innovation-killing qualities of “The Protector” 
that was discussed earlier. (Yes, it is possible for either a single person, or a 
group of people collectively, to develop some of these innovation illnesses. 
You can have a “downer dog pile” of one, or a group acting as a protector.)
Constrained thought is manifested by applying constraints from existing 
systems, processes, and disciplines to a newly proposed innovation. Quite 
often, perhaps even most often, these constraints are irrelevant. 
Constrained thought is often exposed when a young employee or someone 
new to a domain solves a problem that was declared “unsolvable” or innovates 
in an unexpected way. In our experience, the reason this happens is that the 
new or young employee was not aware of the constraints, so she was not 
bound by them. Consider the recent trend of cloud computing solutions that 
actually attract new customers by offering them less functionality than the 
“traditional IT” or “on-premise” systems they replace. Many people would 
reasonably assume that consumers of their service would not agree to such a 
thing. Yet they have, and they have done so in large numbers.
I have had personal experience with constrained thought at a team level. 
Leading innovative teams, and trying to create innovative leaders, this was 
something that we had to manage constantly and actively. There were a lot of 
very creative and energetic people on the team yet they often fell victim to 
constrained thinking or the downer dog pile, especially during brainstorming. 

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
26
What’s crazy is that we often didn’t realize it was happening. We had to train 
ourselves to be diligent in listening for it.
Timing
The timing of the development of something innovative may be one of the 
greatest innovation killers of all. The very nature of innovation often means 
that the innovator has developed an understanding of a problem or opportunity 
ahead of others. In the beginning, it may be extremely difficult for others to 
understand the value of the innovation, or even the innovation itself. Not all 
innovators are great communicators, and fewer are able to communicate with 
people from other disciplines. (Communication is the next innovation killer 
we will discuss.) This only serves to exacerbate the issue.
More than once we have heard that innovation takes five to seven years to 
catch on, and to be truly understood by others. While this may not be a 
precise rule, we have personally witnessed innovations that were not 
understood or accepted, or that were not accepted as relevant in a specific 
domain for many years prior to their becoming mainstream. For example, the 
cloud computing example mentioned earlier in this chapter was not initially 
widely accepted as something of value outside the team that created it. The 
team had to diligently pursue ways to communicate its value.
Another example that might resonate more with your personal experience is 
the acceptance of the Automated Teller Machine, or ATM (also referred to as 
an Automated Banking Machine or “Hole in the Wall”). Certainly in the 
industrialized world, there are very few people who do not use an ATM 
regularly. In fact, I remember when the ATM was introduced to my hometown. 
The primary industries in this remote city were fishing, coal mining, and 
steelmaking. Many people were required to work shifts that prevented them 
from visiting a bank during their hours of operation. When the first ATM was 
brought into the city, it was as if you could see a groove in the pavement 
leading from the other banks to the one with the ATM, as customers swarmed 
toward its convenience.
What might surprise you is that this event occurred more than 20 years 
following the introduction of the ATM. In fact, New York City was home to 
an ATM (then called a “bankograph”) in 19615. In the 1960s ATMs were 
removed shortly after their introduction due to lack of customer acceptance.
5 An article entitled “Machine Accepts Bank Deposits” introducing the Bankograph appeared 
in The New York Times on April 12, 1961.

27
The Innovative CIO
Communication
Even the greatest innovations have no future—and will deliver no value to a 
business or to humanity—unless someone is capable of communicating their 
value to those who can benefit from them or bring them to fruition. Norville 
Barnes, the character played by Tim Robbins in the 1994 movie The Hudsucker 
Proxy, provides a lighthearted example of this type of challenge. Throughout 
the movie, Barnes repeatedly displays a hand-drawn circle and states only that 
the item is for children. This is often greeted with confusion or ridicule. Later 
the viewer learns that Barnes has invented the hula-hoop, which generates 
behemoth revenues for “Hudsucker Industries.”
Unfortunately in the real world, the result of such “skilled” communication is 
rarely success. Often the result is that an innovative opportunity is lost 
forever. If the innovator is not discouraged by the fact that others cannot see 
the benefits of their innovation, the consequence is often a lot of  personal 
“pain and suffering”, and a great degree of frustration, as they try again and 
again to convey the virtues of their innovation without reward. This kind of 
interaction can result in extremely unfortunate outcomes, such as tension or 
conflict in the workplace, open hostility, or the end of a career.
Other communication challenges can also kill innovation. One symptom of a 
communication challenge we frequently encounter is the “we’ve already done 
this” response. Certainly there are cases where a proposed innovation has 
been attempted in the past and is known to be an unsuccessful approach. That 
is not what we are referring to here. Often when the response to a proposed 
innovation is “we’ve already done this,” the people making that evaluation 
have made assumptions about the proposal, frequently before an explanation 
or proposal has begun. This can be the result of differences in vocabulary, 
especially among technology professionals. It can also be the result of bias 
based upon current events and projects.
Good communication is critical to the success of an innovation, not only 
while obtaining initial support for the innovation or in the early stages of its 
implementation. In order to maximize the value of an innovation, superb 
communication is likely a necessity throughout its entire life. Changes in 
personnel, leadership, corporate mission, or priorities can result in the need 
to revisit the benefits of an innovation. And, of course, “budget season” is a 
perpetual driver.
Three years following the introduction of the cloud computing system 
mentioned earlier in this chapter, communication to new and key stakeholders 
became critical to the survival of the initiative. Though the team managed to 
keep the initiative alive that year with increased support and funding, it might 
be overstated to classify the communication as a success. The following year 

Chapter 2 | Stories from the Trenches
28
there was an even greater crisis. It was following that stressful episode that a 
lesson had been clearly learned—communication must be proactive and 
continuous, even when the benefits of an innovation are compelling and 
quantifiable.
Face It Head-on
There is most certainly no shortage of innovation killers, and they can be 
viral. Sometimes many players in an industry suffer from the same malaise, 
resulting in an epidemic of one or more of the previously described innovation 
illnesses across an industry or segment. Often this is because the 
implementation of a poor solution can sometimes give the appearance of 
positive results in the short term. After all, there’s nothing like short-term 
success for the nurturing of short-term thinking. 
Other systematic causes of innovation atrophy are at least as concerning. For 
example, Harvard professor and innovation expert Clayton Christensen has 
recently stated that he believes that the way business schools are teaching 
their students to measure success through the “pursuit of profits,” and the 
metrics they teach and promote, are having a detrimental effect on innovation 
in certain geographies.6
Thus, given the information in this chapter, it should now be clear that being 
an innovative leader is simple. (We’ll remove our metaphoric tongues from 
our cheeks now.) Of course it isn’t simple, though you should not let these 
innovation killers discourage you. Awareness of these is a necessary part of 
the journey toward becoming an effective leader. Discipline, diligence, vision, 
thick skin, and the information in this book will set you on course toward 
becoming an Innovative CIO.
6 Steve Denning, “Clayton Christensen: How Pursuit of Profits Kills Innovation and the U.S. 
Economy,” Forbes, November 2011, www.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning/2011/11/18/
clayton-christensen-how-pursuit-of-profits-kills-innovation-and-the-us-economy, retrieved on 
March 2012.

c h a p t e r
3
Innovation Is 
Not the Only 
“I”
The Other I’s in CIO
“I notice,” said the duck, “that you talk with only one of your mouths. Can’t the 
other head talk as well?”
“Oh, yes,” said the pushmi-pullyu. “But I keep the other mouth for eating—
mostly. In that way I can talk while I am eating without being rude. Our people 
have always been very polite.”
	
	
—Hugh Lofting, The Story of Doctor Dolittle
Business and IT leaders long for the “glory days” when IT was heralded as a 
business value leader. It is widely believed that those days are, to a great 
degree, far behind us. There has been much discussion of late about how 
CIOs and IT leaders must become more innovative, and even more discussion 
about how they are failing to drive innovation for their businesses; in some 
cases even becoming barriers to innovation.
The perception that even successful IT teams are no more than a cost center 
and a drain on business is prevalent. IT is often thought of as a “necessary 
evil” rather than as a strategic asset.
Pushmi-Pullyu
The existence of an IT innovation drought is a widely held belief, and in many 
cases a reality. What may be surprising is that business leaders may be as 

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
30
responsible for this drought as their IT colleagues—perhaps even more so. A 
recent study1 concluded that information technologies deployed since 1995 
have positively impacted profits more than other investments, such as 
marketing or development. In addition, the study concluded that the impact 
of IT investments have an even greater positive impact as industries become 
more competitive. The study suggests, as we believe, that IT teams can 
overcome this innovation drought and make significant, strategic contributions 
to their businesses. 
Paradoxically, those same people who want CIOs and IT leaders to be spend 
more time on innovation quite often put tremendous pressure on them, and 
on the IT team, to focus on other mundane operational tasks. To further 
complicate matters, the complexity and size of today’s technology environ-
ments are such that simply maintaining those operations can consume all of 
an IT team’s capacity and budget.
Like the two-headed “pushmi-pullyu” ungulate interrogated by Doctor 
Doolittle’s duck, today’s CIO is under constant pressure to move in different, 
often opposite, directions. While some of these pressures can help CIOs to 
be innovative, others can impede innovation.
The I’s Have It
To state that senior IT leaders and CIOs are under a tremendous amount of 
pressure is to state the obvious. Not all pressure, however, is bad. Some types 
of pressure can inspire and drive innovation. Others can free up resources or 
create additional time that can be directed toward innovation—what we refer 
to as “increasing the innovation time surplus.” Therefore, today’s IT leaders 
must be able to identify which of these pressures are healthy, and focus on 
creating an environment that fosters and leverages those healthy pressures. In 
addition, IT leaders must also be aware of which pressures are unhealthy, and 
quickly identify and address those. 
We refer to these pressures as “the other I’s” in CIO. This is partially because 
it has become en vogue to replace the word “Information” in “Chief Information 
Officer” with other words beginning with the letter “I.” In some cases, they 
are terms of respect, as in “Chief Invigoration Officer.” In others, such as 
“Chief Immutability Officer,” they are quite the opposite. While some of 
these make for a better pun than others, each has an important impact on the 
performance of today’s technology leader.
1 Sunil Mithas, Ali Tafti, Indranil Bardhan, and Jie Mein Goh, “Information Technology and Firm 
Profitability: Mechanisms and Empirical Evidence,” January 2012, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=1000732, retrieved on March 2012. 

31
The Innovative CIO
In the sections that follow, we will examine some of the I’s that we most 
commonly encounter, both harmful (I-Negatives) and helpful (I-Positives).
I-Negatives
First, consider the I’s that often work in opposition to innovative activities. 
These “I-Negatives” can stifle or quash innovation and even careers:
• 
Inbox
• 
Intermediation
• 
Impenetrability
• 
Investment
• 
Innovation
• 
Inarticulacy
• 
Intelligence
• 
Infallibility
• 
Interloper
• 
Immutability
Inbox
If you have an e-mail account, and today most people have more than one, 
then this I-Negative may need no explanation whatsoever. Think of the large 
number of e-mail messages you receive every day. Now imagine how many a 
senior IT leader receives—operational reports, vendor and stakeholder 
requests, personnel and people management messages, complaints, 
misunderstandings, and the occasional (or not-so-occasional) “throw 
someone under a bus” message. These are but some of the messages a senior 
IT leader receives daily. Several of these messages contain no value at all 
(though they must be read in order to determine that to be the case), others 
are simple and can be dealt with quickly, and many contain detailed documents 
that must be read and evaluated. 
Rarely, if ever, are any of these raindrops in the e-mail deluge related to 
something that will drive new and innovative business value.
Now consider the amount of time that must be spent processing these 
messages. When I was a senior manager as a provider of IT services, a “light” 
e-mail day for me was at least a hundred messages. Most days brought more, 
and many days brought hundreds. Not to mention the four digits of e-mail 

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
32
insanity that greeted me following a vacation or a few days away from the 
office. Consider the amount of time processing this much e-mail takes. If it 
were to take only two minutes to read, process, and respond to each of the 
hundred messages, nearly three-and-a-half hours would be required solely for 
e-mail every day. We have also witnessed people taking several evening hours 
to carefully craft an e-mail to address an issue that could have been addressed 
via a ten-minute conversation.
Out-of-control e-mail can also serve as a warning of destructive cultural 
issues, such as a lack of trust. These issues can themselves destroy innovative 
spirit. We have been a part of teams where the use of e-mail as a weapon was 
their greatest talent. This phenomenon can be even more prevalent in cross-
functional teams. 
Have you ever witnessed an e-mail snowball fight? In dysfunctional teams, 
e-mail is often used as a way to throw work at other members of the team—
often when the sender believes the recipient of the work will be unable to 
respond. It only takes one rock-laden snowball to the head before the recipient 
realizes he needs to build a snow fort of his own. Once that occurs, e-mail 
itself becomes the mission, and the team is working all hours on their e-mail 
defense and offense.
This has become such a widespread issue that stories of major corporations 
taking what might be considered drastic measures to address it are becoming 
public. For example, Volkswagen shut off access to corporate e-mail after 
business hours. The CEO of Atos plans to eliminate e-mail altogether by 2014 
in favor of other methods such as social media and instant messaging. He also 
suggests that employees might adopt other radical forms of communication 
like face-to-face conversations!2
Email driven productivity losses are sometimes touted as the result of today’s 
always-connected, mobile, social world. However, the actions of these two 
leaders are not a new phenomenon. We know of a manager who, in the 
1990s, disabled the corporate e-mail system between the hours of 10 a.m. 
and noon and again from 2–4 p.m. every business day because he thought 
people were not talking to one another enough. They weren’t. I was also 
witness to an e-mail battle royal between two people who had no idea they 
sat two aisles apart in a cube farm. Once they were introduced to one another, 
it took only a few minutes speaking together to resolve the issue they had 
been working on via e-mail for so long.
2 BBC News, “Volkswagen Turns Off Blackberry Email After Work Hours,” December 2011,  
www.bbc.com/news/technology-16314901, retrieved on March 2012. 
BBC News, “Atos boss Thierry Breton defends his internal email ban”, December 2011, 
www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-16055310, retrieved on March 2012.

33
The Innovative CIO
So whether you believe out-of-control e-mail to be a symptom of a 
dysfunctional team or an innovation killer in itself, the bottom line is that an 
out-of-control e-mail culture can certainly take away valuable, scarce time 
from innovation. It can also poison a team’s morale, destroy esprit de corps, 
and leave team members too stressed and exhausted to be innovative.
Intermediation
“Disintermediation” is a word that has come to strike terror into the hearts 
of IT teams and especially IT managers, who often associate it with “rogue 
IT”, loss of control over their organization’s technology, and loss of internal 
IT jobs. In fact, it has been our experience that “intermediation” can be far 
more damaging than disintermediation.
Our use of the word “intermediation” in this context refers to situations 
where IT exercises too much control. Sometimes this is because IT teams feel 
they have a duty to protect the company, and the only way to accomplish that 
is to control everything. Other times it is because they believe the people 
whom they serve do not have enough knowledge about technology. In some 
cases, intermediation happens because a leader or team feels they are 
“smarter” than those whom they serve (more on this later in the chapter). 
Often it is a passive-aggressive tactic aimed at job preservation. Whether the 
motivation is noble or selfish, the impact is damaging.
Many, perhaps most, IT teams can frequently be found discussing how the pile 
of requests they are receiving from their stakeholders is representative of 
much more work than they could possibly perform. So ironically, by trying to 
preserve their role in everything IT-related, they are missing a tremendous 
opportunity to free capacity for innovation.
I learned this lesson firsthand when I was responsible for running a private 
cloud for many years. In this role, I was fortunate to lead one of the most 
service-focused teams I have ever had the pleasure of serving with. However, 
they learned the hard way that being service-focused, one of their greatest 
strengths, could also become their greatest weakness.
Due to their service focus, the team felt more or less duty-bound to fulfill 
every request from their customers themselves. The result was that the team 
took on much more work than they were capable of performing. As a result, 
40- and 50-hour weeks quickly turned into 60- to 90-hour (sometimes more!) 
weeks.
With hours like that, your team can quickly begin to burn out and the quality 
of work delivered can rapidly become, at best, mediocre. As a result, team 
morale is jeopardized. Eventually this approach also results in setting 

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
34
unachievable or unsustainable expectations with the stakeholders. Together, 
it is a recipe for spectacular failure. A team’s propensity for “intermediation” 
is something that must be monitored constantly.
Impenetrability
When overwhelmed by the pressures they face, IT teams will often reduce 
the amount of direct contact they have with their customers. The broadcasting 
term “going dark” is often used in reference to such a withdrawal of 
communication.
Going dark may or may not be a conscious response by the IT team. Questions 
like “Why don’t they just get out of our way and let us do our job?” can be an 
indicator that a team is adopting this I-Negative. The rationale is often a belief 
that they (the IT team) know what they’re doing, whereas the stakeholders 
(often “nontechnical” people) do not. Furthermore, IT teams can believe that 
if they didn’t have to spend so much time explaining things to their customers 
and stakeholders, they would have more time to spend providing service to 
them: “We would be done by now!”
Impenetrable teams often see no value in spending time dealing with stake-
holders, at least until relevant tasks are complete. They cannot understand 
why stakeholders need so much attention or information (that they would 
not know what to do with, would not understand, etc.). They perceive 
investments in this type of work as large, intrusive, of no value to the business, 
and offering no contribution to the end product or objective. 
Technical teams often perceive requests for such information as a lack of 
trust, and they can be quite insulted by it. This is where the great irony lies. 
As a team adopts the impenetrable posture, stakeholders perceive them as 
having intentionally gone dark. The longer the technical team’s lack of commu-
nication persists, the more concerned the business consumers become. The 
stakeholders’ concern is not necessarily because they do not trust the team, 
at least initially (though trust issues can be as much of a cause as an effect). 
Rather, it is often because they lose visibility into things they require in order 
to fulfill their own professional duties. For example, the delivery of a piece of 
technology may be a key element in the delivery of a new customer-facing 
service. As a result, the sales team may need to know the delivery date in 
order to produce revenue forecasts and plans for training, and the marketing 
team may need to develop advertising and promotional campaigns.
So, the more underground a team goes, the more anxious their stakeholders 
become. The more anxious the stakeholders, the more active they become in 
requesting information and updates. This vicious cycle creates ever-increasing 

35
The Innovative CIO
tension for all, resulting in animosity, loss of respect, loss of trust, or even in 
the stakeholders engaging another team or external service provider. In the 
worst cases members of the team that went dark could lose their jobs, or 
their careers can severely, or permanently, damaged.
This I-Negative can definitely be a symptom that a team is inefficient or 
disorganized. However, this I-Negative can also be found in teams who are 
very skilled in the other (usually technical) aspects of their work.
Investment
Investment in existing systems, processes, and technologies may be the 
greatest and most well-known pressure facing technology leaders. When 
many people think of this type of pressure, they commonly think of investments 
that were made, perhaps over a period of many years, in key business systems 
that remain critical to a company’s operations. In some cases, those systems 
may be outdated and no longer capable of delivering the required business 
value. But for others, they are adequate and continue to drive value. Either 
way, systems of this nature often require an enormous amount of time, effort, 
and expense just to keep them up and running. 
In cases where the existing systems remain viable and deliver good business 
value, IT leaders have many options to counteract this I-Negative. Successful 
IT leaders often speak of their use of “edge innovation.” Edge innovation is 
symbiotic innovation. It involves creating new solutions outside the core of 
existing business processes and leveraging those existing business processes 
to enhance the new solutions. This type of innovation certainly has its 
advantages. In cases such as this, the “legacy” solution, instead of being an 
innovation inhibitor, can be an innovation accelerator. With larger enterprises, 
edge innovation that leverages existing systems can deliver an advantage that 
smaller competitors would find difficult, perhaps impossible, to replicate.
Mobile check-depositing services are a great example of this type of innovation. 
These services enable account holders to use their mobile phone to take a 
photo of a check. The check is immediately deposited into their bank account, 
managed by the bank’s “legacy” systems, all without a visit to a bank or even 
sending the check via mail afterward. Such a service provides new, innovative 
business opportunities to early adopter institutions by providing increased 
service and convenience to their customers.
IT leaders must be careful not to allow their thinking to be constrained by 
existing investments and systems. Existing systems may not be suited to 
today’s requirements. They may, however, present a tremendous opportunity 
to innovate. Unfortunately, IT leaders are sometimes reluctant to replace or 

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
36
modify existing systems. This may be because of the business risk involved, 
their inability to deliver a compelling business case even though one exists, or 
because the leader or team is comfortable with the existing systems and does 
not want to change in order to keep things comfortable.
Another common reason is fear that the team who created the existing 
system (often the same team evaluating its replacement) does not want that 
system to be seen as a failure—their failure. Be aware of this treacherous trap. 
It is well-known that technology changes, and at times changes with 
unbelievable speed. This is not a new phenomenon.
As lauded and useful as the Pony Express was for its customers, it was state-
of-the-art for only 14 months (April 1860 to October 1861). The fact that it 
was short-lived did not mean it was not of value while it existed. However, 
the fact that it once provided value did not mean customers should continue 
to use it following the introduction of the telegraph.
IT leaders must have the courage to ask whether technology that they, or 
anyone else, implemented in the past—even the recent past—remains 
relevant and effective. They must constantly evaluate whether existing 
investments still deliver compelling business value, and whether there are 
alternatives that would be business value justified. We have experienced this 
ourselves.
While operating a cloud service, I was faced with an environment in which 
technology and best practices were changing with amazing speed. Sometimes 
we would make a decision to develop and implement a technology that was 
not available anywhere or from anyone. Six to twelve months later, there 
might be a host of providers offering off-the-shelf services that addressed the 
need for which we had developed that solution. Often these new providers 
offered their new solutions for less cost than our internally developed 
solutions (since it was now their core business).
With maximizing business value as our barometer, sometimes it even made 
sense to leverage external services in cases where the cost of those services 
was the same, similar to, or even higher than the cost of developing them 
ourselves. There were also times when it made sense to leverage external 
services even though the solution we could have developed internally might 
even have been “better” than the one we purchased. When either of these 
options was chosen it was usually because so doing enabled us to allow our 
internal talent pool to focus on innovation and on initiatives that would deliver 
higher business value. Value only we could deliver.
It is critical to not become too emotionally attached to what you have created. 
That is not always easy, and it requires conscious consideration.

37
The Innovative CIO
Dealing with these investment related issues requires a very balanced 
approach. On one hand, you should not adopt new technology for the sake of 
new technology. But on the other, becoming emotionally attached to 
technology or solutions well past their “best before” date is also the wrong 
approach. Your focus must remain on the business value delivered by the 
solutions and on the greater business strategy.
Today’s technologies also provide an opportunity for a hybrid approach. For 
example, consider mammoth legacy applications, some of which have existed 
for decades. These can be extremely expensive to maintain. They can also be 
very expensive and risky to modify, in some cases requiring many months, or 
perhaps more than a year, for even the simplest changes. These simple changes 
can cost tens or hundreds of thousands, or even millions of dollars. There are 
now opportunities for these applications to be decomposed and for portions 
of them to be modernized—to take advantage of new opportunities, to 
better prepare them for changes where they will most likely be required, or 
to prepare them for edge innovation—while leaving core functionality in 
place.
The investment I-Negative certainly places a lot of conflicting pressure on 
technology leaders, perhaps more than any of the others. What can make 
matters worse is that in many cases, even though existing investments 
contribute a great deal of value to a business, some business leaders may not 
attribute that value back to the IT team. In other words, the IT team will not 
even “get credit” for the, sometimes substantial, value those systems bring to 
the business.
Innovation
Confused? How could “innovation” be an I-Negative in a book about being 
innovative? Here’s how. Not all innovation will be of value to your company. 
Even good and valuable innovation may not be relevant to your organization. 
Given that time is a finite and scarce resource, leaders must be sure to devote 
their time to relevant innovation. (I suppose this I-Negative could be 
“irrelevant” innovation.)
This I-Negative may not be as obvious as it appears. It is easy to get caught up 
in something new and cool, even if it has no relevance whatsoever to your 
company.
For example, I once worked with a very senior technical leader who had a 
great new idea that he could not let go of, even though it was not related to 
the business. He continued to pursue this idea in spite of the fact that a 
conscious decision had been made not to go into that line of business. I 

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
38
watched this leader deliver the same presentation at least four times, though 
it was not actually on the agenda for any of the meetings in which it was 
presented. Each meeting was fairly well-attended and included senior people, 
so the company spent quite a bit of money to have people sit through each of 
the presentations. It’s not that this new idea wasn’t interesting or even useful. 
It simply had no value or relevance to the company’s business.
Irrelevant innovation can consume resources at any level of a company. 
Managers of teams or people caught in this trap must address irrelevant 
innovation, but they must also be careful not to crush a person or team’s 
innovative spirit when a situation such as this arises.
Managers must also be capable of realizing when they are presented with an 
innovative idea that may present a new business opportunity, but may also 
appear irrelevant to some. In those cases, they must ensure the idea is 
presented to the appropriate people or groups, in the appropriate context, so 
that a conscious business decision regarding whether to enter a new business 
or market can be made.
Not every manager will be inherently capable of either of these. Newer or 
first-time managers are even less likely to possess these skills. Therefore, it is 
critical that new and junior managers receive explicit coaching on how to 
foster innovation. It is likely that they will be among the first to learn of most 
new innovative ideas since they interact with the largest portion of the 
workforce every day.
Inarticulacy
All right, so it may be unlikely that an inarticulate person could rise to the 
level of CIO. In that sense, this I-Negative applies universally. Leaders, even 
technical leaders, must have the ability to express themselves clearly and to 
communicate their vision and goals to their team. This is, perhaps, the more 
obvious aspect of this I-Negative. 
However, there is a nuance to this I-Negative that is worthy of further 
explanation.  It is possible to be articulate in the context of the IT team and 
still be perceived as being completely inarticulate by business people, senior 
managers, and key stakeholders—especially when those senior executives do 
not have a technical background. We have witnessed too many cases where 
great ideas that were poorly communicated to senior executives came to an 
abrupt end, sometimes taking a career or two with them. As the senior IT 
leader takes the floor during a business-led or business-focused meeting, the 
ballet of eyes rolling back in heads and the storm-force gale of frustrated 
exhalations make us think that sometimes the selection criteria for a senior 

39
The Innovative CIO
IT leadership position is to be the technical person who annoys their business 
counterparts the least—“the best of the worst,” if you will.
Senior technical people must have the ability to communicate with business 
people using “their language.” In other words, they need to demonstrate the 
value of their proposals using business terms, keywords, and context that are 
timely and relevant to their audience. In addition, they need to avoid some of 
the most common errors we see technical people making when speaking to 
senior managers. I recently published a paper that offers some simple strategies 
to help technical people, at any level, communicate with senior managers.3 
The following is an excerpt from that paper:
When communicating with senior executives and managers one should 
consider the following:
1.  Less IS More—Start with the Most Important Point (Begin at 
the End)
2.  Consider What Is Most Important to Your Audience
3.  Tell the Time, Not How the Watch Works
4.  Use Questions to Empower the Audience and Confirm Less IS 
More
5.  Practice Your Message, Anticipate Questions (The Rule of 
Three)
6.  Write a Script
7.  Reduce Your Footprint
8.  If All Else Fails . . . Tell Your Story, Your Way . . . Backward
9.  Have Your Backup (Sometimes More IS More)
10. Only Wide Receivers Should Go Long—Stay On, Or Under, 
Time
1. Less IS More—Start with the Most Important Point  
(Begin at the End)
The most important thing to remember when speaking to senior managers is 
to begin with the most important point. Some might say “begin at the end.” 
In some cases this may run counter to our culture or “to our being.” We have 
been trained to educate. To lead people to arrive at our conclusion by sharing 
3 Excerpt from “When Techs Talk to Execs” by George Watt, May 2009. Reprinted with 
permission.

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
40
some history and leading them through the points that brought us to the 
point ourselves. To build a case.
It is my experience that senior executives think in exactly the opposite way. 
They want first to understand the value of a proposal or solution . . . before 
they invest time in exploring it.
With that in mind it is important to begin at the end. If your proposal will 
result in $7 million in savings, then let that be the first thing you share. Use an 
impactful statement such as “Our project is ahead of schedule with 92% of 
relocations complete” or “Our recent training program has resulted in a $4 
million productivity gain.”
Think of it in these terms: each executive has a light above their head with a 
pull-chain switch. When you begin your conversation or presentation the 
light is on. Their hand is on the chain. Your initial mission is to gain their 
interest and get their hand off the chain. (You have two minutes. Maybe.) You 
need to answer the questions: “Why should I listen to this person?” “What’s 
in it for the company?” “What’s in it for me?”
State the purpose of the meeting (e.g., to obtain approval for . . . , to provide 
an update on . . . ), request permission to proceed, say thank you, and then 
open with an impactful statement.
2. Consider What Is Most Important to Your Audience
Beginning with an impactful statement (i.e., getting right to the point) is 
important. The statement must also have relevance to your audience. If you 
are speaking with more than one executive, be sure to consider whether all 
of the executives you are speaking with have common interests. If they do 
not, make sure to consider adding the relevant “and” to your impact statement. 
For example, speaking to a sales executive and the Chief Sustainability Officer 
you might offer an opening line of this nature in order to capture their 
attention: “I am pleased to report that our project added $2 million to our 
top-line revenue and reduced our carbon footprint by 450 tons.”
3. Tell the Time, Not How the Watch Works
I recall leaving one of my first-ever customer visits as a field engineer. A 
customer had asked me a fascinating question. I had never considered the 
problem or solution the customer had asked about. It was very challenging, 
and I was excited because I had thought of a very good solution to the problem 
on the spot. The customer had asked a question in the form of “Can your 

41
The Innovative CIO
product [do this]?” I wove a tapestry of technological wizardry that would 
have made the most talented rug makers jealous. My answer had to be at least 
five minutes in length. The meeting went very well. On our way out of the 
building, Paul, the sales executive, put his hand on my shoulder and said, 
“George, sometimes the answer is just ‘yes.’”
That is more often than not the case with senior executives. They want the 
short answer. If they want an explanation they will ask for one. If you find 
yourself uncertain you can offer one: “Yes. Would you like to know more?” 
“Yes. Would you like me to explain how?”
Imagine if you asked someone what the time was and they began with an ex-
planation of how the crystal in their watch vibrated at a constant speed . . . 
By the time they got to the time, you would likely have forgotten what you 
had asked them. Most of us have been on both ends of a conversation like 
this.
Senior executives are typically under tremendous time constraints. In my 
experience they are grateful to and appreciate very much people who can get 
to the root of issues quickly.
4. Use Questions to Empower the Audience and  
Confirm Less IS More
A common trap that people trying to practice “less is more” can fall into is 
rushing through too quickly. Ironically it is possible to offer too little. It is 
therefore good practice to ask confirming questions, especially if you have 
summarized something large, critical, or complex. For example, when showing 
a detailed project plan you might state something such as, “This is our plan. 
We are on time and within budget. Do you have any questions?” When 
showing a process flow diagram you might state something such as, “Here is 
our customer intake process. Would you like me to step through it for you?”
Asking questions of this nature adds a small pause to allow your audience to 
digest your material or statement without adding too much of a delay or 
disruption in the flow of your conversation or presentation. It is a good idea 
to keep in mind the fact that these senior executives are where they are for a 
reason. They likely have a wealth of experience and are typically very good at 
digesting a large amount of information quickly.
Asking questions of this nature also helps to confirm whether you are 
delivering relevant information and shows respect for the authority of the 
senior executive.

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
42
5. Practice Your Message, Anticipate Questions  
(The Rule of Three)
It may be a statement of the obvious to note that anyone who will be 
presenting something to senior managers should rehearse their presentation. 
However, what we often fail to remember is that almost every interaction 
with a senior manager is a “presentation” of a sort. A meeting in an elevator 
or a brief encounter in the café can be every bit as important as a formal 
presentation.
It is important to “carry with you” the executive summary for your important 
projects. Have that “we have completed 92% of relocations and reduced 
expenses by $2 million” summary in your head at all times. When asked a 
question, think for a moment about the reason for the question. “What about 
my project would be of most interest to a person in this position? To this 
person?”
When preparing for a meeting or presentation, it is also beneficial to view 
things from the senior managers’ perspective and try to anticipate questions 
they may ask. For example, if preparing for a presentation ask yourself what 
questions may be asked about each and every slide, and about the presentation 
or topic overall. Then prepare answers, in executive summary form (less is 
more), for each of the questions. It is amazing the difference this can make in 
the level of confidence you will have in yourself, and the executives will have 
in you in return.
The rule of three: the first time you present something to a senior manager 
(or anyone, really) should be at least the third time you are presenting it. 
Practice at least twice as if you are with the executives. Even if you are alone, 
stand, gesture, and anticipate and respond to a few questions. That will help 
you to set the message and flow and is likely to make you much more 
comfortable during the actual event.
If you can find someone willing to participate in your practice and to give you 
feedback then do so. If you do so it is strongly recommended that you follow 
the rule of three and rehearse prior to your “live” practice session. That 
should help make the session even more effective.
6. Write a Script
Once you have your message refined, it is almost always worthwhile to write 
it down. Writing it will not only help you to refine the message—it can also 
often help set the message clearly in your mind.
Include not only your message or presentation, but also the questions you 
anticipate along with the answers you would give. Having a written practice 

43
The Innovative CIO
Q&A can dramatically improve your ability to answer questions succinctly. 
The act of writing the Q&A can also help you to identify key items that may 
have been left out of the main body of the presentation, or even items that 
should be removed.
It is fine to refer to your notes during a presentation. If you are presenting in 
person, reading the entire presentation directly from your notes is likely ill 
advised. If you are presenting via teleconference, you may be able to use your 
notes more actively. Some people are able to read an entire script during a 
teleconference and deliver an effective presentation. If you are not confident 
that you are one of those people then it is recommended you not do so, or 
that you practice with someone who will provide honest feedback.
Your script may also be of great value if ever you are asked to speak about the 
topic at a time you were not expecting to.
7. Reduce Your Footprint
If you have time to review your notes or slides, take the key points and try to 
restate them in fewer words. Changing the grammatical voice of a statement 
can sometimes help. Less is more, and the more you practice this the better 
and more effective your message will be.
Begin by reducing the key points. Time permitting, move to secondary points 
and the answers you prepared for the questions you anticipated.
8. If All Else Fails . . . Tell Your Story, Your Way . . . Backward
If you have been trained to build a persuasive case—to “tell a story”—it may 
be very difficult for you to begin at the end. If this is the case, try writing your 
story the way you would normally write it. Then take the end of the story 
(e.g., “and we saved $15 million”) and make that your first statement or slide. 
Keep the story line; you may need it. Just begin with the most important 
point.
In many cases this may be the only way to prepare an executive summary. 
There have been cases where I have spent hours preparing a presentation 
with many, many slides only to realize that most of the detail would be of no 
interest (at least initially) to the senior executives. After some rework, those 
presentations become 3–5 slides and 10–15 minutes in duration. Some of the 
most effective presentations I have delivered lasted 10–15 minutes, even 
though they covered large and complex projects that lasted many quarters.
Preparation is paramount. The shorter the presentation, the more important 
the preparation.

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
44
9. Have Your Backup (Sometimes More IS More)
It is important to note that the fact that you may lead with something very 
brief, or you may have a brief presentation planned (3–5 slides, for example), 
does not mean the executives will never be interested in details. The point of 
this paper is not to state executives never care about details nor that they are 
incapable of digesting them. Nothing could be further from the truth. In some 
cases the senior managers you are speaking with may wish to get into the 
details. You might state “This is our process. Would you like me to step 
through it?” and receive the response “Yes, please.”
Thus, though you may not plan to present the details you must be adequately 
prepared to do so.
In these situations you may also need to put some of the other strategies into 
practice. For example, if more than one senior manager is present, it may be 
the case that only one of them is interested in the details. Though there is no 
magic formula, in these cases a well-considered question can often make your 
presentation more effective. For example, when asked to dive into the details 
you might ask, “Is that something of interest to everyone or would you prefer 
I cover this with you alone following the presentation?” A question of this 
nature can help keep you from situations where some key executives lose 
interest while you go through details which they either have no interest in or 
do not understand. Caution is critical, and your question must be asked 
respectfully, especially if you feel there is someone present who may not have 
the background necessary to understand the details. Please be careful not to 
be perceived as patronizing.
10. Only Wide Receivers Should Go Long— 
Stay On, Or Under, Time
This may be one of the most important items to consider. The calendar of the 
most senior executives is typically an insane tapestry of logistics. It is important 
to stay on, or under, the time allotted. Under is best. If you have 30 minutes 
of an executive’s time and you can get your point across in 10, then do so. 
Practice hitting that time target. That will leave some time for possible late 
starts and for questions.
If you begin that 30-minute meeting on time and finish in 10 minutes, the 
senior executive will very much appreciate your getting to the point and 
respecting their time. That will dramatically increase the likelihood you will 
get more of it when you need to.

45
The Innovative CIO
Intelligence
Leaders suffering from the intelligence I-Negative often fall into a classic trap. 
In many cases, they became senior IT leaders as a result of their personal 
intelligence and/or creativity. This can lead to a well-intended, though perhaps 
subconscious, tendency to try to solve every problem themselves. This 
tendency can have some fairly obvious consequences. For example, leaders 
can unconsciously take learning or growth opportunities away from their 
employees. Furthermore, a leader with this I-Negative may be repeatedly 
preventing innovations from being discovered. At the very least they will 
never know what their employees may have accomplished if left to solve 
problems on their own. In worst cases, leaders can send a morale-crushing 
implicit message that they do not trust or respect the members of their team.
Regardless of the impact on the team, the result of this I-Negative is often 
that the leader takes on too much work and/or responsibility. This overload 
often leads to burnout and a decrease in the quality of the leader’s own work, 
which often cascades throughout their team.
Infallibility
A more destructive form of the intelligence I-Negative also exists. Extreme 
“Chief Intelligence/Infallibility Officers” often feel, in fact often strongly 
believe, they are always “the smartest person in the room.” Because of this 
trait, they either intentionally (usually) or unintentionally demean the ideas 
and contributions of others. In its worst manifestation, those ideas sometimes 
find their way back to the organization later (sometimes many months later) 
as “great new ideas” from the same “Chief Infallibility Officer” who killed the 
idea when it was originally proposed.
There have been spirited debates regarding whether or not these people 
actually realize they are revisiting the ideas of others, almost always (OK, 
always) without attribution to the originator—not even as someone who 
“inspired” their thinking. In reality, that “how” does not matter. The outcome 
is unforgivable, and the impact is the same.
Interloper
In the previous chapter, we discussed a number of innovation killers. You may 
have noticed that many of them were related to human personality traits. 
People with these traits can place an enormous amount of pressure on an IT 
leader. Not all of this pressure is bad and not all is malevolent. However, 
dealing with it can be time-consuming and mind-numbing.

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
46
Several types of interlopers can attempt to insert themselves into innovative 
processes. In some cases, their agenda may be destructive, such as when they 
want to take or share credit for new ideas and innovation that they had no 
real part in. Or they may be skeptical about the innovation and concerned 
that it might be bad for the company. To be clear, in the latter case the 
negative aspect is often related to their approach or tactics. This is not a 
suggestion that a proposed innovation should never be questioned.
Others will become involved with the best of intentions. They may find the 
innovation exciting or simply be service-minded and wish to help. In the end, 
the result is very often the same. IT leaders can become consumed by the 
new idea, or overwhelmed by the sheer volume of activity they have to deal 
with, if they do not realize this is happening to them and respond to it 
correctly.
IT leaders must also take care to recognize when this type of meddling occurs 
in the context of their operational responsibilities. This type of lost time is 
not only an innovation-related issue. Time lost due to this type of interaction—
even in the context of “keeping the lights on”—is taken directly from the 
innovation time surplus.
Immutability
Though this is, perhaps, a fairly obvious I-Negative, it is certainly worth 
mentioning and cannot be ignored. Today’s IT leaders need not only be willing 
to accept change in the form of new technologies (i.e., advances in mobile 
computing, social media, cloud computing), they also must be willing to accept 
new ways of communicating and working with their stakeholders and with 
younger workers (now often referred to as “Millennials”).
In addition, today’s IT leaders must learn to accept successful approaches to 
innovation that are different from their own, even if their own approaches 
have been successful.
 I-Positives
Not all pressure is negative. True creative tension can be inspiring. Challenge 
can be exciting and energizing. We refer to the I’s that can help foster 
innovation and/or counteract some of the I-Negatives as the I-Positives. 
These include the following:
• 
Instrumentation 
• 
Innovation

47
The Innovative CIO
• 
(dis)Intermediation
• 
Improvement
• 
ITIL , ITSM . . .
• 
Independence/Initiative
• 
Instruction
• 
Invigoration
• 
Integrity
Instrumentation
Innovative technical people love to spend their time creating reports. As I 
remove my metaphoric tongue from my cheek, I can recall my own experience 
of requesting new reports while leading technical teams developing and 
operating a cloud computing solution. The sighs. The eyes on the ceiling. The 
body language. Every time I asked for a report, it was as if I had told a child I 
was going to take his puppy away. There were so many other cool things to 
be done . . . and those were “actually valuable.”
It is quite common that innovative technicians, and even their leaders, cannot 
see the value in instrumentation or transparency with stakeholders. The irony 
is that the time it takes to stop and create this type of instrumentation is 
often rapidly recovered. Each and every time someone uses a report or 
dashboard is an instance when someone in the technology team did not have 
to spend time retrieving data, creating a report, or answering a question. 
These requests often occur frequently, so proactive creation of instrumentation 
can very quickly create a time surplus that can be directed toward innovation 
and other, more interesting, work. Furthermore, investments in instrumen-
tation pay off ad infinitum. Leaders and teams who are not proactive in their 
communication with customers and key stakeholders also are subject to 
whatever perceptions, good or bad, that customers have about them. Here 
are some of the most common, damaging perceptions:
• 
Your service is awful.
• 
My team does not use your service.
• 
Your service has little (no) value to the company (to my  
team . . . ).
• 
Your service is less modern than [the name of an external 
service]. 
• 
Your service is out-of-date.

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
48
• 
Your service is more expensive than [the name of an external 
service].
Consider, for example, the first perception, “Your service is awful.” If a 
stakeholder’s perception is that your service is awful and you are not measuring 
your service, then your service is awful. In reality your service might be 
perfectly acceptable, or even very good. Yet that will not matter because your 
customers feel differently and you have no data to engage in a meaningful, 
fact-based conversation with them. If, however, you are collecting meaningful 
data, you might find yourself in one of the following three situations, any of 
which would result in a much more productive conversation with your 
stakeholder:
1.  You review the data and determine the service truly is bad. You 
acknowledge this failing, supply some supplementary information, 
identify the cause, and share your plan of action.
2.  Your reports demonstrate the service of interest is actually 
performing well. Even though that is the case, you acknowledge 
that you are concerned because your stakeholder is not satisfied. 
You engage with the stakeholder to determine the root cause of 
their dissatisfaction (even if the cause is simply perception.) In 
such cases, it may be your stakeholder’s engagement model and/
or your communication scheme that is in need of repair.
3.  Your measurements detect that a service is about to suffer. You 
take action to address the cause before it impacts your customer. 
There is no conversation necessary. You meet your SLAs.
Good instrumentation not only helps improve operational efficiency, it can 
also dramatically increase the confidence and trust stakeholders have in your 
organization.
When a team does not possess good operational reporting, they can pay 
dearly for it. Every request for information becomes ad hoc. Often these 
requests are the result of someone voicing one of those previously mentioned 
statements of perception in a meeting of senior managers. If not addressed, 
statements in this context can have results as dramatic as the complete 
dissolution of a service or team. Due to this, we have witnessed these ad hoc 
requests resulting in a full-on, full-time fire drill for one or more employees 
that took them off productive work for one or two days, or more. Sadly, due 
to the time constraints involved, these reports are often created in such a 
way that they are useful for only the request at hand. Thus, the next time a 
request of this nature is received, the fire drill begins again.

49
The Innovative CIO
It can be worse. Add one of the innovation-killing personalities discussed in 
Chapter 2 to this context and creating these “one-time” reports can become 
an innovation killer on its own. In fairness to those caught in this trap, it is not 
always simple (perhaps even possible) to realize this is happening to you while 
you are in the middle of it. The additional workload and accompanying 
frustration can be an effective disguise.
Not only can transparent and proactive communication to key stakeholders 
and senior managers result in a better relationship with them, increased trust, 
and increased confidence in your team, it can also result in the creation of a 
significant amount of time for innovation (“proactive” being the keyword). 
The value of proactive stakeholder communication is becoming much more 
widely recognized. Many businesses are creating “trust” sites that can be 
visited by their stakeholders (in some cases by anyone) at any time. Through 
these sites, customers always know the current state of their services, and in 
many cases they can view historical status as well. Trust.salesforce.com is one 
well-known example of a successful trust site you can visit to see this type of 
proactive, transparent communication in action.
To this point we have focused on measurements of service. It is also key that 
IT leaders be capable of articulating the value their services bring to the 
business. (See also the “Inarticulacy” I-Negative mentioned earlier in the 
chapter.) In order to do so, the value of services must also be measured and 
shared. Measuring items of this nature ensures that IT leaders are able to 
communicate their value to business leaders in business terms. (e.g.: “Orders 
have increased by $2 million in the month since we implemented the new 
search facility.”) This can be extremely beneficial during budget discussions. In 
addition, these measurements can also serve as an indication that a service 
should be re-evaluated or replaced as its value begins to diminish. This key 
benefit of value measurement is often overlooked.
Effective leaders are proactive in their reporting and transparent with their 
customers and stakeholders. This approach to stakeholder engagement 
results in better service to the stakeholders, higher levels of trust, and often 
a substantial increase in the innovation time surplus as a result. It is worth 
noting, however, that measuring the wrong things or ignoring signs from 
“outside the measurements” can be a path to misery.
Innovation
This entire book is about becoming a “Chief Innovation Officer”. While 
(obviously) we will not reproduce the entire contents of the book in this 
section, we would be remiss not to include “Innovation” in our list of 
I-Positives. In addition, we want to reinforce one key point.

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
50
Being a “Chief Innovation Officer” is not only about your own track record of 
innovation or about being innovative yourself. Sure, that can be part of it. 
However, your own creativity may not be the most important key to your 
success. Innovative leaders must also be able to harvest innovation from their 
entire team. Furthermore, even if the CIO is the most creative and innovative 
person in their team, “we” (the CIO and the team) will always be able to 
accomplish more than “I” (the CIO). This is something to keep in mind 
whether you are someone who aspires to be an innovative IT leader, or 
someone who decides which people are assigned to those leadership positions.
(dis)Intermediation
Previously, in the “Intermediation” section, we referred to disintermediation 
in the context of an IT team’s customers creating and acquiring services 
without involving the IT team. While this is certainly one type disintermediation, 
disintermediation can also be a strategic weapon. Disintermediation, when 
applied intelligently, can act as a force multiplier for an IT team.
What may be surprising is that removing oneself from the service equation, 
done properly, can also result in a more satisfied customer. Odds are that you 
have experienced this as a consumer, though you may not have realized the 
reason for your satisfaction. This personal experience may help illustrate this 
point.
Believe it or not, there was actually a time when people had to check out of 
hotels. Face to face. At that time, I was a field engineer and traveled more or 
less every working day of the year (and then some). I rarely spent more than 
a day or two in one place, so several mornings each week I would wait in line, 
luggage in hand, waiting to settle my bill. This process was unpredictable, 
though it was likely to take at least 10 or 15 minutes at the best of times. 
Often it took longer. Since I had to be certain I would arrive at my customers’ 
premises on time, I had to schedule a half-hour for checkout each morning of 
a departure.
Think about that—a half-hour, two to five times every week. In a single year, 
this represents approximately 50–125 total hours set aside to accommodate 
hotel checkout. But then came “zip-out checkout,” “no hassle checkout,” and 
many other similar services. These services allowed guests to have charges 
automatically assigned to their credit cards and either checkout via their 
television or by picking up a receipt from a slot in the lobby. It is obvious that 
these services have evolved, and most hotels offer an even simpler automatic 
checkout today. Guests need only visit the reception desk if there is a problem 
with the bill (in my experience, a very rare occurrence).

51
The Innovative CIO
So, what’s the big deal? It certainly was not that I did not want to speak with 
the hotel agents. In fact, I knew most of them very well. Think about what this 
meant to my time—30 minutes two to five times a week of my personal time 
was again mine. What a huge gift! Even at two checkouts per week, this would 
result in more than 40 hours of personal time returned each year. (It was 
likely twice that.) It also meant a much more predictable schedule. Checkout 
was no longer a factor in whether I would be on time for a customer visit.
With these checkout options, we have a much better service and the hotels 
have a much more efficient operation. Of course, we are all aware that this 
type of positive disintermediation is not limited to rapid checkout services. 
We happily and willfully select positive disintermediation every day through 
services such as online shopping, self-service retail checkout, and automated 
banking machines.
Disintermediation can be used as a strategic weapon—both for IT and for the 
businesses they serve. Recently, I used positive disintermediation (OK, self-
service) to deliver better, faster service while giving my team more time to 
focus on high-value activities like further automating our environment. It also 
enabled them to be more nimble and more responsive to our customers.
(Incidentally, we realize we took a bit of literary license including “(dis)” with 
this I-Positive. This word has such strong currency we thought it important to 
use it.)
Improvement
Often improvement can be the forgotten victim of innovation. New and/or 
innovative approaches are often applied in an information technology context 
to make existing processes more efficient. However, in many cases the 
processes that they improved are no longer relevant, resulting in an efficient, 
irrelevant process.
In some cases, the overall process may be somewhat relevant, though with 
modification could be made more efficient. For example, a process might be 
automated, without changing the process itself, and result in a reduction in 
execution time from one week to three days. That may be heralded as a great 
success (greater than 50% improvement). However, it may later be revealed 
that minor changes in the process itself in combination with the automation 
(perhaps made possible by the automation) could reduce the process to a 
matter of minutes. We and our colleagues hear of these situations regularly.
Something far worse can also happen when processes are automated. If that 
process is no longer relevant (no longer best practice, made incorrect by the 

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
52
automation, etc.), the “wrong” process can be automated. As a result, bad 
things happen far faster than they would have ever before been possible.
Process improvements can contribute greatly to the innovation time surplus. 
Opportunities for process improvements often present themselves while 
other things, such as process automation, are being attended to. Be on the 
lookout for those opportunities. In addition, changes made while automating 
an existing system’s processes can result in changes to the overall business 
system itself. Failing to update processes accordingly can result in missed 
opportunities to deliver additional business value and missed opportunities to 
create time for innovation. Worse, the impact of a failure to update processes 
when necessary can negatively impact a business’ bottom line through the 
delivery of inaccurate information or the automatic execution of an incorrect 
action—that is, doing the wrong things with great efficiency.
ITIL, ITSM . . . 
Plenty has been written about the Information Technology Infrastructure 
Library (ITIL), IT service management (ITSM), and other frameworks and 
maturity models. A detailed discussion of these is certainly outside the scope 
of this book. However, this type of discipline or best practice can be extremely 
beneficial and is certainly worthy of mention. The benefits of their 
implementation are similar to those mentioned in the “Instrumentation” and 
“Improvement” sections of this chapter. These frameworks provide a 
prescriptive approach to achieving these benefits.
One of my teams once implemented a Change Advisory Board (CAB), an ITIL 
concept, to help deal with stakeholder engagement issues (some of which 
were mentioned previously in the “Instrumentation” section).The results 
were very positive. In fact, in the early days the simple fact that the CAB had 
been established was a source of stakeholder satisfaction. The result was a 
happier stakeholder base, better aligned system improvements, and much less 
time spent explaining implementation priorities to stakeholders. This measure 
also helped build stakeholder trust, which also resulted in less time spent in 
confrontation and/or with “nervous” stakeholders.
Care must be taken because not all aspects of these frameworks and models 
are universally beneficial. It is important to understand the value each aspect 
of the system will bring. Being too literal or pedantic in implementation or 
implementing “too much” (i.e., irrelevant aspects) can diminish their value. It 
is even possible to derive negative impact from them if they are approached 
or implemented incorrectly. In some cases, it will be possible to adopt specific 
techniques without adopting an entire system, bringing benefits without 
baggage. If you choose specific aspects of these disciplines early in an 

53
The Innovative CIO
implementation, you can then recognize and enable their benefits early while 
keeping the burden and cost of implementation low.
Independence/Initiative
Innovative IT leaders must support the independence and initiative of others. 
Those others are often referred to as “rogues.” If you are thinking, “But I 
thought one of our main objectives was to eliminate rogue IT”—you are not 
alone. Certainly it would be ideal if your technology team could anticipate all 
future needs of your consumers far in advance and provide perfect solutions 
for them ahead of those needs. Unfortunately, that seldom happens and it is 
likely that every senior IT leader will encounter some form of rogue IT.
Our advice: Embrace the rogue! Often concepts and ideas, and sometimes 
entire solutions, created via rogue IT can deliver substantial value. Great ideas 
can come from anywhere, and it makes sense that often “anywhere” represents 
a group of people who work closest with the systems, processes, products, 
and customers each day of their career. To ignore these solutions or cast 
them away on principle is to potentially squander great opportunity. 
Technology leaders must be confident enough to embrace ideas of this nature, 
to help foster them and make them real, to apply their knowledge and 
resources to ensure the solutions’ success, and to properly attribute the ideas 
to their source.
The presence of rogue IT can also serve as a warning. The proliferation of 
rogue IT can be an indication of a problem-ridden IT department. Certainly 
that is not always the case. At times, ideas just happen where they happen. 
There is no malice aforethought. Other times the consumers (the rogues) are 
simply not aware that the IT group can help them in certain ways and develop 
their own solutions out of “desperation.” The point is that it does not matter 
how the idea came to be. If an idea or innovation can add value to your 
business, does its source really matter (as long as the source is ethical and 
morally sound, that is)?
Thus there are benefits in embracing rogues once they are encountered. 
Moreover, those who do not embrace rogues risk driving them further 
underground. An anti-rogue policy can result in the addition of risk to a 
company’s information assets, as the rogues may or may not know how to 
address key foundation disciplines such as security and data recovery. In some 
cases, they may not even be aware of these key requirements.

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
54
Instruction
As has been mentioned previously and in multiple contexts, one trap senior 
IT leaders can fall into is becoming too involved in detailed execution. This 
can be a completely subconscious action, especially when the work itself is 
exciting and engaging. It can also be a result of some of the innovation killers 
discussed in Chapter 2. It is often well-intended as a show of solidarity: “I am 
willing to get my hands dirty too.”
An IT leader working shoulder-to-shoulder with their employees is fine in 
moderation. In fact, it can be an effective way for the IT leader to learn more 
about the team and vice versa. In our experience, such a display of support 
and camaraderie is often greatly appreciated when work is unpleasant, such as 
when a team is moving to a new location or cleaning a facility.
However, IT leaders must be careful not to take all of the exciting 
opportunities—the fun work—away from their teams. When they do so, they 
squander opportunities for the personal growth of their team members. So 
doing can also result in a negative impact on morale, or at the very least a 
missed opportunity to have a positive impact on morale. Furthermore, IT 
leaders who do this—whatever their motivation—can often take on too 
much detailed work and lower the overall quality of the work associated with 
their “real job” as a result. Alone any one of these effects can be detrimental 
to a leader’s or team’s performance. Combined they are the building blocks 
for a spectacular disaster.
Some of the most effective IT leaders we have encountered have mastered 
the balancing of these forces. They are great coaches who know when to step 
in and when to provide direction. The balance is usually heavily weighted 
toward the latter. They are masters at asking great questions to help guide 
team members to the discovery of solutions, as opposed to giving them the 
answers. The result of helping their team to grow is a more passionate, 
excited, higher performing team—a team with a higher level of trust and 
mutual respect. And their team’s results show it.
Invigoration
Invigoration is another aspect of the CIO as “coach.” Surprisingly, it is one 
that is commonly overlooked. At times, IT leaders are so consumed by the 
volume of work that faces them, the day-to-day pressures, and all of the other 
I’s, that they do not deal with energizing their teams and maintaining and 
improving employee morale and engagement. Some do not know how. It is 
critical that IT leaders at all levels learn the skills necessary in order to 
invigorate their teams.

55
The Innovative CIO
Much has been written about boosting morale and creating amazing team 
spirit. We will not restate what can be found there, though we do believe this 
aspect of being a great IT leader is critical and could not omit at least a 
mention of it. Invigorated teams are much more likely to be high-performing 
teams. The higher a team’s level of performance and efficiency, the more likely 
there will be additional time for innovation, and the more likely the team will 
have a culture that can take advantage of innovation when it occurs.
We believe that clear vision and good communication are key elements in the 
achievement of an invigorated team. Team members must have a clear picture 
of the vision they are trying to achieve, their objectives, and how they 
contribute value to the greater organization, to its broader objectives, and to 
its customers. IT leaders must be capable of articulating their vision and 
objectives, and they must be passionate about their mission. Engaging team 
members in these ways will not only increase the likelihood that the team will 
achieve or exceed their objectives, it will also likely result in the team’s leader 
having more personal time to spend on innovation and higher value activities.
Integrity
Integrity is a critical I-Positive. Though we believe this is critical on principle 
alone, those with integrity receive tangible benefits that will help in the 
context of innovation. Those who have demonstrated a high level of integrity 
can often accomplish things at much greater speed than their counterparts. 
When IT leaders are trusted by their stakeholders, often the time it takes to 
convince them to try something new is greatly reduced. For example, the 
stakeholders know the IT leaders will be diligent in their invention, forthcoming 
with all risks and mitigation plans, and quickly admit failure when it occurs. 
When IT leaders are trusted by their peers, they can co-opt their assistance 
with the creation and implementation of new ideas, sometimes even when 
their peers are not convinced of the value. When IT leaders are trusted by 
their team, delivery speed increases.
Shifting the Balance
One of life’s certainties appears to be that there will always be opposing 
forces, positive and negative, related to almost everything we do. That has 
certainly been our experience with innovation. The key is to shift the balance 
heavily in favor of the positive items. In the case of innovation, a discussion of 
balance often takes the form of a conversation about the amount of investment 
directed at “keeping the lights on” (sustaining operations) vs. the amount 
directed toward innovation. This is an epic struggle according to most IT 

Chapter 3 | Innovation Is Not the Only “I”
56
leaders we speak with. Simply knowing where to begin can be difficult to 
figure out.
Increasing the Innovation Time Surplus
Recognizing the I’s discussed in this chapter is a key early step in the journey 
toward shifting the balance toward innovation. IT leaders must be able to 
quickly identify which pressures can have a negative impact on innovation 
(I-Negatives), which can have a positive impact (I-Positives), and what to do 
to reduce I-Negatives and increase I-Positives. Shifting the balance can also 
increase the innovation time surplus, as less time is spent on low-value activity. 
But there is another balance in need of shifting that is often overlooked.
Lowering the Price of Admission
We all have our own personal biases. We  have some things we like to do and 
others we prefer not to do. We all have our passions and apathies. We 
encounter these every day of our working lives. The passions are easy to deal 
with. We rush to those. What about the tasks we would rather not perform? 
Some managers discount the latter with phrases such as “That’s why they call 
it a job.” I refer to this part of the job as “the price of admission.”
People join a team so they can do what they love to do. What they care 
about. What energizes them.  Everything else they do comprises the price 
they pay to be a member of the team. But effective managers and leaders 
recognize that it is their duty to lower the price of admission for their 
employees.
Lowering the price of admission begins with knowing—truly knowing—every 
member of your team. In order to lower the price of admission, you must 
know what each member of your team loves and what he or she dislikes. You 
will quickly find that each team member will have different likes and dislikes. 
Some will love being creative and working in “whitespace.” Some will be 
extremely uncomfortable with this way of working and will love back office or 
administrative-type tasks. That’s where you can find the magic.
As a manager and a leader, your job is to assign responsibilities equitably to 
those most likely to enjoy them but also to set realistic expectations. There 
will always be some price of admission. The key is to keep it as low as possible 
and to distribute the “fun things” equitably.
Setting employee expectations appropriately is critical as well. Try sharing this 
analogy with your new team members. Explain there will always be a price of 
admission but that you are committed to working with them to keep it as low 

57
The Innovative CIO
as possible. Only say this if you mean it. It is a commitment that will earn or 
destroy their trust in you.
When you lead this way you must be realistic. Explain that sometimes the 
price will be higher. Then do your best to keep those times to a minimum. By 
making your team members aware of your commitment they will be able to 
help you to keep the price of admission low by making you more aware of 
their often-changing likes and dislikes.
Of course, as leaders we need to be careful to assign responsibility to those 
capable of succeeding. It has been our experience that passion and performance 
are often correlated. We also need to be mindful that we may have to take 
team members outside their “comfort zone” in order to help them with 
personal growth or to prepare them for advancement.
With those provisos, we have found that shifting the balance of work to lower 
the price of admission was an extremely useful strategy that helped improve 
team performance and increase trust and mutual respect. We also found that 
the larger a team, the better chance we had at creating a very low price of 
admission.

c h a p t e r
4
Business 
Innovation vs.  
IT Innovation
What Is the Right Focus for an Innovative CIO?
The authors of this book have met with many IT senior managers and CIOs 
over the years. Technology and innovation are frequently the main topics of 
these meetings. Our discussions are usually triggered by some new technology, 
news, or practice in which the CIO is interested. This is sometimes mere 
technical tire-kicking and light relief from our day job. On other occasions, it 
is a more serious discussion about the impact of implementing the new stuff. 
While these technology discussions are fun and impart some useful 
information, we must consider if they are the right type of discussion to 
encourage an innovative approach to business across the whole organization 
that the CIO works for.
Chris Curran1 reviewed a Price Waterhouse Coopers study2 that found only 
25% of surveyed CIOs were interested in or engaged in external innovation. 
Curran explains that external innovation is innovation external to the IT 
department. Specifically, external innovation is innovation of the business and 
customer domain. In a separate finding, Curran also notes that the other 75% 
1 Chris Curran, “Business Innovation or IT Innovation?,” CIO Dashboard, October 2010, 
www.ciodashboard.com/leadership/business-innovation-or-it-innovation, retrieved on May 
2012.
2 Chris Curran, Tom DeGarmo, John Sviokla, “4th Annual Digital IQ Survey,” pwc, 2010, 
www.pwc.com/us/en/advisory/2011-Digital-iq-survey/key-findings.jhtml, retrieved on May 
2012.

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
60
of CIOs were involved in innovation of existing IT. The findings of a recent 
survey by CA Technologies3 support those reported by Curran. The CA 
survey recorded that only 16% of surveyed CIOs were involved in the 
organization’s strategy discussions. Figure 4-1 shows that the majority of 
CIOs surveyed said they are either never or only infrequently involved in 
developing the organization’s strategy.
Both studies indicate that the majority of CIOs tend to be inward-looking,23 
focusing on the IT department rather than the business and the customers. 
For example, CIOs often see internal IT innovation as a major part of their 
role. Conversely, they may be under external constraints from senior leaders 
in their organization to keep their focus on IT. Those external constraints may 
result from a company leadership view that CIOs have nothing to contribute 
to organizational strategy. In this same CA survey, CIOS were asked why they 
thought they were not involved in their organization’s strategy. The highest 
number of respondents answered that CIOs have a technology-focused role. 
3  “The Future Role of the CIO,” CA Technologies, October 2011, www.ca.com/us/collateral/
white-papers/na/The-Future-Role-of-the-CIO-Becoming-the-Boss.aspx, retrieved on May 
2012.
Figure 4-1. This figure shows the results of a CA Technologies survey where 685 CIOs 
were asked this question: “Are you involved in helping to define and agree the business 
strategy of your organization?”

61
The Innovative CIO
The following is a list of reasons given for non-involvement ranked in order of 
most to least frequent answers:
• 
My role is seen as a technology-focused role.
• 
I am not a member of the senior leadership team.
• 
I lack the appropriate skills to be involved in those discussions.
• 
IT is seen as a cost of doing business.
• 
IT is not seen as central to the direction of the business.
• 
I am only ever consulted about the technical deployment of 
any strategies in discussion.
• 
I have a poor relationship with the CEO.
• 
The management team does not recognize the contribution 
that a CIO could bring to strategy discussions.
The respondents to this question were the majority of CIOs who self-identify 
as never being involved in organizational strategy. These answers show that 
many CIOs see themselves either as technology-focused or as not having the 
requisite skills to take part in organizational discussions. 
Given these results it is natural to ask: what is the right domain for an 
innovative CIO? Would your company benefit from your being a CIO whose 
innovations are IT-focused or business-focused?
Which Is the Most Difficult to Achieve: 
Business Innovation or IT Innovation?
When we discuss innovation with CIOs, one topic often recurs: the relative 
difficulty of generating either business innovations or IT innovations. CIOs 
see themselves as having limited time and resources to engage in innovation 
and often assume that these resources would be better focused on the IT 
domain, not the business domain. The IT domain is where they are on familiar 
ground, but there is pull to join the 25% of CIOs mentioned by Curran who 
are innovating externally. The decision about which direction to go in may 
depend on the relative difficulty of the two types of innovation. 
To gauge the level of difficulty, it is best to ask an initial question about your 
company’s target marketplaces. The value of IT-focused innovation tends to 
be greater in a technology-based, online company rather than in the more 
traditional nontechnology companies. The level of difficulty in achieving an IT 
innovation in an online business is also generally far less than in a more 

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
62
traditional business. In an online business, the benefits of IT to the business 
are generally understood and accepted. In a more traditional, less technology-
based business, it may be easier to gain acceptance for a business-focused 
innovation instead. In a traditional business, IT is usually less visible to people 
outside the IT department as an enabler of innovation. This view is more 
likely because staff outside of IT are usually not familiar with thinking of IT as 
an innovative tool and as a business support tool. Therefore, we can conclude 
that the type of market the business is engaged in will have a significant impact 
on how acceptable and credible an IT-led innovation will be. 
Creativity
Creativity is at the heart of innovation. It has already been mentioned in 
Chapter 2 but here we will discuss it briefly as a component of business and 
IT innovation. Innovations come from people thinking creatively. Studies have 
shown that people who are considered highly creative have many more ideas 
than people who are not considered highly creative. It is generally accepted 
that everyone is creative and has creative potential, tapped or untapped. Even 
if you are considered as a person of low creativity, you have the potential to 
innovate, although you may not produce as many innovative ideas as a highly 
creative person. As a CIO, you must tap into the creative potential of your 
staff. 
Innovation requires creativity but it also needs your domain expertise. Domain 
expertise is an asset your employees have that may overcome any creativity 
shortcomings and often stimulates business and IT innovation. You don’t need 
to be highly creative to be innovative if you have domain expertise. As a CIO, 
you should ask if you and your staff have a lack of business domain expertise 
that is hampering a move to external innovation.
Creativity helps to generate ideas, but creativity can be stifled by routine. For 
example, the creativity of children reduces as they get older and move into 
full-time education.4 Creative adults can also find that their creative muscles 
are atrophied by repetitive or boring work, lack of recognition, etc. In Chapter 
Two, we talked about innovation killers. These innovation killers often do 
their work by stifling creativity as well as reducing the enthusiasm for 
innovation. We will look at ways you can encourage innovation in later 
chapters. But for now, it is worth asking if your department and your company 
are endeavoring to stimulate creativity or whether work and management 
4 Sir Ken Robinson, “How Schools Stiffle Creativity,” Published by TED Talks, 2009, http://
articles.cnn.com/2009-11-03/opinion/robinson.schools.stifle.creativity_1_talk-college-degrees-
education?_s=PM:OPINION, retrieved on May 2012. 

63
The Innovative CIO
styles are encumbering creativity and innovation. This is discussed more fully 
in Chapter 10.
A creative staff is more likely to think of new products or processes, but 
innovation is the combination of thinking of something new and putting it into 
practice. Having a lot of ideas does not necessarily make for an innovative 
CIO or an innovative business. It is the combination of ideas and—most 
importantly—the drive to implement useful ideas that generates innovation. 
Business Cases for Innovations
Business innovation and IT innovation generally will require funding and 
approval by the senior leadership team. In all but the most trivial departmental 
innovations, a business case is the best way of moving from an innovative idea 
to an implementation for the business.
Sadly, IT departments do not have a good reputation when it comes to 
business cases. John Thorpe5 quotes a Cranfield University study where 38% 
of respondents claim that business benefits are exaggerated in business cases. 
It can be inferred that a business case has only one purpose: to gain funding 
and has no value beyond that. The failure to deliver the benefits forecast in a 
business case can create an atmosphere of mistrust between the imple-
mentation team and the approvers. In many business cases with IT innovations, 
they are well-explained in technology features but not so in business benefits 
terms. While the IT benefits are clear, the claimed business benefits may be 
fudged or simply misunderstood.
To credibly suggest business innovations, it is not enough that you have great 
technical skills. These technical skills need to be matched with an understanding 
of the business domain and how technology fits into that domain as we 
explained in Chapter 3. The credibility of the business case will depend on 
how well the business benefits are articulated and measured. Furthermore, 
CIOs should not shelve the business case when approval is given but focus on 
reporting progress on both the technical innovation and, more importantly, 
the progress toward the business benefits being delivered. This will require an 
understanding of the business process changes that the IT innovation will 
support. Business cases must be developed with care if they are to be 
influential in promoting innovation and securing the necessary funding.
IT departments often believe that business innovation is difficult and IT 
innovation is is seen as your comfort zone. This should not be an excuse for 
remaining one of the 75% of CIOs who stick to internal IT innovation. An 
5 John Thorpe, “Lies, Damn Lies and Business Cases,” The Thorp Network, July 2009, www.
thorpnet.com/2009/07/lies-damn-lies-and-business-cases/, retrieved on July 2012.

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
64
innovative CIO will be looking for business innovations and working to 
overcome the obstacles to creativity, innovation throughout the organization, 
and the articulation of business benefits for those innovations. 
CIOs Are Always on the Leading Edge  
of Technology
Discussions about innovation with the IT department frequently focus on 
new or leading edge technology. All CIOs are under a constant bombardment 
of e-mails, phone calls, press releases, and marketing material about the “next 
big thing.” It does not matter if the new technology is “bring your own device” 
(BYOD), big data, or cloud computing—the pressure is there. 
To gain an understanding of the influence and evolution of leading edge 
technology, we looked through the web site of Gartner, a respected IT 
industry analysis company, and specifically reviewed their hype cycle press 
releases. The term “hype cycle” is attributed to Gartner and describes new 
technology in terms of its adoption from the first breakthrough to the 
adoption of a fully productive implementation. The Gartner press release of 
20066 indicated that quantum computing was at the breakthrough stage, 
social networking was just coming to the peak of its hype, and smartphones 
were entering the productive phase. In 2008,7 cloud computing, video 
telepresence, and green IT were all cited at the top of the hype cycle. In 
2011,8 cloud computing was still in a similar position at the top of the hype 
cycle, and big data also made an appearance at the top. All of these are 
technologies that may reasonably be on a potential CIO shopping list.
This may be a superficial analysis, but it illustrates issues that CIOs face all the 
time. CIOs are expected to make sense out of the technologies that are new 
or emerging within the context of the company’s own IT and business context. 
There is an expectation that CIOs understand all the new technologies and 
can predict and know how to plan for which technologies will be important 
to their company in the future.
The CIO may also feel pressure coming from staff members from both inside 
and outside IT to consider newer technologies as possible catalysts for 
innovation. Employees will have their own preference for technology and 
6 “Gartner’s 2006 Emerging Technologies Hype Cycle Highlights Key Technology Themes,” 
August 2006, www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=495475, retrieved on May 2012.
7 “Gartner Highlights 27 Technologies in the 2008 Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies,” 
August 2008, www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=739613, retrieved on May 2012.
8 “Gartner’s 2011 Hype Cycle Special Report Evaluates the Maturity of 1,900 Technologies,” 
August 2011, www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1763814, retrieved on May 2012.

65
The Innovative CIO
what it can do for them. This preference is more pronounced in the IT 
industry. In the IT industry, there is a core belief that technology staff love 
new technology. Technologists are frequently seen as favoring the new and 
shiny technology just because it is new and shiny. Whether these assumptions 
are true or not doesn’t matter, but in any sizeable organization there will be 
many differing opinions about the relative merits of emerging technologies. 
The different opinions often map on a one-to-one basis with the number of 
technologists.
The burden of the CIO is increased by the inclusion of legacy IT systems. As 
discussed in Chapter Three, the term “legacy” describes systems that may 
have been implemented from a few to many years ago. These systems run a 
significant part of the core business processes. A CIO who plans to replace 
these systems will need a very convincing justification; however, it will most 
likely be necessary to replace them eventually. Many legacy systems have 
evolved over time and still perform well, supported by the “if it’s not broken 
don’t fix it” mantra. 
Most CIOs would love a clean slate with no legacy systems. They would 
prefer to be able to specify and deliver business process support using the 
latest proven technologies. But that is a luxury that few are allowed except in 
emerging businesses or economies. Some of these legacy systems have been 
implemented a long time ago but are still considered vital to the organisation. 
The mainframe systems that were implemented years ago are still used to run 
large corporations. Once a system has been implemented and proven, it 
usually stays in place until external forces generate a need for a replacement 
strategy.
The CIO role is also largely that of maintenance of the status quo; CIOs are 
expected to keep the lights on, with everything having to do with IT and 
maintenance of IT working smoothly. As we have discussed, this is in addition 
to the expectation that they be conversant with new technology and its 
potential place in their IT strategy. CIOs will have to sell their strategy to 
senior leadership who may have differing views of the value of the technology 
and its place in the IT strategy. CIOs also have to include legacy systems in 
their plans against a background of the momentum of new technologies and 
the associated vendor marketing and sales campaigns.
CIOs need to be able to discriminate between new, leading edge technologies 
that present an opportunity and new technologies that are cool toys. Selecting 
the clear signal of an opportunity from all of the noise of marketing hype is 
difficult but we discuss some ways of making that selection in Chapters 9 and 
10. For the moment all we need to say is that the CIO should consider the 
following points:

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
66
• 
New does not equal good. New technology is not always 
good technology. In the world of confectionery new recipes 
for old favourites have not always been successful.
• 
Technology should not be the key driver in considering an 
innovation. IT is an enabler and sometimes a catalyst, but the 
focus must be on the business and innovation for the business. 
The innovative CIO should evaluate all their prospective IT innovations 
against the value for the business. 
Innovation Is Quantifiable
To be justified in a business case, innovation needs to be quantifiable to the 
extent necessary for approval. Some innovations may not need the formal 
structure of a business case, but they still need to be quantified and justifiable 
if there is a cost involved. There are two ways of justifying a project: the 
inward IT example and the external business approach. The internal IT 
example is focused on introducing efficiencies and cost savings through more 
effective use of IT and new technologies. The external business approach is 
focused on business benefits that will accrue from implementing new tech-
nology.
IT innovation needs to have a clear value statement that should be expressed 
in business terms. The communication of value is one of the more important 
functions of a CIO and should be approached with care and the right language. 
Let’s consider the example of Service Oriented Architecture (SOA).
In 2005, there was a vogue for SOA that has increased over subsequent years. 
IT departments began to adopt SOA because the technology enabled 
functionality to be expressed as reusable services rather than as blocks of 
code, modules, or subroutines. The service interface was a function call that 
had input values and output values, while the functionality and code of the 
service was hidden. The reuse of services yields a “code-once-use-often” 
model of development. The attraction for an IT development shop is the 
lowering of costs resulting from using a component-based approach to 
constructing applications. An internal IT justification would describe the 
potential for cost and time savings in development. The developers would 
only have to code a component, not insert new code within a complete 
application. IT would also see cost savings in testing, with the component 
being tested rather than the whole application being tested. Delta testing 
would be much faster than testing all aspects of an application. These cost-
saving features, accompanied by an increase in application quality from reusing 
tried-and-tested components in an application, are the main technology 

67
The Innovative CIO
features of SOA. Although this is a simplistic representation and does not 
discuss the effort needed to create a truly reusable component, it indicates 
the common arguments for developing a SOA-based approach to new 
projects, particularly in application maintenance or conversion. There may 
also be an enthusiasm for SOA within the IT staff, generated by SOA’s place 
in emerging Web 2.0 technologies. As we have said before, new and leading 
edge technologies often excite technologists.
A justification for the implementation of SOA would have to be made in a 
business case. If this were an IT-focused business case, the current cost of 
application development, the technology implications of moving to a reusable 
code base, and the cost reduction and quality potential of service reuse should 
be emphasized. The reaction of the leadership team of the company to an IT 
feature–led business case would be muted at best. 
Many IT projects have promised much and delivered little and there are still 
regular reports of project failures9. To overcome the stigma of failed projects, 
we should consider the way SOA would be justified using a business benefits 
approach. It is interesting that the criteria most frequently used to measure a 
project’s success or failure are those of the IT justification: on time, on budget, 
functionally correct, etc. Business cases for an IT project seldom measure 
success on business metrics such as cost of business change or benefits 
realised.
A hypothetical case of an organization that has many legacy technologies can 
be used to illustrate the different approaches. These are frequently large 
departments established over a long time, such as the taxation department of 
your favorite country. This department may have applications written in an 
old established language like COBOL and may have been originally developed 
20 or 30 years ago. The human resources that can understand and maintain 
these types of applications are rare and declining in number. There is a well-
documented demographic time bomb ticking under legacy applications.10
Reducing the cost of maintenance and re-engineering the applications may 
seem like a valid proposal to a CIO. Reducing the reliance on declining 
resources and cost reductions could also seem an attractive prospect but 
brings nothing obvious to the business and may also contain an element of 
risk. Proposing the innovation as an IT cost- and resource-saving measure 
aligns the innovation with the IT requirements and may be difficult to justify.
9 “Recession Causes Rising IT Project Failure Rates,” CIO, June 2009, www.cio.com/
article/495306/Recession_Causes_Rising_IT_Project_Failure_Rates, retrieved on May 2012.
10 Joe McKendrick “Mainframe Skills Shortage Worsening” Insurance Networking News 2012 
http://www.insurancenetworking.com/blogs/mainframe-skills-shortage-jobs-30039-1.html, 
retrieved on October 2012.

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
68
To help with the justification, it is wise to pick a rather obvious area that 
might benefit. Taxation applications are at the mercy of legislators, and they 
are sometimes difficult to implement because of changes to the law that 
require extensive changes to the application. Many taxation legislators demand 
the tax changes to be implemented as quickly as possible with no errors. 
Typical large taxation application source code would need to be opened, the 
source code modified, and then the whole application retested. Developers 
familiar with the applications would take time to locate the areas for code 
changes, make the changes, and rebuild the application. Developers less 
familiar would take even more time. Once the application had been built, it 
would need to be tested as a whole. Once the whole application had been 
tested and any problems found and fixed, which would involve retesting of the 
whole application, it would be ready for deployment. 
As we have said, starting a proposal with the technical and resource reasons 
for application decomposition would place this business case squarely in the 
IT domain. Instead, start the discussion with business managers with these 
questions: “What if we can show you how you can respond to legislation 
changes in hours and days rather than weeks and months? Would that be 
interesting to you?” Most revenue department business managers would 
reply, “Yes, how could you do that?” From there you can describe briefly the 
tools that you would use to achieve the business solution. In this way, you 
concentrate on the solution and its benefits rather than the tools. Implementing 
application decomposition using a SOA approach and the features to be 
implemented are the concern of the IT department, not the business 
management. The business department is interested only in the benefits 
described and the delivery date that will enable them to be more agile in 
responding to business and legislative requirements.
The confidence in business case justification of innovations in business benefit 
terms would rise with continued success. To ensure that the focus of a 
business case is in the business benefit area and not the IT tools, CIOs need 
to use a repeatable process that focuses on the business innovation rather 
than the IT implementation. This is often not the case in business cases 
developed by the IT department, where the emphasis is on the IT changes and 
assumes that business managers will be able to understand the effect the IT 
changes will have on business environments.

69
The Innovative CIO
Is This Invention or Incremental 
Innovation?
The differences between invention and innovation have been discussed in 
earlier chapters. IT is capable of generating business innovations, but is IT 
capable of delivering business invention or creation? This question can best be 
answered by considering the source of ideas for an invention or an innovation. 
Many CIOs have demonstrated an entrepreneurial spirit, but are they capable 
of creating or inventing a whole new business? 
Innovative ideas tend to come from some stimulus leading to a new idea that 
builds on other innovations. It may be an incremental change in IT that opens up 
new possibilities. Organizations such as Amazon and Google are using existing 
infrastructure and spare capacity to start a new business. The innovation 
comes in the form of a new line of business using incremental change by 
putting existing IT metrics and spare capacity to use. Inventions are seen as 
much more “blue sky” thinking. 
Innovation, creativity, and invention are often considered almost inter-
changeable terms, and we often hear people discussing inventors and 
innovators as special people who have a moment of enlightenment. As we 
have said earlier, anyone in business can be innovative to some degree. Many 
tools and techniques can be taught to develop innovative behavior. There are 
even university degrees in innovation and creativity.11
One technique that is often used to stimulate creativity and innovation is 
brainstorming. This has been discussed in Chapter 2 in a secion on Fortunate 
Innovation. We extend that discussion to include critical brainstorming. Quite 
often these are fun exercises, where people gather in a room to discuss a 
topic and are told it is a brainstorming session. Most people follow some 
general rules for running brainstorming sessions, such as the following: 
• 
No idea is wrong; all ideas need to be recorded.
• 
Anyone can put any idea into the mix.
• 
There is no discussion of any idea until the exercise is 
completed.
• 
The exercise of idea-gathering should be nonjudgmental.
There are more formal rules used by consultancies, but these general points 
are understood by most people involved. Before instituting brainstorming 
11 City University, London, www.city.ac.uk/courses/postgraduate/innovation-creativity-and-
leadership, retrieved on May 2012.

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
70
sessions, there are some points to consider from work done by Charlan 
Nemeth.12 Nemeth created two groups that were given general brainstorming 
rules. One group was given the additional rule to debate ideas as they 
occurred. The other group just had brainstorming rules similar to those we 
just listed. The findings of the study were that the group that had discussion 
of ideas, and even criticism in their rule set, produced more creative ideas 
than the group without discussion in their rules. This should be implemented 
with caution, to avoid a tendency to move from a critical review of an idea 
into a Downer Dog Pile as we mentioned in Chapter 2. CIOs should consider 
extending innovation brainstorming with discussion of ideas as a means to 
improving the yield of relevant ideas generated.
Generating innovation in the IT department is not too difficult if you consider 
the amount of new and emerging technology that is often discussed, but the 
innovative urge may be driven into unproductive areas. CIOs and their staff 
need to spend time discussing the business with people outside the IT 
department if they are to generate business innovation. An understanding of 
the problems and challenges faced by the business people can help direct 
innovation outside of IT. An understanding of the markets that the business 
operates in and the corporate strategy will also help direct thought toward 
business strategies. 
CIOs also should not be seduced by stories of innovative companies like 
Google allowing employees to spend 20% of their time thinking about 
innovative opportunities and new technologies. Just giving people time to be 
innovative does not generate innovation. The corporate culture has to change 
before this strategy would yield the level of innovation that would deliver a 
return on the investment in time. For example, CIOs could start in small ways 
by suggesting conferences or workshops for staff to attend. This is often a 
good motivator and has the added advantage that the attendees get some 
downtime for thinking outside their normal work environment. 
The main point is that you and your employees need to speak to a wider 
variety of people inside and outside the company, read from an eclectic 
reading list, or just socialize with others. These have the potential to produce 
a “liquid network of ideas,” a term coined by Steven Johnson in his book 
Where Good Ideas Come From.13 A liquid network combines the connectivity of 
a dense network and the plasticity of a liquid. Each new idea changes the 
shape of the network, while maintaining the density of the network. This 
takes advantage of people and ideas that come together and interact. Johnson 
12 Charlan Nemeth et al, “The Liberating Role of Conflict in Group Creativity: A Study in 
Two Countries,” European Journal of Social Psychology 34 (2004): 365-374.
13 Steven Johnson, Where Good Ideas Come From (New York: Penguin, 2011).

71
The Innovative CIO
theorizes that often an innovation comes from a few people having part of a 
good idea, but until they come together in a network there is little value in 
these half-baked ideas.
Becoming an innovative CIO means getting out of your office. Ideas don’t 
come sleeting in through the window or leaping from the page. I am suggesting 
that CIOs add interaction with others to the strategy for exploring ideas. The 
real innovations tend to come when you leave your department and your 
comfort zone to communicate your ideas. It is important to listen to other 
ideas and consider a combination of ideas to mold them into game-changing 
innovation for the organization. Incremental innovation can yield real 
competitive advantage to an organization, but a game-changing idea can 
revolutionize an organization. 
Business Innovation Requires  
an Understanding of the  
Corporate Strategy
To step outside the IT comfort zone, one of the first things to do is become 
acquainted with the overall corporate strategy. We are not implying that you 
have not read or understood the corporate strategy. We are saying that you 
need to understand it in more detail than a paper or a presentation will tell 
you. 
Your first task is to discover the corporate strategy. There is an assumption 
that there is one, but if you are not sure, now is a good time to ask the 
question and show that you are more interested in the company than bits and 
bytes. Other questions then should follow. If there is a strategy, have the 
company leaders reviewed it recently? Have they looked at new directions 
and growth? Is there something in the strategy that generates an idea? These 
are the questions to ask of the strategy team to determine where IT can fit 
into the strategy more seamlessly. As we have noted earlier, CIOs are often 
given challenges to deliver IT support for business process changes when a 
strategic decision has been made. It would be smarter to anticipate the 
challenges by participating in some or all of the strategic decision-making.
Once you are familiar with the corporate strategy, now is the time to look at 
how it is produced. Is this something that happens in meetings that you are 
not invited to? Figure 4-1 showed that this is likely. Also take notice of the 
people attending these meetings: are there any you can talk to informally? 
Does the CEO encourage free discussion, or is the CEO an autocrat? This is 
not a treatise on climbing the corporate ladder or how to play office politics, 

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
72
but it is important that the CIO be aware of the business direction and can 
review this to find new business opportunities.
To find these opportunities, first establish how the corporate strategy process 
works. Sometimes this may come as a shock. Many years ago, I was summoned 
to a corporate strategy meeting for a company that is no longer in business. 
You will not be surprised that it failed when I tell you that the venue for the 
corporate strategy discussion was the bar of Rigby’s Pub. The strategy outlined 
was as outrageous as the location of the discussion, and I formed the 
conclusion that I needed to leave the company.
Most strategic discussions start with gathering information—creating a 
knowledge base for discussion. The focal point for the IT department and the 
CIO is to represent the technology landscape in that knowledge base. There 
are many ways of accomplishing this task. One of the most common is to 
adapt the innovation funnel to look at technological innovation. Figure 4-2 is 
a rudimentary representation of a funnel for technologies based on the 
general acceptance of this metaphor. The funnel shape is used to indicate a 
refinement of understanding of technologies and the selection of relevant 
technologies as their potential becomes better known. The advantage of this 
type of graphic is that it is easily understood.
Figure 4-2. This figure is an example of an innovation funnel showing the graveyard and 
progress of ideas.

73
The Innovative CIO
In this figure, technology innovations are represented by T1, T2, etc., and they 
are identified and included in the “identify” part of the funnel. This part is 
where all the technologies that may have potential for the company are first 
recorded. More information is gathered for technologies in the “identify” 
stage, which will allow an evaluation of the technology potential and the 
relationship of that technology to a desired innovation. After passing the 
evaluation, the technologies may be moved to the “candidate” stage, where 
more intensive investigation will take place. It is at this stage where any 
prototyping may take place. The next stage in Figure 4-2 is the “propose” 
stage. At this point, the technology is seen as sufficiently mature and 
understood well enough to be considered for development and subsequent 
delivery to the business. 
Many entries are moved from the funnel section to the “graveyard” once they 
have been evaluated. The “graveyard” items are in the limbo of ideas that may 
need to be referred to but that have no place in the active part of the 
company’s innovation funnel. It is where you keep track of technology and 
business innovations that are not moving on to the next stage within the 
funnel. Its main function is to be a repository of knowledge about what 
technologies have been rejected. The funnel concept works because it visually 
demonstrates the focus on smaller numbers of relevant ideas to reach those 
that are critical to the organization. Many organizations use the innovation 
funnel as a tool for communicating only the technology landscape; however, it 
is possible to use this for innovations in general. In the case of general 
innovations, you need to decide on the mix of technology and business. 
As you can see from this figure, all of the ideas are considered as technology-
based ideas. Would these be interesting in a business context? Perhaps the 
“techno-babble” will just reinforce the notion that IT and the CIO have 
nothing to say that is business-related. To modify this view, it is important to 
include business context to each of the technologies. For example, you could 
classify each entry according to the potential benefit to the company, the time 
frame in which it will impact the company, and the line of business it may 
affect.
When reviewing the corporate strategy, there are a few pointers to indicate 
how IT can relate to the corporate strategy. For example, a corporate strategy 
that focuses on growth by increasing your organization’s market share or 
entering new markets can indicate opportunities for new technology that will 
support growth. This can be a fruitful area for innovation.
A corporate strategy of maintaining the value of your organization in a stable 
market would have a different effect on technology. A value-based strategy 
would require a continued focus on technology costs. In these circumstances, 
a CIO can develop a strategy that evaluates innovative ways of cutting costs. 

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
74
Any organization that intends growth or stability will keep a close eye on 
costs, but in a growth strategy, cost management has to be allied to investment 
in growth. In this circumstance, an IT strategy that focused on agility and 
speed of delivery would gain more credibility than a cost-cutting argument.
CIOs Need to Understand the Context 
in Which the Company Works
Developing a business strategy cannot be done in a vacuum. To paraphrase 
John Donne, “no company is an island.” There may be, for instance, a good 
idea for the next product or initiative that will generate corporate growth. In 
many companies, evaluating the good idea by looking at the market, your 
product’s place in the market, and the expected impact on the market would 
be considered enough. In some businesses, this statement may be true, but 
the increasing globalization of business demands a broader view of the 
influences that can affect your market. One thing is certain—markets today 
have increased potential to broaden out from their physical location to a 
national or international market. The effect of the Internet on markets has 
been massive. Few organizations with a public interface ignore the Internet. 
While this has an expansive effect on your potential market, it also brings 
national and international influences to bear. These influences may generate 
revenue and profit, or they may depress the potential advantage of your 
innovations.
A good example of the influence of market conditions can be found in the 
competitive world of greetings cards production. Supermarkets and other 
volume outlets expect major discounts without compromising quality. The 
production costs in Europe are comparatively high, leaving only a small margin. 
We know of an executive involved in this market and who decided to move 
production from Europe to China, and this move gave a significant cost 
advantage for production. The use of the Internet to communicate designs 
and orders facilitated the move. The context that was used was the 
comparative production costs across the world. A continual review of the 
global context of card production resulted in production being switched from 
southern China to northern China to counter increasing costs in southern 
China. This executive even has a plan to move production to another country 
if the cost base increases in China. This example makes a good case for having 
a worldview of business strategy. 
Many factors should be considered when building an understanding of the 
context for decision-making:
• 
World political situation

75
The Innovative CIO
• 
Economic pressures
• 
Disruptive technology
• 
Security
• 
Physical constraints
• 
The ability of staff to deliver
• 
The availability of staff to deliver
• 
Business transformation
While this is not an exhaustive list, these are most of the factors that 
organizations consider when making decisions in a global marketplace.
As a CIO, your role may be to implement the business strategy, but 
implementation cannot be done without understanding the context within 
which you make the implementation decisions. Consider this example: I was 
a part of the creation of a backup data center for a Middle Eastern organization. 
I discussed the resilience and recovery strategy with the stakeholders and 
they were clear that they needed a backup strategy, including a new data 
center for a hot fail-over to fulfill their business requirements. 
The location was the problem. We discussed other major centers in the 
country. Anything smaller than a city would not have the power generation 
capacity to cope. One city looked perfect in our view until we discussed this 
with the mayor of the city. He was delighted that we would place the facility 
in his town but asked if we were aware of the city’s problems with 
earthquakes—the city was on an earthquake fault and had frequent tremors. 
This information changed the cost and risk profile of the project to 
unacceptable levels. We finished the project by locating the data center in 
Dubai, thousands of miles away. The context of the location had not been 
considered originally during the business justification. Therefore, the costs in 
the business case were understated because the original planners had 
considered requirements without understanding the wider context.
It may not be possible to accurately predict chaotic events that would alter 
the context of an innovative decision, but there is a need to consider all the 
predictable possibilities that may have an influence on decisions and minimize 
the risk.
New Market Opportunities
Once you have considered how to innovate, immersed yourself in the 
corporate strategy, and considered the context for your decision-making, the 

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
76
next step is to look into new markets. How you identify and exploit new 
markets is a constant requirement for an innovative CIO.
Some help may come from your study of the corporate strategy. The strategy 
may identify adjacent markets to your own. Amazon’s expansion into music 
and DVDs was able to exploit those markets because they were adjacent and 
very similar to the book market. The book market has a similar low-cost/high-
volume product structure as in the entertainment space and needs only a few 
changes in the sales techniques to open up a new area. It is worth considering 
adjacent markets whatever line of business you are in. If you are in a metal 
pressing company, is it such a big leap from servicing the building industry with 
door hinges to servicing luggage makers with suitcase hinges? Market adjacency 
may be one of the easiest innovations to implement. Consider if there is new 
technology that can help you exploit that adjacency.
New technology, tools, and techniques may also enable you to enter a market 
that had been previously closed to you due to the lack of technology at an 
earlier time. The world of soccer may not seem to be a natural market for 
high technology solutions—except in the commoditized markets of exercise 
machines, health care systems, and administration systems. The proliferation 
of data from exercise machines and health monitoring meant that the fitness 
of soccer players was frequently measured with a few parameters that gave a 
“good enough” indication of their aerobic fitness. If that measure of fitness is 
allied to the ability of an experienced coach, a more comprehensive view of 
the players’ health can be gained. Despite large amounts of data being available, 
it was difficult to analyze and draw conclusions until the advent of commercial 
implementations of artificial intelligence (AI) analysis and machine learning 
tools. Once these tools had been used in commercial grade applications, a 
new application of AI and predictive analytics opened up for soccer clubs and 
their suppliers. 
New markets may also be found in new geographic or demographic areas. As 
the emerging economies develop, they represent new markets for goods and 
services. They also represent a challenge due to their different cultures and 
societies. The competitive world of fast food illustrates how these challenges 
can result in winners and losers. In China, Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) has 
approximately three times as many stores as McDonald’s. This is despite 
McDonald’s dominance of the US market.14 One of the main reasons for 
KFC’s dominance is that KFC has adapted its menu far more to the Chinese 
market than McDonald’s. KFC China is a Chinese organization, as opposed to 
14 Kim Peterson, “Why the Chinese Love KFC,” MSN Money, February 2011, http://money.
msn.com/top-stocks/post.aspx?post=ac5d659b-e9c3-4c48-af96-dbb228c62039, retrieved on 
May 2012. 

77
The Innovative CIO
McDonald’s in China, which is an American organization that is operating in 
China. To take advantage of new markets geographically, you will have to 
consider cultural differences and localization. This may mean acquiring new 
skills and techniques. In the case of KFC, they made changes to product, 
marketing, sales, and management strategies. However, you need to be sure 
that you can make money entering a new geography before considering if the 
required changes are needed.
Demographic opportunities are also an interesting challenge for CIOs. My 
daughter cringes when I use (she says misuse) teenage terms to sound “cool.” 
Often the only people who can successfully enter and exploit a teenage 
market are young people who understand teen groupthink. This should not 
prevent you from engaging with a younger, more tech-savvy audience for your 
projects, but you may have to make some changes to your methods of delivery 
of products and your interface. 
A good example is the rise of the smartphone. Go into any phone sales outlet 
and you will have considerable difficulty in finding an old-style feature phone—
almost all the offerings are smartphones. Without going into the complex 
techno-social reasons for this, you can see that smartphones are treated 
differently from mobile phones by their users. These users spend more time 
accessing data and information than they do talking on the phone. In the US, 
smartphone growth among the young is in the high double digits and less so 
in the middle-aged range. The youth market is a great market to tap if you 
can, but your strategy has to be focused on the interface, applications, and 
services that you can offer this group, not just on putting up an HTML5 
interface and saying “my stuff runs in a smartphone browser.” Young 
smartphone users are discerning and want intuitive specialized interfaces. 
To fully exploit this new market, you may even have to invest in some new 
skills and thinking. Gamification, discussed more fully in Chapter 6, is one of 
the techniques for modifying products and interfaces for the smartphone.15 
Gamification turns simple applications such as to-do lists into an adventure 
quest, with game-like interfaces and paradigms. While this may not appeal to 
late adopters and curmudgeons, it resonates with the younger demographic 
who are welded to their smartphones and may constitute a new market 
opportunity for the organization.
15 Natasha Singer, “You’ve Won a Badge (and Now We Know All About You),” New York 
Times, February 2012, www.nytimes.com/2012/02/05/business/employers-and-brands-use-
gaming-to-gauge-engagement.html, retrieved on May 2012. 

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
78
Out-of-the-Box Thinking on  
Existing Markets
Now that you have done some work understanding strategy, context, and 
looking at adjacent new markets, it’s time to think outside the box. Ask 
yourself, “What assets and skills do you have as an organization that can lead 
to new markets and new businesses?” A classic out-of-the-box new business 
was the entry of Amazon into the cloud services market. As we have already 
mentioned, Amazon started slowly in the online book retail trade, expanding 
into the music and DVD business. Amazon’s entry into Kindle eBooks was an 
adjacent market that depended on new technology—eInk—that was not 
available earlier. In this instance, Amazon was not really thinking outside the 
box. It was a bold decision that created a new market and engendered some 
rivals, but it was a technology extension of existing business—books online 
rather than on paper. 
Amazon’s use of spare IT capacity to create an entry into cloud computing 
services has gained them entry to a domain that originally dominated by 
technology companies and was a far more out-of-the box direction. Google, 
EMC, Microsoft, etc. were the leading technology companies that provide 
cloud computing services. Companies who already have a large technology 
base dominate this market. This market now includes Amazon. They converted 
that existing stake in technology to launch their business into a new business 
opportunity: selling and developing solutions for technologists. Amazon sold 
books and other retail goods, not technological services. Their entry into a 
completely divergent business area was something that could not have been 
predicted. Amazon’s presence disrupted the market and caused some concern 
among the “traditional” cloud computing vendors. While the internal decision 
process and idea creation is not known, it can be surmised that Amazon’s 
spare capacity was needed to handle peak demand and forced them to look 
at initiatives such as virtualization to maximize the use of their expensive 
technology. From there, it was a short step to considering their internal 
solution as a cloud computing solution. The real out-of-the-box thinking was 
to externalize their technology by making their internal virtualization solution 
into a product that can be used by people outside Amazon. 
How can this lateral thinking be applied to your organization? You should 
consider what assets you use as part of the existing business. Is there an area 
of expertise that you could market differently? Even if you are CIO of a 
manufacturing company, you may be an expert in customer services and 
customer interaction. These are skills that you may be able to sell to other 
organizations who have a requirement for your expertise. Warehousing 

79
The Innovative CIO
companies may have expertise in supply chain management and RFID 
management. 
Can this be applied to another market? Do supermarket chains keep track of 
their staff locations? If there is a spillage in one area of the store, the best 
person to start the cleanup may be closer than the janitor. Where is the logic 
of contacting a cleaning employee in the rear of the store when another 
employee is nearer and can ensure that customers are not in danger of slipping 
or tracking the spillage? Is supply chain location management something that 
you can introduce to increase customer satisfaction? 
RFID tagging and expertise in managing goods in transit may be transferrable 
to tagging employee badges. Add the RFID tag to a pager and cell phone and 
you not only know where that employee’s device is in the store, but you can 
contact them. Does your organization operate in a market that has a bad 
customer relationship profile? Are there skills in your internal IT customer 
management that can be transferred to your company’s customer base? An 
increase in customer satisfaction ratings may increase marketing and sales for 
the company as a whole. 
These are examples of questions that can stimulate incremental innovation 
and adjacent market thinking and might even generate the next big corporate 
innovation.
Creating IT-Aware Business Leaders
So far in this chapter, we have been discussing how IT leaders can use the 
corporate strategy as a way of understanding the relationship between 
business and IT. We have also encouraged you to develop an understanding of 
the potential for business-led innovation in existing and new markets. In our 
opinion, there is a need for CIOs to develop a “business brain” if they do not 
have one at the moment. It is equally important for all IT leaders to develop 
their ability to educate business leaders on the potential for IT to enable 
business innovation. 
Tools like the innovation funnel can present technology innovations in a 
business context and are easily understood by business leaders. Communication 
between the IT leadership and the business leadership is discussed in more 
depth in later chapters. Communication of innovation has a dual purpose. The 
first purpose is to help other members of the company to understand the 
work that is being done in the IT department to build business innovations. 
The second purpose is to increase the business organization’s understanding 
of the potential of IT to deliver business innovation. We are not advocating 
formal education or training, but guidance for business leaders on technologies, 

Chapter 4 | Business Innovation vs. IT Innovation 
80
their values, and their potential for innovation. You could find yourself 
developing a free flow of information and discussion between IT and the 
business, leading to a much stronger innovative culture in the future.
IT Innovating IT Is Not  
Business Innovation
You have made the decision to become an innovative CIO, and now you are 
considering your options. It does not matter if that decision is forced on you, 
or if you are taking this step yourself. Your first consideration is the type of 
innovation you will foster. Let’s revisit the two studies that we considered at 
the outset of this chapter.
Chris Curran tells us that 75% of CIOs consider only internal IT innovation.16 
This myopia comes from the pressure in the business to keep the lights on 
and keep the costs down. As we agreed earlier, this might have an effect on 
the bottom line by keeping costs low and improving margins, but this is not 
the main contribution IT can make to the growth and success of the business. 
Gaining flexibility and time-to-market by swapping existing technology for 
new technology may be important to the IT department, but it is never going 
to create the next million dollar line of business. Keeping the lights on and 
cutting costs may build your reputation as a great IT guy, but where does that 
lead you? If you want to grow as a member of the executive team or move 
into another senior role in the organization, you will need to do more. 
The CA Technologies survey of CIOs had two purposes.17 Very often people 
make assumptions without testing them by asking questions. One assumption 
is that a CIO who reports to the CEO will be senior enough to be involved 
in all aspects of the business, including the corporate strategy. The survey 
results showed this to be a false assumption. 
The second purpose was to ascertain the views of CIOs around the world 
regarding a career move from IT to becoming the CEO. The survey indicated 
that many CIOs had the necessary skills to make the switch to CEO, but that 
the opportunity was not always there. Not all CIOs are seen as business 
people with an IT specialty, which is indicated by the relatively small 
number—16%—who are involved in forming the business strategy.
One hypothesis the survey tested was that changes in the role of the CIO 
were accelerated by cloud computing. The hypothesis further assumed that 
16 Chris Curran, www.ciodashboard.com/leadership/business-innovation-or-it-innovation.
17 “The Future Role of the CIO,” www.ca.com/us/collateral/white-papers/na/The-Future-Role-
of-the-CIO-Becoming-the-Boss.aspx.

81
The Innovative CIO
the focus of cloud computing on business rather than on technology may 
encourage more CIOs to regard themselves as suitable for the top roles. 
The survey answers were used to develop a white paper outlining the potential 
of CIOs to become CEOs. The most significant conclusion is that many CIOs 
lack the opportunity to externalize their skills to customers and partners. It 
may be that the skills and qualities of the CIO are not being communicated to 
the senior leaders in the company. This is a double problem. Poor 
communication may result in the CIO being excluded from customer and 
partner interaction. It may also indicate that the senior leaders in the 
organization do not believe that the CIO has anything to offer in the corporate 
strategy discussions.
To overcome these negative attitudes, CIOs must take stock of the corporate 
strategy and ensure that the IT strategy is in step with and supports the 
corporate strategy. In addition, innovative CIOs must identify and bring 
forward opportunities that may not be seen by less technology-based leaders 
in the company. These opportunities can be incremental or game-changing, 
depending on their scope. Discovering these opportunities is difficult and 
sitting in the IT department and talking “geek” will not accomplish this goal. 
The innovative CIO is looking outside the IT department, examining the 
market that the company exists in. We are not advising that you neglect the 
IT market, but try and match the events and new technology in the IT market 
with events and changes in the corporate market. This approach, along with 
an understanding of the context of world and market events, will enable CIOs 
to pan for the gold of business innovation. 
IT innovation of IT is not something that will make your name as an innovative 
CIO. IT innovation of the business will lead to business growth and profitability. 
The innovative CIO has the potential to transform IT from a stable fulfilling a 
demand to produce a faster horse to an organization that builds the best 
sports car.

c h a p t e r
5
Pull and Push
The Sources of Technology Innovation
Bringing together business and IT to create and deliver technology innovation 
should be a combined effort. No one area of the business should have 
supremacy, but rather all areas of business—including IT—should work 
together to stimulate growth and competitive advantage through new 
innovation. 
Central to this approach is the notion that anyone can be the key to great 
innovation, especially when it comes to groundbreaking new ideas (as opposed 
to incremental innovation). After all, if a lowly patent clerk like Albert Einstein 
can end up generating some of the most innovative and impactful new ideas 
in the history of science, then there is no reason why IT leadership, or even 
business leaders for that matter, should be the sole holders of the keys to 
innovation.
Nevertheless, it is still important that the innovative CIO—as the informed 
technology leader and expert advisor—comes forward to enable the entire 
business to innovate, while also stepping up to the challenge to drive the IT 
department to innovate directly. 
This means working with business leaders (and their teams) to unleash their 
capacity for innovation, helping them come up with new ideas that they can 
ask IT to deliver: the “business pull” of new technology. It also means that IT 
should come up with new ideas and propose them to the business: the “IT 
push” of new technology. Just as we have shown in Chapter 3, IT push of 
technology can surely deliver business impact, but innovation is a two-sided 
coin, and both sides are heads—much like the pushmi-pullyu!
So while IT leaders and their staff cannot (and should not) be the sole drivers 
of technology innovation, it is likely they are the most connected and informed 
about the potential for business innovation driven by technology. This puts 
the innovative CIO in a unique position to assist and drive both the business 
pull and the IT push of new technology opportunity.

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
84
This chapter will explore how the innovative CIO can contribute in both of 
these approaches to innovation—the business pull and the IT push—while 
working with counterparts in other business units, including marketing, 
finance, sales, product development, human resources, legal, and others.
The Business “Pull”
For some IT leaders, the effect of the business pull of technology innovation 
is not just painfully obvious, but also obviously painful. This new era of 
business-adopted technology and innovation has been a wake-up call, especially 
for IT organizations that have grown up through an old school era when they 
“owned” the technology budgets and decisions.
Increasingly we are seeing the business units as key technology adopters, 
especially driven by demand for consumer-oriented technologies (e.g., social 
media, smartphones, cloud, tablets). Indeed, in many companies non-IT 
employees are adopting these technologies faster than IT staff can respond. 
These IT consumers learn about new technologies in their personal life, not 
from IT. Then they bring these devices to the workplace, regardless of whether 
IT supports their choices or not.
The inability of IT to keep up is proven in reports on technology budgets. 
Since the global economic downturn of 2008, IT leaders are reporting that 
traditional IT budgets are remaining flat and forcing a cost-conscious approach 
to IT spending. However, overall technology spending is actually increasing, 
and quite significantly. 
For example, in a recent survey of CIOs, research firm IDC found that the 
majority were expecting their budgets to decrease or remain flat in 2012 
compared with their budgets from 2011.1 Yet IDC was still predicting that 
worldwide IT spending in 2012 would increase by 6% over 2011 spending in 
constant currency.2 This is almost twice the 3% global GDP growth predicted 
by Goldman Sachs for 2012,3 and more than double the World Bank prediction 
of 2.5% for the same period.4 
1  IDC, The CIO Agenda for 2012 and Beyond: A Look at CIO Sentiment and Priorities, 
Document No. 233098, February 2012.
2  IDC, Worldwide Black Book Query Tool, Version 2, 2012, Document No.  236347, August 
2012.
3  Jan Hatzius, “Outlook 2012,” Goldman Sachs, December 2011, www.goldmansachs.com/
our-thinking/global-economic-outlook/outlook-2012/index.html, retrieved on May 2012.
4  Andrew Burns, Theo Janse van Rensburg, Global Economic Prospects, Volume 4: 
Uncertainties and Vulnerabilities, The International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development/The World Bank, January 2012, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/

85
The Innovative CIO
The clear implication then is that business units outside of IT are directing a 
larger percentage of technology spending for the company, leaving IT leaders 
with a smaller and smaller share of the pie. And indeed, CMOs are recruiting 
external agencies for digital marketing, marketing automation, social media 
programs, and more. CFOs are using cloud services for accounting, finance, 
and ERP. Sales leads are buying tablets to enable their sales teams to be 
mobile, agile, and connected, and they are using cloud-based CRM and SFA 
systems to support them anywhere in the world.
The rapid rise in this business pull of innovation has also significantly affected 
the ability of IT to support innovation. With little extra in the way of budgets 
or personnel to match the increase in technology adoption, not only is IT 
unable to react fast enough to deliver the technology innovation the business 
demands, it cannot even adapt fast enough to support the technologies that 
the business is already adopting for itself. 
As business units and business owners run increasingly faster in their adoption 
of new consumer-driven technologies, IT struggles to keep up with even the 
most basic level of support—connecting to the network, assisting with 
security and privacy, or enabling e-mail connectivity.
As a result, when it comes to the business pull of technology, the entrenched 
approach to IT appears to be holding business back from innovation. We need 
to turn that equation on its head, and get IT back to a trusted position of 
helping the business to drive and adopt technology, rather than fighting against 
it. This means IT departments need to move away from the old school 
approaches that are holding them back.
Overcome the “Old School” Approach
IT departments have put in place many traditional approaches to empower 
the business “pull” of technology innovation. Unfortunately, they often have 
the opposite effect.
For example, one attempt by IT to enable business pull is the traditional 
service desk or request management system, an online system where business 
users can request new product upgrades, application developments, new 
device purchases, and other technologies. This is often integrated with a 
defined catalog of available (approved) technology services. IT staff monitor, 
prioritize, forward, and/or respond to each request as best they can (typically 
with a number of restrictive policies). 
INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1322593305595/8287139-1326374900917/GEP_
January_2012a_FullReport_FINAL.pdf, retrieved on May 2012.

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
86
These service desk and service catalog systems can be very positive engines 
for soliciting innovation—especially when coupled with other enabling 
capabilities such as ideation tools, agile development planning, and automated 
cloud service deployment. However, many catalog-based systems are used to 
impose a restrictive or exclusive approach, which turns them into gating 
mechanisms instead.
The first gate or barrier is often technical—a lack of data fields in the ticketing 
or catalog system to accommodate new technologies. With most of these 
systems, IT enters the range of “allowed” or “approved” services. Business 
users can only select from these approved services when they require new 
technology. 
Such systems also can be slow to progress through the multistage approval, 
acquisition, and provisioning workflows. Worse still, users may discover that 
they cannot even order an item they want only after they have already 
completed most or all of a lengthy workflow.
This exclusive catalog approach also suggests IT has de facto control over 
technology adoption, exercised as control over the “approved” technology 
catalog. Catalogs can also solidify or atrophy over time as no one bothers to 
remove or update out-of-date entries. Obsolete or unavailable technology 
remains available to order, duplicates proliferate, and newer entries pile up.
This approach is not business-focused, it is not service-centric, and it inevitably 
reinforces the perception of IT as the “Department of No.” 
In some ways it is also inherently anti-innovation. A restrictive request/catalog 
system by definition only offers services and technologies that already exist 
and have already been tested and approved by IT. The result of such a 
restrictive approach to service request systems is that they are simply barriers 
when business users want new, innovative technologies.
No wonder business units go around IT to sign up for cloud storage, buy a 
new tablet or smartphone, or even adopt a new Point-of-Sale (POS) system! 
When the new generation of consumer-styled tablet devices first started 
appearing, one large US healthcare organization’s service request system was 
set up to allow users to only order existing devices (various desktops, laptops, 
and smartphones). No options were available for ordering tablets. IT did not 
see these as business devices, so they were never added to the service catalog. 
This exclusionary approach stifled business users’ requests for these innovative 
new tablets, and all the new opportunities they would enable. So doctors, 
nurses, administrators, and executives went around IT and bought tablets 
anyway (and connected them to the corporate network), with no standards, 
policies, or security rules.

87
The Innovative CIO
The problem is not necessarily inherent in the systems themselves. Rather, it 
is typically in the processes that business and IT are tied to in using such 
systems. A good service request system, tied with appropriate process and 
other supporting technology, can actively serve business innovation by linking 
in capabilities for new technology adoption with “known-good” services. 
Another standard approach that can slow innovation is for business and IT to 
conduct annual strategy meetings together, to set technology decisions and 
budgets for the year (or more) ahead. 
This approach can have value for innovation if this annual process acts not 
only to establish long-term strategy, but also to establish ongoing review. 
Reviewing progress annually—or more—can give organizations early warning 
when technologies show a faster uptake than predicted. Of course, the 
further out you predict the less accurate you will be, but more frequent 
reviews will enable more confidence in the long-term strategy.
However, this approach is typically at odds with the sometimes explosive 
nature of innovation. While there is definitely a need to consider and deliver 
long-term planning, with technology moving so quickly this approach is no 
longer adequate to encourage rapid innovation.
For example, just days after Apple released the first iPad, adoption exploded. 
According to Apple’s own reports
• 
By May 3, 2010, just 28 days after its introduction, the 
company sold its millionth iPad.5
• 
By the end of that first quarter, it had sold 3.2 million units in 
total. In the second quarter, it sold an additional 4.1 million 
units.
• 
In just one year following the initial release, Apple had sold 
almost 20 million iPads (see Figure 5-1).
• 
By the time Apple released the third generation of this device, 
it would sell over three million units within the space of just 
three days.6 
5  “Apple Sells One Million iPads,” Apple Inc. Press Release, May 2010, www.apple.com/pr/
library/2010/05/03Apple-Sells-One-Million-iPads.html, retrieved on May 2012.
6  “New iPad Tops Three Million,” Apple Inc. Press Release, March 2012, www.apple.com/
pr/library/2012/03/19New-iPad-Tops-Three-Million.html, retrieved on May 2012.

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
88
An annual planning meeting held in February 2010 would have failed to 
accommodate this phenomenon. A rigid annual business plan would have 
been unable to leverage the opportunities for innovation that such a revolution 
made available. New engagement apps, greater workforce mobility, new 
consumer interactions, and more would simply go begging.7
Similarly, the adoption rate of the social network Twitter was both exceptional 
and rapid, especially between 2009 and 2010, when it grew from 2.5 million 
tweets per day to 35 million tweets per day—a one-year growth of 1,400% 
(see Figure 5-2).8
Figure 5-2. This figure shows the number of Twitter tweets per day from 2007–2010.8
7  “Apple Inc. Unaudited Summary Data,” http://images.apple.com/pr/pdf/q310data_sum.pdf, 
http://images.apple.com/pr/pdf/q410data_sum.pdf, http://images.apple.com/pr/pdf/q111data_
sum.pdf, http://images.apple.com/pr/pdf/q211data_sum.pdf, Apple Inc., retrieved on May 2012.
8  “Measuring Tweets,” http://blog.twitter.com/2010/02/measuring-tweets.html, Twitter, 
retrieved on May 2012. 
Figure 5-1. This figure shows the iPad unit sales in the first four quarters after its release.7

89
The Innovative CIO
A tech strategy set annually would not be agile enough to react to the 
opportunity this growth presented—to connect with customers, influencers, 
and others in a completely new medium with a fundamentally different 
personal attachment, and to leverage that for a new and innovative inbound 
marketing strategy. 
With such a rapid rise in new technology adoption, even a biannual approach 
to technology evaluation and strategy planning is well behind the innovation 
timeline, leaving you scrambling to catch up at the next planning session, or 
struggling to adapt to dramatic interstitial strategic changes. 
Not only this, but with an annual planning approach, when you factor in the 
time between strategy plans and the time it will take to execute on each new 
technology strategy, you will unavoidably be anywhere from a year to 18 
months or more behind your more agile competitors.
Clearly, such old school approaches are no longer sufficient to enable the 
business pull of new technology innovation. Start by knowing your own house. 
Conduct an audit of existing “enablement” systems and processes, and see if 
they really are helping or hurting your innovation efforts.
Adopting a “New School” Approach
The new school CIO takes a much different approach to enabling other 
business areas to “pull” innovation from technology. Such new approaches are 
more consultative, more cooperative, more timely, and more aligned both to 
real-time business needs and to real-time technology innovations. These new 
approaches also equalize the power to say “no” to new ideas—and the power 
to say “yes.” 
So, how does the business know which services to pull? How do business 
leaders find out about the new technologies that might be available to them?
To promote business pull of technology, one key starting point is the 
democratization of knowledge. Former US Secretary of Defense Donald 
Rumsfeld put it this way in a now-famous 2002 news briefing:9
There are known knowns; there are things we know we know. We also know 
there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are some things we 
do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns—the ones we don’t know 
we don’t know.
9  Donald Rumsfeld, “DoD News Briefing - Secretary Rumsfeld and Gen. Myers,” US 
Department of Defense, February 2002, www.defense.gov/Transcripts/Transcript.
aspx?TranscriptID=2636, retrieved on May 2012.

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
90
These “unknown unknowns” especially apply to the business pull of innovation 
too. Business leaders are limited in their ability to apply new technologies to 
business innovation by the limits of what they know about the technologies 
available. They can only innovate within the set of “known knowns”—those 
technologies that they already understand. 
For them there is a world of “unknown unknowns”—that vast set of new 
technologies they have never even heard of, and which they would not even 
know well enough to ask about. Such business leaders simply cannot pull 
technology innovation into their business needs when they do not have the 
knowledge of what is possible. 
This is where technology leaders such as the innovative CIO need to be more 
proactive. By breaking down the barriers to knowledge of new technology 
opportunities, the innovative CIO not only can allow but also positively 
encourage business leaders to innovate with technology themselves. You can 
help teach business leaders about technology, expose them to new 
opportunities, and be their trusted advisor.
For example, periodically brief your peers in the business—from the C-level 
down—on new and upcoming technologies to help them form a starting point 
for potential innovation opportunities. Initiate regular innovation or 
technology workshops with your business peers. Look at implementing the 
innovation funnel (see Chapter 4) as one of the ways of articulating technology 
potential on a regular basis, talking with business leaders about the status of 
entries in the funnel. 
This approach also addresses those CEOs who are inveterate headline readers, 
and who, left to their own devices, are prone to “management by magazine.” 
They see a headline about a new technology, or some new capability in which 
a competitor has invested, and start asking what their company is doing to 
catch up. This is exacerbated when there is little communication between 
them and the CIO.
Encourage your team to also take up this commitment to regular commu-
nications with their business peers. Remember that great new ideas can come 
from anywhere, not just from senior managers. 
Acting as a trusted advisor to the rest of the C-team, the innovative CIO can 
provide technology awareness. And by extension, the entire IT department 
can help to nurture technology adoption by the whole organization. 
You and your team are ideally positioned to work actively with business peers 
to explain to them the latest ideas, the newest technologies, upcoming 
capabilities, and potential opportunities—all with the purpose of enabling 
them to see and understand for themselves how these technologies can drive 

91
The Innovative CIO
business innovation. Do not just teach, lecture, and inform—workshop 
together with your peers and their reports to drive innovation as a team.
Consider holding such workshops on both a regular and ad hoc basis. You can 
certainly plan such sessions ahead of time to cover relatively slow-burning 
technology changes, such as virtualization or cloud computing. But for 
explosive opportunities like the newest device release or the latest social 
networking development, a rapid response and immediate briefing may be a 
better and timelier way to keep your business peers informed. 
Incorporate formal knowledge management (KM) systems to make the sharing 
of knowledge institutional, rather than a gating function in itself. You can buy 
extensive KM systems off the shelf, but they do not need to be overly complex 
or expensive. Start with something very simple, even just a shared notebook 
on a shared drive or a common folder for filing documents and pages on new 
technologies. 
For just a little more complexity, you can have a much better system. Install a 
common innovation wiki, using one of many different open source wikis, 
allowing both IT and business users to collaborate on sharing knowledge 
about new technologies, what they could be used for, and which part of the 
business could benefit. 
Extend a basic wiki with a collaboration service, or include other tools to 
foster innovation such as project management, content management, instant 
messaging, or resource management. You may evolve this service to a 
sophisticated system that connects and aligns business with IT through real-
time business-connected ideation; knowledge; portfolio; project; and service 
management systems that include all of these capabilities and more. 
This new approach to a democratization of information will help you to 
establish knowledge sharing about new technologies and new opportunities 
as a corporate-wide value, not just an individual value.
Beyond this democratization of knowledge, IT must also act as part of the 
business, to be considered as part of the business. 
For example, as the technology leader and trusted advisor to the business, 
you need to actively consider the business interest of new technology 
innovations and whether IT should “own” these, or whether IT can better 
enable business users to own the technology themselves. The old school 
approach, of course, was that IT owned (and therefore controlled) all the new 
technology. The new world of consumerization now enables business users to 
directly select and deploy technology themselves, both from internal and 
external sources. 

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
92
For example, business users can go out and buy their own tablets and start 
using them for work right away. Perhaps more impactfully, they can also “pull” 
innovation directly from third-party cloud service providers, such as sales 
managers signing up their teams to use online CRM and SFA systems, 
marketing managers signing up their teams to use web-based marketing 
services, or finance managers deciding to migrate the company accounts to a 
pay-by-use financial management service. 
In an old school approach, the CIO may have taken steps, even draconian 
ones, to retake control of technology adoption and stamp out this “rogue IT” 
that threatens the standardized process. In the new school approach, this is 
entirely unacceptable. 
To achieve the status as trusted advisor, the innovative CIO must take a more 
balanced and business-centric approach. In some cases, this will mean doing 
more than merely tacitly condoning such rogue IT, but explicitly supporting it, 
and even actively encouraging it. Active interest in integrating and supporting 
new technologies, such as consumer devices, will also generate goodwill and 
add to the likelihood that you will be seen as a trusted advisor.
This is not to say that rogue IT does not create problems, especially with 
security, privacy, cost, and efficiency. However, it is the role of the new school 
CIO to focus on and resolve those problems, rather than stamp out these 
rogue practices entirely. For example, try encouraging business users toward 
one cloud service over another to stabilize budgets or leverage purchasing 
power, or implement tools or processes that prevent unauthorized data use 
and/or leakage when using cloud services or consumer devices. The key is to 
figure out what business users are doing, why they are doing it, and how you 
can help, rather than simply reacting and shutting it down.
The innovative CIO therefore must also be intimately aware of and driven 
toward real business goals. The whole business (IT included) must work 
together to take advantage of new technologies in a way that makes sense in 
context of the overall business goals. IT must also learn about the business 
goals—what really matters, where the priorities are, and where the problems 
are. 
A key skill for innovative CIOs is the ability to listen with open ears as 
advocated by former Amgen CEO Kevin Sharer and IBM CEO Sam Palmisano. 
This means to listen solely to comprehend and to understand what your 
business peers are trying to achieve—without trying to critique or object or 
convince them of anything.10 This is part of the required organizational change 
10  “Why I’m a Listener: Amgen CEO Kevin Sharer,” McKinsey Quarterly, April 2012, www.
mckinseyquarterly.com/Governance/Leadership/Why_Im_a_listener_Amgen_CEO_Kevin_
Sharer_2956, retrieved on May 2012. 

93
The Innovative CIO
to foster innovation—in the structure, culture, skill sets, and more—and no 
doubt requires a new level of technology education, training, mentoring, and 
knowledge sharing throughout the organization.
Another way to engage the business pull of technology innovation is suggested 
by Monte Ford, former CIO of American Airlines, in Chapter 3 of our 
stablemate publication, CIOs at Work by Ed Yourdon (Apress, 2011). Ford 
discussed how American Airlines required employees to work in the IT 
department for a few months so that they understood the technology and 
issues and processes in order to better use that technology. This level of 
commitment may be unrealistic for your organization, but the core idea makes 
a lot of sense.
Exposing your counterparts in other business units to new technologies 
through closer technology education will help the whole organization to 
understand and use technology better. IT can be an ideal partner to help the 
organization understand what is possible and what is not, to improve their 
processes at all levels, and use this understanding to drive innovation through 
business pull.
Going one step further, IT can also actively offer the rest of the business 
technology options that it can pull, and promoting these to other business 
units. To assist in this mission, a well-designed and maintained service catalog 
is key—an online catalog of “known good” technology services that business 
users can order for themselves, supported by processes flexible enough to 
accommodate “unknown good” innovations.
A service catalog can offer a wide range of out-of-the-box services, such as 
Linux-Apache-MySQL-PHP/Perl/Python (LAMP) stacks for developers, 
Computer Aided Design (CAD) software for engineers, fully configured client 
images, collaboration services, cloud service leases (public or private), and 
even physical device orders (tablets, smartphones, office equipment, etc.). It 
can also include automation to deliver the services, to accelerate workflows 
for process and approvals, and include chargeback mechanisms for accounting. 
And it can have flexible workflows that can accommodate exceptions and 
alternatives to satisfy even unexpected requests. 
As mentioned earlier, using service catalogs to restrict technology adoption 
can inhibit innovation. However, when they are used to deliver a baseline of 
accessible technologies, innovation will be stimulated. This is especially true if 
the catalogs are kept up-to-date and if users can easily request additions to 
the standardized services, even if on a trial basis.” 
In other chapters we will explore additional ways to improve business pull for 
technology innovation, such as the following:

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
94
• 
Using new agile development techniques to improve response 
to service requests. (Chapter 6).
• 
Helping to adopt existing new technologies and practices 
such as Near Field Communications, big data, etc. (Chapter 
6).
• 
Helping to adapt to existing consumer technologies such as 
social and mobile (Chapter 7).
• 
Fostering other capabilities to enable intentional business-
driven innovation (Chapter 9). 
The IT “Push”
Of course, technology innovation is not all about the business pull. The notion 
that “we have to put the business people through IT so they can understand 
it” is good, with some success, but it only addresses one side of the business-
IT equation. It is also fraught with risk to innovation as a whole, and to the 
technology leadership specifically, because it implies that IT people are 
relegated to a supporting role—unable to innovate directly and only there to 
serve the business innovators. Rather than address the problem of business-
IT alignment, a “business pull” approach applied in isolation actually exacerbates 
the problem that has caused the rift between technology and business leaders 
and stifled innovation.
Certainly, it is important to encourage business people to take advantage of 
technology and work with them to actualize their ideas. But it is not enough 
to be an order-taker to the business, to merely ask them as customers what 
they want from technology. As the great innovator Henry Ford reputedly said 
after creating the model T and revolutionizing manufacturing and 
transportation, “If I’d asked my customers what they wanted, they’d have said 
a faster horse.”
The other side of the innovation equation is to encourage passionate and 
innovative technologists to help drive the business, and enable these 
technologists to understand the business strategy, goals, and requirements. 
This approach will give them the knowledge and tools they need to work with 
business leaders on their terms, and will allow them to form a vision for what 
technology can do to advance the business. 
This ability for IT to proactively push ideas out to the business can be a very 
powerful approach, as it encourages informed technology people to generate 
new technology innovation, but within the critical context of business 
outcomes. 

95
The Innovative CIO
Such an approach empowers IT leaders as trusted advisors to the business, 
bringing as deep an understanding of technology to the business as sales 
leaders bring regarding markets and customers, or as finance leaders bring 
regarding accounting, taxation, and investment strategies. 
As a technology leader, you should absolutely look to deliver on your 
responsibility to “push” innovation into the business, through centralized 
technology evaluation, adoption, and distribution, just as other business 
leaders “push” new ideas and innovations in their own areas of specialization. 
Rather than wait for orders, choose to be proactive in experimenting with 
and learning about new technology so that you can offer it to your business 
peers to drive innovation.
That is what many great IT leaders have been doing for some time, and so 
have successful business people. Frequently they are one and the same. 
Amazon founder and CEO Jeff Bezos is reportedly a very hands-on business 
leader who pays enormous attention to the technology that his business is 
built on. Similarly, the co-founder and CEO of Kiva, Matt Flannery, is a very 
technology-oriented business leader, who started this innovative non-profit 
while working as a programmer for another innovator, TiVo.11 We are con-
stantly meeting with innovative CIOs who work in collaboration with their 
C-level peers to introduce new technology ideas and brainstorm about how 
they can help deliver business goals.
The innovative CIO has a new role to play, guiding an IT department that is 
an equal with “the business”—that is in theory and reality a full-fledged part 
of “the business.” Technology leaders can and should be real partners in 
formulating business strategy and driving business success. They should be 
just as important as other areas of “the business” such as sales, marketing, 
production, finance, human resources, or operations. 
Unfortunately, many business leaders are not thinking the same way. In fact, 
only 14% of executives see IT as a leading instigator of innovation; almost 
one-fifth see IT as the single greatest roadblock to innovation; but almost 
one-third see IT as no more than an enabler of innovation.12 They are still 
seeing the “old school” of IT—where the CIO (or more likely a VP of IT, 
rather than a full C-level peer) can make suggestions and enable business, but 
ultimately ends up just taking orders. A subservient CIO who acts as a butler 
to the business is not enough to bring IT into the new millennium, where 
numerous third-party technology options are also available to order. 
11  The Kiva Team, Kiva, 2012, www.kiva.org/about/team, retrieved on October 2012.
12  CA Technologies, Why IT needs to lead now: the innovation imperative, September 2012, 
http://www.ca.com/us/collateral/white-papers/na/Why-It-Needs-To-Lead-Now-The-
Innovation-Imperative.aspx, retrieved on September 2012.

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
96
After all, if IT leaders never step outside their own domain to talk with their 
business peers, to learn more about the business, and to communicate new 
technology capabilities (and limitations), then the business is going to find 
their own technology solutions—and not always the best ones. 
The same principle works the other way around. If the only reason that the 
business communicates with IT is to ask what it means when the printer says 
“PC LOAD LETTER,” then IT will never learn how to help the business with 
its strategic goals, using the right new technologies.
Helping the business to pull innovation is important, but it is not the only 
approach. IT can clearly make a significant difference by innovating directly and 
by leading innovation, rather than just showing business leaders how 
technology works and then sitting back in the hope they take up the 
responsibility for innovation. 
For example, a large telecommunication provider was about to release a new 
version of a wildly popular service. Business leaders were expecting activations 
to triple for this new service—a far larger uptake than their systems could 
actually handle. The business asked IT to spend millions on new hardware to 
accommodate this massive load. The technology leaders, however, decided to 
use the following new technologies instead: 
• 
With modeling and simulation software, they determined the 
actual capacity requirements for best, worst, and likely case 
scenarios, instead of just guessing. 
• 
With virtualization tools, they consolidated existing 
workloads to free up additional capacity internally.
• 
Alongside business owners, they evaluated and redefined the 
existing service portfolio to reduce capacity allocated to non-
core applications (or eliminate them entirely).
• 
By utilizing cloud services, they were able to accommodate 
peak loads and any overrun not handled by the existing 
systems.
As a result, the company had an incredibly successful product launch and not 
only avoided massive spending on new hardware and facilities, but actually 
saved costs on existing capacity while maintaining a differentiated customer 
service across their product portfolio.
In another organization, a communications service provider CIO was talking 
with the head of his company’s sales team about how his salespeople had to 
endure a very lengthy sales cycle. This was negatively affecting business 

97
The Innovative CIO
results—reducing productivity, extending time to cash, reducing customer 
satisfaction, and reducing their ability to compete with established providers. 
At this company, sales reps needed to consult with new customers several 
times to present their service offerings, explain different packages and bundles, 
assure service availability in their area and their office, and create and 
communicate pricing and contractual details before they could sign a contract. 
Even then, provisioning was slow too because sales needed to take their 
signed orders and input them into the provisioning systems. The sales cycle 
therefore ran over several months, not only because of this level of involvement, 
but also because the sales reps needed to negotiate multiple meetings with 
senior customer representatives—always a difficult and protracted activity—
simply to collect and convey all this information.
With an understanding of the business needs, and a deep involvement in new 
technologies, the CIO set his team to develop a mobile app for the sales force 
to address the problem. This new tablet app included these features:
• 
The latest brochure and sales information (maintained in a 
central repository to ensure currency) for the meeting 
introduction
• 
Real-time, geo-specific service availability information (using 
tablet GPS and a Google Maps mashup) to ensure the service 
can be delivered
• 
Contract generation using a cloud-based CRM application 
with pre-approved terms and conditions to provide proposals 
instantly
• 
Electronic contract execution with an e-signature that allows 
the sales rep and customer to electronically sign a contract 
on the spot
• 
Integration with central fulfillment systems so that the signed 
contract triggers immediate service provisioning
As a result, sales staff could maximize the value of those precious customer 
meetings by ensuring their salespeople could prove value quickly, while 
recognizing the value of their customers’ time. The more they could do in a 
single meeting, the better for both the salesperson and the customer. 
Sometimes the best innovation comes from simply unleashing the tools, 
techniques, and possibilities on your business peers in sales, marketing, 
operations, finance, and other business units, thereby giving them every 
opportunity to shine. 

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
98
However, sometimes the best innovation actually comes from technology (or 
other discipline-specific) experts applying their own unique thinking, based on 
their deep and career-long learning. It is therefore important for the innovative 
CIO to look at both sides of the innovation equation:
• 
To “pull” innovation from business leaders by educating and 
enabling them, providing a sounding board, an active partner, 
and an implementation resource.
• 
To “push” innovation by contributing new ideas based on a 
unique understanding of technology, as a trusted advisor to, 
and as part of, the strategic leadership. 
The Third Way
It is clearly important to “pull” innovative technology ideas from the business 
and to “push” innovation from the technology perspective too. 
However, we would encourage a third approach that is neither solely pull nor 
push, but rather both working together. 
Combining the deep investment in business goals and the strategy needed to 
get there with the expertise of a technologist and practitioner, an innovative 
and assertive CIO can truly earn the right to sit with the rest of the C-team 
and make business decisions together—including ones regarding technology 
innovation. In an ideal world, this results in an organization where IT has 
educated the business on technology opportunities, the business has educated 
IT on the business goals and drivers, and both connect to drive innovation 
together.
Of course, this change may require new organizational constructs, such as 
forming cross-functional teams or working groups with people from different 
backgrounds, bringing their experience together. It may also require you to 
embrace rogue teams in your organization in pursuit of opportunity, and 
perhaps intentionally create them (even as a spinoff). These issues will be 
discussed later in Chapter 9. 
It also requires you, as a technology leader, to get outside your domain once 
in a while and learn about outside topics. Study up on green energy or 
astrophysics; read new books or online articles about core business rather 
than just IT; spend a couple of hours every week talking with non-IT teams. 
This combined approach requires the innovative CIO to gain a new and 
informed perspective on the business, and on technology, and to recognize 
new opportunities of how to combine the two. 

99
The Innovative CIO
However, taking on a more educated and involved business focus does not 
mean always delivering exactly what the business wants. That is not the point 
of a collaboration at all. As a shaggy philosopher once observed, “You can’t 
always get what you want.” While being a service-focused CIO that is eager 
to deliver business requirements can be a strength, it can also become a 
weakness. As a technology leader and a trusted advisor, you will often need 
to look deeper than the request. Rather than look to deliver the request, you 
may instead need to look past the request per se, to figure out how to solve 
the problem, rather than just fill the order. 
If the business is asking for tools, you need to investigate the need and figure 
out how to say “yes.” Of course, you do not want to say “no” straightaway, 
but consider not saying “yes” immediately either, at least until you understand 
what they are trying to achieve. Rather than enabling them to solve their need 
their way, engage in a conversation with your business peers to find out what 
they are trying to accomplish, and look for the best way to solve their problem. 
Due to politics, organization structures, and even strategic focus, not every 
CIO can have such a conversation. Moreover, maintaining positive and 
persuasive input to these sourcing decisions will need constant reinforcement. 
It goes beyond merely having a business relationship manager—it needs a 
constant commitment to the business, from the CIO down. 
For example, the business may ask to use social networks from their work 
computers, or to connect their tablet computers to the internal network and 
applications like e-mail. Business users may (or may not) have many valid 
reasons for these requests, especially considering the rapid consumerization 
of IT (which we will discuss in Chapter 7). Yet without engaging the business, 
it is easy for IT to see iPads as a gaming platform rather than a business tool 
or Twitter or Facebook as a place to chat about last night’s escapades with 
friends and families, rather than a customer support tool. Inadvertently, IT 
can stifle the business by refusing these requests without really understanding 
them (as explained by “Chief and Chuck” in Figure 5-3).

Chapter 5 | Pull and Push
100
IT should instead try to understand better the business needs that are driving 
the demands for new technologies. IT may see business users buying 
unauthorized devices; signing up for rogue cloud services; or wasting 
bandwidth on social media. Meanwhile, the business simply needs to deliver 
corporate content in real time in a casual setting; issue electronic contracts 
and accept electronic payments from on the road; or chat online with 
customers about new products and services and to resolve customer service 
issues.13 
Understanding these underlying business needs can give you insightful new 
ideas about how to solve business problems, sometimes how the business 
wanted but other times in completely different ways. For example, many 
organizations block Internet chat applications like Skype to prevent external 
chat sessions from leaking information against regulations or even laws. If the 
13  CA Technologies’ CHIEF & CHUCK is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. Based on a 2012 work at www.ca.com/cdit by Dave Blazek, 
retrieved August 2012.
Figure 5-3. Chief and Chuck explore consumer-driven IT.13 

101
The Innovative CIO
business wants to get an exception pushed through the firewall to allow Skype 
use internally, perhaps a similar internal application  would solve the problem 
without opening up compliance issues. Maybe certain tablet applications pose 
legitimate compliance risks but instead of rejecting the entire tablet, you can 
just block those applications—as IBM did with Apple’s iPhone helper app, 
Siri.14
With this approach, you do need to be careful to hold back on the technology 
details, lest you fall back into being a technology component provider rather 
than a business service broker, or a parts machine for the business innovators 
rather than a trusted technology advisor. IT all too often will talk to the 
business about IT capabilities, not business solutions—explaining how the 
watch works, rather than just telling the time. 
When IT leaders talk technology in too much depth, this effectively “trains” 
users to ask for clock parts, rather than asking for the time. They end up 
coming to you for servers, not services. In the process, they commoditize 
what you do, and draw far less value than you can provide. 
This is especially true when the business does not really know what IT can do. 
Indeed, business leaders may have a set (and profoundly misinformed) idea of 
what IT can and cannot do, so they may go ahead and source solutions 
themselves (i.e., cloud SaaS). They may think that this allows them to save 
money and get better service, but if they do not really know what capability 
IT already has, they cannot be sure of either. In fact, they are more likely than 
not to drastically underestimate what IT can do. 
However, if you look to provide solutions to the problem, rather than 
technology widgets and gizmos that someone can use to solve the problem, 
then the business is more likely to come to you for advice, and for service.
This third way puts to bed the notion of “business-IT alignment.” Indeed, the 
notions of IT pull vs. business push are really just a symptom of a lack of 
alignment. If both IT and business work together to drive and enable 
innovation, then the alignment is not only obvious, but becomes second 
nature.
Ultimately, pull and push should bring IT and business together, rather than 
allowing them to run separately. The combination of these two forces creates 
a shared experience that can make magic happen. It is not IT vs. business 
anymore, but rather the whole becomes more than the sum of its parts—the 
classic M&A objective where 1+1 = 3. 
14  Chloe Albanesius, “IBM Blocks Employee Access to Apple’s Siri,” PC Magazine, May 2012, 
www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2404786,00.asp, retrieved on May 2012.

c h a p t e r
6
Opportunities 
to Innovate 
Today
We have mentioned before that you do not need to invent new technology 
to innovate in your organization, industry, market, or geography. Innovators 
do not have to be inventors.
You may find many opportunities to innovate today by putting existing tech­
nology to use in new ways, whether universally new (something no one else 
is doing at all) or just new to you (something your organization has not done 
before). This approach to innovation can even be better, faster, and cheaper 
than new inventions, as you reduce the costs of R&D, failure, and invention 
while still providing new opportunities for your business. 
Finding these existing sources of innovation is not difficult. Scour the Web for 
ideas, check out what your competitors and partners are doing, discover 
what technologies you already have that others are exploiting in new and 
different ways, or ask your users and customers what experiences they have 
found and valued elsewhere. Perhaps more importantly, determine what your 
competitors and partners are not doing and what experiences your customers 
and users are not finding. 
An innovative CIO can help their business to drive value from any number of 
existing technologies. Our experience with innovative IT organizations shows 
they are exploiting a range of current and emerging technologies to­day, to 
drive business innovation. Technologies like virtualization, automa­tion, cloud 
computing, and data analytics are continually at the top of CIO priorities; 
while emerging areas like near field communications, personaliza­tion, the 
Internet of things, and gamification are just starting to revolutionize the 

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
104
business of technology. In the rest of this chapter, we will explore these 
technologies, explain how they are being used by innovative businesses to­day, 
and show how they can help you drive innovation for your business too.
Virtualization
Perhaps the most apparent application of old technology to new innovative 
use cases is virtualization. After all, virtualization is not new but harkens back 
to the mainframes of the 1960s. However, that does not mean virtual­ization 
cannot be innovative. With new use cases and technologies for x86 servers, 
storage networks, desktops, and applications, virtualization has gained new 
life for the modern CIO as an enabler of innovation.
Multiple definitions of virtualization can be found, but we like the definition 
first published in 2006 by one of our authors, which subsequently has been 
reused and republished very broadly:
Virtualization is . . . a technique for hiding the physical character­istics of 
computing resources from the way in which other systems, applications, or end 
users interact with those resources. 
This includes making a single physical resource (such as a server, an operating 
system, an application, or storage device) appear to function as multiple logical 
resources; or it can include making multiple physical resources (such as storage 
devices or servers) ap­pear as a single logical resource.1
However, agreeing on the definition is of secondary importance. The key is 
what virtualization can do for you, primarily by enabling fast, efficient, and 
detached use of compute resources to deliver business outcomes.
The most obvious outcome is consolidation—of servers, storage, data cen­
ters, and so on. Without doubt, consolidation is an attractive use case which 
deliver measurably significant benefits in hardware efficiency, but it is not 
highly innovative. Similarly, virtualization can help to reduce costs, by requiring 
fewer servers and administrators as well as less power and floor space. This 
is also very positive for the day-to-day operational and budget­ary impact of IT, 
but again not highly innovative. 
However, when virtualization is fully exploited as an enabler of automated, 
dynamic computing, the benefits shift from simple workload efficiency to 
business innovation.
1  Andi Mann, Virtualization 101: Technologies, Benefits, and Challenges (Enterprise Management 
Associates, August 2006).

105
The Innovative CIO
The innovational opportunity of virtualization is better understood when 
viewing the evolution of virtualization maturity from consolidation to the 
“cloud-like” state of dynamic IT, as seen in Figure 6-1.
Figure 6-1. The virtualization maturity curve has four phases: consolidation, optimization, 
automation, and dynamic IT. 
Across the four phases of virtualization maturity—consolidation, optimiza­
tion, automation, and dynamic IT—the derived value of virtualization in­
creases significantly and moves from IT-centric to business-centric. 
In early stages, the value of virtualization accrues mainly inside the data cen­
ter. Consolidation results in fewer servers and facilities, reducing hardware, 
software, power, and lease costs. Optimization brings incremental im­
provements to IT administrator efficiency by helping to lower resource costs. 
However, in both phases all the business sees is a lower number on the annual 
budget.
As virtualization matures, it starts to deliver higher values that accrue to the 
business. Automation of compute resources delivers greater agility so that IT 
can respond faster to business demands. The business then starts to see 
more rapid time-to-market for new products and services. 
Then dynamic computing raises the value again, as IT can support rapid and 
innovative approaches to opening new markets, leveraging new alliances, and 
adding new sales channels. The business then starts to see IT helping to 
deliver new revenue streams.

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
106
In addition, some of virtualization’s biggest contributions to innovation are 
not from consolidation and optimization, but from the rapid mobility of 
workloads and the acceleration of dev/test cycle times, allowing for rapid 
deployment of new business-focused capabilities with lower costs and mini­
mal user disruption. Moreover, as virtualization reduces the time and money 
devoted to keeping the lights on, you can spend that time and money on 
innovating and driving business value instead. 
You are almost definitely using virtualization in some way already, probably 
with server virtualization at least (some studies show over 90% adoption for 
this technology). To drive additional innovation, find ways to move up the 
maturity curve. Freeing up resources by gaining efficiency is good, but mov­ing 
up the value chain—from cutting data center costs to delivering new business 
revenue—is far better. 
Even if you have a fully matured server virtualization deployment, challenge 
yourself to leverage other virtualization technologies that you have not fully 
exploited, such as virtual desktops, application streaming, storage and net­
working virtualization, and grid or cluster technologies. Each brings unique 
opportunities to redefine how you view location, resources, ownership, 
scalability, mobility, and more. Go beyond simply freeing up your server farms 
and saving IT time and resources. Instead, focus on what you could do if you 
freed up end users from their physical locations with desktop virtual­ization, 
from their physical devices with application virtualization, or even from their 
applications with user virtualization. 
Virtualization means you can abstract these services from how they are de­
livered and used. By contrast with physical infrastructures, virtualization 
means you are no longer locked into a platform, architecture, location, or 
even a specific application in order to deliver a business service.
When fully exploited to support innovation, virtualization unlocks the power 
of mobile and agile individuals to rapidly iterate new ideas and apply them 
everywhere on demand.
Cloud Computing
Virtualization naturally leads us to cloud computing. While the two concepts 
are not identical, they may leverage each other, and virtualization definitely 
provides an evolutionary path to cloud computing. 
While many people may (legitimately) see cloud as any Internet-connected 
service, there is some consensus around this NIST definition of cloud 
computing:

107
The Innovative CIO
A model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a 
shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, 
storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released 
with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.2
The NIST definition goes on to define five essential characteristics:
• 
On-demand self-service
• 
Broad network access
• 
Resource pooling
• 
Rapid elasticity
• 
Measured service
 . . . three service models:
• 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
• 
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
• 
Software as a Service (SaaS)
. . . and four deployment models:
• 
Private cloud
• 
Community cloud
• 
Public cloud
• 
Hybrid cloud
That said, there is no need to be dogmatic—sometimes “almost cloud” is 
good enough. The key is to take the essential characteristics of cloud and 
apply some or all of them to your business-focused technology initiatives. 
When looking to drive innovation from cloud computing, it is important to 
understand the different levels of “cloud conversation.” For most traditional 
2  Peter Mell and Timothy Grance, The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing: Recommendations of 
the National Institute of Standards and Technologies (National Institute of Standards and 
Technologies, US Department of Commerce, September 2011), http://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf, retrieved on March 2012.

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
108
IT leaders, the conversation is mostly about “feeds and speeds,” focused on 
how to shave marginal costs (much like the early opportunities in virtualization). 
However, as with virtualization, there is a breakpoint between internally 
focused IT benefits and externally focused business benefits. Reducing ad­
ministrator ratios with cloud servers is important to the CIO—moving costs 
from CapEx to OpEx by leasing cloud infrastructure is important to the CFO. 
However, aspects of cloud like faster product delivery, global mo­bility, access 
to new customers, and instant response to market changes is important to 
the business as a whole. Virtualization can also free up time and resources to 
devote to other in-house innovation in order to drive competitive differ-
entiation.
Unfortunately not every IT leader can or will have this top-line discussion. 
Most traditional IT leaders are focused on the bottom-line cost benefit. But 
to be a truly innovative CIO, you must focus on cloud computing as an ena­
bler for other business-focused initiatives, rather than as an efficient end in 
itself.
Examples of successful cloud computing initiatives are everywhere. Several 
years ago, software and services provider CA Technologies implemented a 
new “Labs on Demand” capability to provide internal developers a private 
cloud to self-provision server platforms in order to create and test code for 
new products and releases. With automated server provisioning, system 
builds, and reservation processing, CA Technologies saved more than 33 years 
of developer time in FY10, which amounted to approximately $4 mil­lion 
worth of savings through improved productivity. The company also es­timated 
a further $12 million of savings over the course of just 2 years solely from real 
estate reduction of lab/data center space.3 
Cost savings were not the only—or even primary—benefit. Among the most 
important outcomes was the ability to get new product releases out the door 
faster and with higher quality, because this new cloud approach allowed much 
faster and more thorough development, testing, and quality assurance. The 
financial benefits were important, but cloud also set the stage for more critical 
business improvements.
The simplest way to adopt cloud computing is by using public SaaS for 
nondifferentiating services, such as backup and recovery, customer relation­
ship management (CRM), sales force automation (SFA), collabora­tion, ac­
3  CA Technologies, “CA Saves $16 Million and More Than 25 Years of Developers’ Time by 
Automating Provisioning for Labs on Demand Service,” 2010, www.ca.com/~/media/Files/
SuccessStories/ca-lod-tb-110510-wm_232246.pdf, retrieved on March 2012.

109
The Innovative CIO
counting, or web marketing. Any service that does not make you a better 
business is a signal opportunity to leverage cloud.
Consider adding or replacing services that your business needs but you do 
not or cannot do as well, as quickly, or as efficiently as an “on-demand” ser­
vice provider. Be honest with yourself and your teams, thoroughly examine 
your service portfolio, and identify ways to take on cloud. 
It is easy to cherry-pick this low-hanging fruit; it is harder to evaluate your 
entire portfolio for what should go to the cloud. Organizational tools and 
techniques such as portfolio management software or other published eval­
uation models (as shown in Figures 6-2 and 6-3) will help.
For example, in Figure 6-2, we can see a basic methodology for balancing the 
different capabilities and requirements of enterprise applications, taking into 
account the differences in differentiation and performance require­ments, and 
mapping each candidate to specific types of cloud environments. 
Figure 6-2. This figure depicts a generic portfolio evaluation methodology for cloud 
adop­tion with four types of environments. 
In Figure 6-3, we can see a different methodology (taken from the popular 
handbook, Visible Ops Private Cloud: From Virtualization to Private Cloud in 4 
Practical Steps) that is more prescriptive. This approach emphasizes balancing 
requirements like cost, agility, service quality, and environmental footprint to 

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
110
separate each different type of cloud or virtual environment, according to 
which has better relative characteristics for each workload.
Figure 6-3. The Visible Ops Private Cloud approach to portfolio evaluation stresses 
balanc­ing requirements like unit cost, agility, service quality, and footprint.4 
By using objective insight based on best practice tools and methodologies, 
most organizations will find opportunities to adopt better cloud options.4 
Another alternative is to use internal resource pools to deliver on-demand, 
scalable, elastic, and measured business services—also known as a “private 
cloud”—cheaper, faster, and better than available public offerings. Multiple 
studies by McKinsey, Forrester, 451 Group, and Gartner (to name a few) have 
found that over time the cost of a public cloud service often exceeds the cost 
for delivering the same service internally.
Start small to establish skills and encourage open minds with on-premise 
IaaS—a logical evolution of virtualization. Try to get to PaaS or SaaS quickly 
by standardizing and replicating “known good” platforms and services, pack­
aging them into reusable “virtual services” and making them accessible on-
demand. Again, start with low-hanging fruit before migrating mission-critical 
services, and make intentional decisions with an informed portfolio analysis.
While the benefits from these “cloud-migrant” services can be significant, 
cloud really comes into its own for new “cloud-native” services, where you 
can treat cloud as an opportunity to do new things in new ways.
Cloud enables you to develop and deliver new business capabilities that did 
not exist before—online services that are immensely scalable yet still inex­
pensive even at small scale, new social and mobile services available to any 
4  Andi Mann, Kurt Milne, and Jeanne Moraine, Visible Ops Private Cloud: From Virtualization to 
Private Cloud in 4 Practical Steps (IT Process Institute, 2010).

111
The Innovative CIO
consumer anywhere, and instant access to global markets for suppliers and 
customers. You can also incorporate third-party cloud services into your 
business services, which is a gateway to even more significant innovation 
because it creates the ability for your business to do new things in new ways 
that it simply could not do before. 
Most importantly, do not see cloud computing as an admission of failure. 
Business users often see cloud as the answer to IT leaders who cannot re­
spond to business demand. However, an innovative CIO can use cloud pro­
actively to respond positively to business demand. Leveraging available tech­
nologies to enable your business to try things it otherwise cannot—because 
of the cost, scale, time, or effort—is an opportunity, not a failure. By being 
critical and honest about where you should use cloud computing to replace 
or augment your internal technology services or to build and deliver new 
ones, you can be an authoritative technology expert and a trusted advisor to 
the business. 
Personalization
Most online systems and services can use a number of indicators to identify 
unique individuals to varying degrees of certainty. These indicators include 
explicit usernames or login details, IP addresses or address ranges, cookies 
set by previous visits, cookies set by third parties (e.g., via ad placement), 
specific logins, traceable URLs and URL referrals, or GPS and other location 
data.
Even anonymous users can be identified easily enough. Research conducted 
by the Electronic Frontier Foundation has shown that up to 84% of browser 
configurations are “unique and identifiable,” while browsers with Adobe Flash 
or Java plug-ins raised this percentage to 94% that are “unique and trackable.”5 
In a TED speech in 2011, Eli Pariser (senior fellow at the Roosevelt Institute 
and author of the book The Filter Bubble) noted that Google looks at “57 
signals . . . everything from what kind of computer you are on, what kind of 
browser you are using, to where you are located, that it uses to personally 
tailor your query results.”6
With this capability comes the ability to provide a specific and personal ser­
vice to each visitor. This can be as simple as welcoming web site visitors from 
Twitter or Facebook by suggesting they follow your corporate Twitter handle 
5  Electronic Frontier Foundation, “Web Browsers Leave ‘Fingerprints’ Behind As You Surf the 
Net,” May 2010, www.eff.org/press/archives/2010/05/13, retrieved on March 2012.
6  TED Conferences, “Eli Pariser: Beware Online ‘Filter Bubbles’,” 2011, www.ted.com/
talks/lang/en/eli_pariser_beware_online_filter_bubbles.html, retrieved on March 2012.

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
112
or like your Facebook page. It can also be much more complex, such as 
recommending or even discounting specific items a visitor to your web store 
may have looked at previously but not purchased.
We see the effects of personalization in action every day. Google serves 
advertising tailored to each visitor’s interests, based on login details or the 57 
“signals” mentioned earlier. Amazon welcomes return visitors by name, 
recommending items based on previous purchases. News sites identify a 
visitor’s location based on geo-IP location services to promote local news and 
advertise local services. 
Personalization provides opportunities to drive business value with innova­tive 
improvements to your online services, such as the following:
• 
Provide special offers to promote higher spend, conver­sion, 
and attachment.
• 
Provide discounted registration fees to return visitors to 
capture loyalty.
• 
Customize content to increase appeal for different 
demographics.
• 
Emphasize specific links or actions that are relevant to each 
visitor.
• 
Display ads or articles with higher click-through rates for 
similar visitors.
• 
Change navigation options to promote certain actions for 
specific visitors.
• 
Promote specific partners to people in markets and geog­
raphies you do not operate.
• 
Promote a local store or branch based on geographic location.
• 
Correlate location with local demographic data to tar­get 
promotions.
Be aware though that personalization also raises significant privacy and 
compliance issues. For example, some regulations prohibit the use of per­
sonal content information for anything other than the specific purpose it was 
provided. For example, you can send newsletters to customers by e-mail if 
they subscribed to it, but you cannot use their e-mail addresses for direct 
marketing. In some circumstances, it may even be illegal to use cer­tain 
information (sex, race, religion, etc.) in a discriminatory way, even if it provides 
an arguably better service. Even absent regulation, be careful not to overreach 

113
The Innovative CIO
into someone’s personal information. Your personalized ser­vice may appear 
to be more “creepy” than “helpful”!
Automation
Automation is barely a new invention—to some degree it has been around 
since computing has been mainstream—but it can still help you innovate in 
your business. Being able to make simple tasks or complex processes hap­pen 
independently of any human activity or intervention helps in numerous ways:
• 
Drives down the cost of IT by reducing the costs of la­bor, 
training, licenses, hardware, downtime, recovery, and more.
• 
Reduces human errors by ensuring “known good” pro­cesses 
are followed every time, even for the most com­plex activities.
• 
Improves security by creating functional isolation be­tween IT 
staff and their activity.
• 
Improves audit control by tracking activity from end-to-end 
of any automated process.
• 
Accelerates service delivery by performing activity at 
computer speed, not human speed, and eliminating human 
stoppages.
• 
Improves service delivery by detecting, triaging, and fix­ing 
service problems and faults faster and more effectively.
• 
Attracts and retains quality staff by ensuring activities use 
valuable talents and skills, rather than being mun­dane and 
unsatisfying.
Automation also frees up the “innovation surplus,” releasing time and re­
sources for new development rather than wasting them on repeatable pro­
cesses. It also allows fast, cost-effective dev/test cycles so developers can try 
new ideas, fail fast where they need to, and deploy good services to market 
faster. 
Starting a new automation program is reasonably simple. Any repetitive task 
that your staff performs regularly is a strong candidate for automation. If your 
people are manually running batch jobs, managing backups, creating reports, 
e-mailing status updates, reviewing log files for exceptions, logging errors, 
performing data extract/transform/load operations, fixing recurring errors, 
allocating licenses, building servers (or virtual machines), installing software, 

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
114
onboarding and offboarding staff, reconciling data, or any number of other 
tasks—you could (or should) be automating. 
Look at your staff’s manual activities and figure out if they can be standard­ized 
and made repeatable. This is your starting point for automation. You may 
already have these manual activities and procedures documented in existing 
run books. 
By automating just a single operational task, you can deliver measurable 
benefits. By stringing tasks together, you can automate entire processes. By 
stringing processes together and connecting software components, you can 
orchestrate entire services. And at every extension, you will exponentially 
expand the benefits of automation.
Despite the clear benefits, a new automation program is not necessarily 
without input costs. You may need to purchase additional software, pay for 
training, and engage some process re-engineering, for example. However, you 
can achieve some of these results even with built-in system tools, such as 
Windows Task Scheduler, UNIX/Linux “cron” jobs, or DOS “AT.”
E-commerce
Electronic commerce a.k.a. e-commerce is again not new—organizations have 
long been using online web environments to drive and process com­mercial 
transactions. Nevertheless, from the billions in revenue for sites such as 
Amazon or eBay to the incremental revenues from online table bookings for 
a local restaurant, Internet-based transactions (or increasing existing 
capabilities) drive revenue, productivity, customer loyalty, cost re­duction, 
staffing efficiency, market reach, and much more.
Setting up a web portal for customers to peruse your catalog and purchase 
goods and services is simple. Several software providers offer out-of-the-box 
e-commerce capabilities, including open source systems like Magento or 
PrestaShop or large enterprise software from powerhouses like Oracle, IBM, 
or SAP. You can even start immediately with small-scale trials leverag­ing 
existing third-party e-commerce sites like Amazon and eBay.
If you are already leveraging e-commerce, consider how you can extend the 
benefit beyond Internet sales. For example, you could use sales information 
to feed more granular and effective marketing or improve inventory and stock 
control. You could expand operations into new markets, new geogra­phies, 
and new products, replacing or augmenting traditional storefront re­design, 
branch office expansion, and new product development.

115
The Innovative CIO
Review your competitors’ e-commerce activities and see what they are do­ing, 
how you can replicate, and even more how you can improve on their online 
experience. Research adjacent markets and see what e-commerce innovations 
they are trying and determine if you can benefit from similar approaches. 
Consider mainstream and edge cases—from your industry and others—to 
determine what is at the leading edge and what can help you drive new 
innovation from existing concepts. Whether simply starting to offer products 
and services through an eBay store or building your own portal, e-commerce 
offers a huge innovation opportunity.
Big Data and Analytics
The ability to take massive data sets—larger than traditional content and data 
management systems (e.g., databases) can manage—and analyze that data for 
patterns, correlations, and other useful insights is creating a sea change in 
how businesses use information technology. 
For example, by analyzing and correlating records for stock control, inven­
tory, purchasing, customer demographics, shelf space, aisle traffic, and staff 
levels, a retail organization could better understand inventory requirements 
to reduce stock-on-hand, rearrange products on shelves and in aisles to 
promote and sell more higher-margin items, and manage the location of ad­
jacent goods to improve attachment rates. 
Walmart is an impressive real-world example of turning big data and analyt­ics 
into real business value. The retail giant’s attention to detail of shelf and 
stockroom inventory, restocking times and processes, supplier transporta­tion 
and logistics, and more “big data” have allowed it to squeeze immense value 
out of its supply chain and drive competitive advantage. Web sites like Google, 
Facebook, eBay, and Amazon also track hundreds of millions of data items 
every day—page clicks, product purchases (and rejections), search terms, 
books read, page times, bids made, and much more—in order to an­alyze 
behaviors and preferences and better target advertising and other sales and 
marketing activity.
Big data and analytics may be difficult to start immediately, as they do re­quire 
specialized resources. From new equipment (especially high-volume, direct-
access storage) to unique new skills (analytics engineers, statistical scientists), 
big data analysis is a new capability you may not be prepared for. 
However, you can start relatively small and/or use data you already possess in 
new ways. Consider these examples:

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
116
• 
Connecting client data, demographics, transaction histo­ries, 
problem histories, and other service and product information 
can provide insight into triggers and pat­terns for service 
requests or product purchases to in­form sales, marketing, 
and service provisioning.
• 
Connecting inventory, production, facilities, staff levels, 
product movement, and energy costs can help deter­mine 
better, faster, and cheaper ways of running a fac­tory floor.
• 
Connecting 
information 
about 
patients, 
symptoms, 
equipment, consumables, and staffing can help bring down 
treatment costs, form better responses to partic­ular 
conditions, or better predict, prepare for, manage, or 
eliminate infections, transmissions, and outbreaks. 
• 
Collecting and analyzing social media and networking data 
like Twitter or Facebook comments and correlat­ing with 
customer, product, and demographic infor­mation can 
encourage deeper understanding and better reactions to 
customer service issues, demand fluctua­tion, or competitive 
campaigns.
• 
Even inside the data center, analyzing and correlating data 
about service requests, provisioning requests, staffing levels, 
and response times can improve the speed, cost, and security 
of delivering IT services. 
One word of warning: be careful about what you learn from this new aspect 
of data analytics. Any business from travel to retail to medical and more could 
potentially run into significant privacy issues once data is correlated and used 
for sales and marketing activity.
For example, retail giant Target analyzed purchase data and found a correla­
tion between a certain combination of products and pregnant customers. 
This analysis allowed them to target direct mailings to customers whom the 
company believed were pregnant with relevant maternity products. How­ever, 
Target did not anticipate that these mailers might reveal private per­sonal 
information to others who had no previous knowledge of the preg­nancy, such 
as cohabitants or, as happened in one case, to a teenage girl’s father.7
Similar privacy issues may occur in many different industries. For example, a 
hotel chain, travel agency, credit card bureau, jeweler, etc. can probably de­
7  Kashmir Hill, “How Target Figured Out a Teen Girl Was Pregnant Before Her Father Did,” 
Forbes, February 2012, www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2012/02/16/how-target-figured-out-
a-teen-girl-was-pregnant-before-her-father-did/, retrieved on March 2012.

117
The Innovative CIO
termine through large data set analysis whether customers are cheating on 
their spouses. An insurance company, health care provider, or pharmacy can 
probably determine if someone has a specific condition based on an analysis 
of symptoms, visits, medications, demographics, etc. An e-commerce web 
site can potentially analyze purchase histories and reveal personal interests, 
hobbies, “surprise” gifts, and more. Big data analyses can expose customer 
secrets, and using that data can damage your brand, cost revenue, and even 
lead to fines and other punishments for privacy or discrimination breaches.
Remember that just because you can correlate large volumes of data to de­
termine certain information, does not necessarily mean you should correlate 
that data or use the resultant information. 
“The Internet of Things”
The “Internet of Things” is a phrase coined by Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology technologist Kevin Ashton in 1999 to talk about what would be 
possible if every and any device in the world was connected to the Internet. 
In execution, this concept opens up a massive range of opportunities. Imag­ine 
what could be possible in your business if you could actively communi­cate 
with every patient monitor in a hospital, every heat exchanger in a fac­tory, 
every Point of Sale (POS) terminal in a shopping mall, all via the Internet. 
Many of the devices in your organization may be providing or generating 
useful data already—if only you could access it. Figuring out how to access 
that data via physical or wireless connection could create new insight into 
your business and enable a wealth of innovation.
For example, researchers at the US National Center for Atmospheric 
Research are experimenting with data from automobiles including onboard 
sensor and computer data (temperature, speed, RPM, distance, time, etc.), 
headlight state, windscreen wiper activation, and antilock brake engagement. 
This data allows them to infer real-time information about the environment, 
weather, road conditions, hazards, traffic levels, and more.8 
Similarly, a national railroad operator connects sensors on its tracks, sta­tions, 
crossings, switches, and gates over a private IP network. By analyzing data 
from these devices, the operator can optimize operations to increase the rate 
and speed of railway car movements. With such a complex net­work, where 
8  Laura Snider, “NCAR Scientists Work to Glean Weather Data from Cars: Project Aims to 
Make Roads Safer,” Boulder Daily Camera, 2011, www.dailycamera.com/boulder-county-news/
ci_19413818, retrieved on March 2012. 

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
118
rolling stock is making money and anything sitting still is losing it, even a one-
minute improvement can turn cost into profit.
Insurance companies use telemetry devices in your car to detect and attract 
good drivers and reduce their risk. Logistics companies use GPS and loca­tion 
data to improve their fleet and dispatch operations. Cell phone opera­tors use 
tower locations to triangulate location even without GPS data.
Leveraging the “Internet of Your Things” may be easier than you think. Many 
items in your organization may already be connectable, such as physical ac­cess 
systems, environmental controls, inventory systems, sales terminals, in-vehicle 
GPS, cash drawers, factory equipment, patient monitors, staff IDs, and cell 
phones. Others may be relatively easy to connect to the Internet, even as 
simple as just adding a radio-frequency identification (RFID) tag. 
Find those devices that can be Internet-enabled, understand what type of data 
those devices might be able to produce and communicate, and deter­mine 
what could be inferred if you could correlate that data. Perhaps you can 
reduce the cost of transport, increase sales opportunities, reduce spare 
inventories, provide faster patient care, improve attach rates, or increase 
production speed.
Gamification
Broadly speaking, gamification is the application of gaming principles to stim­
ulate competition and engagement in a way that drives business outcomes. 
The idea is to promote desired business interactions by making them fun and 
accessible by turning them into games and competitions.
The goal is to make interactions faster, more frequent, more “sticky,” so you 
attract and retain more customers, increase satisfaction, create evange­lists, 
promote purchases, and drive revenue. It helps customers (and staff) to enjoy 
doing business and even encourages them to promote you to their friends. 
Gamification has been a staple in print and other traditional media for many 
years, with games like crosswords and “fill-in-the-blanks” competitions being 
used to attract newspaper readers since at least the 19th century. How­ever, 
the current wave is very different, as technology now enables much different 
interactions that are instant, global, online, and social. For example, your 
customers can now play online games that lead directly to a purchase on your 
website, something that is impossible with an old-school mail-in requiring 
customers to “fill in the blanks” to enter a competition.
FourSquare is an incredibly popular modern example of innovating with 
gamification. By encouraging people to compete with each other for most 

119
The Innovative CIO
visits to a location, this company offers customers prizes (even if they are just 
virtual pins, badges, points, or levels), discounts, special offers, and ex­clusive 
services and products. Becoming the “mayor” of a diner may give you a 
permanent 10% discount or a 2-for-1 bonus on meals, getting the first check-
in at a new retailer may let you buy select merchandise, and a desig­nated 
number of visits may qualify you for a loyalty club card with exclusive benefits.9
Similarly, Vail Resorts’ “EpicMix” is providing customers with an engaging and 
competitive game where visitors compete with themselves and each other to 
earn badges (and bragging rights!) for more vertical feet, combina­tions of lifts, 
sequences of runs, multiple resort visits, and more. This im­plementation of 
gamification encourages customers to return more often, purchase more 
products and services, and tell their social networks about their great 
experiences at the Vail Resorts ski fields.10
You probably already have some gamification in your own business, perhaps in 
your own department. Competitions among staff for sales results, im­
provement suggestions, customer satisfaction, turnaround on complaints, 
finishing projects ahead of target, etc. are all types of gamification, whether 
based in technology or otherwise. 
As a CIO, you can start by bringing a technology footing to those competi­
tions to establish the capability, experience, and acceptance of a gamification 
approach to more activities, both internal and external. Track sales compe­
titions online and globally by automating and connecting sales results with 
sales competitions on an intranet web site. Gamify your own innovation by 
mounting an online “suggestion board” and crowdsource the best ideas. 
Within IT, you can track support calls, closed tickets, customer satisfaction, 
and other metrics and offer prizes for higher achievements.
When it comes to gamification externally (with customers, partners, etc.), 
how you proceed will depend on your key goals. You may want to increase 
engagement, drive direct sales, improve customer satisfaction, drive com­
petitive advantage, or turn customers into evangelists. Different goals will 
drive different approaches and different games.
Offer something of value for winning or even just playing. Even virtual prizes 
(online pins, badges, or points) can be successful in promoting your objec­
tives. It can be surprising what people will say or do for you, even for an icon 
or sticker! Consider how participants track their progress, and perhaps 
compare their progress to others, whether in their own network or glob­ally, 
to increase competition and engagement. Plan a full and ongoing experi­ence 
9  For more information, see http://foursquare.com. 
10  For more information, see www.epicmix.com. 

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
120
with clear objectives linked to specific goals for both competitors and your 
business. Include social components like the ability to brag on Face­book to 
help competitors promote the game and/or your brand to their networks. 
Add mobile support to connect with your gamers wherever they are, and use 
location and personal information to connect to local stores, branches, and 
locations.
Again, be mindful of privacy issues. Make sure to protect critical data and 
tightly control access especially to personally identifiable information. 
Near Field Communications
Near Field Communications (NFC) refers to the ability of mobile devices to 
communicate with each other (and with static devices) simply by being near 
to them—typically no further than a few centimeters.
There are many different standards for NFC, but most applications utilize 
RFID standards. Bar codes, QR codes, Bluetooth, and even WiFi can pro­vide 
similar capabilities, but unlike these technologies NFC does not need pairing 
or an explicit connection or scanning process—data exchange is ini­tiated 
simply by proximity—and can involve a two-way data transfer. This makes 
NFC less complex to use, more interactive, and especially practical for casual 
use cases.
NFC enables an easy and automatic way to track movement of devices, in­
ventory, people, and more. For example, you can track inventory through a 
production line, track shopping carts through a supermarket, or track the 
movement of corporate assets into and out of a secure building.
It also allows more complex two-way interactions, such as triggering a digi­tal 
interactive display (e.g., on a billboard, tablet, kiosk), initiating a data ex­change 
(e.g., swap contact information, copy a file, deliver a coupon), or es­tablishing 
a secure connection (e.g., WiFi login or Bluetooth pairing).
Perhaps most interesting, NFC allows a smartphone to act as a so-called 
“digital wallet,” making real-time payments at the POS as simple as waving the 
phone past a contactless reader. This new payment method has the po­tential 
to rival or even overtake credit cards for payment processing.
For example, the Museum of London uses NFC to deliver vouchers for their 
shop and cafés, information about exhibits, downloadable music, and offers to 
join the Museum’s Friends program. For them, it provides addi­tional 

121
The Innovative CIO
“stickiness” to a customer visit and drives additional contact and rev­enue 
opportunities, while promoting repeat engagements.11
In Sydney, Australia, radio station Nova teamed with JCDecaux to use NFC 
for outdoor marketing, allowing casual consumers with NFC-capable de­vices 
to start listening to the station by touching their phones to advertise­ments 
mounted on bus stops, train stations, etc.12 
Start adopting practices and processes to exploit NFC by initially leveraging 
existing RFID tags on plant, equipment, inventory, access cards, etc. Con­sider 
what (or who) moves within your organization that requires tracking. How 
can you track them, and what information will that give you? How could this 
knowledge and insight improve speed, efficiency, or security?
Also research how you might benefit from exchanging data with customers, 
whether casually in a neutral location (shopping mall, information kiosk, or 
billboard) or in a more controlled environment (POS, waiting room, or front 
desk). This exchange can include sending promotions to customers such as 
advertisements or coupons to providing static information such as brochures 
or web links. 
Combined with other technologies such as mobile, social, gamification, or 
geolocation, you can connect your customers with each other to establish 
communities, run games, promote evangelists, and drive brand loyalty. You 
can also use NFC to establish secure connections with customers in order to 
transfer, update, or report customer or account information.
Implementing a mobile payment capability is another option, but be aware of 
how many of your customers have NFC-enabled devices. This may well be a 
gating factor for widespread digital wallet use cases in the short term. 
NFC has numerous use cases with staff, suppliers, agents, and other busi­ness 
partners too. Unlike Business-to-Consumer (B2C) applications, you can know 
(and even control) which users have compatible devices. Use cases include, 
for example, checking suppliers’ payment credentials before ex­changing order 
details, checking customer details and exchanging product information with 
sales agents, connecting with inventory systems to access up-to-date stock 
reports, or exchanging client, production, system, or pa­tient status updates 
during a roster handover.
11  Museum of London, “NFC at the Museum of London,” 2012, www.museumoflondon.org.
uk/Explore-online/mobile-apps/NFC.htm, retrieved on March 2012.
12  Chris Griffith, “Touch-Screen Bus-Stop Ads,” The Australian, September 2011, www.
dailytelegraph.com.au/touch-screen-ads-to-enliven-a-bus-stop-wait/story-
fn6b3v4f-1226141410370, retrieved on March 2012.

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
122
NFC can also take the place of fobs and ID cards for security—both physical 
and network—and in many cases are compatible with existing systems.
One key limitation of NFC is the need to accommodate your user (and cus­
tomer) base. While support is broad—including MasterCard, Visa, Sony, 
Microsoft, Nokia, Samsung, Intel, NTT Docomo, and Broadcom—NFC-
capable smartphones are not common. You should also be aware of poten­tial 
and perceived privacy issues. Smartphones are the repository of much 
personal information, so be cautious when working with customer smartphone 
information.
Agile Development	
Agile development is an approach to software engineering that promotes a 
rapid, iterative, and collaborative development process. As much a philoso­phy 
as a methodology, The Agile Manifesto outlines the core values of agile 
development as follows13:
Manifesto for Agile Software Development
We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping 
others do it.
Through this work we have come to value:
Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
Working software over comprehensive documentation
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
Responding to change over following a plan
That is, while there is value in the items on the right, we value the items on the 
left more.
The aim of agile development is to develop fewer, smaller, and lighter capa­
bilities, but do this more often—as opposed to traditional methods that de­
liver more capabilities but over longer release schedules. This contrasts with 
traditional methods (e.g., waterfall) that tend to follow slow, linear, and 
segmented processes, as illustrated in Figure 6-4.
13  Kent Beck et al, Manifesto for Agile Software Development, http://agilemanifesto.org/, 
retrieved on March 2012.

123
The Innovative CIO
Through iterative development, features can be tested more easily, delivery 
times radically reduced, and feedback acted on much faster. While agile de­
velopment is much more complex in practice—and as much a cultural 
transformation as a coding project management methodology—it is one way 
to deliver better service features, faster and more frequently.
Key to this outcome is agile development’s flexible approach to feature pri­
oritization during development. Customer or business requests can be de­
livered much sooner, as the development cycles iterates much faster. Agile 
development brings you closer to your customers, to their needs, to their 
demands, and to their feedback.
Agile development also helps to innovate faster. You can create new code, see 
if it works, fix any problems, evaluate success, and recycle. You can try out 
many small innovations, easier and faster. These smaller innovations can add 
up to some big innovation too, as we discussed in Chapter 2.
For example, you can use agile development to implement more effective A-B 
testing on web applications, to maintain better utilization of creative team 
resources, or to drive continuous enhancements into existing services. 
Freeing up your people from the typical 6–12 month (or more) software 
Figure 6-4. The top of the figure shows the iterative cycle of agile development. The 
bot­tom shows the linear cycle of waterfall development.

Chapter 6 | Opportunities to Innovate Today
124
development life cycle also means you can adapt more rapidly to changing 
circumstances, be more reactive to innovative ideas, and react faster to 
changing market needs, demands, and business pressures.
Because the development phase is rarely in the public eye, it is hard to see the 
impact of agile development. However, some companies promote agile as a 
differentiator.
UK telecom giant BT, for example, introduced an agile development meth­
odology in 2005. As a result, the company reduced development work in 
some cases from over 2 years down to 90-day and even 30-day delivery cy­
cles. They also used agile to encourage programmers to close the gap with 
their end users, and the gap between requirements-gathering and product 
delivery. With agile development, BT was not only able to deliver new ca­
pabilities faster, including new mobile support, but to improve end-user sat­
isfaction and change perception of development from a cost center to a 
revenue generator.14
Other organizations have been able to reduce their feature delivery times 
even more radically. US-based hosted service and cloud provider Rackspace, 
for example, set its full release cycle to just one week.15
In order to get started, look for new, manageable development projects 
where fast delivery of a limited feature set will be advantageous to your 
business goals. This is not always the case—such as with the launch of a large 
“big bang” product—but in many cases innovation is more successful when 
you focus on providing new capabilities quickly, rather than completely.
Of course, it will be important to provide your developers the correct training 
up front—and perhaps to hire new ones. Agile requires a significantly different 
project approach, with significantly different skills throughout the software 
engineering team. Do not underestimate the cultural change that agile entails 
either. 
Conclusion
These opportunities to innovate with current technology are far from ex­
haustive. Indeed, this topic alone could cover an entire book! However, in this 
14  Thomas Hoffman, “BT: A Case Study in Agile Programming,” InfoWorld, 2008, www.
infoworld.com/d/developer-world/bt-case-study-in-agile-programming-112, retrieved on 
March 2012.
15  Jack Vaughn, “Case Study: Agile Development Moves at Rackspace,” TechTarget, 2008, 
http://searchsoftwarequality.techtarget.com/news/1297491/Case-study-Agile-development-
moves-at-Rackspace, retrieved on March 2012.

125
The Innovative CIO
chapter, we hope that we have provided at least some food for thought, 
whether it is in areas you can improve on your existing technology use to 
enable further innovation, or where you can take the initiative to innovate 
today by adopting existing technologies and approaches.
One point to remember—if you combine these technologies in new ways, 
then you can enable brand-new innovations and really start to differentiate 
your business and boost your own strategic value and that of your depart­
ment. For example, even if you are already using social media, consider how 
much more valuable those efforts could be if you combine them with cloud 
or gamification. If you are already using virtualization, imagine how much more 
effective that could be when combined with automation and cloud. If you are 
already using big data, examine how you can add value by combining it with 
gamification and e-commerce.
With so many opportunities and so many combinations, even these few ex­
amples ensure that you have a wealth of opportunities to innovate today. 
When you add these to other old technologies in your organization—and in 
the next chapter we will discuss even more new opportunities—then look at 
how they can be combined to deliver innovation: the sky’s the limit.
Remember, you do not have to be an inventor to be an innovator. You just 
need to do new things in new ways, even if that is simply reusing existing 
technologies.

c h a p t e r
7
Innovating with 
Consumer-
Driven IT
Consumerization of IT is about the growing trend for consumers to adopt 
technologies well before the companies they work for, and subsequently to 
bring them to work. Typically, this refers to the increasing use of personal 
devices at work, such as smartphones and tablets (commonly referred to as 
“bring your own device” or BYOD), and the use of cloud and social services 
(Gmail, Dropbox, etc.) by employees at work. 
Consumer-driven IT is an extension of the consumerization of IT to 
institutionalize usage of new (formerly designated “consumer”) technologies 
by the business itself, not just individually by its employees. More than just a 
passive acceptance of workers choosing, buying, using, and bringing their own 
devices and services, consumer-driven IT is where the IT department is 
compelled to become active in choosing, buying, using, and supporting new 
consumer-style approaches. 
In the rest of this chapter, we will examine the opportunities for innovation 
that are created by consumer-driven IT.
Understanding Consumer-Driven IT?
Driven by the growing demands of increasingly tech-savvy customers and 
staff, consumer-driven IT incorporates social, mobile, BYOD, cloud, and other 
consumer-oriented technologies. As the CIO, your customers (internal and 

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
128
external) are no longer just “IT users”—working with whatever IT supplies or 
allows. They are “IT consumers”—mobile, aware, enabled, and demanding. 
Some key changes between these states are illustrated in Figure 7-1.
Figure 7-1. IT users have matured to become IT consumers.
These changes present a fundamentally new opportunity for innovation, and 
a critical one in the life of the CIO. 
Consider the rise of consumerization of IT and the technology that encouraged 
it, including cell phones, Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), smartphones, 
cloud services, and tablets. During this consumerization era, many (if not 
most) traditional CIOs were at best absent from, and at worst actively 
resistant to, this change. In this new era of innovation, CIOs need to do more 
than accepting or enabling consumerization—they need to be driving it, 
suggesting it to the business, and showing ways to adopt these technologies 
institutionally to drive new opportunities and new business-focused technology 
initiatives. 
You can immediately look for opportunities to adopt and encourage new 
consumer technologies institutionally, such as these examples:
• 
Would your sales force benefit from having lightweight and 
easily accessible technology to deliver presentations to 
clients, find and transfer inventory, and allocate production to 
new customers? Perhaps you can officially adopt tablet 
devices and develop custom applications that deliver what 
your sales teams need in a compact, instantly accessible app. 

129
The Innovative CIO
• 
Would you be able to attract new customers and maintain 
higher loyalty from existing ones if your staff could 
communicate with customers instantly and not only acquire 
but spread positive endorsements and references? Perhaps 
you can develop new social media programs that take 
advantage of popular social networking platforms.
• 
Would your product designers and engineers be able to bring 
new products to market faster if they could collaborate 
simultaneously across multiple labs and multiple regions to 
model, simulate, and test new ideas together? Perhaps you 
can leverage global cloud services to create an internal 
collaboration platform based on wikis, instant messaging, 
blogs, and shared capabilities to bring these groups together 
more efficiently.
The possibilities are, almost literally, endless. In the rest of this chapter, we 
will consider some more opportunities to bring innovation to your business 
through the adoption of consumer-driven technologies.
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
BYOD is the practice of end users using their own personal computing devices 
for work. You may also see it referred to with many variations, including 
“Bring Your Own PC” (BYOPC), “Bring Your Own Computer” (BYOC), or—
somewhat pejoratively—“Bring Your Own Toys” (BYOT). These devices can 
include smartphones, PDAs, laptops, personal computers, tablets, and other 
consumer technology devices—even personal desktops at home. BYOD is 
driven by and is a subset of the consumerization of IT.
BYOD is an important evolution of the IT device cycle. Since the widespread 
adoption of computers in the 1960s, IT has undergone a series of iterative 
epicycles in response to ongoing demands from end users for greater 
ownership (both figuratively and literally) and control of their computing 
experience. From mainframe to distributed, from distributed to desktop, 
from desktop to smartphone and tablet, each iteration has added to the 
previous one. 
The adoption of distributed systems was driven by a reaction against the rigid 
controls, high cost, and difficult access to centralized mainframe systems. The 
adoption of desktop and personal computing was a similar reaction against 
the costs, unfriendliness, and inflexibility of the (by then) IT-owned distributed 
systems. Similarly, BYOD is a reaction against the rigidity, slow innovation, and 

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
130
lack of corporate options for users in an age of increasing penetration of 
portable computing devices. 
Each reiteration of this cycle has freed up end users from the constrictions of 
the IT department as it existed at those times, and allowed users to boost 
their productivity, explore new opportunities, and drive fundamental change. 
The evolution to BYOD is just the latest iteration of this phenomenon. 
These evolutions do not happen because users want to buy, own, and manage 
their own technology per se. They happen because users want freedom and 
choice in how and when they acquire and use new technology, even if it is not 
blessed by the IT department. Therefore, support for BYOD can free up your 
people to be faster and more productive. It also gives them the confidence, 
budget, permission, capability, understanding, and engagement to try out new 
capabilities and services.
When staff are not limited by IT standards, they are free to experiment with 
smartphone and tablet applications only available on otherwise nonstandard 
environments (e.g. OS X, iOS, Android, Linux). Being outside the firewall and 
away from administrator and policy restrictions, they are also released to use 
cloud applications and overcome the constraints of policy. Because they are 
no longer prevented from buying what they want, staff are also able to 
experiment with new routes to productivity without having to clear them 
first with finance, procurement, contracts, legal, and, of course, IT.
This freedom from IT control is potentially both good and bad, but it is also 
inevitable. Users will use their own devices—and arguably always have—so 
your choice is how to enable, guide, and benefit from this new iteration of the 
IT device cycle, not how or whether to shut it down. If innovation is about 
saying “yes” to good new ideas, then you need to be the department of “yes,” 
not the department of “no.” Embrace BYOD, while still maintaining essential 
security, control, and audit. Manage the risk that comes with these new 
business opportunities; do not simply try to ignore or reject it. 
By embracing BYOD, you may be able to reduce costs, but don’t count on it. 
Hardware and software acquisition is unlikely to be cheaper. Individuals have 
no economies of scale or buying power to drive down device prices. 
Centralized system costs may increase too if you need to provide additional 
capabilities for remote access, virtual desktop infrastructure, streaming 
applications, or application (re)development. Ongoing OpEx can be lower, 
depending on how you structure your support policies, but it can also rise 
due to the need to increase skills and resources to support a new diversity of 
enterprise devices. Be aware that cost reduction is not always a key driver for 
BYOD programs.

131
The Innovative CIO
However, BYOD does come with many other benefits. While not definitive, 
there is a growing body of research1 that suggests the freedom to choose 
their own devices is an important factor in attracting and retaining skilled 
workers. Research has even found that up to 45% of employees, and 40% of 
college students, would rather accept a lower paying job with a choice of 
device than a higher paying job with less flexibility.2 
Similarly, research shows that BYOD is especially appealing to a coveted pool 
of skilled, college-educated younger workers.3 This includes so-called 
“millennials” (a.k.a. “Generation Y,” “Generation Next,” the “Net Generation,” 
or “Echo Boomers”) who entered the workforce around the new millennium, 
and other so-called “digital natives” who have grown up using (and choosing) 
these personal technologies. These younger workers contrast to earlier 
generations (including their parents) who typically had their desktops, laptops, 
PDAs, and smartphones assigned to them by their employers.
This freedom to use your own device also enables highly effective, distributed, 
and low-cost business continuity, because it enables individuals to work from 
home or from other remote locations on their own devices in case of 
emergency or disaster. Moreover, BYOD supports yet another unavoidable 
and related trend, the rapid adoption of telecommuting, which is forecast to 
nearly double, reaching as much as 43% of US workers, by 2016.4 
BYOD also allows the business to rapidly change the makeup of its workforce—
from rapidly onboarding new, temp, casual or permanent staff to sourcing 
staff from global resource pools or to rapidly expanding resources on demand. 
As long as they bring their own devices, employees can work anytime, 
anywhere.
Embracing BYOD can be passive or active. Passive support is to include 
nonstandard (i.e., noncorporate) devices in your IT policy—making sure 
applications, VPNs, provisioning tools, remote desktops, security systems, 
1 Three examples: a) Cisco, “Cisco Connected World Technology Report 2011,” www.cisco.
com/en/US/netsol/ns1120/index.html, retrieved on September 2012; b) pwc, “Millennials at 
Work: Reshaping the Workplace,” 2011, www.pwc.com/gx/en/managing-tomorrows-people/
future-of-work, retrieved on September 2012; c) Accenture, “Global Research on Millennials’ 
Use of Technology,” 2010, www.accenture.com/us-en/Pages/insight-millennials-jumping-
boundaries-corporate-it-summary.aspx, retrieved on September 2012.
2 Fiona Graham, “BYOD: Bring Your Own Device Could Spell End for Work PC,” BBC, 
February 2012, www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-17017570, retrieved on March 2012.
3 Ibid.
4 Ted Schadler, “Telecommuting Will Rise to Include 43% of US Workers by 2016,” ZDNet, 
March 2009, www.zdnet.com/blog/forrester/telecommuting-will-rise-to-include-43-of-us-
workers-by-2016/165, retrieved on September 2012.

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
132
and other IT capabilities support these devices. Active support goes further, 
such as providing reimbursement or a stipend for device purchases or setting 
up specific systems for multidevice access. 
In either case, some important supporting technologies you will need to 
consider include the following:
• 
Secure web applications: integrated security to allow users to 
access web-based applications from any browser on any 
platform
• 
SaaS: enabling any user on any browser to access the same 
functionality, and in many cases with specific support for 
different devices and form factors
• 
Virtualization: including remote desktop (VDI or terminal 
services), application virtualization, virtual desktops, and 
application streaming
• 
Custom app development: building specific tablet and 
smartphone compatible applications to enable mobility
Also, make sure to match IT policy updates with HR and legal policy updates. 
BYOD is as much an operational change as it is a technological one. While 
form factor, network access, application support, and other technological 
challenges are important, many of the most significant challenges will be 
related to responsibility and accountability for acceptable use, data security, 
system support, purchasing, etc.
Mobile Computing
Mobility—not only using mobile devices like smartphones and tablets, but 
also enabling a mobile workforce and growing an “always-local” business—is 
a major driver in business innovation and growth. However, given that your 
business is dependent on technology and computing, your business mobility 
is absolutely dependent on mobile computing. This includes using mobile 
devices internally so your staff can take advantage of the opportunities that 
workforce mobility provides. It also includes leveraging the widespread 
adoption of mobile devices externally amongst your customers, partners, 
channels and suppliers, to help achieve your business goals.

133
The Innovative CIO
Leveraging Mobility Internally
Adopting mobile computing does not necessarily mean buying 40,000 iPads 
for your internal staff, as the CIO of SAP reportedly did5—although it certainly 
can. Adopting mobile computing internally does mean giving both IT and line 
of business staff the ability to work whenever, wherever, and however they 
work best.
For many people, mobile computing means the ability to work on the road—
consider the prototypical road warrior, visiting the office maybe once a week 
(or once a month) just to do expenses and report to local management. For 
these employees, mobility means doing business anywhere, anytime. They can 
see a client at their home or work, late at night or early in the morning, on a 
weekday or a weekend. They can provide a service or close a deal on the spot, 
sign a contract or agreement on their tablet, and even take payments (scan a 
check, swipe a credit card, or enter purchase order details) instantly. Mobility 
allows these employees to bring in new revenue faster, expand addressable 
market opportunities, and open up entirely new sales channels and capabilities. 
For others, mobility means being able to work from home, whether part-time 
or full-time, and maintain a work/life balance. For these employees, mobility 
means they can take the kids to school in the morning, pick them up in the 
afternoon, watch their baseball game in the evening, and still get a full day’s 
work done. They can take care of sick dependents, or manage their complex 
lives without having to take time off from the office 9-5. Moreover, these 
employees do not need dedicated office space and associated resources. All 
of these benefits flow through to the business in better staff retention, lower 
on-costs, the ability to leverage part-time and casual workers, increased 
leverage of global sourcing, and better business continuity in case of a disaster 
(i.e., office fire, hurricane, flood). 
Still for others it means being able to work from anywhere inside the 
organization’s campus—whether on the factory floor, in the showroom, at a 
branch office, on the job site, in the stockroom—or even on-site at a partner’s 
or supplier’s location. The ability to see a production fault and instantly 
communicate a recall to the sales channels while arranging to fix the fault will 
save time, money, and reputation. Being able to identify low production 
inventory and reorder input stock is a critical first step to reducing inventory 
and better managing stock-on-hand. Seeing firsthand as progress slips or 
accelerates on a new construction project means being immediately able to 
realign resources and schedules to avoid costly scheduling issues. Mobility 
5 Dave Rosenberg, “Consumerization of IT Is More Than Using an iPad at Work,” C|Net, 
January 2012, http://news.cnet.com/8301-13846_3-57360376-62/consumerization-of-it-is-
more-than-using-an-ipad-at-work, retrieved on June 2012.

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
134
means your business will be better equipped to respond cheaper, faster, and 
better to all these situations.
In order to deliver these and other business opportunities arising from 
mobility, you will need to consider multiple solutions. Your success will 
depend not only on traditional mobile devices like laptops, but also on many 
other technologies. 
You should start by enabling appropriate workforces with smartphones and 
tablets. Connect these devices to and utilize enterprise applications, whether 
through web-based services, published APIs, or installed (off-the-shelf or 
custom) applications. Typical use cases here include connecting to corporate 
mail over the Internet using technologies like ActiveSync, securely connecting 
to internal network resources over VPN or two-factor authentication, or 
using corporate credentials to access cloud applications directly over the 
Internet. 
However, be prepared to be more committed to mobile innovation too, with 
specific support for mobile devices and workers. You can develop new 
applications that assist staff in the ways they work today, streamlining their 
work by leveraging existing investments in technology and process. You can 
also work with strategic business peers to exploit mobile technology to 
enable new ways of working, and free your line of business staff from location 
and other constraints.
Virtual desktops and virtual applications will also play a part, as they abstract 
the business service for the mobile user away from the location where they 
need to use that service. For example, virtualization allows you to provide 
secure remote access to confidential business data even from a potentially 
insecure location or device, and allows you to provide “instant-on” access to 
critical applications for a new or temporary support worker in a far-flung 
location, on a wide range of devices and operating systems. 
Cloud computing will be an important foundation for a mobility program. 
Cloud provides on-demand applications, always-accessible storage, and 
scalable compute resources that are accessible over the Internet from almost 
anywhere on the planet, and on almost any mobile device. You may look to 
incorporate GPS with cloud-connected mobile devices to enable location 
tracking, satellite phones to ensure an always-connected workforce even in 
the remotest of locations, or content delivery networks (CDNs) to handle 
the bandwidth requirements for high-volume remote content delivery.
However, while supporting mobile devices and other new technologies is an 
important part of delivering this larger mobility story, you should consider 
many other technologies to support mobile computing. At a minimum:

135
The Innovative CIO
• 
Connect these devices to private and/or public networks 
that ensure security and compliance. 
• 
Protect and secure data at rest and in transit to mitigate the 
possibility of accidental data loss or malicious data theft.
• 
Modify existing systems and applications to support new 
devices and locations whatever and wherever they are.
• 
Provide delivery channels that can support the new traffic 
volumes caused by mobility, such as by video conferencing or 
content delivery.
You also need to accommodate the nontechnology aspects of mobility, such 
as procedures, policies, and best practices. 
Leveraging Mobility Externally
Your customers, clients, constituents, patients, partners, channels, and other 
stakeholders are all adopting mobile computing. According to Nielson, for 
example, 43% of adults in the US now own a smartphone.6 Whether it is a 
simple cell phone, a smartphone, or a tablet, more consumers are adopting 
mobile technology and more searches and purchases are being done on 
mobile devices. As an innovative CIO, you have the opportunity to help lead 
your business in responding to that adoption.
Your stakeholders’ mobile devices open up an opportunity to adopt new and 
innovative mobile commerce (also commonly referred to as “m-commerce”) 
applications. One outstanding early example of mobile commerce is Starbucks 
for iPhone and Android.7 These applications, championed by the company’s 
award-winning CIO Stephen Gillett, allow customers to find their nearest 
Starbucks location, manage their stored value card, add to the balance on 
their card, track their loyalty program, and even pay for their purchases with 
their phone.
In addition to providing convenience for customers, while driving loyalty and 
brand reputation, the Starbucks applications also significantly impacted 
spending decisions. In fact, according to Forbes, in 2011, the Starbucks mobile 
6 The Nielson Company, “Beyond Clicks and Impressions: Examining the Relationship 
Between Online Advertising and Brand Building,” 2011, http://nielsen.com/content/dam/
corporate/us/en/reports-downloads/2011-Reports/Nielsen-Beyond%20Clicks%20and%20
Impressions.pdf, retrieved on March 2012.
7 Starbucks, “Starbucks at Your Fingertips, No Matter Where You Are,” www.starbucks.com/
coffeehouse/mobile-apps/mystarbucks, retrieved on March 2012. 

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
136
applications accounted for 26 million transactions and $110 million in card 
reloads.8
Probably the fastest and easiest way to leverage mobile adoption in order to 
drive mobile commerce is to participate in a third-party program, such as a 
social location network service like Foursquare. You can even create your 
own program leveraging existing social networks, such as Facebook, LinkedIn, 
or Twitter. Increased attachment through increased mobile interaction can 
help drive additional business—and revenue—to your physical locations 
through a combination of mobile and social.
Once customers are already at your location, you can take advantage of their 
mobile connectivity to provide easy interaction and drive additional or 
incremental transactions via bar code, localized SMS, QR codes, NFC, 
Bluetooth, or WiFi. For example, you can deliver (or exchange links to) 
coupons, brochures, promotions, special offers, and other content directly to 
their mobile device. This can be good for immediate use, or can be used to 
encourage return visits and additional business (2-for-1, valid-next-visit, etc.). 
Or you can provide forms, instructions, information, or assistance to reduce 
queues and make customer visits faster and more satisfactory while requiring 
less employee time for each customer.  
A very affordable investment in mobility is developing a specific mobile 
application for your business. This is a great opportunity for attracting and 
retaining customers, and for driving marginal up-sell and net-new revenues. 
You do not have to start with a full-fledged mobile app either. With mobile 
commerce especially, you can quickly enter a relatively early-stage opportunity 
with minimal functionality. Perhaps start by developing a loyalty app, using an 
existing third-party app, or publishing a simple informational app. Work with 
customers to crowdsource enhancements, target additional platforms, and 
quickly push out additional functionality incrementally.
As an aside, mobile applications are especially well-suited to agile devel-
opment—with mobile developers working directly with customers, under-
standing what they want, and building a great mobile app with small, fast new 
feature increments.
Then if you connect mobile and social with cloud and gamification, you can 
drive anytime, anywhere access to high-value services from any customer 
device. Leveraging multiple consumer-driven technologies at once provides an 
attractive opportunity to promote customer contact, gather customer 
8 Darcy Travlos, “Apple: More Than the New iPad,” Forbes, March 2012, www.forbes.com/
sites/darcytravlos/2012/03/08/apple-more-than-the-new-ipad, retrieved on March 2012. 

137
The Innovative CIO
intelligence, improve sales and attachment, drive higher satisfaction, strengthen 
customer loyalty, and reinforce your brand.
Social Networking
Social networking is a rising phenomenon that is rapidly permeating every 
online consumer’s life. The ability for multiple people to all share some com-
monality by connecting together online in a broad interconnection is changing 
the way people relate to each other. As consumer-driven IT becomes the 
norm rather than the exception, social networking is changing the way people 
do business too. Some examples of social networking sites, applications, and 
services include Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, YouTube, WordPress, and 
Wikipedia.
Online social networking is merely a logical progression from the real life 
practices of social networking—getting people together to connect in social 
groups both big and small to exchange contacts, ideas, or opportunities. In 
the modern context, it has simply morphed to refer to online interactions in 
general. As such, many of the outcomes are fundamentally similar, but they 
can occur at much larger scale and across broader geographies. Online social 
networks also are able to leverage new “social” media like blog content, 
online video, interactive chat, and more. 
Social networks can be very simple, localized, and specialized—for example, 
the subscribers to your corporate blog or the customers connected to your 
support team’s Twitter account. They can also be massive and global in 
scale—such as the million-plus followers for Coca-Cola on Facebook. 
While some may think social networking is synonymous with Facebook, in 
reality it is much more than a way for you to know when your son or daughter 
is “in a relationship.” As Coca-Cola’s online presence shows, social networking 
is also a way for your business and its employees to connect directly with 
customers, partners, agents, suppliers, and each other. It fosters closer 
relationships internally and opens up new (often more convenient) lines of 
communication and especially collaboration. It also builds connections 
externally by engaging with customers, partners, suppliers, influencers, and 
others in more personal ways. 
Social media clearly delivers measurable business benefits too. According to 
Nielsen, advertising in social media generates a 55% greater lift in ad recall 
than nonsocial ads, with a 4x improvement on click-through rates when 
friends endorsed products and services online compared with standard online 

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
138
advertising.9 Moreover, adults who are active on social media are more likely 
to purchase a range of goods and services, from gym memberships and music 
to clothing, shoes, and accessories.10,
Expanding these connections makes your business better informed and more 
able to react to even the most subtle and nascent of market forces. Even if 
what you hear is 90% noise, you can still identify many new ideas and digest 
useful new information from customers, suppliers, academics, researchers, 
journalists, pundits, and competitors. Social networking also opens up two-
way communications beyond just the usual suspects to a wider range of views, 
which you can find instantly, as long as you can filter out the extraneous 
detail. It can even help you to find, attract, and retain talented and connected 
employees.
A positive adoption of new social networking technologies can drive improve-
ments in outbound reputation, additional sales and marketing opportunities; 
expanded connections with new partners, agents, and suppliers; and increased 
loyalty from existing customers. Social networking also provides you with 
new opportunities to interact, learn, share ideas, and perhaps even become 
recognized by your peers and others as an expert in your area.
Moreover, your competitors may already be using social media—connecting 
with your customers, your suppliers, your partners, your advisors. If you are 
not using social networking, then you are out of the game, and potentially 
losing business and missing ideas. 
Yet perhaps the most compelling driver is that your customers are already 
using social media. For example, imagine the rapidly increasing group of online 
consumers, who would primarily interact with your organization via social 
media, but cannot. Ask yourself the following questions:
• 
If they cannot tweet you with questions about your product—
or even worse, their tweets are never answered—but your 
competitor tweets back with answers, guess which company 
they will buy from?
• 
If they cannot “like” your business or product on Facebook, 
“+1” you on Google+, hashtag or “@” mention you on 
9 The Nielsen Company, “Ads with Friends: Analyzing the Benefits of Social Ads,” 2011, http://
blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/ads-with-friends-analyzing-the-benefits-of-social-
ads/, retrieved on March 2012. 
10 The Nielsen Company, “State of the Media: The Social Media Report Q3 2011,” September 
2011, www.nielsen.com/content/dam/corporate/us/en/reports-downloads/2011-Reports/
nielsen-social-media-report.pdf, retrieved on March 2012.

139
The Innovative CIO
Twitter, then they will not be able to tell their expanded 
social networks about you.
• 
If they cannot get a discount from you on Groupon or a 
special deal on Foursquare, but they can get one from your 
rival instead, they will probably visit your competitor’s store, 
not yours.
• 
If they are on the go when they need your service, but your 
web site does not support their smartphones, then they will 
probably log in to your competitor’s mobile site instead.
• 
If they cannot buy from you online by clicking through from 
your social network homepage or profile, then they probably 
will not buy from you at all.
Conversely, of course, if your competitors are not using social networking, 
you have a chance to put them out of the game.
To make a start with social networking today, begin by making it easy for all 
the stakeholders (staff, customers, partners, yourself) to contribute, to join a 
conversation. If it is difficult, high-effort, or high-risk, or if there is no real 
incentive to do so, then inertia will outweigh action. Remove the firewall 
blocks, at least on selected social networks that are directed more at business 
(LinkedIn, Twitter, or Quora) than personal use (Facebook, Google+, or 
Foursquare). Remember, however, the premise of consumer-driven IT. Even 
consumer-oriented technologies can be turned to business use—indeed 
Facebook (perhaps the quintessential personal social network) is now driving 
massive volumes of corporate connection through company pages and the 
like (pun intended). 
Start to promote the use of social networking technologies internally in IT 
and across the business to help communicate, document, and collaborate 
with each other. For example, you can start to crowdsource your institutional 
knowledge using enterprise social networking technologies like instant 
messaging, blogs, wikis, social media, etc. These private social networking 
solutions can be installed on your infrastructure or acquired as a service from 
a cloud provider, but are accessible only to authorized users (e.g. employees, 
contractors, agents, suppliers). Unlike publicly crowdsourced data (Wikipedia) 
or a cacophony of voices speaking at once on an infinite number of topics 
(Twitter), using social networking technology internally allows you to take 
greater control. Where you need to, you can limit access to the right 
stakeholders, and ensure information is verified (or at least note where it is 
not), while laying a foundation for adoption of external social networking

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
140
It can be a great boost for you as the CIO to blog professionally. Not only 
does this set an example for your business leaders, but it will give you more 
insight into your customers, better understanding of your markets, and an 
authoritative and connected reputation to bring to the C-level meetings. You 
can even use this as a springboard to help your C-level peers to start 
connecting on social media too by helping them to blog, connect on LinkedIn 
and Twitter, and more. You may need to involve your professional commu-
nications teams (i.e., public relations, corporate communications, marketing) 
to help engage your C-level peers in social media, but at least you will be 
communicating a controlled and immediate message out to your market, and 
hearing their feedback unfiltered and instantly. 
Find ways to connect with your partners, agents, and other third parties too. 
Connecting with resellers, agents, suppliers, and others online via Twitter, 
FaceBook, or LinkedIn for example, will give you the ability to use a broad and 
allied social network to promote your own capabilities and messages, while 
sourcing better partners and resources. Connecting with trade and financial 
journalists, analysts, thought leaders, bloggers, and other influencers can help 
you drive awareness, brand recognition, and even demand. 
You should be careful to avoid treating social networking as a megaphone or 
as a channel for your personal voice alone. Most social networks are definitely 
better for two-way conversations than for broadcasting, and you need to 
decide how to balance your personal brand and opinions with those of your 
organization. However, if you are fair and even-handed in promoting and 
supporting your allies (and sometimes even your competitors) on social 
networks (“liking” their pages, “plussing” their posts, “+K’ing” their advice, 
“RT’ing” their tweets, and “reblogging” their blogs), they may well do the 
same for you, increasing the value to both brands.
Talk to your Chief Marketing Officer about the wealth of marketing oppor-
tunities available through external use of social networking too. Consider 
these examples for your business:
• 
Hosting an online chat with experts for (or with) your 
customers and prospects
• 
Using external messaging for customer support or soliciting 
references and testimonials via social networks
• 
Running customer acquisition or satisfaction promotions 
through Facebook or Twitter
• 
Promoting a new product or service with Internet videos or 
other nontraditional (and maybe viral!) media

141
The Innovative CIO
• 
Running a syndication program for your ads and downloads 
through LinkedIn
• 
Promoting an ongoing conversation by sharing information 
through your blog posts
All of these opportunities are new ways to use new social networking 
technologies to drive new and innovative marketing opportunities and build 
relationships.
However, a word of caution—social networking can also have a negative 
impact. Consider the post on Twitter from Qantas Airways, in the middle of 
a highly publicized and inconvenient industrial dispute, asking for bouquets 
about customers’ “dream luxury inflight experience.”11
This tweet received instead mainly critical (and very public) brickbats from a 
highly dissatisfied and highly vocal segment of its customer base.12 
No matter how you approach social networking, you will need to adopt new 
policies, monitor their adoption (or transgression), and enforce remediation 
where necessary, to make sure you avoid potential nightmares like this one. 
Consumer Cloud
We have already discussed the opportunities for innovation by adopting 
business-oriented cloud services (see Chapter 6). However, there are many 
options for individuals to access consumer-oriented cloud services too—and 
many legitimate business reasons for them to do so: 
• 
Creative workers may use YouSendIt to exchange large media 
files with coworkers, partners, or even customers to bypass 
unworkable file-size limitations that are typical on many 
corporate e-mail servers.
• 
Knowledge workers may adopt online productivity applica-
tions like Prezi, Zoho, or Google Apps to access new features 
and capabilities that existing corporate-owned software 
cannot or does not deliver.
11 Qantas Airways on Twitter, http://twitter.com/#!/qantasairways/status/ 
138777262895009792, retrieved on March 2012.
12 Alicia Wood, “Qantas Makes Hash of Tweet Campaign,” Sydney Morning Herald, November 
22, 2011, www.smh.com.au/travel/travel-news/qantas-makes-hash-of-tweet-campaign-
20111122-1nsa4.html#ixzz1pWTp7YxU, retrieved on March 2012.

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
142
• 
Partner or supply chain managers may use iCloud or Dropbox 
to share workgroup content with partners or suppliers if it is 
too difficult (or simply impossible) to get a shared environment 
from IT.
• 
Marketers may use YouTube, Vimeo, HootSuite, Facebook, 
and other consumer cloud services to deliver content through 
new media, in new locations, and to new customers where 
central IT cannot.
• 
Sales reps may use Skype, FaceTime, or Google Chat to have 
sales meetings or management reviews while they are on the 
road, avoiding corporate VPNs and other “hassles” that keep 
them from selling.
• 
Mobile and multidevice workers may use iCloud, so they can 
work with the same content whether they are at their desk 
or outside the office or at home on their personal computer 
or iPad.
• 
Programmers may use Google Mail or bitTorrent to exchange 
files that are prohibited from e-mail by corporate policies, 
such as zip, exe, jar, iso, or other potentially malicious file 
types.
Of course, each of these consumer cloud services poses challenges to the 
traditional IT department. To address these issues, as CIO you could try to 
shut down all but the centrally approved systems. You could apply network 
and firewall policies, conduct domain filtering, use deep packet inspection, etc.
You could attempt to identify and prevent use of these “rogue” cloud services. 
However, realistically it is too easy to work around even the most capable 
technology barriers. For example, workers can simply use these same cloud 
services, but on personal devices and networks instead (including smartphones, 
tablets, and mobile device tethering). They can quickly find and switch to 
alternative services and alternative domains. The more tech-savvy can use 
proxies and other deceptions to bypass the controls. Your business faces the 
same outcome.
A better (and more realistic) approach starts by understanding and officially 
accepting the need for consumer cloud and sustaining corporate interests 
through policies and guidelines, not by (at best partially-effective) technology 
barriers. Rather than try to block them, instead assist and guide users in their 
selection and operation of consumer cloud services. 
After all, it will probably happen anyway. But if you get ahead of consumer 
cloud adoption, you can make sure it goes well for the business as a whole, 

143
The Innovative CIO
not just easy/cheap/fast/available/etc. With IT taking the lead, you can enable 
the innovative use of consumer-grade cloud services while maintaining 
important policies that balance individual enablement and corporate 
protection. With IT stepping up to proactively offer (and even pay for) cloud 
services that address user requirements, it reduces the incentive for those 
users to go around IT and use rogue cloud services. 
Consider these steps as you open up safe and responsible opportunities to 
adopt consumer cloud:
• 
Discover what is in use: look for existing cloud services in use 
and catalog them and their common users.
• 
Look for new options: Honestly review internal systems to see 
where existing consumer cloud services could do better.
• 
Determine the requirements: Look for the common users, and 
ask why they did or would adopt consumer cloud services. 
• 
Discover the business value: Understand what value cloud 
services could add to the business, including cost, speed, 
ease, etc.
• 
Consider the risk: Determine the possible impacts that each 
cloud service poses, including cost, compliance, reputation, 
etc.
• 
Investigate alternatives: Look for more options that may be 
cheaper, safer, more scalable, more reliable, etc.
• 
Consult with business leaders: Join your peers in an informed 
decision on whether or how to support consumer cloud 
services. 
• 
Communicate expectations broadly: Explain and justify your 
policies and limitations clearly and then enforce them appro-
priately.
Of course, approval and acceptance of consumer cloud services—whether 
tacit or explicit, accidental or intentional—does not mean just opening up the 
spigot and allowing any user to adopt any cloud service for work purposes. 
Not all services are equal, and there will still be a time to say “no,” and to do 
it with business support. 
Nor can you simply stop at the adoption of consumer cloud services. It will 
also be incumbent on corporate IT to provide management and security—
some “adult supervision” —for the consumer cloud. When cloud services are 
being used by just a handful of workers, you may opt to just monitor them. 

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
144
But when services are being adopted en masse by entire departments, business 
units, or divisions, then the business as a whole will need to apply more 
intentional and scalable management and security systems. 
For example, at any significant scale, even (or especially) the consumer cloud 
will need at least some basic management and security, such as the following:
• 
Discovery and inventory management to detect, catalog, and 
secure any “rogue” cloud activities—not to shut them down 
(though sometimes that may be necessary) but to be ready to 
support them while maintaining security, governance, and 
compliance
• 
SaaS-enabled security systems to protect corporate data and 
knowledge in the consumer cloud—such as Single Sign-On, 
identity and access federation, social media login integration, 
data loss and intrusion prevention, etc. 
• 
Cloud-oriented financial management, such as asset manage-
ment, ERP integration, budget control, procurement, contract 
management, etc., to ensure both IT and the business operate 
with fiscal responsibility, mindful of corporate assets and 
expenditures
Who better than the innovative CIO to lead an informed, secure, and 
profitable adoption of the consumer cloud?
In the end, you may not be able to discover, monitor, and support every one 
of the seemingly limitless array of consumer cloud services your employees 
have adopted or will adopt in the future. Indeed, you may not want to, unless 
or until it becomes a business issue. But you should get at least some visibility, 
if not always control, of the “rogue” consumer cloud services, so you can at 
least make informed business decisions about them.
Other Consumer Technologies  
Driving Business Change
This is by no means intended as an exhaustive inventory of consumer-driven 
technologies that are entering the business world. Multiple other consumer 
technologies are having substantial impact. Some examples of these technol-
ogies are:
• 
GPS: From military to business to consumer . . . and then back 
to driving business, GPS is resurgent. It is no longer restricted 

145
The Innovative CIO
to expensive, specialty devices, but has become commonplace 
on smartphones and tablets. Cloud-based cycling application 
Strava, which uses GPS to track and compare riders’ times 
and achievements, was Velo magazine’s “Technical Innovation 
of the Year” in 2011. The location check-in mobile application 
Foursquare relies on GPS too, and its developer is working 
on a reported billion-dollar valuation.13
• 
Camera phones: Cell phone cameras are also incredibly 
widespread. In mid-2012, for example, the iPhone camera 
was the leading source device on photosharing site Flickr by 
a significant margin.14 Of course, not every business can 
leverage camera phones into a $1 billion sale like Instagram, 
or drive hundreds of thousands of positive impressions like 
Vail Resorts’ “EpicMix.” But many businesses can and do 
leverage the ubiquity of camera phones to create and expand 
customer engagement, intimacy, spend, share of wallet, 
feedback, loyalty, retention, and more. 
• 
Set-top boxes: The rise of the set-top box (including dedicated 
boxes like Roku or Apple TV, as well as multifunction gaming 
and media devices like the Sony PlayStation 3 or the Microsoft 
Xbox 360) is rapidly taking share away from traditional TV 
audiences as they become more legitimate alternatives to 
broadcast, cable, and satellite TV. Especially as they add more 
streaming media, interactive applications, and integration 
with traditional PCs and applications like XFINITY, Netflix, 
Hulu, and iTunes, set-top boxes have the potential to 
transform many businesses, not just media and gaming 
companies.
• 
Personal Area Networks (PANs): PANs have moved on from the 
difficult-to-navigate Bluetooth connections of old to the plug-
and-play simplicity of personal WiFi and 3G/4G hotspots that 
are connected by simply tapping an NFC-enabled device. 
These can be a great boon to productivity and innovation, 
allowing immediate collaboration—anywhere, anytime, across 
the table, or across the world. However, if used injudiciously, 
they can become a burden as they open up a new, unauthorized, 
13 Michael Arrington, “Square Raising New Round, Joining Billion Dollar Valuation Club, 
TechCrunch, June 2011, http://techcrunch.com/2011/06/07/square-raising-new-round-joining-
billion-dollar-valuation-club, retrieved on June 2012. 
14 Flickr, “Explore/Camera Finder,” www.flickr.com/cameras, retrieved on June 2012.

Chapter 7 | Innovating with Consumer-Driven IT
146
unmanaged, and likely unsecured penetration vector for mali-
cious entry directly into your corporate data and network.
• 
Unified communications: Few of today’s technology consumers 
would accept having different devices and/or networks for 
voice calls, video chat, social networking, e-mail, and text 
messaging. These are all just core capabilities of a single 
device—the smartphone—with many of these capabilities 
already tightly integrated in applications like Skype, Visual 
Voicemail, or Google Chat. Businesses are also unifying 
communications, whether through corporate adoption of 
consumer smartphone technologies and applications, or 
more sophisticated enterprise capabilities, driving outcomes 
from cost reduction to productivity and more. 
As we have noted, this list is not designed to be exhaustive. Look around you, 
and especially at the devices and technologies that are exciting your younger 
workers (or family members). They may just open your eyes to the next big 
technology change that you need to exploit.
Combinations of technologies add multiple dimensions too. In combination, 
there are almost limitless opportunities for consumer-driven IT to enable and 
increase business innovation.
Conclusion
Even with this relatively cursory exploration, we can see that the rise in 
power of the consumers of information and other technology is truly changing 
the way businesses and governments adopt, adapt, and leverage new 
technologies for business innovation. 
This trend will only grow more powerful over time, as millennials and other 
digital natives continue to enter—and subsequently lead—the workforce. 
This new wave of workers will bring with them an ever-increasing demand to 
attach to new technologies, bring them into the workplace, and drive new 
ways of doing business. 
As we explore in upcoming chapters the ability to innovate tomorrow, and 
the need to make innovation intentional, you will see that your success as an 
innovative CIO to change the way you do business will substantially depend 
on your ability to identify and exploit these new technologies, and empower 
your new workforces to do the same. 

c h a p t e r
8
Opportunities 
to Innovate 
Tomorrow
Rescuing Your Company with  
Future Innovations
Over the years, many once-successful companies have vanished. The move 
from household name to has-been is sometimes swift. A look back over the 
IT industry can point to a number of sizeable organizations that have ceased 
to be or that have morphed into a new form. You may remember companies 
like Prime and Wang in their heyday. These were major players in the computer 
industry and their names only exist today as part of other organizations, but 
in the early days both were large successful companies. At its peak, Wang had 
revenue of $3 billion and a staff in excess of 30,000. What caused the demise 
of these large organizations? Sales slumps, economic depression, poor service, 
poor financial management, and unrealistic pricing are certainly some of the 
reasons for failure. Other organizations from this time survived and thrived. 
It was not that long ago that Apple was considered a basket case. How did 
other organizations survive all of the management and financial turmoil? In 
our view, one part of the reason that some companies fail and others grow is 
based on the failing company’s lack of foresight and innovation. Innovation in 
this context needs to be the right kind of innovation. Foresight needs to 
account for trends that were obvious in hindsight but were obscured or not 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
148
even considered as important. I can remember being told a few months after 
the first IBM PC launch, “Don’t worry about the IBM PC: memory and storage 
are well below business requirements—it’s just a toy.”
Controlled Innovation Can Save . . . Uncontrolled 
Innovation Can Destroy
Vision and strategy are elements that are important in the continuing success 
of any organization and can sometimes save a company. IT strategy does not 
always map to business strategy, as we have remarked earlier in the book. 
Some IT leaders have said that they don’t have an IT strategy—they only have 
a business strategy that IT supports. We believe that this is the right mindset: 
business-focused IT. 
Innovation can definitely reinvigorate a company. For example, until the advent 
of the first Motorola flip or clamshell phone, the Motorola handset range was 
no more distinguished than the competition. Before the advent of the iPhone, 
the flip phone generated great interest in their handsets and was the highest-
placed phone in the PC World’s “Greatest Gadgets of the Past 50 Years.1” 
Company failure is sometimes attributed to a failure to innovate. There are 
many reasons for a company to stagnate and fail. Jim Collins has discussed 
these reasons in several books, including Built to Last and How the Mighty Fall. 
It would be wrong to suggest that failure to innovate is a major factor in 
company failure. Indeed, Collins notes, in a Time Magazine article, that 
businesses are often innovating extensively up to the time of their demise2. 
This could be seen as a natural, knee-jerk reaction. You can almost hear the 
directive from the CEO to product development:
The company is not performing well. Sales are down. We need some new 
products to reinvigorate our catalogue. Go out and get me some new products—
something innovative that will deliver the growth that we need.
In our view, this demand for innovation—taking resources and focus away 
from the immediate problems—is too little too late. Collins makes the point 
that uncontrolled innovation and risk-taking are prevalent up to the final 
failure of a company. Controlled innovation, as part of the company culture 
and ethos, is a way of ensuring that the product lines stay vital and build 
growth. Using innovations as the basis of a corporate strategy will maintain 
1  Dan Tynan, “The 50 Greatest Gadgets of the Past 50 Years,” PC World, December 24, 
2005, www.pcworld.com/article/123950/the_50_greatest_gadgets_of_the_past_50_years.
html, accessed on October 2012.
2  Randy James, “Jim Collins: How Mighty Companies fall,” Time Magazine, June 10, 2009, 
www.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,1903713,00.html, accessed on May 2012.

149
The Innovative CIO
and grow the organization. Innovations that are panic measures or “the only 
way out” are doomed to fail and bring the company down with them. 
Uncontrolled innovation may not save a failing company. It can have a disastrous 
effect on a healthy company.
Some years ago, I was in a board meeting of a company I worked for. The 
chairman outlined an innovation to the business model that would enable the 
company to grow into new locations. He asked us all, one by one, for our 
opinion. We unanimously endorsed the plan, providing there was some 
caution. We suggested that we use this to consolidate locations where we 
had a small operation, grow into new locations that were likely to yield further 
growth, but stay away from locations where the costs, infrastructure, and 
customers were more risky. We were told that this was timid thinking—the 
company would exploit all areas and the rest of the business can support 
weaker locations. We all left the meeting with a sense of foreboding, and we 
were right. The company started failing in only 18 months and failed completely 
after 2 years. This can be directly attributed to the decision taken by the 
chairman.
The negative effect of too much uncontrolled innovation is supported by 
comments from Thorsten Heins, the CEO of Research In Motion (RIM). He 
stated in an article in CIO magazine that the staff at RIM got so excited about 
innovation that they inserted the innovations in the product lines causing 
delays and quality problems. Delays and quality issues plagued RIM in 2011 
and early 2012. 
Using innovation as sticking plaster to heal a broken company is not a long-
term plan. Using innovation to prevent a company needing sticking plaster is 
a better strategy. Innovation should be part of a growth strategy, of business 
transformation not business salvation. We are not suggesting that innovation 
is the best way to get your organization back on track, but lack of innovation 
will certainly be more likely to prevent the organization from growing. In the 
economic climate prevailing since 2007, growth is important.
Innovation may be essential, but it would have little value if it were not in line 
with the corporate vision and strategy. In Chapter 4, we have already 
mentioned the link between IT, innovation, and the corporate strategy. We 
recommended that CIOs review the corporate strategy and become more 
involved in the strategic decision-making. This is possible if you have access to 
the corporate strategy or the people developing the strategy. Evidence from 
a recent survey, however, shows that only 16% of CIOs questioned were 
always included in corporate business strategy discussions.3 
3  CA Technologies, “The Future Role of the CIO,” October 2011, www.ca.com/us/collateral/
white-papers/na/The-Future-Role-of-the-CIO-Becoming-the-Boss.aspx, accessed on May 2012.

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
150
If you, the CIO, are not an integral part of setting the corporate business 
strategy, you may feel that there is little that you can do while you wait for 
words of wisdom from on high. This feeling of being an “order taker” for 
business IT demands is magnified if you do not have a direct reporting line to 
the CEO. In this case, you may have to be politically savvy and look for allies 
outside the CEO’s department. In most dynamic sales-focused organizations, 
the Chief Marketing Officer and the head of sales are influential and may be 
able to see the potential for innovation in their areas more easily. This is more 
of a political strategy and outside the scope of this book. Nonetheless, 
business-savvy CIOs should make themselves visible even if they are not yet 
seen as the trusted IT partner for the CEO. A business innovation led by IT 
would raise visibility where mere cost-saving would not. High praise is unlikely 
for merely doing your job.
A Look Ahead
In the remaining sections of this chapter, we will look at how you can develop 
a “nose” for innovation, enabling you to recognize the potential benefits of 
innovations early. Recognizing that an innovation will have little or no return 
for the organization is as important as recognizing an innovation that will 
generate millions. We will also consider where you can generate information 
that will help your crystal-ball gazing into the future. For instance, can you use 
mergers and acquisitions as a way to drive innovation and what are the pitfalls 
of this approach? We end the chapter with a few of the far-horizon innovations 
that would be interesting to put on your watch list.
Recognizing That You Are at a  
“VisiCalc or iPad Moment”
When it comes to innovation, many business managers anticipate an innovation 
that will make headlines. Searchers for the “VisiCalc” moment or the “iPad 
moment” may be overlooking significant innovations that will deliver business 
improvements. These improvements can often be made without the need to 
qualify as a world-changing innovation. Both VisiCalc and the iPad had a long 
gestation, and both had to wait for technology to catch up with requirements. 
So what is a “VisiCalc moment”? VisiCalc was waiting for an affordable 
personal computer—step forward the early Apple II. This enabled an 
affordable alternative to the manual balance sheets or expensive computer 
bureau time available. Dan Bricklin, the inspiration behind VisiCalc, needed to 
write a spreadsheet for a report during his MBA studies at Harvard, and he 
had either to write it by hand or develop a program to give a visual 

151
The Innovative CIO
representation of the spreadsheet. This program was improved and 
compressed to run on a microcomputer, and the VisiCalc moment had arrived. 
Was this a big-bang, world-changing innovation, or an incremental innovation? 
Pen and paper spreadsheets had been use for years but involved a lot of 
rewriting and correction. There were clumsy time-sharing programs available, 
but they were expensive and cumbersome. I would suggest that the best 
measure of the impact of VisiCalc was the gasp of surprise from a room full 
of accountants when I demonstrated VisiCalc recalculating a complex business 
spreadsheet in seconds. Their surprise turned to excitement when we 
explained the cost and other uses. At that moment, I knew how a magician 
feels when his best trick stuns his audience. Yes, this was a big-bang innovation, 
but it was the culmination of several smaller innovations:
• 
Using a microcomputer rather than a mainframe or 
departmental mini-computer
• 
Delivering an on-screen grid as the user interface
• 
Allowing the sheet to be recalculated when a value was 
changed
Demonstrating VisiCalc, I could tell that this was a winner, but how do you 
know when your innovation will strike gold? How do you decide to continue 
investments in an innovation that has not delivered on its promise? This is the 
most difficult part of innovation and one that most organizations struggle to 
master. The balancing act between patience to see an innovation through to a 
successful conclusion and the ending of an unproductive project is difficult to 
manage. 
Spotting a Winner
There is an old adage that you should not look for needs to fulfill but create 
a need that only you can fulfill. This is easier said than done, but there are 
examples of this throughout history. Some of the more recent have been the 
sticky note and our earlier examples. How do you spot the winning idea? 
There is a popular innovation myth, quoted by Scott Berkun in his book The 
Myths of Innovation, that good ideas are hard to find.4 He states that creativity 
has been sidelined in the current world because it is easy just to reuse 
someone else’s ideas. Look at all the people in your organization. Are they 
lacking in creativity? Are they bereft of ideas? Most people have ideas, but 
they don’t know what to do with them, as we discussed in Chapter 4. Finding 
the good idea or the great idea is more difficult because there are so many 
4  Scott Berkun, The Myths of Innovation, O’Reilly Media, 2010.

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
152
ideas. Innovations are ideas that are acted on, so in this section we will 
consider the terms as identical.
If you consider that ideas don’t leap fully formed from the research lab but are 
often incomplete, untidy, and needing some development, then it is clear that 
you need to filter the ideas that are generated. The trick is to make sure that 
your filter is not set to exclude everything, just the ideas that are waiting for 
technology to catch up or are not likely to meet a business priority. 
The filter for ideas should be set so that ideas can be categorized by the 
following:
• 
Cost: how much an idea will cost to develop and implement. 
If you ask futurists what future they want, most of them will 
have major transportation improvements as a wish. This is 
not likely to happen in the short term because of the high 
cost of infrastructure developments.
• 
Scope: the breadth of vision for the idea. If you were in the 
domestic water heating business, you would not want to 
invest in an ocean boiler, unless it is relevant to your business 
plan.
• 
Impact: how will it change things? Will it create new value or 
efficiencies? Will it have a negative impact on some or all of 
your business in the future?
• 
Relevance: a category this is often the sticking point. When 
people are asked to think “out of the box,” many of the ideas 
may not be relevant to your business or your part of the 
world. This could lead to their rejection unless one of the 
parameters of the idea creation is that your organization is 
looking for new lines of business or adjacent lines of business 
that the idea can fit in to.
Once ideas have been categorized, they can be reviewed, and in many 
organizations a committee of the great and good does this. These folks will 
have to evaluate the ideas and decide which ones are worth progressing. I am 
not sure that a committee would have given the iPad approval, based on the 
high cost of development. Here is one of the dilemmas of innovation. Often 
the best person to deliver the world-changing innovation is the inventor or 
visionary. That is not to say that a committee has no place, just that it is more 
likely to have organizational, political, or even social reasons to abandon 
something difficult with high potential. Innovators may have to argue well and 
fight hard to get their ideas acted on.

153
The Innovative CIO
Times of economic crisis will generate innovations. Innovation has a value to 
the organization. Many organizations are keen on protecting the value of their 
innovations, and this can have a negative effect. There are few ideas that 
cannot be improved by discussion. Discussion is one area that innovators are 
wary of. A private inventor may not want to disclose his idea before it has 
some kind of protection, such as a patent. Corporate inventors may want to 
keep the innovation quiet so that others in the hierarchy do not claim it as 
their own. There are rules about prior disclosure of ideas if they are part of a 
patent application. Your coworkers’ discussion of ideas can be a valuable 
exercise and result in a stronger more valuable innovation, unless you are 
paranoid.
Collaboration and Communication
The reputation of the IT department as a source of understanding and delivery 
of innovative ideas can be enhanced. Innovative CIOs should review their 
communications both internally and externally. In particular, CIOs should 
continually review the information delivery and control systems that they are 
managing. You should ask some searching questions about your use of the 
information that you have at hand as a CIO. One source of information for 
dissemination is the technology futures information that you have probably 
gathered over time. 
A more significant future development that is gaining traction in the industry 
relates directly to the fact that the CIO has access to most of the data the 
corporation owns. This access is through internal applications, databases, 
e-mail systems, and web sites. Having ultimate control of this data can lead to 
some serious innovation. A problem in virtually any organization is that this 
massive amount of data will continue to grow. It needs to be analyzed and the 
CIO is in the best position to organize this. Having control of the data, CIOs 
can develop analysis tools that will help them understand the complex 
business world that the company operates in. This understanding can lead to 
innovative opportunities.
The growth of social networking tools and the ability to use them to increase 
collaboration may also generate an “iPad moment.” In the past, collaborators 
had to be co-located with their team to be able to generate momentum and 
ideas. There were naive attempts to use distributed teams with conference 
calls and e-mails. In many organizations, these are still the staples of a 
distributed team. It has been clear for some time that not all the best-qualified 
thinkers in an organization will live near or travel to a central location on a 
frequent basis. Social networking and imaginative use of telepresence and 
collaboration tools are overcoming this problem. It is interesting to note that 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
154
the birth of the World Wide Web would not have been possible if Tim 
Berners-Lee had no access to hypertext developers around the world. The 
Web would have stayed in CERN and probably not made it outside his 
department. 
Real-time collaboration is in its infancy. I am someone who experimented 
with Google Wave and I can tell you that being able to read what someone 
miles away is typing, in real time, makes for clearer conversations. More 
importantly, online brainstorming can become a reality and idea development 
does not have to wait for complete sentences. I also found that if colleagues 
were not fluent English speakers, they were happier to collaborate in real 
time through text, even though they seldom spoke on a conference call. 
Other new developments in online collaboration are discussed later in the 
chapter.
Is Innovation Insight or Luck? 
Innovation has often been associated with an idea that has just popped into 
your head—a lucky thought, in fact. Ideas don’t just happen. If you consider 
the creativity of a small child compared with a middle-aged employee, the 
child has many more ideas. We have discussed creativity in previous chapters, 
but it is worth mentioning here because luck, creativity, and serendipity are 
closely related. Serendipity can be thought of as a happy accident. Steven 
Johnson in his book Where Good Ideas Come From has a whole chapter on it.5 
The important point he makes in this chapter is that the association between 
ideas is one strength of serendipity. The happy part of a happy accident is due 
to the significance of the accident to you. Social media and collaboration 
encourage serendipity. Serendipity is reduced by secrecy. As we mentioned 
earlier in this chapter, secrecy is often the stock-in-trade of the inventor. One 
way to decide if serendipity plays a part in your organization is to think back 
to all those corridor conversations over the coffee pot. Quite often an idea 
will develop because of the different backgrounds and objectives of the coffee 
drinkers. It is not just the stimulant effect of the coffee, but the sparking of 
new trains of thought generated by discussing ideas and chance meetings. We 
will discuss the personal network effects in a later part of this chapter.
Creating the Crystal Ball
Whenever I hear the words “predicting the future,” I have this image of a 
shawl-covered lady sitting in front of a crystal ball and delivering 
pronouncements to the hushed audience. It is interesting to contemplate that 
5  Steven Johnson, Where Good Ideas Come From, Riverhead Press, 2011.

155
The Innovative CIO
the businessman needs some of the skills of the crystal-ball gazer. I am 
referring to research, understanding of the impact of small changes, 
observation, analysis, and deduction that can create a credible prediction.
To predict the future you need to be able to look at the world in which you 
and your company operates. Social, political, and economic macro trends can 
have an influence on corporate strategy and have an impact on IT. A luxury 
goods supplier would be a good example of a company who would use these 
trends to help them develop a strategy to expand out of their own country. 
They would consider trends that indicate the capability to pay for the goods 
and the societal changes to the population to be more status-conscious. 
Once the company has created a strategy based on an analysis of the trends, 
there may be a direct effect on the IT department—for example, by localizing 
applications. Identifying opportunities to innovate in the future will depend on 
some understanding of that future.
Can You Predict the Future?
Predicting the future is not easy—so many factors influence the way the 
world changes. One of the most difficult problems is to account for the major 
factors that may have an influence and develop a contingency plan if things 
change. There are no simple cause-and-effect relationships in world trade. If 
there was a simple cause-and-effect relationship in business, the process could 
look like the following:
1.	 Our company has a product that consumers like.
2.	 There are a growing number of consumers in China.
3.	 We should open an office in China.
4.	 Sales will increase due to the extra units we sell in China.
While this may be simplistic, there are times when this type of logic has led 
to a decision that has unpredictable results. There are ways that some of the 
guesswork can be taken out of the decision-making process and companies 
often have a team of people who are tasked with building the knowledge to 
transfer the guesswork just mentioned into an educated guess. There are a 
number of recognized theories that can be brought into play. They all have to 
start with some basic knowledge about what is going on in the world. 
There is a lot of emphasis on world conditions in this chapter. The simple 
reason is that these conditions can affect the markets in which you are selling 
your goods. If you are restricting sales to one country, no matter how large, 
world conditions such as the current economic crisis will affect that country. 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
156
Prediction of the future is based on three layers of knowledge and 
understanding:
• 
Knowledge of world political, social, and economic factors 
and trends that may affect the market you are interested in
• 
Knowledge of the market and competition that you are 
interested in
• 
Knowledge of new developments that may influence the 
market you are interested in. These are often disruptive 
developments that you need to understand. In IT terms, this 
is where knowledge of new and emerging technologies is 
valuable.
Gathering this information for the first time is a daunting task and can take 
many, many months. Once the knowledge is gained, it only requires frequent 
periodic review and amendment. This exercise is not the corporate strategy. 
It develops the knowledge base on which a strategy can be built. Even if you 
are not involved in developing the corporate strategy, this information will be 
valuable as it can help you understand and possibly contribute to corporate 
strategy. You may also find that other parts of the organization have not taken 
a comprehensive and organized approach to knowledge gathering.
Predicting the future is not based on guesswork but on experience and 
knowledge of external trends and factors that will influence technology 
direction. Don’t be like the guy who bought a room full of CPM-based 
minicomputers the week before IBM announced the IBM PC, making his 
investment obsolete in a matter of weeks. CIOs need to plan for the future 
and ensure that they are always aware of changing conditions in the business 
and wider world before making a plan. Gathering information is the first part 
of becoming knowledgeable enough to predict future innovations. 
Gathering Relevant Information
A knowledge base can be constructed from a large number of information 
sources. You should check with the marketing and PR departments for any 
specialist sources they may have access to. The finance department is also a 
good source of economic data. You may also find some closet politicians and 
economists within your own department who may be interested in taking 
part in this exercise. Table 8-1 lists some sources of information in the three 
layers just mentioned.

157
The Innovative CIO
Table 8-1. Sources of Information
Layer 
Source
Information Type
World
News media
Macro trends that may affect you: war, economic 
slumps, major oil finds, energy shortages, raw 
materials trends
World
OECD and 
World 
Economic 
Forum 
reports
Macro trends but often with a less sensationalist 
approach compared with the news media
Market
Business and 
market 
analysts
Understanding of the market for your company’s 
products and services. These will have a view of the 
impact of world trends and enable you to create a 
better understanding of the relationship between 
market and world.
Market
IT industry 
analysts
Although these are specialists in IT, they often have 
a view of world and business trends. They may also 
help you to understand emerging technology trends.
Emerging and 
Disruptive 
Technologies
IT industry 
analysts
There is value in the emerging trends that analysts 
can identify; however, these are often looking 
further into the future than is necessary for 
day-to-day operations. But looking into the future is 
where you will discover opportunities for future 
innovation.
Emerging and 
Disruptive 
Technologies
IT staff
You should not neglect the knowledge and interests 
of the staff in your department. Some members of 
staff are enthusiastic and knowledgeable about the 
technology they work with and can provide valuable 
insight based on experience as well as wide reading.
One additional area of information that you may find useful is from the 
research labs of universities and research institutes. These organizations often 
produce regular reports that can be scanned for interesting information. 
Gather as much information as you can, as long as this does not impact the 
next stage of understanding future trends and opportunities. You may find 
that it is difficult to stop the information gathering since there is always 
something new on the horizon.

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
158
Information and Knowledge Can Help  
with Predictions
Eventually you will need to make a decision. This can sometimes be hindered 
by an obsessive information-gathering exercise. No answer is perfect; just 
good enough will do for most decision-making. The next stage is the analysis 
of the information and the synthesis of a strategy based on that knowledge. 
Business innovation is generally searching for new ways to grow the business. 
Less frequently it is focused on cost reduction, but the most influential 
innovations tend to be growth-oriented. Growth is often associated with 
entering a new product market in your own geography or opening a new 
office to increase existing product sales. While the CEO or head of sales 
typically initiates this type of innovation, the need for IT support will often 
mean that the CIO is involved during the decision process. 
As an example of the use of this knowledge, we can look at a company 
planning to open an office in a different geographical region. There are many 
logistical problems needing a solution. In IT, there are a number of related 
questions to be asked that may highlight further problems to be solved:
• 
Will you need local IT staff? This will be partly determined by 
the size of the new operation, the resilience of the local 
infrastructure, Internet, etc.
• 
Do your existing suppliers operate in this region? What are 
the delivery conditions and costs? 
• 
Will you need to partner with other organizations locally? 
• 
Who will be in charge of outfitting and equipping the new 
office?
Added to these IT considerations, the prudent CIO will need to be familiar 
with the new region, its customs, and local regulations. It may be that the new 
region has unique privacy laws or laws restricting information that noncitizens 
can hold. A knowledge base to answer these questions would be of value in 
discussing the broader IT impact of working in this region. The innovative 
CIO can also use this as an opportunity to create an atmosphere of trust by 
demonstrating an understanding of the geo-socio-political realities of this 
region in meetings with senior management. This may be part of a shared 
knowledge base should the CIO be a part of the decision-making team. In the 
likely case that the CIO has been informed, much further down the decision 
timeline this data may reinforce or add caution to a decision. It is too late for 
the CIO to suggest restrictions on delivery of Internet access when the office 

159
The Innovative CIO
lease has been signed. Having a good knowledge base that will become trusted 
in your company will help prevent IT from being considered as an afterthought. 
The information that you would gather for such a knowledge base can be 
allied to a review of the innovation potential of a new market. Are there 
technologies that will work better in that region? Mobile phones are the 
computing device of choice in sub-Saharan Africa. The landline infrastructure 
is weak or nonexistent. Planning an expansion into this area may call for 
repurposing of your internal IT applications to a mobile platform. The 
expansion into a new geographic area can be used as a test bed or pilot for 
increasing the mobility of the whole workforce. The logistics of recruiting 
local staff in the new location may generate a review of IT management and 
recruitment across the entire company. It may be prudent that investing in 
remote management and one central IT function rather than duplicate 
functions in many locations will bring benefits to the whole of IT, not just the 
new location. The innovative CIO will be looking for these opportunities in 
any major business innovation.
Networking Is a Future Opportunity
As we have mentioned in other parts of this chapter, social networking and 
collaboration are having an impact on innovation. In this section, we will 
explore two meanings of network. The first meaning is one more familiar to 
technologists: the physical network that runs the business. The second 
meaning is that of the social network of friends, colleagues, and other personal 
contacts. Improving networks in both senses can yield dividends.
Physical Networks: Faster, Further, Cheaper
The most obvious effect of network improvements is in the increasing 
numbers of remote and distributed workers. This change is delivering benefits 
such as reduced travel time and more motivated employees. Increasing 
broadband performance is also allowing Voice over IP and video conferencing. 
Soon there will be enough network capacity for high-quality telepresence and 
virtual reality interaction. These areas may enable better communications 
between the company, suppliers, partners, and customers. This is not to 
suggest that face-to-face communications have no place. People still buy from 
people for high-value items, but there are increasing numbers of alternatives 
for commodity items.
Future innovation will depend on how technology fits together—how it 
communicates and relates to other technologies and users. Cloud computing 
is offering a partial solution to this problem. Part of the value of cloud 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
160
computing is that connecting to a service requires no knowledge of the 
underlying technology supplying that service. Cloud computing in itself is not 
likely to cause many problems to end users. After all, anyone who uses Gmail 
or Hotmail is already an experienced cloud user. 
The challenge being faced is in the physical network. At the enterprise level, 
companies can afford to have networking experts who will resolve issues 
quickly. The increased consumerization of IT, moving the IT capability out to 
the users, has generated a group who have little understanding or interest in 
solving the networking problems that may exist. Anyone who has had a 
problem on their home broadband will empathize with the complexity and 
large number of points of failure on this physical network. 
The proliferation of technology in the last 20 years has generated complex 
networks both at home and in the office. Many complexity challenges have 
been solved, but some remain before the full potential of the network can be 
realized. Internet users are vulnerable to the impact of additional complexity 
and traffic. There is a potential for further congestion from the explosive 
capacity of Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6). If your home broadband is 
already at capacity with streaming videos and other Internet traffic, the 
additional load of noncomputing devices using the network could expose 
undiscovered network vulnerabilities that cannot be hidden behind cloud 
computing.
“Internet of Things”: Getting Your Fridge 
and TV Chatting
Retail and logistics companies are leading the implementation of Internet of 
Things (IoT) applications today. We have already discussed the innovation 
opportunities generated by IoT in Chapter 6 “Opportunities to Innovate 
Today”. Some of the experiments in healthcare and transport applications of 
this technology are also described in Chapter 6. Logistics and retail companies 
are leading the field in implementations at the moment. Although there are 
concrete plans in the IoT space now, IoT is also something to consider for the 
future. 
Many analysts and commentators talk about instrumenting the world and see 
a greater potential for IoT in the future. There is recognition that the 
application of IoT technology will be a long time arriving in some business 
domains. Analysts have suggested that 75% of companies in the energy, 
automotive, utility and aerospace world will adopt IoT in the 5 to 8 year 
timeframe. Opportunities for innovation in IoT are both current and in the 
future.

161
The Innovative CIO
One big issue drives this dual potential of IoT; there is currently no “killer 
app” for IoT. This issue is acknowledged widely in the IoT field and is a constant 
discussion point at conferences and in analyst reports. The lack of a compelling 
business reason for the whole of IoT is not preventing the experiments and 
trials. There is a feeling in the IoT world that we should just instrument things 
and eventually the nuggets of gold will emerge. Our instincts tell us that there 
is something valuable about IoT but at the moment we are not sure what that 
is. IoT is an area that should be kept on a watch list for future innovation as 
well as being considered in your current innovation plans.
Let your imagination run a little wild thinking about what you could do in your 
business if everything in your business world could be instrumented and 
capable of communicating. Consider waste disposal as a problem: if all your 
household or business waste was instrumented it would be possible for you 
or your company to take better decisions about where and how your waste 
can be handled. There will be the inevitable protests about “town hall snoops” 
checking you are disposing of your garbage properly, but these may be silenced 
with decent security and privacy measures. The potential advantage is the 
focus on the disposal chain, aiming to deliver similar efficiencies to the supply 
chain. An efficient disposal chain could, potentially, generate major cost 
savings on taxes and disposal fees. This example illustrates both the potential 
of IoT and some barriers to its adoption. It is already possible to instrument 
a lot of the disposal chain with RFID tags on goods and garbage handling. 
There are no compelling financial reasons to do so currently, other than 
avoiding fines for putting the wrong garbage in a recycling bin. Efficiencies in 
disposal would need a re-think of attitudes to garbage and a government plan 
to create an incentive for greater efficiency.
We feel that the potential of the Internet of Things will be greater in the 
future once there is an understanding of the wider benefits of being able to 
link to most parts of the physical world to the Internet. When the killer app 
comes it would be remiss of you to have missed it.
Smartphones Are the Computing Platform  
of Choice
In the developing world, smartphones are the computing platform of choice, 
for many of the millennials and even older generations are becoming more 
phone-centric. In many parts of the emerging economies, the mobile phone 
has the same appeal. Broadband capacity is increasing and in particular mobile 
broadband is increasing in capacity. This will have an impact on both the scope 
of the mobile network and its capabilities. As the spread of mobile broadband 
increases and the cost decreases, more individuals will use the smartphone. 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
162
This will push the mobile capability further and further out to the edge of the 
network. It will bring a whole new customer base into contact for goods and 
services for the first time. Mobile phones are already being used in ways we 
never would have thought of even four years ago. In parts of Africa, users can 
send an SMS with the drug batch number to a pharmacy phone number and 
get a return SMS telling them if the drug is counterfeit or safe to use. Will the 
mobile phone enable more intimate conversations with customers? Are your 
internal applications ready for the request for mobile enablement? It may be a 
good time to start looking at the potential for your company and the customer 
requirements to decide to invest in a mobility strategy.
One area to consider beyond mobile is the potential for augmented reality via 
the increased capacity mobile network. We will discuss this later in the 
chapter.
Expanding the network and improving the network is one of the topics that 
really appeal to the technologist. IPv6, wireless, pervasive computing—all are 
comfort words and resonate with the technologists. Don’t get caught in the 
trap of explaining how these things work; look for the business potential.
Networking for Pleasure and Profit
As we mentioned earlier, another meaning of networking is the interaction 
between individuals and groups of people. Sales and marketing executives 
regard networking as a critical skill, leading to ideas, opportunities and 
friendships. The innovative CIO needs to embrace this style of networking as 
much if not more than the physical networking. The CIO can enable increased 
networking of the company, customers, and suppliers by the use of social 
networking tools. The IT department should accept the challenge of managing 
social networking for the company to ensure that the users are successful and 
protected.
More organizations (including your own), customers, and suppliers’ organi-
zations, are networked and becoming increasingly porous. Porous is used here 
to describe how suppliers and customers may use your organizational tools. 
If you have a help desk service that customers can enter trouble tickets in to, 
that is a porous application. This is a growing trend, with some organizations 
giving suppliers access to stock levels so that the suppliers become responsible 
for maintaining stock rather than the retailer. All of this is part of a more 
networked world of business. This is frequently used as a way of cutting costs.
Social networks are being used increasingly as a communication medium. 
Companies are increasingly putting instructional or advertising videos on 
YouTube. Contact and newsworthy information is posted on Facebook and 

163
The Innovative CIO
LinkedIn and executives, and thought leaders often use Twitter to disseminate 
information and links to relevant information. All of these are ways of 
increasing the level of networking that can add value to your organization. It 
does not matter if LinkedIn is where you reach out to customers or if 
Facebook is where your marketing material is located, social networking is 
here to stay. The old-style data center was a tightly controlled world of tried 
and tested applications that had been in place for a long time. Most IT 
managers and some CIOs still prefer it that way and have locked the company 
systems away from social networking. I was at a large bank recently and was 
told by staff that they cannot even look at their own company pages on 
Facebook from within the office network. This style of IT management has a 
negative effect on the perception of IT. Social networking should be encouraged 
with only small amounts of company data secured: financial information, 
planning and customer information, and of course, anything that is covered 
under the various regulations and privacy laws. 
One area that social networking is enabling is collaborative working. E-mails 
are good communication media, but they are still stuck in the memo school 
of business. Social networking is allowing more interaction. A post on a social 
network can attract ideas and discussion that has the potential to gather 
more views and opinions. This can help make ideas better, help the company 
avoid bad decisions, and help in creating an innovative atmosphere that is 
open rather than closed.
Open Innovation: Enlarging Your Network
“Open innovation” is a term that was originally coined by Dr. Henry 
Chesbrough at Haas Business School in UC Berkeley.6 It has been well-
promoted and is an initiative that is gaining some traction. The basic premise 
is to use a group of people to make an innovation better by collaborating. 
Companies should use external and internal resources to create innovations, 
develop products, and go to market. This model changes the emphasis from 
commodities that are sold to services that are supplied. In this world, IP is 
truly in the service delivery rather than the product being implemented. This 
may be counterintuitive to many existing IT organizations, but a case can be 
made that an open source/open innovation approach can work if the internal 
resources are not available to maintain a nonstrategic product line. This would 
require significant buy-in from the management team and in particular the 
finance department, but it may apply in some future cases and can be 
considered in future product retirement plans.
6  Henry Chesbrough, “Program in Open Innovation,” University of California Berkeley, 2003, 
http://openinnovation.berkeley.edu/index.html, accessed on May 2012. 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
164
Business Expansion Using Future  
IT Innovations
Opportunities to innovate in the future are likely to be focused on technologies 
that may be emerging today or the synergies in technology that will come 
from future developments. Business expansion is the most important function 
of the IT innovator. Leading the field with an innovation will gain visibility and 
drive growth. While it may not be long before other organizations catch up 
to you, they will always be in second place. And as long as focus and execution 
are in step, you will always be able to keep one step ahead—if you are first. 
You don’t always need to be the best.
Expansion through New Ways of Working
One of the important trends we noted in the discussion on network expansion 
is the growth of the network both in capacity and reach. It was only in the 
very early years of the 21st century that broadband technologies became 
commonplace in the office, then the home. Initially the Internet was accessed 
through dial-up modems, and then early broadband cable modems started the 
move to inexpensive connectivity in the developing world. Broadband 
capabilities in the developed world are becoming more prevalent with a small 
number of rural communities still to be connected. In the developed world, 
this has led to process and facilities innovations such as remote or home 
working. The spread of wireless hotspots, tablet computing, and mobile 
applications have meant the workforce can participate from many locations. 
While there are implications for social and economic developments, the 
tethering of employees to a location is no longer necessary. Organizations can 
recruit the people best able to carry out work rather than the people who 
can get to an office. The innovative CIO has to become more aware of the 
requirements for this style of working and the configuration, management, 
and security problems of remote working. Adapting to this new way of 
working will be mandatory in the future, but since it is driven by IT capabilities 
you have to be integral to the decision process but not seen as a negative 
influence. Using emerging technology such as ambient telepresence and 
enhanced reality will also generate new ways of communicating and delivering 
information.
Mobility Generates Further Expansion
While the developed world is well served by wired broadband and an increase 
in the number of WiFi hotspots, the developing world is relying more on 
mobile broadband. Predictions have been made that mobile broadband is the 

165
The Innovative CIO
next growth area in networking. What are the implications for your 
organization? Will mobile broadband, phone tethering, and tablet computing 
deliver the same location independence? What advantages will that bring to 
your organization? How can you, as an IT leader, ensure that your company is 
ready to take advantage of this trend before the competitors? You should 
consider how a growth in mobile broadband will enable you to tap into new 
locations for markets and the staff to service those markets. Once the mobile 
broadband revolution has arrived, markets in Africa, South America, and 
other more remote locations will become open to your organization with a 
faster, cheaper start-up cost. Most importantly, employees and customers in 
those areas will have the same quality of service that they would have in the 
developed world. This may be worth considering as you plan for expansion 
into new locations in new geographic regions.
Increasing Your Global Reach
The global drive to expansion of the physical network capacity can also 
generate new markets. For example, in the health care world some 
communications and diagnostic tools require a network to be able to function. 
The reach of other technologies can help expand your business. It will not be 
long before you can connect to a 3D printer, print some components on the 
other side of the world, and have lower-cost labor assemble the components 
into a finished product.
The amount of data that you have can drive better analysis of customers 
outside your own region. Most marketing organizations are aware of the 
different meaning associated with the color red in different cultures. Using 
red as a color for an emergency device would work in the West. In China, it 
may be assumed that this device is a lucky device. These broad cultural 
differences are well-documented. It would be a crass sales or marketing 
employee who ignored them when considering an expansion into a new 
geographic area. As data is gathered, more subtle differences will emerge, and 
this will enable the personalized marketing that will ensure that each customer 
is treated as an individual and that individuals have offerings especially for 
them. 
New Lines of Business from Old Data
“Big data” is a phrase that is becoming a little overhyped, but describes an 
interesting condition. Now most organizations are focused on getting more 
value from their data. These organizations are being swamped by data coming 
from existing enterprise IT systems. Supermarkets are looking at highly 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
166
personalized shopping experiences based on complex analytics. They hope to 
be able to upsell items based on an intimate knowledge of the customer’s 
individual buying pattern. A quick analysis of my buying patterns at a 
supermarket would indicate that I buy different wine and cheese at different 
times. I tend to buy lighter flavored varieties of both in the summer, heavier 
flavors in the winter. Marketing targeted on my seasonal preferences can 
result in an increased sale even with such scant analysis. Retail analysts have 
already delved far deeper than this into the behaviors and buying patterns of 
their customers. Until the current aggregation of enormous amounts of data, 
finer-grained data analysis has been difficult. In some strategic conversations, 
we have been told that the amount of data stored in an organization is a 
problem and costing too much. This attitude is starting to change with the 
realization that this data can be a gold mine of new information. New 
techniques and technology are starting to make new knowledge available 
from this amount of data. 
Expanding Your Business and Market with 
Innovative IT
Innovative IT can deliver new lines of business to an organization. One of the 
more recent examples, as we mentioned in Chapter 4, is Amazon moving into 
the provision of cloud services. Amazon executives have recognized that the 
computing power they use for supporting the business could be used to 
provide a different service to their customers. Amazon has reused their 
existing resources to expand into a new line of business. They have entered a 
new market that is not related to their main line of business. Organizations 
can exploit some of their expertise and resources to deliver these 
opportunities. You should take a fresh look at your company’s resources to 
look for new opportunities.
Identifying adjacent markets can also develop new lines of business. An 
adjacent line of business would be expanding into the sale of magazines if you 
already sold books. 
Innovation Delivers Growth Through 
Mergers and Acquisition
As an organization develops, there are several opportunities that present 
different options for growth. Most startups have an innovative idea that 
develops into a growing organization and other innovations fuel that growth. 
Organic innovation of this type can generate large corporations, although 
frequently there is a mix of merger and acquisition (M&A) activity in parallel. 

167
The Innovative CIO
Some companies start small and fuel their growth by acquiring customers, 
products, and market share by acquisition and have little or no organic growth 
beyond the start-up phase. In both these styles of growth, there will be some 
merger and acquisition activity. There are some common acquisition pitfalls in 
this approach. In regard to mergers or partnerships, the problems are slightly 
different.
In an acquisition, one company acquires another with a view to using their 
resources to grow. The acquired company may be left as a totally separate 
business unit, or even a separate “wholly owned” company. This separation 
removes some pitfalls but also may remove some of the economies of scale in 
property, administration, and all-supporting activities. Many acquired 
companies are merged into the owner’s company at least at the administrative 
level to drive economies in both companies. It is assumed that the acquisition 
would be due to some synergy between the organizations and if they are left 
as separate entities then there is no advantage to ownership. In IT terms, one 
of the most common economies of scale is the merging of internal systems. 
There should be no need for two accounting, human resources, or enterprise 
resource planning (ERP) systems as a start. This would also simplify the 
company regulatory compliance requirements by bringing all the systems into 
one central organization. 
In a merger, there is a less clear “who owns what” demarcation. There may 
be an attempt to discuss the use of separate internal systems and management. 
Most importantly, the IT systems that are more flexible and standards-driven 
in a merger are likely to be the ones that win out. This is because the flexible 
systems can absorb other IT processes easier than more rigid or difficult-to-
modify systems.
In a partnership, both organizations have to have some synergy and the 
partnership may be to enable expansion into new markets or locations or to 
have a cross-selling opportunity. In this case, the security and privacy of both 
organizations have to allow some porosity of the companies’ internal systems.
IT innovation can reduce the impact of merger and acquisition. The innovative 
CIO will be preparing for M&A by looking for ways to overcome some of the 
pitfalls.
Pitfalls of M&A
In any M&A activity, the business decision-makers tend to ignore most of the 
IT implications of that activity. Two banks planning to merge would not 
specifically discuss the internal IT systems to ensure compatibility or ease of 
integration; they would be concerned with other areas of the business. The 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
168
integration of IT would be important but not a gating factor for the deal. 
Merging two separate corporate IT systems can be a long and difficult exercise, 
particularly if the IT systems have not been designed with flexibility in mind. 
Greater consideration should be given to customer needs if the customer-
facing applications are to change. Merging several applications is an opportunity 
to make innovative changes to the user interface and processes that these 
applications support. 
In a partnership, there is a different requirement. A partner probably would 
not want to use the same customer-focused user interface to order goods. A 
partner would expect more information than a customer would normally 
expect. A partner may require supply chain information, shipping information, 
or marketing collateral. All of this information would need to be available to 
enable the partner to maximize their potential. Corporate IT systems are 
often locked down to such an extent that this information is difficult to 
achieve. If you also consider there may be incompatible IT systems, then a 
straight daily data dump may not be possible. This is also an issue if you and 
your partner have different processes to link goods and services with 
customers. What if your partner runs a “just-in-time” supply chain and your 
supply chain is based on batch behavior? IT should not be a limiting factor for 
mergers, acquisitions, and partnerships, but an enabler and better still an 
innovative factor in future success.
Innovation of Products and Services
The innovative CIO needs to develop a strategy that will allow an easy 
integration and exploitation of joint intellectual property (IP). Often a merger 
or acquisition is planned to fill a shortfall in an offering by acquiring new 
technology or capabilities.
One clear advantage of a merger or acquisition is the possibility of increasing 
your intellectual property portfolio. While there are obvious advantages to 
this strategy, it also enables additional innovations based on the acquired IP. In 
some cases, this can open up adjacent markets, as we have already mentioned, 
and grow the business by developing new products.
A strategy based on delivering IT as a service will increase the capability of the 
IT department and has the potential to create new innovative uses by 
aggregating the best services from both organizations in a single service. A 
single interface can then be developed to be the common interface to the 
underlying systems without requiring massive rewrites and redevelopment of 
those systems. 

169
The Innovative CIO
One area that can yield value is the increased understanding from access to 
the joint data set. Analysis of both data sets in a merger or acquisition can 
deliver more customer insight identifying cross-selling or up-selling potential. 
Developing and improving the current capabilities for handling the increasingly 
large amounts of data within the current organizational structure is a good 
way to ensure that data sets from M&A activities can deliver value quickly.
Innovation of Business Processes
We have mentioned in several chapters that the concept of IT innovating IT 
is not likely to win executive backing. Mergers and acquisitions are one of the 
few activities where IT innovating IT may be justified, as long as the discussion 
is on the why and business benefits level, not the how-we-plan-to-use-all-this-
cool-new-technology. Modification of internal systems by taking a service-
oriented approach will enable flexibility and the ability to integrate existing 
systems quickly. Moving from proprietary, in-house, and legacy systems to a 
more generally accepted standard-based system will ensure that when the 
decision is taken to merge two organizations, the IT department is in an open 
and flexible architecture.
As an M&A process is underway, there will be a change to business processes 
requiring an underlying change to the IT applications that support them. 
Delivering an 18-month plan for completing all the work may mean that you 
are never going to complete any task, since there may be another merger or 
acquisition in the next 6 months. You may want a Rolls-Royce solution to “fix 
this for once and all,” but you may not get this luxury. Plan for fast and near-
enough right. Plan to be flexible and service-oriented, but plan to be aggressive 
in support of the massive business process changes that M&A will bring.
Delivering a flexible, easily integrated system to the business will create 
confidence in the executives that any merger, acquisition, or partnership can 
be viewed in purely business terms with IT enabling and smoothing out 
technology problems. In this way, the business remains focused on the 
business, and the CIO will be regarded as a trusted advisor rather than an 
obstacle.
Crystal Ball on Standby: The Future Is 
Nearer Than You Think
In this chapter, we have talked about the opportunities for future innovation. 
We have suggested how the future can be predicted based on a solid 
knowledge base and some of the areas that will influence your thinking on 
innovating for the future. In this section, we will talk more about the 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
170
technologies that can have an influence and where they may be of value. We 
have mentioned a number of technologies in earlier chapters. Here we will 
discuss a few emerging technologies that are on the radar but are not 
considered a near-term option. These can be grouped into three broad areas:
• 
Collaboration and communication
• 
New user interfaces
• 
Smarter devices and environments
We will discuss these areas in the context of innovation for the future.
Collaboration and Communication
Social networking is an important feature that has allowed more collaboration 
between distributed groups of people but still tends to be a send/respond 
model of communication, although we have mentioned real-time collaboration 
earlier in this chapter. One of the things lacking in conference calls, or even 
video conferences, is the type of serendipitous encounter that is frequently 
talked about as a “water cooler” event. This is based on chance meetings 
away from the desk at a common area like a refreshment station. These 
chance meetings can spark ideas, remind participants of things to discuss, or 
even just remind you that next time you have a challenge with something 
there is someone you can talk to. A frequent cry from distributed groups is 
for a meeting in a single location because the informal interaction is so 
valuable. This is the one major loss in the drive for a more distributed team. 
“Ambient telepresence” is a term that refers to mobility of a telepresence 
terminal. The technology ranges from simple laptop, microphone, speakers, 
and camera to a remote control robot containing all of these things in a single, 
vaguely human, casing. The portability of the device is important. This is not 
about opening a video conference window on your own laptop; it is about 
allowing a device to become a personal avatar for a team member. It is a one-
to-one relationship. Microsoft Research has published research in this area, 
referring to it as “Embedded Social Proxies7.” The concept is simple. If a device 
can represent one person, the device can be taken with the team to meetings, 
used for one-on-one sessions, and even taken to lunch. Microsoft Research 
uses a cart that is moved manually but there are other self-drive alternatives. 
The self-drive alternatives allow a person who is logged in as the user to drive 
these more expensive integrated units from place to place. Otherwise the 
device has to be carried or wheeled by a friendly person in that location.
7  Rob Knies, “Remote Meetings – Thinking Inside the Box,” June 2009, Microsoft Research, 
research.microsoft.com/en-us/news/features/esp-061009.aspx, accessed on October 2012.

171
The Innovative CIO
There are many undiscovered challenges with this technology. For example, 
there is little proof that a wireless connection is fast enough to build a 
relationship with an avatar as a team member. Another intriguing question is 
how you “drive” yourself in the avatar robot down two flights of stairs and 
through a security pass–coded door. The challenges are real, but the 
technology shows promise, particularly in solving the team-building aspects of 
a remote or distributed team. As an innovative CIO investigating this 
technology, you may find a supporter in the CFO. In any international 
organization, the travel budget is always a major operating expense, so ways 
of improving productivity and teamwork that don’t involve flights will find a 
ready audience in the finance department.
Mobile broadband is spreading, and fourth generation bandwidth is starting to 
emerge. This will have an effect on ambient telepresence but will also enable 
the use of augmented reality. Virtual reality is where a whole virtual 
representation is used to simulate some segment of reality. Overlaying 
additional data, information, enhanced skills, and effects on top of reality is 
augmented reality. Virtual reality has many existing applications in terms of 
simulation and virtual design. Augmented reality is emerging as a means of 
enhancing the views of reality. A good example would be a view of some real 
vegetables in a supermarket, and an overlay identifying the vegetables, 
recommending cooking methods and recipes that use the vegetables. 
Supermarkets and the retail industry are already investigating this technology. 
There are applications in most areas of business including customer relationship 
management, product support, and manufacturing. Although augmented 
reality is in its infancy, there have been some experiments that should be 
watched—for example, Google’s Project Glass. Some of the planned 
capabilities that have been reported for this project are also in the user 
interface domain.
New User Interfaces
However much the display mechanisms are changing thanks to the huge 
uptake of tablets and touch screen technology, content production is still 
stuck in the screen, keyboard, pointing-device era of interface. There have 
been some commercial products that use voice interaction, such as Apple’s 
SIRI and various dictation applications. All are having mixed success, but they 
will continue to develop aided by the increasing miniaturization, improved 
battery technology, and a need to create content for a content- hungry world. 
Some of your users and customers who are still having problems interfacing 
with IT may be ready to experiment with voice control and content creation. 
One consideration is the increasing number of millennials who are suffering 
from repetitive stress injuries from heavy use of text messages and social 

Chapter 8 | Opportunities to Innovate Tomorrow
172
networking. There may be a need for an alternative to mobile device data 
interaction that does not require repetitive movement of fingers and thumbs. 
This may be an opportunity for innovation in mobile workforce interaction 
with IT devices and nontraditional devices.
A challenge going forward is the use of voice activation and dictation in a 
crowded area; privacy and nuisance issues may require subvocal voice 
activation, although this is a long way off. While this is a technology worth 
keeping under scrutiny, there are also social and psychological barriers that 
will become more evident as people interact more with devices. This 
interaction with devices is more obvious in the “Internet of Things” where 
devices get smarter and interact more with each other and with people.
Smarter Devices and Environments
The “Internet of Things” has already been referred to in this chapter. One of 
the research areas that are getting some investment is in the use of integrated 
command-and-control systems in Smart Cities. Smart Cities are cities that 
have a high degree of integration between the population, the services, and 
the people who supply services. Many visions start with citywide broadband, 
terminals for specific tasks, and transport systems that take a holistic view of 
the movement of people and goods across the city. As noncomputing devices 
get connected to the Internet, the possibility for more complex interaction 
increases. We are already seeing this with location-based services on mobile 
phones becoming more common. Sensors in clothing, books, streetlights, 
doors, vehicles, and drinks delivery systems can monitor and interact. This is 
developed to the extent that people are already creating believable scenarios. 
For example, a person is walking down the street, a garment is monitoring the 
person and recognizes a slight dehydration, and the garment then communicates 
with a street sign that recommends the person step into the next store where 
there is a water fountain. While much of this has a science fiction feel, a lot of 
the technology is available. Wearable sensors for monitoring an individual are 
being used more frequently in health care. Reactive street furniture is being 
experimented with in integrated command-and-control systems, and location-
aware software is already on your mobile phone. The debate on the ethics of 
this direction is not for this book, but the innovative CIO should review all of 
these potentially disruptive uses for devices. Devices that are on the Internet 
and capable of both delivering data and interacting with each other are 
becoming more common. Is there an innovative business application for this 
technology in your organization?

c h a p t e r
9
Making 
Innovation 
Intentional
Innovation Is a Butterfly: Where’s My Net?
Opportunity is missed by most people because it is dressed in overalls  
and looks like work.
—Thomas A. Edison
We’ve all seen them—posters that proclaim that a company is an innovative 
company, that innovation comes from everywhere, and that it is everyone’s 
duty to innovate. While these statements may be true, we also know that 
simply posting a slogan, even with noble intent and firm belief, will not make 
a company innovative. Nor will the absence of such things prevent innovation 
from occurring. While there is nothing wrong with promoting an innovative 
culture in these ways (they can help), organizations must take care not to 
believe that posters and screen savers will alone lead to innovation. Those 
that do so may limit their intentional initiatives to those campaigns and will 
miss innovative opportunities, or even discourage innovation as their messages 
may be seen as not matching their actions.
An organization that is suffering from one of the “innovation killers” discussed 
in Chapter 2, or possessing one or more of those innovation-killing 
personalities, could be in even worse shape if an internal PR campaign is their 
sole action. In most cases, no slogan or poster will cure those illnesses or 
change a destructive personality. Thus, deliberate action must be taken in 
order for your company to benefit from the innovation that occurs within.

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
174
The phrase “innovation that occurs within” is an important one to keep in 
mind. The most important aspect of making innovation intentional is not 
always related to doing things to help generate innovative ideas. It is often 
about doing things to capture those ideas and then, just as caterpillars must 
be nourished in order to become butterflies, caring for and feeding those 
ideas.
Fostering Innovation
So, where does innovation come from? Where does it happen? From whom 
do the ideas spring forth? At the risk of using an overused cliché, it has been 
our experience that innovation does come from everywhere and it can come 
from anyone. Therefore, we would have to agree that the slogan is correct. 
Our point is simply that the danger organizations face when using it is believing 
that simply saying or displaying it is the answer to all of their innovation 
problems.
There is also another key question we are often asked: “How can we encourage 
innovation? How can we become more innovative?” Our answer? You probably 
already have innovative people in your organization. Therefore, perhaps the 
questions should be rephrased: “How can we help our people to bring forth 
their innovations? How can we harness the innovative power of our people? 
How can we ensure we are gaining the most benefit from our innovations?” 
There are many techniques that may help. We will begin this chapter by 
discussing some of the approaches we have found to be effective.
Don’t Think About It
Many times innovation and new ideas come when least expected by the 
innovator. To be clear, we are not referring to the type of innovation discussed 
in Chapter 2 as “fortunate innovation.” Accidental innovations do occur, and 
when they do the experience is magical. Accidental innovations are gifts. 
Enjoy and appreciate them. What we are referring to here are cases when a 
team faced with a challenge or opportunity develops an innovative idea when 
they are not consciously thinking about the challenge or opportunity it 
addresses.
When this happens, it may appear to be unintentional innovation—something 
that just happened. We believe that quite often these things are much more 
intentional than one might believe. Some people think that when a person is 
unable to solve a problem and consciously moves on to something else, the 
subconscious mind can continue to work on the unresolved problems and 
challenges. Regardless of your opinion of the science behind this theory, our 

175
The Innovative CIO
experience has been that not focusing on a problem can often result in its 
resolution.
Consider the following scenario and ask yourself whether it has ever happened 
to you. You had been working on a problem for an extended period, or 
perhaps at the end of an exhausting week, when you decide you are too tired 
to concentrate on it any longer. Fatigue has won the battle. Since you are 
exhausted, moving to another mentally challenging task is not a viable option. 
Perhaps you actually have that as a conscious thought, or perhaps you try 
something else challenging and soon realize it is not going to bear fruit.
So you move on to something a bit more mechanical. You fill out a form, take 
an online survey, or perhaps clean your work area. You may have even put 
some music on in the background to help you relax. Perhaps you clean your 
office for five or ten minutes. Perhaps for a half hour. Then, as if from nowhere, 
it hits you! You have the answer! You have a new idea! It is one of the best 
things you have ever thought of.
Certainly cleaning the office is one of the innovation techniques many of us 
use often—though the “office” in that phrase may really be your mind. Some 
of our most innovative ideas have come when we were not thinking about 
them. Before a person makes the connection between shifting focus away 
from a challenge and how that act can contribute to a resolution, the ideas 
can appear to come from nowhere. 
A somewhat humorous incident caused me to personally recognize this pat-
tern. Over a short period I had presented several creative ideas to a com-
pany’s cofounder. On several of these occasions, when the cofounder had 
asked how I had come up with the idea, I started my explanation by saying, 
“I was in the shower and . . .” I had not made the connection until one day 
the cofounder ended a meeting by saying: “You need to take more showers.” 
We shared a laugh about his observation, but unfortunately the people arriv-
ing for the subsequent meeting were highly confused.
While I cannot state with certainty whether that singular event was the 
turning point, I admit that once I realized the power of stepping away from 
a problem, I was able to harness it, at least somewhat. I also discovered that 
taking short breaks, even when not completely baffled by a problem, could 
help me get to a solution more rapidly. Incidentally, this works as well when 
applied to more routine tasks, such as working through a project plan as it 
does for creative ideas. Often a ten-minute walk can help bring forth a solu-
tion to something that may have presented a progress-delaying challenge for 
hours.

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
176
One key element to the success of this technique is not to focus on something 
else that is also mentally challenging. For example, initially during my ten-
minute walks, I would listen to podcasts or books in order to learn something 
new while walking. At the end of those walks, it was often even more difficult 
for me to return to solving the problem I had stepped away from.
Once in a while I did get lucky and the podcast or book touched on something 
that resolved the issue. However, success came more often if I listened to 
music, or nothing at all, and let my mind wander. Sometimes I would fairly 
quickly come upon a solution or approach. Other times my mind would drift. 
Then, seemingly from nowhere, a stream of ideas would start to flow; so 
rapidly in many cases that I would have to stop and take notes.
And that is when I learned the value of the next tool: taking notes.
Before we address this next subject, it is worth noting that the “don’t think 
about it” technique can also be applied in a group setting. In fact, consciously 
or unconsciously it is often in play. Group activities, such as dinners or sporting 
events, are often a part of team meetings. In addition, participants in team 
meetings are often given some time in between working sessions and the 
group activity during which to unwind – to explore the locale or visit a fitness 
center. These activities can provide down time that will enable each individual’s 
ideas to ferment. Creating opportunities for people to “not think about it” in 
a group setting offers the added benefit of having others with whom to further 
develop ideas once they materialize.
Take Note
Ideas can come at any time and from any place. While not thinking about 
something can be a technique for making innovation intentional, it is not 
always intentionally employed. A walk to the grocery store, a bicycle ride with 
a child or friend—these are all opportunities for you to not think about your 
work. And then it hits us. Eureka! As you cycle down that beautiful path, you 
develop not only an idea but a complete solution—everything you need to 
develop, deploy, execute, and realize its benefits.
You arrive home or to your office fully energized. Perhaps you go straight to 
your desk to begin working on the problem. Perhaps (likely) you are distracted 
by someone or something, though eventually you get back to your new idea. 
Well, at least you thought you had an idea. Has this ever happened to you? 
Sure it has. Sometimes you can remember bits of the idea. Sometimes all you 
can remember is that you had an idea. It’s even worse when the only thing you 
can remember is that the idea was outstanding.

177
The Innovative CIO
Therefore, it is critical that you always have the capacity to stop and take note 
of any ideas you have. You can never be certain what might inspire you or 
where you will be when it happens. In fact, even in writing this book, there 
have been several times when I have stopped while on a walk or shopping . . . 
and written an idea, outline, or paragraph.
The good news is that today it is simpler than ever to be able to take notes 
anywhere and at any time. You can certainly carry a pen or pencil and paper. 
Smartphones can make note-taking simple, and tablets such as the iPad can 
enable the creation of professional-looking, ready-to-distribute documents 
while on the move. In fact, they can also enable the document’s distribution. 
And there are various services that enable the storage of the notes or 
documents off the device (in the cloud) so that they are protected even if 
something happens to the device.
And “anywhere” means anywhere. I had an experience that was reminiscent of 
the fairy tale “The Shoemaker and the Elves.” At that time, it was commonplace 
for programmers in my circle to work around the clock to deliver code. 
Often we would work to the point of exhaustion without realizing it. It was 
only when we were too tired to solve a problem that we would realize our 
exhaustion. 
So completely tired, I would go to sleep. And then I would often dream of a 
solution. I would wake up in the middle of the night having solved the problem. 
Because I had solved the problem, I would then be completely relaxed and 
would fall back to sleep with a smile on my face. The next morning, I would 
wake up completely refreshed, with only a memory that I had solved the 
problem—but no memory of how.
I eventually learned to keep a pen and paper next to my bed. When I woke up 
in the middle of the night having solved a problem, I would write down the 
solution. In the morning, the solution would be there. Often I had no memory 
of writing the code or solution until I saw the sheet of paper. In homage to 
that fairy tale, I would refer to such code as having been created by the “Code 
Fairies.”
Leverage Your Inexperience
Often organizations that are faced with a difficult challenge will respond by 
assigning their most experienced people to resolve it, and it’s difficult to 
dispute the sound logic in that decision. Though we would not dispute that as 
an approach, we would like to suggest another approach be added to your 
arsenal: send in the new guy.

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
178
Newer employees are often able to find creative and innovative ways to solve 
problems or seize opportunities, even when those with more experience 
have not been able to do so. Why? One reason may be that confirmation bias 
is not a factor. New employees do not know that certain things will never 
work and that some things cannot be done.
Thus, for new employees, the impossible has not yet become impossible. A 
more experienced person may already possess the knowledge that a certain 
problem cannot be solved (or cannot be solved without certain constraints). 
More experienced employees may be encumbered by what they believe is 
possible and by what they know cannot be done.
The life experiences of new employees may also be different from those who 
arrived on the scene earlier. They may have grown up in a different locale or 
had atypical interests in their youth, at least for someone in their area of 
specialty. So, when faced with the problem, perhaps an employee who was a 
rock climber applies a rock-climbing principle to a business problem (maybe 
subconsciously), and in so doing solves a problem that had challenged others 
without even breaking a sweat.
Furthermore, new employees may have been exposed to tools and techniques 
throughout their formal and informal education that were not normally 
applied to the domain in which the problem exists. For example, today’s 
graduates not only have a wealth of knowledge regarding social media tools, 
they also know how to get the most out of them. This might provide them 
with a vastly different view of a problem and solution space than someone 
from a different generation.
We must also consider passion. Youthful exuberance is a wonderful thing and, 
expressed properly, can be contagious to team members of all ages. The value 
of passion in innovation cannot be discounted. Passionate, young team 
members can also possess a remarkable level of diligence that can enable 
them to look at aspects of a challenge that may have been discounted by 
someone with more experience.
Are we suggesting you never again assign employees with experience to a 
problem or innovative challenge in their domain? That experienced people 
cannot be innovative? Of course not. Innovation can come from anyone, 
anywhere, at any time. We are simply stating that, in our experience, the 
value of inexperience should not be overlooked.
After all, Google founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin met when they were 
aged 22 and 21, respectively, made the initial version of Google available at 
approximately age 23, and officially founded Google at around age 25. 

179
The Innovative CIO
And diversity in a team’s composition can often be the key to their success. 
This is not only the case in terms of differences in the age of the team’s 
members, but also in terms of other attributes such as gender, work 
experience, and personal interests.
Listen to Your Customers
All right, we admit “listen to your customers” may appear to be a fairly 
common sense suggestion. Though our experience is that, in the context of 
innovation, this common sense may not be all that common. Even organizations 
that take very good care of their customers can miss an opportunity to 
leverage their customers’ innovative ideas.
In some cases, customers are able to present an innovative idea in a form that 
is easily consumed. They may be able to articulate its benefits beautifully. They 
may even be able to propose sound methods for achieving it along with a 
detailed plan. In those cases, adoption of the idea may be a simple exercise. 
However, customers’ ideas are not always expressed in terms this simple.
More likely, though a customer may have a great idea, it may not be evident at 
the outset. Because customers may not have certain skills needed to clearly 
articulate the idea they may not be able to effectively state its benefits to you, 
to other customers, or to themselves. 
In other instances, you may be presented with a case of “solve the solution.”  
In cases of solve the solution, customers do not communicate the problem 
they are trying to solve or the benefit they would like to receive. They believe 
they have arrived at a solution that will deliver that benefit, and that is what 
they present as the need. Members of internal IT departments are likely very 
familiar with this phenomenon, especially so if their constituents are technically 
savvy. The request arrives in a form such as, “I need three quad core servers 
(often a specific model is stated), a (specific model) router, some duct tape, 
and 50 meters of CAT 5.” The specifications they present are very specific, 
and there is often no context at all with the request.
A request of this nature can be a defining opportunity for an IT (or any) 
organization. Here are three possible responses:
• 
Do it: Give the customers exactly what they asked for. On the 
surface that makes sense, though the risk is that the solution 
the customer proposes may not at all address their objectives. 
In other words, what they requested may not be what they 
truly need.

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
180
• 
Say “no”: This technique has a double “benefit”. Customers 
do not get what they need. The respondent has perpetuated 
their team’s reputation as an organization that exists to 
prevent things that they did not propose from happening. 
When responding to customer requests IT teams must keep 
in mind the common perception that they are not capable of 
innovating and that they are not of value in the context of 
innovation. The arrival of terms like “Office of the CI-No” or 
“CI-Slow” are evidence of this widespread belief.
• 
Engage: Work to understand the customer’s objectives. Ask 
questions to determine what they are trying to accomplish. 
Learn how the solution they envision will make their lives or 
their services better. Understand how their workflows would 
change and improve following the implementation of the new 
solution.
The best choice is obvious. Whether the request be vague or solve-the-
solution specific, it presents a tremendous opportunity for a team to engage 
with their customers and to learn more about their objectives and about the 
opportunities they envision. That does not mean saying “yes” to exactly what 
was requested, which may not help them. It does mean actively listening to 
them and having them explain their objectives, and the benefits they believe a 
solution will deliver. It means asking questions: “Help me understand how 
that would help your business?” “Describe how your business will function 
more effectively after we implement this?” “How would your workday or 
your work processes change after the solution is implemented?”
If you find yourself thinking, “But they don’t know our technology . . . They 
don’t know our constraints . . . Their solution will never work,” you have 
fallen into a common trap. You have made the assumption that the skills 
required to build a solution within a domain are also required in order to have 
innovative ideas in that domain. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Carefully consider what your customers do. They use the products and 
solutions you acquire, implement, deploy, develop, and/or create to solve 
their business problems. Every day. It is likely the case that you (as a provider) 
may not. As such, it is highly likely that they understand the problem and 
opportunity spaces of the domain much more deeply than you. So it should 
be no surprise that they have ideas, although they may not have the ability to 
bring those ideas to life. That’s where you come in. And the partnership is 
where the magic happens. Each partner can make the other’s ideas better.
What do you have to lose by engaging your customers? At the very worst, 
you have a great conversation about ideas with them. Even if they do not 

181
The Innovative CIO
bring forth ideas that can be leveraged, you have strengthened your relationship 
and partnership with them. And often the seeds of ideas that are planted in 
conversations such as those will bring value later on.
An added benefit is an increased level of trust between you and your 
customers. The benefit, and necessity, of trust between you and your 
customers cannot be overstated. Apart from the obvious, having your 
customers’ trust can result in additional time being available to your team to 
work on innovative ideas (e.g., your customers may not need updates as 
frequently, or in as much detail).
Incidentally, the customer we are referring to could be someone who works 
within your company (an internal customer) or someone who buys products 
from your company (an external customer). In either case, the considerations 
are the same. In fact, it may even be more challenging to work with internal 
customers in this context.
Be a Socialite
The rise in popularity of social media presents organizations with never before 
seen opportunities to learn from their customers. In fact, it may be of even 
more value that services like Twitter and Facebook also present innovative 
organizations with opportunities to engage with people who are not their 
customers.
Without a doubt, a company’s customers can, and do, have great ideas. Social 
media provides a direct connection to many customers with whom you might 
not otherwise be able to connect. Through social media, these customers can 
bring their ideas and suggestions to you. They can also use social media to 
expose problems they encounter while using your products and services. On 
the surface, this might appear to be a bad thing. It is not.
If there is a problem with your products or services, your customers are 
already telling everyone about it via social media and other means. We see it 
every day. It’s there for you too. Each interaction of this nature presents a 
great opportunity for your company. Some companies do very well at 
responding to issues surfaced via social media—others, not as well.
Social media can make you aware of issues you would not otherwise have 
known about. These issues may lead to innovative solutions, or even new 
products or features. They also present a chance for you to show your current 
and potential customers what your company really stands for.
One of the most valuable aspects of social media is the connection you can 
make with people who are not yet your customers. Those people may also 

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
182
have ideas that will help your business. Since they are not already your 
customer, chances are that there is no other way in which you would have 
known about them. These potential customers could place groundbreaking, 
innovative ideas in your lap, and it won’t cost you a cent. For example, a tweet 
like “Hey, @YourCompany. If your product had a home key I would buy 100 
of them” might lead you to a breakthrough. In addition, they are not 
constrained by what they believe your company or products can already do. 
They will be focused on their actual needs.
Hug a Rogue
Rogue IT has been the topic of much discussion for quite some time, and it 
appears to be a growing phenomenon. Essentially the phrase refers to a group 
of non-IT personnel obtaining or creating a business solution (that would 
normally be within the domain of their IT team) without their IT team’s 
involvement. Some think of it as a parallel IT organization. The common 
perception of rogue IT as a secret parallel organization, often conjoined with 
terminology related to clandestine operations—has caused it to be referred 
to by other names, such as the ominous “Shadow IT.” This brings to mind 
visions of the director of Shadow IT sitting in a high wingback chair petting a 
cat. It’s not usually that frightening, unless you a senior IT leader or CIO.
Rogue IT teams rarely have a fully staffed IT team, and they often consider 
themselves to be nontechnical. But there are exceptions. In fact, I was an 
“unintentional rogue,” and worked in an environment where the parallel 
organization had enough of the attributes of a corporate IT team to be 
considered fully staffed. In contrast, rogue teams often acquire solutions that 
do not require an IT team’s support. Or at least they believe that to be the 
case when they first acquire the solution.
Often rogue IT emerges in the context of the acquisition of a SaaS solution 
such as SalesForce.com. To be clear, I am not maligning SaaS companies. 
Rather, it is a testament to how those companies have created solutions that 
deliver compelling business value while removing the need for their customers 
to be concerned with some basic functions that are traditionally the domain 
of an IT team. Less often a rogue solution may be created (developed) by the 
shadow IT team itself.
Sometimes the rogue solution encompasses a customer’s entire business 
service requirements. At times, the solutions only partially address their 
needs. Furthermore, customers may believe they are acquiring an end-to-end 
solution but later learn this is false. They may learn that they require additional 
functionality. As this phenomenon matures, consumers are realizing more 
that they may require integration between the new (rogue) solution and other 

183
The Innovative CIO
services, which may include their own homegrown services or off-the-shelf, 
on-premise solutions.
Those who acquired a rogue solution may also come to realize that the 
solution requires more care and feeding than they had estimated. There may 
be a need to perform maintenance and operational activities, maintain 
relationships with vendors, provision new users, configure the system, ensure 
the system meets the required business continuity or disaster recovery 
standards, or manage contracts and agreements with the vendor. As a result, 
we are seeing the emergence of a phenomenon we call the service boomerang.
We use the term “service boomerang” to refer to what happens when 
someone who has acquired a rogue solution realizes that the IT team is good 
at performing functions (such as those just mentioned) and brings the rogue 
solution to the IT team with a request that the IT group take over management 
of the rogue solution. This presents IT teams with a golden opportunity to 
build relationships with their customers and to position themselves as more 
strategic partners. Improvements in relationship and trust may even result in 
the IT team being perceived as a more trusted advisor, which in turn may 
result in their obtaining a seat at the business team’s innovation table.
Sadly, some IT teams do not want to catch the boomerang. Are you wondering 
why that matters? What does this have to do with innovation? If you don’t 
have a seat at the table, if you are not a valued partner. If you are not a trusted 
advisor, you may never be given an opportunity to innovate. You may never 
become aware of opportunities or challenges that might lead your team to an 
innovative solution.
Therefore, the first step is to catch the boomerang. Though, unfortunately, 
some IT departments are unable to do so. I recall a conversation with someone 
who had gone rogue and subsequently brought their solution back to their IT 
team. This person’s team had replaced an on-premise business system with a 
SaaS version of that same system from the same vendor. They did this because 
the IT team had not been able to make changes to the on-premise system 
quickly enough. As well as addressing their agility problem, the new, rogue, 
system had also saved their company a substantial amount of money.
During our conversation the person explained that the IT team wrapped the 
new, nimble system in processes and procedures that had not been designed 
with that type of solution in mind. In the words of a member of the rogue 
team, “[The IT department’s] process is not built for nimble changes.” The 
rogue team was forced to again go rogue. You are not likely to get a third 
chance, though your successor may. We have seen that happen.
However, that is the darker side of rogue IT. Rogue IT can be extremely 
positive in the context of innovation. As was mentioned previously, rogue IT 

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
184
happens on your company’s frontiers. It is normally the result of the people 
who know the most about a specific aspect of a business taking action to 
meet a challenge or seize an opportunity they would not otherwise have been 
able to address. This is a good thing.
Sure, in a perfect world, it would be better for innovative IT leaders to be in 
tune with, and in front of, all of the needs of the business. Some are able to 
accomplish this feat. When this frontier innovation occurs, IT leaders are 
presented with a leadership opportunity. Does it really make sense not to 
accept an innovation that can benefit your company on principle or because 
you are upset? Of course it does not.
Presented with these opportunities, innovative IT leaders must embrace the 
rogues. If they do not, they will drive rogues further underground, limiting the 
value the IT team can bring to the organization. Such action will also prove 
that perceptions of IT being unable to innovate or even to support innovation 
are fact-based. Furthermore, when IT teams embrace rogues, they will be able 
to add value to the rogues’ ideas, enhance them, and perhaps even deliver 
more related (or unrelated) innovation of their own.
Embrace Your Inner Rogue
Much can be learned from rogue IT, and it goes beyond the innovation 
delivered by these teams. IT leaders who take time to embrace rogue groups 
can also learn how the rogues operated, how they discovered their innovations, 
how they were able to bring their ideas to fruition, how they executed, and 
how they were able to overcome constraints that may have prevented others 
from creating their own innovative solutions.
As an innovative CIO, leverage these rogue techniques and recognize that the 
techniques (and the rogues) are not all that radical. You may even learn that 
you already posses some rogue qualities. You may also eventually adopt some 
rogue best practices, if not for everything, perhaps in situations where you are 
challenged to deliver a solution via your standard operating procedures.
Lower the Artillery
Have you ever heard a dumb idea . . . a really dumb idea? Everybody has. 
Now, have you ever been in a situation where someone’s idea—good or 
bad—was absolutely trampled by someone else? Perhaps it happened in a 
public setting like a team meeting. How did the person respond? How willing 
was this person to step up and offer an idea at the next opportunity? Chances 
are that next opportunity was not taken. Most people would remain silent, 

185
The Innovative CIO
especially if the firing squad that attacked their previous suggestion was 
present.
On the other hand, have you ever been in a situation where a really dumb idea 
eventually morphed into a great idea? We have—many times. The critical 
point here is that not all good ideas appear to be good ideas when they are 
first proposed. It could be because the person who had the idea did not have 
sufficient time to articulate it well. In other cases, what starts as a truly silly 
idea can spark a sequence of creative thought that results in an amazing idea 
or innovation.
As a leader of a high-performance innovative team, you must create an 
environment where people feel free to exchange ideas. While we are not 
suggesting you let all of your meetings run wild with silliness, there are ways 
to handle a truly bad suggestion such that the person who made it does not 
feel like an idiot. Open nastiness cannot be tolerated. It really does not take 
much effort to create a culture where full frontal attacks on less than perfect 
ideas will be rare occurrences, at least within your span of control. Responding 
to truly bad ideas can, and must, be done with tact.
There are times to encourage a little bad idea generation. For example, during 
a brainstorming exercise you might encourage participants to share ideas 
whether they believe them to be good or bad. That is a fairly common 
technique. During such exercises, there is almost always a point, often early 
in the exercise, when the group cannot think of any more ideas to share. Or 
at least they cannot think of anything they are willing to share.
Take this opportunity to explicitly ask for a few bad ideas. It can be done in a 
lighthearted way, and can serve to return some energy to the room: “All right, 
does anyone have a really stupid idea?” or “I’ll buy ice cream for the person 
who comes up with the dumbest idea in the next 60 seconds.” Usually the 
ideas generated in this way are not of much use, but at other times the ideas 
are good. Sometimes they can even lead to the ultimate solution or innovation. 
But almost always, it restarts the brainstorming process, leading to more 
viable ideas for consideration.
Be Intolerant
In the previous section, we mentioned the “bad idea” firing squad and how an 
innovative leader must create an environment of trust and respect within 
their team. Intolerance of destructive, negative behavior and personalities 
must also be applied when some of the innovation-killing personalities 
discussed in Chapter 2 such as “The Protector”, “The Perfectionist”, or “The 
Innovative Authoritarian” are present.

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
186
The probability that an IT team will be innovative and productive is dramatically 
reduced by the presence of these destructive types of personalities. The 
negative impact a leader’s tolerance of destructive personalities has on a team 
can be enormous. Even those who are not the targets of the negative 
personalities will be impacted.
To put it simply, when leaders tolerate this kind of behavior, they are 
responsible for it. Not just metaphorically. If permitted to persist, it is likely 
that the other team members will lose respect for the leader and will begin 
to interpret this inaction as an endorsement of it. What’s worse, as a result 
others may also begin to display symptoms of those innovation illnesses. Like 
many illnesses, they can be contagious.
Make it clear from the outset that such behavior will not be tolerated within 
your team. Though that will not take care of everyone, it will constitute a 
strong beginning and send a message outside your team as well. Though you 
are not likely to cure the worst of the infected outside your team, positive 
culture can also be contagious—especially when it brings success.
One sure sign of success in dealing with this is having people from other 
teams want to work in your group. When that happens, be sure to ask the 
person who wants to join your group why they want to do so, even if you do 
not have a position for them. Sometimes the answer will be less than 
enlightening (e.g., “I wanted to work with virtualization”). Other times, you 
might be surprised by the insight the question will bring.
Take Time
These days it feels as if you cannot have a conversation about innovation 
without discussing what Yahoo! President and CEO Marissa Mayer referred to 
as “a license to pursue dreams” in 2006 while she was Vice-President of 
Search Product and User Experience at Google.1 What we are referring to is 
Google’s policy of permitting its employees to apply 20% of their time (one 
day per week) to pursue any project that might interest them. This process is 
often referred to colloquially as “Google’s Innovation Time.”
This topic usually generates a lot of discussion, excitement, passion, and even 
cynicism typified by phrases such as “OK, so if I had Google’s money, I could 
throw away 20% of my staff budget and not worry about it too.” or “Hey, we 
all have access to ‘20% innovation time.’ As long as we schedule it before 9 
a.m. and after 5 p.m. or on weekends.” It is at this point that the discussions 
1  “License to Pursue Dreams,” presentation by Marissa Mayer, recorded May 17, 2006, http://
ecorner.stanford.edu/author/marissa_mayer, retrieved on March 2012.

187
The Innovative CIO
become less than productive. But most people agree they would certainly 
appreciate having a similar program at their disposal.
There are some misconceptions regarding how Google’s program works in 
practice that might change some people’s opinions regarding its usefulness 
and practicality. During Mayer’s presentation, she explained that the process 
was not exactly that regimented. Employees did not usually take a full day off 
every week to work on innovative things. It might be more common, for 
example, for someone to work on their core projects for a few months 
straight and then spend a few weeks pursuing their interests and dreams. 
(Google permits the accumulation of unused innovation time.) In addition, 
Google employees are also known to use the more ubiquitous approach of 
pursuing their interests after hours or on weekends.
Therefore, it appears that the program’s success has at least as much to do 
with the people they hire and their corporate culture as it does with the 
program itself. But the approach cannot be dismissed as being only a gimmick. 
It has delivered quantifiable results. Mayer also mentioned that in the last half 
of 2005, 50% of the products and services Google launched started their life 
in the 20% time.
Will that work for you? Like any of the well-known, successful techniques, it 
depends on different factors, such as the business you are in, the people you 
hire, your corporate culture, etc. 
However, there is a more universal lesson to be learned from this program, 
regardless of your opinion of it. Innovation does require a commitment of 
time. When organizations invest in programs like Google’s, they are also 
sending a message to potential, and current, employees that innovation 
matters. They are making an explicit statement that, not only is innovation 
encouraged, it is expected. This can do wonders for a corporate culture and 
can be a tremendous recruiting tool. 
To say that innovation, or almost anything, takes time is not that awe-inspiring. 
But managers and leaders need to be able to give their teams the time they 
need to pursue innovative ideas, especially if they show promise. This may be 
done through a formal program, or in the field where teams are allowed to 
pursue an avenue of exploration that may not have been part of a plan of 
record. 
This concept is hardly new. For example, agile development methodologies 
often include a similar concept referred to as a “spike.” In a spike, time can be 
allocated to pursue an avenue of research that was not part of the original 
plan. The outcome of that research might then be put into future development 
cycles (referred to as “sprints” in agile methodologies). Agile methodologies 
are well-suited to support the concept of pursuing an innovative hunch, 

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
188
although allocation of time for a person or team to pursue a possible avenue 
of innovation is not necessarily consistently practiced in agile or nonagile 
teams. It requires discipline and conviction.
This discipline is also relevant at a micro level. Even when teams have been 
given permission to pursue an innovative idea, they may not be given the right 
kind of time. Confused? You are not alone. At one point in my career, I was a 
manager in a role that required me to spend roughly half of my time managing 
and leading, and the other half creating and delivering solutions (innovating). I 
soon realized that it was becoming more and more difficult to complete 
creative tasks during the workday. I came across an article where Paul Graham 
pointed out that those who are creating things need large chunks of time to 
pursue their creative activities.2 After much investigation and soul-searching, 
I realized the problem was that my daily calendar looked like a chessboard. It 
was filled with back-to-back meetings and meetings sandwiched between half-
hour or hour-long breaks.
Further investigation led to the discovery that my schedule was dominated by 
meetings with senior managers. You have to take that time whenever you can 
get it, right? Wrong! Well, at least most of the time. I eventually learned to 
use my calendar as a strategic weapon.
I learned that often a meeting time suggestion is just that—a suggestion—and 
that alternate times were usually acceptable to even the most senior 
executives. Building a relationship with the administrative assistants who took 
care of the senior executives’ schedules made that even simpler. And simply 
blocking two-hour or half-day chunks of time made sure there was ample 
time for working on creative tasks and other deliverables.
But I also learned something that was even more disturbing to me—I was 
doing this to my own team! I had been scheduling meetings with the members 
of my team, who were to spend most, or all, of their time on creative activities, 
solely based upon when I had openings in my calendar. I learned that scheduling 
a meeting at 10:30 a.m. can spoil a half day of productive, creative time. 
Scheduling a meeting at 1:30 p.m. or 2 p.m. can spoil an entire day.
I began to schedule meetings with my team members more strategically—first 
thing in the morning, last thing in the afternoon, or whatever made sense in 
the context of the meeting. Sometimes I would meet with the team or 
managers for lunch, which often had the added benefit of helping the team 
members to bond and increased their mutual trust and respect. In addition, 
2  Graham Paul, “Maker’s Schedule, Manager’s Schedule,” July 2009, www.paulgraham.com/
makersschedule.html, retrieved on March 2012.

189
The Innovative CIO
meetings were only scheduled in midmorning or midafternoon when there 
were no alternatives.
The difference it made to the me, even early on, was amazing. As soon as I 
was convinced it made a difference, I met with the team leaders and discussed 
what I had learned. The team leaders had noticed a difference as well. Meetings 
had become less annoying. (OK, bad meetings were still bad meetings, though 
good meetings were less disruptive.)
The team made this practice a part of their culture. Sure, there were still 
times when they had to break the rules, but those became the exception 
more than the rule. This approach made a difference not only in the context 
of improving creative productivity, but team members also reported that it 
actually made them feel better and reduced stress both during meetings, and 
outside of them.
So whether your company adopts a formal innovation time program or not, 
managers and leaders must realize that creativity and innovation require time 
and focus. Their employees need time to pursue promising innovative ideas. 
Turning an innovative idea into a product, service, or process that is customer-
ready requires investment.
Invest
Many theories exist about how companies can invest in innovation. Some 
organizations buy innovation by acquiring companies that have innovated, by 
investing in those companies, by embedding the innovations of others, or by 
licensing patents. Certainly those are viable strategies, but we would like to 
discuss an alternative to that type of investing in innovation – organic 
innovation.
Organic innovation, innovation that comes from within your company, 
requires investing in your existing employees. Even something as simple as an 
agile spike, as discussed in the previous section, requires the allocation of time 
and resources, which will impact your budget and expenses. It is not as simple 
as telling your team they can spend as much time as they like on innovation as 
long as they do it before 9 a.m. and after 5 p.m., or that they can spend as 
much time as they like on an idea as long as they do everything else they are 
scheduled to do and meet their existing deadlines.
We admit that we have seen this work, though we question the ethics of that 
approach. It also comes with a high price that includes a burned-out team, low 
morale, and destruction of employee trust and loyalty.

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
190
Obviously, there are times for teams to push hard. There are times when a 
person or team will become passionate and excited about something 
innovative and on their own decide to work on it day and night for an extended 
period. That is not what we are referring to.
In addition to budgeting for time and resources that are directly and obviously 
related to specific innovation initiatives, consider investing in your employees 
in other ways. This can be in the form of education, seminars, activities that 
inspire creativity, or even temporarily assigning them to another team, internal 
customer, or external customer. Working in a customer’s shoes can make an 
amazing difference in the solutions that are later developed by an employee. 
It is also amazing how often something unrelated to a specific domain plays a 
significant role in the development of an innovative solution for that domain. 
Cross-pollination of personnel can create opportunities for that to occur.
Investments in innovation can, of course, also be more formal. For example, 
a specific portion of a department’s budget can be set aside for innovative 
activities, though often any pool of funding set aside for innovation morphs to 
become the organization’s emergency fund. Without careful management and 
governance, it can become a pool of funding that is used to address short-
term needs that had not been planned for, which brings us to the next topic.
Take a Longer View
As was mentioned in the previous section, many organizations get caught up 
in short-term activities. They become driven by the day-to-day grind. This is 
similar in nature to the “Inbox” pressure mentioned in Chapter 3. A great 
deal of conviction and discipline is required in order to resist the urge to 
cannibalize an innovation fund in a time of need. It can be even more challenging 
when that fund is managed by the same person responsible for those shorter-
term objectives. Companies that take only a short-term view can become 
irrelevant very quickly, or can be forced to take a less efficient or more 
expensive approach to maintaining their relevancy. They may never lead their 
markets.
One approach to funding innovation is to allocate a percentage of funding to 
different delivery horizons. For example, you might invest 85% of your 
research and development budget to near-term execution (up to a year 
ahead), 10% to the midterm (up to two or three years in advance), and 5% to 
things that may pay off in the longer term (e.g., two to five years), if at all. The 
bottom line is that there must be an acceptance by all that not every 
investment will bear fruit. This fact often leads to debate that then kills 
programs of this nature before they gain momentum, or even get off the 
ground. The discussion often goes something like the following:

191
The Innovative CIO
Presenter: “So, not every one of these investments will lead to a successful 
product or service, though those that do should more than justify the overall 
investment. Any questions?”
Attendee: “So, suppose we commit an amount to a specific project, let’s say 
$120,000 for each of the next two years. What if halfway through the first 
year we realize we are on the wrong path. The remaining $180,000 is given 
back to the operations budget, right? We can use it for whatever we need to 
use it for?”
Presenter: “No. That money stays in the innovation fund.”
Attendee: “So, even though we know we are working on the wrong thing, 
we will continue to invest in it for another 18 months, throwing good money 
after bad. Ridiculous!”
This is where the meeting can turn into a slugfest, especially if there is already 
a great deal of political tension among the attendees. If the attendees continue 
to listen, if the team is mature and disciplined, they will learn about an aspect 
of successful innovation programs that is often lost on people, especially 
those with a short-term, operational focus. In a case such as the example just 
described, the remaining $180,000 would not be returned to operations. 
Neither would it be invested in the failing initiative. It would instead be 
invested in another long-term initiative that showed promise. The total 
amount invested in long-term innovation remains the same.
The key with these programs is to “fail fast.” The more rapidly a team can 
recognize it is on the wrong path, the less investment there will be in the bad 
idea—and the more funding there will be for other innovative ideas that show 
promise.
The irony is that although organizations can benefit from a “fail fast” culture, 
innovation projects require decision makers to have a long attention span. 
New, innovative ideas rarely deliver huge returns in the short term. 
Unfortunately, management teams often measure them in the same ways they 
would an existing star product. Measurements such as the number of new 
customers per month, monthly revenue from the product, or combined 
annual growth rate are likely not as useful in the context of a product or 
service in its early life. Organizations that measure these new things in those 
(old) ways often abandon an initiative that could be a viable and profitable 
product because of their short-term view.
In some cases, organizational leaders who are not part of the innovation 
initiatives look for ways to kill them in order to obtain access to their funding. 
Use of those (“old”) types of measures gives such people all the ammunition 
they need to kill a project. Therefore, leaders of innovative initiatives need to 

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
192
ensure those initiatives are measured in the right ways. Their measurements 
need to ensure the project is progressing and to provide insight into the 
longer-term viability of the initiative. At the same time, the measurements 
must help the initiative to fail fast if that is its ultimate fate.
The fate of innovation funds can be even worse if the discussion described 
earlier does not happen. In those cases, their funding is often moved to 
operations without discussion or forethought.
Spin Off: Do What the Rogues Do
Sometimes a business’s standard best practices serve as huge barriers to 
innovation. A team may find that processes and procedures, that exist for 
normal projects, are slowing down the execution of an innovative idea they 
are trying to bring to life. Those processes may even prevent them from 
making any progress whatsoever, especially if the new innovation involves 
aspects that did not exist when those processes were put in place. Or the 
team may be subject to measurements that are not as useful in the context of 
their new mission (as was discussed previously).
In these cases, spinning the organization off and letting them do new things in 
new ways, using new tools might be a better approach. This approach may 
also enable such a group to take advantage of some of the other measures, 
such as innovation funding and new types of measurements.
To be clear, we are not suggesting teams not be held accountable for their 
work and objectives. We are simply suggesting that there are different 
methods that might be more effective at making them accountable in their 
new context. 
Hire the Right People
This is likely the most critical element of making innovation intentional. Not 
only is it the case that innovation does not happen without people, it does 
not happen without the right people.
This is not simply a matter of skills. Sure, skills matter, but the presence of 
skills alone does not guarantee innovation will occur. As has been discussed 
throughout this book, there are many other things to consider, such as 
passion, personality, and whether the person is well-suited for the team’s 
culture. One bad apple can spoil the barrel. One bad hire can damage a team 
beyond belief.
A team that values their culture and makes it a priority while recruiting can 
itself have a positive impact. It sends a message to potential team members 

193
The Innovative CIO
that will not only help attract the right kinds of people to apply to join the 
team, it can also create benefits that far outlive the recruiting process. Team 
members who have passed muster will have a sense of team pride and esprit 
de corps from the minute they are accepted.
I recently had a conversation with someone who had been a member of such 
a team for approximately a year. The person was extremely passionate while 
describing how much he enjoyed working on the team. He specifically 
mentioned that during the interview process he had been asked a lot of 
questions that were aimed at determining whether he was a good cultural fit 
for the team. He thought his hiring manager’s approach was outstanding, and 
it made his desire to become a member of the team stronger. Even a year 
later, this person was proud he had “passed the test.” Clearly, a cultural fit was 
important in the hiring process.
Get It Out There
As discussed in Chapter 2, perfectionists are those who might never deliver a 
finished product because it would never be good enough to meet their 
standards. But even those who are not perfectionists can take too long to 
bring a product to the public and who can, in so doing, miss an opportunity.
This is a recurring theme in many of the innovation-related conversations and 
presentations by people who have worked at some of the most innovative 
companies that ever existed. For example, during a recent conference I 
attended, Guy Kawasaki, a well-known innovator and former Apple employee, 
summed it up by imploring the audience not to be afraid to ship <something 
before its time>.
There is more to this than you might imagine. It is not only about getting a 
solution to market so that your company can gain revenue from it sooner. It 
is also about listening to your customers.
In the previously mentioned presentation by Marissa Mayer, she gave an 
example from her own experience. She told of a deadlock between a team of 
engineers that could not be resolved. They could not agree which of two 
features to put into a specific product. Their solution to the deadlock was to 
release their product without either feature. They then waited for the 
customer feedback, which came in overwhelmingly in favor of one of the 
features.
So getting your innovation out there, even if a little early, can be a way to 
increase its value to your customers.

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
194
Active Techniques: “You! Go Be innovative!”
“So, you want to innovate, do you? Well, here’s how . . .”
Sound familiar? There are many commonly used idea-generation techniques. 
Some are more successful than others, and certainly some fit specific cultures 
and challenges better than others might. Much has been written about many 
of these, so we will not spend too much time on them. We will, however, 
mention a few that we have used successfully for the sake of illustration. 
Take a SWOT at It
SWOT analysis has been around for quite some time, and it has fallen out of 
favor with some. It is often used to provide an extremely high-level view of a 
competitive landscape or to add context to a plan. Under the right 
circumstances, it can be useful in the context of innovation.
At times, generating innovative ideas is more a function of asking good 
questions than it is about giving good answers, at least initially. It could also be 
argued that without a good question there will never be a good answer. 
Admittedly, sometimes it can be difficult to find those great questions, which 
is why SWOT analysis can be useful.
Sometimes you may find yourself in a position where you are thinking, “So, 
what now?” This may be when you are presented with an outright challenge 
to innovate. It may also be when you have just completed bringing an 
innovation to life. You might ask “what now” at a time when the innovation is 
in operation and all of the innovative ideas that were in your queue have been 
implemented.
Once a team has implemented all of the innovative ideas they had throughout 
the early life of a project there is a risk that the team will fall into an operational 
funk. That nothing new will be brought to the product or service—at least 
nothing innovative—and that it will begin to become irrelevant over time. The 
team’s innovative spirit also becomes at risk.
At those times, a team event that includes a combination brainstorming-
SWOT session can be helpful. These events normally consist of seven time-
limited brainstorming exercises, one for each of the following: developing the 
team’s “mission;” setting high-level “objectives;” enumerating “strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats;” and a discussion of possible “actions.” 
The exercises consist of a time-limited brainstorming session followed by a 
ranking of each of the ideas discussed during the session.
The output from a SWOT session is an updated mission statement; a 
statement of the high-level objectives (ways in which the mission will be 

195
The Innovative CIO
accomplished); a prioritized list of the team’s strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats (the SWOT); and a prioritized list of possible 
innovative ideas that leverages the team’s strengths, minimizes the impact of 
their weaknesses, take advantages of their opportunities, and addresses their 
threats. Ironically, the section teams often have the most difficulty with is the 
“strengths” exercise. That is where the facilitator is critical.
Like any other technique, this one is not a panacea, though it can help when 
a team needs to be revitalized and can serve as an effective team-building 
exercise. Often teams do not get many opportunities to spend a day (or a half 
day) working together toward the same objective. It can also serve as a 
vacation for the mind of each participant. It is worth noting again that a strong 
facilitator who can keep the exercise focused and moving, and who can 
maintain respect and trust among the participants, is key to the success of 
these sessions.
Idea Competitions
In an idea competition, employees—either all of them or those from specific 
organizations—are encouraged to submit ideas by a specific date. As with 
other types of competition, there are normally various prizes awarded. For 
example, we have seen these awards given: a (substantial) trophy for the 
highest number of accepted ideas (bragging rights are more powerful than you 
might imagine), a cash award for any idea that is submitted for patent (or 
receives a patent), and a guaranteed executive sponsorship for the ideas that 
show the most promise in terms of value to the business.
In order for these competitions to be successful, they must be well-defined. 
The objective or domain to be addressed the ideas must be clearly stated and 
understood by all. For example, I was the idea evaluator for a technology-
related innovation challenge. One employee chose to submit a suggestion 
that a very specific type of fitness class be offered for free in the company 
cafeteria. The point is not that the idea was a bad one—it may have been a 
great idea—it simply would not help to achieve the objective of the challenge 
(innovation in a specific domain).
Why is that a problem? Whether or not ideas are relevant, the competition 
evaluators must read every one of them and include them in their deliberations. 
(You don’t know an idea is not relevant to a domain until after you’ve evaluated 
it.) Even with a minimum amount of time dedicated to each of these 
suggestions, this task can consume an enormous amount of the evaluation 
team’s time. Also, each must be responded to and, if appropriate, directed to 
the appropriate team in the company.

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
196
Popular competitions can generate hundreds of ideas, and processing that 
much detailed information can be mind-numbing. A large volume of irrelevant 
submissions can also create a risk that the evaluation team might overlook 
something with great potential (i.e., due to fatigue).
Competitions with more specific objectives can often deliver more spectacular 
results—with the added benefit of a lighter workload for the evaluation team.
If you decide an idea competition is right for your organization, set the 
potential participants’ expectations for evaluation and follow-up so that you 
can meet those expectations. Otherwise, you risk sending the subliminal 
message that innovation does not really matter to you. It’s just something you 
need to check off as having been accomplished.
It is also critical that the evaluation criteria be clearly set, even if that includes 
a statement that the beauty of an idea may be subjective. In one such 
competition, the rules clearly stated that a winner of the grand prize might 
not be chosen. This was because the prize was executive support and budget 
to bring the innovation to life: a substantial commitment. The team was not 
at all obligated to award even a single prize, and the entrants respected the 
sensibility and honesty of the no mandatory winner regulation. Ironically, in 
that case there was a tie for first, and two grand prizes were actually awarded. 
Finally, you must recognize, even before you launch it, that an investment will 
be required. That investment will usually include a significant commitment of 
time from very senior people (to act as sponsors, mentors, and evaluators). It 
may also include funding for prizes, a system to collect the ideas, and even 
commitment to follow through on the ideas (or why collect them).
Follow-through on those commitments is critical. A competition of this 
nature represents a promise to the employees (or customers) who participate. 
Following through on the commitments you made at its outset will tell them 
a lot about your organization and its culture and integrity.
Be prepared to invest before, during, and after the competition.
Speed Rounds
In a speed round, each person or team with ideas are asked to present them 
to a group, one after another. Normally they are given only a brief period of 
time for their presentation, often five or ten minutes. The presentations are 
often followed by a brief period for questions (usually five minutes). Following 
all presentations, attendees (or specific attendees) are allocated one or more 
votes that they can award to one or more of the ideas. (If given more than 
one vote, they are usually permitted to allocate more than one vote to one 

197
The Innovative CIO
or more of the ideas they might be strongly in favor of.) The idea with the 
most votes is the winner, and presumably will be pursued by the team. Often 
multiple ideas are selected for follow-up, and there is nothing to prevent 
someone from following up on an idea that did not win should they believe in 
it.
As with all types of competition, follow-up and commitment are critical. It is 
also important to reinforce throughout the entire exercise that the votes are 
to be cast for the idea with the most promise, not for the best presentation, 
funniest speaker, or person they liked the best.
Done right, this can also serve as a great team-building exercise. This type of 
exercise is also well-suited for all-hands meetings that many teams often host 
annually, or even more frequently.
In addition to its value in promoting innovation, a speed round competition 
can have the additional benefit of improving morale (e.g., as people are allowed 
to voice their ideas in a public forum). They can also serve as an opportunity 
for managers to help their team members grow professionally.
Prescreening ideas can help ensure the best, or most ready, presentations are 
brought to the competition. Coaching and mentoring the presenters will 
ensure those people obtain the best possible experience, as do the attendees.
Many Others
There are many, many other techniques that can be used to generate innovative 
ideas, such as trend unbundling, product deconstruction, and recombinant 
market analysis. There are even different styles of brainstorming. Though we 
could fill an entire book with a discussion of these, we will limit our discussion 
to those we have already covered and move on to something else as important. 
In fact it may even be more important.
Catching the Butterfly
A chrysalis is to a butterfly as an idea is to innovation. If not allowed to 
develop and grow, the idea never becomes an innovation, just as the chrysalis 
never becomes a butterfly. Once a butterfly exists, its beauty must be captured 
(on film, of course). Without proper care and feeding, the butterfly will not 
survive. Without proper care and feeding, innovations are simply flights of 
fancy people have spent their time on.
We have been witness to a large number of great ideas—creative innovations—
that never delivered to their full potential. Many never really delivered any 
substantive benefit whatsoever, even though some had huge potential. In 

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
198
some cases, other companies went on to take the market space that these 
innovations would have addressed, even when the competitive solutions may 
have been inferior to those innovations. Why does that happen?
In many cases, this is due to one of the innovation killers that were discussed 
earlier. But for others, the reason was perhaps both simpler and more 
disappointing: those in possession of the innovative ideas did not know what 
to do with them. They could not execute. Or they simply got caught up in 
their day-to-day operations and eventually forgot about the innovative idea. 
These things are more common than you might believe. And they are far 
more common than they should be.
Own It
One of the most common ways in which we have seen innovations wither in 
their chrysalis is due to lack of clear ownership. In order for an innovation to 
have any chance of success, there must be clear ownership of the activities 
required to turn that idea into a product, component, or service. Some would 
say this is where the real work begins. 
Bringing an innovation to life requires strong leadership and disciplined 
execution. These projects are not likely to be successful without the strong 
sponsorship of a senior executive. Preferably the sponsor should be willing to 
invest time coaching the project’s leader if the leader is not a seasoned or 
more experienced executive. A passive sponsor may not be sufficient unless 
the appointed leader has a tremendous relationship with that sponsor and 
knows how to manage upward.
Co-sponsorship is something to be avoided if possible. Obtaining funding 
from many groups is fine, provided the funding is transferred at the outset; 
however, having more than one senior leader in the role of executive sponsor 
can create more problems than it solves. On one end of the spectrum, all 
leaders may possess plausible deniability as a result of shared ownership. This 
can mean nobody is truly accountable, and the project will receive no attention 
as a result. On the other end, all leaders may decide to become active, which 
can lead to conflicts in direction or even in simple things like reporting formats 
and measures. At the very least, this will consume an inordinate amount of 
the project leader’s time. At worst, the project will fail because of it.
With a clear owner, there is no ambiguity with regard to who is accountable 
for project structure and execution, and for follow-up with the innovators.
In addition, without the proper investments in resources and personnel, the 
owner will have little chance at success. The sponsor must invest in the owner 
and in the project, which may require assigning some of their best and brightest 

199
The Innovative CIO
people to the project. One would hope this would make obvious sense to 
sponsors, since they would not likely be sponsoring the project if they did not 
see its potential value to the business. However, someone suffering from one 
of the innovation illnesses may decide to lead or sponsor the initiative so they 
can ensure its demise. That does happen. We have witnessed it in action, and 
some are very good at hiding their intentions.
Don’t Be Too Smart
It is often stated, “Sometimes less is more.” That is certainly often the case in 
the context of delivering an innovative solution to others. It can be tempting 
to dump every feature and option possible into a new, innovative solution, but 
it is much better to keep things simple at the outset. Put the most valuable 
and compelling features in the solution, roll it out in a small scale, and shake 
down the processes required in order to deliver the benefits to a broader set 
of consumers.
The more complex the solution, the more room there will be for error. It will 
also be more challenging to deploy and more difficult for potential consumers 
to understand, especially when implementing a breakthrough idea that is 
dramatically different than things that have come before it.
Do you find it hard to believe that simple things can be difficult for people to 
understand when they are first introduced? Consider the introduction of the 
mouse. Today most of us take using a mouse for granted, and actions such as 
double-clicking are second nature to us. However, one of the most difficult 
challenges some of us faced in the 1990s was teaching mainframe technicians 
how to use a mouse to double-click: “Press the button on the left twice while 
your cursor is hovering over the icon. No faster. Not that fast. Why is the 
system slow? We just launched the program 27 times. We need to wait until 
it’s finished.” This may appear nonsensical now, and that is exactly the point. 
What is second nature to us today was not always so.
In addition, complex solutions will be potentially slower, and they may cost 
more to operate.
This topic reminds me of a lesson I learned as a child. On occasion, I would 
approach a simple problem in a work setting with what I believed to be a very 
elegant approach. At times, (usually) these solutions would require more 
effort, which I did not mind at all. However, the lesson I often learned was 
that the elegant solutions often did not deliver any more value to my 
customers or employer than a much simpler solution would have. In fact, the 
elegant solutions were sometimes less valuable. Furthermore, sometimes the 
additional effort required would put the timelines at risk. It was at those 

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
200
times my family would impart some small town wisdom: “Sometimes it’s best 
not to be ‘too smart.’” That is, it is possible to overthink and over deliver.
Finally, delivering simple solutions will bring forth the added benefit mentioned 
in the “Get It Out There” section earlier in this chapter. It will provide others 
with an opportunity to help you make your solution better and more relevant 
while you are still in a position to act upon their suggestions.
Get Out of the Way
There are many things that organizations do—either intentionally or 
unintentionally—to impede the delivery of innovative solutions. Two of the 
most common we encounter are inflexible, heavy process and overactive 
leadership.
Consider that an innovative idea by its very nature may be something that 
those who designed your corporate business practices might never have 
considered while developing those processes. For example, a development 
process built to manage 18-month projects may be so heavy that the 
developers working on a short-term innovation initiative are putting more 
actual effort into the maintenance of project artifacts and compulsory 
activities than they are into the project itself. We have seen that happen, in 
some cases over and over. This presents another leadership opportunity for 
the project owner.
It is the project owner’s responsibility to be a resource to the team in this 
regard by tearing down walls, understanding the issues, and driving the 
necessary changes and exceptions into the business processes. Incidentally, 
many large organizations have one or more people who are exceptionally 
good at removing obstacles. They can rapidly break through to the most 
important issues—understand what can and must change, and understand 
what cannot and should not change. They also possess the networking skills 
required in order to overcome the obstacles any project team may encounter, 
and usually have a substantial personal network. One of these master 
networkers may not always be the leader of the project. If it is not, enlisting 
the assistance of such a person can have an enormous positive impact on a 
project’s outcome, and it will allow the owner to focus on other things. 
Another way in which leaders and managers can help teams during the 
execution phase is to leave them alone. This is not to suggest managers and 
leaders should not lead their teams. Rather we are suggesting they not do the 
work for them. While leaders, especially those higher in the organization 
structure, need to set direction and ensure their teams are progressing 
toward the achievement of their objectives, micromanaging their teams will 
most likely be more than counterproductive.

201
The Innovative CIO
While working on a project with the members of another team, I asked them 
to show me one of the new projects they had been working on. They were, 
of course, proud to do so. During the demonstration, I asked whether a 
specific function was available or planned. The response was shocking.
The person demonstrating the solution completely lost his temper and went 
on an amazing rant. Why? The team had wanted to put that functionality into 
the product. They believed it addressed a key requirement and would make 
the solution compelling. They had not included the feature because their 
senior executive ordered them to leave it out.
That executive, a former developer with deep technical skills, reviewed their 
work regularly. When he encountered something he would have done 
differently, he made them change it. He made them do it his way. If you think 
this is bad, it gets worse.
This team was created from the most talented engineers in the company. They 
had been tasked with developing new, innovative solutions—to create break-
through innovation. Every member of the team was at the peak of their craft, 
and they had a proven track record of innovations and patents to prove it.
Not only were the team members completely frustrated, the senior leader’s 
ideas were often worse and sometimes outright wrong.
We have found that providing the right people with the right objectives and 
questions and letting them develop creative solutions on their own can deliver 
far better results. Give them some creative freedom and watch them amaze 
you, but remember, the phrase “the right people” is important in this context.
To be clear, we are not suggesting that teams not be managed. Nor are we 
suggesting that managers should let their teams wander off in a direction they 
know to be wrong. (Sometimes a team will misinterpret an objective.) We are 
simply proposing that there are often many ways to accomplish something, 
and that sometimes more than one of them are equally valid. To all leaders 
and managers, we also suggest that someone else’s way may actually be better 
than yours.
Develop Good Habits
Sometimes little things can make a big difference. That is certainly the case in 
the context of innovation. Simple habits such as always having a way to record 
ideas wherever and whenever they occur to you and having the discipline to 
review those ideas regularly can make an amazing difference.
Even the existence of a regularly scheduled idea competition can be an 
impetus for people to capture their ideas. Sometimes a financial incentive or 

Chapter 9 | Making Innovation Intentional
202
public recognition can result in the development of better habits throughout 
an organization. For example, many companies offer a financial reward to 
inventors whose ideas pass a review and are submitted for patent. In some 
cases when patents are granted, inventors receive another award or are 
recognized in other ways (e.g., on a plaque or trophy that is placed in a 
prominent, public area in their office). Though on the surface these gestures 
may appear to be small, they can go a long way to building good habits, and 
they have resulted in increases in idea capture and patent applications.
Taking action to develop good habits for capturing and sharing ideas can 
deliver amazing results.
Do Not Welcome Failure
Initially the title of this section was to be “Do Not Accept Failure.” While I 
do feel that title appropriately communicates the sentiment of this section, I 
recognized it might give a false impression that I believe that one should never 
give up on an idea, no matter how bad it turns out to be. Or that one should 
never look at the brutal facts and admit when they were wrong about an idea. 
They should.
However, too often people are willing to give up on a good idea without so 
much as a whimper. That is, they give up without at least giving some 
consideration to a broader set of factors. For example, perhaps the innovation 
is being delivered to the wrong audience, applied to the wrong problem, or 
offered under the wrong business model. It may simply be that the idea is 
good and the execution is bad—all that is needed is a new approach to breathe 
new life into the innovation. This is yet another reason why listening to 
customers and not-yet-customers is critical. They will often provide the 
answer in those cases. Often what is not obvious to you will be obvious to 
them.
It may also be the case that the innovative offering is just too far ahead of the 
market, or at least the market to which you are presenting it.
Train the Coaches
Training your coaches may be the single most important thing you can do to 
increase the innovative output of your organization.
If you believe, as we do, that innovation can come from anyone, then you 
might also want to take note that there are usually a lot more “anyones” at 
the bottom of an organization’s hierarchy than there are elsewhere. Great 

203
The Innovative CIO
ideas often come from those people, so it is critical that all managers, even 
the most junior team lead, know what to do when that happens.
All managers must know how to capture and evaluate an idea. They need to 
know how to assess its value and applicability. They need to know where to 
take it when it addresses an opportunity outside their own domain. They 
need to know whom to contact if they are not sure about its value.
Though all managers and leaders must possess these skills, this type of 
coaching is extremely important for more junior managers. There are usually 
a lot more of them, and they are often the first to learn of new ideas. These 
managers must also know how to respond when presented with a truly silly 
idea. They must know how to funnel the creative spirit demonstrated by the 
employee in a direction more likely to result in a relevant innovation. Above 
all, they must know how to do so in a way that will not crush the innovative 
spirit of their colleague or employee. Their team must continue to feel 
comfortable to share creative ideas freely. (OK, they must also know how to 
ensure their team’s time is not being wasted on too many obviously 
unproductive ideas.)
If you are not yet convinced of the importance of this, consider the television 
series Undercover Boss. In this series, senior executives of major corporations 
(often as senior as the CEO) put on a disguise and go to work on the front 
lines of their organization. They perform tasks ranging from manufacturing 
line jobs to customer service to custodial functions to telephone support to 
back office functions. Quite often what they discover delivers amazing value 
to their organizations. They are also often presented with high-value, 
innovative ideas from their front-line employees; ideas that these employees 
have had for a long time. In most cases, these employees had no idea what to 
do with their ideas, and they often felt that nobody would care about their 
ideas or even listen to them.
It is also critical to make it as simple as possible for employees to share ideas 
and to reduce the friction of creative sharing. Some of the techniques that 
have been discussed earlier in this chapter will help reduce that friction. In 
addition, classic approaches such as idea walls, which are places—usually 
online—where people can share their ideas and advice, and can encourage 
innovative ideas and aid in their metamorphosis. Each approach has its 
challenges, though we believe capturing an idea, even in a less than perfect 
way, is better than not capturing it at all.

c h a p t e r
10
Connecting IT 
Innovation 
with Business 
Value
You will be as much value to others as you have been to yourself.   
—Marcus Tullius Cicero (January 3, 106 BC–December 7, 43 BC)
In this book, we have often said that an idea must be accompanied by action 
to turn it into an innovation. Action demands investment, and investment will 
only be made if there is a potential return. We have stated that IT innovations 
for the IT department that are not for cost-cutting purposes only have value 
if they are considered as investments that will grow the business. This may be 
the development of a more flexible and adaptive system for M&A activity. It 
may be to improve the speed of response on a critical part of the infrastructure. 
Innovation needs to be related back to business value to have credibility.
The business case is frequently the place for stating the value of a fresh 
innovative project. Establishing a value for an existing IT infrastructure is not 
easy. IT is an intangible and only really noticed if it is absent. This statement 
was illustrated clearly when a major UK bank failed to update customer 
accounts for several days. The failure made worldwide news. That an organi-
zation is functioning normally and there are no problems reported is not news 

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
206
unless you are a part of a very disorganized company. Ask a few executives in 
any organization, and they are likely to say that IT is vital to that organization. 
They will tell you that the organization cannot function without it. Despite 
this assertion, some organization’s executives have a negative view of IT, 
colored by perceived problems like poor web site navigation or the failure of 
a document to print. I know of one organization where the CFO threatened 
to reduce the budget of the IT department because of this reason: 
We spend all these millions on IT, and I can’t even print a simple document. Oh, 
and the copier is out of toner again.
In this chapter, we will explore the characteristic differences in attitude that 
CIOs, CEOs, and CFOs have toward innovation. 
We will discuss reporting and measuring innovation and the typical pitfalls, 
barriers, and objections facing someone who is developing an innovation push. 
We will also talk about how these can be identified and addressed in the 
context of a real-world example. This chapter is all about how you persuade 
your organization to see the business value in your innovation project and to 
keep the project on track by communicating that value to the right person at 
the right time.
How to Align Efforts in Innovation  
with Broader Business Values
Aligning innovation with business values has similar challenges to aligning IT 
with business. Aligning IT with business implies alignment with business 
requirements. Aligning IT with business values implies a judgment call that the 
business requirements will add value. Much has been written about aligning IT 
with business through the years. In the halcyon days of business IT, when 
functionality moved from the geek-infested IT departments to be closer to 
the user, people were predicting that IT would change the world of work and 
play. Microcomputers became cheaper and large numbers of desktops were 
purchased, but underneath this seeming success was a frustration. IT did not 
seem to deliver what the business wanted. It was also said that IT couldn’t 
deliver what business wanted because business could not define what they 
wanted well enough. This is one of the reasons for the rise of requirements 
engineering as a science. The disconnect was seen as an alignment problem, 
and it has been with us ever since.
Aligning innovation efforts with business values suffers from the same issues. 
An innovation may not have an immediate or obvious business value, yet have 
a complementary value to another innovation. The complementary innova-

207
The Innovative CIO
tions need to be evaluated together. There has been a lot of research into 
so-called complementarities in innovation. This research has been conducted 
mostly in the domain of resource-based views of strategy. Establishing the 
complementary nature of many innovations is not easy. Using an analysis of 
complementary innovations can deliver a better understanding of the value of 
the innovation portfolio. With each proposed innovation, there is a cost and 
often there is no immediate relationship between the cost of the innovation 
and the value to the business. Establishing a portfolio-based valuation of 
innovation will enable complementary innovations to express their true value. 
We talk about this more in the section of this chapter on reporting and 
measuring. 
Aligning innovation to business strategy requires a knowledge of the business 
strategy, but innovators must also have an understanding of their expert 
domain. New technologies and IT processes should be evaluated as part of a 
constant search for business value. It is equally important to establish the cost 
of any business process change. The cost of business process change is also a 
cost of an innovation. You can think of the cost of an innovation being 
calculated by this formula:
Cost of IT implementation project + 
Cost of business process change = 
Total cost of innovation
The cost of business process change is the cost of all the evaluation, design, 
communication, education, and training that the changed business process 
requires. Some organizations ignore this part of an innovation with the 
subsequent problems of cost overrun that can ensue. CIOs introducing an 
IT-led innovation should not neglect business process change as part of their 
plan. The cost of the IT implementation is usually the major cost element in 
any business case. The business process change needs to be factored into the 
business case. 
If the innovations are to be IT-led, then the technology-aware CIO has to be 
able to engage with the people most responsible for the business strategy. 
This means a deeper understanding of their cultural and mindset differences. 
For someone in a line of business, the most frequent driving force is quarterly 
performance. This is something that is alien to many innovative projects that 
need discussion, experimentation, and modification before they can deliver. It 
would be difficult to try to persuade someone with a line of business mindset 
to sponsor or support an innovation unless the value was readily apparent and 
the delivery was within their timeframe, normally a three-month period. 
Resolving this language/mindset barrier is the first step to aligning innovation 
efforts with broader business values.

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
208
How to Discuss Innovation Outside of IT:  
Learning to Speak CEO and CFO
Innovation is important for business growth. There have been a number of 
surveys of CEOs conducted on a regular basis, and these surveys often show 
that the majority of CIOs are innovating internally, either in IT itself or in the 
wider business. Few of these CIOs are innovating externally to produce 
market-facing or new market innovations. This is often expressed as an issue 
by the CEOs. Communication between the CIO and the CEO is one area 
that can help both in internal innovation but also in external innovation. The 
use of the right language, understandable by the target audience, often clears 
up misunderstanding and confusion. An understanding of the motivations and 
mindset of the different members of the C-level is a necessary part of selecting 
the right language. We have spent many years meeting and talking with 
business people and have identified that the CEO and CFO are the executives 
more generally interested in innovation across the company. Conversely the 
Chief Marketing officer and other members of the C-level are interested in 
innovation in their own domain. Understanding the audience for your 
innovative proposal can smooth the communication and ensure that the 
message is clear, concise, and presents your argument in a way that gains 
maximum acceptance:
• 
CEOs have a split focus. Part of their concentration is focused 
on the current growth of the organization, and the other part 
is on the future growth. Current growth is not normally a 
target for innovation since the timescales are too short for 
anything innovative that requires lengthy implementation. 
Innovation to drive future growth will capture the attention 
of the CEO as long as it is clear that your focus is on growth 
in the future. Once you have captured the CEO’s attention, 
you don’t have much time to explain the benefits and potential 
of the innovation. There is a challenge in this—CIOs tend to 
be detail-oriented and CEOs expect the big picture. If you 
are presenting a report, spend the majority of the time talking 
about the broad picture that should be part of your executive 
summary and leave the details for questions and background. 
CEOs are also invested with a sense of urgency. Your 
innovation may be a compelling idea, but will take time to 
deliver. CEOs may be driven to the more immediate innovative 
solution, such as a merger or acquisition to deliver the results 
faster. If the fastest way to deliver on an innovative idea is 
through M&A, you need to have an M&A strategy in place. 
Going to the CEO with a good idea, agreeing to buying a 

209
The Innovative CIO
company to fill the skills gap, and then failing to integrate and 
support the acquisition is not a good scenario for success, as 
we noted in Chapter 8.
• 
CFOs are charged with maintaining and improving the 
financial health of the organization. CFOs tend to develop a 
risk-averse attitude to anything that has a cost. They are 
mostly interested in numbers—not outcomes. This can 
generate a misunderstanding between you and the CFO 
because innovations are not generally easy to measure and 
quantify. CFOs most frequently evaluate projects on the 
Return on Investment (ROI) measure. ROI on an innovation 
is not easy to establish, partly because the return from some 
innovations may take a long time to arrive. ROI is most 
frequently used to measure the success of a well-defined 
implementation of existing technology. If you have an 
innovative idea for a new product, you will need to develop 
the product, invest in marketing, and then sell the product. 
Depending on the maturity of the market and the sales cycle 
for the product, it could be three or more years before you 
get a realistic view of the return on your innovation. This 
would give a poor ROI measure compared with implementing 
an upgraded e-mail system. CFOs are interested in the future, 
but they have a clear preference for results and return-
oriented milestones. The CFO will also appreciate cost-
saving innovations. You should be cautious about overstating 
the cost savings to the CFO. Setting expectations too high 
will affect your credibility when you propose the next 
innovative project.
The CEO and CFO are likely to be the arbiters of the innovation budget. The 
CEO sets the vision, and the CFO sets the budget. Both of these executives 
will be valuable sponsors of innovation if you can gain their attention and 
engage their imagination. The two depictions given are stereotypical views of 
the mindsets and attitudes of these two members of the executive suite. 
They point out some of their most prominent attitudes and behavior. It is 
possible for you to establish their concerns and enthusiasms in your discussions 
with them. 
If you want to engage with the CEO and CFO outside of your normal 
reporting and business discussions, you will need to pick a topic that is not a 
product or existing business process innovation but something more 
adventurous. One suggestion is that you take something that is new and 
interesting but is most likely something that has not been considered by either 

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
210
the CEO or CFO. In Chapter 8, we discussed the concept of ambient 
telepresence. This is not on the horizon for most executives at the moment. 
Discussing ambient telepresence with the CEO and CFO may generate 
interesting conversations and could show two different views. The CEO may 
feel that there are no communication problems that need to be fixed. After 
all, they can have face-to-face conversations with their leadership team when 
they want. The leadership may travel often, but they are generally co-located 
in company headquarters. Also most people come running if the CEO hints 
they need a conversation! The CFO, however, may view ambient telepresence 
as an innovation with a high potential for cost reduction. Any international or 
global business is likely to have a large travel budget. This is often one of the 
single most expensive items in the cost of doing business. Any CFO with a 
budgetary line item of travel will tell you that reducing the cost of travel is a 
major controllable priority. If you offer the opportunity to reduce travel and 
improve communication at the same time, it would be a surprise to me if the 
CFO did not become an immediate and enthusiastic supporter.
This assumes that an innovative project is successful. Communicating realistic 
estimates including a potential failure is just as important as communicating 
the potential for success. Many discussions and presentations focus on the 
advantages of success but seldom mention failure. This would be an error of 
judgment. Failure may happen, and the C-level can be unforgiving of a surprise 
failure. Unpleasant surprises can have a permanent effect on innovation and 
your own career. Carrying out a risk assessment on a proposal and 
communicating the risk is important. Total failure, where the whole innovative 
project crashes and burns, is something that has to be dealt with. 
A risk assessment should also provide information about the remedial action 
that may be needed if a risk occurs as well as the probability of a risk happening. 
A good example of this is in the world of research. It is an accepted risk that 
a research project may fail to deliver all or some of the results anticipated. 
Even for complete failure, there remains the knowledge that something can’t 
be done. This knowledge has value to a researcher. Innovation shares some of 
the characteristics of research, but if failure comes as a surprise, extolling the 
virtues of knowledge rather than success may not help the image of innovation 
in the company.
There are other members of the management team, particularly in the C-level, 
who may be potential supporters or sponsors of your innovations. They may 
have different attitudes and motivations than the CEO and CFO, but they can 
be relied on to support innovations that have a direct positive effect on their 
part of the business. 

211
The Innovative CIO
• 
Chief Sales Officer (CSO) or the head of sales will be 
interested in innovations that increase potential sales. The 
world of sales is driven by immediate or short-term returns. 
Therefore, implementing a mobile app that can improve 
customer relations will be appealing if the app can be shown 
to have a fast and significant effect on sales. Sales and LOB 
management are focussed on quarterly returns and year-end 
results since this is often the way they are measured and 
compensated.
• 
Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) or head of marketing has a 
view of innovation focussed on improvements in commu-
nication and messaging. Marketing and PR are heavy users of 
social media and communications technology. They often 
allocate part of their budget for procuring communications 
devices and software. This should not be seen as a problem 
of IT outside the control of the IT department—it should be 
seen as an opportunity. Marketing may consider using part of 
their budget to fund an innovation should they see an 
improvement in communication and messaging. 
Sales and marketing staff are also skilled presenters of ideas and having them 
as sponsors will ensure that the innovation is seen in the best light, without 
techno-babble. Getting either or both of these stakeholders involved and 
enthusiastic can improve the chance of success of your proposal.
Beware of the Imitation Trap
In a meeting some time ago, I was told about the CIO of a firm of lawyers. The 
CIO said that innovating a business process in the firm was difficult. He could 
never get innovation funded unless he was able to mention that a rival firm of 
lawyers was making the same changes. This was the only tactic he could use 
to get an innovation approved, but he ran the risk of falling into the imitation 
trap. In the middle of the “noughties,” there was a vogue for large and 
expensive customer relationship management software implementations. 
Many companies embarked on one- or two-year efforts to revolutionize their 
customer relations and improve sales and customer satisfaction. There was an 
expectation of unique insight into the customer base from applying these 
tools. The concern I have is the similarity of the solutions. If all the companies 
collect the same data, stored in the same CRM system with the same data 
structure and querying capabilities, what is the differentiator? Identical 
solutions will deliver identical results.

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
212
Imitation may be the sincerest form of flattery, but it is not a differentiator. 
Imitation does have a place in an innovator’s portfolio if it is ensures that your 
company avoids commercial disadvantages. Figure 10-1 highlights that 
innovations can be categorized into four separate groups. The top two groups 
are strategic and disruptive innovations. They are responsible for competitive 
advantage, and neither of these two groups contain any imitative innovations. 
The lower two groups categorize innovations according to their area of 
influence. These groups are where the catch-up or imitative innovations can 
be categorized. If a competitor creates a disruptive or strategic innovation, it 
may alter the requirements for your products and services or your business 
process. The first organization to produce a mobile banking application for 
the phone created a disruptive innovation; it could also be described as a 
strategic innovation for that organization. If your company needs to offer the 
same services as a competitor, that may be classed as imitation, but at least it 
prevents you from being at a competitive disadvantage. This is similar to 
matching another organization’s business process changes. 
Figure 10-1. Four categories are included here for classifying innovation. 
There is a good rule of thumb when considering if your innovation is merely 
imitation. If the innovation will ensure that your competitors lose their 
advantage, then it is valid. It the innovation does not make a significant 
contribution, then you should consider that it is an imitation and not follow 
the herd. 
How to Persuade the C-level to  
Take a Chance on Innovation
We have discussed communications and creating a group of sponsors who 
will be prepared to be your allies when it comes to developing an innovation. 

213
The Innovative CIO
There are three key points to maintaining their support and making success 
more likely:
• 
Developing your vision: As we have mentioned several times, 
this is allied to the business strategy. The IT vision should be 
a business-focused vision, not a technology-heavy vision. 
• 
Communicating the change: Poor communications are at the 
heart of resistance to change. As an innovative CIO, your job 
is to tell people what the change is, what it will bring to them 
and the organization, and how it will be implemented.
• 
Embody a sense of urgency: Good ideas stay as good ideas 
unless they are acted on. The sense of urgency for actions 
will ensure you are not playing catchup all the time, but that 
you are instead taking the lead.
These three areas are important in persuading the C-level to take a chance on 
innovation. The vision will demonstrate business-focused leadership. 
Communications will build confidence that the innovation is the right one and 
being implemented well. The sense of urgency will generate confidence that 
the innovation will be part of the immediacy of modern business. In the next 
section of this chapter, we will discuss how you can make innovation part of 
the company strategic planning and how to tell executives how well you are 
doing.
Persuading the CEO and other members of the C-level is not easy. The focus 
in any organization is growth, and the opposite is stagnation. Using these 
tools and the other methods in this book will help you create the strategic 
vision, have the necessary changes communicated, and if you add urgency into 
the mix, the arguments are likely to be compelling.
Making IT Innovation Part of  
the Strategic Planning
In Chapter 4, we talked about business strategy and its influence on IT. Many 
CIOs are faced with the challenge of implementing IT for a business strategy 
even though they were not involved in the decision. This can lead to frustration, 
but it also means that the strategic planning team has made decisions with an 
incomplete understanding of the relevant IT facts. The information about new 
and existing IT capabilities would be needed for the strategy team to be able 
to decide if their requirements are realistic. There is also the strong chance 
that a team without an IT leadership member would miss an opportunity to 
use strategic or disruptive IT innovations to lead a business innovation. 

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
214
The results of the CA Technologies survey we mentioned in Chapter 4 
showed that 64% of CIOs do not report to the CEO1. The CIOs who report 
to different C-level members are not often considered as part of the executive 
team for planning purposes. These CIOs only have the option to become 
influencers to the business strategy rather than having a direct input.
Influencing the C-level often requires more than a few suggestions and 
discussions. It is sometimes necessary to classify innovations into groups that 
are easier for the C-level to understand. This also helps you to explain the 
difference in emphasis that you may place on innovations that may not match 
the emphasis of other senior managers or executives with their own 
enthusiasm. Remember Figure 10-1 that showed the four different categories 
of innovation? You can regard this figure as a tool to help you to classify an 
innovation correctly. This tool will enable you to label an innovation as 
strategic, relating to the company strategy—for example, creating a mobile 
phone app to locate sales staff who are on the road. The innovation may be 
classified as disruptive—generating a fundamental change like enhanced reality 
displays. Updating a core product to include capabilities present in a 
competitor’s offering, like adding a camera to a mobile phone, can be classified 
as a core product and service innovation. Making the move from telephone 
banking to Internet banking would be an innovation that fits into the business 
support innovation part of Figure 10-1. Core product and business support 
innovations are not part of the strategic planning process. Both strategic 
innovations and disruptive innovations must be considered as part of the 
strategic planning process.
Working with C-Suite and the Board  
to Bring IT into Strategic Planning
Being an influencer of senior management requires a different approach to 
developing innovative ideas. Legitimacy of the CIO is important, and there are 
several ways in which it can be demonstrated:
• 
Legitimacy by stature: This is often a feature of the expertise 
of CIOs and their prominence in the company, their length of 
tenure, and their expertise demonstrated outside the 
organization. CIOs in this position are believed because of 
who they are and what they know. CIOs who do not report 
1 “The Future Role of the CIO,” CA Technologies, October 2011, www.ca.com/us/collateral/
white-papers/na/The-Future-Role-of-the-CIO-Becoming-the-Boss.aspx, retrieved on May 
2012.

215
The Innovative CIO
to the CEO may not be seen as plausible because of their 
place in the reporting hierarchy.
• 
Legitimacy by interest: A competitor may be publicly imple-
menting or embracing an innovation, and this makes it a 
potentially valid idea. This is one situation where you need to 
be aware of the imitation trap. Imitation in the core or 
support areas of Figure 10-1 is valid, but may fail to excite the 
audience.
• 
Legitimacy by demonstration: Here the legitimacy of the 
innovation is demonstrated by use of a prototype or mockup 
of the innovation. Often these prototypes can be achieved 
with a small amount of funding or through skunk works, but 
they are no less effective. There has been a lot of hype, in the 
past, about RFID and its potential to revolutionize retail and 
particularly the supermarket business. Several IT companies 
and supermarkets built demonstration stores that showed 
the use of RFID. These demonstrated contact free shopping 
and walk-through checkouts. These stores were relatively 
expensive demonstration sites. But in order to generate 
understanding and enthusiasm for an idea, it is sometimes 
important to help others visualize the concepts. You may 
think it trite, but in many cases a picture really is worth a 
thousand words.
• 
Legitimacy by analyst: Industry analysts frequently write papers 
that look to the future and make suggestions about new 
trends. These can either be gleaned from the web sites of 
analysts, meetings, or articles in the national or trade press. 
Some CEOs will ask what opinion makers think of an idea, 
even if you have developed a compelling case for the 
innovation. A regular scan of the trade press relevant to your 
organization will also ensure that you are thinking and talking 
the same language as your peers or CEO.
Each of these areas of establishing the legitimacy of an innovation is valid on 
its own. Alternatively you may find that a judicious mix of some or all of these 
methods may be needed to establish an idea as valid. One of the hurdles that 
you may have to overcome is the digital literacy of the C-level executive. 
There are a number of commentators who see an increase in the digital 
literacy of the general public increasing with the advent of consumer-driven IT. 
I was talking to a CIO recently who mentioned that this was an illusion. 
Understanding how to use e-mails and social networking tools to interact 
with people is different from being digitally literate. 

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
216
In 2004, I met a customer—who was a senior executive—processing a huge 
pile of paper. When I asked what he was doing, he said he was reading his 
e-mails. He had a daily print out of e-mails done by his secretary. He would 
write comments and responses on the paper and give them back to his 
secretary to work on for the following day. At the other end of the scale, we 
have the digital natives who have difficulty with handwriting when they leave 
full-time education. It is true that over time the older executives will be 
replaced by a generation who has never known a world without the Internet 
or smartphones. Even then these new executives would not be expected to 
understand the world of innovative IT in the same way as the company IT 
specialist. Handling the lack of digital literacy in the rest of the senior 
management team is a difficult task, but it offers enormous opportunities for 
the CIO to develop into an essential part of the business strategy team.
Getting onto the Strategy Team
If you are not a member of the corporate strategy team, there are ways of 
infiltrating that group and becoming a trusted member of the team. While you 
may think it is obvious, the first thing to do is to review your IT strategy. If 
you haven’t got one, get one. There are many ways to develop a strategic plan, 
but this topic is outside the scope of this book. Joe Peppard and John Ward, 
in their book on strategic planning for information systems, developed a 
strategic planning framework that you can use as a starting point2. If there is 
no IT strategy, then it would be difficult to discuss the strategy for the business 
because you would have no credibility as a strategist. Several times in this 
book we have made the point that there should not be a separate business 
and IT strategy—they should be merged into one. Merging the IT strategy 
with the business strategy is only possible if you have developed your IT 
strategy using a well-considered and clear process.
Orders for IT support from business strategists should be considered against 
an existing IT strategy. Having to adapt an IT strategy due to business demands 
is not a chore; it should generate a view of the IT department as a flexible, 
well-organized group. 
The prevailing attitude of senior management is that IT is a cost of doing 
business. There is an understanding of how important IT is to the business, 
but many companies are not exploiting IT to the fullest extent to drive 
business growth. The CIO becoming part of the strategy team should change 
that, but only if the CIO is seen as open and flexible and capable of thinking 
strategically. We have suggested that having an IT strategy be the first step in 
2 John L Ward and Joe Peppard, Strategic Planning for Information Systems (John Wiley and Sons,  
2002).

217
The Innovative CIO
becoming a member of the corporate strategy group. However, this is not the 
only qualification. It is also important to understand the business needs and 
requirements of the company. 
If you can, gain access to the business strategy. Understanding the business 
strategy will make it possible for you to review that strategy against the work 
you have done to build your own IT strategy. You may discover some flaws in 
the business strategy. It is often the case that a set of fresh eyes can see things 
that are hidden to insiders. You may also see that your IT strategy needs 
modification. In either case, it is important that you communicate your 
findings about the business strategy in a nonjudgmental way. Making suggestions 
where IT can improve the business strategy is the first step in gaining the trust 
you will need to become a regular member of the business strategy team.
Reporting and Measuring the  
Business Value of Innovation
Many commentators have mentioned that the more abstract an innovation 
idea is, the harder it is to evaluate. The hardest innovations to measure and 
evaluate are the most difficult to get funding or mindset for further work. 
Reporting and measuring the business value of innovation is generally 
acknowledged as one of the biggest challenges in developing and maintaining 
an innovative culture in a business. Innovators are almost universal in identifying 
the measurement of innovation as a problem of communication with the 
other members of the organization. Companies with little or no history of 
innovation have measurement that is seldom adaptable to measure innovation. 
Innovation is not the only situation where measurement is a problem. 
Estimation of project duration and cost is an issue across the whole industry. 
Some specifics fit the innovation case more closely. Scott Anthony, in his 
Harvard Business Review article “The Planning Fallacy and The Innovators 
Dilemma,” makes the point that organizations often make exaggerated claims 
of the financial return on an innovation.3 They also underestimate the project 
duration. Anthony notes that humans are bad at estimating how long a task 
will take. In his article, he put together an interesting sample of data about 
disruptive companies to illustrate his point that looking at historical data may 
give perspective and help develop more accurate estimates. He finally indicates 
that using an uninvolved outsider can counter a possibly unrealistic insider 
estimate. 
3 Scott Anthony, “The Planning Fallacy and the Innovator’s Dilemma,” Harvard Business Review, 
August 2012, http://blogs.hbr.org/anthony/2012/08/the_planning_fallacy_and_the_i.html, 
retrieved on August 2012. 

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
218
We are not suggesting that you pull someone off the street to look at your 
plans, but someone from another part of the business, respected for their 
integrity, may be a good person to review your plans and offer constructive 
criticism. The bullet points below are from a conversation with a business 
manager that has bearing on this and other parts of the chapter. This manager 
recognized the problems with measuring innovative activites and the conflict 
between those activities and a quarterly-based revenue stream for mature 
products.
During the research for this book, I interviewed the general manager of a 
business unit in a Fortune 500 Company. This manager, who has a good track 
record for generating business from innovation, had a few things to say about 
getting an innovative product off the ground, including reporting and measuring 
innovation:
• 
Before you start building a team, make sure you have the 
support of the CEO—although that doesn’t mean that other 
executives won’t try and kill your project. They’ll just find it 
harder.
• 
Recognize that you will spend more time on internal issues 
than promoting the innovative product outside.
• 
Corporate culture and business practices can kill an innovation 
before it has left the drawing board. Employees often see 
innovation as mere widow-dressing.
• 
You may encounter whispering campaigns across the company 
suggesting that the effort is failing. The only way to counter 
this is to communicate often and positively—press and 
analyst reports are very useful. 
• 
Internal processes don’t often fit your requirements. Your 
project may not fit the project management processes and 
won’t get milestone signoff from other parts of the company. 
Ignore them or bypass them if you need to. Set up your own 
internal measures.
• 
Measurement is difficult. You have a lack of alignment on 
success metrics with the mature parts of the business, and 
you can’t view progress and success through a mature 
business lens.
• 
Senior management doesn’t have the appropriate “carrot and 
stick” to encourage their support for innovation. Their staff 

219
The Innovative CIO
will focus on their own personal needs—not for the good of 
the project.
• 
There are unrealistic revenue-based measures placed on you 
that are always going to predict failure. Try and avoid these 
where you can or get the CFO onside so that the importance 
of these measures is reduced in the case of an innovative 
project.
Despite all the struggles, internal conflicts and constant vigilance, when he 
was asked if it was worth it, the general manager said that he was proud of 
the team’s achievements. They were making steady progress and leading an 
emerging market. He also said that it continues to be enormous fun.
Approvals
The issues with measurement and reporting can be highlighted with an 
example from the approvals, project management, and benefits reviews typical 
in an organization with a well-established and mature product line. When this 
organization investigates an extension to an existing product, the first task is 
to create a business case. This is frequently used as a means to get investment 
approval. The benefits of the product extension are listed as the costs and the 
resources required. The business case may not be a stand-alone document 
but instantiated as data put into a project portfolio management tool. Either 
style of business case has a few problems for innovative projects:
• 
The benefits of an innovation may have a longer lead time 
before it reaches a level of benefit comparable with an existing 
project.
• 
The evaluation of the innovation business case may be 
conducted by executives who have a fixed formula for cost 
benefit analysis that does not match the cost benefit metrics 
expected for a mature product.
• 
Innovative product progress through the project management 
process may not be smooth. Project management gates will 
have to be negotiated, and innovations may not meet the 
mandatory requirements that will allow the innovative project 
to progress to the next stage in a development project.
• 
The development process may be too restrictive for an 
innovation but may work well for maintaining the correct 
level of control for extension or upgrade of an existing or 
mature project.

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
220
Approvals for an innovative project may be difficult, but having the CEO as a 
sponsor will often help. Although the benefits may not be fully understood at 
the start of a project, there needs to be a regular review of the benefits that 
are anticipated. The results of this review should be communicated frequently 
and as widely as possible. 
Time Frames
Public companies have to report quarterly and annually on the financial health 
of the company. This leads to a short-term mentality in some parts of the 
company. Quarterly measurement and incentives do not generally match the 
progress of an innovative project. In the early stages of an innovative project, 
financial information may merely highlight cost rather than benefits. This is 
particularly true if the project involves the development of products to exploit 
a new marketplace. 
An example here might prove helpful. If your organization is selling vacation 
packages on the Web and sees a new market for convention packages, there 
would need to be changes both to the web applications and the business 
processes. The initial research may have established the proof points of cost, 
potential profit, and market analysis for example. This has encouraged the 
CEO to approve the project. The project timeline and benefits need to be 
reviewed and firmed up. This review may lead to optimistic estimates of time-
to-completion and project cost. There will be a time lag between approval of 
the project and the first implementation. In an extensive upgrade to software 
and business process, it may be more than a single quarter where investment 
is being eating up by costs and no sales benefit, which means no financial 
returns. If the reporting emphasis is on costs in the first part of the innovative 
project, other parts of the organization may become concerned about the 
lack of return on investment. This can often turn into pressure to review or 
even cancel the project, particularly if those other parts of the organization 
are feeling starved of resources, funds, or facing layoffs. Patience is always a 
quality that is in short supply in these circumstances. You need to make sure 
that the measure for the project focuses on benefits and not costs. You also 
need to report successes in the project—for example, on time, under budget, 
or creating interest in the company. These will allow you to communicate 
frequently while the expected results are being anticipated.
An innovative project for creating a new entry into a market has the additional 
timing issues of having to create marketing momentum to generate sales. 
Creation of a new product does not mean that it will find a ready market, 
particularly if the market itself is new. In these circumstances, more than one 
or two quarters will pass before the investments in the innovation make some 

221
The Innovative CIO
impact. The longer the time before an investment starts to yield benefits, the 
more likely it is that there will be pressure to cancel the project. 
The time frame of an innovative project can affect the perception of the 
project. A CIO leading the development of an innovative project should not 
neglect the frequent adjustments of any communications or progress reports. 
At each development milestone, there should be a re-evaluation of the 
benefits that are predicted and any adjustments that are needed. If the market 
for the new product is maturing and other competitors are validating the 
market, this needs to be communicated. CIOs from a technology background 
often fall into the development trap of concentrating on the IT development 
and communicating progress of that development. The CIO should give equal 
importance to the business process changes and include them. The benefits 
anticipated should be reviewed with increasing importance as the duration of 
the project extends. 
Benefits Realization
There are a number of ways of describing benefits and linking them to the 
innovative vision, the IT development, and the business process changes they 
support. Joe Peppard, John Ward and Elizabeth Daniel have described how to 
identify, plan, and manage the benefits delivered as part of an IT investment. 
The Benefits Dependency Network (BDN) is a cause/effect network–based 
tool and is described in more detail in their paper written for MIS Quarterly 
Executive4. The BDN describes IT enablers, the enabling changes, business 
changes, benefits, and investment objectives as a set of linked objects. This 
network can be constructed in several ways, depending on how it should be 
applied. The important point is that building the network imposes a discipline 
on considering the relationships among benefits, IT, and business process 
change. It also creates a visualization of the project that can be used to 
describe the relationship. This network can be reviewed and refined to deliver 
an increasingly accurate picture of the innovative project’s benefits and 
objectives. It can then form part of the reporting and measurement processes 
of an innovative project.
Measurement of Portfolio Innovations
Creating a value statement for an innovation may be difficult but achievable. 
There are often situations where there are several innovation-led projects 
that are at different stages of progress. Reporting on these innovations 
4 John Ward, Elizabeth Daniel, Joe Peppard, “Building Better Business Cases for IT 
Investments”, MIS Quarterly Executive, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2008, 1–15.

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
222
individually may not lead to a full appreciation of the value of innovation. 
Some businesses have had to address this problem, and their approach can 
help in considering a portfolio of benefits. A good example of how a business 
reports value from each stage in a process is the metal pressing industry. It is 
common in this industry to need multiple pressings of a raw material to create 
a finished object. The raw material has a value—when the metal is cut and 
first pressed it has an increased value. At each stage in the production process, 
the value of the object increases until it reaches the value of the finished 
object. This object could be a button for a pair of jeans or a metal rivet. The 
value of the objects at each stage on the process is the work in progress 
value. It is common to add the value of raw material awaiting processing to 
the number of objects and their interim value, to give a value metric for the 
manufacturing process. This is part of the value reported as part of business 
management. 
This approach can be used to report the benefit accrual for a set of innovative 
projects. You would need to establish the benefits already present for each 
innovation at a particular time. Some of the innovative projects may be nearing 
completion and have tangible benefits, sales, or performance improvements. 
If the benefits can be quantified, they can be added to the benefits accrued by 
projects at earlier stages of development. The benefits may not be as tangible, 
but each benefit may be reported. Even a new project may have a benefit—for 
example, training a member of staff in HTML5 could be a requirement at the 
start of the project but the benefit is that you now have a member of staff 
who has been trained. Summing up the benefits can offer a clearer picture of 
the total value of the innovative projects in progress and may refute some of 
the objections of other staff members to the investment in “unproductive” 
projects.
Overcoming Institutional Objections  
and Barriers
A key skill in shepherding any innovation to completion is how to overcome 
institutional barriers and objections. Objections tend to be personal, linked 
to company politics and personal concerns. Barriers are mostly organizational 
in nature and spring from a mismatch between the needs of innovation and 
the needs of the organization. Organizational barriers can be broken down 
into two further areas: organizational barriers that are a function of the 
organizational structure, management chain, etc. and operational barriers 
that are a function of the organizational business and management processes.

223
The Innovative CIO
Organizational Barriers
Organizational barriers are manifested in organizational structures that 
prevent decision-makers, budget holders, and sponsors of an innovation from 
working together to implement the innovation. These barriers are often 
found in organizations that don’t have an innovation infrastructure and a clear 
mandate to innovate. An organizational barrier can be as simple as isolating 
human resources needed under a different part of the management structure. 
The different parts of the management structure may have different priorities 
to your own. Marketing and PR in many organizations are handled in a 
centralized part of the organization. If an innovative project needs marketing 
or PR resources, they would be expected to apply to the corporate 
departments for resources. Responses from these departments may not be 
positive, particularly if they have already committed their annual marketing 
and PR budgets to promoting mature products and projects. 
The only way of overcoming these barriers is to ignore them, with the blessing 
of the senior management sponsor. This may have a negative effect on your 
relationship with the affected department heads. This negative effect may be 
mitigated if you are careful in your communications with other department 
heads and use this as an opportunity to educate them in the positive values of 
your plans. In this circumstance, there may be a need to create a company 
within a company. Building a small multidisciplinary team can be the only way 
of ensuring that you have needed resources under your control. There comes 
a time when the innovative project has matured sufficiently that some 
resources need to be returned to the mainstream, and this can also present 
some challenges.
Operational Barriers
Operational barriers are those that are a function of the existing business 
processes, such as procurement, supply chain, human resources, and facilities. 
These processes are not likely to be flexible in a large or mature company 
with little or no innovative culture. Even companies who have a good track 
record of innovating mature products or exploiting mature markets often 
have business processes that cannot be adapted without disruptive risk to the 
existing business processes and operations. There may need to be an 
operational review before the innovation can be adopted. A good example 
would be a supply chain innovation promoted by IT, sponsored by resource 
management, but opposed by purchasing due to procurement rules that may 
need review or changing. Tools like BDN will help you to describe the situation 
more clearly with regard to the impact on process rigidity on an innovation’s 
benefits. Operational barriers often become insuperable in a time of strict 

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
224
cost control. When a company is reducing operational budgets, for example 
in a time of recession, the innovative project that has not yet yielded a return 
on investment will come under pressure to reduce costs. Often an innovation 
has been allocated the minimum investment and may not have much excess 
budget to lose without a severe impact on development and benefits. These 
are the times that having the CEO and/or the CFO as a sponsor will pay off. 
You may need to counterpressure for cost and staff reductions. The best way 
to do this is through communication and reporting. It is important to keep 
staff, particularly sponsors, informed on progress and achievements, partic-
ularly if there are complementary pieces in the trade press.
As an innovative CIO, you may have implemented an innovation by sponsoring 
it yourself, through skunk works, or a small internal budget realignment. If you 
have confidence in your investment, then it should be relatively simple to 
maintain the momentum. Telling people about the innovation and looking for 
investment are often hurdles that you can overcome with demonstrations and 
prototypes.
Overcoming Objections
Innovations can also fall foul of political and social group dynamics in a company 
that can make any proposer of a new idea quail. Objections are often unique 
to the individual and may not be easy to see or understand.
There are often seemingly valid objections to the implementation of an 
innovation. If these objections are clearly and openly stated, they can be 
discussed and resolved. Objections that are more difficult to counter are 
those that are hidden as part of a whispering campaign. The objection is never 
aired publicly, but the innovation does not get the support that was anticipated 
or needed. You may not even know that there are objections to an innovative 
project. The motivations for people to raise objections can be difficult to 
establish. Some objections can be attributed to the characteristics of the 
objector. Some habits of objectors have already been discussed under the 
term innovation killers in Chapter 2. We will expand on these habits and 
characteristics here in the context of innovation and business value. These 
characteristics may be stereotypes, but they are also valid despite being 
stereotypes.
The novelty of a proposal, particularly if it proposes significant changes, can 
be met with obstacles, objections, and resistance to change across the whole 
organization. Novelty alone is sometimes sufficient to generate objections. A 
frequently raised objection to innovation is expressed in the phrase “we have 
not done anything like this before.” Another phrase that is often used in these 

225
The Innovative CIO
circumstance is “That’s not how we do things here.” These types of objections 
are a symptom of a resistance to change and a desire to maintain the status 
quo. They are deeply rooted and as such will be difficult to move. They can 
also be the expression of a risk averse executive.
The risk averse executives will be concerned about the level of risk that is 
involved in an innovation. The results-driven executives will ask how much 
and how soon will the company see a return on investment. As we mentioned 
earlier, the measurement criteria of innovation are sometimes difficult to 
establish. We sometimes refer to these members of staff as “nervous nellies.” 
They see only the downside—all risks are inflated and exaggerated because 
they are nervous about the outcomes. Nervous nellies can sometimes be won 
over by illustrating the past record of innovation and the ways in which the 
current plan is working well.
Personal pique is also sadly common in many organizations. If your innovation 
has been granted funding, other executives may feel aggrieved if their 
innovation has not gained funding. Professional jealousy can often undermine 
an innovation, particularly if it is supplemented by organizational or operational 
barriers.These barriers can sometimes be ignored, but ignoring a barrier is 
more difficult if there is an executive with an alternative agenda labeling you 
as a maverick who is ignoring company policy.
Managing Change
Managing change is one of the most extensive disciplines of management 
training. It has been recognized that any change will meet resistance. Resistance 
can often kill or restrict change, hence the emphasis on change management 
in management training. Many of the tools and techniques for managing change 
and overcoming resistance have been well-documented in books, articles, 
and, of course, management training. There are many authors writing on this 
subject, including John Kotter. Kotter has identified an eight-stage process for 
creating major change in his book, Leading Change.5 This process has suggestions 
that can help the CIO overcome barriers and objections. One relevant point 
he makes is that creating a guiding coalition can deliver a group with the 
power to create change. Managing change is one of the main tools in connecting 
IT innovation with business value.
To help you consider the fellow employees that you are working with, we 
have identified a number of different stereotypes of people who will raise 
objections about an innovation:
5 John Kotter, Leading Change (New York: Harvard Business Press, 1996). 

Chapter 10 | Connecting IT Innovation with Business Value
226
• 
Devil’s Advocate: This is a person who persistently looks at the 
downside of every project and seems to get pleasure from 
forecasting disaster. When they are right, they are often 
ignored because their good call is is discounted. Frequent 
predictions of disaster that are proven wrong may discredit 
all their predictions. Sometimes they are right more than 
they are wrong, and in that case they become a key influencer. 
The only way to counter these people is to take their first set 
of objections seriously, review the project against their 
forecast, and if they have a valid point, it will need to be 
addressed. The drawback to this approach is the amount of 
time it can consume. In our experience, this requires an 
“answer-once-and-then-ignore” style of solution.
• 
Confused Employee: There may be a genuine reason for the 
confusion of this group. This may also be a subset of the 
group who complain “we have not done this type of thing 
before.” It could be a lack of understanding of the objectives, 
a confusion about the “how” of what you are trying to do, or 
just a general confusion about why there needs to be an 
innovation. Before dismissing this group’s objection, it is 
always wise to review what you have already said about the 
project. Is it as clear as you think? Often this group can 
highlight a flaw in project communication and sometimes in 
the reasoning. You should take an unbiased view of the group’s 
objections and perhaps pass them on to a third party for 
review. If this group is still confused after relevant changes to 
the project or the communications, you will have to consider 
ignoring them. Before finally dismissing any new confusion 
they exhibit, you may want to take a last look at any points 
they raise. If these employees are still among the few who are 
confused about some aspect of the project and they don’t 
have concrete points to make, they may lose their influence 
and cease to be significant as objectors.
• 
Change-phobics: There are people like this in most organi-
zations—one executive I met referred to the middle man-
agement permafrost who were determined that things would 
not change in their organization. The change management 
tools mentioned earlier should be brought into play to 
overcome their resistance to change. If the change-phobic is 
a senior executive, overcoming the objection can be difficult. 
However, the CEO may be enlisted to provide persuasion. 
Not all change is good, but the rapid and frequent changes in 

227
The Innovative CIO
many organizations have helped them to adapt to changing 
market and financial pressures. These objectors are often 
driven by fear of change and the impact of change on them. 
• 
Politician: These are people who are intent on developing 
personal or departmental success rather than considering 
the organization as a whole. This is a common type of person 
in large organizations, and they can be destructive to the 
entire organization. They sometimes live by this maxim: it is 
not enough for me to succeed, someone else has to be seen 
to fail. They are generally smart people, and this is where the 
issue lies with handling them. The innovative CIO may be 
making suggestions and planning innovations that affects their 
area of business. If they are onboard one of the guiding 
coalition or the sponsorship group, then you will have every 
chance of succeeding. They will see your success as being 
their success. Our advice in this circumstance is to get the 
politician on your side if possible, unless you are confident of 
the support of the CEO and other members of the C-level. 
The politician is frequently the main objector to projects that 
remain untouched during a period of cost-cutting or during a 
critical evaluation of their department’s performance. 
These are not scientifically determined groups of employees but groups that 
we have identified in our long careers. Often an individual can be in one or 
more groups and their group membership may change over time and circum-
stance.
Overcoming these objections and barriers is a time-consuming and almost 
full-time job. It cannot be neglected, for just expecting everyone to see the 
benefit of your innovation will not save the project. If your efforts in innovation 
have not been aligned with business value, they may be dismissed as a nice 
option, not really worth the investment, and ultimately the first casualty in 
any cost-cutting. Establishing this link between business value and innovation 
is one of the key skills for any CIO who wants to become innovative.

c h a p t e r
11
The Dirty Little 
Secrets of 
Innovation
The path to becoming an innovative CIO can be a rewarding one, but it may 
not be an easy one. While we see hundreds or thousands of volumes, articles, 
and speeches extolling the virtues and beauties of successful innovation—and 
of famous innovators—we rarely get insight into the ugly side of innovation. 
We see the triumphs and successes, but we rarely witness the blood, sweat, 
and tears; the road bumps and detours; and the failures of innovation and of 
innovators.
In this chapter, we will highlight some of the less obvious challenges you will 
face, and expose the darker side of innovation. Some of these hazards will be 
readily apparent, but many will not. Some of the hidden challenges will be 
avoidable, but most will not. Worst of all, some of your biggest obstacles will 
be deliberately put in your way, not by your competitors, but by your own 
colleagues. 
These are some of the “dirty little secrets” of innovation. 
Most Innovation Will Fail
First and foremost, you must understand that innovation is not a sure thing. 
Indeed, you should go into your innovation program realizing that most 
innovation will fail to deliver the results you want, let alone the results you 
expect.

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
230
You can do everything right—set up the right organization to foster innovation, 
establish a culture of innovation, allocate staff and resources to innovation 
programs, ensure executive sponsorship and support—and still get innovation 
wrong. Perhaps you simply do not have the right ideas or the right people; 
perhaps the wind is blowing the wrong way on the day you release your 
innovation to the world; perhaps the competition was working on the same 
idea and beat you to market. 
The fact is, innovation is not predictable, and it is not assured. On any given 
day, any number of factors, many of which are not yours to control, can 
undermine your chances of success.
For example, many people would cite Google as one of the most innovative 
companies on the planet. From its early days as a slimmed down web search 
page to its current incarnation as a massive conglomerate of technologies, 
Google has innovated in Web, mobile, publishing, communications, collabo-
ration, e-commerce, news, advertising, media, social networking, and other 
technologies. Google has a reputation for encouraging innovation, building its 
workforce and culture around innovation, and delivering some of the most 
highly regarded innovations in recent years. 
However, most of even Google’s innovations have failed to be a success, in 
commercial terms at least. 
In 2011, Google spent 13.6% of its total revenues on research and development 
(R&D), slightly up from 2010 (12.8%) and 2009 (12.0%). In 2011, Google’s 
total revenues were $37 billion, so this works out to around $5 billion annually 
spent on R&D—a substantial amount in anyone’s terms. 
Yet, Google depends on what more or less amounts to a single revenue 
stream—paid advertising—for more than 95% of its total revenue. Indeed, 
most of Google’s other innovations (organic and inorganic)—e-mail, chat, 
video, maps, etc.—have added very little directly to its reported revenue 
(although many of them do support a growing captive market for its revenue-
generating advertisements).1
Moreover, many of Google’s innovative services have been completely or 
partially abandoned, sometimes very publicly. Here are a few examples:
• 
Google Wave: the company’s high-profile communication and 
collaboration tool was given up for adoption to the Apache 
1  Financial data from Google Inc., “United States Securities and Exchange Commission Form 
10K, for the Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2011,” www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/
data/1288776/000119312512025336/d260164d10k.htm, retrieved on July 2012.

231
The Innovative CIO
Foundation in just less than 18 months. This was despite wide 
and generally positive media coverage and substantial uptake 
by customers. 
• 
Google Buzz: the company’s attempt to compete with other 
social and collaboration networks like Facebook and Twitter 
lasted a little longer, but was shut down just two years after 
it debuted to broad fanfare (ultimately replaced with 
Google+). 
• 
Google Knol: the company’s attempt to counter the huge 
popularity of the free online user-contributed encyclopedia, 
Wikipedia. This service certainly included a number of 
important competitive innovations, but was nevertheless 
abandoned after four years as it failed to attract the popularity 
of its better known rival.
These are just three well-known examples in a long list of shuttered Google 
projects, including Google Checkout, Google Answers, Google Code Search, 
Google Desktop, and many more.
Similarly, the history of Apple, another frontrunner in many people’s minds 
for title of “the most innovative tech company on the planet,” is strewn with 
failures like The Quicktake, the Lisa, the “hockey puck” mouse, and the 
Pippin.2,3 Perhaps few examples are more symbolic of this than the Apple 
MessagePad, running the Newton operating system—one of the first in a long 
line of mobile devices then known as PDAs. 
The first Newton was released in 1993, but by 1998 Apple had killed off the 
product line, as its reportedly poor functionality and high prices4 led to under 
expected product sales and poor reviews.5 After initially being spun off as a 
separate entity, then reabsorbed into the Apple mothership, the Newton 
platform that had shown so much promise was also eventually abandoned. 
2  Andy Greenberg and Rachel Rosmarin, “In Pictures: 10 Apple Flops”, October 2011, http://
www.forbes.com/2008/10/29/apple-product-flops-tech-personal-cx_ag_1030apple_slide_2.
html?thisSpeed=30000, retrieved on September 2012
3  Bryan Gardiner, “Learning From Failure: Apple’s Most Notorious Flops”, January 2008, 
http://www.wired.com/gadgets/mac/multimedia/2008/01/gallery_apple_flops?slide=7. 
retrieved on September 2012
4  Andy Greenburg, “When Apple Failed”, Forbes.com, October 2011, http://www.forbes.
com/2008/10/29/apple-product-flops-tech-personal-cx_ag_1030apple.html, retrieved on 
September 2012
5  “PDA (handheld computer),” Encyclopedia Britannica, last updated February 25, 2010, 
www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/1581618/Newton-MessagePad, retrieved on September 
2012.

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
232
Similarly, Apple’s first foray into cloud computing was also rife with fits and 
starts, and it too was eventually abandoned. Initially released as iTools, then 
renamed to .Mac, Apple attempted to penetrate the personal cloud storage 
and application space with what would become better known in its later 
incarnation as MobileMe. However, even after these multiple iterations, 
MobileMe was cancelled, having never reached the level of success that had 
been expected.
However, this regular and almost predictable tendency for innovation to fail is 
not always a bad thing. 
Failure is an inherent part of the innovation cycle, and can even be the basis 
of valuable learning to drive further (and successful) future innovation. For 
example, Google leveraged its failures in collaboration and social networking 
(Wave, Buzz) into another new innovation, Google+. This innovation 
introduced many new and popular capabilities like “hangouts” and “circles,” 
which were competitive differentiators against other social networks. 
Similarly, Apple eventually leveraged its failures in the cloud market to 
transform MobileMe into a more successful cloud storage service, iCloud. 
And there can hardly be a starker example of turning failure into success: 
Apple went from the disappointing Newton-based mobile devices to ultimately 
releasing its phenomenally successful and truly revolutionary iPad tablets.
The real secret here is not that innovation fails, but what to do when it 
does—as it almost certainly will. Rather than simply updating your resume 
and abandoning ship, look to analyze the failure and learn from it, so you can 
make a conscious (and rapid) decision whether to conclude, remediate, or 
end the innovation project. The adage here is to “fail fast” (and fail cheap), so 
you can either prove or disprove your innovative ideas. 
In relative terms, “fail fast” is what Google did with Google Wave, which 
allowed Google Buzz to fail fast, which then allowed Google+ to come to 
market just over two years after the initial release of Google Wave.
By contrast, Apple “failed slow” with the MessagePad and Newton OS, taking 
more than five years to pull the plug. While this did not hurt Apple in the long 
run, there were times soon after the Newton platform was cancelled when 
the company’s very existence was in jeopardy. It took Apple more than ten 
years to recover and find success in the handheld device space with the 
introduction of the iPod, iTunes and the iTunes app store business model, and 
eventually the iPad. It is almost hard to believe that its earlier attempts in 
mobile device innovation almost destroyed the company. 

233
The Innovative CIO
Innovation Will Cost You Money
Perhaps this goes without saying, but intentional innovation can be very costly. 
It often takes a substantial investment, from the cost of staff and other human 
resources to the cost of development systems, cloud services, physical space 
for desks and equipment, testing, pilot procedures, necessary equipment, and 
much more. In the software business, for example, some of the most 
innovative companies spend up to a quarter of their revenues in R&D, with 
companies like Microsoft, IBM, and Cisco spending more than $5 billion a year 
on R&D (as shown in Figure 11-1). 
Figure 11-1. R&D spending by cloud and virtualization software vendors is shown in this 
figure. Data was taken from SEC filings from respective companies.6 
6  Google Finance, http://www.google.com/finance

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
234
Unfortunately, a lot of that money is lost, if not wasted, because as we have 
seen, a great deal of innovation effort fails to deliver commercial results. 
Even ostensibly successful innovation may actually end up losing money. To 
start with, it can be very difficult to link revenue and profit definitively back to 
a singular innovation. It is clearer in the case of a blockbuster product like the 
iPad and its antecedents in the Newton platform, but even then it may not 
account for the losses incurred by previous failures, even if they ultimately 
informed the innovation success. 
It may also be difficult to show the results of innovation in financial terms 
when the return on investment (ROI) spreads out over multiple products and 
services. An innovative capability may attract more customers and broaden 
the revenue base, yet still be difficult to attribute because it does not drive 
revenue to a single product. For example, Google continues to grow revenue 
through its single core revenue stream, undoubtedly fed by the increasing 
engagement with its customer base through a range of innovations. Yet it 
does not identify these innovations explicitly as sources of new revenue in 
their own right, at least not in its official SEC filings. It is therefore very 
difficult, especially for an outsider, to allocate new revenue specifically to the 
innovative services that Google has added to its portfolio.
It may be that your innovation efforts pay off once in a blue moon. If you are 
lucky, the return on that unitary success will cover the costs of your many 
failures. However, it is also possible that your innovations may simply never 
pay off. 
This was clearly the case with webOS, a handheld operating system designed 
by Palm, Inc., released on a handful of proprietary devices. Despite many 
innovative features and being from the one-time market leader in the mobile 
device market, it was never as successful as intended. Ultimately, webOS 
proved to be no competition for other successful platforms such as (perhaps 
ironically) Apple iOS. Palm was eventually acquired by Hewlett-Packard (HP) 
for $1.2 billion in 2010, with webOS being a centerpiece of the deal,7 before 
HP effectively abandoned this investment, and several webOS-based devices, 
as they failed to meet financial targets and internal expectations.8 In 2011, HP 
finally turned over the core OS to the open source development community, 
7  Richard Waters, Chris Nuttall, “Hewlett Packard to Buy Palm for $1.2bn,” Financial 
Times, April 2010, www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/0aa1ef6e-5303-11df-813e-00144feab49a.html, 
retrieved on September 2012.
8  Hewlett-Packard, “HP Reports Third Quarter 2011 Results and Initiates Company 
Transformation,” August 2011, http://h30261.www3.hp.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=71087&p=irol-
newsArticle&ID=1598003, retrieved on September 2012.

235
The Innovative CIO
while selling off remaining inventory of webOS devices for as little as 20% of 
their original retail prices,9 presumably at a substantial loss. 
Similarly, Research In Motion (RIM) attempted to compete with the emerging 
tablet market (substantially dominated by the Apple iPad) with the PlayBook, 
a tablet device that was criticized as a copycat. In the second quarter of 2011, 
the PlayBook had underachieved its estimated sales by a ratio of 10:1. After 
initially estimating sales of 2.4 million units, RIM soon revised that estimate to 
800,000 units10 before finally reporting actual sales in the quarter of just 
200,000 units.11 As a result, the PlayBook almost certainly failed to recoup its 
investment, and in fact forced RIM to take a $485 million write-off to account 
for the losses the company incurred as it heavily discounted the device in an 
attempt to generate sales.12 Although the complete history of the PlayBook 
has yet to be written, it is certainly true that it has cost RIM a substantial 
amount of money, and to date it cannot be viewed as anything but a high-
profile, high-cost failure to capitalize on innovation.
Innovation Can Be  
a Career-Limiting Move
While almost everybody would jump at the chance to be a Wilbur or Orville 
Wright, how many would jump at the chance to be a Samuel Pierpont Langley? 
Already I can hear you asking, “Samuel who?”
An older contemporary of the Wright brothers, Samuel Pierpont Langley 
(seen in Figure 11-2) was an award-winning scientist, a respected inventor, and 
a self-styled innovator who struggled unsuccessfully for years to find the 
secret to manned aviation. 
9  Nathan Olivarez-Giles, “HP TouchPad Mania: TouchPads Selling Out in U.S. at $99.99,” 
Los Angeles Times, August 20, 2011, http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/technology/2011/08/hp-
touchpad-mania-touchpads-selling-out-in-us-at-99.html, retrieved on September 2012.
10  Lance Whitney, “Report: RIM Axes PlayBook Sales Target,” C|Net, June 2011, http://
news.cnet.com/8301-1035_3-20073637-94/report-rim-axes-playbook-sales-target, retrieved 
on September 2011.
11  Research In Motion, “Research In Motion Reports Second Quarter Fiscal 2012 
Results,” September 2011, www.rim.com/investors/documents/pdf/pressrelease/2012/Q2_
press_release.pdf, retrieved on September 2012.
12  Research In Motion, “Research In Motion Announces Third Quarter Provision Related to 
PlayBook Inventory and Confirms Commitment to Tablet Market; Provides Update to Q3 
and Fiscal 2012 Guidance,” December 2011, www.rim.com/investors/documents/pdf/
financial/2012/Dec-2_press-release-FINAL.pdf, retrieved on September 2012. 

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
236
Despite a number of innovative attempts, including catapulting an unmanned 
prototype off a barge anchored in the middle of the Potomac River in 1896 
(as seen in Figure 11-3), Langley never did find the secret of manned flight in 
a heavier-than-air craft.
Figure 11-2. Samuel Pierpont Langley (right) is shown here with his chief mechanic and 
pilot, Charles Manly. (Photo courtesy of NASA)  

237
The Innovative CIO
But to the victor goes the spoils, so while everyone remembers the Wright 
brothers as the inventors who succeeded in the first manned flight in 1903, 
few remember Langley and his failures, even though he was actively 
experimenting with manned flight until just nine days before the Wright 
brothers’ historical first flight. With a history of failure, including multiple 
crashes, Langley died just three years later, without contributing anything 
more of substance to the history of aviation, or indeed to the history of 
innovation.
For Langley, this was not exactly a career-limiting move (CLM)—his career 
was already well-established when he started his research of manned flight, 
and he was, after all, 71 years old when he died. However, following his 
failures, he was forced out of this research primarily because he could not gain 
additional funding to continue his endeavors.
This stands as an object lesson in the risk of establishing yourself as an 
innovative CIO. When most innovation ends in failure, and much innovation 
ends up costing money with little or no attributable ROI, the risk of being 
labeled a failure is very real and can have severe consequences. Taking up the 
position as an innovative CIO, and embarking on such a path, can easily result 
in this turning out to be the feared CLM. Do you really want to be the chief 
of a program known for cost and failure? This could well be the harsh reality 
of a bent toward innovation. 
Figure 11-3. This is a modified houseboat on the Potomac, showing the launching machinery 
for Samuel Pierpont Langley’s manned flight experiments. (Photo courtesy of US Library of 
Congress)

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
238
Moreover, it is not just failure that can make innovation a CLM—ironically, 
you can also be the victim of your own success. Radical innovation can upset 
the existing regime so much that you effectively invent yourself out of a job.
Take automation as an example. Automation allows IT administrators to 
document, standardize, and automate their day-to-day work processes. In 
doing so, it eliminates much of their work, and in some cases eliminates it all. 
As a direct result of this innovation, IT administrators or operators can easily 
innovate themselves out of a job. Even as a leader, this can be true. For 
example, cloud computing has the potential to replace a large proportion of 
the tradition IT establishment, and in some cases may even replace it entirely, 
leaving very little for a traditional CIO to do. 
There are ways around this, of course. Transitioning from Chief Information 
Officer to Chief Innovation Officer (or any of the other I’s we discussed in 
Chapter 3) is just a start. You may end up becoming the Chief Digital Officer 
or Chief Technology Officer for your organization, rather than the CIO. 
Such an evolutionary transition is, after all, a proven path in what today we 
call “IT.” Remember that before Information Technology (IT) there was 
Information Systems (IS), before that it was Management Information Systems 
(MIS), and even before that we had Data Processing (DP). Going forward, 
some pundits predict the replacement of “IT” with “BT”—Business 
Technology—and further into the future it could be something different again. 
This is simply another step in the ongoing evolution and regeneration of this 
industry. 
The trick for you as an innovative CIO will be to identify the impacts of 
innovation before they happen; get ahead of them with a new focus, new 
skills, new capabilities, and new contributions; and maintain your value to the 
business as a leader in technology and business, regardless of your title.  
Good Innovation Sets a Bad Precedent
Ironically then, even successful innovation is clearly not always a personally 
positive outcome. In fact, successful innovation can set such a high expectation 
for future innovation that it is impossible to be as successful a second time. 
Not every innovation will be golden, but you will be judged against those that 
are.
It is true that some people and organizations have the uncanny ability to 
innovate continuously and successfully, delivering products and services that 
are increasingly better, more functional, more attractive, more profitable, and 
more successful. 

239
The Innovative CIO
Look at organizations like Xerox PARC, inventors of many revolutionary and 
successful innovations, including the graphical user interface (GUI), the laser 
printer, Ethernet, WYSIWYG editing, and object-oriented programming 
(OOP). 
Or individuals such as Nikola Tesla, who was substantially responsible for a 
string of radical innovations, including the principles (and many patents) 
behind alternating current (AC) power, X-rays, bladeless turbines, cryogenic 
engineering, and the modern transistor.
In the tech world, we see a few similar examples of innovative entrepreneurs 
who continue to deliver successful inventions, including Niklas Zennström 
and Janus Friis (Skype, Kazaa) and Jack Dorsey (Twitter, Square). 
However, history is also littered with inventors, both corporate and individual, 
who never managed to deliver success beyond their first and most famous 
invention, no matter how good their subsequent ideas actually were:
• 
Dean Kamen made his multimillion dollar fortune when he 
sold his first invention as an adult, the autosyringe, to an 
international health care company. By contrast, after investing 
$100 million developing the now famous Segway, only 30,000 
units were sold in six years, well short of its hype and of the 
success of the autosyringe.13
• 
Erno˝ Rubik is famous as the inventor of the eponymous 
Rubik’s Cube, a smash-hit toy which became the world’s 
fastest-selling toy when it was released in 1980 and by some 
measures is the most successful puzzle toy in history.14 
Despite attempts to replicate this success, with subsequent 
toys like Rubik’s Magic, Rubik’s Snake, and Rubik’s 360, Erno˝ 
Rubik never did achieve the same level of success. 
• 
Alexey Pajitnov was the man behind one of the most 
successful video games in history, Tetris. However, despite his 
invention being named “Greatest Game of All Time,” 
becoming the best-selling mobile game of all time,15 and 
working on or with almost 20 different video games since the 
13  Douglas McIntyre, “The 10 Biggest Tech Failures of the Last Decade: Segway,” Time 
Magazine, May 2009, www.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1898610 
_1898625_1898641,00.html, retrieved on July 2012.
14  Alastair Jamieson, “Rubik’s Cube Inventor is Back with Rubik’s 360,” The Telegraph, January 
2009, www.telegraph.co.uk/lifestyle/4412176/Rubiks-Cube-inventor-is-back-with-Rubiks-360.
html, retrieved on July 2012.
15  Tetris Holding, “History,” www.tetris.com/history/index.aspx, retrieved on July 2012.

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
240
release of Tetris, Pajitnov has never replicated his initial 
success. 
Clearly then, successful innovation does not guarantee ongoing innovation. This 
is perhaps never as apparent as the many one-hit wonders of the 21st-century 
technology boom. In so many Silicon Valley success stories, such as Napster, 
PayPal, Netscape, and more, their creators—including famous names like 
Marc Andreeson and Peter Thiel—never repeated the same level of success. 
Many of these innovators have gone on to fund others’ new innovations by 
contributing to or running venture capital funds, but have not reached the 
high bar of expectation that they set for themselves with their first successful 
innovations.
This is not to say that any of these inventors are known as failures per se. Marc 
Andreeson, for example, has had substantial success with other ventures of 
his own, including LoudCloud (rebranded as Opsware and subsequently sold 
to HP for $1.6 billion), though clearly not as groundbreaking as his earlier 
innovation with Netscape. 
Nor is it to say that one major innovation cannot set your organization and 
yourself up for a long career of success. Mark Zuckerberg, the founder of 
Facebook, barely created a single idea himself (at least according to allegations 
from Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss that he stole their idea, resolved when 
Facebook settled with the Winklevoss twins for $65 million16), yet he has 
parlayed that into a multibillion-dollar company and personal fortune. 
However, they do provide a clear lesson that you cannot always live up to the 
expectations set by prior successful innovation. 
As an innovative CIO, you will be responsible for setting a path to continued 
success. Using the advice in this book, you will need to develop the management 
understanding and institutional knowledge to maintain and sustain growth 
through innovation. As we have seen, it is clearly not impossible to put in 
place organizational structures and processes to enable continuous and 
successful innovation.
However, you must also be prepared for the possibility that you and/or your 
team may end up being marked as failures, simply because you did not live up 
to the initial expectation you set with others by virtue of early success. 
16  Steven Musil, “Winklevoss Twins Drop Facebook Lawsuit,” C|Net, June 2011, http://
news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-20073512-93/winklevoss-twins-drop-facebook-lawsuit, retrieved 
on September 2012.

241
The Innovative CIO
Not All Innovation Is Good Innovation
As we explored in Chapter 2, innovation is not always useful in your “day job.” 
Good innovation requires immense discipline. It is not enough just to forge 
forward with innovation programs, processes, and structures even in the face 
of difficult or poor results. You must also reject some ideas that come from 
innovation programs even when they seem to be unique and exciting.
Just because it can be done, does not mean it should be done. Just because 
you come up with a new idea, does not mean it is a good one. Just because 
you can develop an idea, does not mean you should put your resources into 
that idea. 
To adequately develop and take advantage of innovative ideas, you need to 
apply resources to that development. Modeling, prototyping, testing, piloting, 
trialing, producing, marketing, and all the other effort needed to take an idea 
and make it real requires specific allocation of finite resources. 
This recognizes the well-known economic principle of “opportunity cost”—
the resources you devote to one innovation are no longer available to develop 
another, so at a figurative level the cost of developing one innovation is often 
the lost opportunity to develop another. 
Like many business opportunities, you need to prioritize your resources into 
the projects and innovations that are most desirable for your organization. 
Sometimes, perhaps often, this will mean that many ideas, even good or great 
ideas, will never get the resourcing they require to take them to fruition. 
And this dirty little secret is also, surprisingly, a good thing.
Retaining focus is critical, especially in a business setting. Your owners and 
shareholders will hold you accountable if you lose your way. You should 
understand your organization’s vision and mission, and be sure that any 
innovation you pursue aligns with that vision and mission. 
Even brilliant ideas may not suit your vision and mission, and will not advance 
your corporate goals. Even an unquestionably visionary idea can be beyond 
your ability to capitalize on, for any number of reasons: 
• 
It may require too many resources to adequately develop.
• 
It may need capabilities outside your current competencies.
• 
The risk of failure has a high probability, high impact, or both.
• 
The ROI is not high enough or will take too long to achieve.
• 
It will not deliver enough of a competitive advantage.

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
242
As an innovative CIO, you must set the bar on what to pursue and what to 
abandon, carefully deciding according to the business opportunity and benefit, 
and stick to that bar. You must have the will (and the support) to not only 
identify “good innovation” but also to identify “not good enough innovation.” 
Understand that you simply cannot execute on every good idea, and therefore 
be prepared to throw away ideas that do not meet your bar. Otherwise, you 
risk diluting your ability to innovate effectively and becoming “a jack of all 
trades, but a master of none.”
Apple cofounder and CEO Steve Jobs, ever-quotable on the topic of innovation, 
was also a strong proponent of having the discipline of focus. He was well-
known to reject innovation that did not fit his organizational vision, even to 
the point of rejecting good innovation simply because it was not right for the 
business, the time, or the need:
People think focus means saying ‘yes’ to the thing you’ve got to focus on. But 
that’s not what it means at all. It means saying no to the hundred other good 
ideas that there are. You have to pick carefully. I’m actually as proud of the 
things we haven’t done as the things I have done. Innovation is saying ‘no’ to 
1,000 things.
—Steve Jobs, Apple Worldwide Developers Conference, May 1997
Conversely—and somewhat confusingly—there are times when persistence 
is as valuable as focus. This is exemplified in the now-famous history of the 3M 
Post-it Note. As the story goes, the original inventor of the glue used on 
these repositionable notes, Dr. Spencer Silver, initially found very little use for 
it. His invention was, in effect, a glue that did not really stick things together, 
barely usable, let alone a good innovation.
A focus on usable innovation may have caused Silver to abandon this as simply 
a failed invention, but instead he pursued a use case for this unusually 
nonadhesive glue for years. It was six years before Silver and his 3M colleagues 
figured out a use for this “failed” innovation, and 12 years before 3M released 
Post-it Notes to a commercial market and to phenomenal success.17 His 
determination to find a commercial use for the innovation paid off eventually, 
perhaps the exception that proves the rule. 
Similarly, though on the other side of this coin, it can also be difficult to 
determine that an innovation is actually good, not bad. Take the case of Kodak 
and the digital camera. It is perhaps not well-known that an engineer at Kodak, 
17  3M, “About Post-it® Brand,” www.post-it.com/wps/portal/3M/en_US/Post_It/Global/
About/About, retrieved on July 2012.

243
The Innovative CIO
Steve Sasson, was actually the first person to invent the digital still camera.18 
Unfortunately, the executives at Kodak were unable to recognize that this 
was a good innovation. Instead they tried to understand how this radical and 
revolutionary technology could fit into the then-current paradigm of taking, 
storing, and viewing print photographs. In hindsight, it is easy to see that this 
viewpoint was flawed. Often the best innovation completely disrupts and 
even destroys current approaches, but you need to be able to see the 
possibilities, not just the difficulties, of a new approach.
The key to both of these stories is that you need to be able to look beyond 
“how we do things” and be able to see “how it could be different”—which is 
not always easy to do.
Innovative Ideas Are Not Enough
Good ideas, no matter how innovative they may be, do not guarantee success. 
How many times have you had an inspiring idea without acting on it, only to 
later see that idea translated into a phenomenally successful product or 
service? How often have you seen such an offering and thought to yourself, 
“That was my idea. If only I had done something with it!”
The truth is, good ideas alone do not ensure successful outcomes. They are 
certainly necessary, but not sufficient.
A promising new product or service does not just become a phenomenal 
success overnight, especially in a larger enterprise. It needs executive backing, 
financial investment, production facilities, resource allocation, marketing 
strategy, training and education, go-to-market execution, demand generation, 
sales activity, logistics, and organizational support to drive an idea to fulfillment.
A good innovation also needs to exist at the right time and in the right place. 
Externalities including market readiness, competitive positioning, cost of 
production, economic situation, infrastructure availability, technology 
maturity, public policy, and more can all make or break an innovative idea. This 
means that even with the best idea and the best internal support, it is not 
always up to you.
Innovation also needs to be able to scale, and do so at the right pace. As a 
new technology service or capability is taken on, and it grows even with an 
internal customer base, it will likely follow the same growth pattern identified 
by Everett Rogers in the theory of “diffusion of innovations,”19 extended and 
18  Steve Sasson, “We Had No Idea,” Eastman Kodak Company, October 2007, http://
pluggedin.kodak.com/pluggedin/post/?id=687843, retrieved on July 2012.
19  Everett Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations (Glencoe: Free Press, 1962).

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
244
made popular in Geoffrey Moore’s Crossing the Chasm.20 This pattern can be 
seen in Figure 11-4.
Figure 11-4. This graph depicts Everett Roger’s Innovation Adoption Life Cycle.21 
That is, you must hit the right scale at the right time, from just a 2.5% take-up 
among innovators and enthusiasts, to a larger scale with early adopters, and 
then to the additional 34% that make up the early majority. Plan how to make 
your innovation, as Moore puts it, “cross the chasm” from the early adopters 
to the early majority so that you can get to a sustainable scale. Also plan on 
how to scale your innovation for when you achieve that goal. If your service 
does not cross the chasm, it will be hard to sustain it. If it crosses the chasm 
without being sustainable, then it will fail to satisfy demand. Ultimately, it does 
not matter how good the innovation is—without the right scale at the right 
time, chances are it will not be successful.
Even if your innovation team creates the right ideas at the right times, gets 
the internal support they need, has alignment with the external environment, 
and achieves the right scale at the right time, the rest of your organization 
may not be ready to take it up. It may be the wrong time for them. You may 
have the wrong people on the program or in the audience. Or you may have 
an insurmountable cultural challenge. There may be internal political issues, 
or even intentional sabotage. Some organizations are simply not good at 
leveraging new innovations or accessing new markets. Other organizations, 
pushed by Wall Street expectations, are too worried about quarterly returns 
to commit to long-term innovation success. 
Something as simple as having the wrong organization chart can also get in the 
way of your good ideas becoming successful innovations. As we have seen in 
Chapter 9, there are ways to set up an organization and establish supporting 
processes to enable intentional innovation. However, you cannot always 
20  Geoffrey Moore, Crossing the Chasm (New York: HarperBusiness, 2002).
21  Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:DiffusionOfInnovation.png, retrieved on July 
2012, reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 License.

245
The Innovative CIO
predict where innovation will come from, so a fantastic innovator or innovation 
from the wrong part of the organization will have substantial barriers from 
the start. 
As we have noted, executive support and vetting is key. Not every organization 
can function well with a powerful, charismatic, and/or hands-on leader making 
firm decisions. However, over-reliance on executive support and approval can 
also kill off even the best ideas. Every additional person who can support an 
idea can also probably veto it, adding one more roadblock, and one more way 
to fail, even for the good ideas. 
Therefore, it is important to manage this uncertainty as you would any 
predictable risk. Continue to encourage and evaluate good ideas, but 
understand their chance for success. Consider how they relate to the internal 
and external environment, whether they align with organizational objectives, 
how and when they can scale, how to gain the right level of executive support, 
and how to mobilize the organizational support to move from good idea to 
successful innovation. And understand that even with all this in place, 
sometimes the best ideas still will not produce positive results, regardless of 
what you do.
People Will Want You to Fail
By definition, innovation means doing new things, doing things in new ways, 
or both. Unfortunately, that works against a very common human emotion—a 
fear of change and a desire to maintain predictability. 
As an innovative CIO, you will be actively planning to upset the day-to-day 
lives of many of your people, at least some of whom may not want to consider 
radical new ideas. They are comfortable in their roles and responsibilities, able 
to deal with everything in their jobs every day, without any risk or challenge. 
They consider this to be a successful way to work because every day they do 
the things that got them to where they are. They believe this is just what is 
expected of them. To do new things in new ways is to undermine not just 
their routine habits, but their fundamental belief systems.
You may also find political ramifications to innovation. Changes that disrupt 
existing organizational structures, staff levels, budgets, and other sources of 
institutionalized power structures will threaten people’s positions and power 
bases, which can drive resentment and resistance. Even senior executives may 
be looking for you to fail in order to protect their empires and power bases, 
so you may find these threats are no less true of your bosses than your staff 
or your peers.

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
246
From their perspective, innovation will threaten many people’s worlds. It 
could be as simple as innovation meaning they cannot do the same things they 
used to, so you are upsetting their rhythm by making them adapt their 
processes. Perhaps your innovation is creating additional work for them, 
which is almost always unwanted. Or it could be exactly the opposite—your 
innovation could be reducing or even eliminating their work, which is a much 
more existential threat. If you are making roles obsolete and people redundant, 
drastically changing jobs that have been the same for many years, and gutting 
departments or even entire business units (such as in the example of Kodak 
and digital photos), then in the best case you will struggle to gain support for 
your ideas. In the worst case these affected people will actively work against 
the success of your agenda, willfully or otherwise.
Unfortunately for you and your innovation agenda, this means that many 
people in your organization—including your own staff, senior IT managers, 
staff and executives from other business departments, and even other C-level 
executives—will be actively trying to undermine your efforts. Perhaps they do 
not consciously want you to fail, and almost certainly will not talk about their 
intent in such explicit terms, but ultimately that is what they want to happen. 
Therefore, be prepared to see your own staff and your business peers actively 
looking for and espousing many different reasons why your innovation will not 
work. They will throw out objections and highlight barriers. Hallways and 
e-mails will echo with the sounds of “Yes, but . . .” Staff and executives will 
show negativity and skepticism, albeit couched in concern for the business 
and its success. Important innovation projects will get bogged down in 
process, external support for your programs will be understaffed and 
reprioritized, your requests will go to the bottom of the queue, and important 
prerequisite tasks will slip through the cracks—intentionally or otherwise.
Of course, shedding light on potential barriers to innovation is not in itself 
necessarily destructive. After all, as we have already discussed, many 
innovations will fail, so there are clearly many valid barriers and objections 
that will cause this failure. For the most part, such objections are not just 
made up and mostly do reflect real barriers, though they may not always seem 
significant. When raised as a way to detect and overcome potential risk, 
raising objections is actually very positive, and a necessary part of acting on 
innovative ideas. It is important to understand risks and actively manage them, 
and plan to overcome obstacles. For this risk management to work, you need 
to dispassionately identify and accommodate the very real potential for failure. 
So the naysayers may well be right, but that does not mean they are helping.
When objections are raised as an excuse to impede innovation, rather than as 
a way to facilitate innovation, they can quickly put the brakes on your plans to 

247
The Innovative CIO
do new things in new ways. It is all too easy for an innovation jam to become 
the “downer dog pile” we described in Chapter 2, with multiple people piling 
on why something cannot be done.
In addition, you may be blocked by the challenge of inertia and the path of 
least resistance. It is simply easier to do the same things tomorrow as you did 
today. It is easier to do nothing than to learn how to change. It is easier to 
resist change than to support it. It is easier to point out a barrier than to 
figure out how to overcome it.
Brace yourself for this resistance, whether passive or active. Never 
underestimate the human issues involved with innovation, and especially the 
natural human inertia against disruptive change.
Innovation Is an Art, Not a Science
It may be late in our book to say this but, despite all the ideas in this book, 
and in many other notable and scholarly writings on the topic, innovation is 
not a science. 
There is no definitive formula for successful innovation. 
Innovation is, rather, a rarefied and exquisite art.
This really should be apparent in the ongoing mantra throughout our writings 
that much innovation will actually fail—and this is a good thing. Of course, we 
have tried to outline for you a number of keys to success and some important 
ways that you can help to avoid or mitigate failure, but at its heart innovation 
remains fragile and unpredictable. Innovation is as much the result of trial and 
error, fortuitous accident, hard work, or sheer luck as it is the result of 
intentional activity. In this regard, it is clear that innovation is more like an art 
than a science. 
A corollary of this particular dirty little secret is that measuring innovation—
like measuring any art—is not always helpful. It may be possible to measure 
some outcomes of innovation with empirical data, such as the number of 
patents filed or granted, new products delivered, positive recommendations 
received, new sales closed, existing customers served, or new customers 
acquired. Moreover, you absolutely should measure the success of your 
innovation, not just for the sake of reporting, but also to catalog and document 
what works for you and what does not. However, you should not be tricked 
by the many useful and viable metrics surrounding innovation into believing 
that this makes innovation a measurable scientific endeavor. 
Because it is not always possible to measure innovation. Indeed, it is not 
always even desirable to measure innovation. Sometimes the benefits and 

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
248
improvements of innovation are recognizable more in qualitative terms than 
quantitative terms. You may be able to readily understand what it means to 
be “better,” to improve your competitive or market position, and to generate 
excitement in your customers and staff, but such outcomes are frequently 
difficult to measure. Like the investor said while looking for a good painting to 
buy, “I don’t know what art is, but I know what appreciates!”
There are no hidden secrets to successful innovation, no “silver bullets,” even 
though article after article will tell you they exist. Just search the Internet for 
the phrase “secrets of innovation” and you will find tens of thousands of 
results—but then again, if it is on the Web, how “secret” can they be? Books 
like ours can give you a framework, a starting point, a foundation, and a vision. 
We can show you examples and explain where they went right or wrong. We 
can give you ideas and help you develop strategies and tactics, all proven to 
help you drive successful innovation. 
Nevertheless, no one (ourselves included) can guarantee you will be successful, 
even if you do everything in this book. It will ultimately be up to you to paint 
your own picture, author your own guide, sculpt your own progression, sing 
your own praises—and deliver your own success. 
Not Everyone Can Innovate
Sorry to say, it does not matter how smart, funded, resourced, committed, 
inventive, or supported you and your team are, it is not always possible to 
innovate. There are a number of external issues, beyond the secrets we have 
already discussed, that will hold you back if you are not careful to avoid or 
overcome them.
One key external issue that will affect your ability to innovate, over and above 
these other mechanistic qualifications, is the personal capabilities for 
innovation within you and your teams. How individuals respond to new ideas 
is always difficult to predict. With a number of very real reasons for your staff 
and others to reject and resist change, as we have noted earlier, this is 
potentially a major barrier to your success. 
Another key external issue is your corporate appetite for innovation. If, as we 
noted in Chapter 2, “culture eats strategy for breakfast,”22  then it could also 
be said that it comes back to eat innovation for lunch. You should always 
beware of phrases such as, “That’s not how we do things around here,” or, 
“That’s how we’ve always done it,” as they do not bode well for any innovation 
22  Generally attributed to management consultant Peter Drucker, popularized in 2006 by 
Mark Fields, president of Ford Motor Company.

249
The Innovative CIO
program. Watch out for politics too, especially the old guard in your 
organization who may not be predisposed to your new ideas. Whether they 
are invested in the original (although now perhaps obsolete) decisions about 
process, tools, products, and services; or they are invested in the status quo 
because of their empire or the recognition they have garnered or the power 
base; or they simply cannot see the same future that you can—these cultural 
forces can be difficult to surmount.
Then there is the question of whether the market and your customers 
(internally as well as externally) have given you permission to innovate. You 
must gauge the perception of your organization and determine whether your 
market will allow you to be innovative.
Some organizations or companies are almost expected to innovate. Think of 
Apple, for example. Rightly or wrongly, it is expected to be innovative, and 
when it fails to deliver that innovation it is actually punished for it. This was 
the case when it released the incremental iPhone 4S, rather than the expected 
innovation of the iPhone 5, causing its share price to drop substantially.23 
However, many organizations not only lack an expectation of innovation, but 
even lack permission from the market to be innovative.
We see this regularly when “old favorites” try to change, only to be faced with 
a lukewarm, if not downright hostile, reaction from their customers.
One example of this (albeit outside technology) happened in April 1985 when 
the Coca-Cola Company introduced a new (arguably innovative) formulation 
of their market-leading beverage of the same name. Despite extensive market 
testing that predicted its success and a substantially positive response from 
some customers in major markets, “New Coke” (as it came to be known) 
created an uproar among Coca-Cola’s customers. In certain key markets, it 
was so roundly rejected by the customers that in July 1985 Coca-Cola 
reintroduced “Coke Classic” and by 2002 the company had ceased to produce 
the new formula at all, renaming “Coke Classic” back to “Coke.”24 Ultimately, 
while accepting many other innovations (including Cherry Coke, Diet Coke, 
and Caffeine-free Coke, for example), the market fundamentally rejected the 
ability of Coca-Cola to change one of its core products. 
Another key constituent in your ability to innovate, over whom you have 
almost no control, are your shareholders (for private enterprises) or your 
citizens and politicians (for public sector enterprises). Many businesses are 
23  Rory Cellan-Jones, “Apple Unveils Refreshed iPhone 4S, but no iPhone 5,” BBC, October 
2011, www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-15172238, retrieved on July 2012.
24  The Coca-Cola Company, “Coke Lore: The Real Story of New Coke,” www.thecoca-
colacompany.com/heritage/cokelore_newcoke.html, retrieved on September 2012.

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
250
rated on their quarterly results, and may not be intrinsically set up to support 
the longer-term vision that is essential in an innovation culture. It is very 
difficult to contemplate innovation in an organization that is laser-focused on 
a three-month return. Even annual reporting can be deleterious. Public sector 
organizations can find more leeway in expectation (there is a reason many 
long-term “public good” innovations like the Internet were undertaken by 
government, not private enterprise). However, even these organizations can 
face anti-innovation pressure as they are asked to deliver results in a single 
election cycle, and often much less. 
The reality is that you are not always in control of your own innovation 
destiny. Customers, shareholders, constituents, other executives, and more 
can all too easily undermine your innovation efforts—despite your best 
efforts. 
Innovation May Cannibalize  
Your Business 
As we have explored, innovation definitely upsets the apple cart. It can 
undermine individuals and teams, and reduce the power base and empire of 
otherwise well-positioned executives. It can fundamentally change the way 
people work and the outcomes they are expected to achieve. Sometimes 
innovation is so radical that it may even threaten to cannibalize your core 
business. It can decimate or make obsolete anything from individuals to whole 
departments or business units and even to entire companies.
And neither you nor your organization is immune from this same radical 
disruption.
To be a true innovator, you should be looking for the next development that 
will revolutionize and/or dominate your industry. You should be looking to 
find what will disrupt your competitors and erode their advantage, what will 
drive your market to significant change in purchasing, what products and 
services will drive a substantial change in your business opportunity. 
Sometimes you will discover innovations that will not just undermine your 
competitors, but will undermine your industry. You may find innovations that 
will undermine your own staff, your department, or even your own job. When 
the point of innovation is to do new things new ways—and to do existing 
things in better (new) ways—then sometimes you will find that innovation 
means the need to disrupt yourself or your business. This may mean that you 
find ways to cannibalize or undermine your own business.

251
The Innovative CIO
The problem is that once you see these disruptions, you cannot simply ignore 
them. If you can find these innovations, it is a good bet that eventually someone 
else will. If you do not take advantage of these disruptions, you run the risk 
that someone else will. So you may need to do it first, even if it may kill you. 
You may need to disrupt yourself before others disrupt yourself for you. 
Examples of this in technology form the stuff of innovation legends. You can 
look at IBM, which dominated the typewriter market with the Selectric but 
eventually killed off the typewriter by embracing the personal computer—in 
effect cannibalizing their business by embracing this innovation. 
By contrast, we have already noted the history of Kodak, which has suffered 
significant market pressure as it failed initially to embrace its own innovation 
in digital photography. We can also point to bookstore chain Barnes & Noble, 
which for too long failed to embrace digital publishing, allowing Amazon and 
its Kindle e-reader to erode Barnes & Noble’s market position. We can also 
see how Blockbuster continually rejected efforts to dismantle its bricks and 
mortar business model, allowing innovators like Netflix and Redbox to do 
exceptional damage to its business with new delivery methods like mail order, 
self-service kiosks, and online streaming, all of which Blockbuster was late to 
embrace. 
There is also the immediate threat from cloud computing, which many say will 
make the traditional IT department obsolete. Cloud will likely change your 
personal job in the business of IT, and without significant change in your own 
role, may even make you redundant. Yet you cannot ignore it, as that will only 
lead to an inevitable atrophy in your role as your business counterparts 
demand new approaches, and adopt cloud services directly. Like King Canute, 
you cannot turn back the tide, and must instead figure out how to embrace 
these changes—even if it may damage your department, or even your own 
prospects. Putting your head in the sand is simply not a viable option when 
faced with the opportunity of radical innovation. 
Of course, these are just a few examples of factors outside your control that 
will affect your ability to innovate. Difficulties satisfying the requirements of 
other business executives, channels, and partners; an ecosystem that relies on 
your products and services, backward compatibility, standards and interfaces; 
and many more factors can get in the way. 
In the end, to be a successful innovator you will need to accommodate and 
manage the conflict that cannibalization can create. There is no one correct 
approach, but you must recognize, acknowledge, and react to this threat 
when it appears. In some situations, you may be able to simply accept and 
mitigate the risk. In others, you may be able to ameliorate the threat. In a best 

Chapter 11 | The Dirty Little Secrets of Innovation
252
case, you may be able to take advantage of the new opportunities this threat 
creates.
However, one thing is for sure—you cannot simply close your eyes and hope 
the threat of cannibalization goes away, because it will not. You must accept 
it, make a plan to deal with it, and move forward. 

c h a p t e r
12
What’s Next  
for Me?
Few things are impossible to diligence and skill. Great works are performed not 
by strength, but perseverance.
—Samuel Johnson
If you have gotten this far, you have read a lot of practical advice based on the 
experiences of the authors. This practical advice has been written to help you 
take action. After all, as we have stated many times in the previous chapters, 
good ideas without related action are nice but will have no impact on the 
organization. You have the opportunity with the help of this book to develop 
a strategy that will improve the use of IT in your organization. This can lead 
to growth, new products and services, or hopefully the rewards that come 
with them. 
It is time to decide on your priorities for innovation. These will be different 
for each reader of this book. The first stage in this process is to use your 
personal experience and what you have picked up from this book so far. At 
this time, you will need to ask some searching questions:
• 
Does the culture of your organization support innovation?
• 
Who are the innovators in the business?
• 
Can you improve your relationship with them?
• 
Is the business growing? 

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
254
• 
Is it possible to develop growth to improve your position in 
your market without radical innovation?
• 
Can you move into new markets with innovation?
• 
Is there an appetite for change in your IT organization or in 
the business as a whole?
• 
Who are the most likely sponsors for innovation?
• 
Do you have the nerve to promote innovation?
• 
Do you have the patience to stick with an innovative project 
until you see results?
• 
How well does your company use technology now and could 
you do better?
All of these and more questions need to be considered before creating an 
innovation strategy and an action plan from that. You will notice that we have 
not mentioned technology in any of these questions. Detailed technology is 
outside the scope of this book, and we are assuming that you already 
understand the capabilities of the technology you provide to the organization.
So what is next for the innovative CIO? Can you develop a “nose” for 
innovation? This chapter will look at some of the qualities of an innovative 
CIO. We will encourage you to be—or continue to be—adventurous in your 
promotion of innovation. We will also discuss the reality that not all innovations 
deserve to see the light of day. Some innovations need to be terminated 
before they cost too much in resources or reputation.
What Is an Innovative CIO?
We have discussed the role of an innovative CIO in previous chapters. The 
CIO is responsible for supplying IT to the business. This is the day job and the 
expectation of senior management. Many CIOs see IT maintenance as their 
sole responsibility. Keeping the lights on is what they believe is the highest 
single priority for the business. CIOs with this mindset see IT excellence as 
about performance, uptime, and cost control. These are, without dispute, 
important parts of the role. But we hope that we have persuaded you that 
CIOs should be doing more beyond their core business.
A continual theme of this book is that innovation is needed to add value to 
the business and this value-add should be IT-led. Keeping IT costs low is 
important, but cost reduction does not add value to the business. Value is 
what IT leaders will be measured on in the future. At some stage in our 

255
The Innovative CIO
discussions with senior business executives, they tell us that IT is the heart of 
the business. They say things like the following:
“We couldn’t run our business without IT.”
“IT is critical to our business success.”
“IT enables business innovation and is core to our strategy.”
These firmly held views are often at odds with answers from the same 
executives when you ask if IT is fulfilling their expectations. Their answers to 
this question frequently indicate that IT is still not as effective as the business 
needs. These views were gathered in informal discussions but also supported 
by a survey into the changing role of the CIO1. When CIOs were asked how 
closely they believe their view of the CIO role matches the CEO or other 
C-suite executive’s view of the role, only 29% of the CIOs said the views were 
identical. Further insight into the attitudes to the CIO came from asking if 
their respective companies use IT to the extent the CIO would expect. The 
result of this question was 37% of CIOs responded “no.” The responses of 
the CIO to these survey questions indicate that there is a continuing 
disconnect between the expectations of the CIO and the expectations of 
others in the company with regard to the effectiveness of CIO and IT.
The conflicting views cannot be reconciled by communication alone. You 
need to ask yourself about the senior people in your organization. Do they 
know what is happening in the IT domain—what new technologies and what 
new services are being promoted or developed? Increasing numbers of people 
in their thirties are entering the senior management ranks. These people have 
not known a world without personal computers. There is an assumption that 
the digital literacy of the executive team will increase as these “digital natives” 
become more senior in organizations. At the current time, this is still not the 
case, although we are watching the next ten years with interest! The evidence 
from the CIO survey shows that 59% of senior management is not considered 
digitally literate by the CIOs in their organizations. As an innovative CIO, you 
will have to manage the expectation of people who are not as digitally literate 
as you are, but who sometimes think they are. You will also have to overcome 
the doubts of people who know IT is important, but think that they are not 
getting the best from IT.
You should also consider the velocity of technology change and introduction. 
There are a number of commentators who argue that technology is moving 
too fast for a single executive to keep pace with. The increasing number of 
1 “The Future Role of the CIO,” CA Technologies, October 2011, www.ca.com/us/collateral/
white-papers/na/The-Future-Role-of-the-CIO-Becoming-the-Boss.aspx, retrieved on May 
2012.

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
256
new advances, and more particularly, the understanding of the potential 
impact of those advances are overwhelming. The role of the CIO is to be an 
IT specialist. More and more frequently, the expectation is for a business 
expert who has special responsibility for IT. This would be the IT equivalent 
to the COO who is the business expert with special expertise in logistics. 
You are fortunate if you are in the position of being regarded as an IT-savvy 
business expert. The Future Role of the CIO survey also highlighted the 
previous experience of the CIOs we questioned. The sizable majority of the 
CIOs had an IT background with only 5% having experience in finance, 
logistics, or sales and marketing. This shows that the “home-grown” CIO 
promoted from within the organization is most likely to come from an IT 
background. In our view, this is the reason that few CIOs are regarded as 
business experts. Many large organizations hire in CIOs with a business 
background. The progression from business expert to CIO is not easy but is 
valued in many cases for the credibility it gives to the CIO’s innovative business 
suggestions.
This seems to imply that only CIOs from a business background will have 
credibility to talk about innovation to the business. IT people who want to 
make it as a business expert need to have some additional business experience, 
not just experience keeping the data center’s lights on. There are a number of 
ways to gain the required business experience. Training or education is one 
way, such as part-time or on-the-job MBA degree courses or courses for 
other qualifications. The important thing is to develop a business focus and 
equip yourself with the language of business. As we have stressed in many 
places in this book, leave the technology chats for the IT department. Talk 
business and capabilities to the business people.
During the writing of this book, we have had some interesting discussions 
about the changes that a CIO would need to make to convert from a 
technology to business focus. One of the comments most frequently made is 
that the changes and opportunity to convert are not fully within the CIO’s 
control. A CIO may be driven to be innovative, but it is not possible for them 
to go it alone. In Chapter 10, we talked about how the CIO can work with 
sponsors. Gaining an executive sponsor and capturing the imagination of the 
decision-makers is often the key to getting things rolling.
Often the IT department and the CIO are spending all their time maintaining 
their existing infrastructure. This is a demanding task. You should take a few 
minutes to look at your daily workload. How much of your workload is 
running to stand still? What did you do that was innovative in the last working 
day? If the answer is nothing or near nothing, then you have some work to do 
to generate the energy to innovate. Innovative work is not concerned with 
maintaining the status quo. Consider the structure of your department. Are 

257
The Innovative CIO
you notified of all problems or only the most serious ones? Have you delegated 
correctly? Does that give you time to plan or even review any innovations?
If you consider yourself a pragmatic manager rather than an innovator, do you 
have someone in your department who is an innovator? Can you structure 
your department so that it will foster innovation?
Recently I came across an IT department that was generating some interest in 
their innovative suggestions for the business. When I spent some time 
discussing this with them, I found that the one thing that had generated the 
suggestions was moving the IT department desks into the same physical space 
that some of the other departments occupied. Just moving outside of the 
isolated IT offices started to get conversations going. Adding some sporting 
events and the occasional afterwork social event ensured that contacts made 
at work carried over. This was just good management, fostering a united 
workforce. It did get people talking across departmental boundaries. 
While these changes may be influential, developing an innovative culture and 
habit may require a “rethink” of the whole organizational structure. While 
this is not normally something within the scope of the CIO, it is worth your 
thinking about new structures and being able to discuss them when the CEO 
asks about innovation, particularly if innovation has not been successful.
Creating an Innovative Organization
The previous chapters of the book have emphasized the difficulty in measuring 
and managing innovation with the same measures and in the same way as 
mature products and services are managed. We have discussed tactics for 
avoiding some of the negative effects of innovating in a company that is not 
geared up for innovation. A Fortune 500 general manager told us that he has 
had to treat an innovative project as though it was a startup company. He set 
up a separate team to duplicate every function he needed, keeping the team 
small and focused. This was the only way that he could get the project off the 
ground. His problem was that each quarter other parts of the company were 
asking when there was to be a return on the investment, and any return he 
stated was always perceived as lower than expected.
One way of avoiding these problems may seem obvious—create a completely 
separate startup. Acting as a venture capitalist for a separate startup creates 
the emphasis on agility and innovation and removes the bureaucracy of a large 
organization. Creating a separate company may lose some of the economies 
of scale and the support that being part of a larger organization can give. 
There are other methods of creating the separation between innovation and 
core developments through changes in organizational structure. Creating an 

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
258
“emerging business unit” as a separate entity, only reporting to the CEO or 
general manager is always a possibility. Again this would duplicate all the 
functions, on a smaller scale, of the larger organization. This has many of the 
advantages of a startup, but gains little from being part of the larger organization 
and has little management support except at the highest level. This structure 
creates a climate of functional duplication, where even the HR or office 
facilities may be duplicated. Another possible solution is the creation of an 
innovation team within an existing core business unit. This team would have 
separate goals from the other parts of the unit but the same management. 
Inevitably this may lead to conflicts of objectives where neither part of the 
organization thrives. 
Acceptance is growing for an alternative organizational strategy. This strategy 
will encourage innovation and still enable the existing business to function 
optimally. The strategy is to create an ambidextrous organization. This 
organizational structure creates a separation between the core, mature 
business, and innovation. The innovative business can still use the skills, HR, 
and cash of the larger organization but not be measured in the same way. The 
innovative part of the business will not have to follow processes and corporate 
rules in the same way as the mature part of the business. This may look like 
all the advantage goes with the innovative part of the business, but in fact it 
removes the issues with innovation from the mature part of the business and 
allows this mature part to focus on sales, marketing, and product development 
needed to keep it healthy.
Charles O’Reilly and Michael Tushman call this type of organizational structure 
an ambidextrous organization in their 2004 paper for Harvard Business Review2. 
This is not a new concept. Ambidextrous organizational structures have been 
discussed in many papers over the years dating back to 1971. The main feature 
is the two separate domains in an ambidextrous organization. There is the 
core products domain, where products and services are mature and exploiting 
a mature market. Secondly, there is the innovative products and services 
domain where new products and services are being developed to expand into 
new markets. 
Both core and innovative domains are important to the company, but they 
have different goals. If this level of separation is maintained with different 
marketing, sales, and development goals, both parts will succeed. A critical 
success factor is that the integration of the two domains is at the higher level 
of management of the organization. Both domains should have separate 
management structures and budgets. For example, the innovative part of the 
2 Charles O’Reilly and Michael Tushman “The Ambidextrous Organisation” 2004, http://hbr.
org/2004/04/the-ambidextrous-organization/ar/pr retrieved on November 2012.

259
The Innovative CIO
organization should have their own HR function that has a dotted line report 
to the HR executive to ensure that HR policies are in-line with regard to legal 
and ethical considerations. Innovative HR can use different processes and 
goals for recruitment but use the advice and experience of the HR executive 
as well.
This brief discussion of a management theory is needed to demonstrate that 
organizational barriers are the concern of the CIO even if the CIO has no 
direct influence on them. We spent some time on reviewing operational and 
organizational barriers to innovation in Chapter 10. The points mentioned 
here are for further consideration. Once you have established yourself as a 
trusted IT advisor to the business, you may have the opportunity to suggest 
alternative management or organizational structures that are worth 
considering. A story from the past may illustrate the point about gaining the 
confidence of the business executives.
One of the companies I worked for had very tight operational controls on 
each of its business units. The complexity of the business, staffing ratios, and 
delivery mechanisms meant that there was little flexibility for managers to 
develop any innovative programs. After several attempts to persuade the 
executives that the company needed a new service offering, my colleague and 
I discussed new services in management meetings and informal communications. 
We were initially told to concentrate on the day job but over a period of 
months the ideas gained supporters and we were invited to present to the 
chairman of the board. The chairman listened for about ten minutes and then 
gave the green light, informed the operations manager to set up a separate 
team, instructed the finance director to make budget available, and told my 
colleague and me to prepare a more detailed plan for implementation starting 
the following week. 
Five months later we were demonstrating the pilot version of our idea. This 
pilot enabled the company to enter a new market and for a while the company 
made a lot of money until other organizations entered the market and 
innovated beyond our entry. Getting the buy-in from the chairman and major 
shareholder and setting up a separate team were crucial to success. The only 
problem was that this was not the development of an innovative culture in the 
company, just a one-off innovation. We were lucky that we had patience so 
that we gained support in the company, and we were lucky with the timing. 
We had made our pitch just at the time that the chairman had been considering 
the future of some software packages that had been developed. He had 
concluded that he needed some new hook to sell the packages to a larger 
market, and we provided the opportunity.
In this war story, success depended on luck but there are two other points to 
consider. First, we put our head above the parapet. We made the point that 

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
260
there was a new opportunity; we didn’t accept the initial knock back and 
persisted with our idea. Second, we suggested an organizational change that 
was accepted, but not made permanent. Both points were crucial to the 
success, but alone neither of the points would have made success possible. To 
create a lasting innovative culture, you need to consider how an innovative 
organization should look and how it will relate to the existing organization.
Why Would You Stick Out Your Neck  
to Innovate?
The number of failed IT projects is legion, and they range in size from big to 
small. Failure is one thing that most managers and executives don’t want their 
names associated with. Some corporate cultures are so risk averse that they 
are almost static. Something new and untried does carry a high risk. Innovation 
brings with it a high risk of failure. So why would a CIO want to be associated 
with innovation?
The most compelling reason for CIOs to innovate is that it is expected of 
them. Most executives see IT as the innovative factor that will drive growth. 
Examples of innovative uses of IT fire them up. They expect the IT department 
to come up with suggestions and projects that will revolutionize their business. 
Sadly, this expectation has generated frustration with the IT department. 
Expectations are sometimes inflated by a review of competitors and their use 
of IT. If a competitor has launched a new product and is starting to corner the 
market for that offering, this would be seen as a disadvantage to your company. 
The questions then asked of the IT group in this circumstance are this: 
“Where is our innovation? Why aren’t we doing this?” A good example of 
competitive advantage was displayed a few years ago. A bank had developed a 
mortgage offering that reduced the amount owing by the monthly payment 
plus any interest accruing on other positive balances. This offering caught the 
public imagination and was popular. Other banks soon came into the market 
for this product but were disadvantaged by being late. Because some banks 
had relatively inflexible IT systems, they were unable to enter the market until 
later and lost business. Some were not able to make IT changes at all and 
were never able to compete with that offering. 
A common characteristic of many businesses is impatience. If they get a great 
idea of ways to drive revenue, they won’t want to wait for a long time. When 
I first started in the IT business, IT projects had tens or even hundreds of 
programmers, analysts and systems programmers working for many months, 
sometimes years. With agile development and continuous release strategies, 
the IT world is continually reducing time-to-release software changes, 
sometimes down to days and weeks. Imagine the expression of the business 

261
The Innovative CIO
leaders if you come to them to talk about the extra delays on your already 
delayed project. Ensuring that you have a flexible and agile infrastructure is a 
valid IT innovation, but it still needs to be placed in a business context. This 
is what the business leaders will expect of an innovative CIO.
Lack of growth leads to stagnation, and stagnation in business will eventually 
lead to the demise of the business. If you only have a year to retirement, lack 
of growth may not be an issue. The likelihood is that you want to continue 
being employed, unless you have just won the lottery. Investing in innovation-
led growth is part of the “keep paying me” plan, which can meet with some 
resistance from the established lines of business. In a company that has a core 
group of mature products, there may be resentment that investment is going 
into the new products or initiatives. It is frequently said by the core business 
managers that the core products are supporting the waste of resources on 
innovation. This is certainly the case if allocation of resources to innovation 
might reduce resources available the core product business. 
So, if innovation has a high risk of failure and may discourage employees from 
considering innovation, we should first look at some of the reasons for failure:
• 
Failure is often the result of management impatience. The 
expectations have been high and time frames have been 
reduced. If the innovation has failed to deliver in those time 
frames, no matter how promising the project, it gets killed by 
senior management. One additional effect of failure is that 
the employees may get fired as well. 
• 
Has the innovation suffered from mission creep? An 
innovation to improve the user interface for one application 
suddenly becomes a complete redesign of the other user 
interfaces, costs more than the original estimate, fails to 
deliver, and the redesign is seen as a failure.
• 
Failure can come from not focusing on the growth potential 
of an innovation. The other innovations in your portfolio are 
under pressure to release budget or resources, so this project 
should release resources. You should always look at each 
innovation and evaluate the level of market disruption it will 
cause and its growth potential before deciding to alter budget 
or resources.
The potential to fail should not discourage CIOs from innovating. There are 
ways of mitigating the risk of failure, as we discuss later in this chapter.
Innovation is a strategic direction that the CEO should be expected to 
support. However, there are managers who see the status quo as the optimal 

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
262
mode of operation. This “head in the sand” attitude is often the default 
mindset of middle management. Without growth, the organization may 
stagnate and fail. We have mentioned the business conflict between Netflix 
and Blockbuster. Blockbuster was complacent, had shops that it needed to 
support, and failed to see the impact of high-speed broadband on the movie 
download community. Blockbuster had stagnated and instead of leveraging its 
name and market presence, it allowed a new organization to take its market. 
We can speculate that Blockbuster was not worried about movie downloads 
because there had been several organizations who had entered the movie 
download market while Blockbuster was riding high and these companies had 
all failed to catch the imagination. Download or streaming speed was one 
reason for their failure, but also there was little understanding of the potential 
of movie streaming from the movie distributors. The distributors wanted to 
protect their revenue from DVD and tape hires rather than threaten this with 
streaming initiatives. Once broadband, streaming speeds, and distribution and 
demand had all lined up, the days for tape and DVD rentals were numbered. I 
haven’t rented a movie from a store in seven years or bought a DVD for two 
years. The then CIO of Blockbuster should have been focusing on new delivery 
methods and not the efficiency of POS (Point of Sale) terminals. 
As an innovative CIO, you are expected to embrace the idea of new tools and 
technologies—being late in the game may be a company killer and cost you 
and the department dearly. You should not let corporate stagnation deter you 
from developing and delivering innovation.
How Can You Develop a “Nose”  
for Innovation?
Developing a “nose” for innovation is part of a CIO’s personal development. 
It takes time and needs practice. It is easier to learn a new language in small 
bites. In the same way, this skill needs to be practiced little and often. Most 
innovators are curious. Asking questions and trying to find out answers, 
solving puzzles—this is the lifeblood of innovation. Innovators are always 
interested in the new and novel. They store each fact away and often make 
surprising connections between facts. There are even tools that can do this 
like DEVONthink. This database has a query engine to create associations 
between what you write and content you already have stored or read. These 
connections can illuminate an idea or expand it into something unique. Trying 
to bridge the gap between the IT and business world may require unusual 
connections before it can result in something new. When Facebook started, 
it was a college project. The business connections were not made until later. 
Businesses may have cautiously decided to use Facebook for communications 

263
The Innovative CIO
but they are all familiar with the potential. Twitter is another personal 
communication tool that has also become a business tool. 
There are other ways that you can gain insight. You may consider a refresher 
course on business management if that is your experience or background. If 
you came into the role of CIO through the IT route, you may consider 
business as a new area of study. We mentioned earlier in the chapter that 
there are a number of online or part-time MBA courses that will expand your 
business experience. If you don’t have the time or inclination for study, you 
may be able to join in with some of the business managers, particularly when 
they are discussing new business strategy and sales approaches.
The IT world, new directions, and technologies are all considered the primary 
area of expertise of the CIO. Keeping up to date in the IT domain should be 
a given. Magazines, papers, books like this one, blogs, online articles, and 
industry analysts are all good sources of information and opinion, and we are 
sure that you are already well-versed in their use. However, just reading the 
articles is not enough. Each article or blog should be evaluated against your 
current IT situation and the business you are in. Does this new technology 
have potential for your business? If you only have Microsoft tools and operating 
systems, you should not restrict your reading and reviews of that technology 
base alone. There may be something in the Linux or mobile worlds that can 
be applied to your business. As we just stated in the previous paragraph, you 
need to have a broad view of technology. Making the connections between 
what you have, what the business needs, and what new IT stuff is happening 
is the source of a lot of innovative thinking. 
If you are evaluating the potential impact of new technology, indulging in 
“what if” sessions with your staff can help you in your evaluations. Develop a 
way of handling the information that you receive. Like most people, we expect 
that you are suffering from information overload. You will need to be selective, 
and every piece of information needs to be evaluated for its potential. The 
only problem with filtering information is that you may miss the one key thing 
that starts a train of thought.
In our discussions with CIOs of leading companies, we have been given some 
reasons for their difficulty in innovating. A frequently mentioned reason is 
“the day job.”.As a CIO you cannot neglect this area, but even in the most 
difficult circumstances you also need to take time out to consider growth and 
innovation. You may even find that you return to the current system’s problem 
with a fresh approach that saves the day. Watching the ways that competitors 
are using IT is another way of expanding your knowledge; however, you may 
need to consider if you can “leapfrog” over the competition with innovative 
uses of IT. 

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
264
In addition to these ways of generating a nose for innovation, there are more 
organized ways. Creating a more formalized way of generating innovation may 
require a cultural change. We will look at that later in this chapter but from 
an individual perspective, creating a more formal nose for innovation may 
require considerable effort and some cost. We have talked to a CIO who tells 
us that he spends two weeks a year in Silicon Valley, meeting with venture 
capitalists and small companies to discuss developments. Another CIO has 
developed a complex database of technology that contains details of new 
technology, the vendors’ offerings, and analysts’ reports and opinions. This 
work may result in a more formal cultural change, but will require time and 
effort and again, support from the other executives. These CIOs have built a 
knowledge base that can be continually updated and expanded to help them 
to gain a good overview of the IT landscape. Knowledge is the way to develop 
the nose that you need for innovation.
Is Innovation in Your Title?
This is a politically tricky question to ask. If you search the Web, you will find 
a number of thinkers and analysts who are convinced that announcing the 
creation of an innovation department or the role of a Chief Innovation Officer 
indicates a company that is not innovative. How true that would be in your 
case we will leave to you to answer, but you should consider the following 
points:
• 
An innovation department will generate some visibility that 
there is somewhere for all those good ideas to go.
• 
Chief Innovation Officers only have innovation to focus on—
they would not be expected to focus on other operational 
considerations.
• 
It will be expected that a Chief Innovation Officer need to 
come up with good ideas and processes to improve the 
innovative standing of the company.
So, it is not always the kiss of death. It is sometimes the knee-jerk reaction of 
the CEO to a perceived lack of innovation in your company. If you have 
followed the advice and points in the rest of this book, you should not be in 
a position of standing on the sidelines waiting for the appointment. You should 
already be considered the Chief Innovation Officer as well as the Chief 
Information Officer.
If you have joined an organization that has already put an innovation depart-
ment in place or has created a chief innovation officer, you will have to work 

265
The Innovative CIO
within that structure. It does not mean that you have no innovation role, but 
in the early days you may have to get approval for innovations that you are 
promoting from the innovation team. An innovative CIO buzzing with new 
ideas and enthusiasms may be seen as a potential threat to the Chief Innovation 
Officer or their department. You should be aware of this, but innovation is 
too important to your organization to allow politics to obstruct it.
Can You and Your Culture Adapt  
to Become More Innovative?
Earlier in the book, we mentioned how a company can change to become 
more innovative and generate high levels of growth. We also outlined some of 
the organizational changes that may smooth the way for innovations by 
removing or ignoring some of the operational and organizational obstacles. 
Many of these changes will have a positive effect, but they won’t generate an 
organization that is focused on innovation for growth. That requires a cultural 
change, not just in the department that is innovating, but also in the wider 
organization to develop an understanding and appreciation of the value of 
innovation. Cultural changes are always difficult to achieve. A cultural change 
does not happen by dictate, just because the CEO says so. There are underlying 
attitudes and behaviors that will need to be modified before a cultural change 
becomes more than a plan. Management that is intent on maintaining their 
power base or employees who only see change in a negative way can 
undermine the best-intentioned cultural changes. Cultural changes take time 
to occur. 
Often a company will announce a new mission statement that will not work 
without cultural change. A year later when the company performance against 
the mission statement is reviewed, there is often surprise that there have 
been few real changes and developments. There must be a real drive and focus 
on change to see progress even three years down the line. Trying to change 
the behavior and mindset of employees is a long-term task. Trying to develop 
an innovative culture will take just as long. 
We have talked to a number of CIOs who want to create an innovative culture 
in IT. They have researched innovative companies like Google and have noticed 
that Google and other companies allocate time for employees to innovate. 
We have discussed the Google case more fully in Chapter 9, but other 
companies also have the concept of innovation time. The time allocated to 
innovation ranges from 10 to 25% of the employees’ working time. Some 
executives believe that telling employees they have 20% of their time for 
innovation will generate innovative ideas; however, just allocating time will 
not increase the innovative potential of the team. One executive in a Fortune 

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
266
500 company told us that despite a change to the working time to include 
innovation time it was undermined by middle management who didn’t change 
workloads and priorities. Employees still could not get the time to innovate, 
but there was still an expectation of an increase in innovation. It took time for 
the problems to filter through to senior management. There needs to be a 
unified process supporting the allocation of time for innovation. We have 
outlined some of the process changes for idea creation and measurement in 
other chapters. It is clear to us that creating a cultural change in a team or a 
department is a complex, long-term exercise. It can be even longer if it is a 
cross-organizational change.
Measuring cultural change is as difficult as measuring innovation. Some people 
are happy to measure innovation and cultural change using the Justice Potter 
Stewart method:
■ During a judgment in an obscenity case Justice Potter Stewart said that hard-core pornography 
is hard to define—but I know it when I see it.3
Others need to measure the impact of innovation and of cultural change by 
trying to associate increases (or decreases) in revenue or profitability with 
the changes. One area that has been used to measure innovation is the patent 
measurement. Innovative ideas can be patented. Some parts of the world only 
allow a patent to be awarded to a technology; others allow business processes 
to be patented as well. Registering a patent is costly and time-consuming, but 
there are a number of analyses of US patents that place average values of 
$9,000 on a patent, although some are worth much more. One reason for 
placing some emphasis on patents is the leverage that a company gets when 
they are holding patents. This is particularly important when negotiations to 
sell or buy licenses and franchises are underway. If your company does not 
have a well-established patent process, then creating a culture that emphasizes 
patent production as a way of measuring innovation will not deliver results. In 
this circumstance, a discussion with the company legal department may 
generate a change in attitude to patents.
3 Judith A. Silver “Movie Day at the Supreme Court or “I Know It When I See It,” FindLaw, 
2008, http://corporate.findlaw.com/litigation-disputes/movie-day-at-the-supreme-
court-or-i-know-it-when-i-see-it-a.html, retrieved on November 2012.

267
The Innovative CIO
Do You Have the Attention Span  
to Be Innovative?
It’s always nice to get some quick wins, particularly when you can use them to 
validate an approach. Whenever you engage in a project that is new or has 
potentially unknown benefits, you need to look for the quick win or validation 
that your approach is working. A balance needs to be achieved between quick 
wins generated by impatience for results and the need for patience to allow 
project results to be realized. This balance needs to take into account projects 
that are not fulfilling early promise. 
Once a project has been given the green light, there is a great enthusiasm that 
can be maintained by communication of progress and early wins. Early wins 
can be a milestone met or an endorsement from someone influential, for 
example, an analyst or the press. An influential quick win is a commitment to 
purchase on project completion or an agreement to join a project pilot study. 
We have already stressed the need to communicate to ensure that the project 
is seen as a real project and worth continuing. There may come a time when 
the communication and wins start to tail off. This is the most critical part of 
an innovative project. The doubters and “nervous nellies” start to make their 
presence felt when things are not going well. You may be urged to cut your 
losses, close the project, and move on to something more viable. How do you 
know when the time is right to pull the plug or increase your drive to continue 
the project? 
There are many examples of innovations that have been killed early and as 
many that have stayed the course but failed to make it to market. Consider 
this example. Gardening is a popular pastime and during the last 30 years 
more and more products have been created to tap into this enthusiastic 
market. In the 18th century, gardeners in the employment of large households 
looked for ways to force plants to grow faster in the cooler times of the year 
or to protect delicate plants from frost and predators. They often used bell 
cloches (large glass domes). These were put over plants for protection or to 
encourage growth. In the 1970s, a plastic version was designed. It would fit a 
large circular plant pot like a miniature green house—it could be used like a 
bell cloche and was designed with small holes in the top so that plants could 
be watered without moving the cloche. The holes were drilled precisely, after 
a lot of experiment and calculation, to enable the optimal amount of water 
for the plant without too large a drop of water that would damage delicate 
plants. This was marketed under the name “Ploche.” 
Why are we discussing garden equipment in a book for CIOs? In our view, this 
is a good example of an innovation that had been overdeveloped. With the 
Ploche, there had been market and sales analysis and advertising material 

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
268
prepared. But despite all the investment and work, the product failed to sell 
in any great numbers. It was an innovation; it had been engineered precisely 
and people were initially enthusiastic. So why did it bomb? After a lot of 
discussion, the producers discovered that cheaper alternatives were 
considered “good enough” and precision engineering of this type of item did 
not have a premium value. 
The Ploche also suffered from being so well made. After you had bought three 
or four, you did not need to buy any more for years so there were few repeat 
purchases. The Ploche didn’t break easily and again the opportunity for future 
sales faded away. The development should have ended earlier than it did, cost 
less, and got out onto the market earlier. There was no need to spend weeks 
and months creating a perfect article that would fit onto an eight-inch pot 
when sales depended on purchasers owning or buying additional pots. The 
project should have been reviewed at each stage and this vital question should 
have been answered: “Will the public pay enough of a premium to recover the 
investment in each innovative change?” If the answer was negative, then the 
development should have been stopped or modified to create a “near enough” 
product that would sell.
There is another good example of a technically good product that didn’t sell 
well because of a mistaken development direction, the Psion 5. Back in the 
1990s, the Psion 3 handheld computer was released. You could use it to write 
notes and letters, and it would store diary entries, notes, tasks, and contacts. 
It was one of the first best replacements for the day planner or Filofax. As a 
standalone tool, it was excellent—it was compact, had good battery life, and 
there was a limited integration with PCs. It was never intended to become  
a peripheral for the PC, and so the integration was a little clunky. The rival 
was the Palm Pilot that came out with much better integration with PCs but 
no keyboard. Many people were happy using the Psion and had no plans to 
replace it. 
At this time, companies started to deploy Microsoft tools for e-mail and 
appointments. In these environments, the Psion became more awkward 
because of the lack of simple integration. Needing to rekey diary entries into 
the Psion from Windows applications was a common problem users 
experienced. Psion released a new version, the Psion 5 with a touch screen 
and marginally better integration. Users of the Psion 3 had become frustrated 
with the lack of integration and PC tools, although the Psion 3 had simpler 
data entry and better-looking applications than the Palm Pilot. If the PC 
integration had been of the same quality as the Palm Pilot, customers would 
have been happy. But the new Psion 5 was more a hardware and user interface 
upgrade. Psion missed the point. Most of the commercial world was starting 
to use Microsoft tools as their internal standard. The developers of Psion 

269
The Innovative CIO
would have been better served if they had concentrated on software 
integration rather than touch screens. The Psion 5 is another example of an 
innovation that should have been tested at each stage rather than developed, 
as we suspect, inside a bubble. 
There are a number of key indicators to help you decide if you need to kill off 
a project. The adage is “fail fast,” and is often extended to “fail fast, fail cheap.” 
If you look into the two examples we have given, both of them should have 
identified the point at which the cost of completion would be less than the 
value of success. The Ploche could have been put to market faster without 
the extra design tweaks and the Psion 5 could have been a Palm killer if the 
Microsoft integration had been perfected. The indication that you may need 
to kill a project can come from a number of questions:
• 
What does the market expect from you in terms of 
innovation? If you are in a stable market, then there may not 
be much demand for innovation. It is a different matter if you 
are breaking into a new market area. Look at your competitors. 
Their innovation activities may tell you that you should put 
your innovation money into another area.
• 
Is there anything on the market that is “near enough” that 
you can only compete on cost? There is no point in over-
engineering if there is something that is cheaper and fulfills 80 
or 90% of the market requirements. Will the market sustain 
a premium for perfection?
• 
Is your innovation different enough? To make a real difference, 
an innovation has to be different. You should consider the 
disruptive effect of the innovation. The more disruptive 
potential an innovation has the more you should persist with 
the project.
• 
Are the early pilot studies getting the traction that justifies 
continued investment? A prime advocate of the fail-fast adage 
is Google. If you used the first versions of Google Wave, you 
would have been impressed by the potential but depressed by 
the number of people using it. Google announced that it was 
ceasing support for Google Wave a short time after opening 
it up to all users because the user uptake was not as significant 
as Google expected.
These questions, the answers, and this section of the chapter can be reduced 
to three rules that will enable you to decide on patience or the axe for an 
innovative project:

Chapter 12 | What’s Next for Me? 
270
1.  Talk to your critics. They often highlight areas that you have not 
thought about or had hoped no one would notice.
2.  Microfailures are better than macrofailures. If you are planning 
to “fail fast, fail cheap,” the microfailure is your friend. You should 
set up measures for all the critical components of the project 
and a plan for the possible failure of that component. If your risk 
assessment and risk management plan is good, you should be 
able to continue with the project without a macrofailure.
3.  Trust your gut instinct. Sometimes you just know that things are 
not going right without being able to point to anything obvious. 
Use your gut feeling to tell you to review the microfailure risk 
assessment before deciding to kill off a project or to continue 
with investment.
Being innovative is not a one-off. Being innovative is an attitude or mindset 
that uses curiosity and interests to improve things. By using these rules, you 
should be able to develop innovations that will change things for the better in 
your work.

Summary
Although innovation may appear to be the latest hipster buzzword, innovation 
itself is and always has been important. All types of innovation matter, as well. 
For evidence of how even apparently simple innovations can be of remarkable 
value, we need look no further than to the use of clothing as a simple water 
filter in the prevention of guinea worm disease. 
The value of a specific innovation is not always obvious to everyone—
sometimes not even to the inventor. And when the inventor does realize its 
value, others still may not see that value. Sometimes innovation happens but 
is not captured. Sometimes innovation is temporarily forgotten. Sometimes it 
is lost altogether. 
However, one truth remains: in today’s business climate, every company must 
innovate, lest it put its future at risk.
Part of your role as the innovative CIO is to recognize all innovation when it 
appears, regardless of its source, and to divine its potential for adding business 
value. This is why it is so important to acknowledge the many types of 
innovation and how each can be of value. Whether you drive innovation in 
use or in process, whether it’s incremental innovation, fortunate innovation, 
deliberate innovation, or desperate innovation, you should not overlook or 
discount the value these different approaches can bring to your organization. 
Furthermore, innovation need not involve invention. Even simple ideas can 
fundamentally change your organization and help it achieve core business 
goals. Indeed, innovation can come from anywhere, from anyone, at any time. 
Not all innovation will be valuable to your business, despite the best efforts of 
your people, even though it may be of value to others. So, another aspect of 
the innovative CIO’s job is to channel your team’s creative energies toward 
the innovation that matters, without crushing their innovative spirit. One key 
approach is to suppress those negative views that can kill innovation as it 
occurs—or keep it from occurring. There are many innovation-killers, such as 

Summary
272
culture; organization; styles and personalities like The Perfectionist, The 
Innovative Authoritarian, or The Protector; attitudes like the downer dog 
pile; as well as constrained thinking, timing, and communication. Each can have 
a profoundly negative impact on team morale, innovative spirit and output, 
and overall productivity. Innovative IT leaders must face these innovation-
killers head on.
These are just a few of your immediate challenges. As we have seen from the 
other I’s in “CIO,” there are many pressures, both positive and negative, facing 
innovative IT leaders. For example, you must learn to respond to and minimize 
the “I-Negative” pressures while fostering and leveraging the “I-Positive” 
pressures. There will always be opposing forces in almost all human endeavors; 
shifting the balance in favor of the positive is the key to building an innovative 
team. Shifting the balance of work time to favor employees’ passions and 
strengths can also be key to success. In fact, this can help you increase the 
“innovation time surplus”—the amount of time you can free up for each team 
to focus on innovation. 
As we have discussed, even if you master these I-Negative and I-Positive 
pressures, it is not enough to foster innovation; that innovation must align 
with your strategic business goals. Unfortunately, as an innovative CIO you 
will face so many challenges to producing innovation that maintaining a focus 
on alignment will be difficult. 
Only a minority of CIOs are involved in building their organizations’ business 
strategies; the reasons for this may be personal or organizational, but it means 
that it is a bigger challenge for a CIO to generate business innovations than to 
produce IT innovations. However, if you want to gain funding for innovation, 
you will need to develop a strong business case, using business terms, that 
concentrates on the “why,” not the “how.” You need to tell the time, not 
explain how the watch works.
Your ability to be successful will, therefore, depend highly on developing and 
improving your business communication skills. Using business-centric tech-
niques and guidelines, adopting the correct language, focusing on the business 
value, and describing IT innovations as business imperatives—all these 
methods will make your business case much more compelling.
Innovation is even more compelling when it is not only described in business 
terms but also linked to business direction and strategy. This will be easier for 
a CIO who is part of the corporate strategy team, but as mentioned above, 
this C-suite engagement is sadly rare for all but a few CIOs. However, you can 
still participate in business innovation with some level of access to the 
corporate strategy, and by using tools such as the innovation funnel. You can 
also influence corporate strategy by using IT expertise to deliver business-

273
The Innovative CIO
aligned IT innovation, as well as educating business leaders so they can 
recognize the strategic value of technology in achieving business goals. 
This, alas, sets up the potential conflict between the “business pull” and the 
“IT push” of innovation. But do not assume that there is only one, right way 
to drive innovation. Many organizations focus on building, enabling, and 
responding to the demands of business users as a primary source of innovation. 
Indeed, most business leaders perceive this as the most appropriate source of 
innovation. Others view the voice of the customer to be the only legitimate 
source of innovative ideas. Of course, business users often are more connected 
to your customers and the demands of your market, and customers often are 
a significant source of new ideas—but they are not the only, or even the best, 
sources of innovative ideas. 
As a technologist, you know that a great deal of innovation comes from 
technology drivers, not just from business users and customers. But when 
business leaders try to innovate without understanding how the technology 
landscape is changing, and what the new possibilities that these changes 
enable, they are effectively operating with one hand tied behind their backs. 
Moreover, while customers and markets may sometimes drive good 
innovations, they frequently do not demand the innovations that will ultimately 
be the most successful. As we have seen from several examples, sometimes 
all a customer wants is a faster horse, but what she really needs is a new mode 
of transportation.
In fact, neither business nor IT has a monopoly on great innovation. It is, 
instead, a pairing of technology expertise (and the ability to exploit it) and an 
understanding of business goals (and the market demands that drive them) 
that drives the best new ideas. This combination of business and IT opens up 
many more possibilities to be truly innovative, to drive radical rather than 
incremental change, and to move the needle measurably toward meeting your 
organizational goals.
Even without radical new ideas, there are incredible opportunities to innovate 
today using currently available technologies. We have seen how IT leaders can 
adopt, adapt, or repurpose common technologies to accelerate innovative 
business opportunities. From virtualization and automation, which have been 
around for over 40 years, to relatively new concepts such as big-data analytics 
and gamification, there are some clear paths for driving business innovation.
Consider, therefore, how you can consolidate IT, improve process, accelerate 
development, and give your business peers the opportunity to try more new 
ideas faster, cheaper, and more efficiently than ever before. Use existing 
technologies like NFC, RFID, or GPS to improve your existing products and 
services, create greater efficiencies, open up new market opportunities, or 

Summary
274
drive competitive differentiation. Understand how you can use the information 
from Internet-connected devices and sensors to expand capabilities for your 
organization, optimize operations and logistics, and create new markets.
More specifically, look at the consumer-driven technologies that are rapidly 
permeating the market, including current and future customers, to see what 
is now possible. In some cases, you will not even need to drive innovation—
your employees and customers will do it for you. As internal and external 
users adopt new technologies and bring their own devices to work, they will 
help you uncover new ways to address key corporate goals. 
CDIT and related technologies (including mobile devices, social media, 
personal networks, unified communications, and set-top boxes) also open up 
many immediate opportunities for intentional innovation. For example, you 
can increase mobility for your employees and services; improve your ability to 
attract, retain, and satisfy your customers; or uncover new sales opportunities 
that deliver better market attachment and increase revenue. 
On the other hand, you will find that future opportunities for innovation are 
difficult to predict. As an innovative CIO, you will need to match knowledge 
of world markets with an instinct to differentiate between valuable innovation 
and uncontrolled innovation. Still, some more structured approaches will 
help. Innovation may happen in spite of what an organization does or does not 
do; but there are intentional activities that will dramatically increase the 
likelihood of success and the quality of innovation.
For example, finding the right innovation may require networking with your 
peers and others. We have identified the importance of alignment with the 
C-suite to gain their trust and explicit support for innovative programs. 
Unfortunately, the intangible nature of IT value makes it difficult to establish 
it as a quantifiable business value. Indeed, many people in business believe that 
IT just happens—unless it fails, and then only a major failure brings home the 
true value of IT. It is up to the innovative CIO to actively promote an 
understanding of IT’s innovative value among the C-suite members and other 
business leaders.
Executives attach different significance to innovations, based on their 
organizational roles and experience. A social-networking campaign may 
delight the head of sales by generating interest in certain products. The CFO 
concerned with quarterly balance sheets may view the same campaign as a 
waste of money. Thus, CIOs need to ensure that the IT innovation message 
is variously adapted to appeal to the different motivations of C-suite members.
However, C-suite support and promotion are not enough. You also need to 
network with other IT and business leaders, and with non-IT and junior staff, 
both internally and externally. There is no harm in creating top-down slogans 

275
The Innovative CIO
and posters, but these alone will not make a company innovative. Encourage 
an innovative culture and make innovative habits pervasive throughout your 
organization. Move your teams beyond the institutional objections and 
barriers (including the innovation-killers we have described) and ensure they 
recognize the positive and negative influences on innovation while striving to 
keep innovation moving forward. Explicitly train your managers and leaders, 
especially newer employees, in your innovative culture. Since they are in the 
trenches, they are often the first to be exposed to new, innovative ideas.
Developing good innovations can also require physical networking, from 
instrumentation of the physical world based on the Internet of Things and 
smartphones, to gathering information that will expand your knowledge of 
future IT. You can also leverage mergers and acquisitions to deliver innovation 
by bringing in either new staff with different cultures and ideas or new 
technologies and processes. 
While instinct and judgment are important, reconciling the potential sources 
of future innovation benefits most from establishing a process for achieving 
success. The best results come from structured activities that deliver 
innovation. For example, we have seen how SWOT analyses, idea competitions, 
speed rounds, and other intentional approaches help capture innovative spirit, 
foster innovative teams, and escape an innovative funk. Some other best 
practices include the following:
• 
leveraging your inexperience
• 
listening to your customers
• 
being socialites
• 
embracing rogue innovation
• 
lowering your artillery and not permitting belittling
• 
being intolerant of negative behaviors and innovation-killers
• 
providing adequate time for innovation
• 
investing in innovative activities
• 
taking a longer view
• 
being prepared to spin off innovative teams
• 
getting innovative products in front of customers
Practices like these will help you foster, generate, and recognize good business-
focused innovation. However, you may find that your organization is unable to 
effectively capture and harvest its value. Innovative leaders must be aware of 

Summary
276
this possibility, and always be on the lookout for ways to reliably leverage the 
value of innovative ideas. It takes a lot of work to make an innovative idea a 
reality. First, it requires explicit ownership and defined simplicity in approach 
and delivery. Second, it needs streamlined business processes, good habits, 
and an appropriate level of diligence.
We started out this book by demonstrating the value of innovation—in curing 
disease, spreading knowledge, and connecting friends and family. Similarly, we 
have noted that, to be successful as an innovative CIO, you must demonstrate 
the value of innovation. This means reporting the business value of innovation, 
using business metrics. It requires monitoring the business benefits of 
innovative programs throughout their lifetimes, not just at the delivery point. 
It means looking beyond IT measures and including business measurements 
like market penetration, customer satisfaction, and financial returns. Even 
then, you have no guarantee of success. As time goes on, you will become 
familiar with the “dirty little secrets” of innovation. 
In a world where most innovations will fail, you have to be determined and 
committed to becoming an innovative CIO. Innovation can be very costly for 
your organization even when it succeeds, but it’s especially costly when it 
does not succeed (regardless of how fast it fails). You may find that innovation 
is barely wanted at your organization, especially if it may cannibalize current 
business or splinter burgeoning empires. Yet if you do not identify the potential 
impact of innovation, you cannot manage that impact, and may instead cede 
new markets to new competitors while losing existing markets to obsolescence. 
Innovation can also be very costly for you personally. You may find that a focus 
on innovation could damage your career progression and burden you with 
expectations that you simply cannot meet. You could find yourself pigeonholed 
in a role with limited resources and given little chance of success. Even when 
you have organizational support, innovation is hard to manage; when others 
in your organization deliberately undermine your efforts, it can be literally 
impossible. 
Moreover, you will find that innovation success is difficult and elusive. It is not 
enough to have a great idea; you or your organization need the structure and 
positioning to give that idea support, resources, and priority. It is insufficient 
to voice support for good innovation; you have to show the impact that 
innovation will have on your organization. You must be realistic and understand, 
first, whether your organization is even capable of innovating. Even then, you 
may be unable to predict when you will be successful and when you will not.
And, finally, there is the need to internalize innovation, to manage the 
organizational, cultural, structural, process, and personal changes that 
innovation demands, both within IT and without. As mentioned earlier, CIOs 

277
The Innovative CIO
often view the value of IT differently from other executives. Many executives 
consider IT of critical importance to the organization, but they do not feel 
that the IT department is delivering the maximum value. Often, CIOs feel 
that the low level of IT literacy among other executives prevents them from 
exploiting IT innovation to its best advantage. 
Culture change is, therefore, a prerequisite for building an innovative 
organization. But culture change is not a short-term exercise. As much 
patience is needed to bring about organizational change as to develop 
innovation itself. Nevertheless, organizational structures can be changed to 
foster innovation; an ambidextrous organization is one structure that can 
have a positive effect on innovation.
CIOs and their executive peers need the courage and patience to innovate. 
Courage is often required when an innovation fails to deliver its anticipated 
value. One failure should not close an innovative program; it should be viewed 
as a gain in knowledge and experience. Rather, having too few innovation 
successes should be the measure of overall value. Remember, innovation can 
lead to personal and cultural growth, and with foresight, patience, and 
perseverance, it will deliver new processes and products that strengthen the 
CIO’s organization.
***
The bottom line is that, despite all the challenges and caveats, becoming an 
innovative CIO is not just a goal worth pursuing but also an imperative for any 
modern IT leader (and his or her business) to thrive—or, in many cases, 
simply to survive. If today’s organizations look to the past and treat innovation 
as arcane magic that can be unleashed only through rarified incantation, or as 
some fortuitous accident that no one can predict or control, or as something 
for other organizations to lead, then they will lose market, lose customers, 
and ultimately fail. 
On the other hand, if IT leaders leverage new technology developments in 
cooperation with their business leaders; if they approach innovation inten-
tionally with structure and discipline; if they exploit the complex intercon-
nections of people, process, and technology to do new things in new ways; if 
they describe, deliver, measure, and prove business value, then they will be 
able to open new markets, beat their competition, improve their value 
proposition, and thrive in a modern marketplace.
Perhaps most important, becoming the innovative CIO is not a pipe dream; 
it’s an achievable reality, both today and in the future. Here, we have shown 
how many CIOs have not only driven technology innovation to improve the 
IT environment, but also to improve the business environment. 

Summary
278
The choice today is to “innovate or die”—and this is the choice that you now 
have as an IT leader. Do you look to drive innovation intentionally to survive 
and thrive? Or do you keep doing what you have always done and let the chips 
fall where they may? In this book, we have given you the starting point you 
need to recognize the opportunities in front of you, to try new things and 
make them successful, and to make a real and fundamental difference to your 
organization. We have provided a launching point for your new career as an 
innovative CIO. 
The rest is up to you. 

I
Index
A
Accidental innovation, 174. See also 
Fortunate innovation
Admission price reduction, 56
Agile development, 122
A-B testing, 123
BT company, 124
core values, 122–124
cultural change, 124
definition, 122
innovation, 123–124
iterative cycle, 123
prioritization, 123
Rackspace, 124
Ambidextrous organization, 258
Ambient telepresence, 170
Automation, 113–114
B
Benefits Dependency Network (BDN), 221
Big data and analytics
new start examples, 115
old data analysis, 165–166
privacy issues, 116
retail organization, 115
Target, 116
Wallmart, 115
Bring Your own Device (BYOD)
active support, 132
adoption, 129
benefits, 131
cost reduction, 130
passive support, 131–132
research, 131
support for, 130
Business cases, 63–64
Business expansion
big data, 165–166
global drive, 165
innovative IT, 166
mobility, 164
through new working ways, 164
Business innovation. See Innovation
Business-IT allignment, 98–101
Business process change cost, 207
Business pull, 84–85
annual strategy meetings, 87
collaboration service, 91
democratization of knowledge, 89–90
formal knowledge management system, 
91
innovation funnel, 90
innovation wiki, 91
innovative CIO, 92
iPad adoption, 87
long-term planning, 87
ongoing review, 87
online catalog, 93
service catalog, 93
service catalog systems, 86
service desk/request management system, 
85
technology adoption, 87, 88, 93
technology education, 93
third-party cloud service providers, 92
Twitter adoption, 88

Index
280
Business values
alignment problem, 206
approvals, 219–220
benefits realization, 221
business process change cost, 207
business strategy, 207
complementary innovation, 207
innovation efforts, 206
portfolio innovation measurement, 221–
222
reporting and measurement, 217–219
time frames, 220–221
BYOD. See Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
C
Camera phones, 145
Career-limiting move (CLM), 235–238
Change management
change-phobics, 226–227
confused employee, 226
devil’s advocate, 226
politician, 227
Change phobics, 226–227
Cliquetocracy, 19
Cloud computing
advantages, 108
bottom-line cost benefit, 108
characteristics, 107
cloud conversation, 107
deployment models, 107
Labs on Demand, 108
NIST definition, 106
portfolio evaluation methodology, 109–
110
private cloud, 110
public SaaS, 108
service models, 107
third-party cloud services, 111
Visible Ops Private Cloud approach, 109–
110
Coach training, 202–203
Communication, 27–28
Company failure rescue
benefits of innovation, 150
controlled vs. uncontrolled innovation, 
148–150
Company working context, 74–75
Constrained thought, 25
Consumer-driven IT
BYOD, 129–132
camera phones, 145
consumer-oriented cloud services, 141–
144
definition, 127
GPS, 144
mobile computing, 132
levaraging mobility externally, 135
levaraging mobility internally, 133
personal area networks, 145–146
set-top boxes, 145
social networking, 137–141
understanding, 127
unified communications, 146
Consumer-oriented cloud services
adoption opportunity, 143–144
creative workers, 141
knowledge workers, 141
management and security, 144
marketers, 142
mobile and multidevice workers, 142
partner/supply chain managers, 142
programmers, 142
sales reps, 142
Controlled innovation, 148–150
Corporate business strategy, 71–74
Co-sponsorship, 198
Creative innovation, 197–198
coach training, 202–203
failure rejection, 202
good habits development, 201–202
overactive leadership, 200–201
ownership and co-sponsorship, 198–199
simple solution, 199–200
Creativity, 62–63
Cultural fit, innovation, 192–193
Culture, 17
cliquetocracy, 19
dysfunctional culture, 20
fear, 19–20

281
Index
inconsistency in rewards/rewarding 
failure, 18–19
theft of credit, 18
unhealthy internal competition, 17–18
Custom app development, 132
Customer’s innovative ideas, 179–181
D
Deliberate innovation, 12–14
Desperate innovation, 14–15
Disintermediation, 50–51
Downer dog pile, 23–25
Dumb idea, 184–185
Dysfunctional culture, 20
E
Electronic commerce/E-commerce, 114–115
F
Fear of failure, 19–20
Fortunate innovation, 11–12
G
Gamification, 118–120
GPS, 144
H
Hiring process, innovation, 192–193
I
Idea competitions, 195–196
Idea generation techniques, 194
idea competitions, 195–196
other techniques, 197
speed rounds, 196–197
SWOT analysis, 194–195
Impenetrability, 34–35
Improvement, 51–52
Inarticulacy, 38–44
Inbox, 31–33
Incremental innovation, 10–11, 69
Incremental innovation/invention, 69–71
Independence/initiative, 53
I-negatives, 31
immutability, 46
impenetrability, 34–35
inarticulacy, 38–44
inbox, 31–33
infallibility, 45
intelligence, 45
interloper, 45–46
intermediation, 33–34
investment, 35–37
irrelevant innovation, 37–38
Infallibility, 45
Information Technology Infrastructure 
Library (ITIL), 52–53
Innovation. See also Technology innovation
admission price reduction, 56–57
agile development
A-B testing, 123
BT company, 124
core values, 122
cultural change, 124
definition, 122
innovation, 123–124
iterative cycle, 123
prioritization, 123
Rackspace, 124
atrophy, 28
automation, 113–114
big data and analytics
new start examples, 115
privacy issues, 116
retail organization, 115
Target, 116
Wallmart, 115
business expansion
big data, 165–166
global drive, 165
innovative IT, 166
mobility, 164–165
through new working ways, 164
business vs. IT innovation, 61–62
business cases, 63–64
creativity, 62–63

Index
282
Innovation (cont.)
career-limiting move (CLM), 235–238
CEO vs. CFO, 209–210
CEOs, 208–209
CFOs, 209
Chief Marketing Officer (CMO), 211
Chief Sales Officer (CSO), 211
classification categories, 212
cloud computing
advantages, 108
bottom-line cost benefit, 108
characteristics, 107
cloud conversation, 107
deployment models, 107
Labs on Demand, 108
NIST definition, 106
portfolio evaluation methodology, 
109–110
private cloud, 110
public SaaS, 108
service models, 107
third-party cloud services, 111
Visible Ops Private Cloud approach, 
109–110
company failure rescue, 147–148
benefits of innovation, 150
controlled vs. uncontrolled innovation, 
148–150
company working context, 74–75
consumer-driven IT (see Consumer-
driven IT)
corporate strategy understanding, 71–74
cost
profit, 234
R&D spending, 233
Research In Motion (RIM), 235
return on investment (ROI), 234
webOS, 234
creative innovation, 197–198
coach training, 202–203
failure rejection, 202
good habits development, 201–202
overactive leadership, 200–201
ownership and co-sponsorship, 198–
199
simple solution, 199–200
criterias of good innovation, 241–243
definition, 7
development
accidental innovation, 174–176
customer’s ideas, 179–181
dumb and great ideas, 184–185
hiring process, cultural fit, 192–193
idea competitions, 195–196
investment, 189–190
long-term view, 190–192
negative personalities, 185–186
notes taking, 176–177
organizational spin-off, 192
other techniques, 197
perfectionists, 193
personal rogue qualities, 184
rogue IT, 182–184
social media, 181–182
speed rounds, 196–197
SWOT analysis, 194–195
team diversity and new employees, 
177–179
time allocation, 186–189
e-commerce, 114–115
emerging technologies, 169–170
ambient telepresence, 170–171
augmented reality, 171
mobile broadband, 171
new user interfaces, 171–172
smarter devices and Internet of 
Things, 172
social networking, 170
virtual reality, 171
external innovation, 59
failure, 229
Apple, 231–232
Google Buzz, 231
Google Knol, 231
Google Wave, 230
non-predictability, 230
fear of change, 245–247
gamification, 118–120
good or bad, 15–16
guinea worm disease, 1
control creation and deployment, 2
unaffected, 2

283
Index
illustrations
automated teller machine, 3
disease eradication, 2
TouchHb, 3
imitation trap, 211–212
imperative, 4
incremental innovation or invention, 69
innovative CIO, 240
innovative companies
Nikola Tesla, 239
Xerox PARC, 239
innovative entrepreneurs,  
239
innovative ideas, 174
innovative ideas and other success-driving 
criterias, 243–245
Internet of Things, 117–118
invention, 7
IT, 29
IT-aware business leaders, 79–80
IT innovation using IT, 80–81
IT investment, 29
killers (see Killers of innovation)
leading-edge technologies, 64–66
lost, 4
mergers and acquisition (M&A), 166–167
business process innovation, 169
pitfalls of, 167–168
product and service innovation, 168–
169
Near Field Communications
definition, 120
device movement tracking, 120
digital wallet, 120
limitation, 122
mobile payment capability, 121
Museum of London, 120
outdoor marketing, 121
standards, 120
use cases, 121
networking
Internet of Things (IoT), 160–161
open innovation, 163
physical networks, 159
for pleasure and profit, social 
networking, 162–163
smartphones, 161–162
new market opportunities, 75–77
online personalization
advantages, 112
Google, 112
indicators, 111
privacy and compliance issues, 112
organization’s business strategy, 60–61
out-of-the-box thinking, 78–79
pressures, 30–31
i-negatives (see I-negatives)
i-positives (see I-positives)
prevention issues, 248–250
pushmi-pullyu, 29
quantifiable, SOA, 66–68
risk assessment, 210
Roger’s innovation adoption life cycle, 
244
sales and marketing staff, 211
social–political–economic trends
cause-and-effect relationship, 155
corporate strategy, 156
decision making, 158–159
future prediction, 156
knowledge base and information 
gathering, 156–157
technologies
for communication, 3
in healthcare, 3
time surplus increase, 56
types, 8
deliberate innovation, 12–14
desperate innovation, 14–15
fortunate/accidental innovation, 11–12
incremental innovation, 10–11
innovation in use or process, 8–9
undermining/cannibalizing business, 250–
252
unmeasurable, 247–248
unsuccessful entrepreneurs, 239–240
values, 2
virtualization
automated dynamic computing, 104
business outcomes, 104
consolidation, 104, 105
definition, 104

Index
284
Innovation, virtualization (cont.)
dev/test cycle time, 106
maturity curve, 105
optimization, 105
physical/logical resources, 104
server virtualization, 106
time-to-market, 105
workload mobility, 106
VisiCalc/iPad moment, 150
collaboration and communication, 
153–154
serpendity, 154
winning idea spotting, 151–153
Innovation-killing/negative personalities, 185–
186
Innovative authoritarian, 21–23
Innovative CIO
business background, 256
business characteristics, 260
business vs. IT innovation, 61–62
business cases, 63–64
creativity, 62–63
company working context, 74
competitive advantage, 260
corporate strategy understanding, 71
culture adaptation, 265
external innovation, 59
flexible and agile infrastructure, 261
gardening example, 267
high risk of failure, 260, 261
incremental innovation or invention, 69
innovation-led growth, 261
innovative organization, creation of, 257
ambidextrous organization, 258
emerging business unit, 258
HR function, 259
war story, 259
IT-aware business leaders, 79
IT innovation using IT, 80
IT maintenance, 254
lack of growth, 261
leading-edge technologies, 64
Netflix vs. Blockbuster business conflicts, 
262
new market opportunities, 75
organization’s business strategy, 60
out-of-the-box thinking, 78
patent measurement, 266
personal development, 262
Psion 3 & 5, 268
quantifiable innovation, SOA, 66
role of, 256
surveys, 255
technology change, 255
termination indicators, 269
validation, 267
workload, 256
Institutional objections, 222
change management, 225
change-phobics, 226–227
confused employee, 226
devil’s advocate, 226
politician, 227
novelty of proposal, 224
operational barriers, 223–224
organizational barriers, 223
personal pique, 225
risk level, 225
valid objections, 224
Instruction, 54
Instrumentation, 47
Integrity, 55
Intelligence, 45
Interloper, 45
Intermediation, 33–34
Internet of Things (IoT), 117–118
chatting, 160–161
smarter devices and, 172
Investment, 35–37, 189–190
Invigoration, 54
I-positives, 46–47
disintermediation, 50–51
improvement, 51–52
independence/initiative, 53
innovation, 49–50
instruction, 54
instrumentation, 47–49
integrity, 55
invigoration, 54–55
ITIL, ITSM, 52–53
Irrelevant innovation, 37
IT-aware business leaders, 79

285
Index
IT innovation. See also Innovation
business values
alignment problem, 206
approvals, 219–220
benefits realization, 221
business process change cost, 207
business strategy, 207
complementary innovation, 207
cultural/mindset differences, 207
innovation efforts, 206
portfolio innovation measurement, 
221–222
reporting and measurement, 217– 
219
time frames, 220–221
C-level
business-focused IT vision, 213
communicating change, 213
sense of urgency, 213
company working context, 74
corporate strategy understanding, 71
incremental innovation or invention, 69
institutional objections, 222
change management, 225–227
novelty of proposal, 224
operational barriers, 223–224
organizational barriers, 223
personal pique, 225
risk level, 225
valid objections, 224
IT-aware business leaders, 79–80
leading-edge technologies, 64–66
new market opportunities, 75–77
out-of-the-box thinking, 78–79
quantifiable innovation, SOA, 66–68
strategic planning, 213–214
IT strategy, 216–217
using C-Suite, 214–216
using IT, 80–81
vs. business innovation, 61
business cases, 63
creativity, 62
IT push, 94–98
IT service management (ITSM), 52–53
IT strategy, 216–217
J
Justice Potter Stewart method, 266
K
Killers of innovation, 16–17
communication, 27–28
constrained thought, 25
culture
cliquetocracy, 19
dysfunctional culture, 20
failure to acknowledge effort and/or 
accomplishment, 18
fear, 19–20
inconsistency in rewards/rewarding 
failure, 18–19
theft of credit, 18
unhealthy internal competition, 17– 
18
innovation atrophy, 28
innovative authoritarian, 21–23
organization, 20–21
perfectionist, 21
protector, 23
downer dog pile, 23–25
timing, 26
L
Leading-edge technologies, 64–66
Long-term view, innovation, 190–192
M
M&A. See Mergers and acquisition (M&A)
Market opportunities, 75
Mergers and acquisition (M&A), 166–167
business process innovation, 169
pitfalls of, 167–168
product and service innovation, 168– 
169
Mobile broadband technology, 171
Mobile computing
levaraging mobility externally, 135
levaraging mobility internally, 133

Index
286
N
Near Field Communications (NFC)
definition, 120
device movement tracking, 120
digital wallet, 120
limitation, 122
mobile payment capability, 121
Museum of London, 120
outdoor marketing, 121
standards, 120
use cases, 121
Networking
for pleasure and profit, social networking, 
162–163
Internet of Things (IoT), 160–161
open innovation, 163
physical networks, 159–160
smartphones, 161–162
NFC. See Near Field Communications 
(NFC)
Notes taking, innovation, 176
O
Open innovation, 163
Operational barriers, 223
Organic innovation, 189
Organizational aspects, 20
Organizational barriers, 223
Out-of-the-box thinking, 78
Overactive leadership, 200
Ownership, 198
P
Perfectionist, 21
Personal area networks (PANs), 145
Personalization of online services
advantages, 112
Google, 112
indicators, 111
privacy and compliance issues, 112
Personal pique, 225
Physical networks, 159
Portfolio evaluation methodology, 109
Portfolio innovation measurement, 221
Pressures
i-negatives, 31
immutability, 46
impenetrability, 34–35
inarticulacy, 38–44
inbox, 31–33
infallibility, 45
intelligence, 45
interloper, 45–46
intermediation, 33–34
investment, 35–37
irrelevant innovation, 37–38
i-positives, 46–47
disintermediation, 50–51
improvement, 51–52
independence/initiative, 53
innovation, 49–50
instruction, 54
instrumentation, 47–49
integrity, 55
invigoration, 54–55
ITIL, ITSM, 52–53
Protector, downer dog pile, 23–25
Pushmi-pullyu, 29–30
Q
Quantifiable innovation, SOA, 66–68
R
Rogue IT, 182–184
S
SaaS, 132
Secure web applications, 132
Serpendity, 154
Service catalog systems, 86
Service desk/request management system, 
85
Set-top boxes, 145
Smartphones, 161
Social media, 181
Social networking, 137, 170

287
Index
Social–political–economic trends
cause-and-effect relationship, 155
corporate strategy, 156
decision making, 158–159
future prediction, 156
knowledge base and information 
gathering, 156–157
Speed rounds, 196–197
Spike, agile development, 187
Strategic planning, 213–214
IT strategy, 216
using C-Suite
digital literacy, 215–216
legitimacy by analyst, 215
legitimacy by demonstration, 215
legitimacy by interest, 215
legitimacy by stature, 214–215
SWOT analysis, 194–195
T
Technologies
ambient telepresence, 170–171
augmented reality, 171
mobile broadband, 171
smarter devices and Internet of Things, 
172
social networking, 170
user interface, 171–172
virtual reality, 171
Technology adoption
iPad, 87
Twitter, 88
Technology innovation
business-IT allignment, 98–101
business pull
annual strategy meetings, 87
collaboration service, 91
democratization of knowledge, 89– 
90
formal knowledge management 
system, 91
innovation funnel, 90
innovation wiki, 91
innovative CIO, 92–93
iPad adoption, 87–88
long-term planning, 87
ongoing review, 87
online catalog, 93
service catalog, 93
service catalog systems, 86
service desk/request management 
system, 85
technology adoption, 87–89, 93
technology education, 93
third-party cloud service providers, 92
Twitter adoption, 88
innovative CIO and IT department, 83
IT push, 83, 94
Time allocation, innovation, 186–189
Time surplus increase, 56
Timing, 26
Trends. See Social–political–economic trends
U
Uncontrolled innovation, 148
Unified communications, 146
V, W, X, Y, Z
Virtualization
automated dynamic computing, 104
business outcomes, 104
consolidation, 104, 105
definition, 104
dev/test cycle time, 106
maturity curve, 105
optimization, 105
physical/logical resources, 104
server virtualization, 106
time-to-market, 105
workload mobility, 106
Visible Ops Private Cloud approach, 109–
110
VisiCalc/iPad moment
collaboration and communication
data analysis tools, 153
distributed team, 153
real-time collaboration, 154
social networking tools, 153

Index
288
VisiCalc/iPad moment (cont.)
information delivery and control systems, 
153
serpendity, 154
winning idea spotting, 151–152
cost, 152
discussion, 153
economic crisis, 153
evaluation, 152
impact, 152
relevance, 152
scope, 152

The Innovative CIO
How IT Leaders Can Drive Business 
Transformation
Andi Mann
George Watt
Peter Matthews

The Innovative CIO: How IT Leaders Can Drive Business Transformation
Copyright © 201  by CA. All rights reserved. All trademarks, trade names, service 
marks and logos referenced herein belong to their respective companies. 
The information in this publication could include typographical errors or technical 
inaccuracies, and the authors assume no responsibility for its accuracy or 
completeness. The statements and opinions expressed in this book are those of the 
authors and are not necessarily those of CA, Inc. (“CA”). CA may make modifications 
to any CA product, software program, method or procedure described in this 
publication at any time without notice. 
Any reference in this publication to third-party products and websites is provided for 
convenience only and shall not serve as the authors’ endorsement of such products 
or websites. Your use of such products, websites, any information regarding such 
products or any materials provided with such products or on such websites shall be 
at your own risk.
To the extent permitted by applicable law, the content of this book is provided “AS IS” 
without warranty of any kind, including, without limitation, any implied warranties 
of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. In no event 
will the authors or CA be liable for any loss or damage, direct or indirect, arising from 
or related to the use of this book, including, without limitation, lost profits, lost 
investment, business interruption, goodwill or lost data, even if expressly advised in 
advance of the possibility of such damages. Neither the content of this book nor any 
software product referenced herein serves as a substitute for your compliance with 
any laws (including but not limited to any act, statute, regulation, rule, directive, 
standard, policy, administrative order, executive order, and so on (collectively, “Laws”) 
referenced herein or otherwise. You should consult with competent legal counsel 
regarding any such Laws.
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, 
or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission 
of the copyright owner and the publisher.
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-4410-3
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-4411-0
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we 
use the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the 
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar 
terms, even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of 
opinion as to whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights.
3

President and Publisher: Paul Manning
Acquisitions Editor: Robert Hutchinson
Developmental Editor: Jeffrey Pepper
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, 
Michelle Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey 
Pepper, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan 
Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh
Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando
Copy Editor: Jennifer Sharpe
Compositor: Bytheway Publishing Services
Indexer: SPi Global Inc.
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media, LLC., 
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 
348-4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. 
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.
apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or 
promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For 
more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at 
www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. 
Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the 
author(s) nor Apress shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any 
loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the information 
contained in this work. 

This book is dedicated to innovative IT leaders  
who are already making a difference  
to their businesses and customers, and  
to those who are working hard to move past 
keeping the lights on.

About the Authors
Andi Mann is vice president of strategic 
solutions at CA Technologies. With over 25 
years’ experience across five continents, Andi 
has deep expertise in enterprise software on 
cloud, mainframe, midrange, server, and desktop 
systems. Andi has worked within IT for global 
corporations, with software vendors, and as a 
leading industry analyst. He has been published 
in the New York Times, USA Today, Forbes, CIO, 
ComputerWorld, InformationWeek, TechTarget, and 
more, and has presented worldwide on IT 
strategy, innovation, virtualization, cloud, auto-
mation, and management. Andi is a co-author of 
the popular handbook, Visible Ops – Private Cloud. He blogs at http://pleasediscuss.
com/andimann and tweets as @AndiMann.
George Watt is vice president of corporate 
strategy at CA Technologies. A transformative 
leader with more than 25 years of experience, 
George has spearheaded initiatives that have 
enabled organizations to simplify and automate 
their complex IT infrastructures, deliver new 
business benefits, and drive millions of dollars in 
savings and productivity gains. In the early 2000s 
George founded the CA Technologies Engi-
neering Services team, responsible for protecting 
the company’s intellectual property, managing 
the consolidated source-code repository, and 
providing automation and development tools. In 
this role George led the development of CA Technologies’ own private cloud 
and enjoys sharing his lessons learned with others who are now venturing on 
a similar journey. George began his technical career as a systems programmer/
sysadmin and systems engineer. He has held many leadership positions, leading 
technical and presales teams in Canada, the United States, and globally. 

xii About the Authors
Throughout his career, George has delivered innovations such as a lightweight 
event management agent, a knowledge base for a neural network-based 
predictive performance management solution, and one of the earliest private 
clouds. Many of George’s innovations are now available to CA Technologies 
customers as product components or features. He blogs at www.pragmatic-
cloud.com and tweets as @GeorgeDWatt.
Peter Matthews is vice president and research 
staff member in CA Labs at CA Technologies. 
Peter is based in the UK working as a researcher 
and coordinating research activity between CA’s 
R&D laboratories and academia. He has more 
than 30 years of IT experience with leading-edge 
technology, ranging from mainframe program-
ming and UNIX development to cloud computing 
and MIS research. Peter has leveraged his 
experience by participating in the CA Tech-
nologies corporate strategy team and leading 
groups investigating the influence of macro 
social, political, and economic trends on future 
technology. Collaborative research projects have been a major part of Peter’s 
work with subjects as varied as service oriented architecture, requirements 
engineering, business process performance analysis, and value metrics for 
existing IT infrastructure. The latter generated a new research project 
examining the role of the CIO in a cloud-computing environment. Provisional 
results of this continuing project have been published by CA Technologies as 
a report, “Being the Boss.” This and other projects have benefitted from 
Peter’s frequent discussions with IT leaders on research and innovation topics. 
He is CA Technologies’ representative on the Cloud Services Measurement 
Initiative Consortium, managed by Carnegie-Mellon University. He blogs at 
http://community.ca.com/blogs/innovation/default.aspx and tweets as @peterm57.

Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I wish to acknowledge the undying support of my darling 
wife, Heather Mann. Without your patience, wisdom, devotion, love, and 
much more, this book have been impossible, as would the better part of my 
success and joy in life to date. You are my love and my life, every single day.
I would also like to thank the many IT leaders who I have talked with, read 
about, and taken advice from over my many years in technology―whether in 
finance, logistics, entertainment, telecommunications, healthcare, government, 
service providers, or other industries; in my native Australia, my adopted 
USA, or across Europe, Africa, Asia, and Latin America; or in capacities as 
technology vendors, industry analysts, and media contributors: you are too 
numerous to name individually, but collectively constitute the source of the 
most important part of my contributions to this book.
To my co-authors George and Peter: you are brilliant, storied, and amazing 
people to work with. I can only bask in the reflected glory of your contributions, 
which are without doubt the best parts of this book. Similarly, thanks to all of 
my other amazing colleagues at CA Technologies who made this work 
possible, including Andrew Wittman, Jacob Lamm, Adam Famularo, Ron 
Collier, Jackie Kahle, Bill Talbot, and Katherine Demacopoulos. 
Finally, I personally dedicate this book to my father, Brian Mann, who sadly 
passed away as we were writing this book; and offer my greatest thanks 
especially to my mother, Joan Mann, who still inspires me every day. You both 
taught me to be inquisitive but discerning, to challenge the status quo, to look 
beyond the obvious, to believe in myself, and always to strive to do new things 
in new ways. Whether at school or university, tinkering with personal 
computers, poring over crosswords and cards, cataloging decommissioned 
abattoirs, working night shift in datacenters, or visiting (and then occupying) 
executive suites, I owe you my life-long passion for thinking, learning, and 
leading. I love you and think of you every day, which thoughts never fail to 
buoy my spirits.
Andi Mann

Acknowledgments
xiv
I am fortunate to have been influenced by innovators very early in my life. 
They all played a part in this book in some way. Many of those were, of 
course, members of my family. My earliest memories of my love of innovation 
include my grandfathers, Albert Mombourquette and George V. Watt, both 
innovators in their own right. The latter also taught me the value of a patient 
second look when facing a problem, and how to begin facing any challenge 
with the belief that whatever it is, it can be done. My parents, Donalda and 
Everett Watt, taught me the value of hard work and the importance of honor 
and trust; all key to my success in innovation. My uncle Robert Watt and my 
cousin Leslie Dancses both inspired my interest in technology. Leslie was also 
my first business partner and witnessed the creations of the “Code Faeries” 
mentioned in the book first hand. To all of them, and to the many family 
members I have not named, thank you.
I have also been fortunate to work with many innovative people in my 
professional life. There are far too many to mention individually. The journey 
that leads to innovation is not easy, and making an innovative idea a business-
value driver can be even more difficult. Thank you to the colleagues, team 
members, customers, and partners who were part of my journey. I look 
forward to the challenges we have yet to face.
To my co-authors, Andi and Peter, thank you for a great journey. I will surely 
miss our banter.
Finally, without the support of my children, James and Heather, and my wife, 
Lee Anne, it would not have been possible for me to write this book. To my 
children, thank you for being so patient and supportive those many evenings 
and weekends I spent writing. Lee Anne, I don’t know how you endured my 
thinking aloud and the countless times I approached you with, “Hey, can you 
read this?” You all inspire me daily.
George Watt
I would first like to thank my wife Pat and my daughter Georgie for their 
generous support over the long nights and weekends locked in my room 
writing. I would particularly like to thank Pat for her patience and insight 
whenever I emerged to ask, “What do you think of this piece?” My daughter 
Georgie has patiently waited for me to finish writing to fulfill taxi duties and 
my wife Pat has frequently delayed dinner to suit my schedule not hers. 
Friends have also been supportive even when I vanished to work on a chapter 
during the Outcast’s hockey tour.
Many of the ideas and comments in this book are the result of working with 
Professor Joe Peppard of Cranfield School of Management, without whom I 

xv
Acknowledgments
would not have become interested in the role played by CIOs in innovation 
and business management. His kind support and the quality of his writing have 
been an example to me. I would also like to thank all my colleagues in CA who 
have enabled me to speak to and listen to senior IT management and given me 
so many good examples, particularly Terrence Clark, Gabby Silberman, Sarah 
Atkinson and Colin Bannister 
To my co-authors Andi and George I have had a great time working with you, 
learned a lot and laughed a lot. It has been a pleasure collaborating with you 
both.
Peter Matthews
The Authors jointly wish to say thank you to Robert Hutchinson, Rita 
Fernando, Jennifer Sharpe, and the Apress team for your patience, guidance, 
and for keeping us on track. Without you this would have been a very different 
and much inferior text, if indeed it existed at all. Also our special thanks to 
Karen Sleeth and Connie Smallwood, our CA Press sponsors, Steve Versteeg 
our sponsor/reviewer, and Gabby Silberman our CA executive sponsor for 
giving us the opportunity, encouragement, and support to write this book. 

