eB O O K
WILEY
WILEY
JOSSEY-BASS
PFEIFFER
J.K.LASSER
CAPSTONE
WILEY-LISS
WILEY-VCH
WILEY-INTERSCIENCE
B u s i n e s s C u l i n a r y A r c h i t e c t u r e
C o m p u t e r G e n e r a l I n t e r e s t
C h i l d r e n L i f e  S c i e n c e s B i o g r a p h y
A c c o u n t i n g F i n a n c e M a t h e m a t i c s
H i s t o r y S e l f - I m p r o v e m e n t H e a l t h
E n g i n e e r i n g G r a p h i c D e s i g n
A p p l i e d S c i e n c e s P s y c h o l o g y
I n t e r i o r D e s i g n B i o l o g y C h e m i s t r y

The Guru Guide
™
to Entrepreneurship


The Guru Guide
™
to Entrepreneurship
A Concise Guide 
to the Best Ideas 
from the 
World’s Top Entrepreneurs
Joseph H. Boyett
and
Jimmie T. Boyett
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
New York • Chichester • Weinheim • Brisbane • Singapore • Toronto

This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
Copyright © 2001 by Joseph H. Boyett and Jimmie T. Boyett. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as
permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or the authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy
fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 750-4744. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158-0012, (212) 850-6011,
fax (212) 850-6008, E-Mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional services. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional person should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Boyett, Joseph H.
The guru guide to entrepreneurship: a concise guide to the best ideas from the world’s 
top entrepreneurs / Joseph Boyett & Jimmie Boyett.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-471-39084-4 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Entrepreneurship. 2. Businesspeople. 3. New business enterprises–Management. 
I. Boyett, Jimmie T. II. Title.
HB615 .B685 2000
658.421–dc21
00-042886
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To our grandson,
Tobias Joseph Luongo,
the newest branch on our family tree.


Contents
Introduction
ix
Chapter 1
Should You Do It?
1
Chapter 2
The Perfect Idea
36
Chapter 3
Money Matters
81
Chapter 4
Getting Customers
131
Chapter 5
Keeping Customers
173
Chapter 6
Managing People
207
Appendix
The Gurus
241
Notes
315
Select Bibliography
331
Index
357
vii


Introduction
T
his book answers a very simple question: If you had all the time
you needed to acquire and read all of the books and articles that
you could find written by and about the world’s greatest entrepre-
neurs—people like Bill Gates, Richard Branson, Michael Dell, and Sam
Walton—what would you learn about starting and running a successful
business? “Nice idea,” you say, “but I don’t have the time to do something
like that. I’ve got a day job, and the kids have to be fed.” Well, research is
our day job and our kids are all grown now and feeding kids of their own,
so we took the time to do what you might like to do yourself but can’t. This
book is the result of that effort. Here you will find the wisdom of 70 of the
world’s greatest entrepreneurs carefully extracted from more than two hun-
dred fifty books and over two thousand articles about their ideas and ex-
ploits. The Guru Guide™to Entrepreneurship is your synthesis and digest
of the best thinking about what it takes to succeed on your own from the
people who have been there and done it—the world’s greatest entrepreneurs.
The Guru Guide™to Entrepreneurship is a clear, concise, and informa-
tive guide to the wisdom of some of the world’s most-successful entrepre-
neurs. You hold in your hand a digest of the best thinking about what it
takes to start your own business and succeed, but we have designed this
book to be more than just a digest. It also provides you with a much-needed
cross-reference to the best thinking about the key issues involved in starting
and running a business. The ideas of each entrepreneur are linked with
those of others who agree or disagree. We identify the ideas and concepts
that fit together and those that conflict. We provide you with an easy-to-
follow guide to exploring the secrets of these entrepreneurs. We report on
methods and results. Finally, we provide you with an evaluation of their
strengths and weaknesses.
ix

OUR GURUS
You may wonder how we decided whose ideas to include and which topics
to cover. We started by making a list of the kinds of questions we would
want answered if we were starting our own business. What does it take to
succeed as an entrepreneur? How does a person know if he or she has the
right stuff? Where do entrepreneurs get their ideas? Are some business
ideas better than others? How do you pick the right business? How do you
get financing? How do successful entrepreneurs find and keep customers?
How do they manage money? And, finally, how do they manage people?
Once we had a list of topics, we began making a list of entrepreneurs.
Some came readily to mind—Bill Gates, the cofounder of Microsoft; Sam
Walton, the founder of Wal-Mart; and Ray Kroc, the founder of McDon-
ald’s Corporation. In other cases, we knew the companies but did not know
much about their founders or in some cases, even who their founders were.
White Castle, Netscape Communications, Home Depot, Boston Beer,
TCBY, and Southwest Airlines are all examples. We ultimately developed a
list of over a hundred entrepreneurs and companies. Our list covered just
about every industry and type of business. We then went searching for ev-
erything we could find about them. What had been written by and about the
founders of these companies that would shed light on how they answered
the questions we had posed? The thoughts and ideas of some of our entre-
preneur gurus were easy to find. People like Bill Gates, Sam Walton, and
Michael Dell have all written books or articles outlining their management
strategies and offering their advice about starting a business. The ideas of
other entrepreneur gurus were harder to locate because little had been
written about them or they had been so busy building their companies that
they hadn’t stopped to tell their stories. Still, we kept digging. We ulti-
mately compiled data covering the thoughts and ideas of 70 entrepreneurs
who became the gurus for this book. Here are the entrepreneur gurus that
we selected, listed in alphabetical order. Their biographies can be found in
the appendix.
Paul Allen, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation
J.Walter (Walt) Anderson, cofounder of White Castle
Marc Andreessen, cofounder of Netscape Communications
Mary Kay Ash, founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
x

James L. (Jim) Barksdale, cofounder of Netscape Communications
Phineas Taylor (P.T.) Barnum, founder of “The Greatest Show on Earth”
Jeffrey P. Bezos, founder and chief executive officer (CEO) of
Amazon.comº
Arthur Blank, cofounder of Home Depot
Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group
Charles M. Brewer, founder of MindSpring Enterprises
Warren Buffett, founder of numerous investment companies and
chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.
Washington Atlee Burpee, founder of Burpee Seed Company
Tom Chappell, cofounder of Tom’s of Maine, Inc.
Jim Clark, founder of Silicon Graphics and cofounder of Netscape
Communications
Ben Cohen, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Finis Conner, founder of Conner Peripherals
Joshua Lionel Cowen, cofounder of Lionel Manufacturing Company
Cecil B. Day, cofounder of Days Inn of America, Inc.
Michael Dell, founder of Dell Computer Corporation
Anthony Desio, founder of Mail Boxes Etc.
Roy Disney, cofounder of Disney Brothers Studio (later Walt Disney
Productions, Ltd.)
Walt Disney, cofounder of Disney Brothers Studio (later Walt Disney
Productions, Ltd.)
Charles Ferguson, cofounder of Vermeer Technologies, Inc.
Debbi Fields, founder of Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc.
Bill Gates, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation
Earl Graves, founder, publisher, and editor of Black Enterprise
Robert Greenberg, cofounder of L.A. Gear
Jerry Greenfield, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Bud Hadfield, founder of Kwik Kopy
Wilson Harrell, founder of over one hundred companies, columnist
for Success Magazine, and former publisher of Inc. Magazine
Frank Hickingbotham, founder of TCBY (This Can’t Be Yogurt)
Soichiro Honda, cofounder of Honda Motor Company, Ltd.
Wayne Huizenga, founder of Waste Management, Inc.
Masaru Ibuka, cofounder of Sony Corporation
Edgar Waldo (Billy) Ingram, cofounder of White Castle
Ken Iverson, former president, chairman, and CEO of Nucor
Corporation
I N T R O D U C T I O N
xi

Steven Jobs, cofounder of Apple Computer, Inc., and cofounder of
NeXT
Howard Johnson, founder of Howard Johnson Company
Herb Kelleher, founder of Southwest Airlines
Phil Knight, cofounder of Nike, Inc. 
C. James (Jim) Koch, founder of Boston Beer Company
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s Corporation
Edwin Land, founder of Polaroid Corporation
Chris Larsen, cofounder of E-Loan
Charles Lazarus, founder of Toys “R” Us
Bill Lear, founder of Lear Jet Corporation
Bernie Marcus, cofounder of Home Depot
Konosuke Matsushita, founder of Matsushita Electric Industrial
Company
James W. (Jim) McLamore, cofounder of Burger King
Edward Miller, cofounder of Spic and Span, Inc.
Tom Monaghan, founder of Domino’s Pizza
Robert Mondavi, founder of Robert Mondavi Winery
Akio Morita, cofounder of Sony Corporation
David Packard, cofounder of Hewlett-Packard
Ross Perot, founder of Electronic Data Systems (EDS) and of Perot
Systems Corporation
Stephen M. Pollan, financial consultant and writer
Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop
Bill Rosenberg, founder of Dunkin’ Donuts
Pleasant Rowland, founder of Pleasant Company
Colonel Harland Sanders, founder of Kentucky Fried Chicken
(KFC)
Howard Schultz, founder of Starbucks Coffee Company
Ricardo Semler, president and CEO of Semco, S.A.
Fred Smith, founder of Federal Express
Thomas Stemberg, cofounder of Staples, Inc.
R. David (Dave) Thomas, founder of Wendy’s International, Inc.
Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting System, Cable News
Network (CNN), and Turner Network Television (TNT)
Jay Van Andel, cofounder of Amway Corporation
Lillian Vernon, founder of Lillian Vernon Corporation
Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
An Wang, founder of Wang Laboratories, Inc.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
xii

HOW WE SELECTED OUR GURUS
As you peruse our list of entrepreneur gurus, you may question some of our
selections. Wait a minute, you may be saying, isn’t an entrepreneur some-
one who starts a business? If so, then what is Ray Kroc doing on the list?
Weren’t the McDonald brothers the founders of McDonald’s? Ray Kroc ac-
quired franchising rights from them, but he didn’t invent McDonald’s, did
he? We have to admit, you are right about that. And, you might be asking,
how did Ricardo Semler get on the list? He didn’t found Semco; he inher-
ited it. Again, we have to admit you are right. Technically neither Kroc nor
Semler founded the businesses they are so famous for running, but does
that make them any less entrepreneurial than someone like Bill Gates, who
cofounded Microsoft? It does if you accept only a narrow dictionary defini-
tion of the term entrepreneur.
We prefer something broader like that proposed by Lloyd Shefsky, au-
thor of Entrepreneurs Are Made Not Born. Shefsky defines the word entre-
preneur by looking at the word in its three parts—entre, pre, and neur—and
tracing them to their Latin roots. Entre means “enter,” pre means “before,”
and neur means “nerve center.” Thus, concludes Shefsky, an entrepreneur
is someone who enters a business—any business—in time to form or
change substantially that business’s nerve center. Shefsky notes that entre-
preneurship isn’t concerned with whether people start, buy, or inherit the
business they run but with what they do to develop or change the nerve
center of the business itself. Kroc, Semler, and indeed all of our entrepre-
neur gurus certainly did that. In that respect, they are all entrepreneurs.
ORGANIZATION OF THIS BOOK
We have organized our gurus’ ideas into six chapters. Each chapter covers
an important issue about starting and running a business and summarizes
the ideas of our panel of gurus on that issue.
Chapter 1, Should You Do It? answers the most basic of questions:
What does it take to be an entrepreneur? What attributes or characteristics
are essential for success? How do you know if you have what it takes to be-
come the next Bill Gates or Sam Walton? In this chapter we provide three
self-tests for entrepreneurial potential offered by our gurus. We then discuss
I N T R O D U C T I O N
xiii

five constants of experience and opinion that our gurus believe successful
entrepreneurs share.
In Chapter 2, The Perfect Idea, we examine where our gurus get their
ideas for businesses, how they conduct their search, and what they have
learned about the necessary ingredients for a foolproof business. We outline
what our gurus say are six near-perfect foundations for businesses and
seven suggestions our gurus offer for sharpening any business idea to the
point of perfection.
Chapter 3, Money Matters, deals with one of the activities entrepre-
neurs say they hate most—raising money. In this chapter we discuss our
gurus’ recommendations for deriving your estimate of start-up costs, rais-
ing initial capital, working with bankers and venture capitalists, managing
your finances, and weighing the pros and cons of going public.
In Chapter 4, Getting Customers, we reveal our gurus’ tricks, tips, and
techniques for attracting customers. We show you how they use promotions
and gimmicks to get attention, how they court the press to garner free pub-
licity, how they conduct market research, and how they develop and use ad-
vertising.
Of course, once you attract customers, you want to keep them, which is
what Chapter 5, Keeping Customers, is all about. We show you how our
gurus calculate the value of a customer and describe nine things that our
gurus consider key to keeping customers for life. Among other things, we
outline our gurus’ secrets for providing world-class quality and service and
for listening and responding effectively to customer complaints, ideas, and
suggestions.
In our concluding chapter, Chapter 6, Managing People, we discuss how
our gurus hire, inspire, motivate, reward, and when necessary, fire the people
who work for them. We explain in this chapter why our gurus feel it is a mis-
take to try to hire people for specific jobs and why it is good to be a tough boss.
We reveal our gurus’secrets for developing team spirit and how they empower
people to do what is right to exceed customer expectations all the time.
SOME GUIDANCE FOR WHAT FOLLOWS:
HOW THE CHAPTERS ARE ORGANIZED
Throughout The Guru Guide™to Entrepreneurship, we have tried to sum-
marize as clearly, succinctly, and objectively as possible our gurus’ key
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
xiv

ideas. Our personal opinions are expressed in sections entitled “Our View”
and preceded by the following icon:
OUR VIEW
At the beginning of each chapter, we use the following icon to identify the
gurus whose ideas are covered in that chapter. For example, the chapter on
managing people begins as follows:
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E — T h e  G u r u s
At the end of each chapter, we provide a summary of the key ideas pre-
sented in that chapter. Key ideas are identified by the following icon:
KEY POINTS
You can read this book straight through, from beginning to end, covering
the topics in the order we present them, or you can go directly to a topic that
interests you. You can read the chapters in any order you wish, because
each chapter has been designed to stand on its own. We therefore encourage
you to start with whatever topic is of most interest to you at the moment. If
you are interested in specific gurus, check the index or the guru lists at the
beginning of each chapter to find out where they appear in the book and
proceed accordingly. You are in control of how you read this book. In fact,
this advice is a good summary of the message contained herein. You are in
control, or at least you had better be.
So here it is—an unbiased but highly opinionated look at the best advice
the world’s greatest entrepreneurs have to offer about starting and running
your own business or making the business you now run even better. We
wish you good reading and success in all your entrepreneurial endeavors.
If you have comments about The Guru Guide™to Entrepreneurship or
would like to learn about other Guru Guides™as they become available,
please visit our Web site at http://www.jboyett.com or e-mail us at 
Boyett@jboyett.com.
Joseph H. Boyett
Jimmie T. Boyett
I N T R O D U C T I O N
xv

S H O U L D  YO U  D O  I T ? — T h e  G u r u s
Marc Andreessen, cofounder of Netscape Communications
Mary Kay Ash, founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics
Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group
Ben Cohen, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Walt Disney, cofounder of Disney Brothers Studio (later Walt Disney
Productions, Ltd.)
Debbi Fields, founder of Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc.
Bill Gates, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation
Earl Graves, founder, publisher, and editor of Black Enterprise
Jerry Greenfield, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Bud Hadfield, founder of Kwik Kopy
Wilson Harrell, founder of over one hundred companies, columnist
for Success Magazine, and former publisher of Inc. Magazine
Soichiro Honda, cofounder of Honda Motor Company, Ltd.
Wayne Huizenga, founder of Waste Management, Inc.
Masaru Ibuka, cofounder of Sony Corporation
Howard Johnson, founder of Howard Johnson Company
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s Corporation
Edwin Land, founder of Polaroid Corporation
Bill Lear, founder of Lear Jet Corporation
James W. (Jim) McLamore, cofounder of Burger King
Tom Monaghan, founder of Domino’s Pizza
Robert Mondavi, founder of Robert Mondavi Winery
Akio Morita, cofounder of Sony Corporation
Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop
Pleasant Rowland, founder of Pleasant Company
Howard Schultz, founder of Starbucks Coffee Company
Fred Smith, founder of Federal Express
Thomas Stemberg, cofounder of Staples, Inc.
R. David (Dave) Thomas, founder of Wendy’s International, Inc.
Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting System, Cable News
Network (CNN), and Turner Network Television (TNT)
Jay Van Andel, cofounder of Amway Corporation
Lillian Vernon, founder of Lillian Vernon Corporation
Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
An Wang, founder of Wang Laboratories, Inc.
xvi

Should You Do It?
W
e start this book about entrepreneurship seeking answers to
the most basic of questions: What does it take to be an entre-
preneur? What attributes or characteristics are essential for
success? How do you know if you have what it takes to become the next Bill
Gates or Sam Walton? What questions should you ask yourself before you
quit Father Corporation and Mama Employer and strike out on your own?
Being entrepreneurs themselves, our gurus have grappled with such
questions. Their answers are scattered throughout their writings, and we
have harvested as many of those answers as we could find. Some entrepre-
neurs made it easy for us. They have posed questions they think you should
ask yourself to gauge your mettle. We begin our quest for answers with the
questions these entrepreneur gurus pose. Then we turn to an examination of
some recurring themes, warnings, and admonitions that populate the writ-
ings and interviews of our other gurus. What does it take to succeed as an
entrepreneur today? Quite a lot, it turns out.
DO YOU HAVE WHAT IT TAKES? 
SOME BASIC SELF-TESTS
Let’s start with questions posed by three of our gurus. We invite you to
score your entrepreneurial potential by checking off those questions to
which you can answer positively. The more questions you can truthfully
check off, the greater the likelihood you have what it takes.
1
1

You may know the first guru, Lillian Katz, better by the name Lillian Ver-
non. She is the founder of the $258 million direct-marketing company Lil-
lian Vernon Corporation. Exhibit 1.1 contains 10 questions Vernon thinks
you should ask yourself before you attempt to start your own business.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
2
EXHIBIT 1.1.
Lillian Vernon’s Questions to Determine If You Are 
an Entrepreneur

QUESTION
LILLIAN VERNON’S COMMENTS
❏
1. Do you have the neces-
To succeed, you must feel passionate about the work 
sary commitment?
you have chosen. Lukewarm enthusiasm will not sustain
you through the challenges you will face in a start-up
business.
❏
2. Are you prepared to 
Launching your own business demands long 
work extremely hard?
hours of labor. Are you sure you want to give up a
good part of your social life: your weekends, golf games,
and vacations? For your developing business to suc-
ceed, you will need to focus all your energies on it.
❏
3. Do you have the mental 
If your attention flags, you may jeopardize your venture.
stamina and concentra- 
tion to meet the demands
your project will impose 
on you?
❏
4. Do you:
An entrepreneur must be open-minded, flexible, and 
a. Accept new ideas 
able to respond to new ideas.
easily?
b. Treat other people’s 
ideas with respect? 
c. Make decisions 
right away?
❏
5. Are you prepared to 
No matter how carefully you plan,you are bound to run
spend time analyzing a 
into an unforeseen problem now and then. Be prepared 
problem and finding a 
to cope with such a situation.
solution?
❏
6. Are you ready to com-
A company’s success is never an overnight miracle.That 
mit to the long term?
is one reason you must be absolutely certain that you 
love your work—there will be a lot of it.
(continued)

Next, we turn to a series of questions posed by Earl Graves, the founder,
publisher, and editor of Black Enterprise, in his book How to Succeed in Busi-
ness without Being White (see Exhibit 1.2). Graves addresses his questions
specifically to African-American entrepreneurs, but we think these questions
are good ones to answer regardless of your race or gender. He warns that en-
trepreneurship is not an easy road, and his questions bear that out.
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
3
EXHIBIT 1.1.
(continued)

QUESTION
LILLIAN VERNON’S COMMENTS
❏
7. Do you have adequate 
Banks and other financial institutions seldom lend  
backup resources?
money to start-up businesses. Will family members or
friends invest in your company or tide you over during
a rough patch?
❏
8. Are you good at concen-
Often, no one but you will be able to take care of small 
trating on detail?
items. An entrepreneur’s life is not one of ideas alone.
❏
9. Are you ready to sit 
Without a best-case/worst-case scenario to guide you 
down and write a careful 
through the first years,you may be in for an unpleasant 
analysis of your business 
surprise or two.Be aware and be prepared.
prospects?
❏
10. Are you an optimist by 
Mistakes and setbacks are bound to occur. Can you 
nature?
learn from your mistakes without getting derailed or
discouraged?
Source: Adapted from Lillian Vernon, An Eye for Winners: How I Built One of America’s Greatest Direct-
Mail Businesses (New York: HarperCollins, 1996), pp. 204–205.
EXHIBIT 1.2.
Earl Graves’s Questions concerning What It Takes to Be
an African-American Entrepreneur

QUESTION
EARL GRAVES’S COMMENTS
❏
1. Do you have a junkyard-
If you don’t know what that means, you’ve never 
dog mentality?
climbed a junkyard fence and encountered a guard dog
trained to get a grip on you and not let go.True entrepre-
neurs don’t let go.If one venture fails,they try another.If
one product doesn’t sell,they look for a better idea.If
one company official isn’t buying,they look for another
who is.Like the junkyard dog,they hang on no matter
how much they are shaken,cursed,beaten and kicked be-
cause they stay focused on the task at hand.
(continued)

T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
4
EXHIBIT 1.2.
(continued)

QUESTION
EARL GRAVES’S COMMENTS
❏
2. Are you willing to take a 
Successful entrepreneurs are not afraid to make leaps,
risky leap, but only after 
but they look first.They don’t have a death wish, but 
a good look?
they are willing to take a risk to accomplish their goals.
The really good ones take a risk only after they’ve es-
tablished a Plan B and even a Plan C and Plan D to fall
back on.They know what they are getting into and how
they can get out.
❏
3. Do you have a talent for 
Entrepreneurs are usually natural leaders, and while the 
focusing on solutions 
people around them are busy pointing at problems and 
rather than problems?
pitfalls, entrepreneurs are usually engaged in finding so-
lutions and bridges over the trouble spots. I have no
patience with people who want to tell me what’s wrong.
I only want to hear from the person who first tells me
the solution and then fills me in on the problem. I don’t
want to hear that your basement is flooded. I want to
hear that you’ve found the phone number of the cleanup
company.Then tell me why you’re calling them.
❏
4. Do you have a high level 
If you are doing business with me, chances are you can 
of energy?
expect a call anywhere from six in the morning until,
well, nearly six the next morning. And it might come
while I’m on my exercise bike,in the car,riding a train or
on an airplane. A real entrepreneur never rests.
If you’re the kind of person who likes to go home 
on Friday night and hit the hammock or stay on the golf
course for the entire weekend, you won’t cut it as an
entrepreneur.
❏
5. Do you have a drive to 
Other people might set a goal of making money so that 
make money so that you 
they can buy a fancy house, send their kids to private 
can make more money?
schools or pay off debts.
Entrepreneurs will do those things, but most are
driven to make money so that they can use it to make
even more.They never say,“I’ve got enough money.”
They are capitalists to the bone, and the product is not
as important as the return on investment. If there is an
opportunity to make more, they’ll generally pursue it.
(continued)

S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
5
EXHIBIT 1.2.
(continued)

QUESTION
EARL GRAVES’S COMMENTS
❏
6. Do you have a talent for 
Like most entrepreneurs, I get my biggest kick out of 
starting companies, but 
finding and developing new companies and new prod
not necessarily manag- 
ucts, though I no longer have a great deal of interest in 
ing them?
micromanaging my businesses. I keep a close eye on my
managers, mind you, but I prefer to focus on the long-
range plans and opportunities.That is typical of most
entrepreneurs, and it is also a reason why many of
them have problems running the businesses they have
launched.
❏
7. Are you flexible?
The only thing that owning a soft drink bottling fran-
chise and publishing a magazine have in common is that
both are businesses that if run right will make money.
Good entrepreneurs are flexible and adaptable.They
can learn what they need to learn about an industry in
order to make money in it.They leave the technical
stuff to the hired experts. Entrepreneurs are focused
on the profit potential, not the ingredients or chemical
composition of the product.
❏
8. Do you have an abun-
Of all the qualities typically cited as crucial to the 
dance of courage?
makeup of a successful entrepreneur, none is more
taken for granted than pure courage. Countless would-
be entrepreneurs armed with Ivy League MBAs, the lat-
est management theories and fail-safe concepts fall by
the wayside because they don’t have the guts for it. On
the other hand, many entrepreneurs armed only with
dedication and intestinal fortitude thrive.
Source: Adapted from Earl Graves and Robert L. Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being White:
Straight Talk on Making It in America (New York: HarperBusiness, 1997), pp. 123 –126.
Finally, listed in Exhibit 1.3 are 10 questions posed by Dave Thomas, the
founder and spokesperson for Wendy’s fast-food chain. Thomas believes
that you should not even think about a business you might open until you
have first taken a close look at “what makes you click.” He suggests that
you think of your answers to the questions he raises as a kind of personal
inventory that will help you decide if you have the personality to be an en-
trepreneur.

T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
6
EXHIBIT 1.3.
Dave Thomas’s Ten Questions to Ask Yourself before
Starting Your Own Business

QUESTION
DAVE THOMAS’S COMMENTS
❏
1. After you achieve some-
Do you like to sit back and savor [your achievements],
thing, do you like to go 
or is the success quickly yesterday’s news as far as 
ahead and do some-
you’re concerned? I’m not saying that sitting back is 
thing new?
wrong. I often wish that I could, but achieving the last
challenge doesn’t stick with me long. It’s never enough.
When I [succeed at something] I [want] to move on to
do new things. Most entrepreneurs are like this.
❏
2. Are you willing to commit 
You’d better know if you’re prepared to be single-
all of your time and 
minded about something.The best way to find out is to 
energy to an idea?
look at your past. Have you done it before? Did you
like doing it?
❏
3. Do you have self-
A person can do anything he or she wants to do [but 
confidence?
cannot] do something if they don’t want to. It’s a
matter of personal choice. It helps if you have self-con-
fidence, if you believe in yourself, and have family and
friends who believe in you, too.
Self-confidence is something most of us have to
work at constantly.We have to think positive thoughts,
and take care not to let the jerks of this world get us
down.Some of the most unlikely people will try to shake
your confidence by throwing their education,their
money,or their social position in your face.They try to
make themselves feel big by making you feel small.
❏
4. Do you like to work with 
There is nothing I ever achieved that didn’t involve 
people?
plenty of other people.You can’t do it alone, that’s for
sure. And, remember:Who’s going to run the business
and keep it going if you decide you want to move on
and do something else?
❏
5. Are you willing to slice 
Along with liking to work with other people, you have 
the pie?
to be able to share the successes—to give others an
ownership stake and part of the rewards. People who
are focused on themselves and don’t enjoy sharing
usually don’t make good entrepreneurs.
(continued)

S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
7
EXHIBIT 1.3.
(continued)

QUESTION
DAVE THOMAS’S COMMENTS
❏
6. Do you want to be an 
In my mind, the difference between being innovative 
innovator or a creator?
and being creative is that creators invent things, while
innovators use inventions in new ways.We’ve done a lot
of innovative things at Wendy’s—the Pick-Up Window
and the square hamburger are two.We didn’t invent the
salad bar or the stuffed baked potato, but we were the
first ones to put them into a national chain of quick-
service restaurants.
Creators like to perfect things, innovators want to
apply them. Entrepreneurs are mostly innovators.
❏
7. Even when things are 
Back in 1975, when the Wendy’s business had been 
going well, are you always 
opened only six years, I used to keep a list of all the 
trying to fix problems?
stores in the bottom 10% of sales.Whenever a store
hit that group, we would throw in extra promotions,
more advertising, and coupons. It was a simple pro-
gram, but it worked, and it saved a lot of stores that
proved later to be winners from being closed in the
early days. Some people like to polish the best of what
they do better; I’m more concerned with getting every-
thing up to the same high standard.
❏
8. Are you always trying to 
Keep thinking,“How can I improve myself and do 
learn from others?
better?” One way is to learn from other people and not
resent them for their success.I never resented anyone
for owning anything.I just wanted to figure out how I
could own something myself.Too many people spend all
of their energy being resentful and jealous,instead of
using that energy to benefit themselves.The bottom line
is to find out how someone became successful,learn
from that,and then go out and do it.
❏
9. Do you think there’s a 
No problem is too small because small problems can 
solution to every problem?
grow into big ones. For example, every now and then, I
get claustrophobic. It makes me nervous to ride in el-
evators and in the backseat of cars. One time I was rid-
ing in the backseat of a limousine with President Ger-
ald Ford and I started feeling closed in. Instead of going
into a panic and spoiling the day for myself, I looked out
the window and stared outside.When I am on an el-
evator that is crowded, I get off at the next floor and
wait for one that is not so full. But I don’t stop riding
elevators. Just don’t ever stop looking for solutions.
(continued)

Well, how did you do? Do you have what it takes, or did the questions and
comments raise a few hairs on the back of your neck? If you are like most
people, you probably have at least one or two hairs reaching for the stars.
Vernon, Graves, and Thomas cover a lot of ground, and you might ask:
Are these just their ideas or do they reflect the thinking of most successful
entrepreneurs? To be honest, we may not be able to answer that question
fully. We examined the ideas of over a hundred entrepreneurs in conducting
the research for this book, but of course, there are many more successful
entrepreneurs. What we can say, however, is that many of the character-
istics that Vernon, Graves, and Thomas mention—such as commitment,
willingness to work hard, self-confidence, high energy level, and so on—
are also mentioned by most of the other gurus we examined. They tend to
discuss them, however, in response to one common characteristic shared by
all entrepreneurs. This universal entrepreneurial characteristic is the ex-
plicit or implicit topic of much of our gurus’ musings about the necessary
ingredients for successful entrepreneurship. It has to do with membership
in a very special club. Successful entrepreneurs pay dues to join this club.
Unsuccessful entrepreneurs, and the rest of us, never join the club—or if we
do, we resign quickly. What club is this? Wilson Harrell, the entrepreneur
extraordinaire and columnist for Success Magazine, called it simply “Club
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
8
EXHIBIT 1.3.
(continued)

QUESTION
DAVE THOMAS’S COMMENTS
❏
10. Can you rely on your 
Can you live with the downside—really live with it? 
business intuition?
Can your family live with it, and do they understand it
as well as they should? Lots of people will bravely say,
“Let’s go for it. It doesn’t matter if we’re broke tomor-
row.” But they don’t try to imagine what they would
have to sacrifice if they only had half of their current in-
come and none of their benefits for a few months.
On the other hand, if you need lots of studies and
information to make decisions, it’s risky to be on your
own in business.You can’t afford that kind of comfort.
Had I said,“Let’s go research this Wendy’s idea and see
how we make a niche for ourselves,” the first Wendy’s
would never have been built.
Source: Adapted from R. David Thomas, Dave’s Way (New York: Berkley Books, 1992), pp. 214 –218.

Terror.”1 According to Harrell, admission to this exclusive club is automatic
for all entrepreneurs, permission to join is neither needed nor sought, and
tenure is indefinite. We will spend the remainder of this chapter discussing
Club Terror because if you believe our gurus, the ability to pay the dues of
this club is the defining characteristic of all entrepreneurs. We will share
with you what we learned about the severity of the dues and how our gurus
found the resources to pay the price of membership.
WELCOME TO CLUB TERROR
When you become an entrepreneur, writes Wilson Harrell, you “no longer . . .
have to be bothered with such ordinary feelings as concern, frustration, or
even fear. Those genteel things are the least of your troubles now. You can
put them away as a child puts away toys. From now on, you will be in the
grip of a human emotion that the good Lord, or more likely His nemesis,
created just for entrepreneurs.”2 For Harrell, true terror isn’t fear like the
sudden rush of adrenaline that you feel when you are almost hit by a drunk
driver. It isn’t accidental, unexpected, or short-lived. It is, instead, “a pri-
vate world filled with monsters sucking at every morsel of your being . . .
[where] there can be no sleep . . . just wide-awake nightmares.”3 He com-
pares Club Terror to an experience of his during World War II:
As a fighter pilot during World War II, . . . I was shot down behind enemy
lines.There, badly burned, I was picked up by members of the French Un-
derground, who devised a unique and cynical way to hide me from the Ger-
mans:They buried me in a cornfield with a hose stuck in my mouth so I
could breathe.The first time they buried me, I lay there for four hours—
time enough to consider all the bleak possibilities. I figured the Germans
would 1) stick a bayonet through the dirt and into me; 2) riddle the hole
with bullets; 3) accidentally kick the hose; or, worst of all, 4) turn on the
faucet. For 11 days in succession, I was buried. For 11 days I lived with a
new and unwanted friend—stark, raving fear.4
Harrell remarks that his experience in the war may have been the ultimate
in fear but that his experience as an entrepreneur has been almost as gruel-
ing. When asked why anyone would want to voluntarily put themselves
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
9

through such torture, he continues his war story. Along with the terror,
notes Harrell, he was amazed to discover that he felt a kind of exhilaration
that he had never felt before: “Each time the French partisans dug me up, I
was amazed at how high I felt. I was elated. I had conquered fear and I
knew it. Of course, it helped quite a bit that I was still alive.”5
To conquer fear and know it. To be elated. To feel alive. To have sur-
vived in the face of impossible odds. It seems that, in addition to the “mon-
sters sucking at your being,” Club Terror offers something else—a high that
people who have what it takes to be entrepreneurs find irresistible. For most
of us, the emotional high promised by Club Terror carries too great a price
tag. We just can’t summon what it takes to sustain our membership, so we
never join or we drop out quickly. Consequently, we never experience
either the terror or the high. Successful entrepreneurs summon the re-
sources to pay their Club Terror dues, and this is how they do it.
PAYING CLUB TERROR DUES
As we read the biographies, autobiographies, and interviews of successful
entrepreneurs, we were struck by several recurring themes—constants of
experience and opinion that our gurus share. Think of them as a few basic
requirements for entrepreneurship. If you want to be a successful entrepre-
neur, insist our gurus, you must do the following:
I Embrace failure.
I Reject money as your goal.
I Exhibit a dogged determination.
I Sacrifice your personal life.
I Believe passionately in your vision.
We expand on each of these requirements in the following sections.
Requirement #1: Embrace Failure
The terror in Club Terror often comes from a fear of failure. When starting
out, entrepreneurs frequently risk their entire life savings and substantial
portions of the life savings of friends and relatives. Mary Kay Ash, founder
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
10

of Mary Kay Cosmetics, describes what it was like when she started her
business:
When we started our business [in 1963], we were well aware of the risks.
Every single penny I had went into the investment. My son Richard, a life in-
surance agent, quit his $480-a-month job to work with his mother on her
“crazy idea” at $250 a month. A few months later my son Ben gave up a
$750-a-month job in Houston and moved his family to Dallas to join us—
for the same pay as his younger brother’s!
Richard and Ben took substantial reductions in salary, and my lifetime
savings of $5,000 was on the line. I desperately wanted to start my own
business—it was my only chance to be self-employed. All bridges were
burned behind us.6
Ash’s experience is common to many entrepreneurs. It is only natural in
such a situation to feel fear, even terror; yet, successful entrepreneurs perse-
vere. They do the following in response to their fears:
I Take the risk out of the risks.
I Persevere through their failures.
I Learn from their failures.
Taking the Risk out of Risk
Randy Fields, husband of Debbi Fields, the founder of Mrs. Fields Cookies,
writes that his experience with his wife and other entrepreneurs has con-
vinced him that entrepreneurs are not risk takers in their own minds. “Ask
an entrepreneur if his idea is going to work,” says Fields, “and [the entre-
preneur will reply], ‘Of course, it will.’”7 Fields jokes that he believes this
inability on his wife’s part, and on the part of other entrepreneurs, to per-
ceive and be intimidated by the possibility of failure is a “mental defect.”8
Defect or not, Wilson Harrell asserts that this ability to convince oneself
that risky ideas aren’t so risky is essential to an entrepreneur’s success.
It is no achievement to walk a tightrope laid flat on the floor.Where there is
no risk,there can be no pride in achievement and,consequently,no happiness.
Ray Kroc9
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
11

One of the ways entrepreneurs convince themselves that their idea is
going to work is to weigh the risks and find them acceptable. For example,
Richard Branson, founder of Virgin Airlines and the rest of the Virgin
Group, examines the downside in everything he does and prepares for the
worst. When he started Virgin Airlines, Branson bought just one plane, later
explaining, “I had an agreement with Boeing to take it back if things didn’t
work out.”10 Upon weighing the consequences if her company were to fail,
Debbi Fields reasoned, “Gosh, is that the worst thing that can happen? I’m
going to go into the cookie business and lose the $50,000. I’d have to figure
out a way to pay it back. I’m willing to do that.”11
I look at it this way: I’ve been broke five times in my life. One more time
won’t hurt.
Walt Disney12
Persevering through Failure
Although Fields didn’t fail, others did—some of them multiple times. For
example, Bud Hadfield, who founded Kwik Kopy, recalls that his early en-
trepreneurial career was quite a struggle: “In a fairly short period of time, I
rang up an impressive record of failed businesses. There was my half-
interest in a pig farm; the pigs ate so much I virtually gave my half away. I
went broke with an ice cream parlor, a gas station, a frozen food business, a
fireworks stand and a personnel agency.”13
Finally, in 1966 Hadfield ran out of reasons to fail and succeeded for a
while with a printing company he called Instant Print. That same year Had-
field got a letter from a lawyer in Chicago threatening legal action. “The
letter said if we continued to use that name, they would sue us, throw us in
jail, take away our children—the usual threats.” As a result, Hadfield was
forced to find a new name for his business. His wife suggested “Quick
Copy” with a “K” (Kwik Kopy). For your logo, she continued, “you could
have one K chasing another K.”14
My attitude toward mistakes in business is somewhat similar to my attitude
toward failed experiments in technology. Both are inevitable and provide
valuable feedback that can direct you to the right path.
An Wang15
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
12

Hadfield’s story is typical of many successful entrepreneurs. Their his-
tory is one of failure after failure until one day they hit upon the right idea
or right circumstances and finally succeed. Entrepreneurs know, remarks
Debbi Fields, that they only truly fail when they stop trying, because it is
only then that failure becomes official. They view failures as hurdles that
may hurt their shins but don’t prevent them from chugging along. And, says
Fields, failures can also be blessings in disguise, “signs of your destiny cor-
recting itself. . . . Failures can lead you in a new and better direction
[whereas] successes can sometimes be diversions, because they let you
think you had everything solved when that turns out not to be true.”16
Learning from Failure
Edwin Land, founder of Polaroid Corporation, compares the entrepreneu-
rial experience to scientific research, where “you fail and fail and fail, and
when you succeed you stop.”17 Mary Kay Ash calls this pattern “failing for-
ward to success” and says that it has been the pattern of her business life:
I failed miserably at my very first Mary Kay beauty show. I was anxious to
prove that our skin-care products could be sold to small groups of women,
and I wanted to make my first show a huge success. But that evening I sold
a grand total of $1.50.When I left, I drove around the corner, put my head
on the steering wheel, and cried.“What’s wrong with those people?” I
asked myself.“Why didn’t they buy this fantastic product?” Bursts of fear
flashed through my mind. My initial reaction was to doubt my new business
venture. I became worried because my lifetime savings were tied up in the
company. I looked in the mirror and asked myself,“What did you do wrong,
Mary Kay?” Then it hit, I had never even bothered to ask anyone for an
order. I had forgotten to pass out order cards and had just expected those
women to buy automatically! You can bet I didn’t make the same mistake at
the next beauty show.
Yes, I failed—and for a few brief moments I was fearful. But after analyz-
ing what had happened, I learned from that failure.18
Even Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart, experienced failures and set-
backs, but he prided himself in learning from those experiences. Walton
purchased a Ben Franklin variety store in Newport, Arkansas, in 1945. He
set as his personal five-year goal the task of making his store the most prof-
itable variety store in the region. At the end of that time, Walton thought he
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
13

had succeeded, but an innocuous legal oversight cost him his success. Here
is how he described what he learned from that experience:
My five years in Newport were about up, and I had met my goal.That little
Ben Franklin store was doing $250,000 in sales a year, and turning $30,000
to $40,000 a year in profit. It was the number-one Ben Franklin store—for
sales or profit—not only in Arkansas, but in the whole six-state region. It
was the largest variety store of any sort in Arkansas, and I don’t believe
there was a bigger one in the three or four neighboring states.
Every crazy thing we tried hadn’t turned out . . . well, . . . of course, but
we hadn’t made any mistakes we couldn’t correct quickly, none so big that
they threatened the business. Except, it turned out, for one little legal error
we made right at the beginning. In all my excitement at becoming Sam Wal-
ton, merchant, I had neglected to include a clause in my lease which gave
me an option to renew after the first five years.
And our success, it turned out, had attracted a lot of attention. My land-
lord, the department store owner, was so impressed with our Ben Frank-
lin’s success that he decided not to renew our lease at any price—knowing
full well that we had nowhere else in town to move the store. He did offer
to buy the franchise, fixtures, and inventory at a fair price; he wanted to
give the store to his son. I had no alternative but to give it up. . . .
It was the low point of my business life. I felt sick to my stomach. I
couldn’t believe it was happening to me. It really was like a nightmare. I had
built the best variety store in the whole region and worked hard in the
community, done everything right—and now I was being kicked out of
town. It didn’t seem fair. I blamed myself for ever getting suckered into such
an awful lease, and I was furious at the landlord. Helen [Walton’s wife], just
settling in with a brand-new family of four, was heartsick at the prospect of
leaving Newport. But that’s what we were going to do.
I’ve never been one to dwell on reverses, and I didn’t do so then. It’s not
just a corny saying that you can make a positive out of most any negative if
you work at it hard enough. I’ve always thought of problems as challenges,
and this one wasn’t any different. I don’t know if that experience changed
me or not. I know I read my leases a lot more carefully after that, and
maybe I became a little more wary of just how tough the world can be.
Also, it may have been about then that I began encouraging our oldest
boy—six-year-old Bob—to become a lawyer. But I didn’t dwell on my dis-
appointment.The challenge at hand was simple enough to figure out. I had
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
14

to pick myself up and get on with it, do it all over again, only even better
this time.19
Later, Walton was to call his Newport experience a blessing in disguise.
He had a chance for a brand-new start. So, he started over and did it
again—only even better. It was a typical entrepreneurial response to fail-
ure—pick yourself up, ask what you can learn from the experience, and try
again, even better this time.
Requirement #2: Reject Money as a Goal
As Wilson Harrell roamed around the country making speeches to budding
entrepreneurs, he would always ask his audience the same questions:
“What’s your motivation?”
“What are you after?”
“What, in your mind, constitutes success?”
Predictably, the answers he received often revolved around money, power,
influence, or something specific such as big homes, yachts, and private
planes. Harrell would give members of his audience with those kinds of an-
swers the following advice:
If you’ve got a job, keep it. If you haven’t, go try and get one, because I don’t
think you’re going to make it as an entrepreneur. . . . Most entrepreneurs
fail because they’re not entrepreneurs in the first place. Entrepreneurs are a
special breed, with the gate to their kingdom well-guarded against the
greedy and get-rich-quick. Many knock, few are admitted. Entrepreneurship
is about more than money, power or influence.20
Our gurus repeatedly maintain that they are not and were not motivated
by money. In fact, Richard Branson recalls that the great fortune he made
was often bittersweet. After he sold Virgin Records, he was enormously
rich but grieving. “I remember walking down the street [after the sale was
completed]. I was crying,” he writes. “Tears . . . [were] streaming down my
face. And there I was holding a check for a billion dollars. . . . If you’d seen
me, you would have thought I was loony. A billion dollars.”21 Still Branson
wasn’t happy. It wasn’t the money that mattered.
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
15

[Money] is not the motivator or even the measure of my success.
Marc Andreessen22
Some gurus become almost indignant when asked about money. They
can’t understand the obsession some people seem to have with it. As a case
in point, consider Bill Gates’s response to an insistent reporter’s question-
ing in a December 1990 interview:
Q: What does all the money you have mean to you?
Gates: I don’t have any money. I have stock. I own about 35 percent of the
shares of Microsoft, and I take a salary of $175,000 a year.
Q: Yes, but you sold about $30 million worth of Microsoft stock, didn’t you?
Gates: About a year ago.
Q: Most people still consider that “money.” Don’t you?
Gates: Yes, that’s money, . . . that’s money.
Q: Now that we’ve established that you do have money, what does it mean
to you?23
After this exchange, Gates went on to argue that all money really meant to
him was that he didn’t have to worry about the price of a meal in a restau-
rant and that he would be able to have a nice house overlooking Lake Wash-
ington. He declared that his primary concern wasn’t the money; it was sell-
ing software.
Sam Walton and Ted Turner (founder of Turner Broadcasting System)
have expressed similar disdain for their accumulated wealth (see Exhibits
1.4 and 1.5).
One reason for not having money as your primary goal, say our gurus, is
that the single-minded pursuit of personal wealth will very likely make it
impossible for you ever to gain real wealth. If you chase money, declares
Debbi Fields, you’ll never catch it. Ted Turner explains why: “If you think
money is a real big deal, . . . you’ll be too scared of losing it to get it.”24
In short, if you are afraid of losing money, you won’t take the prudent
risks that all entrepreneurs must take to succeed. The money-stealing mon-
sters of Club Terror will win.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
16

S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
17
EXHIBIT 1.4.
Sam Walton on What Money Meant to Him
In his 1993 book Sam Walton: Made in America, My Story,Walton discussed his attitude about
his wealth:
Here’s the thing:money never has meant that much to me....If we had enough groceries,
and a nice place to live, plenty of room to keep and feed my bird dogs, a place to hunt,
a place to play tennis, and the means to get the kids good educations—that’s rich. . . .
We’re not ashamed of having money, but I just don’t believe a big showy lifestyle is
appropriate for anywhere, least of all here in Bentonville where folks work hard for
their money and where we all know that everyone puts on their trousers one leg at a
time. . . . I still can’t believe it was news that I get my hair cut at the barbershop.Where
else would I get it cut? Why do I drive a pickup truck? What am I supposed to haul my
dogs around in, a Rolls-Royce?
Sam Walton
Source: Sam Walton and John Huey, Sam Walton: Made in America, My Story (New York: Bantam Books,
1993), pp. 9–10.
EXHIBIT 1.5.
Ted Turner on the Importance of Money
Ted Turner, founder of CNN, lays it right on the line in his own inimitable fashion. Don’t
worry about the money, he says, other things are more important.
Years ago, there was a time when my stock had been rising quickly. I knew how many
shares of stock I had. (I only had one stock; I’ve only had one stock. I’ve never had time
to play the market.) So I figured out that if the stock hit a certain point, I was going to
be a billionaire, and I’m still in the tiny office where I was when I was only worth a few
million. I couldn’t tell anyone at the office. All of my friends were working at the
company; the highest-paid person was making $100,000. I was so much richer than my
other friends in Atlanta that I couldn’t tell them—they’d think I was bragging. I did go
home and tell my wife, and she said,“I don’t care. I’ve got to help the kids with their
homework.” No one even cared. I thought bells and whistles would go off. Nothing
happened at all. Ever since then, having great wealth is one of the most disappointing
things. It’s overrated, I can tell you that. It’s not as good as average sex. Average sex is
better that being a billionaire. It’s good to know so you don’t have to worry about it
too much.
Ted Turner
Source:“The Wit and Wisdom of Ted Turner,” Across the Board, July–August 1997, p. 13.

OUR VIEW
Although our gurus maintain that they are not motivated by money and
would do their jobs even if they were not compensated, that is not to say
that they would volunteer to give up their stock options or ask their boards
to take them off the payroll.
Of course, our gurus aren’t saying that money doesn’t matter. In fact, Chap-
ter 3 is devoted to this topic. What the gurus are saying is that money is not
their primary objective. Money may be a way of keeping score, and it is al-
ways necessary for financing the pursuit of a dream, but rarely, if ever, should
it be considered an end in itself. Instead, they recommend doing something
you were born to do and having fun making money while you do it.
Success should not be measured in dollars. It’s about how you conduct the
journey, and how big your heart is at the end of it.
Howard Schultz25
Do What You Love and Get Paid for It
First and foremost, say our gurus, success means doing something you find
to be fun. Richard Branson recalls that 1993 was a watershed year for his
company. Virgin was making money and finally had become a strong brand
name that could be used to launch a wide variety of businesses. “At this
point,” he notes, “I could have retired and concentrated my energies on
learning how to paint watercolors or how to beat my mum at golf. It wasn’t
in my nature to do so. People asked me, ‘Why don’t you have some fun
now?’ but they were missing the point. As far as I was concerned, this was
fun.”26
Life is too precious to be wasted in doing work you don’t love.
Tom Monaghan27
Our gurus add that it is also important to do something that you believe
is worthwhile—something for which you would like to be remembered.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
18

Pleasant Rowland, founder of Pleasant Company (manufacturer of the
American Girl doll) quotes Yeats: “Look up in the sun’s eye and see what
the exultant heart calls good, that some new day may breed the best because
we gave, not what they would, but the right twigs for an eagle’s nest.”28
Many of our gurus began with a mission or a vision of doing something
worthwhile. For example, Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield, cofounders of
Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream, wanted to do more than just sell ice cream. They
wanted to create a company that was employee friendly, was environmen-
tally sensitive, and generated a fair return to investors (see Exhibit 1.6).
Our gurus argue that you will not have the courage to endure Club Terror
over the long term if you are not having fun doing something you feel is
worthwhile.
OUR VIEW
We applaud the gurus’ invocation to pursue worthwhile ventures. None-
theless, we caution novice entrepreneurs not to lose site of fundamental
business practices. Many of the successful entrepreneurs discussed in this
book, including Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield, Tom Chappell, cofounder
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
19
EXHIBIT 1.6.
Ben & Jerry’s Mission Statement
We’re in business to make and serve the best all natural ice cream, frozen yogurt, and sorbet,
to provide fair economic return to our staff and our shareholders, and to include an active
concern for the community in our day-to-day decisions. As a company
I
we have a progressive, nonpartisan social agenda;
I
we seek peace by supporting nonviolent ways to resolve conflict;
I
we will look for ways to create economic opportunities for the disenfranchised;
I
we are committed to practicing caring capitalism;
I
we seek to minimize our negative impact on the environment;
I
we support sustainable methods of food production and family farming.
There will always be differences of opinion about how we actualize our mission, but a
commitment to the intent of our mission is an essential part of membership at Ben & Jerry’s.
No amount of expertise can compensate for a lack of commitment to our mission and to
our aspirations. In calling these “Our Aspirations” we are mindful that we will constantly be
striving to reach these ideals.
Source: Ben Cohen, Jerry Greenfield, and Meredith Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip: How to Run a Values-
Led Business and Make Money Too (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997), p. 173.

of Tom’s of Maine, and Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop, had to
be rescued by business practitioners who did not necessarily share their
high ideals and values or, in the words of Yeats, the desire to build an
eagle’s nest.
Requirement #3: Junkyard-Dogged Determination
In Exhibit 1.2 we listed eight questions posed by Earl Graves for determin-
ing if you have what it takes to become a successful entrepreneur. Graves’s
first question was, “Do you have a junkyard-dog mentality?” For him, this
means that “True entrepreneurs don’t let go.”29 A dogged determination to
succeed in the face of what seems like impossible odds is the defining char-
acteristic of entrepreneurs cited by all of our gurus. For example, Howard
Johnson, founder of Howard Johnson Company, explains, “Most projects
that fail do so simply because their initiators just do not keep doggedly at
them—and all too often they give up just short of the goal.”30
Porter Bibb, author of It Ain’t as Easy as It Looks, an unauthorized biog-
raphy of Ted Turner, credits Turner’s persistence as one of his defining
traits. “Stack the odds against Turner,” writes Bibb, “and he will usually
prevail, not because he is necessarily the biggest, bravest, strongest, or
smartest, but because he simply will not give up. Ted Turner does not know
how to quit and will keep fighting until the tide has turned and the battle is
won.”31 Turner himself agrees: “I never quit. I’ve got a bunch of flags on
my boat, but there ain’t no white flags. I don’t surrender. That’s the story of
my life.”32 And it is the story of most entrepreneurs’ lives. Richard Branson
is a good example.
Branson beat the odds repeatedly, not because he was, as Bibb described
Turner, bigger, braver, stronger, or smarter, but largely because he was
doggedly determined. Take Branson’s experience somewhere over the Pa-
cific in the early 1990s. He and his partner had accidentally jettisoned the
fuel for their hot-air balloon. They were literally out of gas, suspended
above rough seas. Everyone expected them to crash. Branson and his part-
ner had two options, neither of which offered much hope. They could bail
out with slim hope of being rescued, or they could stay aloft in 200-mile-
per-hour winds and hope their balloon could withstand the strain, catch the
jet stream, and miraculously make it to land. In characteristic junkyard-dog
fashion, Branson hung on and eventually crash-landed the remnants of his
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
20

balloon on a frozen lake in Canada. Not only had he and his partner sur-
vived, but they had broken the world balloon-travel speed record. Branson
considered the adventure one of the great moments in his life and a meta-
phor for what it takes to succeed as an entrepreneur. “When we lost our
fuel, all that mattered was keeping the balloon moving in the jet stream; it
wasn’t a matter of giving up,” he said after his safe landing. “The same
applies in business. If things are not looking good, you don’t just give up.
You try to keep going.”33
“Quitters never win and winners never quit.” Be guided by that.You can
still do a lot of dumb things, make a lot of mistakes, and get discouraged,
but usually there is a solution out there somewhere.
Jim McLamore34
And keep going they do. Successful entrepreneurs find a way to win—
somehow. David Cook, cofounder of Blockbuster, describes Wayne Hui-
zenga’s “keep-going” style this way: “It’s like he’s got a goal and he tries to
run around this way to it and if that doesn’t work, he runs around the other
way and he finally finds a way through, but as long as he reaches his goal
who the hell cares how he got there. But he always gets his goal.”35
To Debbi Fields, it is just a matter of the word No being an unacceptable
answer. She knows what she wants to accomplish, and she is determined to
accomplish it, even if the “it” is only a minor travel irritant, such as not get-
ting room service when she wants it.
“I call up room service . . . and I say,‘I know that it says room service isn’t
available until 7 o’clock, however I need to have coffee at 6. Is that a possi-
bility?’ ” When the answer is no, as it usually is, Fields then calls the assistant
manager, or if necessary, the general manager.“Hi Manager,” she says,“I’m
only the customer and I want to know what possibilities exist to have you
deliver coffee to my room at 6 o’clock, since your room service isn’t avail-
able until 7?”
She has not yet failed, Fields says triumphantly, to get coffee before 7.
“You need to explore the possibilities,” she says,“and find out what kind of
negotiations will work—to not take no for an answer.”36
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
21

When I climbed the hills, I saw the mountains.Then I started climbing the
mountains.
Ted Turner37
According to our gurus, dogged determination is a requirement for suc-
cessful entrepreneurship that must be exhibited over and over. Rarely, it
seems, can an entrepreneur start a new business without having to over-
come obstacle after obstacle. The early entrepreneurial experiences of Jay
Van Andel, cofounder of Amway, are good illustrations of this type of de-
termination. Van Andel’s story begins at the end of World War II. There was
a kind of airplane craze after the war, so Van Andel and two friends decided
to get in on the action.
We bought a two-seat Piper Cub in Detroit for a down payment of $700.
We didn’t know the first thing about flying, so we had to hire a pilot to fly it
from Detroit to Grand Rapids. . . .The next difficulty was making enough
money to pay off and fly the airplane we just bought.
The solution to that problem was to open a flying service.We named it
Wolverine Air Service, which wasn’t too original in the Wolverine State,
but we didn’t care. Flying instruction was our mainstay, but we also offered
passenger rides, group transportation, and sales and rentals of airplanes.We
still didn’t know how to fly, so we hired two veteran pilots to do that job
while we did the legwork on the ground. . . .
We were counting on being able to use the new Grand River Air Park
in Comstock Park, which was under construction when we started.When
the airport project ran out of money, we attached pontoons to the bot-
tom of our airplane and used the Grand River for our airstrip.This was a
lesson to us in improvisation, and we learned a few more like it during our
air service days. . . . [We] employed the services of an old chicken coop for
an office. . . .
While on a trip to Florida to deliver a plane, the idea occurred to us to
open a drive-in restaurant, like ones we had seen elsewhere.We had $300
to invest, so on May 20, 1947, we opened the “Riverside Drive-Inn Restau-
rant,” which was the very first of its kind in the area.We knew just about as
much about running a restaurant as we had known about flying when we
started, but we didn’t let that stop us. [We] built a diminutive wooden
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
22

structure there at the air park, laying the foundation and nailing the clap-
boards ourselves. It took several months to get electricity hooked up prop-
erly, so we bought a generator.We also had no water for some time, so
every evening we would fill up jugs at the nearest place that had plumbing
and carry them to the restaurant.
From five o’clock in the afternoon until midnight we kept the restaurant
open, [trading off jobs]. . . . A good entrepreneur never rests, so we were al-
ways trying to think of something else that we could provide the custom-
ers at the air park. At one point, we started offering canoe rides down the
Grand River. . . .We also began offering fishing excursions on that lake. After
just two years in business, we were operating a flight school, charter serv-
ice, repair service, and aircraft and gasoline sales organization, as well as the
boat rental and charter business, and the restaurant. . . .
We learned a lot of lessons about business during these several years. . . .
Lesson number one was that running a business is a matter of pressing on
in spite of an unending series of unexpected problems. . . .The problems we
ran into were never ending, but we persisted.When the air park didn’t
open on time, when the electricity and water weren’t hooked up for our
restaurant on time, when several of our airplane engines were destroyed
after we used the wrong lubricating oil, when hail and wind seriously dam-
aged several of our airplanes, we didn’t give up.Winter snows forced us to
put skis on all the airplanes, but it seemed that as soon as the skis were on,
the snow would melt, and as soon as we removed them, the snow would
fly. But the first year, we flew two million passenger miles and earned
$50,000.38
Van Andel and his partners overcame the obstacles. Faced with a Club
Terror monster, they found a solution. They fought back again and again:
No landing strip? We’ll use the river.
No office? We’ll use that chicken coop.
No electricity? Find a generator.
No water? Haul some in.
Snow on the ground? Put skis on the plane.
Every guru tells the same kind of story. They survived because they refused
not to survive. The monsters weren’t going to kick them out of Club Terror.
Like Debbi Fields, they just wouldn’t take “no” for an answer.
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
23

Don’t tell me it can’t be done.
Bill Lear39
Requirement #4: Sacrifice Your Personal Life
Someone once said that at some point everything must degenerate to work.
Entrepreneurs know this better than anyone because if there is one thing en-
trepreneurs do, it is work. Reflecting on his life, Howard Johnson recalled
that he had no interest or time for anything but building his business. “I
think that [building the business] was my only form of recreation. I never
played golf. I never played tennis. I never did anything athletic after I left
school. I ate, slept and thought of nothing but the business. If I went to a
party or anywhere, I would always end up talking business.”40
Our gurus describe their lives as consisting mostly of work, particularly
during the early years of starting their business. Wayne Huizenga claims to
have worked 20 hours a day, bar none. When asked about the hours he put
in, Bill Gates said that rumors of his still working until 4:00 A.M. were ex-
aggerated. “I generally work until midnight, with a break for dinner with
someone from work,” said Gates in Playboy interview. “Then I go home
and read a book or the Economist for an hour or so. Generally, I’m back in
the office by nine the next morning.”41 By the time he was 37, Gates
claimed to have slowed his pace to just 72 hours a week. “I mean, I assume
you don’t count reading business magazines, the Journal, or the Econ-
omist,” he quipped.42
The only place where luck comes before work is in the dictionary.
Anita Roddick43
Of course, some of this may just be bravado, the equivalent of working-
hour tall tales. Still, most gurus report that the early years of their business
ventures are quite demanding. Fred Lager, author of Ben & Jerry’s: The In-
side Scoop, describes some of Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield’s expe-
riences as they tried to turn a ramshackled 1940s vintage gas station into an
ice-cream parlor. It was February 1978, winter in Vermont:
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
24

They worked incredibly long days on the renovations, starting first thing in
the morning, and going long into the night.When they couldn’t stand the
cold anymore, they took a break at the bus station down the street, where
they’d warm up and use the bathrooms.They were trying to conserve all
their cash, living on saltine crackers and tins of sardines that they got at
Woolworth’s, three for a buck.
By the time they got home, they would fall into bed, only to wake up ex-
hausted in a freezing cold house.The house, which was really a summer
cottage, wasn’t insulated, and the wind would whip up off the lake and blow
right through the walls. Eventually they stopped driving home at night and
started sleeping in the gas station. Ben slept on top of the chest freezer in
the back room; Jerry was out front on a cot that he’d bought at the army-
navy store. . . .
[By the spring, Ben and Jerry had their business up and running at last,
but the work got even harder.] As the summer ended, the exhilaration of
being in business gave way to exhaustion from working endless hours,
seven days a week. One night Jerry was so tired when he left the store, that
he dropped the night deposit bag into the mailbox on the corner by mis-
take. Another night, Ben went outside while Jerry did the final mopping, and
fell asleep in the gravel parking lot.44
Most gurus report similar experiences. They started early, worked late,
got only a few hours sleep, and started all over the next day.
Why do entrepreneurs work so hard? Because they have to. During the
first years, in particular, there’s no one else to do all of the things that have
to be done. Ben Cohen recalls that reality:
In the beginning there was Ben and there was Jerry, and we did it all: made
all the ice cream and all the decisions, borrowed all the money, patched to-
gether all the broken-down equipment.That’s one thing about starting a
business: when you’re an employee you can blame the boss for buying the
wrong machine or making you work long hours. But when you’re the boss,
you have no one to blame but yourself. Darn—I bought the wrong equip-
ment. Now I’ll have to work all night. Again.
Another thing about starting a business: you get plenty of on-the-job
training. Between us, over the years, we’ve been dilapidated-gas-station ren-
ovators; ice-cream-flavor inventors; short-order crepe chefs; hot fudge
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
25

makers; ice cream scoopers; delivery persons; line workers; manufacturing
overseers; vehicle, equipment, and facility procurers; circus-bus outfitters;
ice cream distributors; and communications specialists. (Until about 1982,
Jerry wrote a personal response to every person who sent a letter to the
company.) And that just covers the first few years.45
Tom Monaghan, founder of Domino’s Pizza, recalls that his experience
as jack-of-all-trades during his first years in the pizza business was similar
to Ben and Jerry’s.
Although I didn’t open until five o’clock in the afternoon, there was a lot of
what I call backroom work to be done first. I made the sauce and the pizza
dough fresh every day.Then the meat and vegetable toppings had to be pre-
pared and sliced.The most tedious and time-consuming job was dicing the
cheese. I vowed I would find a way to do that mechanically, but there was
nothing suitable in the restaurant equipment catalogues I pored over.There
were always errands to be run: supplies to pick up, bills to be paid. And any
extra time I had went into making improvements in the store. My chief
concern was with the layout of the oven and counters. I kept rearranging
them, trying to cut a few steps and shave fractions of seconds off the time
it took to make pizzas. Given the oven I had, there was nothing I could do
to reduce cooking time. But I could control the assembly of raw materials,
and I was obsessed with finding ways to speed up this end of the process. I
was constantly on the run.
I wouldn’t have been able to function if it hadn’t been for . . . [two early
associates] making deliveries. A few times when they weren’t around, I’d
take an order on the phone, make the pizza, then lock the door and do the
delivery myself. It was a crazy situation.
If I ran out of something, I would take money out of the till and run to
the grocery store next door.The couple who owned it felt sorry for me,
and they’d sell me stale fruit pies for a dime. I’d go back to my kitchen and
eat a whole darned pie. I was always hungry. Much as I loved pizza, I
couldn’t afford to eat my own product, unless it was a burned one or an
order someone hadn’t picked up.46
Of course, the long hours eventually take a toll, and the price is usually
borne by the entrepreneur’s family. He or she simply isn’t around much of
the time. That absence is inevitably the source of regrets. Wayne Huizenga
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
26

recalls the lyrics of the Harry Chapin song “Cats Cradle”—“we’re going to
have a good time, Dad.” “That hits me every time I hear that song because
that’s me right to the T,” says Huizenga. “That comes back and hits you real
hard and I wish I’d have spent more time with them. I never saw my kids
play Little League ball. I never went to a PTA meeting, Marti [Huizenga’s
wife] did all that stuff. The only play I ever saw was when our daughter
Pam one time was in a play. I missed all that stuff with all the kids. That’s
not good and I wouldn’t advise anyone to put that much into it.”47 Huizenga
might not advise it, but he did it. Most successful entrepreneurs do. It’s part
of the dues of Club Terror.
Requirement #5: Be Passionate about Your Vision
Why is it that successful entrepreneurs can make such sacrifices, even sac-
rifices that they know they may regret later? Is it just the thrill of it all, as
Wilson Harrell suggests, or is there something more? Our gurus say there is
something more—one last characteristic that separates the genuine entre-
preneur from the rest of us—and this may be the ultimate defining charac-
teristic of the successful entrepreneur. It is an unbridled, unconditional be-
lief in their idea, despite overwhelming opposition.
The biggest risk that an entrepreneur has to face is internal.They have to
decide that this is the thing that they want to do with their time and their
life more than any other thing.
Fred Smith48
So, you want to sell cookies, start a package delivery service to compete
with the U.S. Postal Service, or maybe just launch something simple like a
24-hour, seven-day-a-week cable news channel. You mention your idea to
a few friends, relatives, and business associates, and they all respond with
the same three little words—Are you crazy? Let’s look at one entrepre-
neur’s idea and examine her commitment to that idea, in the face of such
opposition.
Debbi Fields remembers that everyone she consulted about starting a
cookie business thought it was a bad idea.
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
27

To me, selling cookies in a store was a good idea.
Wrong!
A terrible idea!
At least, that’s what everyone said.
Everyone.
First of all, there were the surveys. Randy [Fields’ husband], a good,
tough business head, pointed me in the direction of market analyses and I
became an eager reader of such reports.They all said the same thing:
America loves crispy cookies. . . .
I had some good evidence to the contrary, however. Randy’s clients
really liked the cookies the way I fixed them—[lusciously soft]. After two or
three visits to the house, they took to telephoning before they flew in to
consult with Randy . . . wondering out loud if Randy’s wife wasn’t planning
to bake some of those terrific cookies. . . .
We’re talking about executives here, important people, hardheaded deci-
sion makers.They’re flying thousands of miles to consult with this financial
wizard who does magic with numbers . . . and all they can think about is
whether or not they’re going to get a cookie.
Who better to ask? So I said to them,“What would you think about my
starting a business to sell these cookies to the public?”
“Bad idea,” they said, their mouths full of cookies, what had been a plate-
ful only minutes earlier now reduced to crumbs that they were artfully
dabbing up with genteel thumbs.“Never work,” they said.“Forget it.”
I went to one fellow, a marketing specialist who had been a successful
executive with one of the most aggressive—and market-sensitive corpora-
tions in the world, and I said to him,“You’ve always loved my cookies.Well,
now I want to go into the cookie business.What do you think? How should
I go about selling them?”
He said,“Debbi, it’s never going to work. Nobody’s going to buy your
cookies.”
All the professionals were negative and it made me crazy. I couldn’t un-
derstand it. I knew I wasn’t sophisticated but I had eyes to see with. It was
like they were telling me one thing yet showing me something completely
opposite. It didn’t make any sense at all.
So I tried my family—they’d loved my cookies for years.
My mom said,“Debbi, I cannot believe you’re going to waste your life
standing over a hot oven.”
I tried Randy’s parents.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
28

“Debbi,” Randy’s mom said,“it’ll never work.” She and Randy’s dad were
very disappointed. I think they feared for both of us, believing that we
would ensnarl ourselves in something that wouldn’t work out and wind up
broke and miserable and unhappy with each other.
At last, I went to my friends at the junior college and told them what I
had in mind. No luck there, either. Everybody was singing in the same key:
the idea seemed strange, the concept didn’t exist. I’d go on and on about
my cookies, the little store, the fresh-baked treat served hot in a napkin.
It seemed to make people hungry, but they still didn’t think my idea
would work.
Finally, in desperation, I phoned up [my friend,] good, old, dependable
Wendy Marks and told her what I had in mind. At this point I would have
been satisfied with even hesitant support.
She couldn’t believe it.“Debbi, I can’t imagine it ever working.”49
Far from being unique, Fields’ experience is typical. All of our gurus re-
port similar opposition to their ideas. Howard Schultz warns that you
should expect it. “People will shut you out. They’ll regard you with suspi-
cion. They’ll undermine your self-confidence. They’ll offer you every rea-
son imaginable why your idea simply won’t work.”50 In short, says Schultz,
you’ll find yourself very much the underdog.
Given so much “grumpy negativism,” as Debbi Fields calls it, most of us
would just give up. Characteristically, entrepreneurs respond in just the op-
posite way. Schultz says that he found the opposition to his idea invigorat-
ing. “Part of me relished the fact that so many people said my plan couldn’t
be done.”51 Robert Mondavi, founder of Robert Mondavi Winery, recalls
being energized by his decision to launch out on his own. “I felt totally re-
born,” he writes. “I was like a kid again, bursting with energy, ready to
climb the mountain, conquer the world, go for the gold. Yes, at the unlikely
age of fifty-two, the great adventure of my life had finally begun.”52
Entrepreneurs respond to the negativism they meet by becoming even
more committed to their idea—more convinced that they are right. Their
idea becomes their life dream, the opportunity to control their own destiny,
and the opportunity to do something that others may think is impossible but
that they think is unique, worthwhile, and immanently doable. They be-
come stubborn.
And their stubbornness becomes infectious. Even those who have the
gravest doubts begin to wonder if the idea might work after all. George
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
29

Babick of CNN’s New York office said of Ted Turner: “If Ted predicted the
sun will come up in the west tomorrow morning, you’d laugh and say he’s
full of it. But you’d still set the alarm. You wouldn’t want to miss the mir-
acle.”53
So, where does this unbridled confidence come from? Two sources,
say our gurus—ignorance and optimism. Entrepreneurs have a heavy
dose of both.
Ignorance Can Be Bliss
If you don’t know that something can’t be done, then you don’t know you
can’t do it. Ted Turner didn’t know anything about television. In fact, he
said he didn’t even watch television, so he created the superstation. He
didn’t know anything about news. In fact, he had made jokes about the
news on his superstations, so he created CNN. He didn’t know he couldn’t
do these things, so he just went out and did them.
Masaru Ibuka, cofounder of Sony, credits ignorance for some of his
greatest accomplishments, as well as for those of Soichiro Honda, co-
founder of Honda Motor Company.
We had been working on making the tape recorder for the first time in
Japan.We then decided to go with the transistor radio, so we started prod-
uct development, but the yield rate of the main transistor was awfully low.
At best, only four or five would be any good. American companies were
also trying to make successful transistor radios, but they too were not get-
ting anywhere with development. . . .
Nobody had the experience of developing transistor manufacturing
techniques, so no one really knew how difficult it was, and besides, there
were no experts in the field.Today, there are experts whom we can get ad-
vice from, and usually after getting the advice we are supposed to give up
on a new innovation.Those days, there weren’t any experts to get advice
from. So, I had to decide by myself.
Both Honda and I in that sense were amateurs at technology. Using my-
self as an example, we also started on development of the transistor televi-
sion much earlier than other companies.We didn’t know anything about
electric circuits for television, so we weren’t aware of the complexities in-
volved. If we had known about the complexity of those circuits from the
beginning, we probably would have stayed away from them.54
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
30

Time and again, entrepreneurs succeed when others won’t even try. The
entrepreneurs try because they don’t know enough to know that what they
want to do can’t be done. It’s a good idea, they reason, so everything will
turn out right.
A Little Optimism Can’t Hurt
Successful entrepreneurs are the eternal optimists. Thomas Stemberg, co-
founder of Staples, says that his defining bias is his ability to see oppor-
tunity in every setback. He likes to retell a joke that he attributes to Bryant
Gumble, the host of The Early Show:
It’s Christmas morning and two kids—one a pessimist, the other an opti-
mist—open their presents.The pessimist gets a brand-new bike decked out
with decals and accessories in the latest style.“It looks great,” he says.“But
it’ll probably break soon.” The second kid, an optimist, opens up a huge
package, finds it filled with horse manure and jumps with glee, exclaiming,
“There must be a pony in there somewhere!”55
Randy Fields sees that same type of optimism in his wife, Debbi:
[She] is the kind of person that on Christmas Eve would go shopping at the
shopping center and instead of taking the first [parking] space that she
finds, which is what I think most people would do, which is way in the back
of the parking lot, she says,“Oh no, there’ll be one right in front of the
door.” And she’ll go get the one right in front of the door. It’s irrational to
imagine there is one right in front of the door . . . but it’s always there.56
Of course it’s there. Debbi Fields couldn’t believe it wouldn’t be. David
Gardner, one of the on-line personal finance advisors known as the Motley
Fool, believes that Fields’s kind of effusive optimism is a defining charac-
teristic of entrepreneurs:
There are people in the world who can’t see how anything will ever work
out, or just think it will be too much of a pain . . . to do it. And then there
are the people who think all of life is wonderful and work so hard because
of those feelings that they have. Ultimately, it’s not a value judgment. I mean,
maybe optimism is just a flight of fancy and we’d all be better off if we were
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
31

pessimists. But when you’re talking about starting your own business, you
have to be one of those people who believes you can do anything if you set
your mind to it.57
We close this chapter with one final story. It’s a favorite of Akio Morita,
cofounder of Sony Corporation.
Two shoe salesmen . . . find themselves in a rustic backward part of Africa.
The first salesman wires back to his head office: “There is no prospect of
sales. Natives do not wear shoes!” The other salesman wires: “No one
wears shoes here. We can dominate the market. Send all possible stock.”58
Now that’s the response of a true entrepreneur!
KEY POINTS
The universal characteristic that all entrepreneurs possess is a willing-
ness—even eagerness—to live with the fear of failure, what Wilson
Harrell calls Club Terror.
Conquering Club Terror makes entrepreneurs feel elated and alive.
Rather than being intimidated, they are stimulated by the risks in-
volved in entrepreneurship.
Entrepreneurs don’t consider themselves to be risk takers. They have
weighed the pros and cons and convinced themselves that their so-
called risky idea isn’t that risky after all.
Entrepreneurs accept occasional or even repeated failure as the price
they must pay to succeed eventually. In the words of Mary Kay Ash,
they see themselves as “failing forward to success.”
One of the reasons entrepreneurs can tolerate failure is that they see it
as the source of real learning. When knocked down, successful entre-
preneurs pick themselves up and figure out what they can learn from
the experience.
Money is almost never the primary motivation for a successful entre-
preneur. In fact, most successful entrepreneurs argue that no one can
acquire real wealth by pursuing money exclusively since they will be
unwilling to take the financial risks from which real wealth flows.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
32

The real goal of most successful entrepreneurs is to have fun while ac-
complishing something worthwhile.
True entrepreneurs have a junkyard-dog mentality. They are deter-
mined to make their endeavor a success. They take on any job, no
matter how menial, and work as many hours as necessary to succeed.
Most end up paying a high personal price for their devotion to their
business.
Finally, successful entrepreneurs believe passionately in what they are
doing. The negativism of others only strengthens their resolve. Their
confidence in their ultimate success is further strengthened by their
ignorance—they don’t know that what they are trying to do can’t be
done—and by their optimism: At heart, they believe that things will
just turn out right in the end.
S H O U L D  Y O U  D O  I T ?
33

T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A — T h e  G u r u s
J.Walter (Walt) Anderson, cofounder of White Castle
Mary Kay Ash, founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics
James L. (Jim) Barksdale, cofounder of Netscape Communications
Phineas Taylor (P.T.) Barnum, founder of “The Greatest Show on
Earth”
Jeffrey P. Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon.com
Arthur Blank, cofounder of Home Depot
Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group
Warren Buffett, founder of numerous investment companies and
chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.
Washington Atlee Burpee, founder of Burpee Seed Company
Tom Chappell, cofounder of Tom’s of Maine, Inc.
Ben Cohen, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Finis Conner, founder of Conner Peripherals
Joshua Lionel Cowen, cofounder of Lionel Manufacturing Company
Michael Dell, founder of Dell Computer Corporation
Anthony Desio, founder of Mail Boxes Etc.
Bill Gates, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation
Earl Graves, founder, publisher, and editor of Black Enterprise
Robert Greenberg, founder of LA Gear
Jerry Greenfield, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Wilson Harrell, founder of over one hundred companies, columnist
for Success Magazine, and former publisher of Inc. Magazine
Frank Hickingbotham, founder of TCBY (This Can’t Be Yogurt)
Wayne Huizenga, founder of Waste Management, Inc.
Edgar Waldo (Billy) Ingram, cofounder of White Castle
C. James (Jim) Koch, founder of Boston Beer Company
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s Corporation
Edwin Land, founder of Polaroid Corporation
Bill Lear, founder of Lear Jet Corporation
Bernie Marcus, cofounder of Home Depot
Konosuke Matsushita, founder of Matsushita Electric Industrial
Company
Robert Mondavi, founder of Robert Mondavi Winery
David Packard, cofounder of Hewlett-Packard
Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop
34

Pleasant Rowland, founder of Pleasant Company
Howard Schultz, founder of Starbucks Coffee Company
Fred Smith, founder of Federal Express
Thomas Stemberg, cofounder of Staples, Inc.
R. David (Dave) Thomas, founder of Wendy’s International, Inc.
Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting System, Cable News
Network (CNN), and Turner Network Television (TNT)
Lillian Vernon, founder of Lillian Vernon Corporation
Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
35

The Perfect Idea
W
e call this chapter “The Perfect Idea,” but of course there is no
such thing. Every idea for a new business is flawed in some
way. However, that doesn’t keep entrepreneurs from searching
for the foolproof business proposition. In this chapter, we examine where our
gurus get their ideas for businesses, how they conduct their search, and what
they have learned about the necessary ingredients for the perfect business.
FINDING THE PERFECT IDEA
Let’s start with the basic question: Where do entrepreneurs look for their
ideas? According to our gurus, the answer is simply anywhere and every-
where. Their first piece of advice about finding the perfect idea is to be
open to them all the time. Watch, look, and listen, say our gurus. There are
plenty of ideas around if you are just paying attention. All the best ideas
have not been taken. Our gurus are confident that many remain. After all,
they pick up ideas for new businesses every day, and you can, too, if you
know how. Here are some suggestions.
Constantly Gather Ideas
Lillian Vernon suggest that you “gather ideas as you work, chat with friends,
garden, watch children play, drive, watch television, and, shop.” “It is a good
2
36

investment of your time,” she continues, “to browse through shops, street
fairs, and offbeat little boutiques. Wherever you find yourself and whatever
you are doing, keep your mind open to ideas for products or services that
might satisfy needs. Also watch for ways to improve what is already on the
market.”1 That last one was the source of Vernon’s first idea.
Vernon notes that her emphasis has always been on the words special
and exclusive. It is not surprising, therefore, that her first idea for a product
came to her when she noticed that, although there were plenty of belts and
bags on the market for teenagers to choose from, they weren’t distinctive.
Nothing made them special or exclusive. Vernon decided to offer bags and
belts that would be personalized with the owner’s initials, and it worked.
On the basis of a single ad in the September 1951 issue of Seventeen, Ver-
non launched a mail-order business with orders for over sixty-four hundred
bags and belts in the first four months, a response that she terms no less
than astounding. From the kernel of that simple idea, Vernon has built a
business that in 1998 had revenues of $258 million.
Richard Branson has a similar penchant for shamelessly picking up sug-
gestions and ideas as he goes about his daily business. He even carries
around a black notebook to record his notes on conversations, observations,
and ideas that he thinks he can put to use. Members of the senior staff in
Branson’s various Virgin Companies carry the same black notebooks, and
they put them to similar use. Branson attributes this openness to ideas, re-
gardless of source, as a key to his success.
Today’s booming economy offers particularly good opportunities both in
new and in traditional industries. Exhibit 2.1 contains a list of hot entrepre-
neurial opportunities.
Our gurus preach caution when exploring ideas for businesses. There are
many ideas—some good, some bad, some based in the hard reality of the
marketplace, some just impossible schemes. The gurus warn you not to let
the excitement you feel at hearing about a great new business opportunity
blind you to the truth. Warren Buffett, investor extraordinaire, tells the fol-
lowing story to make this point:
[An] oil prospector . . . met St. Peter at the Pearly Gates.When told his oc-
cupation, St. Peter said,“Oh, I’m really sorry.You seem to meet all the tests
to get into heaven. But we’ve got a terrible problem. See that pen over
there? That’s where we keep the oil prospectors waiting to get into heaven.
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
37

T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
38
EXHIBIT 2.1.
Hot Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Biotechnology
I
Blood screening tests.
I
Genetic engineering.
I
Alternative medicines.
I
Bionic parts and artificial organs.
I
Bioelectronic products.
I
Animal drugs.
I
Inoculated eggs.
I
Implantable animal microchips.
I
Grass that doesn’t need cutting.
Internet
I
Designing Web sites.
I
Internet marketing services.
I
Office supplies.
I
Small-business equipment.
I
Health supplements.
I
Specialty foods.
I
Gaming and add-on products.
I
Travel and leisure products.
I
Video games and multimedia.
I
Books and magazines.
Training and Professional
Development
I
Customized on-site computer training.
I
Computer-training centers.
I
Image consultants and executive coaches.
I
Professional organizers.
I
On-line and multimedia content con-
sultants.
I
Videoconferencing organizers.
I
Programming consultants.
I
Electronic data interchange consultants.
Fitness and Health
I
Healthier foods.
I
Door-to-door wellness services.
I
Low-tech healing specialists versus tradi-
tional doctors for remedies.
I
Holistic healing.
I
Ancient remedies.
I
Spas and cosmetic-surgery centers.
I
Holistic health clubs and fitness services.
I
Exercise machines.
Indulgence Goods
I
Gourmet food in small servings.
I
Ice cream and other sinful desserts.
I
Natural goods and organic produce.
I
Energy-producing products and vitamin
supplements.
I
Specialty coffee, tea, wine shops.
I
Natural water products.
I
Healthy frozen foods.
I
Brew pubs and customized beers.
I
Flowers.
I
Specialty breads, soft pretzels, and bagel
outlets.
I
Exotic meats such as buffalo, elk, venison,
ostrich.
I
Quaint hotels and boutiques with spe-
cialty services.
I
Adult toys (laptops, CD players).
I
Designer baby clothes.
I
Aromatherapy (scented candles, bath oils,
and lotions).
Child Care and Elder Care
I
Child-care centers and camps.
I
Rent-a-grandmother services.
I
Products and services for the homebound.
I
Elder-care consulting services.
I
Day-care centers and activities for the
elderly.
I
Senior travel clubs.
I
Independent-living centers.
I
Assisted-living centers.
(continued)

T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
39
EXHIBIT 2.1.
(continued)
Home Health Services
I
Home health-care providers.
I
Door-to-door medical transportation
services.
I
Homemaking services.
I
Elderly relative services.
Children’s Products and Services
I
Juvenile safety products.
I
Infant and children’s organic food 
products.
I
Children’s fitness centers.
I
Kiddie golf.
I
Nursery design and furniture.
I
Home health care for newborns.
I
Children’s educational software for math,
reading, science, etc.
I
Multimedia computers.
I
CD-ROM encyclopedias.
I
Educational toys, games, and puzzles.
I
Children’s learning centers and camps.
I
Centers for children with learning disabil-
ities.
I
Children’s bookstores.
Ethnic Products
I
Specialty lines of cosmetics.
I
Hair-care products and salons.
I
Ethnic grocery stores and cookbooks.
I
Ethnic food mail-order catalogs.
I
Ethnic cafes, restaurants, and food courts.
I
Vitamins and dietary products.
Home-Office Products and Services
I
Home decorating and furnishings.
I
Home-safety devices.
I
Home-office furniture and technical
equipment.
I
On-site repair services for home offices.
I
Auto safety alarms and sound systems.
I
Personal-safety items while traveling.
I
Home-delivery services for computers,
printers, etc.
Smart Appliances
I
Digital cellular phone, radios, and inter-
active television.
I
Digital-imaging products.
I
Electronic notepads.
I
Multisensory robotics.
I
Smart homes and appliances.
I
Voice-recognition products.
I
Electronic film cameras.
Pet Pampering
I
Pet hotels.
I
Pet grooming and traveling vans.
I
Pet home-care visits.
I
Pet emergency clinics.
I
Old-age homes for pets.
I
Pet television and radio shows.
I
Doggie day care.
I
Doggie bakeries.
I
Cat furniture and clothing stores.
I
Seat belts for pets.
One-of-a-Kind Retail Boutiques
I
Clothing.
I
Jewelry.
I
CD stores.
I
Delicatessens.
I
Bakery cafes.
I
Travel-related outlets.
I
Paint-your-own pottery stores.
I
Customized breweries.
I
Specialty shoe stores.
(continued)

And it’s filled—we haven’t got room for even one more.” The oil prospec-
tor thought for a minute and said,“Would you mind if I just said four words
to those folks?” “I can’t see any harm in that,” said St. Pete. So the old-timer
cupped his hands and yelled out,“Oil discovered in hell!” Immediately, the
oil prospectors wrenched the lock off the door of the pen and out they
flew, flapping their wings as hard as they could for the lower regions.“You
know, that’s a pretty good trick,” St. Pete said.“Move in.The place is yours.
You’ve got plenty of room.” The old fellow scratched his head and said,
“No. If you don’t mind, I think I’ll go along with the rest of ’em.There may
be some truth to that rumor after all.”2
Buffet’s point is that the mass exodus to hell is unfortunately what happens
with too many business investments. “People know better,” writes Buffett,
“but when they hear a rumor—particularly when they hear it from a high
place—they just can’t resist the temptation to go along. It happens on Wall
Street periodically, where you get what are, in effect, manias. Looking back
no one can quite understand how everyone could have gotten so swept up in
the moment. A group of lemmings looks like a pack of individualists com-
pared with Wall Street when it gets a concept in its teeth.”3 The same can be
said for entrepreneurs.
Check Out the Competition
While you are out there doing some cautious looking and listening, suggest
our gurus, be sure that you are spending at least some of your time looking
at and listening to your would-be competition. All good entrepreneurs are
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
40
EXHIBIT 2.1.
(continued)
Source: Adapted from Courtney Price and Kathleen Allen, Tips and Traps for Entrepreneurs (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1998), pp. 12–25.
Personal Shopping and Errand
Services
I
Wardrobe consultants.
I
On-site customer apparel shoppers.
I
Gift services.
I
Corporate pickup and delivery services.
I
Messenger services.
I
Rent-a-butler.
I
Rent-a-chef.
I
Rent-a-driver.
I
Publicity escort services.

snoops. It’s part of the trade. Sam Walton relished the time he could spend
prowling the competition, stealing ideas. He even recalled one experience
when he got caught:
I was in the big Price Club on Marino Avenue in San Diego, and I had my lit-
tle tape recorder with me—like I always do and I was making notes to my-
self about prices and merchandising ideas.This guy, a big guy, comes up to
me and says,“I’m sorry but I’ll have to take your tape recorder and erase
the material you’ve got on it.We have a policy against people using them in
the stores.” Well, we have the same policy, and I knew I was caught. So I
said,“I respect that. But I’ve got things on here from other stores that I
don’t want to lose, so let me write a note to Robert Price”—that’s Sol’s
son. So I wrote:“Robert, your guy is just too good. I was trying to get some
information on this recorder about some of the items you were carrying
and some of my impressions of your store, and he caught me. So here’s the
tape. If you want to listen to it, you certainly have that privilege, but I have
some other material on here I would like very much to have back.” So in
about four days I got a nice note back from Robert, with the tape, and none
of it had been blurred or scratched out. He probably treated me better
than I deserved.4
Entrepreneurs can be very inventive with their snooping. Thomas Stem-
berg recalls employing both his mother-in-law and his wife as amateur
sleuths for his office-supply company, Staples:
I used to shop with my mother-in-law. She had an apartment in Fort Lau-
derdale, and together we put the nearest Office Depot store through its
paces. She’d order paper clips, pens, and paper to be delivered to her apart-
ment, and then call to complain and ask that the stuff be picked up and re-
turned to the store. I really wanted to learn how they did everything: what
their systems were like, what they had in stock, and what they couldn’t do. I
visited stores constantly.
On another occasion, I had my wife, Dola, apply for a job at Office
Depot’s Atlanta delivery-order center. She said she had experience in tele-
marketing and, in a soft, Southern accent, explained that she was anxious to
move back “home.” Staples did not offer delivery service at the time, so I
wanted to investigate how Office Depot’s delivery system worked, how
many people were in the operation, and how it trained employees. Dola
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
41

stopped the application process before the company even offered her a job
interview, but we still got the information.5
Occasionally, writes Stemberg, his snooping and that of his team has
gotten almost silly—more Laurel and Hardy than James Bond. He vividly
recalls one particular two-reeler played out in Florida:
During a visit to Florida, five executives, including Krasnow [Staples’ execu-
tive vice president for sales and marketing], visited Office Depot’s North
Miami Beach store.While scouring the facility for information, Krasnow no-
ticed the employee schedule posted on a bulletin board and quickly made a
mental note of all the pertinent numbers. Fifteen minutes later, the Staples
executives were preparing to leave when they heard a commotion. One of
the Staples executives was racing down an aisle, waving a piece of paper in
his hand and crying,“I got the schedule! I got the schedule!” Behind him, a
half-dozen Office Depot associates were in hot pursuit.“It was the same
report that I saw,” says Krasnow.“We all bolted out of the store and ran to
the parking lot.”6
OUR VIEW
A little stealth can be a lot of fun. Just don’t get caught up in your spy cap-
ers and do something you shouldn’t do. Use some discretion. Don’t do any-
thing illegal. Play fair with the competition. Keep your sense of humor, and
most of all, don’t forget why you are doing it. You’re not just interested in
finding out what your competition is doing wrong. You also need to be
looking at what your competition is doing right.
Stemberg recalls sending a team to Florida in 1987 to check out Office
Depot’s first four stores. The team’s report was highly encouraging for Sta-
ples. In part, it read as follows:
They make very little effort in the areas of customer service.We asked a
number of questions of various employees [to] which we received fair to
poor responses.They appeared indifferent and basically uninformed. In the
area of service to the consumer, it simply came down to our having con-
sultants, management, and employees in general trained and available to as-
sist the customer where Office Depot had a work force designed to
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
42

strickly [sic] deal with product packout and display at all locations. Many
items out of stock, shelves not straightened, and shelf tags that were miss-
ing, out dated, and in wrong locations. . . .We personally felt much better
about our operation and were not impressed by their lack of standards and
personnel. If we were to put a store up against them there’s no doubt we
would be much superior.7
The Staples team was confident that Office Depot would never make it. In
reality, Office Depot not only made it, but by 1995 it had outstripped Sta-
ples to become the largest office-supply retailer in the country. What had
the Staples team missed? Krasnow explained, “In hindsight, what the
ripped boxes and messy stores reflected was that their prices were really,
really good. . . . Customers were snapping up merchandise. Office Depot
had challenges that needed to be overcome, but the basic demand was there.
And it obviously became very, very successful.”8
Michael Dell, founder of Dell Computer Corporation, believes that one
of the biggest mistakes entrepreneurs make is failing to fully understand the
fundamental economics of the industry they are in. By this he means under-
standing where the leaders in the industry really make their money. “Un-
derstanding the profit pool of your industry,” advises Dell, “can open your
eyes to new opportunities.” Dell explains that you should “think of a com-
petitor that has high market share and is very profitable in a specific part of
the market. Then think about how compelling it would be to exploit that
strength as a weakness. Your competitor will most likely not be able to re-
spond to an aggressive attack without significantly reducing its profit.”9
Case in point, in the mid-1990s Dell recognized that the major strength of
some of his competitors (Compaq, IBM, and Hewlett-Packard) was their
position in the market for servers. Although the competitors’ servers were
good, Dell felt they were priced unjustifiably high. Instead of passing sav-
ings along to their customers, Dell’s competitors used their excess profits in
servers to subsidize other parts of their businesses, such as entries into the
markets for notebook and desktop computers. Dell decided he could exploit
his competitors’ strength by introducing a line of Dell servers at much
lower prices. Dell Computer eventually took 20 percent of the market for
servers and drained its competitors’ profit pools, thus making it difficult for
the competitors to compete in the market for notebook and desktop com-
puters. Dell saw a competitor’s strength and exploited it as a weakness.10
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
43

Recognize Opportunities
Of course, the key to gathering ideas from daily contacts or from the com-
petition is to recognize business opportunities when you hear or see them.
Many people would never have seen the profit potential in a competitor’s
strength like Michael Dell did. The knack for spotting business opportuni-
ties that others of us miss is a specialty of entrepreneurs. Successful entre-
preneurs have well-tuned opportunity antennae. Wilson Harrell is a good
example. Here is a story about the way a surefire money-making idea came
to him one day. See if you figure out the exciting business opportunity Har-
rell spotted.
One day I found myself in Baghdad, Iraq, in the office of a man named
Ahmed, who befriended me and let me stay at his house for a few days. He
held a cocktail party, which of course was illegal, since liquor is a no-no in
Moslem countries. I have found that rich people all over the world don’t pay
much attention to religious laws if they interfere with having fun. Sure
enough, I met the son of the prime minister there. He invited me to go on a
wild boar hunt the next day, which sounded like a lot of fun. I had killed a lot
of hogs in my youth on our Georgia farm.The next day at daybreak, I arrived
with my host at a palace in the middle of nowhere with a humongous hang-
over. A guy in a white sheet presented me with a 12-foot spear and a horse.
It gradually sank into my still-inebriated brain that these would be our only
weapons against the boars. Back where I came from, you hunt wild hogs
from a platform in a very high tree with a 30-30 rifle. Nobody in his right
mind ever got any closer to a mad Georgia hog than that.These were wild
boars with tusks about a foot long.With nothing between me and death or
dismemberment but a pointed stick, I mounted my trusty Arabian steed.
Everybody yelled and charged around. I got into the spirit of things, and
somehow a hog ran into my spear.What happened next set off entrepreneu-
rial bells in my head: All the killers were presented with a certificate good
for a bounty of one pound sterling—about $4—from the government.You
see, in Iraq, wild hogs roamed the country rooting up crops—a menace to
farmers. Since Moslems aren’t allowed to eat pork, wild hogs had no natural
enemies, except a bunch of guys on horses with spears, having fun.11
Well, how did you do? Did you spot the opportunity, or are you mystified
as to how Harrell planned to turn wild hogs in Iraq into a money-making
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
44

proposition? We couldn’t see much of a market for wild boar hunting when
we first read this story; then we read on:
I had spotted a deal.There I was in a country with 10 million hogs. I cor-
nered the son of the prime minister and asked him if his daddy would
give me the exclusive rights to commercially rid his nation of wild hogs.
He thought I was crazy. I explained that we could use about 100 jeeps
with mounted machine guns. It wasn’t just the $4 that interested me, but
the hog meat. I reckoned that we could put up a processing plant and
supply the world’s cheapest dog food to American supermarkets. How
could we miss?
By the time the son of the prime minister had stopped laughing and tell-
ing the story, all his friends wanted to invest. I was about to become king of
the dog-food business. Armed with the exclusive franchise to establish a
processing operation in Iraq, along with a lot of investors’ money, I grabbed
a plane to America in search of equipment for processing and canning dog
food. I met with food brokers and supermarket buyers. Everybody was ex-
cited. My price for 100 percent pork was about half the going rate for the
slop they were calling dog food. I was on a roll. Every day was more excit-
ing than yesterday.12
Unfortunately for Harrell, he never became the king of dog food. Before
he could get his venture off the ground, Communists overthrew the Iraqi
government and exiled, killed, or jailed all the capitalists. Harrell lost the
chance to make a fortune, Iraq remained stuck with its wild boars, and pet
lovers in the United States never got to feed their animals gourmet 100 per-
cent wild boar pet food.
Find an Irritant
The genesis of Harrell’s idea was an irritant. The wild boars were a menace
to farmers. The opportunity Harrell spotted was a creative way to remove
the irritant and create value for himself and others—in this case both the
Iraq farmers and U.S. pet lovers. Anita Roddick notes that one of the mis-
takes would-be entrepreneurs make is not trusting their gut instincts
enough, especially when it comes to things that irritate them. (Exhibit 2.2
lists four million-dollar ideas that originated from little irritants.)
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
45

“The fact is,” Roddick writes, “that if something irritates you it is a
pretty good indication that there are other people who feel the same. Irrita-
tion is a great source of energy and creativity. It leads to dissatisfaction and
should prompt you to begin asking yourself the types of questions that can
lead to a good business idea.”13 Roddick explains that her idea for The
Body Shop came from just such an irritant. “It seemed ridiculous to me that
you go into a sweet shop, and ask for an ounce of jelly babies and you can
go into the grocers’ and ask for two ounces of cheese, but when you wanted
to buy a body lotion you had to go into Boots and lay out five quid for a
bloody great bottle of the stuff. Then, if you didn’t like it, you were stuck
with it.”14
Roddick’s observation led her to ask herself a series of questions:
Why couldn’t I buy cosmetics by weight or bulk, like I could if I wanted gro-
ceries or vegetables? Why couldn’t I buy a small size of a cream or lotion,
so I could try it out before buying a big bottle? These were simple enough
questions, but at the time there were no sensible answers, although it did
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
46
EXHIBIT 2.2.
Four Million-Dollar Ideas
S.C.R.U.B.S. is the brainchild of a nurse, Sue Callaway, who was bored with the drab
medical scrubwear she had to wear to work. She turned her own colorful, fashionable
designs into an estimated $23 million company.
Perfect Curve Inc. was created when Gregg Levin noticed that his friends went to a lot of
trouble to make the brims of their baseball caps curve just the right way when they wore
them backwards. Levin developed a little piece of plastic that bends the brims perfectly and
has grossed in excess of $1 million from it.
FUBU (For Us, By Us) is the creation of Queens, New York, friends Daymond John, J.
Alexander Martin, Keith Perrin, and Carl Brown, who found that they could not buy the
urban fashions that they wanted in their neighborhood retail stores. The FUBU line of
clothing is now worth in excess of $200 million.
Direct Root Water Spikes were developed after their inventor, Andrew Rose, attempted
to get a six-foot plant into a sink so he could water its roots—the way his mother had told
him he should water all plants. Rose lost the behemoth plant, but his simple plastic spike that
waters plant roots efficiently has generated more than $1 million in revenues.
Source: Debra Phillips, G. David Doran, Elaine W.Teague, and Laura Tiffany,“Young Millionaires:Thirty
Entrepreneurial Superstars Under 40 Reveal How They Made It to the Million-Dollar Club,” Entrepreneur,
November 1998, pp. 118–126.

not take a brilliant business brain to work out that bigger profits accrued
from selling bigger bottles.15
Roddick had her idea, and The Body Shop was born. Similar experiences
have led our other gurus to their “perfect idea.” For example, Fred Smith
explains that he developed the idea for Federal Express because of his poor
experience in getting spare parts delivered for his first business venture, a
jet-aircraft sales company called Arkansas Aviation that he had started after
his return from Vietnam. “I became infuriated,” writes Smith, “that I could
not receive on any timely and reliable basis air freight shipments from
places around the United States.”16 Federal Express was Smith’s way of re-
moving an irritant to himself and others.
Similarly, Thomas Stemberg says his idea for Staples came at least par-
tially from the frustration he felt late one afternoon when he could find no
office-supply store that stocked the type of ribbon he needed for his
printer.17 And Anthony Desio credits his idea for Mail Boxes Etc. to his im-
patience with the U.S. Postal Service’s long lines, short hours, and limited
services. “I saw that companies like Federal Express and DHL had become
successful by offering alternatives to the post office,” he writes, “and I
thought the same alternatives could work for retail services.”18
ARE YOU CRAZY?
Okay, you have kept your eyes and ears open, checked out the competition,
tuned your opportunity antenna on multiple wild boar hunts, and made a
laundry list of all those day-to-day irritants that make you so mad that
you’re just not going to take them anymore. You’ve come up with what you
think just might be the perfect idea. This, you think, just can’t miss. So, you
start chatting up your idea with your friends, relatives, business associ-
ates—anyone and everyone you can corner. Regardless of how good you
may think your idea is, though, the reaction of almost everyone you talk to
about it is the same. Remember the three little words we mentioned in the
last chapter? That’s right—“Are you crazy?”
As we said before, no matter how good your idea may be, the people you
trust most are going to reject it out of hand. Practically every guru tells the
same story. You will recall that Debbi Fields met with what she called
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
47

“grumpy negativism” from everyone. Our other gurus had similar expe-
riences.
Arthur Blank:
Building Home Depot was a tough, uphill battle from the day we started in
a Los Angeles coffee shop. . . . No one believed we could do it, and very few
people trusted our judgment. Or they trusted our judgment, but just didn’t
think the concept of a home improvement warehouse with the lowest
prices, best selection, and best service was going to work.19
Mary Kay Ash:
When I began Mary Kay, my accountant looked at my proposed commission
structure and said,“There’s no way, Mary Kay.You can’t pay this many cents
out of a dollar and still operate. It just won’t work.” Many well-intentioned
people, including my attorney, assured me it would fail. After all, who ever
heard of a company based on the golden rule? My attorney went so far as to
send to Washington for a pamphlet that showed how many cosmetics com-
panies went broke every year.“Listen,” people said,“you’re dreaming.”20
Robert Mondavi:
Everyone thought I was crazy, of course. As soon as word spread of my
plan to build my own winery—the first new winery in the Napa Valley since
the late 1930s—I began to get skeptical looks and comments. Start a new
winery? Make wine that would stand beside the greatest wines in the
world? Set out to transform the eating and drinking habits of an entire na-
tion? What arrogance! What folly! Bob Mondavi has a screw loose. He’s
spent too much time with his head in his barrels. . . . I could hear the guf-
faws up and down the Napa Valley.21
Every entrepreneur hears the guffaws. You will too. As Thomas Stem-
berg notes: “There is no shortage of forces that conspire to minimize your
dream, to suggest that failure is the probable outcome. Like Darth Vader
luring Luke Skywalker over to ‘the dark side,’ new competitors, expe-
rienced experts, even the status quo conspire against someone who is trying
to do something new.”22 As Mary Kay Ash explains, all of these naysayers
are well-intentioned people. They aren’t out to rain on your parade. They
are trying to save you from making a terrible mistake. They genuinely do
not believe that the idea you are proposing will work. But why?
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
48

Business is full of lawyers and advisers, and you’ve got to remember, what-
ever you’re doing, that these guys are trying to keep you from getting
burned.That’s their job. So if you get a new idea, don’t expect everybody to
say,“Let’s go.” You’re the one who says that.
Ted Turner23
If It’s Really New, There Can’t Be Market for It
Think about what makes a good idea such a jewel in the first place. As Tom
Chappell, cofounder of Tom’s of Maine, explains, “entrepreneurship by
definition is creating something new, discovering markets that no one
thought were there, markets that will not be counted until the entrepreneur
announces they are there.”24 “If you look at the history of most entrepre-
neurial ideas,” notes Fred Smith, “there’s that common denominator that
somebody had a different perspective or slightly different view of some-
thing than the traditional wisdom or the traditional thinking was at the
time.”25 When Frank Hickingbotham proposed selling a creamy, sweet,
dessertlike frozen yogurt and positioning his company, TCBY, as an ice-
cream parlor, most analysts said it couldn’t be done and that his company
would never survive the winter. The conventional wisdom at the time was
that yogurt was a product that could only be sold as a side order in pizza,
barbecue, or sandwich shops or as a health food in a health-food store.26
Suppose you were approached by an enterprising young man in the early
1980s who said he wanted you to invest your hard-earned money to help
him build a chain of coffee bars in the United States patterned after the kind
he had seen in Italy, where fine coffee would be served and, as he put it,
“the social aspect of coffee drinking would be a conduit to conversation.”
Now, suppose also that you were familiar with the coffee trade in the
United States. For example, you knew that coffee was the world’s most
widely traded commodity, after oil; that it was mostly sold in bulk; that the
consumption of coffee by Americans had been declining since the 1960s;
that coffee shops were nothing new, and those that made money did so on
food and not coffee; that specialty coffee drinks, like espresso, were sold
primarily in restaurants as an after-dinner drink. And suppose you knew
that, like you, most Americans gave little thought to their cup of coffee be-
yond choosing between regular and decaf. Would you loan this young man
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
49

the money he wanted, or would you tell him the same thing most people
told Howard Schultz: “Wake up and smell the coffee, son, this is America,
not Italy. Go get a serious job and support your family?”27 Our guess is you
would have thought the kid was nuts.
The best ideas are those that create a new mind-set or sense a need be-
fore others do, and it takes an astute investor to recognize an idea that not
only is ahead of its time but also has long-term prospects.
Howard Schultz28
So, what do you do when you run up against this wall of opposition? Do
you give up and go back to your day job? Not if you’re an entrepreneur. As
Robert Mondavi maintains, “if you want to succeed, you have to listen to
yourself, to your own heart, and you have to have the courage to go your
own way.”29 But of course, you also know enough not to proceed without
giving your idea another look just to see if by chance you missed something.
Our gurus call this necessary step toward the perfect idea “sharpening.”
An invention that is quickly accepted will turn out to be a rather trivial al-
teration of something that has already existed.
Edwin Land30
SHARPENING YOUR IDEA
Throughout their writings, our gurus offer a number of suggestions con-
cerning how you can “reality check” your idea, sharpen it, and make it
better. Although it is unlikely that you will win over all, or even the ma-
jority, of your naysayers by following these suggestions, they should help
you either gain confidence in your idea or redirect your thinking toward a
more workable one. These suggestions are summarized in the form of ques-
tions in Exhibit 2.3. We give a more complete discussion of each suggestion
in the following sections.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
50

Suggestion #1: Make Sure Your Idea Meets a Need
There has to be a need. Mary Kay Ash makes this point beautifully:
Only a small percentage of new businesses do succeed. I think one reason for
that is that people go into a business simply because they want to be in that
business.That’s not a good enough reason. A woman may love decorating her
own home, so she thinks,“Gee, I want to be an interior decorator.” The com-
munity probably already has skilled, well-established decorators. Many
women want to go into the glamour professions, like fashion, without any
real training or experience. It is not wise to start a business unless you have
something new or different or better to offer than is presently being offered.
The best reason to start a new company is that there is a need for what
you have to offer, or that you’re better than what is being offered.When we
began, no cosmetic company was actually teaching skin care. All of them
were just selling rouge or lipstick or new eye colors. No company was
teaching women how to care for their skin. So we came into a market
where there was a real need—and we filled it. Oddly enough, it’s still true
today that women are not knowledgeable about skin care, despite all the
information on television, in magazines, and in newspapers.They buy a
product here, there, and everywhere, but they don’t have a coordinated
program.We fill a void by helping women understand how to take care of
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
51
EXHIBIT 2.3.
Sharpening Your Idea

Question
❏
1. Does your idea meet a genuine need in the marketplace?
❏
2. Has you idea been refined with real input from customers?
❏
3. Is your idea unique, or does it represent a real enhancement to an existing business
model?
❏
4. Does your idea focus on a specific market niche?
❏
5. Can the success of you idea be improved by linking it to another business venture?
❏
6. Is there a way to minimize your downside risk through creative financing and/or a
joint venture?
❏
7. Are you being realistic?  Are you prepared to admit that the idea isn’t workable if
the facts tend to bear that out?

their skin. So, if you want to start a successful business, you must offer
something different or something better than what is available.31
You first have to meet a need.
Every man’s occupation should be beneficial to his fellow-man as well as
profitable to himself. All else is vanity and folly.
P.T. Barnum32
David Packard, cofounder of Hewlett-Packard (HP), argues that, for an
idea to be worth pursuing, it must be both practical (workable) and useful.
It must not only fill a need, it must do so economically and efficiently. He
recalls that, in the early days of HP, he and Bill Hewlett had a built-in
method of determining if an idea met the needs test. “When HP was making
primarily test and measuring instruments for engineers, we had a built-in
method for helping us determine what customers might need in the way of
innovative new instruments. We called it the “next bench” syndrome. If the
idea for a new instrument appealed to the HP engineer working at the next
bench, it would very likely appeal to our customers as well.”33
As HP’s business and product line expanded, HP expanded its listening
to include nonengineering customers. That’s the second suggestion.
Suggestion #2: Let Your Customers Be Your Guide
We will say more about listening to customers in Chapters 4 and 5. For
now, we will only note that our gurus believe the key to listening to cus-
tomers involves the following:
I
Getting out into the marketplace.
I
Talking to customers.
I
Observing them.
I
Showing them your product.
I
Explaining your service.
I
Asking them what they think.
In the early years at Home Depot, cofounders Bernie Marcus and Arthur
Blank donned orange aprons and worked in their stores waiting on custom-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
52

ers and listening to complaints. Marcus explains that the personal expe-
riences he and Blank had in the stores was a key to their success. “We found
out by talking to customers what we were doing right, and what we needed
to do to make the company better, and the things we were doing wrong.”34
My grandmother always said that God gave you two ears and one mouth
for a reason.
Finis Conner35
Entrepreneurs who listen to customers—and we mean really listen—
often find themselves changing their idea for a business, sometimes in very
dramatic ways. Robert Greenberg, founder of LA Gear, originally opened a
retail store on Melrose Avenue in Los Angeles to sell his own line of ap-
parel, jeans, and footwear. Greenberg said that he wasn’t sure at the start
which part of the business would catch on, but he hoped that at least one
would. When he observed that customers were buying a lot more shoes than
they were apparel and jeans, he sold off the apparel business and announced
that from then on he was in the shoe business.36
Other successful entrepreneurs have listened to their customers and
found themselves totally rethinking their ideas. For example, Joshua Lionel
Cowen originally marketed his Lionel train as a store window novelty
meant to be used to display merchandise and attract customers. It was only
when the customers began insisting on buying the trains themselves that
Cowen got the idea to market his device, not as a store display, but as a
toy.37 Washington Atlee Burpee, founder of Burpee Seed, had a similar ex-
perience. He set out originally to sell purebred livestock and fowl by mail
order. As an additional service, he began including several varieties of
seeds to provide purchasers of his livestock and fowl with the proper feed
for their animals. It wasn’t until he noticed that his seeds were outselling his
animals that Burpee came to the conclusion that he was in the seed busi-
ness, not the animal business.38
Companies that are successful today—and, perhaps more importantly, com-
panies that will be successful tomorrow—are those that can get closest to
their customers’ needs.
Michael Dell39
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
53

Suggestion #3: Be Unique, or At Least Be Better
Let’s say your idea passes the needs test and you have checked it out
with your potential customer and found them responsive. The next ques-
tion to ask yourself, say our gurus, is, Is your idea unique? Imitation may
be the sincerest form of flattery, but in the entrepreneurial business, it is
more often a ticket to failure than to success. “Make sure you are offer-
ing something different from the rest,” advises Lillian Vernon. “Is your
product unique or sufficiently unusual to fill a neglected niche in the
market?”40
You may be saying, “Wait a minute. I know successful businesses that
are really no more than clones of other successful businesses.” You’re right.
Cloning is a great entrepreneurial pastime. How many fast-food hamburger
chains owe their inspiration to Billy Ingram and Walt Anderson and their
famous White Castle system? McDonald’s, for one. Earlier in this chapter
we discussed Staples and one of its clones, Office Depot. So, what gives?
The difference, according to our gurus, is that there are clones and then
there are clones plus. The successful clones add better execution or a
unique twist to set themselves apart, if only temporarily. Office Depot, you
will recall, was beating Staples on price, and to gain an edge, McDonald’s
invented a number of enhancements to the White Castle fast-food system.
For example, McDonald’s was the first to premake hamburgers and keep
them warm under infrared lamps, thus making the quick service White Cas-
tle was known for even speedier.41 Lesson: You can clone and succeed if
you clone and enhance.
What Makes the Pleasant Company Successful
We are not the first doll company.There have always been dolls out there
for girls.We are not the first publishing company that publishes for children
or girls.There are lots of children’s book publishers.We’re not the first
people to publish historical fiction for girls.There is lots of historical fiction
out there.We are not the only catalog company that sells children’s prod-
ucts.We are unique for one thing.We have targeted little girls as intelligent,
important people, and we talk to them that way. And their parents appreci-
ate that. And that’s what matters here. And that’s why we’re successful.
Pleasant Rowland42
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
54

Suggestion #4: Focus on a Single Market or Type of Product
or Service
You will increase your chance of success, say our gurus, if you find a mar-
ket niche and keep to it. Lillian Vernon quotes Peter Drucker, the famous
management consultant: “Concentration is the key to economic results.”
“That’s advice every entrepreneur should heed,” writes Vernon. “Concen-
trate on the products you know how to sell and on the market with which
you are familiar. Stay in the business you know.”43 The risk of straying
from your niche, warns Jim Barksdale, cofounder of Netscape, is that your
resources will be spread too thin and you will become distracted from your
main goal. P.T. Barnum put his advice this way: “Engage in one kind of
business only, and stick to it faithfully until you succeed, or until you con-
clude to abandon it. A constant hammering on one nail will generally drive
it home at last, so that it can be clinched.”44
Suggestion #5: Leverage Your New Idea by Linking It to Your
Other Business Ventures
One way to increase the odds of success for your new business venture,
argue our gurus, is to link it to other businesses you own. In short, you use
one established business to help another get on its feet. This assumes, of
course, that like most entrepreneurs you will start a number of different
businesses in your lifetime. Richard Branson and Ted Turner are masters at
pulling off such leverage. Here is how Branson explains the symbiotic rela-
tionships between the jigsaw of companies he has founded under the Virgin
Group umbrella. Notice that Branson appears to violate the “stay focused”
rule by branching into seemingly unrelated businesses.
My vision for Virgin was ultimately summed up by [the musician] Peter Ga-
briel, who once said to me on a ski lift:“It’s outrageous! Virgin is becoming
everything.You wake up in the morning to Virgin Radio; you put on your
Virgin jeans; you go to the Virgin Megastore; you drink Virgin Cola; you fly
to America on Virgin Atlantic. Soon you’ll be offering Virgin births,Virgin
marriages,Virgin funerals. I think you should rename Virgin the ‘In and Out
Company.’ Virgin will be there at the beginning and there at the end.”
As ever, Peter, an astute businessman as well as a gifted musician, was
close to the truth. He had no idea at the time that we had two hundred
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
55

people down in Eastbourne working on a range of Virgin cosmetics,
another designing a range of Virgin clothes, or that we were just about to
bid for two British Rail franchises, which would make us the largest train
operator in Britain. I doubt that we’ll ever go into Virgin Funerals, but Virgin
Births has certain ring to it. If there’s a good business plan that offers good
value, limited downside, good people, a good product, we’ll go for it. . . .
This partly explains the jigsaw of companies we have. As well as protect-
ing each other, they have symbiotic relationships.When Virgin Atlantic opens
a flight to South Africa, I find that we can launch Virgin Radio and Virgin Cola
there.We can use our experience in the airline industry to make buying train
tickets easier and cheaper.We can draw on our experience of entertaining
people on planes to entertain people on trains; we can use enormous stock
of entertainment at the Virgin Megastores to make trips to Virgin Cinemas
more fun.We can use the cinemas to have people sample our Virgin Cola. A
trip to the cinema used to involve queuing up in the rain to buy your ticket
from a man behind thick plate glass, watching the movie with one cup of pop-
corn, and then blundering out through a fire escape into some back street
piled high with litter. Not anymore it doesn’t—and that’s because we have
put all the Virgin experience together across retailing, entertainment, food,
music, and travel to make it an easy-to-organize and enjoyable night.45
Ted Turner describes how he linked his billboard company and his radio
stations to their mutual benefit this way:
One reason I wanted the [radio] station in Chattanooga so much was that I
also owned the billboards there. See, I could take my vacant signs and pro-
mote my radio station. One of the things that was wrong with the billboard
business was that although we had a 25 percent profit, we would also have
25 percent of our signs not being used. It seemed like an awful waste to
have any unsold signs, because you have to do the upkeep on them anyway.
It’s not like a newspaper, where if you don’t get ads you can cut the number
of pages. So I would put up my own radio ads on the open billboards, and
use them that way. It doesn’t sound too brilliant, but it worked.46
Suggestion #6: Limit the Downside Risk
One of the reasons Branson likes his symbiotic relationships and Ted
Turner seeks synergy is that they both are seeking to reduce the risk of a
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
56

new venture. Here are three more ways Branson advises in order to reduce
the downside:
1. Arrange financing in such a way that any borrowing or liabilities
are without resource to your other funds. Branson cites the financing of
Virgin Airlines as a good example. “There, we [had] the banks lending on
the basis of the airline’s performance and the value of the aircraft them-
selves. The Group’s [parent company] only obligation to the banks [was] to
provide leadership and management to the team at the airline.”47
2. Develop the business as a joint venture with someone else. Branson
developed Music Box, a pan-European television venture based on the
MTV network in the United States, as a joint venture with Thorn EMI and
Yorkshire Television.
3. Have a way out. Again Branson cites his airline as a good example.
“We went into the airline business on the basis that we could get out after a
year or two or so, (using the ‘walk away’ rule) we said to Boeing that we
were not going ahead unless they gave a commitment to buy back the 747
during the first three years of its life at a fixed price. They agreed, so we
were able to embark on the airline business, knowing that the downside was
very limited.”48
Suggestion #7: Suspend Disbelief, but Not Forever
The main reason to limit the downside is to make it easy for you to get out
of an investment should your perfect idea turn out to be not so perfect after
all. One of the tricky things about being an entrepreneur, say our gurus, is
that you have to have a stubborn belief in your idea to succeed. You have
to be willing to stand up to the naysayers and often go against the prevail-
ing opinion. You have to insist that you are right when almost everyone
else thinks you are not only wrong, but you’re crazy. As Bill Gates puts it,
to a certain extent, you have to suspend disbelief and say, “Hey, we’re
going to go for this new business,” regardless of what anyone else thinks.49
On the other hand, warn our gurus, your stubbornness can be a death trap.
You can become so psychologically committed to the idea that you stay
with it long past the time when you should have let it go. According to our
gurus, the real key to sharpening your idea and reducing risk in a new in-
vestment is to be prepared to walk away from the idea if you have sharpened
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
57

it all you can and it still seems dull. “If an idea is a clunker,” advises Bran-
son, “admit it. There’s no glory in prolonging a failure. . . . Don’t let ego get
in the way.”50
Deals are like London buses—there is always one coming. And it is surpris-
ing how often the next deal is better than the one you have, with great re-
luctance, had to give up.
Richard Branson51
SIX NEAR-PERFECT FOUNDATIONS 
FOR A SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS
We said at the beginning of this chapter that there was no perfect business
idea, and there isn’t. You can do all sorts of sleuthing to find irritants or
competitor weaknesses. You can follow all of our gurus’ suggestions for
putting a razor-sharp edge on your proposal. And you may still have to
admit that what you first thought was perfect just isn’t. No one can give you
a surefire plan for finding the idea that makes you the next Bill Gates.
However, our gurus do offer a variety of suggestions for what you should
be looking for as you sort through the various business ideas that come to
your attention. Exhibit 2.4 summarizes what we call “near-perfect” founda-
tions for businesses. The sections that follow provide a more complete dis-
cussion of each foundation. Although they can’t guarantee your success,
our gurus say they sure don’t hurt.
Foundation #1: Have a Proprietary Idea or Technology
Having a proprietary idea or technology may be the best foundation of all,
but it is also the hardest to find. You have such an idea or technology if you
have something like Apple’s Macintosh operating system. Obviously, your
exclusive idea or technology, particularly if you own the patent, gives you
an advantage. “It’s less risky,” explains Howard Schultz, “if you can erect
some barrier to entry, to prevent a dozen competitors from popping up and
grabbing your market away from you before you can establish yourself.”52
Where are you most likely to find a proprietary idea or technology today?
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
58

Schultz suggests you look in the fields of biotechnology, software, or tele-
communications. Notice that he does not mention coffee bars.
Foundation #2: Execute Better
Jim Koch, cofounder of the Boston Beer Company, which makes Samuel
Adams beer, is fond of telling about his meeting with a group of Harvard
Business School students. Koch had been asked to appear before the stu-
dents and give a presentation about his experiences as an entrepreneur. In
the course of the presentation, Koch asked the future MBAs what they felt
he should have focused on when starting his company. The students offered
typical business school responses:
“Do good market research.”
“Hire an ad agency.”
“Find a good PR firm.”
One student suggested that none of his fellow students had it right. The
most important thing for Koch to do, advised this future business leader,
was to “locate the hot buttons on the quality vector.” Koch recalled that he
could only respond with, “What the hell is that supposed to mean?” Koch
says that he was amazed that in all of the suggestions no student men-
tioned the one thing he thought was both obvious and critical—brew a
better beer.53
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
59
EXHIBIT 2.4.
Six Near-Perfect Foundations for a Successful Business
1. A proprietary idea or technology.
2. Significantly better execution and/or commitment to perfection.
3. Being first to market, skating ahead of the competition.
4. Playing the underdog—using agility to fight an established, larger competitor while simul-
taneously avoiding head-to-head combat.
5. Turning a presumed disadvantage into an advantage.
6. Serving others—being values led.

When asked to what he attributed the success of McDonald’s, Ray Kroc re-
sponded simply;“We take the hamburger business more seriously than
anyone else.” He added:“The French fry has become almost sacrosanct for
me. . . . Its preparation is a ritual to be followed religiously.”
Ray Kroc54
If you don’t have a proprietary idea or technology—or even if you do—
our gurus argue that you can win if you just execute better. In fact, Michael
Dell says that, while some businesses are founded on one silver-bullet
idea—one product or patent that is guarded 24 hours a day—that’s not
where growth in tomorrow’s economy will come from. Real growth, argues
Dell, will come from companies that execute better than their competition:
The key is not so much one great idea or patent as it is the execution and
implementation of a great strategy.
Look at Disney or Wal-Mart or Coke.You can understand their
strategy—it’s really not that complicated. But it’s genius! It’s completely
comprehensible, yet few companies can really replicate their success.
Why? It’s all about knowledge and execution. . . .
Besides Dell, there are countless successful companies that are thriving
now despite the fact that they started with little more than passion and a
good idea.There are also many that failed, for the very same reason.The
difference is that the thriving companies gathered the knowledge that gave
them a substantial edge over their competition, which they then used to
improve their execution, whatever their product or service.Those that
didn’t simply didn’t make it.55
Moreover, execution isn’t just about getting the big things right. You have
to pay attention to the little things as well. Dell says he learned that from
weekly customer advocate meetings that Dell Computer held in its early days.
In these meetings, salespeople served as “advocates” for their customers
who had issues with Dell by sharing the issues with a larger group of em-
ployees from many different functions within the company. Actions were
assigned on the spot to correct any processes that might be affecting cus-
tomer satisfaction.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
60

If you attended this meeting regularly, you soon noticed a pattern: Al-
most all the complaints were about what the industry deems “little things,”
like whether the power cord was in the box, whether the box was de-
signed for easy access, or whether it was delivered when we said it would
be.We began to realize that customers were less focused on what the in-
dustry calls “big things”—such as product features or hot technology—
probably because those needs had been largely satisfied.We were fasci-
nated to learn how the “little things” became “big things” to the people
who really mattered.56
Ideas are easy. It’s execution that’s hard.
Jeff Bezos57
The key to execution, declares Dell, is expectation. You have to set tough
goals for yourself and your people. “In coming up with strategies to beat
your competition, consider your core strengths,” writes Dell, “and then dial
it up a few notches.”58
If you can’t do something first class, don’t do it at all.
Ted Turner59
Robert Mondavi states that, when he created Robert Mondavi Winery, he
set forth one guiding ethic—the pursuit of excellence regardless of the cost,
work, or personal sacrifice. “I was going to work like a fanatic, and I’d
probably drive everyone around me like a fanatic.”60 But, reasoned Mon-
davi, wasn’t that what it would take to be the best? He recalls thinking of
the way great artists approached their work:
Great artists are always fanatics.The painting or the poem or the symphony
is not finished until every brushstroke, every syllable, every note, is finally
perfect. And in perfect harmony with the rest of the creation. If we wanted
to enter the ranks of The Best, if we wanted our wines to stand beside the
great wines of Bordeaux and Burgundy, we had to hold ourselves to just as
rigorous a standard. If we wanted to enter the kingdom of high art, I knew
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
61

we had to go beyond the pursuit of excellence and cultivate a passion for
perfection.
Nothing less would do.61
I really don’t think that we do anything different. I don’t think we’re unique,
we’re certainly not smarter than the next guy. So the only thing that I can
think of that we might do a little differently than some people is we work
harder and when we focus in on something we are consumed by it. It be-
comes a passion.
Wayne Huizenga62
If you intend to build your business on a foundation of excellence, your
goal, advises Howard Schultz, should not be to just give your customers
what they ask for. You should be trying to offer them much more. Don’t just
get the big things right. Get the little things right also. Strive for the perfec-
tion of the great artists. Then offer your customers even more—excellence
that is way beyond what they have known before. “If you offer something
[your customers] are not accustomed to, something so far superior that it
takes a while to develop their palates,” argues Schultz, “you can create a
sense of discovery and excitement and loyalty that will bond them to you.”63
A Fable about the Value of Excellence in Execution
IN EARLY 1994 two men, an American and a Briton, independently had
the same inspired thought about the Internet. At a time when many retailers
were setting up on-line malls for existing stores, these two men realised that
the Internet could do something traditional retailing could not.Without the
constraints of shelf space and physical locations, on-line stores could be infi-
nitely big, dwarfing their physical-world competition. Both turned towards
bookselling as the area to prove this because of their wives—the American’s
wife was an aspiring novelist, the Briton’s works in publishing.
In a few months, the two men, who were in their early 30s, had both set
up what they each claimed was the world’s biggest on-line bookstore, one
based in Oxford, the other Seattle. Both listed around 1m [one million]
books, both were equally accessible from anywhere in the world, and both
offered similar services for customers, such as e-mail notification when a
new book by a favourite author had arrived. . . .
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
62

In May [1997], Jeff Bezos, the American, took his bookstore,
Amazon.com, public at a valuation of nearly $500 m[illion]. Mr. Bezos him-
self is now worth nearly $500 m[illion].Two months earlier, Darryl Mat-
tocks, the Briton, had listed his bookstore, the Internet Bookshop, on Brit-
ain’s Ofex, a small pseudo-market that matches traders’ orders. It is now
worth about $10 m[illion], and his stake is worth about $3 m[illion]. . . .
Whilst $3 m[illion] is hardly something to be sneezed at—and the amiable
Mr. Mattocks seems anything but an unhappy soul why has the Briton fared
less well? The chief reason is that Amazon is the better bookshop.64
Foundation #3: Be First—Skate Ahead of the Competition
Wayne Gretzky, the great hockey star, once said that his success came not
from his ability to skate where the puck was but rather from his ability to
skate where the puck was going to be. If you can do that with your business
idea, say our gurus, then you have a strong foundation for your business.
How do you anticipate where the business puck is going to be? Michael
Dell suggests that you think about “changes in customers’ buying behavior,
in technology, in the existing competition, in potential competition, and the
most fundamental change of all, in what your business is doing [or your
competitors are doing] that could be done in a different way.”65
Foundation #4: Be the Underdog
At first blush, playing the underdog doesn’t sound like a very good strategy.
Intentionally going after the Goliath of your industry seems more like a rec-
ipe for disaster. And yet Federal Express did it (versus UPS and Airborne),
Netscape did it (against Microsoft), Ted Turner did it (against the networks),
and Richard Branson did it (against British Airways and Coca Cola, among
others.) The advantage of going after a big established player like Coca
Cola, for example, Branson explains, is that they often have gotten fat and
have very vulnerable skin.66 You can actually exploit both their weaknesses
and their strengths. Jim Barksdale says he learned while he was at Federal
Express that there were certain advantages to being a small company com-
peting against bigger, more established, longer-term companies. He discov-
ered, for example, that “the larger company typically has more difficulty in
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
63

moving rapidly. Their people are not as fresh and ready to do battle. [And]
they tend to have many irons in the fire that they have to worry about.”67
There are two secrets to competing against the Goliaths, say our gurus.
First, take advantage of your small size to be agile and nimble. “Lightning
strokes, sneak attacks, hit them before they know what’s happening, don’t
give them a chance to regroup,” says Ted Turner. “That’s the only way it
will work, that’s the only way a little guy can beat a big guy. No holds
barred. Don’t stop just because you’re little and you’re afraid and it looks
like you haven’t got a chance. The rabbit can get away from the fox, but he
better get on his hind legs and hop.”68
Second, say our gurus, avoid head-to-head combat. Your strategy should
be to fight the entrenched big companies on your ground, not theirs. As Jim
Barksdale puts it, the lesson to be learned is that, “in the fight between the
bear and the alligator, the outcome is determined by the terrain.”69 For ex-
ample, if you are a small-town retailer up against a giant Wal-Mart, you cer-
tainly aren’t going to be able to compete head-on against America’s
number-one retailer. Your best bet, say our gurus, is to change the terrain.
How do you do that? Here is a lesson on competing against a big company
like Wal-Mart from a real expert—Sam Walton himself.
Unless small merchants are already doing a great job, they’ll probably have
to rethink their merchandising and advertising and promotional programs
once a discounter arrives on the scene.They need to avoid coming at us
head-on, and do their own thing better than we do ours. It doesn’t make
any sense to try to underprice Wal-Mart on something like toothpaste.
That’s not what the customer is looking to a small store for anyway. Most
independents are best off, I think, doing what I prided myself on doing for
so many years as a storekeeper: getting out on the floor and meeting every
one of the customers. Let them know how much you appreciate them, and
ring that cash register yourself.That little personal touch is so important
for an independent merchant because no matter how hard Wal-Mart tries
to duplicate it—and we try awfully hard—we can’t really do it.
I think in the case of variety stores, they have to completely reposition
themselves, something like the way Don Soderquist did when he was presi-
dent of Ben Franklin. He saw that there just wasn’t any future in competing
with Wal-Mart and Kmart so he started converting a lot of their variety
stores into craft stores.They offered a much bigger assortment of craft
merchandise than any Wal-Mart could, and they held classes in things like
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
64

pottery and flower arranging, services we could never think about provid-
ing. It worked.They stayed in business in the small towns and have been
quite successful with many of those stores.The same thing can be done
with fabrics: offer higher quality material and throw in some sewing classes.
Or ladies’ apparel. I don’t care how many Wal-Marts come to town, there
are always niches that we can’t reach.70
Foundation #5: Turn a Disadvantage into Profits
A variation on the theme of avoiding head-to-head combat that our gurus
suggest is taking a disadvantage and turning it into an advantage. Michael
Dell explains how Dell Computer used such a tactic in the mid-1980s:
Back in the 1980s, when PC sales really began taking off, getting your com-
puter serviced was about as enticing—and involved—as having a root
canal. If you bought the machine at a computer dealer, you had to put it
into the car and drive it over to the service center, where you would wait
in line to drop it off and come back days, maybe weeks later.
And then there was no guarantee it could—or would—actually be fixed.
When I first founded Dell, prospective customers initially had a hard
time imagining buying a computer over the phone because they assumed
that servicing it would be impossible.Without a store to drive it to, they
figured they’d have to box it up, mail it in, and then wait even longer to get
it back.Then of course there was the fear that, because a computer was an
expensive proposition to begin with, sending it in the mail would pose an
even greater opportunity for damage (not to mention the shipping cost).
Competitors also assumed that because Dell sold direct to customers,
we would not be able to create an advantage in service.With the added
“benefit” of resellers and physical stores, they assumed they would always
have an advantage in service, however bad theirs might be.
They were clearly wrong.
From the very beginning, we saw a huge opportunity to provide extraor-
dinary service where our competitors saw none—and designated it one of
the company’s early objectives. In 1986, we offered the very first program
in our industry for on-site service—a kind of “house call” service for sick
computers. If your computer had a problem, you didn’t have to go any-
where; we came to you—to your business, house, or hotel room. And we
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
65

would come by the very next business day or on the same day. [Later Dell
offered four-hour and even two-hour on-site service.]
Suddenly, our competitors’ service centers looked a little old-
fashioned—and really slow. Even today, if you take your computer to be
serviced at a retail service center, the repair time can be as much as two
weeks, a far cry from the next business day. And there’s still no guarantee
that it will be fixed.What the competition initially assumed would be a dis-
advantage for us turned out to be a massive advantage.71
Foundation #6: Be Values Led
The final foundation for a business—being values led—may sound a little
strange, but it is strongly advocated by a select group of our gurus, includ-
ing Mary Kay Ash, Tom Chappell, Ben Cohen, Konosuke Matsushita
(founder of Matsushita Electric Industrial Company), Anita Roddick, and
Jay Van Andel. Each of these gurus expresses the concept differently, but
essentially it is this: Service to others is the best and strongest foundation
for any business.
Possessing material comforts in no way guarantees happiness. Only spiritual
wealth can bring true happiness. If that is correct, should business be con-
cerned only with the material aspect of life and leave the care of the human
spirit to religion or ethics? I do not think so. Businessmen too should be
able to share in creating a society that is spiritually rich and materially af-
fluent.
Konosuke Matsushita72
Mary Kay Ash states that service to others is the most important justifi-
cation for being in business and that “every new business must be built
upon this premise, since wanting to make money or desiring to ‘dabble’ in
a favorite pastime are not enough to sustain such a venture.”73 She cites the
Bible passage Matthew 25:14 –30, the parable of the talents, which teaches
that you should use and increase whatever God has given to you, and that
when you do, the good you do will come back to you. Ash says that in her
case she wanted to help women: “I wanted to provide opportunities for
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
66

them to create better lives. I saw Mary Kay Cosmetics as a vehicle for
women to realize their dreams. Our organization would supply the quality
products, education, encouragement, and motivation women need to suc-
ceed.”74 “Then and now,” adds Ash, “everything anyone in our sales orga-
nization does to succeed is based upon helping others. As beauty consult-
ants we must help customers; and as sales directors we must help our
people to succeed. The company structure requires each person to help
others in order to climb the ladder of success. The individual who thinks
only ‘What’s in it for me?’ will never make it in our company. We truly be-
lieve that if you help enough other people get what they want you will get
what you want! The people who are the most successful in our company are
those who have helped the most people grow.”75
Ash admits that some people may find such altruism strange and in con-
flict with the profit motive, but, she argues, in reality there is no conflict at
all. “Actually,” she writes, “the two are harmonious, because when your
employees do well, they become content, enthusiastic, and loyal, resulting
in a healthy bottom line.”76
One of the greatest responsibilities of an entrepreneur is to imprint his or
her values on the organization.
Howard Schultz77
Ben Cohen says the experiences of a wide range of companies—Pata-
gonia, Inc. (clothing), Odwalla, Inc. (juice), Tom’s of Maine, Inc. (personal-
care products), The Body Shop International PLC (body-care products), Blue
Fish Clothing, Frontier Cooperative Herbs, Working Assets Funding Service
(credit cards and long-distance phone service), Rhino Entertainment (music),
Tommy Boy (music), Whole Foods Market, Just Desserts, Stonyfield Farm
Yogurt, Aveda Corporation (personal-care products), and many more—prove
his contention that serving others, or as he terms it, “being values led,” is
good for business.78 Cohen cites the following results of a 1994 Cone Com-
munications and Roper Research survey to back up his contention.
I Seventy-eight percent of adults said they were more likely to buy a
product associated with a cause they care about.
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
67

I Sixty-six percent of adults said they’d be likely to switch brands to
support a cause they care about.
I Fifty-four percent of adults said they’d pay more for a product that
supports a cause they care about.
I After price and quality, 33 percent of Americans consider a com-
pany’s responsible business practices the most important factor in de-
ciding whether to buy a brand.79
Still not convinced? Well, say our gurus, there is one other thing to think
about. Maybe, just maybe, it is immoral not to take your values, service to
others, and so on in consideration as you are laying the foundation for your
business. That’s what Anita Roddick thinks. In her 1991 book Body and
Soul, Roddick explains her beliefs this way:
I believe this to be immoral. It is immoral to trade on fear. It is immoral
constantly to make women feel dissatisfied with their bodies. It is immoral
to deceive a customer by making miracle claims for a product. It is immoral
to use a photograph of a glowing sixteen-year-old to sell a cream aimed at
preventing wrinkles in a forty-year-old.
It is immoral, but it slots perfectly well into the context of a general
business environment in which greed has become respectable and worth is
measured by what you accumulate rather than what you contribute; into an
environment of insider trading and backhanders; into an environment in
which bosses award themselves exorbitant pay rises while they are sacking
hundreds of their employees. . . .
I am mystified by the fact that the business world is apparently proud to
be seen as hard and uncaring and detached from human values.Why is al-
truism in business seen as alien to the point where anyone claiming to be
motivated by it is considered suspect? I personally don’t know how the hell
anybody can survive running a successful business . . . without caring. I don’t
know how they keep their role within the community. I don’t know how
they keep their soul intact.80
OUR VIEW
We don’t either. If you agree and want to put a little soul into your business
proposal, take a look at Tom Chappell’s suggestions for incorporating your
values into your business strategy, as summarized in Exhibit 2.5.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
68

T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
69
EXHIBIT 2.5.
Tom Chappell’s Key Steps for Incorporating Your Values
into Corporate Strategy
STEP
ACTIVITY
DESCRIPTION
1.
Identify your personal 
The simplest way to articulate your values, says 
and professional values.
Chappell, is to write out your “I believe” statements.
For example:
I
“I believe that profit is essential to a healthy
business.”
I
“I believe that people are worthy of respect.” 
I
“I believe our business should benefit this com-
munity.”
2.
Ask yourself the big 
Chappell advises you to raise the questions that will 
questions.
provoke answers about beliefs and values and force
them to the surface. You shouldn’t be afraid to be
too general or philosophical. He explains,“You are
questioning the nature of your business, its essence,
and that, after all, is what philosophy is all about.”
Chappell suggests you ask yourself questions such
as the following:
I
Is business only quantitative—about the numbers?
I
Is it qualitative—about values?
I
Is it about both?
I
Do I want my business plans to include what I
value?
I
Should there be some coherence between what
I value in business and what I value in my life
outside the office?
3.
Read material that raises 
Chappell suggests the following as a good starting 
ethical issues.
point for your reading list:
I
Leadership and the Quest for Integrity, by Joseph L.
Badaracco Jr. and Richard R. Ellsworth
I
Corporate Ethics and Strategic Planning, by R. Ed-
ward Freeman and Daniel R. Gilbert Jr.
I
“On Enlightenment,” in Immanuel Kant’s On 
History
I
I and Thou, by Martin Buber
I
Essay on the Mind, by Jonathan Edwards
I
I Corinthians, in the New Testament
(continued)

THE BUSINESS PLAN
If you have followed our gurus’ suggestions in this chapter, by now you
have gathered ideas for a business, checked out your potential competition,
sharpened your idea, and picked a foundation that you think will serve your
company well as it grows. You may have even clarified some of your per-
sonal values and decided how you would incorporate them into your busi-
ness. You are now ready to write your business plan.
Exhibit 2.6 presents a brief summary of a standard business plan as de-
scribed by Earl Graves. Graves suggests that you keep your plan to a length
of about twenty-five to fifty pages. It should contain four major sections: the
executive summary, market analysis, management summary, and financial
analysis. Also see Exhibit 2.7 for a list of books, software, and Web sites
that offer advice on preparing a business plan.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
70
EXHIBIT 2.5.
(continued)
STEP
ACTIVITY
DESCRIPTION
4.
Answer the following 
Chappell advises you to write down your answers 
questions:
to these questions, edit them, and invite comments 
I
Who are we?
from others.
I
What are we about?
5.
Implement your beliefs.
Remember, says Chappell, nothing is written in
stone. Your first attempt may not work. If it
doesn’t, try again.
Source: Adapted from Tom Chappell, The Soul of a Business (New York: Bantam Trade Paperbook, 1994),
pp. 35–37.

T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
71
EXHIBIT 2.6.
The Standard Business Plan
SECTION
DESCRIPTION
Executive summary
This is a two- to three-page overview intended to convince
readers to read your plan in its entity. Graves explains that it
is important for you to convey your passion for the project
in this summary. Briefly describe your product, market,
customers, and suppliers. Explain what makes your company
unique, how much start-up capital you feel you require, and
what you expect the returns on investment to be over what
time period.
Market analysis
Who are your customers? Why will they be attracted to your
business? What are the industry trends? Who are your
existing and potential competitors? What are your strengths
and weaknesses compared to them?
Graves suggests that you consult The Encyclopedia of
Associations for trade associations for your industry.You should
contact them for information you will need to complete this
section of your plan.Other potential resources include the
World Wide Web,Thomas Register of Manufacturers, and the
Rand McNally Commercial Atlas and Commercial Guide.
Management summary
Who will run the company? Include biographies of yourself
and any other managers. Investors want to know about
relevant skills you and your other managers bring to the
business, your prior experience, and any degrees or training
you might have that will be of benefit to the company. Explain
what role each manager will play in the business. Graves
suggests that you include an organization chart if you have
more than five managers.
Financial analysis
This section should provide your financial projections over
the first three to five years. How will you generate the
money to operate the business? What do you expect the
cash flow to be like during the start-up years? How much
money will you need to borrow? What assets and liabilities
will the company have over the time period covered by the
financial analysis? How long will it take for the company to
break even (e.g., sales revenues equal total cost)? (See
Chapter 3 for more information on how to calculate start-up
costs.)
Source: Earl G. Graves and Robert L. Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being White: Straight
Talk on Making It in America (New York: HarperBusiness, 1997), pp. 141–148.

T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
72
EXHIBIT 2.7.
Business-Plan Resources
Books
I
Anatomy of a Business Plan: A Step-by-Step Guide to Starting Smart, Building the Business, and
Securing Your Company’s Future, 4th edition, by Linda Pinson and Jerry Jinnett (Chicago:
Dearborn Trade, 1999). Award-winning best-seller.
I
The Business Planning Guide: Creating a Plan for Success in Your Own Business, 8th edition, by
David H. Bangs (Chicago: Upstart Publishing, 1998). Named by Forbes as its favorite, most
useful small-business book.
I
The Complete Book of Business Plans:Simple Steps to Writing a Powerful Business Plan,by Joseph
A.Covello and Brian J.Hazelgren (Naperville,IL:Sourcebooks Trade,1994).Five-star reviews.
I
The Instant Business Plan Third Edition,Twelve Quick and Easy Steps to a Successful Business, by
Gustav Berle and Paul Kirschner (Santa Maria, CA: Puma Publishing, 2000). Includes free
downloadable Macintosh and Windows business-planning software.
I
The One Page Business Plan: Start with a Vision, Build a Company! edited by James T. Horan
and Rebecca S. Shaw (El Sobrante, CA: One Page Business Plan, 1998).Tom Peters calls
The One Page Business Plan “an out and out winner.”
I
Online Business Planning: How to Create a Better Business Plan Using the Internet, by Robert T.
Gorman (Hawthorne, NJ: Career Press, 1999). Includes a complete, up-to-date resource
guide.
I
Your First Business Plan: A Simple Question and Answer Format Designed to Help You Write Your
Own Plan, 3rd edition, by Joseph Covello and Brian J. Hazelgren (Naperville, IL: Source-
books Trade, 1998). Best-selling guide for the novice.
Software
I
Adams Streetwise Complete Business Plan, Adams New Media
I
Business Plan Pro, versions 3.0 and 4.0, Palo Alto Software
I
Business Plan Writer Deluxe, Macmillan Digital Publishing
I
Business Plans Made E-Z, E-Z Legal Forms
I
Cortext Software Business Plan Deluxe, Cortext Limited
I
Officeready Business Plans, Canon Computer Systems
Web Sites
I
<http://www.sba.gov> (home page for the Small Business Administration [SBA]). A search
of that site for the key words business plan results in several helpful sites, including the
SBA’s online courses in business plan development listed below.
I
<http://classroom.sba.gov/xtrainx/BPLAN914/ie.htm> (the site for SBA’s online course for
Internet Explorer users)
I
<http://classroom.sba.gov/xtrainx/BPLAN914/ns.htm> (the site for SBA’s online course
for Netscape users)
I
<http://www.sba.gov/hotlist/bplan.html> (the SBA Hotlist for business plans)
Note: Because the Internet is a constantly changing media, these addresses are subject to change. If any one
address does not work for you, try using the keyword search from the SBA home page.

FRANCHISING OR BUYING THE PERFECT IDEA
Let’s say that you have followed all of the suggestions provided in this
chapter and still the perfect idea escapes you. Should you give up your
dream of becoming an entrepreneur, or is there another route to business
ownership? Actually, there are two other routes available to you. You could
buy a franchise or purchase an existing business. Here is what our gurus
have to say about these two options.
Going the Franchise Route
Would the franchise route be a good option for you? First, some words of
wisdom from Earl Graves about the ins and outs of franchising. Then, we
will look at some advice from Dave Thomas on checking out a franchisor
before signing on the bottom line.
Earl Graves’s Advice on Buying a Franchise
I Franchises do not encourage independent thinking. The first thing
to know about franchising, says Graves, is that franchises do not encourage
independent thinking; so, if your bent is to be a free spirit, franchising may
not be right for you. Be aware, cautions Graves, that the franchise owners
will lay down strict rules for you to follow, including rules covering your
approach to marketing and the delivery of goods and services.
I Don’t think of franchise ownership as a part-time job. As a franchise
owner you are responsible for your business 24 hours a day, seven days a
week. It is not a nine-to-five job. You’ll have deadlines and quotas to meet.
You will be expected to learn about and stay abreast of developments in
your market. The franchisor will probably insist that you attend training
workshops. And on a day-to-day basis you won’t be able to just sit back and
give directions. If you can’t see yourself cleaning the rest rooms or sweep-
ing the parking lot late at night, a franchise may not be for you.
I Don’t think that franchising is a way to avoid the unpleasant task of
drawing up a good business plan. You still need one, says Graves, so you
should ask the franchisor for all the details about start-up costs and working
capital you will need. Crunch the numbers. Can you avoid borrowing the
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
73

start-up fees and still retain enough money in reserve to last at least three
years without profits? If not, advises Graves, you need to do some more
analysis. Think it though. Plan.
I Get expert advice. In addition to a well-thought-out business plan,
Graves advises you to get the counsel of smart legal and accounting profes-
sionals who can help you fine tune your b.s. detector. In particular, says
Graves, never sign an agreement without first having your attorney review
it thoroughly. Make sure you completely understand your rights and obliga-
tions and those of the franchisor.
I Know exactly what it takes for you to get out of the deal. Graves notes
that some tough contracts allow termination only if it is initiated by the fran-
chisor. That means you could be locked in for life even if you want out.
I Check out the franchisor carefully. Read all of the fine print in the
Uniform Franchise Offering Circular (UFOC) that the franchisor is re-
quired to give you by Federal law. Then ask questions. A lot of questions.81
What should you ask? Let’s turn to Dave Thomas, the founder of Wendy’s,
for some more advice about how to check out a franchisor.
Dave Thomas on How to Check a Franchise Out
Dave Thomas has the distinction of having been on both sides of the fran-
chise fence, first as a franchisee for KFC and then as the franchisor for
Wendy’s. Here are his suggestions for checking out a franchise.
I Learn everything you can about the franchisor. Ask the franchisor
for a copy of its annual report and study it carefully. Check trade and busi-
ness magazines to see what has been written about the franchisor over the
last few years. Ask your stockbroker for any investment research that he or
she may have about the company.
I Visit the franchise. Visit several different units of the franchise to see
how they operate. How well are standards followed from one place to the
next? If you find big differences between the way different locations are
run—for example, one is clean and efficiently run and another is sloppy and
slow—then there may be a problem with the franchisor’s system.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
74

I Talk to franchisees. Thomas suggests you ask franchisees questions
such as the following:
 What do you like and dislike about the franchisor?
 Does the franchisor keep his or her commitments to you?
 Is the franchisor a tough inspector? Does he or she make franchisees
operate their units according to the system? (Thomas says you want
a franchisor to be tough because that is the only way standards will
be maintained across the system, protecting your investment.)
 Is there any difference in how company-owned and franchised
units are run? (In the best franchises, says Thomas, you will see
very little if any differences.)
I Investigate the background of franchisees. Do most of the current
franchisees actually run their units themselves, or are they primarily just in-
vestors? Thomas advises you to look for a franchisor who has the minimum
number of absentee franchise owners. As he puts it, “A franchise isn’t just an
investment, it’s a way of life. You can’t play this game from the sidelines.”
I Find out about how well the franchisor communicates with franchi-
sees. Do franchisees have the opportunity to get together and share infor-
mation? Is there a good dialogue between franchisees? According to Thomas,
you want to be part of an organization that maintains a good and open flow of
communication so that ideas are shared and problems can get solved fast.
I Check out the size of the franchise. Thomas warns you to be espe-
cially cautious about buying into a franchise with only a few units. A small
chain will not be able to give you the kind of operating, marketing, adver-
tising, and other support you will need. If the franchise is just starting, says
Thomas, you should be sure to find out about expansion plans. Does it plan
to grow fast? How does the franchisor plan to accomplish that?
I Find out how the franchisor deals with a franchisee who gets in
trouble. The big danger, explains Thomas, is that a franchisee can get into
deep trouble before the franchisor discovers what is happening. The key to
avoiding such disasters is communication. Thomas suggests that you find
out how the franchisor keeps tabs on franchisees so that he or she can detect
problems before they get out of hand.
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
75

I Find out about any hidden charges. Are you going to be forced to buy
supplies or equipment exclusively from the franchisor? Such an arrangement
can provide extra profits for the franchisor and add tons of extra costs for
the franchisee.
I Work for one of the franchisees before you invest. The best way to
learn about the franchisor, says Thomas, is to go to work for one of the ex-
isting franchisees. That way, you learn the system from the inside before
you put up your money.82
Warren Buffett on Buying an Existing Business
Suppose you find the whole prospect of following someone else’s game
plan confining. You want a little more independence to do things your way
than you would have as a franchisee. In that case, buying an existing busi-
ness might be right for you. Someone has already developed the idea and
made it work. You buy their assets, learn their system, and still have the
ability to tailor it to your liking. How do you make sure you don’t make a
mistake and pick the wrong business to buy? Here is some advice from
Warren Buffett.83
Mistake #1: Buying Because the Price Looks Cheap
Buffett cautions you not to get carried away with a bargain purchase. “Un-
less you are a liquidator, that kind of approach to buying businesses is fool-
ish,” writes Buffett:
First, the original “bargain” price probably will not turn out to be such a
steal after all. In a difficult business, no sooner is one problem solved than
another surfaces—never is there just one cockroach in the kitchen. Sec-
ond, any initial advantage you secure will be quickly eroded by the low re-
turn that the business earns. For example, if you buy a business for $8 mil-
lion that can be sold or liquidated for $10 million and promptly take either
course, you can realize a high return. But the investment will disappoint if
the business is sold for $10 million in ten years and in the interim has an-
nually earned and distributed only a few percent on cost.Time is the friend
of the wonderful business, the enemy of the mediocre.84
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
76

Mistake #2: Buying a Business with Problems, Even If You Think You Know How
to Fix Them
As Buffett puts it, “good jockeys will do well on good horses, but not on
broken down nags.” No matter how good a business manager you may
think you are, says Buffett, you are better off avoiding difficult business
problems rather than trying to solve them.
Mistake #3: Buying a Business When You Don’t Like the People
No matter how attractive the business, Buffett says, he has never been
successful in making a good deal with a bad person. His advice: If you
don’t like the people you have to work with in making the deal, walk
away from it.
THERE IS NO FINISH LINE
Here are a couple of final words from our gurus that apply whether you
start a business from scratch, buy one, or go the franchise route.
First, our gurus warn that even with the best advice there is nothing cer-
tain about what you are doing. Richard Branson puts it this way: 
There aren’t ingredients and techniques that will guarantee success. Parame-
ters exist [such as those presented in this chapter] that, if followed, will en-
sure that a business can continue, but it’s not as if you can clearly define . . .
business success and then bottle it as if it’s a perfume. It’s not that simple.To
be successful, you have to be out there, you have to hit the ground running,
and if you have a good team round you and more than a fair share of luck,
you might make something happen. But you certainly can’t guarantee it just
by following someone else’s formula.85
Second, there is no finish line. You are going to have to reinvent your
company over and over to survive. Bill Gates estimates that every product in
his company becomes obsolete in three years; so, he sees himself constantly
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
77

reinventing his game plan. We are confident that you will find, like Gates,
that your company needs constant attention. You will just have to keep try-
ing because, as Arthur Blank likes to say, every entrepreneur quickly learns
that “those that don’t make dust, eat dust.”86
KEY IDEAS
There are no perfect ideas for businesses.
Real entrepreneurs gather ideas for creating and reinventing their
businesses everywhere and all the time. They are constantly on the
lookout for products or services that might satisfy needs.
One source of ideas is the competition or potential competition. Real
entrepreneurs make it a practice to visit their competitors’ stores and
shop their businesses in order to discover what their competitors are
doing wrong and what they are doing right.
Successful entrepreneurs have well-tuned antennae for detecting busi-
ness opportunities. They constantly ask themselves, “How could this
problem be turned into profit?”
Successful entrepreneurs recognize that irritants are often the genesis
of good ideas. If something bothers the entrepreneur, it probably
bothers others also. Removing the irritant may be a solid basis for a
new business.
Successful entrepreneurs are not surprised when their ideas for busi-
nesses are rejected by friends, relatives, and business associates. They
take the rejection only as a sign that they must check out their idea in
more detail.
Entrepreneurs who buy a franchise should:
 Treat the franchise as a full-time business and not as an investment.
 Check out the franchisor carefully before proceeding.
Entrepreneurs who decide to buy an existing business should:
 Not shop for bargains.
 Not buy a business with problems, even if they feel they know the
solutions.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
78

 Not buy a business if they dislike or do not trust the existing own-
ers or managers.
Successful entrepreneurs know that even the best business idea will
need attention over time. There is no finish line. All businesses have
to be reinvented every day.
T H E  P E R F E C T  I D E A
79

M O N E Y  M AT T E R S — T h e  G u r u s
Arthur Blank, cofounder of Home Depot
Ben Cohen, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Cecil B. Day, cofounder of Days Inn of America, Inc.
Walt Disney, cofounder of Disney Brothers Studio (later Walt Disney
Productions, Ltd.)
Charles Ferguson, cofounder of Vermeer Technologies, Inc.
Debbi Fields, founder of Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc.
Bill Gates, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation
Earl Graves, founder, publisher, and editor of Black Enterprise
Jerry Greenfield, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Bud Hadfield, founder of Kwik Kopy
Wilson Harrell, founder of over one hundred companies, columnist
for Success Magazine, and former publisher of Inc. Magazine
Chris Larsen, cofounder of E-Loan
Bernie Marcus, cofounder of Home Depot
Tom Monaghan, founder of Domino’s Pizza
Robert Mondavi, founder of Robert Mondavi Winery
Ross Perot, founder of Electronic Data Systems (EDS) and of Perot
Systems Corporation
Stephen M. Pollan, financial consultant and writer
Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop
Howard Schultz, founder of Starbucks Coffee Company
Thomas Stemberg, cofounder of Staples, Inc.
R. David (Dave) Thomas, founder of Wendy’s International, Inc.
Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting System, Cable News
Network (CNN), and Turner Network Television (TNT)
Lillian Vernon, founder of Lillian Vernon Corporation
80

Money Matters
M
oney matters. It is as simple as that. The money you have or can
get from someone else makes all the difference in your ability to
start a business and keep it going. All entrepreneurs learn that les-
son, and almost all entrepreneurs hate it. Of all the activities entrepreneurs
hate the most, raising and managing money are at the top of the I-can’t-
stand-to-do-it list. The fun for entrepreneurs is thinking up ideas, taking pru-
dent risks, winning and losing, wooing customers, inspiring employees,
creating, and innovating. Accounting, financial analysis, running the numbers,
wooing bankers, and romancing venture capitalists are rarely tasks entrepre-
neurs enjoy. If you are like most entrepreneurs, you will find this chapter—
well—necessary. So, let’s begin with the most necessary of necessary things.
Just how much is it going to cost to get your “perfect idea” off the ground
and keep it running until it can take care of itself?
ESTIMATING START-UP COSTS
So far in this book we have relied exclusively on entrepreneurs as our
gurus because we wanted to present the ideas of people who had been
there and done it. This chapter is a little different. We will be turning to the
advice of two well-known business writers as we discuss methods for esti-
mating your start-up costs. As we already noted, real entrepreneurs don’t
find the ins and outs of money matters that enjoyable, so they rarely go
into great detail about how they crunched their numbers. In addition, our
81
3

entrepreneurs’ approaches to such matters as estimating start-up costs are
often decidedly unsophisticated compared with those recommended by the
experts in small-business development. Because we want to be true to our
entrepreneur gurus, while not giving you bad advice, we include both ap-
proaches in this chapter.
First, we share with you an example of the typical entrepreneur’s method
for calculating start-up costs, based on the experiences of Ben Cohen and
Jerry Greenfield of Ben & Jerry’s. As you will see, it is rich with impreci-
sion. Next, we share the recommendations of Stephen M. Pollan and Mark
Levine, coauthors of The Field Guide to Starting a Business. Their approach
is much more precise. The difference between these two approaches is
somewhat analogous to the differences between the approach most of us use
to jump-start a car and the method recommended by battery manufacturers.
Faced with getting the car going on a cold and snowy day, most of us pay lit-
tle attention to the order in which we attach the cables. The manufacturer’s
guide, on the other hand, gives precise instruction amid dire warnings of the
possible consequences should you not follow their steps. We all know that
both methods have worked in the past. We also know that the manufacturer’s
way is a lot less dangerous. That said, here is the way start-up costs are
usually calculated, followed by the way some notable experts recommend.
The Ben & Jerry Approach to Estimating Start-Up Costs
When Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield decided to open a homemade-ice-
cream parlor in Burlington, Vermont, in 1978, they had exactly $8,000 be-
tween them to invest in the business—$4,000 from Jerry, $2,000 from Ben,
and $2,000 from Ben’s father. They knew that $8,000 wouldn’t be enough
but had no idea how much they would really need. Here is how they calcu-
lated their start-up cost, as explained in their 1997 book, Double Dip.
We sent away for some of the inexpensive little six-page brochures the
Small Business Administration publishes.The brochures gave us formulas to
figure out how much money we needed to start out with, and what our
break-even point would be. Everything we needed, and in those days they
[the brochures] cost only twenty-five cents each.
We used those brochures to fill in the blanks on the pizza parlor busi-
ness plan we were using as a template. Unfortunately, we read one of the
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
82

brochures wrong, which caused us to make a basic error in our planning.
We thought you were supposed to double your cost of ingredients to
come up with your retail price. In fact, for an ice cream parlor, you’re sup-
posed to triple it.
Also, the business plan called for us to estimate how many ice cream
cones we were going to sell in an hour, a week, or a month.That stumped
us. How were we supposed to know how many people were going to pa-
tronize a homemade-ice-cream parlor in a town that had never had one?
There was no rational basis for coming up with an estimate of sales—but
writing a business plan, applying for a bank loan, required us to do that. . . .
Later we realized that our initial calculations were based on sales pro-
jections that were unprojectable, on the wrong formula for figuring selling
price, and on a huge underestimation of the number of ice cream cones we
would end up selling in a typical day. Not surprisingly, our financial model
showed the business couldn’t be successful. . . .
In those moments it helps to be a person like Ben, who realizes facts
and figures don’t tell the whole story—and may be downright
misleading. . . .
But there’s always that choice to make.You can just as easily say,“I don’t
believe the numbers,” as,“I don’t believe my own qualitative judgments
based on my observations of the marketplace.”
After all, it wasn’t instinct alone that told us to go ahead despite the
projections.We couldn’t afford to hire anyone to do market research, so
we’d done our own—visiting homemade-ice-cream parlors up and down
the East Coast.We counted the revolutions per minute of the ice cream
freezers at Steve’s.We learned how other shops made ice cream.We saw
ice cream parlors that were successful in towns similar to Burlington.We
familiarized ourselves with the competition they faced, their pricing, the
kind of products they were serving.We had reason to believe we could be
successful too. So we changed the numbers to project first-year sales of
$90,000 and a pretax net profit of $7,746.1
As Greenfield says, it’s easier to go with your instincts—just like attach-
ing the battery cables. In this case, everything worked out okay. They got
their bank loan, although as we will see later in this chapter, not on the basis
of their financial projections and not for the amount they thought they
needed. Would it have been different if they had used a more sophisticated
formula in estimating their start-up costs, or are all such projections just
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
83

wishful thinking anyway? Let’s look at the way Pollan and Levine say you
should perform your calculations.
The “Expert” Approach to Estimating Start-Up Costs
Stephen Pollan and Mark Levine are coauthors of The Field Guide to Start-
ing a Business. Pollan is a financial consultant who has appeared on such
television programs as Good Morning America and Today. Pollan and Le-
vine suggest you calculate your start-up cost as follows:2
Step One: Prepare a Personal Austerity Budget
Calculate your living expenses—food, housing, clothing, utilities, and so
on. Then cut your expenses to the bone. What is the minimum amount you
actually have to have to stay alive for 18 months? Do you have that much
money readily available to you in a savings, checking, or money-market ac-
count? If your answer is yes, proceed to step two. If no, stop now. You’re
not ready to start your business.
Step Two: Determine Your Initial Cash Outlay
Make an estimate of all of the one-time costs you will incur in starting your
business. The types of expenses Pollan and Levine say you should consider
are listed in Exhibit 3.1.
Step Three: Determine Your Working-Capital Requirements
Working capital is the amount of money you will need each month to make
up for the shortfall between the money you take in from selling your prod-
ucts and/or services and the money you must pay out in operating expenses.
During the early days, months, or even years of your new business, you
should expect your shortfall between income and expenses to be sizable.
Later, as your business improves, the difference between income and ex-
penses should narrow until you reach breakeven, that is, you can pay all of
your monthly expenses based on the money you have taken in that month.
In order to calculate the working capital, you will need you need to prepare
a cash-flow analysis. Here is how Pollan and Levine suggest you do that:
(1) determine your monthly fixed costs, (2) determine your monthly vari-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
84

able costs, (3) estimate what you can charge per item, (4) determine your
contribution margin, (5) determine how much sales you need to break
even, (6) forecast your cash flow, and (7) estimate your working-capital
requirements.
Determine Your Monthly Fixed Costs
Fixed costs are monthly expenses that you will have that do not vary ac-
cording to your volume of sales. (See Exhibit 3.2.)
Determine Your Monthly Variable Costs
Variable costs are those costs that will vary based on your volume of sales.
(See Exhibit 3.3.)
Estimate the Price You Can Charge per Item
To arrive at a price for the product or service you plan to sell, Pollan and
Levine suggest that you ask yourself the following:
I Is the product or service unique enough to command a high price?
I Are there any legal limits on how much I can charge?
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
85
EXHIBIT 3.1.
Initial Cash Outlay
ITEM
AMOUNT
ITEM
AMOUNT
Deposits:
________
Office supplies
________
Rent
________
Transportation equipment
________
Telephone
________
Professional fees:
________
Utilities
________
Legal
________
Insurance
________
Financial
________
Other
________
Other
________
Machinery and equipment
________
Advance advertising and publicity
________
Office equipment
________
Leasehold improvement
________
Office furniture
________
Inventory (one turn)
________
Stationery
________
Total Initial Cash Outlay
________
Source: Stephen M. Pollan and Mark Levine, The Field Guide to Starting a Business (New York: Fireside, 1990),
pp. 124–125.
Note: In making your estimates, include only the amounts you will have to pay up front. If you will be paying for
some of these expenses over time, include them in your estimate of working capital in step three.

I How will competitors respond to my pricing?
I Are there market conditions—such as new technology, pending legis-
lation, or new sources of supply—that could affect the price?
I Will I have to work through middlemen to get my product or service
to the public? If so, what is their pricing policy?
I If I have to purchase items for resell, what is the industry standard
markup? (The markup is the difference between the selling price and
amount the reseller paid for the item. For example, if you buy an item
for $10 and then turn around and sell it for $15, the markup is 50 per-
cent. Higher-quality items command a higher markup than lower
quality items, particularly if they are accompanied by exceptional
service.)
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
86
EXHIBIT 3.2.
Fixed Costs
ITEM
AMOUNT
ITEM
AMOUNT
Rent
________
Exterminating
________
Salaries
________
Garbage collection
________
Fees
________
Telephone
________
Advertising
________
Cleaning and maintenance
________
Promotion
________
Professional dues
________
Taxes
________
Continuing education
________
Water
________
Upkeep of business libraries
________
Electricity
________
Other
________
Insurance
________
Total Fixed Costs
________
Window cleaning
________
EXHIBIT 3.3.
Variable Costs per Item or Sale
ITEM
AMOUNT
ITEM
AMOUNT
Raw materials
________
Credit card fees (2 to 15% of sales) ________
Packaging
________
Other
________
Sales commissions
________
Total Variable Costs
________

Determine Your Contribution Margin
Your contribution margin is the difference between your variable costs in
producing an item or providing a service and the price you can charge for
the item or service. For example:
Sales Price  Variable Cost  Contribution Margin
$3.00  $1.00  $2.00
Determine the Volume of Sales You Need to Reach A Break-even Point
To find out what volume of sales you need to break even, divide your
monthly fixed costs by the contribution margin. For example:
Monthly Fixed Costs / Contribution Margin  Break-even Volume
$10,000 / $2.00  5,000 items
Forecast Your Cash Flow
To forecast cash flow, project your income and expenses month to month
until you reach breakeven. (See Exhibit 3.4.)
Estimate Your Working Capital Requirements
Your working capital requirements represent the sum of the shortfall (in-
come minus expenses) for the period from start-up until breakeven.
Step Four: Determine the Amount You Need for Start-Up
To determine how much money you need for start-up, add together your in-
itial cash outlay and your working capital requirements.
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
87
EXHIBIT 3.4.
Cash Flow
Month
1
2
3, etc.
Breakeven
Sales
xx
xxxx
xxxxxxx
xxxxxxxx
Income
$xx
$xxx
$x,xxx
$xx,xxx
Expenses
$xx,xxx
$xx,xxx
$xx,xxx
$xx,xxx
Difference
$xx,xxx
$xx,000
$x0,000
$0
Note that Pollan and Levine warn that you should take into consideration such things as customer-payment
terms, supplier-payment terms, loan- or investment-payback terms, and your requirements for cash to reinvest in
your business when estimating your income and expenses.

Step Five: Double It!
Pollan and Levine don’t suggest this step, but our entrepreneurs do. Take
whatever amount of capital requirements that your calculations indicate
you will need and double it. Arthur Blank explains, “I always tell people
starting new companies to secure twice the capital they think they need.
Not because they need the money, but because it gives you the confidence
and the strength to do what you think is right instead of being pushed by ex-
ternal financial forces.”3
Most people are amazed at how much working capital it will take and the
number of imponderables you have to consider just to come up with your
estimates. They typically decide about halfway through Pollan and Le-
vine’s calculations that Jerry Greenfield just might be right: It’s easier to go
with your instincts. But if you’re still interested in being an entrepreneur,
you need to go on to the next step—coming up with the money.
RAISING THE MONEY
There are two sources of funds to provide you with working capital: debt
and equity. Debt is money you borrow and have to pay back. Equity is
money you obtain from investments people or institutions make in your
company in return for some share of ownership. Debt and equity financing
have both advantages and disadvantages.
The advantage of equity financing is that you don’t have to pay it back if
things don’t work out. The disadvantages are (1) it’s hard to get, (2) you
have to give up some ownership and perhaps control of your company to
get it, and (3) we repeat—it’s hard to get.
The advantage of debt financing is that you keep control of your busi-
ness, at least until you find you can’t make the payments on your loan when
they come due. The disadvantages of debt financing are (1) it’s hard to get,
(2) you have to make payments on your loan regardless of whether your
business is making any money or not, and (3) we repeat—it’s hard to get.
Pollan and Levine state that it is essential that you achieve a balance be-
tween these two types of financing. They explain:
If your business is highly leveraged—has a large amount of debt financing as
compared to equity financing—cash flow can become a major problem be-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
88

cause of the interest and amortization you’ll have to pay. If your business is
minimally leveraged—has a large amount of equity financing compared to
debt financing—you won’t be taking full advantage of the invested dollars
[since you could carry some debt and free up the investment money to use
elsewhere]. Businesses funded solely on debt financing are very risky. . . .
Equity financing gives you some strength and protection.4
In short, you want a mix of financing. It’s okay to take out some loans,
but get as much equity financing as you can. Just realize that getting
money—debt or equity—is going to be hard and that you are going to have
to do it repeatedly. You will need money to get started; you’ll need another
influx of money when your business starts to grow; and you’ll need another
and another as you try to expand your business and become even bigger.
The whole task of money raising just isn’t going to end.
There are only two ways of raising money: the hard way and the very
hard way!
Anita Roddick5
Dealing with Rejection
We discussed rejection in the first two chapters, but certain aspects of rejec-
tion bear repeating. You should expect to be turned down often when you
approach people and institutions for money. Howard Schultz recalls that, in
the course of the year he spent trying to raise money for his coffee bars, he
spoke to 242 people and was turned down by 217 of them. “Try to imagine
how disheartening it can be to hear that many times why your idea is not
worth investing in,” writes Schultz. “Some would listen to my hour-long
presentation and not call me back. I’d phone them but they wouldn’t take
my call. When I finally got through, they would tell me why they weren’t
interested. It was a very humbling time.”6
For Schultz, the hardest part of fund-raising was just keeping an upbeat
attitude rejection after rejection.
You don’t want to pay a visit to a prospective investor and not display the
full measure of passion and enthusiasm about what you’re proposing to do.
You can’t be dejected when you meet with a landlord to begin negotiations
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
89

about leasing a location. But if you’ve had three or four fruitless meetings
that week, how do you whip yourself up? You really have to be a chameleon.
Here you are in front of somebody else.You’re depressed as hell, but you
have to sound as fresh and confident as you were at your first meeting.7
Schultz writes that raising money was always difficult and that he never
really felt that he was good at it because it took him so long. Over time, he
says, he did get better at his presentation and at anticipating and responding
to objections and concerns. He learned a lot because he got plenty of prac-
tice, and you will, too. One of the things you will learn is that, while some
entrepreneurs are also bankers and investors, typically, bankers and invest-
ors are not entrepreneurs. They have a different mindset.
Bankers and Investors Aren’t Entrepreneurs
According to Wilson Harrell, if you ask an audience of entrepreneurs who
they distrust and detest the most, their immediate answers will most often
be “bankers,” “venture capitalists,” and “Wall Streeters.” Similarly, if you
bring together a group of bankers, venture capitalists, and Wall Streeters
and ask them who they dislike and distrust most, their most likely response
will be “entrepreneurs,” although they would also admit that these same en-
trepreneurs have made their financial institutions the most money. Why do
these two groups, who are so dependent on each other, dislike and distrust
each other so much? The answer, says Harrell, is mind-set.
Let’s take a moment to compare them:They, the money providers, believe
with every morsel of their being that “growth” and “profits” are the same
words; that “net revenue” is the only barometer for success.The idea that a
business person would pour every dime of potential profit back into grow-
ing a company is simply not acceptable.
On the other hand, entrepreneurs know that showing a profit and pay-
ing taxes is stupid during the fast-growth years of a company.The word
“risk” to the financial community is synonymous with Black Friday, AIDS,
the Bubonic Plague and getting fired.To entrepreneurs,“risk” is a way of
life.We eat it for breakfast.To entrepreneurs,“security” means the “com-
pany,” and its continued growth.To them, it means mortgages on homes,
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
90

liens on everything that’s not nailed down and, above all,“personal guaran-
tees.” To them “success” means “pay back.” To entrepreneurs, it means foot-
prints in the sands of time. On and on it goes. Mindsets from different
worlds.8
It is crucial, however, for the entrepreneur to develop and maintain a
working relationship with these people who have such a different mind-set.
So, let’s take a look at each of three groups to whom you will undoubtedly
go again and again for financial support—your friends and relatives, bank-
ers, and venture capitalists.
Dealing with Friends and Relatives
We start with your friends and relatives for a simple reason. It is with them
that you will most likely be forced to start raising money, whether you like
it or not. After emptying out your bank account—minus what you need to
live on for those 18 months (see step one on calculating your start-up costs
discussed previously)—your next stops will be your mom, dad, brother,
sister, uncle, aunt, next-door neighbor, tennis buddy, doctor, dentist, attor-
ney, accountant, or some such person. Why not go first to your friendly
neighborhood banker or venture capitalist? Simple. Practically all—99.9
percent of them—will turn you down. Your best shot at getting financing is
from the people who know you best and who have the greatest faith in you.
Once you have secured their loans and investments, say our gurus, then you
can think about other sources of funding.
Keep in mind as you approach friends and family that what you are dis-
cussing is a business transaction, even though the loan or investment that
you receive may be based more on emotion than on cold-blooded financial
ratios. As Earl Graves puts it, “blood may be thicker than water, but don’t
take it for granted. Why risk touching off a family feud in the event of a
misunderstanding over money.”9 Graves suggests that you have your attor-
ney draw up a promissory note for every loan from a friend or family
member, detailing, among other things, the following:
I The amount of the loan.
I The date of the loan.
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
91

I The interest rate.
I The frequency of payments.
I The period over which the loan will be repaid.
I The collateral you are offering should you not be able to pay back the
loan.10
You and the friend or relative making the loan should sign the document,
and, advises Graves, it should be witnessed by a notary who is not a family
member.
Such attention to detail may seem excessive, considering that you are
dealing with a close friend or relative. In fact, says Graves, it is critical for
a reason that has nothing to do with keeping peace in the family—tax con-
sequences. He explains:
The agreement must be not only formal but legal as well. Entrepreneurs
risk IRS audits if the Feds suspect things aren’t quite right.
Remember that all bank deposits of more than $10,000 in cash are au-
tomatically reported to the IRS.When you deposit Uncle Joe’s check for
$30,000 in your bank account and fail to report it on your personal or
business tax form, you’ll have some explaining to do.
The relative providing you with the loan should base the interest rate on
current rates in the market. Otherwise the loan might be considered a gift
and subject to federal gift taxes. Federal tax laws allow individual taxpayers
to give up to $10,000 a year tax-free to any individual. A married couple
can give up to $20,000 a year to each individual. Amounts above that can
be subject to gift taxes for the borrower.
To be certain you don’t run afoul of the tax man, consult section 7872,
subsection D of the IRS code. Each month the IRS also publishes rates for
loans ranging from short term to long term.Your accountants, too, should
be consulted regularly to make certain that they are monitoring your busi-
ness and keeping you out of trouble, which is what they are paid to do.11
What our gurus are saying about loans also applies to investments. You
should have your attorney draw up a document spelling out how the invest-
ors will share in the profits, roles and responsibilities, survivorship, buy-out
rights, and so on. In short, dot the i’s and cross the t’s on all of these issues.
You will be glad you did.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
92

Dealing with Bankers
Okay, you’ve tapped your friends and relatives for all of the funds they are
willing to or can loan you or invest in your company. Maybe you’ve been
lucky and found an affluent “angel” who is willing to invest a sizable
amount because he or she thinks the adventure would be fun or a way to
display financial expertise. Regardless, you have assembled a pool of cash.
But you still need more. You don’t yet have the working capital your esti-
mates indicate you need, much less double your estimates as our gurus ad-
vise. It’s time now to approach your local banker.
You are now armed with the reality that your banker’s answer will likely
be “no.” Not only that, but you will probably get a lecture on how perilous
it is for a bank to do business with someone like you. Dave Thomas recalls
an unpleasant experience with a banker in the early 1960s, shortly after
Thomas had taken over a group of Kentucky Fried Chicken franchises in
Columbus, Ohio:
One of the first things I wanted to do was to install air-conditioning systems
in the four restaurants because I know how air conditioning could build traf-
fic. But, instead of going downtown to the commercial loan department and
talking with somebody who knew something about business, I went to the
local branch that did our banking.The loan officer there knew about loans
for cars and refrigerators but couldn’t understand air conditioning as a busi-
ness principle. Instead of a loan, what I got was a big lecture on how late
these restaurants were in paying their bills and what a lousy risk I was.12
Thomas says that experience and others like it left him pretty sour on
banks and the judgment of bankers. Tom Monaghan reports a similar bank-
ing experience in the early 1960s:
I wanted to borrow $250 to buy a used refrigerator for my DomiNick’s
store [the forerunner to Dominos Pizza]. I asked [the bank president] for
the money in a very humble way.
“Nope,” he said.
I begged and pleaded, but he just leaned back in his big leather swivel
chair and tossed his head from side to side for emphasis as he slowly re-
peated,“Nope . . . nope . . . nope.”
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
93

He gave me a long lecture about all these ratios, and what it amounted
to was that I had to have $500 in the bank in order to borrow $250.
“If I had five hundred dollars,” I asked,“why would I want to borrow two
hundred fifty dollars from you? Why don’t you take that refrigerator I want
to buy as collateral?”
“Nope.”
Monaghan says he came away feeling humiliated and switched banks at
the first opportunity. He eventually got the money for his refrigerator else-
where and says he had forgotten about the incident until one day in 1985
when the chairman and president and the senior vice chairman of the Na-
tional Bank of Detroit (NBD) paid him a visit. They sought out Monaghan
to invite him to sit on NBD’s board of directors. As he accepted the offer,
Monaghan writes, he couldn’t help thinking, “This is my revenge for being
turned down on that refrigerator loan, and as Jackie Gleason used to say,
‘How sweet it is!’”13
Most of our other gurus have had similar unpleasant experiences with
banks and bankers, yet all agree that banking relationships are critical.
“Bankers,” says Monaghan, echoing the sentiments of most of our gurus,
“are the keepers of the keys to success for an entrepreneur. They can help
you more than anyone else. They can also hurt you most, because all cred-
itors and potential creditors check with the bankers first. A negative word
from a banker can block all your plans. In times of trouble, it’s doubly im-
portant to have a good relationship with your bank, because you must be
able to write checks to stay in business.”14 At times, the survival of your
company may depend on the quality of the relationship you have with your
banker. Consider the example of Home Depot.
Arthur Blank and Bernie Marcus opened their first four Home Depot
stores in Atlanta in 1979. By 1983, with the help of a friendly banker at Se-
curity Pacific National Bank by the name of Rip Fleming, they had grown
their business to 19 stores and $250 million in revenues. Then disaster
struck. Fleming reached 65 years of age and was forced into retirement.
The Home Depot account was turned over to a new loan officer who
viewed the company as just another small business with limited potential
for growth. “We were being handled in a traditional manner by the bank’s
small-business group,” Blank recalled. “ We were numbers and points to
them, not people with unique personalities.”15
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
94

Recognizing that the good banking relationship they had enjoyed in the
past was now all but gone, Blank and Marcus appealed to Fleming for help.
Fleming responded by asking a young loan officer he had been mentoring,
Faye Wilson, to get involved in the Home Depot account. Wilson agreed to
take on the account as a favor, and Marcus and Blank soon discovered that
she was quite different from the banker they had been assigned. Blank re-
called that Wilson came across as quiet and unassuming but that she was
extremely articulate and could speak with great passion about something if
she believed in it. Perhaps more important, Wilson was interested in getting
to know Home Depot and seemed open to working with its founders. Un-
like the other loan officer who had been primarily interested in achieving
maximum guarantees and protection for the bank, Wilson was more of a
customer advocate. The change in bankers was to prove extremely fortui-
tous for Home Depot just two years later.
In 1985 Marcus and Blank were seeking a $200 million to $225 million
line of credit in order to grow from 50 Home Depot stores with $700 mil-
lion in annual sales to 100 stores. Because the loan was too large for Secu-
rity Pacific to take on by itself, Wilson had organized a consortium of banks
to share the risk, including C&S Bank in Atlanta. Everything was going
well until the last minute, when disaster struck. Blank explained what hap-
pened this way:
The problem came when Wilson received a call from the C&S loan officer
who had been in the syndication meetings with us.We later learned that he
thought our expansion into California was too risky, so at the last minute, he
unilaterally made the decision that the bank would not participate in the deal.
This set off alarms because here was a local bank, one that knew the
company, knew the management, presumably had an ability to physically be
involved day-to-day, looking at operations if they wished, and we had other
business with them.Their withdrawal—for unexplained reasons—was less
an issue of their share of the cash but the appearance of a problem at
home.What would another bank, one we didn’t already have a relationship
with, say? “C & S must know something we don’t know.” It created a poten-
tial blackball effect.16
Wilson told the Home Depot founders that she would take care of the
problem. Calmly, she began working the phones, reassuring loan officers at
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
95

the other banks in the consortium that all was well a Home Depot. Perhaps
more crucial, Wilson went to her bosses at Security Pacific in an effort to
convince them to pick up the C&S share of the loan. The bank’s chief credit
officer asked Wilson one thing, “Are you willing to put your job on the line
for this?” She said she was, and she did. The bank consortium stayed to-
gether, and Home Depot got its loan. Writing about Wilson’s contribution
years later, Arthur Blank put it simply, “She literally saved our company.”17
Wilson was later to become the first woman on the board of Home Depot.
Rules That Govern the Relationship with Your Banker
What makes the difference? Why were Dave Thomas and Tom Monaghan
turned down for relatively minor loans whereas Bernie Marcus and Arthur
Blank found a banker who was willing to put her job on the line for them? The
difference, say our gurus, has to do with following the four rules that govern
the relationship you have with your banker. (See Exhibit 3.5 for a summary.)
Rule #1: Bankers Make Loans to People, Not to Companies
Bankers don’t make loans to companies. They make loans to people. Con-
sider Debbi Fields’s experience, for example. Fields recalls that, when she
got the idea for her cookie company, she went looking for a banker to loan
her start-up money. Fields and her husband, Randy, had a mortgage from
Bank of America and had gotten to know a banker there by the name of Ed
Sullivan—not the television host. Initially, says Fields, she and her husband
had decided not to approach Sullivan for their business loan because they
wanted to keep their mortgage holder separate from their business banker.
After repeated turndowns from other bankers, the Fields decided that keep-
ing their business and personal banking separate just wasn’t going to work
out. They decided to turn to Sullivan for the loan.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
96
EXHIBIT 3.5.
Banking Rules
Rule #1: Bankers make loans to people, not to companies.
Rule #2:You have to get to know your banker.
Rule #3:You have to learn to speak your banker’s language.
Rule #4: Sometimes, you have to make them sweat.

Ed was that very rare thing, a kind and understanding banker. His kindness
was not based on the fancy little phrases they teach people in bank school,
it was based on a personal approach to what turns out, in fact, to be a very
personal transaction—the lending of money, the establishment of trust be-
tween individuals, perhaps the ultimate test of intuition.
Ed Sullivan was a gentleman of the old-fashioned variety, warm and
courtly, nearing sixty at the time, with thin graying hair. He’d had several hip
surgeries and walked with difficulty. His counterpart at the bank was a
young man named Bob Derenzi, whose smile was the real thing, backed up
with easy laughter, a guy who had a knack for making you feel like the most
important person in the entire world.
We invited Ed over for lunch, with a plateful of chocolate chip cookies
for dessert. After lunch, it became clear to me that Randy and Ed wanted
to talk privately, so I acted the part of the little woman and left them in the
kitchen. Later on, Randy told me what was said.
The tone was man-to-man.“Randy,” Ed said, getting down to business
right away,“how much are you going to put into this?”
Randy shrugged.“I don’t know. Maybe twenty-five, fifty thousand.”
Ed nodded, accepting Randy’s figures.“You know it isn’t going to work, of
course, but there are some positives. It’ll be a good education for Debbi.
You’ll know where she is every day, it will give her something to do, some-
thing she can call her own and, last but not least, it’ll become a terrific tax
shelter for the money you make in your consulting practice.”
Randy agreed.
“Look,” Ed went on,“my bank, the Bank of America, was built on the
basis of investing in people. A.P. Giannini had at the heart of his building this
bank one basic idea: you invest in people, you don’t invest in businesses and
numbers.”
So Ed Sullivan, Bob Derenzi and the Bank of America went against their
business instincts and made the loan because they trusted Randy and me to
pay back the money when the business flopped.They trusted us, not
cookies, and certainly not projections or marketing surveys. And if I’d sus-
pected in my heart that the whole process was really based on emotion all
the mumbo jumbo about numbers and graphs aside—I was absolutely sure
of it now. Banking is nine-tenths instinct.When it comes right down to it,
these people have to decide whether you’re going to turn them into kings
or paupers. It’s a gut-level decision and anybody who tells you different is
kidding you.18
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
97

You may recall the earlier description of Ben Cohen and Jerry Green-
field’s mumbo-jumbo exercise in creating their own business plan. Like the
Fields, they discovered that the numbers in their spiffed-up plan were less
important in getting them their loan than was their relationship with their
banker. Ben tells the story this way:
Plan in hand, we went to Fred Burgess at the Merchants Bank in town and
asked him for $18,000. Fred said he’d submit the loan to the Small Business
Administration because the SBA would guarantee it. If we couldn’t pay it
back (which many small business start-ups never manage to do), the SBA
would repay the bank 90 percent of what it had loaned us.
The SBA agreed to give us the $18,000 if we found a “suitable location”
in Burlington.We thought the gas station was a fine choice, but the SBA
didn’t agree, because we couldn’t get more than a one-year lease.When we
went back for our loan, the SBA wouldn’t approve it. Fred offered us
$4,000 instead.We took it.
Fred’s loan didn’t seem like the greatest vote of confidence, but we
weren’t too proud to accept it. All we had was $8,000, and the extra
$4,000 gave us just enough to open. Looking back on it now, it’s clear that
Fred didn’t expect to get paid back. He probably thought it was worth the
$4,000 just to watch how we spent it. Maybe he figured he’d get some
amusing stories out of it.19
Rule #2: Get to Know Your Banker
How do you build the kind of relationship with a banker that Debbi and
Randy Fields had with Ed Sullivan, that Bernie Marcus and Arthur Blank
had with Faye Wilson, and that Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield had with
Fred Burgess? Well, advises Earl Graves, you don’t wait until you need the
money. Long before you approach them for a business loan, says Graves,
you should try to get to know your local banker as an individual. Find out
what interests he or she has in common with you. What charities does he or
she support? Establish a connection any way you can. Once you get a loan,
writes Graves, don’t just send the loan officer quarterly statements. Instead,
you should make it more personal. “Invite the banker to visit your plant or
distribution center. Let the banker meet your key people. Face-to-face con-
tact with the banker helps build a bond of friendliness and trust that will go
a long way toward winning approval on the next and undoubtedly larger
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
98

loan request.”20 Graves says you should notify your banker when you get a
major new account, purchase a new piece of equipment, or hire new man-
agement talent. “And, of course,” he notes, “if there’s bad news, don’t
sugarcoat it. Explain what happened and how it will be remedied.”21 In
short, you have to work at the relationship constantly.
If you are in debt to a man, you owe it to him to let him know exactly how
your business stands. And when he knows you aren’t holding anything back,
he isn’t going to be hard on you if occasionally you can’t pay a bill the day it
falls due.
Howard Johnson22
Rule #3: Learn to Speak Your Banker’s Language
Part of working at your relationship with bankers is learning to speak their
language or finding someone to translate “bankese” for you. Bankers
speak the language of accounting and finance, a language that is foreign to
most entrepreneurs. Anita Roddick recalls that her first experience in get-
ting a business loan was a disaster simply because she didn’t understand
bank-speak. It was in the early 1970s, and Roddick had decided to open a
little shop to sell cosmetics. Working with her husband, Gordon, she cal-
culated that she would need about four thousand pounds to get started. She
assumed that getting the loan would be no problem because she was pre-
pared to use a small hotel she and her husband owned as collateral. Unfor-
tunately, writes Roddick, she went about the whole loan process in the
wrong way.
I made an appointment to see the bank manager and turned up wearing a
Bob Dylan T-shirt with [my daughter] Samantha on my hip and [my other
daughter] Justine clinging on to my jeans. It just did not occur to me that I
should be anything other than my normal self. I was enthusiastic and I gab-
bled on about my great idea, flinging out all this information about how I
had . . . discovered these natural ingredients when I was traveling, and I’d
got this great name,The Body Shop, and all I needed was £4,000 to get it
started. I got quite carried away in my excitement, but I was on my own. I
discovered that you don’t go to a bank manager with enthusiasm—that is
the last thing he cares about.When I had finished, he leaned back in his
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
99

chair and said that he wasn’t going to lend me any money because we were
too much in debt already.23
Roddick was stunned. She couldn’t believe she had been turned down.
I went home to Gordon absolutely crushed.“That’s it,” I said.“It’s hopeless.
The bank won’t give me any money.” I was ready to give up, but Gordon is
much more tenacious than I am.“We will get the money,” he said,“But we
are going to have to play them at their own game.” He told me to go out
and buy a business suit, and got an accountant friend to draw up an
impressive-looking “business plan,” with projected profit and loss figures
and a lot of gobbledegook, all bound in a plastic folder.
A week later we went back to the same bank for an interview with the
same manager.This time I left the children behind and Gordon came with
me.We were both dressed in suits. Gordon handed over our little presen-
tation, the bank manager flipped through it for a couple of minutes and
then authorized a loan of £4,000, just like that, using the hotel as collateral.
I was relieved—but I was angry, too, that I had been turned down the first
time. After all, I was the same person with the same idea. It was clear to
me that bank managers did not want to deal with mothers with babies.24
Experiences such as those reported by Roddick and other entrepreneurs
he has known convinced Wilson Harrell that many entrepreneurs just should
not try to interface with members of the financial community. “If you know
in advance that the chances of ‘getting along’ are small or nil,” writes Har-
rell, “why risk blowing a relationship that’s so vitally important? Wouldn’t it
be better to employ the services of someone who could speak for you—
someone with their [the banker’s] mindset—someone who could act as in-
terpreter?”25 Would such an approach work? It did for Tom Monaghan.
Remember that Monaghan had problems with bankers from the begin-
ning—he couldn’t even borrow $250 to buy a used refrigerator. Monaghan
writes that he found his inability to communicate with bankers enormously
frustrating. Then, in 1977 he met a financial consultant by the name of John
McDivitt who found a way to translate Monaghan’s vision into bankese.
I’m not sure what John thought of Domino’s potential, but I was fascinated
by his response when I explained the hard times I’d had in dealing with
bankers. [John’s] principal contribution was a penetrating financial analysis
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
100

of our business and a presentation of it that allowed bankers to under-
stand, for the first time, what a dynamic company they were looking at in
Domino’s.
John constructed an economic model of our business, demonstrating its
organization from a single working unit, a store, through all the various lev-
els of consolidation we had at that time. He analyzed the variable costs at
the store level, showing how they changed and related to each other at dif-
fering volumes of business.These models became templates to overlay re-
ports from the stores so we could interpret what was happening in them. I
was fascinated by the logic of this exercise and how it clearly demonstrated
the economic functioning of our stores as if they were machines with ob-
servation windows cut into them to show their working parts.
John then drew a numerical picture in which he channeled the cash trib-
utaries produced by all our operating units into a single stream. Collec-
tively, this grew into a broad river of money. I wasn’t surprised. I knew what
a powerful cash producer Domino’s was, but this was the first time I had
seen it depicted so objectively. Now I understood what John meant when
he talked about explaining our business in economic terms.
No wonder bankers had failed to appreciate my passionate appeals for
money. I might as well have been speaking Swahili, because the words I was
using to describe our business simply weren’t meaningful to them.The per-
suasive power of John’s economic model was immediately self-evident.26
Like Monaghan, you may be able to find a translator to help you com-
municate with the money changers. On the other hand, you may be stuck
doing what Roddick terms the “hell-raising, hair-raising, money-raising”
yourself. If you are, here are five questions Earl Graves suggests that you
ask yourself before you keep that appointment with your banker.27
1. How much money do you need? If you want to borrow $50,000,
only ask for $50,000. Never ask bankers how much they are willing to
lend. It’s important to collect the most precise calculations possible
and then explain why you need every penny.
2. How will you repay the loan if things go as planned? Will it be
from your business’s cash flow, proceeds, or the conversion of assets?
To demonstrate to the banker exactly how you’ll make good on the
money owed, you should present at least a year of monthly cash-flow
statements and quarterly projections for the term of the loan.
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
101

3. How will you repay the loan if things go sour? In most cases you’ll
have to surrender collateral such as equipment or property. Bankers
will consider the market value of the collateral you have pledged
against the value of the loan. Regardless of how the bank is compen-
sated, it’s important to have a contingency plan.
4. How will the loan help your business? Bankers want to be assured
that the infusion of cash into the business will help it build cash flow,
expand the sales force, or lead to cost controls. Count on a rejection
letter if you tell the banker the money will be used to increase your
salary or buy a fancy new vehicle.
5. What’s your personal stake? If your own finances aren’t on the line,
bankers won’t be interested in risking any of their cash. Banks prefer
a personal investment of at least 20 percent.
Rule #4: Sometimes You Have to Make ’Em Sweat
Our final banking rule is drawn from the experiences of Cecil B. Day, the
cofounder of Days Inn of America. In 1972 Day was trying to arrange fi-
nancing for his string of motels. He was having particular trouble with one
banker who stubbornly refused to loan money for construction. Frustrated,
Day decided some unorthodox tactics were in order. He knew that this par-
ticular banker was very fond of air-conditioning and had frequently bragged
about his air-conditioned office, home, and car. “Air-conditioning did for
the south what furnaces did for the North,” the banker was fond of saying.
Day asked the banker to ride with him to one of the motel construction sites
where he could see what was being done and where they could discuss
Day’s pending loan. The banker agreed, and Day arranged to pick him up
the next morning. The trip to the construction site would be one the banker
would never forget.
The day of their meeting, Day departed his home not in his normal auto-
mobile but driving his son’s 1971 Pinto. The Pinto had no radio, no ciga-
rette lighter, and most important for Day’s purposes, no air conditioning.
Day picked up the banker at the appointed time, and they began their hour-
long trip to the construction site. As they drove, the temperature began to
rise—80, 85, 90. The banker, who by now was beginning to sweat pro-
fusely, kept giving Day one excuse after another as to why the loan couldn’t
be made. Day was uncomfortable also, but he just kept driving and pitching
his case for the loan. The banker still refused. Day kept driving and plead-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
102

ing his case. The sun kept climbing in the sky, and the temperature kept
creeping up—92, 95, 98. Sweat poured off the banker. His suit was
drenched. Still, Day just kept driving and pitching his case. Finally, near
heat exhaustion, the banker yelled “Okay, okay. You can have the loan. Just
get me back to the bank where it’s cool.”28
Day knew that, in dealing with bankers, sometimes you just have to
make ’em sweat.
Dealing with Venture Capitalists
There are two sources of funds for your business—debt and equity. You go
to bankers for debt financing. At some point, you will likely have to go to
venture capitalists for your equity financing. If you are like most entrepre-
neurs, you’ve probably heard about venture capitalists. You may even have
read some stories about them, but chances are you don’t really know much
about the process of obtaining venture capital. That is what makes Charles
Ferguson’s 1999 book High Stakes, No Prisoners so helpful.29 Ferguson is
a cofounder of Vermeer Technologies, Inc., the company that created Front-
Page, a software tool for creating Web sites. Ferguson’s book chronicles his
involvement with Vermeer from the time of its founding in 1993 until it was
sold to Microsoft in 1996. Our interest here centers around the events of
August through December of 1994, when Ferguson was looking for fund-
ing for his dream. Here, in summary and in Exhibit 3.6, is what happened
and, more important, what Ferguson, a novice at starting companies,
learned about venture capitalists.
Lesson #1:Venture Capital Is a Rough Game
August 1994: Ferguson met his first venture capitalist (VC), Andy Marcu-
vitz, whom he describes as the ideal VC type—heavyset, badly fitting suit,
no discernible personality, no sense of humor, no compassion, never
makes a joke, rarely smiles, argues relentlessly, but keeps his voice even
and never loses his temper. At their first meeting, the two attempted to daz-
zle each other with their technical and business credentials. Finally, Fergu-
son announced that Vermeer was a “paradigm-shifting” company and that
if Marcuvitz wanted to hear more he would have to sign a nondisclosure
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
103

agreement. Anyway, Ferguson continued, he had some private investors
who might be an alternative to VCs. Regardless, he intended to drive a
hard bargain and would never give up control.
To Ferguson’s surprise, Marcuvitz was decidedly unimpressed. In fact,
Marcuvitz began to lecture:
Kid, if you think you can do it that way, be my guest. But you’re already rais-
ing warning flags for VCs. In the first place, we don’t like nondisclosure
agreements:They’re generally a sign of trouble, like husband-and-wife
boards of directors. Founders who are obsessed with secrecy tend not to
understand what’s really important to a company’s success, and sometimes
they’re just crazy.You should be letting us get to know you.You don’t seem
to have much business experience, and what little you do have is not in
startups.That’s okay, but be sure that you don’t make a big mistake. For ex-
ample, raising money from random rich people is usually bad: It’s dumb
money, and it takes too much time to service. If you do manage to fool
someone, your valuation will be too high. So then, when you try to get se-
rious VC money, either you’ll have to explain to your friends why you over-
charged them, or you’ll try to get the VCs to accept a huge setup for no
reason.VCs don’t play that game, so you could ruin your whole deal. And
anyway, your fears are misplaced:We don’t want to control you—we just
want to make money.30
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
104
EXHIBIT 3.6.
Lessons about Venture Capital
I
Lesson #1:Venture capital is a rough game.
I
Lesson #2: Unless you have an introduction from someone they know, most venture capi-
tal firms won’t even talk to you.
I
Lesson #3:Venture capitalists don’t invest in financial projections; they invest in people.
I
Lesson #4: Expect premoney valuation to be a major stumbling block.
I
Lesson #5:Venture capital presentations are grueling.
I
Lesson #6:Venture capitalists will drag the process out.
I
Lesson #7:Venture capitalists drive a tough bargain.
I
Lesson #8: If a venture capitalist suggests a party, he’ll stick you with the bill.

The rest of their meeting was a sparring match, with the participants
trading shots about the industry, the Internet, what’s possible and impossi-
ble in seeking VC capital, and so on. Ferguson came away rating the meet-
ing as a draw. Over the next few months, he learned several more hard les-
sons about raising venture capital.
Lesson #2: Unless You Have an Introduction from Someone They Know, Most
Venture Capital Firms Won’t Even Talk to You
August and September 1994: Ferguson attempted to contact other venture
capital firms with no luck. He learned quickly that he didn’t have the expe-
rience or contacts to get most of them even to return his phone calls.
Lesson #3:Venture Capitalists Don’t Invest Based on the Financial Projections:
They Invest in People
September 1994: Ferguson and Marcuvitz met again, and Marcuvitz agreed
to arrange a presentation at the offices of Matrix Partners in Waltham, Mas-
sachusetts. Ferguson provided an overview of the market—on-line ser-
vices, the Internet, growth of the Web, and so on. His staff followed with a
demonstration of the software, technical discussion, and review of finan-
cials. Marcuvitz listened politely to the numbers then announced that the fi-
nancials didn’t mean anything. They only indicated that the entrepreneur
had thought seriously about the size of the market and the cost of designing
and developing the product.
Lesson #4: Expect Premoney Valuation to Be a Major Stumbling Block
Mid-September 1994: At Marcuvitz’s request, Ferguson met with Paul
Ferri, the founder of Matrix and a longtime VC game player. Ferguson de-
scribes Ferri as “clearly a tough guy—even more laconic and poker-faced
than Marcuvitz.” Ferri had a number of questions for the entrepreneur:
I Do you plan to be CEO?
I How much money does the company need for the first round of fi-
nancing?
I What premoney valuation do you place on the company?
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
105

The latter question set off an argument. Premoney valuation is the value
of the company before the VC investment. It determines how much of the
company the venture capital company owns. For example, if the prevalua-
tion is $2 million and the venture capital firm puts in $4 million, then the
total value of the company after the investment is $6 million and the ven-
ture capital firm owns two-thirds of the company. On the other hand, if the
prevaluation is $8 million and the venture capital firm puts in the same $4
million, they end up owning only one-third of the company. Obviously,
VCs push for a low prevaluation. The danger for the entrepreneur is not
only losing control but ending up making very little money. Ferguson re-
called a friend who had joined a start-up owning 2 percent of the company.
Four years later the company was sold for $18 million, but because of a low
prevaluation, his original shares were so diluted that the friend received
only $76,000 for his original 2 percent stake.
Determined not to lose control and end up with a paltry sum after years
of 70-hour weeks, Ferguson told Ferri he wanted a premoney valuation be-
tween $20 million and $30 million. Marcuvitz and Ferri smiled and ex-
plained that Ferguson was naive. Such an evaluation was ridiculous and
maybe even dangerous. Venture-capital valuation rules of thumb, taking
into account Ferguson’s experience, the experience of his team, and the va-
garies of the market, they said, placed the prevaluation closer to $2 million
than $20 million. Ferguson argued back with a list of reasons why $2 mil-
lion was too low, but Marcuvitz and Ferri were unmoved. They suggested
that Ferguson talk to other VCs, if he didn’t believe them. They even pro-
vided some introductions to other VC firms.
Lesson #5:Venture Capital Presentations Are Grueling and Can Drain Your
Personal Bank Account
Mid-September to early December 1994: Ferguson and his team pre-
sented to more than 20 VC firms, half on the West Coast and half on the
East Coast. Travel expenses were eating into their remaining funds. The
presentations were filled with tension and anger. Most of the VC firms
didn’t know anything about the Internet and had to be educated. Most were
uninterested. Occasionally, conflicts of interest arose. For example, just be-
fore one meeting Ferguson discovered that a VC firm for which they were
scheduled to present was already an investor in a potential competitor. He
learned to research VC firms carefully before doing a presentation.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
106

Lesson #6:Venture Capitalists Will Drag the Process Out,Assuming That the
Longer It Takes for You to Get Funding, the More Willing You Will Be to Agree
to Their Terms
November 1994: Ferguson was getting scared. Many of his best people
were working without cash compensation, and he didn’t know how long he
could retain them that way. He needed to buy computers, acquire office
space, hire more people, and reserve space at trade shows. The Internet was
exploding, and he was running out of time and money. To make matters
worse, the VCs had raised new issues. They didn’t want the founder to be
the CEO; they wanted to bring in someone from the outside who was expe-
rienced running a start-up. Plus, they wanted Ferguson and cofounder
Randy Forgaard to agree to a period of vesting.
Lesson # 7:Venture Capitalists Drive a Tough Bargain
Late November 1994: Ferguson was in California again for another round
of presentations. He was exhausted and anxious to head home. Late on the
afternoon before he was scheduled to leave, he got a call from Wade Wood-
son from Sigma Partners, a small VC firm to which Ferguson had been talk-
ing for several months. Woodson wanted a meeting as soon as possible.
Ferguson was testy. He told Woodson that he already had a meeting that
night and that he would be flying out first thing in the morning. He said he
could meet Woodson at the airport at 6 A.M. but he mumbled, “What’s the
point if this is just another turn down?” Woodson replied: “I don’t think I
would get up at 5 A.M. for that. If I was just going to say no, I think I’d sleep
in.” “Oh!” thought Ferguson.
At six o’clock the next morning, Woodson handed Ferguson a term
sheet. Sigma Partners was proposing a $4 million investment with a pre-
valuation of $4 million. The proposal was contingent on several conditions:
(1) Ferguson must find two other VC firms willing to be coinvestors; (2) he
must take a 20 percent cut in his personal stock holdings in the company;
and (3) the stock-option pool for future employees must come out of Fergu-
son’s and Forgaard’s shares, not those of Sigma Partners. Ferguson calcu-
lated that he would be left with just 12 percent of the company and For-
gaard would own only 4 percent. They wouldn’t be getting nearly what they
wanted, and a number of issues, such as vesting, CEO selection, control, re-
mained to be solved. But Ferguson and Forgaard were exhausted and almost
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
107

out of funds. They accepted. It was just a handshake deal, with no papers
signed, and Sigma Partners could walk away anytime it wanted. As for Fer-
guson, Woodson cautioned him: “Now Charles . . . we have a deal. You
can’t use this to go out and shop for a better offer. No reputable firm will
give you better terms once they know that you’ve got a handshake deal with
us. And we will certainly walk away if we find out that you’re using our
offer as a bargaining lever. If we were to pull out under those circum-
stances, no one else would be interested in you.”31
Lesson #8: If a Venture Capitalist Suggests a Party, He’ll Stick You with the Bill
December 1994: Ferguson made a round of telephone calls to the few VC
firms that still seemed interested, hoping to line up the coinvestors that
Sigma demanded. Matrix finally agreed to come in on the deal, as did Atlas
Venture in Boston. The investment would consist of $1.6 million each from
Sigma and Matrix, plus $800,000 from Atlas Venture. Ferguson spent the
Christmas season on the phone, day and night, trying to resolve the remain-
ing outstanding issues of vesting, CEO selection, and so on. He got to be
CEO at a salary that was one-fifth of what he made before starting the com-
pany. Finally, the deal was done and a conference table full of papers were
signed. Marcuvitz even suggested a pizza party for the whole company to
celebrate. Ferguson recalls, “My goodness. . . . Marcuvitz has a human side.
But just before the dinner ended, he stood up, shook hands, and departed.
He had stuck me with the bill. That’s more like it, I thought.”32
A venture capitalist’s answer is “No, No, No” until it’s “Yes.” At which point
they add,“I’m going to pay you as little as possible for as much of your
company as I can get.”
Thomas Stemberg33
Maintaining Control
Whether the debate is over prevaluation, CEO selection, vesting, or any of
numerous other issues, conflict between investors and entrepreneurs usually
centers around one central issue—control. Our gurus have one piece of ad-
vice when it comes to that issue. Fight as long as you can and as hard as you
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
108

can to maintain as much control as you can. And beware of what Wilson
Harrell called the “hooey.” Here are three examples from Harrell:
Most investors will try and persuade the entrepreneur that they won’t ex-
ercise the control prerogative; that they’ll let the entrepreneur continue
running the company.That’s a bunch of hooey. Others will say that they
only want control until they get their money back, or make some predeter-
mined profit.That’s more hooey.
In rare instances, an investor will suggest that you become partners, with
equal control.That’s equal hooey. It just means you get to spend all your
time arguing or hiring lawyers. Entrepreneurs become entrepreneurs for
one simple reason: to be free. If you give that up, then you stop being an en-
trepreneur, and to hell with that.34
In the pursuit of funding, you will have to deal with Harrell’s “hooey” re-
peatedly. You’ll have to decide how much control you are willing to give up
to get the money you desperately need. Sometimes your best option, say our
gurus, is to reject the hooey outright. Just say no. Bernie Marcus says he had
to make that call at least twice while seeking funds to get Home Depot going.
The first instance involved none other than another of our gurus—Ross Perot.
In the late 1970s, Ken Langone, a Park Avenue investment banker and
later cofounder of Home Depot, was helping Bernie Marcus in his search
for $2 million to fund the opening of the first four Home Depot stores. Lan-
gone knew Ross Perot because he had helped Perot take EDS public in
1968. Langone arranged for Marcus to meet Perot, and after some sparring,
Marcus and Perot reached an understanding. Perot would put up the entire
$2 million. In return he would own 70 percent of Home Depot, Langone
would get 5 percent, and Marcus and Blank would retain 25 percent, with
which they would have to bring in additional people to run the business.
Marcus’s “hooey” decision came during the course of a meeting with Perot
in Dallas at which they were to hammer out the final details. Marcus de-
scribes the confrontation this way:
During a discussion of what perks would go with my salary, I told Perot I
had a small problem.While my salary and perks would be similar to those I
enjoyed at Handy Dan [Marcus’s previous employer], there was the matter
of a company car.
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
109

The leased car I had been driving was still being paid for by Handy Dan,
but the company would repossess it unless I planned to take over the
lease or buy it for the depreciated value.This was a good deal for a new
company.
“We ought to try to save as much money as we can,” I said.“I would like
to buy it outright at the depreciated value.Would you like me to buy it, and
then I will just charge it to our entity, or do you want to give me a check,
and I will pay for it?”
“That’s fine,” Perot said.“You can either do that or buy a new car, I don’t
really care.”
But then Perot decided to test me.“What kind of a car is it?” Perot
asked in that peculiar Texas drawl of his.
“It’s a Cadillac.”
Perot didn’t like that answer at all.
“My people don’t drive Cadillacs,” he said.“My guys at EDS drive Chev-
rolets.”
“That’s fine,” I said.“I think it’s a good policy for you, but this is a new
company we’re forming, not EDS. Look, this is a four-year-old car and I’m a
big guy. It is cheaper to have an old Cadillac than it is to go out and get a
new Chevrolet. So how do we pay for it?”
Not that the question meant anything.
“My people don’t drive Cadillacs,” Perot said again. And again,“My
people don’t drive Cadillacs.”
And when he said it the third time, I realized this was never going to
work.35
Marcus recalls sitting across the table from Perot and thinking, “What he
is really saying is ‘I am the boss; I control your life. I will tell you what to
do and what not to do.’” It was more than Marcus could take, so he called a
halt to the meeting.
I smiled.“Ross, I have to talk to Kenny for a minute.Would you mind if we
step outside?”
Ken was perplexed.
“Look, Kenny,” I whispered,“I know Perot is a very important person in
your life, but you have to understand something. If this guy is going to be
bothered by what kind of car I am driving, how much aggravation are we
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
110

going to have when we have to make really big decisions? If we can’t be free
to run the business the way we know it has to be run, it isn’t going to
work. I am never going to have this man for a partner. I would rather starve
to death. No way.”
Now it was Ken’s turn to wonder whose brains were scrambled.“You
must be out of your mind! Are you crazy? My God, he is going to give you
$2 million!”
“Kenny, I wouldn’t touch it with a ten-foot pole. I am out of here,” I said
and headed down the hall.36
Marcus walked away from the deal leaving Langone to make excuses to
Perot for his abrupt departure. Perot seemed to have no hard feelings about
the aborted deal, but Marcus later calculated that Perot’s 70 percent share in
Home Depot would have been worth about $58 billion in the late 1990s. It
was a high price for being hung up about Cadillacs and Chevrolets. As for
Marcus, Langone was eventually able to get the $2 million by selling pre-
ferred stock to a group of investors.
Marcus’s second turndown of a funding offer came not long after the
Perot episode. The $2 million in start-up capital that Langone had raised
from his investors proved sufficient to get Marcus and Blank to the point of
opening their stores. They had been able to acquire leases on four Atlanta-
area stores. What they didn’t have was the $3 million they estimated they
needed to purchase inventory and actually open the stores. “We needed that
$3 million,” writes Marcus, “the way someone dying of stab wounds needs
blood in their veins.”37
One potential source of funds that Langone lined up was a Boston-based
venture capitalist. He came to Atlanta, discussed the deal, and he and Mar-
cus reached an agreement. Marcus agreed to drive the VC back to the air-
port while the Home Depot staff celebrated. Then the hooey started.
I happily drove our new investor to the airport. But in the car, the man
turned very serious again.
“Listen, there are things I didn’t want to talk about in the office because
they are very sensitive, and I want to discuss them with you,” he said.
“What are they?” I asked
“First, I need two men on the board of directors.”
That was easy, something I anticipated.“Okay, you got it.”
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
111

“Now, when I make an investment, I like people to invest with me, and I
need an investment on your part.”
“What do you mean ‘investment’?”
“Well, I need to have you invest.”
“We started the business, we left everything in California, especially our
support system,” I said, puzzled.“We are sacrificing our lives here.”
“No, I mean more than that,” he said.“First of all, you should not have
company cars.”
We all had leased company cars because so much of our time was spent
in cars, driving all over Georgia on company business, and none of us could
afford to buy cars. Pat [Farrah, another founder] was broke and I was
broke, attorneys having sucked us both dry. Arthur and Ron [Brill, another
member of the founding team] had no money either.
“That would be kind of tough for us,” I said.“But if we could figure out a
way to pay for auto expenses, maybe we can do that.”
“Okay,” the man said.“Another thing is that everybody needs to take a
10 percent cut in salary.”
I stared at him in disbelief.“Everybody?”
“Yes.”
“Do you know what I just went through to hire these people? I hired
them from all over the United States. I brought them here. I sold them on
this dream.They took less money than they ever had made before, and they
left their security, all of those things, and you want me to cut their salaries
by 10 percent?”
“Yes.”
“Well, I guess we could do that, if that’s so important to you. I don’t
think it’s fair, but what choice do I have?”
“Now,” the man said,“is the best of all. I am not paying your employees’
or managers’ medical insurance. I think they should get it on their own.”
The blood rose up in my eyes. I swerved and pulled the car onto the
shoulder of the highway. My gut told me this was a terrible mistake, and my
premonitions so far had been right.“Get out of the car,” I said.“Get out of
the G-damn car!”
The man just looked at me. He thought I was crazy.We were in the mid-
dle of nowhere; cars and trucks were zipping by.
“I said, get out of the car! You are a stupid sonuvabitch! Do you think I
would get in bed with an imbecile like you? Get out of the f-ing car.You can
walk to the airport for all I care.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
112

I then got out of the car and, as the man timidly got out, I tossed his lug-
gage by the side of the road.
“Please don’t leave me here!” the man pleaded.“I have to catch a plane.”
After several minutes, still fuming, I relented and allowed the man back
in.“Don’t talk to me for the rest of the trip. I will have nothing to do with
you.We are finished.This partnership is over before it has begun.”38
Marcus eventually got his $3 million in funding in the form of a line of
credit with Security Pacific Bank, thanks to the help of Rip Fleming, the
loan officer we mentioned earlier. He also retained control, which is, of
course, what our gurus say you should do.
Ideally, say our gurus, you want to own 51 percent or more of the busi-
ness. Depending on your industry, that may or may not be possible. Howard
Schultz, for example, notes that if you have a retail business like his and
you want to expand rapidly with company-owned stores, you’ll require re-
peated injections of capital to cover expenses, inventory, rents, and so on. It
will be almost impossible to expand without giving up some of your stake
in the business. Schultz says he would have liked to have retained 50 per-
cent ownership of Starbucks, but at the time, he felt he had no choice but to
relinquish some control in order for Starbucks to grow.39
If you can’t retain 50 percent ownership for reasons such as Schultz out-
lines, our gurus urge you to negotiate for control of the company anyway.
How can you do that? Robert Mondavi had few funds of his own and
needed a substantial investment to get his winery going. Therefore, he
agreed to take a 20 percent equity share at the outset, provided that he re-
tained 50 percent of the vote on substantive issues. His investor agreed.40
Wilson Harrell was once in a situation in which he was desperate for funds.
He negotiated his heart out but still could not get the investor to budge. Fi-
nally Harrell agreed to give up 51 percent of the stock but with some con-
ditions. He insisted that the company bylaws be changed to allow him to
appoint two members of the board of directors. The investor would appoint
the other two members. The four directors would then pick a fifth accepta-
ble to all. As compensation for serving as president and CEO, Harrell nego-
tiated stock options that would be earned based on performance. Over a pe-
riod of years, Harrell was able to exercise these options and ultimately
regain 51 percent ownership.41 In short, say our gurus, keep fighting for
control any way you can.
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
113

Do anything, but don’t give up control. For example, agree to give up 60, 70
or 80 percent of the profits until the investor has recovered his or her in-
vestment, plus a reasonable return. Agree that you won’t increase your sal-
ary, or put your girlfriend on the payroll, or buy a yacht, or whatever. In
other words, agree that all the investor’s money will go exclusively to build-
ing the business. Agree to those kind of controls, but do everything possible
to keep 51 percent of the stock out of the control of any single individual.
Wilson Harrell42
MANAGING THE MONEY ONCE YOU GET IT
Let’s assume that you have dealt with all the hooey. You hung tough and re-
tained, if not 50 percent ownership, at least 50 percent control. You have the
money in your hands or bank account. Now you have to use it. More im-
portant, you have to manage it. Entrepreneurs usually aren’t very good at
that either. If venture capitalists are wary about allowing entrepreneurs to
be the CEOs in start-up companies, they are terrified at the prospect of hav-
ing a true entrepreneur serve as the chief financial officer. Here is how Fred
Lager, former president and CEO of Ben & Jerry’s and author of Ben &
Jerry’s: The Inside Scoop, describes Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield’s ap-
proach to money management during the early years of their company.
While funny, the Ben-and-Jerry approach to accounting is anything but
atypical.
Neither Jerry nor Ben liked to keep the books, and their recordkeeping
was almost nonexistent.Within two months of opening, there was a sign on
the front door of the gas station [the site of their first ice cream shop] that
read “We’re closed today so we can figure out if we’re making any money.”
They spent the day with an accountant, who tried to set them up with a
system that would keep track of their sales and expenses.
At first Jerry paid the bills, but when they ran into cash-flow problems,
Ben took over. Ben stopped paying the bills, and cash flow improved imme-
diately.The deposits were made up by whichever of the two closed up at
night.The cash got counted, stuffed into a night bag, and dropped off at the
Merchants Bank, where it was opened and deposited into their account the
next morning.The bank’s count almost never agreed with theirs, and they
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
114

put candy bars in the bags to compensate the tellers for the extra work in-
volved in reconciling their account.43
Our gurus, being true entrepreneurs, don’t have sterling records as money
managers. However, they do have four pieces of general advice on that topic:
1. Be a miser.
2. Know your numbers.
3. Reinvest in the business.
4. When all else fails, be creative.
Let’s take a look at each of these pieces of advice.
Be a Miser
Lillian Vernon echoes the advice of our other gurus, “Do not spend your
hard-earned cash on anything but necessities—stylish office furnishings
and the like are peripheral to the ultimate success of your business.”44 Ver-
non recalls that, when she started her mail-order business, she composed
advertising copy on a $25 manual typewriter, cranked out mailing labels on
an old Addressograph, used the backs of order forms for scratch pads, and
even recycled paper clips. Your major aim when you are starting out, says
Vernon, should be liquidity.
Liquidity [is] the business world’s term for actual cash.There are misunder-
standings about the word cash; profits are not cash, accounts receivable are
not cash until they are received, and physical assets are not cash. Although
your computer system is a company asset, it can’t pay the utility bills or
meet your employees’ salaries.Think of cash for your company as you think
of the money in your checking account: it is always available.You use it to
pay bills, to tide you over in an emergency: suppose a labor strike hits your
product-delivery system and you can’t get the goods to the customer on
time. Once your business is established, only cash can give you the where-
withal to expand.45
The other point to remember about cash, says Vernon, is that it takes time
to arrive. Just because you are showing a profit on paper doesn’t mean you
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
115

can pay your bills. “Suppose you paid off your bills for inventory and you
have sold enough product to show, on paper anyway, a profit. Until your cus-
tomers actually pay you, however, you have no cash on hand. There may be
a time lag ranging from two to three months between your outlay and your
cash income. That is the harrowing time for a beginning business.46
The best way to make the time less harrowing, say our gurus, is to con-
serve your cash.
Know Your Numbers
Of course, you can’t conserve cash unless you know exactly how much cash
you have. That means you have to know your numbers. “‘Know your
numbers’is a fundamental precept of business,” writes Bill Gates. “The busi-
ness side of any company starts and ends with hard-core analysis of its
numbers. Whatever else you do, if you don’t understand what’s happening in
your business factually and you’re making business decisions based on anec-
dotal data or gut instinct alone, you’ll eventually pay a big price.”47 Learn to
read your balance sheets and income statements. Most important, say our
gurus, set aside a specific time on a regular basis to analyze all of the numbers
about your business—financial and nonfinancial. Debbi Fields says she starts
every business day playing Sherlock Holmes with her sales figures:
I get to my office early in the morning—in winter it’s still dark and cold in
the mountains—and I go right for the coffee.
Next stop: the store controller’s office. Steaming cup in one hand, com-
puter printout in the other, I read down long lists of numbers, sometimes
stopping, sometimes backing up.
The computer tells the story of one day in the life of a company, who
won and who lost, successes and failures in more than five hundred Mrs.
Fields Cookies stores spread over twenty-five states and five foreign coun-
tries, on four continents, spanning sixteen time zones. By 6:00 A.M., Utah
time, all this information has flowed into a terminal in Park City, high in the
Utah Mountains.
For the next hour or so, I play Sherlock Holmes. Hidden among these
numbers are special problems that need to be fixed. I need to find them,
and, because I am the chief executive officer of this company, it’s up to me
to fix them. Fix them now.The way I’ve come to think about it, last month’s
profit and loss statements are ancient history; that’s all over and done with.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
116

What matters to me is what happened yesterday and what I can do about
it today. . . .
As I read across the columns for a certain store or district, a picture of
the problem begins to form in my mind and, close beside it, an idea of what
the solution might be. My hand begins to wander toward the telephone—
the day is beginning.48
Notice that while reviewing the numbers Fields is simultaneously devel-
oping a plan of action to make them better. That’s another key, say our
gurus. “The analysis should always support action,” advises Bill Gates,
“not just more analysis. Analysis should lead you step by step to a decision
and to action. You have to think, act, evaluate, adapt.”49
Reinvest in the Business
As you review your numbers, you should be able to identify the liquidity
that Vernon mentioned. You will be tempted to take some of that wonderful
liquidity for yourself. After all, you have worked hard, you’ve sacrificed for
it, and you’ve earned a few treats for yourself—a little indulgence. Resist
the temptation, say our gurus. When you are starting a business, you
shouldn’t be taking money out. Any money the business earns, over and
above the bare essentials you need to survive, should be reinvested in the
business. Vernon declares that it is the single piece of advice she would give
new entrepreneurs. She recalls taking enough out of her business in the
early years to eat, live, and educate her children. Beyond that, all the money
went back into the business. “Just as real estate people tell you that loca-
tion, location, and location are the three essential considerations when buy-
ing a house, so do I believe that reinvest, reinvest, and reinvest are the three
rules of starting up a business and keeping it going. . . . There is a line in
Thornton Wilder’s play The Matchmaker to the effect that money is like
manure, it should be used to make things grow.”50
A fellow who hasn’t been in business before looks in the cash register and
thinks,“That’s all mine.” But it isn’t. It belongs to the vendors, to his em-
ployees, to debt retirement, to interest, to royalties.
Bud Hadfield51
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
117

When All Else Fails, Be Creative
Of course, you can do your absolute best at managing cash flow and still
find yourself broke. Despite your best intentions, your liquidity may solid-
ify. What then? Then you do what you do best. You’re an entrepreneur, an
innovator, and a creator. Innovate and create. Almost all of our gurus at one
time or another have had to resort to unusual tactics to pay their bills, and
you will too. Here are three examples to get your creative juices flowing.
Ted Turner’s “Beg-a-Thon”
After purchasing a money-losing television station in Atlanta and turning it
around with innovative and often irreverent programming and promotion,
Ted Turner attempted to do the same with a station in Charlotte, North Car-
olina. This time, Ted’s superstation formula didn’t seem to be working as
well. The station was bleeding red ink. Desperate for cash, Turner decide to
go directly to his viewers for help. He launched a 24-hour fund-raising
“beg-a-thon,” as he called it, during which Turner personally went on the
air and asked his viewers to send in whatever they could afford to help save
his station. Over 35,000 people responded to his appeal, sending in contri-
butions that ranged from 25 cents to as much as $100. Turner raised nearly
$50,000 for his ailing station.
In typical entrepreneurial fashion, Turner is said to have used the money
to build a new parking garage for the station rather than paying off his
debts. Nevertheless, Turner kept the station alive. When he ultimately sold
it eight years later, he paid back every dime to the 35,000 contributors to his
“beg-a-thon.” It seems he had kept the names and addresses of all those
who had made a contribution.52
Fred Smith Goes to Las Vegas
In the early 1970s, Fred Smith met with representatives of General Dynam-
ics in New York, seeking funding for his struggling overnight delivery ser-
vice, Federal Express. Smith left the meeting discouraged, having been
turned down again by a source he had been sure would come through with
some badly needed cash. As Smith tells the story, he went to the airport to
catch his flight back to Memphis. As he was checking in, he saw a TWA
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
118

flight schedule announcing a departing flight to Las Vegas. On impulse,
Smith opted for the flight to Vegas.
On landing, Smith proceeded to the nearest casino and began placing
bets. He had all of $100 in his pocket. Over the next few hours, he won
$27,000, which he immediately sent back to Memphis. By various ac-
counts, the money was used to make the payroll or purchase fuel for the
planes. Smith recalls that the $27,000 wasn’t decisive, but as he puts it, “it
was a omen that things would get better.”53 And they did.
Ben & Jerry’s Ice-Cream-for-Life Payment Program
Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield opened their first ice-cream parlor in an
old abandoned gas station that Fred Lager describes as “the embodiment of
funk. . . .  It had been built in the 1940s, and the exterior walls were covered
by a white baked-enamel aluminum skin that was sectioned off into large,
two-foot squares, giving the station an almost igloo-like appearance. The
roof was flat, and the right front corner of the building was curved in a
wide, sweeping arc that visually softened the impact of the structure as it
protruded into the lot.”54 The station had no heat and obviously needed a lot
of work to be turned into anything resembling an ice-cream parlor. Because
they had limited construction skills, the pair hired Darrell Mullis, an em-
ployee of a local building contractor to help with the work. The only prob-
lem was that they had no money to pay Mullis. Needing the help anyway,
Cohen and Greenfield came up with an innovative proposition. Would Mul-
lis be willing to perform the work in return for ice cream? Mullis thought it
over and agreed, thus becoming the first charter member of Ben & Jerry’s
“Ice-Cream-for-Life-Club.”
They later offered a similar deal to their plumber, Lanny Watts. Lager
describes Watts as Burlington, Vermont’s, “alternative, hippie plumber.” He
didn’t advertise and wasn’t listed in the Yellow Pages. He was also innova-
tive. For example, while repairing the plumbing in Cohen and Greenfield’s
broken-down gas station, soon-to-be ice-cream parlor, Watts discovered a
broken urinal in the bathroom. Concerned that ripping it off the wall might
lead to other repairs that the pair couldn’t afford, Watts simply left the uri-
nal in place and built a plywood box to cover it. Watts’original arrangement
with Cohen and Greenfield was to work for his regular hourly rate plus ma-
terials. The problem was that he quickly lost track of how much and which
materials he had used. Watts didn’t want to have to reconstruct everything
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
119

from scratch, so he asked Jerry Greenfield if he could just ballpark it. Jerry
thought for a moment and then made a counteroffer. Would Watts be will-
ing to accept the same deal they had given Darrell Mullis—free ice cream
for life or as long as Ben & Jerry were in business, whichever came first?
Watts considered the offer for a moment and then said he had some ques-
tions. Did the offer apply just to the original store or did it include any sub-
sequent franchises? Never having thought about franchises, Greenfield
readily agreed. “Sure, Lanny, it includes our franchises,” answered Green-
field. But that wasn’t enough for Watts, who wanted further clarification.
“Well, I’m not just talking about your Vermont franchises now, I’m talking
about all the franchises, coast-to-coast.” Standing in the rubble of what he
thought would be his first and only outlet, Greenfield agreed. “Sure
Lanny,” he said, “coast to coast. No problemo.” Watts thus became the sec-
ond member of the ice-cream club. But it wasn’t to last. About six weeks
after Cohen and Greenfield opened their store, Watts came by to say that he
had run into some cash-flow problems of his own and wanted out of the ice-
cream club. The pair reluctantly agreed and bought back Watts’s member-
ship for $350. Lager notes that it was one of the most shortsighted business
transactions a plumber had ever made—“Lanny’s fish story. The one that
got away.”55
GOING PUBLIC
“For most entrepreneurs,” writes Thomas Stemberg, “taking their company
public is the Holy Grail. An initial public offering, or IPO, betokens accep-
tance by the financial community and credibility among corporate peers.”
Of course, there is another benefit—“It turns company founders into multi-
millionaires.”56 Correction—it can turn young founders into billionaires.
For a notable example, look to Bill Gates. Microsoft stock went on sale on
March 15, 1986, at $21 per share. Almost immediately it went to $55.50
and then to $90.75. At the age of 31, Bill Gates became the youngest bil-
lionaire in history.
Okay, you’re saying, this is what I have been waiting for—making it big,
becoming a billionaire. After all of the drudgery—finding seed money, beg-
ging bankers, wooing VCs, watching every nickel and dime, and working,
working, working, and working some more with little pay and less sleep—
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
120

now is the time to cash it all in and get rich. But hold on just a moment, say
our gurus. Going public can lead to riches for the founders, and it can have
other advantages. But it also can have some disadvantages. Here is what
Howard Schultz discovered when he took Starbucks public:
The Advantages
Being a public company has lent Starbucks a certain patina, taking it to the
big leagues. Our stock market listing provided the liquidity that has allowed
many people at Starbucks, including me, to cash in stock options and buy
things we need or have long wished for. It has likewise served as a great in-
centive to attract talented people, who join us not only because of the ex-
citement of building a fast-growing company but also because of the value
we are creating.
Our success on Wall Street also added dimension to the brand. It al-
lowed us to go back to the market almost every year and ask investors for
more money to underwrite our growth.We’ve raised close to $500 million
since going public, by issuing new stock or selling bonds that convert into
stock if the price goes above a certain level. I personally enjoy the intellec-
tual stimulation of interacting with the bright people I’ve met on Wall
Street, people who have done their homework and understand the com-
pany. I also like the challenge of formulating a strategy for Starbucks to fi-
nance its growth.57
And the Disadvantages
It exposes your business to a high degree of scrutiny and your personal life
to a sudden lack of privacy. Most importantly, it increases the weight of re-
sponsibility to shareholders and imposes a burden of meeting Wall Street’s
expectations. . . . Alongside the exhilaration of being a public company is
the humbling realization, every quarter, every month, and every day, that
you’re a servant to the stock market.That perception changes the way you
live, and you can never go back to being a simple business again.58
Going public is the financial and legal equivalent of stringing up your under-
wear for everyone to examine. And the examination is endless.
Thomas Stemberg59
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
121

Still interested? Still convinced going public is the Holy Grail? Okay,
then, exactly what is the process for taking your company public? Well, say
our gurus, it ain’t as easy as it looks. “Taking a company public,” declares
Bernie Marcus, “requires a magical, mystical combination of dazzling
numbers, personality, and a little sleight of hand.”60 It’s somewhat like find-
ing venture capital, only tougher. Here is how two young Internet entrepre-
neurs recently did it.
Their names are Chris Larsen and Janina Pawlowski. Larson, a former
auditor for Chevron, and Pawlowski, a former mortgage broker, quit their
jobs in 1992 to start a mortgage business. In 1995 they took their business
on-line as E-Loan. The business model was simple. They would save home
buyers as much as 50 percent on mortgage fees by cutting out the loan
agent and handling the process over the Internet. By December 1998 they
had revenues of $6.8 million, and although they had not shown a profit,
they were confident that it was time to take their company public. Here’s
the chronology:61
January 13, 1999: E-Loan’s board approves an IPO, and Larsen and
Pawlowski begin their search for investment bankers to help them.
Seven investment banks compete for the honor of underwriting the
E-Loan offering and taking 7 percent of proceeds as their fee. The
pair is anxious to select an investment banker with analysts who
can spur investor interest. By February they settle on Goldman
Sachs and Company because of its knowledge of E-Loan and the
mortgage industry. The participants agree to take E-Loan public by
Memorial Day so they can catch investors before the summer-
vacation season.
February–March 1999: Larsen and Pawlowski undertake the arduous
task of drafting a prospectus. The prospectus will be the only docu-
ment that E-Loan can use to attract investors. Every word must be
precise. Risks to investors must be spelled out. If something goes
wrong with the stock, the prospectus will be E-Loan’s and its founders
chief defense. Getting the wording right is tough because the bankers,
lawyers, and executives all have to agree. Larsen describes the pro-
cess as like 35 people trying to write a term paper. The final draft is
hammered out during one long 32-hour session in late March, and the
prospectus is sent to the printer.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
122

As E-Loan’s vice-president for business development puts it, “ev-
erything begins to happen at warp speed.” E-Loan rushes to close
some expansion deals in Japan and Europe and to reach agreement on
credit lines to fund consumer loans.
Larsen and Pawlowski start getting calls from friends and relatives
they have never known—including none other than Barbra Streisand.
Streisand, like the rest, wants to be put on the “friends-and-family”
list so she can purchase shares at the initial offering price. Pawlowski
is impressed and puts Streisand’s name on the list. Other new friends
and family don’t fare as well.
April 1999: Larsen, Pawlowski, and their chief financial officer, Frank
Siskowski, begin preparing for two weeks of presentations they will
be giving to potential investors in June. They hire a communications
consultant to help them and run through several practice sessions
while she watches. Her verdict: Siskowski seems okay. Larsen talks
too fast. Pawlowski sounds tentative. All need more practice.
While Larsen, Pawlowski, and Siskowski are practicing, E-Loan’s
prospects turn south. Refinancings that drove E-Loan’s perfor-
mance in the first quarter are slowing due to rising interest rates. As
a consequence, E-Loan’s revenues for the quarter are likely to be
flat. That’s bad news for the IPO because it may spook investors.
Worse, two IPOs for Internet companies “break” or fall below their
offering price on the first day, and the Dow Jones industrial average
dives 235 points in a single day. The signs look very bad for 
E-Loan’s IPO.
Reluctantly, the parties involved decide to hold off. They won’t be
going public before Memorial Day. The question is, When will they
be going public? Goldman Sachs suggests waiting until the end of
July, but Pawlowski and Larsen are worried about such a long delay.
They finally reach an agreement—they will go public June 29 but
drop E-Loan’s filing range by $2 a share to between $9 and $11 to
keep investor interest. It could cost E-Loan up $7 million in what
they raise from the offering, but, they reason, they can always raise
the filing range closer to the time of the IPO if market conditions im-
prove.
June 15, 1999: Larsen, Pawlowski, and Siskowski kick off two weeks of
presentations to investors with a meeting at T. Rowe Price Associates
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
123

in Baltimore. Then it’s on to investor meetings in Milwaukee, Min-
neapolis, Kansas City, Denver, San Diego, Los Angeles, San Fran-
cisco, Chicago, Houston, New York, Boston, and so on. They give
58 presentations to nearly two hundred money managers in 12 days.
Sometimes they are scheduled for eight presentations in a single
day, starting as early as 7 A.M. Pawlowski describes the experience
to company employees in a message on the company Intranet this
way: “Drive, drive, drive. Park. Go to the bathroom. Present [to the
investors]. Get feedback. Go to the bathroom. Drive, drive, drive . . .
Park, run, run, run, sweat, run. No time for the bathroom! . . .
Whew! . . . Do we have to do this again tomorrow?”62
Pawlowski compares the experience to that of actor Bill Murray
in the movie Groundhog Day. Her life is just one day lived over 
and over.
The road show ends on Friday, June 25. Larsen and Pawlowski
sweat out the weekend. They are hoping for a offering price of $16 a
share. They will hear from Goldman Sachs on Monday.
Monday, June 28, 1999: A Goldman general partner calls to say that
Goldman is worried that some potential investors may be wavering.
That being the case, they want to bring E-Loan out at $12 to $14.
Larsen and Pawlowski are crushed, but it is out of their control. By the
end of the day Goldman Sachs decides on $14. It’s at the top of the
range and much better than the $9 to $11 that they had agreed to back
in the spring. Still, the E-Loan founders are disappointed.
June 29, 1999: Larsen, Siskowski, and Pawlowski, who is accompanied
by her nine-year-old son, are gathered at Goldman Sachs near Wall
Street, staring at computer screens, waiting for trading to begin. Sud-
denly, E-Loan’s symbol snakes across the screen. The price—20 7/8.
They are already up 50 percent. Larsen and crew rush to call the
troops back in California. E-Loan’s entire staff of 250 is glued to the
ticker. Someone calls out the E-Loan price. The stock just hit $23—
now it’s at $30—$38—$43. By the time the market closes, E-Loan’s
stock is up 164 percent, and 41 of E-Loan’s employees find that they
are suddenly millionaires. Larsen and Pawlowski do even better—
over $200 million each. (See Exhibit 3.7 for a summary of the results
of E-Loan’s IPO.)
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
124

DEALING WITH WALL STREET
With their successful IPO, Larsen and Pawlowski joined the ranks of suc-
cessful entrepreneurs. They created a company and saw it legitimized by
the market. Welcome, say our gurus, to a new experience, one that Howard
Schultz describes as an emotional roller coaster. “In the beginning,” writes
Schultz, “you accept the congratulations [for your company’s stock perfor-
mance] as if you really deserve them. Then, when the stock price falls, you
feel you have failed. When it bounces back, it leaves you dizzy.”63 What’s
so frustrating about the ride, says Schultz and our other gurus, is that you
have very little control over it. Your stock goes up. Your stock goes down.
But the true value of your company stays the same. All the time you are
either being praised or damned. By way of example, Schultz recalls dra-
matic fluctuations in Starbucks’s stock price during the first part of 1996
that seemed to have no relation to what was actually happening with the
company. His story is typical.
In early December 1995, Starbucks’ stock price reached a record high—the
sort of news that normally lifts moods around the office. But in fact, we had
just learned that our Christmas merchandise was not selling as well as we
had predicted, and tension ran high as we waited for the final results of the
critical holiday selling season.
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
125
EXHIBIT 3.7.
Results of E-Loan’s IPO
Total amount raised
$56,300,000
Minus fees:
Underwriters
$3,900,000
Attorneys
$700,000
Accountants
$550,000
Prospectus printer
$500,000
Listing, filing, and IPO registration
$118,000
Miscellaneous
$132,000
What E-Loan took home for selling 10 percent of its equity
$50,300,000
Source: Robert D. Hof,“Inside an Internet IPO,” Business Week, September 6, 1999, p. 63.

In early January, when we announced December comps of only 1 per-
cent, the stock fell dramatically, from $21 to $16. In just a few days, we lost
$300 million in market value, even though we had announced only a $5 mil-
lion shortfall in sales. Concerned investors called me up, asking:“Why is the
company performing so poorly?” The Wall Street Journal declared that we
were a “shining light” that “may now be fading.” Analysts seemed sure that
our growth days were over, that the bloom was off the rose.
In fact, Starbucks hadn’t changed in that month. Although our sales were
lower than expected, our overall annual sales growth was nearly 50 per-
cent.We were still buying and roasting coffee.We were opening a store a
day.We continued with our plans to enter new cities and introduce new
products.
Three months later, the stock rose to another all-time high. Comps
were healthy again for the first three months of the year.
Goldman Sachs, one of the pedigree bankers on the Street, with no
vested interest in Starbucks, predicted even higher profit margins and a
higher stock price.
Investors were now phoning to congratulate me—some of them the
same people who had called with serious concerns during the Christmas
season.
What had changed? Again, nothing substantial. Starbucks was the same
company in April that it was in January.The difference was that Wall Street
suddenly decided the company was worth a lot more.64
At some point, advises Schultz, you have to come to grips with the irra-
tional nature of Wall Street. Relax and just focus on running your business.
Try to remain calm through the “heady highs and sickening lows.” And
when the financial press calls to ask you what happened and what might
happen and why, just maintain your composure. No one does that better
than Ben Cohen. Maybe that’s a good way to end this chapter. Here are
highlights of one of Cohen’s most notable interviews with the Wall Street
press. This time it was the Wall Street Transcript (TWST). Notice how calm
Cohen remains throughout the interview, brilliantly fielding each question.
Learn from it. You may have to do this some day.65
TWST: Do you believe you can attain a 15-percent increase in earnings
each year over the next five years?
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
126

BEN: I got no idea.
TWST: Umm-hmm. What do you believe your capital spending will be
each year over the next five years?
BEN: I don’t have any idea as to that either.
TWST: I see. How do you react to the way the stock market has been treat-
ing you in general and vis-à-vis other companies in your line?
Ben: I think the stock market goes up and down, unrelated to how a com-
pany is doing. I never expected it to be otherwise. I anticipate that it will
continue to go up and down, based solely on rumor and whatever sort of
market manipulation those people who like to manipulate the market can
accomplish.
TWST: What do you have for hobbies?
BEN: Hobbies. Let me think. Eating mostly. Ping-Pong.
TWST: Huh?
BEN: Ping-Pong.
See, we told you Ben Cohen was brilliant.
KEY IDEAS
Money matters, but raising it is the activity that entrepreneurs hate most.
Most entrepreneurs go with their instincts in estimating start-up costs.
Most experts recommend a process similar to the following to arrive
at start-up costs:
 Step one: Prepare a personal austerity budget.
 Step two: Determine your initial cash outlay.
 Step three: Determine your working-capital requirements.
 Step four: Determine the total funds you will need.
 Step five: Double your estimate.
There are two sources of funds—debt and equity. Entrepreneurs
should strive for a balance of both.
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
127

Bankers and investors have a different mind-set from that of entrepre-
neurs. As a result, entrepreneurs should expect frequent rejection as
they seek funding.
Your best sources of initial funding are friends and relatives. Just be
sure that all loans and investments are documented.
Bankers don’t make loans to companies; they make loans to people.
Therefore, the relationship you develop with a banker will be critical
to your success in obtaining financing.
Entrepreneurs who do not speak the accounting and finance language
of bankers should employ an intermediary who does.
Venture capitalists don’t invest based on financial projections. They
invest in people. Therefore, it is important that any venture capitalists
you approach get to know and like your team.
Premoney valuation will always be a stumbling block in negotiations
with venture capitalists.
Conflicts between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists normally
center around issues of control of the company. You should fight long
and hard to retain as much control of your company as possible. If you
cannot retain 51 percent ownership, at least try for an arrangement
that gives you freedom to make the most important decisions about
company operations without interference.
Walk away from any deal if you feel you are sacrificing too much
control or if you are not comfortable with the investors.
The following are keys to managing money:
 Be a miser.
 Know your numbers.
 Reinvest in the business.
 When all else fails, be inventive.
Going public can make you rich and legitimize your company. The
disadvantages are that you lose your privacy and become a servant to
the stock market.
Taking a company public requires a magical, mystical combination of
dazzling numbers, personality, and a little sleight of hand.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
128

Running a public company is an emotional roller coaster with dizzy-
ing highs and lows. As the founder, you have no control over the di-
rection of the roller coaster, but you will receive both praise and
blame for whatever happens.
The only way to cope with an irrational Wall Street is just to relax and
focus on running your business.
M O N E Y  M AT T E R S
129

G E T T I N G  C U S TO M E R S — T h e  G u r u s
J.Walter (Walt) Anderson, cofounder of White Castle
Marc Andreessen, cofounder of Netscape Communications
Mary Kay Ash, founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics
Phineas Taylor (P.T.) Barnum, founder of “The Greatest Show on
Earth”
Arthur Blank, cofounder of Home Depot
Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group
Jim Clark, founder of Silicon Graphics and cofounder of Netscape
Communications
Ben Cohen, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Debbi Fields, founder of Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc.
Earl Graves, founder, publisher, and editor of Black Enterprise
Jerry Greenfield, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Wilson Harrell, founder of over one hundred companies, columnist
for Success Magazine, and former publisher of Inc. Magazine
Masaru Ibuka, cofounder of Sony Corporation
Edgar Waldo (Billy) Ingram, cofounder of White Castle
Phil Knight, cofounder of Nike Corporation
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s Corporation
Edwin Land, founder of Polaroid Corporation
Bernie Marcus, cofounder of Home Depot
Robert Mondavi, founder of Robert Mondavi Winery
Akio Morita, cofounder of Sony Corporation
David Packard, cofounder of Hewlett-Packard
Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop
Pleasant Rowland, founder of Pleasant Company
Colonel Harland Sanders, founder of Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC)
Thomas Stemberg, cofounder of Staples, Inc.
R. David (Dave) Thomas, founder of Wendy’s International, Inc.
Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting System, Cable News
Network (CNN) and Turner Network Television (TNT)
Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
130

Getting Customers
I
f you have worked your way through our first three chapters, by now
you should have done the following:
I Explored whether you have what it takes to join Club Terror.
I Started searching for, and maybe found, your perfect idea.
I Considered how you can scrape together enough money to get your
business started.
Your next step will be to open the door to your business, launch your
Web site, announce your wonderful new product or service, and—have cus-
tomers avoid you in droves. Contrary to the fantasy of the movies, if you
build it, they will not necessarily come—at least not initially and not with-
out some prodding. Don’t panic, our gurus advise, it happens to most entre-
preneurs.
When Bernie Marcus and Arthur Blank opened their first Home Depot
stores in Atlanta, they sent their children into the parking lot to hand out
dollar bills to potential customers. Their idea was to lure customers into
the stores by giving them the opportunity to win prizes by matching the se-
rial numbers on the bills to numbers posted on signs inside the stores. The
kids started the day with $700. They ended the day with almost $700. Mar-
cus and Blank had so few customers, they couldn’t even give their money
away.1
Thomas Stemberg had a similar problem wooing customers when he
opened his first Staples. In an effort to entice office managers into his store,
131
4

he distributed coupons good for discounts on office supplies to office man-
agers at businesses in the area surrounding the store. Then he waited and
waited and waited. It took more than a month before the first office man-
ager showed up with one of Stemberg’s coupons. It seemed the office man-
agers in the area had little, if any, interest in Stemberg’s office superstore.2
The experiences of Marcus, Blank, and Stemberg are common. Like in-
vestors, customers are hard to attract, but don’t despair. Our gurus have
plenty of advice to offer. Here is how they recommend that you get cus-
tomers.
USE PROMOTIONS AND GIMMICKS TO GET ATTENTION
Your first priority, say our gurus, is to let your potential customers know
that you exist. You have to announce your business. Most of our gurus
started with some type of short-term promotion intended to create customer
awareness and build traffic. Marcus and Blank’s dollar bills and Stemberg’s
coupons are two good examples. A list of others is shown at Exhibit 4.1.
The following sections discuss each idea.
Give Your Product Away
When Debbi Fields opened her first cookie store, she recalls standing be-
hind the counter hour after hour with no customers and no sales. The
cookies that she had baked early that morning lay in the display case be-
coming less fresh and less warm with each passing minute. Fields knew she
would have to throw them away because they no longer met her standards.
She was mad at the world. “Here I had something wonderful to share,” she
remembered, “and all people seemed to care about was price.” At that
point, Fields says, she made a critical decision. “I thought, if I can’t sell
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
132
EXHIBIT 4.1.
Short-Term Promotional Ideas
I
Give your product away.
I
Celebrate the holidays.
I
Use contests and games.
I
Do something mysterious.

them, I’m going to give them away.” Fields called a friend to come and tend
the store, “just in case some disoriented consumer attempted to buy a
cookie,” loaded up a tray of cookies, and went out on the street. Fields cred-
its what happened next as a critical component to her business that, in a few
years, would begin grossing over a hundred million dollars annually.
I was bound and determined to get a reaction.I simply couldn’t believe that
years of compliments and smiles on behalf of these cookies counted for noth-
ing.I was afraid of rejection,embarrassed that I might meet someone I knew.
What I really wanted to do was crawl into one of my new cabinets, slam
the door, and cry until I fell asleep. But the idea of failure absolutely terri-
fied me. I was so afraid to fail that I physically forced myself to take my plas-
tic tray and head out into the busy Palo Alto streets.
“Sir, would you try these cookies, please?”
“Mmm, these are good.Where can I buy them?”
Not everybody was willing to taste a free cookie, but eventually the
braver souls finished up what I had on the tray. I went back to the store
and started baking. An hour later, some of the people who’d tried a cookie
on the street wandered into the arcade and presented themselves at the
counter.They’d found me! And they bought cookies.
By the end of the day, I had exactly fifty dollars in sales in my cash
drawer and I won my bet with Randy [Fields’s husband had bet her she
couldn’t sell fifty dollars worth of her cookies the first day].When I came
home, flushed with victory, he bet me I couldn’t sell seventy-five dollars’
worth the following day.
That day, after giving away some more cookies, I did seventy-five dollars
in sales.3
Fields says that, since the first day in Palo Alto, she has been a true fan of
giving the product away.
Ever since that first sunny morning in Palo Alto, I’ve believed in giving free
samples to the public, and that is the ongoing policy of Mrs. Fields Cookies
today, wherever the stores might be found. It’s a very simple statement:
here’s a cookie sample, and I’m betting my business that once you’ve had a
taste, you’ll be back as a customer. I’m also saying,You are the judge of this
product.We are not selling by hype or high pressure, and we are betting that
we can please you enough to make you buy what you just got for free.4
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
133

Sound good? Just give away some of your product or a little of your service
and customers will beat a path to your door. Well, not necessarily. Fields
argues that this approach works only when it is treated as more than just a
product giveaway. She continues:
Offering a sample to a potential customer is a pleasant sort of exchange. It
involves human contact, a few words back and forth, an act of giving that
takes the chill off the marketplace. . . .
The idea is based on my experiences as a shopper at the friendly stores
in Menlo Park. Every person who comes to a Mrs. Fields counter is impor-
tant, really important. It’s become quite the fashion for service personnel, in
a certain type of restaurant, for instance, to be terribly chummy. Only one
way will this work: if it’s really meant. Insincere patter turns people off like
crazy—you have to hire individuals who have an instinctive affection for
other human beings, and you cannot teach them some line of formula chit-
chat to use on the customer. Spontaneity is everything; it must come from
the heart!
In my little store in Palo Alto, I did what I meant to do the whole time I
was planning the business: I made friends everywhere. Apparently, I wasn’t
the only person in the world tired of being treated like a detached hand
with a dollar in it. Every day more and more people discovered the store,
every day more and more of them came back. I had customers who came
every morning, five days a week at 10:00 A.M. for their coffee break. Some-
times, when they couldn’t make it, they would telephone to let me know
they wouldn’t be in. I got to know many of my customers by name, I knew
where they worked, I knew about their families, I knew about their lives.
At one time, the neighborhood diner or cafe worked in exactly the
same way. But that concept was put aside—lost in the anonymity of mass
feeding, and fast food restaurants. So I didn’t create the idea—I just woke
it up.
Maybe the food-service business had changed, but I discovered that
people hadn’t changed at all.They still wanted and needed recognition.The
store worked.The idea worked.5
Debbi Fields says her idea can work for you if you remember one simple
thing—it is the pleasant exchange, the sincere human interaction, that
makes the difference. People get to sample your product or service, that’s
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
134

true. But more important, they feel the chill being removed from the
marketplace. They associate your business with warmth and friendship—
and that’s not a bad association.
Use Contests and Games
Next to product giveaways, games and contests are probably the most
popular attention getters our gurus have tried and recommend. Sam Walton
was a particular fan of contests and used them frequently to attract custom-
ers to his Wal-Mart stores. Among his favorites were these two:
I Hidden item. An expensive item is hidden somewhere in the store
and the person who finds it gets to buy it for a ridiculously low price. Note,
however, that this particular type of promotion once caused real headaches
for one of Walton’s store managers, as explained in Walton’s 1993 book
Sam Walton: Made in America.
One year, on George Washington’s birthday, Phil Green [a store manager]
ran an ad saying his Fayetteville store was selling a television set for twenty-
two cents—the birthday being on February 22.The only hitch was that be-
fore you could buy that television set you had to find it first. Phil had hid-
den it somewhere in the store, and the first person to find it, got it.When
Phil arrived at the store that morning, there was such a crowd out front
that you couldn’t even see the doors. I think all of Fayetteville was there,
and a lot of them had been there all night. Our folks had to go in through
the back.When they finally opened the front doors, there was a stampede
like you wouldn’t believe: five hundred or six hundred people tearing
through that store looking for one twenty-two-cent television set. Phil sold
a ton that day, but the place was so totally out of control that even he ad-
mitted playing hide-and-seek with merchandise was a terrible idea.6
I Kiss the pig. Jars with each of the store managers’ names written on
them are set out in the store. Customers are asked to vote for the manager
they would most like to see kiss a pig by dropping money into the glass jars.
The money that is collected is donated to a charity, and the winning man-
ager gets the honor of kissing a pig at a special ceremony held at the store
for all of the customers to witness.
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
135

Then, of course, there is the classic World Championship Moon-Pie-
eating contest that got started by accident and ended up becoming an annual
tradition at Wal-Mart’s Oneonta, Alabama, store. Walton recalled the origin
of the contest this way:
The Moon Pie contest started back in 1985, when John Love, an assistant
manager . . . accidentally ordered four or five times more Moon Pies than
he intended to and found himself up to his eye balls in them. Desperate,
John came up with the idea of a Moon Pie Eating Contest as a way to move
the Moon Pies out before they went bad on him.Who would have thought
something like that would catch on? Now it’s an annual event, held every
fall—on the second Saturday in October in the parking lot of our Oneonta
store. It draws spectators from several states and has been written up in
newspapers and covered by television literally all over the world. As of this
writing, by the way, the world record for Moon Pie eating is sixteen double
deckers in ten minutes. It was set in 1990 by a guy named Mort Hurst, who
bills himself as “the Godzilla of Gluttony.”7
As Walton freely admitted, many of the games and contests Wal-Mart
holds, such as those just described and shown in Exhibit 4.2, are corny.
After all, what could be sillier than grown men and women stuffing them-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
136
EXHIBIT 4.2.
Sam Walton’s Favorite Games and Contests
I
Plate drops. Store employees write the names of prizes on paper plates and sail them
off the roofs of the stores into the parking lots.
I
Balloon drops. Same idea as plate drops, with slips of paper identifying the prizes placed
inside balloons.
I
Shopping-cart bingo. Every shopping cart is given a number. Numbers are drawn at ran-
dom and announced over the store’s public-address system.The customer whose cart has
the correct number receives a discount on all items she or he has in the cart at the time.
I
Travel giveaway. Boxes of candy are given to the customer who has traveled the far-
thest to get to the store. (This is a popular game for store openings.)
I
Coins in the haystack. A Wal-Mart store in Ardmore, Oklahoma, once placed a pile of
hay in front of the store and mixed $36 worth of coins in it. Customers’ kids were invited
to dive into the haystack in search of the money. Each kid could keep as much as he or
she could find.
Source: Sam Walton, with John Huey, Sam Walton: Made in America (New York: Bantam Books, 1994),
pp. 205–207.

selves with Moon Pies or kissing pigs? Yet, they work. Customers love
them. Why? Because it’s fun, writes Walton: “When folks get together and
do this sort of silly stuff it’s really impossible to measure just how good it is
for their morale. To know that you’re supposed to have a good time, that
there’s no place for stuffed shirts . . . is a very uplifting thing for all of us.”8
It’s also, we might add, good for the cash register.
Celebrate the Holidays
True entrepreneurs never let a holiday go by without offering some kind of
promotion or gag to garner attention. Phil Green’s 22-cent television set pro-
motion was a tie-in to Washington’s birthday. Other Wal-Mart stores make it
a practice to field entries in every local holiday parade. For example, the
Fairbury, Nebraska, store sponsors a precision shopping-cart drill team that
marches in all local parades. Wearing Wal-Mart smocks, members of the
team execute a complex series of whirls, twirls, circles, and crossovers. In
Fitzgerald, Georgia, the local Wal-Mart store has a float in the Irwin County
Sweet Potato Parade. The float features seven store volunteers dressed in
costumes depicting various fruits and vegetables. As the float passes the
judging stand, the volunteers launch into their favorite company cheer.
Wal-Mart isn’t alone in exploiting holidays for customer attention and
good will. Most of our other gurus do the same. For example, its first year
in business Ben & Jerry’s gave free ice-cream cones to moms on Mother’s
Day. As Fred Lager explained, “any woman who came in with her kids, pic-
tures of her kids, gray hair, or stretch marks qualified. Visibly pregnant
women got two cones.”9
As in the case of games and contests, many of the holiday attention
getters sponsored by our gurus are silly. What makes them work? Like
games and contests, say our gurus, the holiday stunts are devoid of cyni-
cism and loaded with fun. They are silly but sincere.
Do Something Mysterious
Holiday celebrations are often just staged, good-natured, silliness—people
dressing up in costumes and so on; but there is another kind of staged
attention-getting silliness that has a slightly more serious undertone. It may
be the most difficult type of attention-getter to pull off because it involves
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
137

some degree of trickery. The idea is to attract attention by doing something
unusual or mysterious. Your customers’ curiosity literally leads them to
your door. The master of this kind of attention-getting stunt was none other
than P.T. Barnum.
Barnum used a wide range of attention getters to attract customers to his
New York museum in the mid-1800s. For example:
I He placed bright-colored flags and a huge revolving light on the roof
of the museum. People could see the flags waving in the breeze, illuminated
by Barnum’s spotlight, for miles around. They would search out Barnum’s
building just to see what the flags were all about.
I In constructing his building, Barnum had the contractor build a bal-
cony on the second floor. Visitors to the museum were encouraged to step
out on the balcony to get a breath of fresh air and to enjoy the view. Barnum
knew that the sight of so many people congregated on the balcony high
above the street would attract the attention and rouse the curiosity of nearly
every passerby on the street below.
I Barnum hung signs and banners on the walls of his building and at
night projected eerie images onto the side of his building. No one walking
down the street could possibly miss them.
Of course, today, signs, banners, lights, and flags are nothing new. Along
with balloons, they are used as attention getters by almost every start-up re-
tailer. Often, however, they aren’t very effective. Passersby do, indeed, pass
by without giving the business a thought. Why? Our gurus answer simply
that they have become common. They are no longer mysterious. Barnum
understood that the device itself is not as important as the way the device is
used and the curiosity it produces. In fact, part of his genius was his ability
to turn a simple object into a source of mystery and intrigue. Take the com-
mon brick as an example. Barnum is said to have hired a young man one
day and given him several bricks along with the following instructions:
Now go and lay a brick on the sidewalk at the corner of Broadway and
Ann Street; another close by the Museum; a third diagonally across the
way at the corner of Broadway and Vesey Street, by the Astor House; put
down the fourth on the sidewalk in front of St. Paul’s Church, opposite;
then, with the fifth brick in hand, take up a rapid march from one point to
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
138

the other, making the circuit, exchanging your brick at every point, and say
nothing to no one. . . .
You must seem to be as deaf as a post; wear a serious countenance; an-
swer no questions; pay no attention to any one; but attend faithfully to the
work and at the end of every hour by St. Paul’s clock show this ticket at the
Museum door; enter, walking solemnly through every hall in the building;
pass out, and resume your work.10
Somewhat confused by these strange instructions but nevertheless eager to
earn his wages, the young man did as he was told. Within half an hour over
five hundred people had assembled to watch the young man complete his
mysterious chores, and at the end of the hour, when he presented his ticket and
walked through the museum doors, most bought tickets and followed him. The
brick stunt worked so well that the police eventually put an end to it, com-
plaining that the huge crowds in front of the museum were blocking traffic.
Over one hundred years later, Anita Roddick used a similar stunt to at-
tract attention to her first Body Shop stores. This time the device was per-
fume instead of bricks, but the goal was the same, as Roddick explains:
Brighton shopkeepers opening up for business in the spring of 1976 occa-
sionally had cause to sniff the air, then pause and scratch their heads at the
curious sight of this odd woman in dungarees with unruly dark hair walking
down the street intently spraying strawberry essence on to the pavement.
It was not a madwoman—it was me, laying a scented trail to the door of
The Body Shop in the hope that potential customers would follow it.11
Passersby sniffed the air and did follow the scent, all the way to front of
Roddick’s shop, which itself was drenched in the most exotic perfume oils
she could find. Roddick’s scented trail worked not because of the device she
used but because of the effect it engendered. The smell of exotic perfume on
the street was different, curious—mysterious. Her ploy was also simple.
That’s the last lesson our gurus teach about your efforts to attract attention.
Keep It Simple
Our gurus say you should try to keep your promotions and attention-getting
efforts as simple as possible. If you don’t, not only do you run the risk of
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
139

customers missing the point of your complex promotion but you may find
that administering it becomes a nightmare. That’s what happened to Ben
Cohen and Jerry Greenfield during one of their earlier efforts to attract cus-
tomers to their fledgling ice-cream store. It was winter in Vermont, and ice-
cream sales had sagged. In an effort to boost sales, the pair came up with
the idea for a promotion they called POPCDBZWE (pronounced “pop sid
biz we”)—Penny Off Per Celsius Degree Below Zero Winter Extravaganza.
As the name implies, the promotion was to offer a penny off on the price of
ice cream for every degree the temperature was below zero in Celsius. As
you might expect, the promotion became a nightmare for the employees,
who were expected to convert Fahrenheit to Celsius while scooping ice
cream. Customers didn’t understand the calculations or find the few cents
discount motivating.
Eventually, Cohen and Greenfield replaced the POPCDBZWE promo-
tion with another one that Cohen concocted. He proposed what he called
the First Law of Ice-Cream-Eating Dynamics. This breakthrough in thermal
physics held that a person’s sensation of cold was a result of the difference
between their internal temperature and that of their surrounding environ-
ment. Thus, one way to warm up in cold weather, argued Cohen, was to eat
a lot of ice cream. Because the ice cream was cold it would lower your in-
ternal temperature and thus make you feel warmer. Cohen is said to have
lectured on the subject extensively but to no avail. Sales did not improve.
COURT THE PRESS FOR FREE PUBLICITY
The promotions and gimmicks discussed so far are aimed at capturing the
attention of the passerby—the shopper in the mall who might be enticed
into Debbi Fields’s cookie shop by a sample, the person on the street who
might impulsively buy a ticket to Barnum’s museum out of curiosity, or the
shoppers who might return to their local Wal-Mart store to see the manager
kiss a pig. These types of promotions are all necessary attention getters, say
our gurus, but they pale when compared to the most powerful attention-
getter of all—press coverage.
According to Wilson Harrell, press relations are so important that you
shouldn’t leave them to chance: “If I could relive my marketing life, I
would never begin a business, or deploy a new idea, product or service,
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
140

without retaining a professional PR firm. . . . As a matter of fact, I would re-
tain them before I hired my first vice president, lawyer, or accountant. From
day one, I would have someone devoted to getting ‘free’ publicity for what-
ever I was trying to do.”12 What can a professional public relations (PR)
person do for you? Harrell provides the following example:
It was in 1969. Art Linkletter and I had become involved both financially
and emotionally in marketing Toasta Pizza [a frozen pizza that could be pre-
pared in a home toaster]. After incredible test-marketing results, we were
ready to roll out nationally. By then, I had learned the value of PR, and re-
tained a small but brilliant PR firm. One day, just as our roll-out was about
to begin, the two partners come dancing into my office unannounced—full
of fire and vinegar.With bouncing excitement, they told me their idea:“We
want to proclaim to the world that this year (1969) is the 100th anniver-
sary of pizza.” I asked a logical question:“So what?” Twenty minutes later,
after they unfolded their plot, I sat at my desk dumbfounded—while it
began to sink in.Then I jumped up and yelled,“Let’s do it!” and started
dancing with them.
Their plan was to contact every TV talk show in America, and volunteer
to appear on their programs to celebrate the 100th Anniversary of Pizza, to
talk about its origin and progress down through history until today, when a
brand-new innovation would thrust pizza into every household in the
world that had a toaster. Of course, when they appeared on the show, they
would have a home toaster and demonstrate how easy it was to produce
instant Toasta Pizza, which everyone present would gobble up.
The idea became a plan, the plan became an outrageous PR campaign. It
worked like magic.They hired a beautiful young woman, Italian of course,
with the gift of gab and a sexy accent. She traveled the country appearing
on TV and radio programs, telling all about the history of pizza, while she
sold the hell out of Toasta Pizza. As part of the campaign, the PR firm had
also written news releases and stories, which newspapers and magazines
picked up and ran all over the country.
All the PR activity was carefully planned to coincide with the efforts of
our sales force. It was an entrepreneurial marketing coup, par excellence.
Every supermarket buyer in America must have seen or heard or read
about Toasta Pizza, because we got a 95-percent supermarket acceptance
on the first roll.Voila! That one idea was worth more than all the millions
we spent on advertising . . . at about one-hundredth the cost.13
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
141

OUR VIEW
The reality is that neither Harrell, nor Linkletter, the PR firm, nor anyone
else knows when the first pizza was concocted, but the concept dates to pre-
history. There is ample evidence that the Greeks and Etruscans ate flat
bread topped with a variety of condiments—an early version of pizza—
long before 1869. Regardless, the media didn’t question Harrell’s claims,
and he got his publicity, thanks, of course, to the PR guys and their out-
rageous idea.
Like Harrell, Jim Clark, founder of Silicon Graphics and cofounder of
Netscape, favors bringing a PR specialist into a company at start-up. Marc
Andreessen, Clark’s cofounder at Netscape, recalls that he was skeptical
when Clark first mentioned the idea: “I was like, ‘We’re a start-up company
and we don’t need to hire a full-time PR person.’” Still, Clark insisted, and
they brought in Rosanne Siino, a PR specialist from Clark’s previous com-
pany, Silicon Graphics, as the 19th Netscape employee. Siino was soon
able to get a story about Andreessen in a local California paper under the
headline: “He’s Young, He’s Hot, and He’s Here.” That was followed by a
story in Fortune heralding Netscape as one of “25 Cool Companies” and
featuring a large photo of Clark, Andreessen, and the entire Netscape devel-
opment team. Within a few months and prior to shipment of Netscape 1.0,
Marc Andreessen was being proclaimed as the next Bill Gates. People
magazine included him as one of the most intriguing people of 1994, along
with other notables such as Tiger Woods, the golf pro, and Time gave him a
prominent spot on their list of 50 future leaders. Given Siino’s performance,
it is hardly surprising that Andreessen later changed his mind about the wis-
dom of hiring a PR specialist and declared the decision to hire Siino “one of
the smartest investments [Netscape] had ever made.”14
You Are Your Own Best Publicist
Of course, one of the reasons Siino was successful is that she really did
have a story to tell. Clark and Andreessen were interesting people doing in-
teresting things. In a sense, they were their own best publicists; they could
use themselves to promote their company. That’s an important lesson to
learn, one that Richard Branson says he learned from Freddie Laker, foun-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
142

der of Laker Airline, which later went out of business. When Branson was
forming Virgin Atlantic, he recalls going to Laker for advice on how to
compete against British Airways. Laker told Branson to use himself, which
is exactly what Branson did. In fact, he was so successful in getting free
press attention from publicity stunts, ranging from daredevil balloon expe-
ditions to April Fools’ pranks, that the term Bransonesque (meaning “flam-
boyant”) became part of the British vernacular. In characteristic fashion,
Branson argued that he was just trying to help, because he recognized that
reporters and editors needed stories and pictures. When he disguised a bal-
loon as a UFO, filled it with midgets dressed as little green men, and landed
it on a field near London, he was only trying to make the British press’s
jobs a little easier.15 Likewise, say our gurus, you should try to help out
your local and national press. A few tips on how to do that are listed in Ex-
hibit 4.3, then discussed in the sections that follow.
PR Tip #1: Manipulate Help the Press
None of our gurus are as adept at manipulating helping the press as Richard
Branson. In fact, most writers site Branson’s skill in dealing with the press
as one of the key reasons for the success of his various enterprises. Bran-
son’s secrets for dealing with the press are summarized in Exhibit 4.4.
1. Be available. From the beginning of his entrepreneurial career, Bran-
son has made himself available to the press. He doesn’t hide behind
press officers or PR specialists, and reporters and editors have come
to appreciate his availability and reward him with positive stories.
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
143
EXHIBIT 4.4.
Richard Branson’s Secrets for Dealing with the Press
I
Be available.
I
Plan for meetings.
I
Treat reporters well.
I
Tell them what you want them to know.
EXHIBIT 4.3.
Tips on Becoming Your Own Publicist
I
Help the press.
I
Find an angle.
I
Put on a flashy show.
I
Celebrate everything.

2. Treat reporters well. Branson is not only available; he treats the press
well. When reporters come to interview him, Branson meets them
promptly, welcomes them with refreshments and a smile, and is direct
and straightforward with his answers. He takes an interest in their
opinions, going so far as taking out his notebook occasionally and
writing down some point they make. Reporters go away impressed—
this successful and busy man is very nice and surprisingly normal.
3. Plan for the meeting. What most of the reporters don’t realize is that
their visit with Branson is carefully staged. Branson plans the en-
counter down to the last juicy tidbit of information he will drop, as
though by accident, into the conversation. Every spontaneous funny
line is prepared in advance. Even the setting and Branson’s wardrobe
are carefully selected for maximum visual appeal.
4. Tell them what you want them to know. Branson recognizes that most
reporters are busy and are unable or unwilling to spend time carefully
checking facts. As a result, explains Tim Jackson, author of Richard
Branson; Virgin King, Branson often hoodwinks journalists.16 For ex-
ample:
 In the course of an interview, Branson repeatedly has to excuse
himself to take phone calls. The reporter assumes, and writes in his
column, that Branson is in great demand and his business is boom-
ing. The reporter doesn’t know that all the calls are coming from
the same public telephone and that all are being made by one of
Branson’s employees.
 During the filming of a BBC documentary, Branson produces a mu-
sician who explains in solemn terms why he has decided to sign
with the upstart Virgin Records rather than a larger record company.
No one on the production team thinks to check the background of
the “musician.” As a result, they never learn that, in fact, he is the
husband of Branson’s secretary and that Virgin not only has not
signed him to a contract but they haven’t signed anyone else either.
OUR VIEW
While the above stories are true, at least according to our source, we can’t
help but caution our readers that hoodwinking the press may not always be
the smartest move. You could get caught, you know.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
144

PR Tip #2:There’s Nothing Better Than a Flashy Show
One of the secrets of Branson’s success with the press has been his visual
flair. Branson notes that he has worn almost every costume imaginable, in-
cluding dressing as Peter Pan, a pirate, an airline stewardess, and a bride in
wedding dress and high heels. Fancy dressing, says Branson, “makes a
back page photo into a front page one.”17
As long as you don’t hurt anyone and are creative, the authorities are
usually fairly forgiving.
Richard Branson18
Of course, dressing up is not the only way to dazzle the press. For those
who may be a little squeamish about cross-dressing, there are other ways to
make a visual impact. For example, Branson is said once to have hired a
team of jokesters to sneak onto the Heathrow runway and drape a canvas
sheath with the Virgin Airlines logo over the tail of a British Airways air-
craft.19 And when he opened his Virgin Records store on Broadway, Branson
had himself lowered into Times Square atop a big lighted globe similar to
the one dropped on New Year’s Eve. The photographers, of course, flashed
away as a close-up of Branson’s image was broadcast to the giant Sony Jum-
botron. Followed by the mass of reporters, Branson strode into his 75,000-
square-foot megastore and up to one of the store’s thousand listening sta-
tions, where he began listening to selections from Liza Minnelli’s latest
album. Suddenly, someone tapped a “startled” Branson on his shoulder.
Who would have guessed it—Liza herself asking how Branson liked her
new record. “Great,” said Branson, as the reporters scribbled notes and the
photographers took their front page photos of the smiling duo.20
PR Tip #3: Find an Angle
Our gurus caution that being visual, by itself, is not enough. You can shoot
off rockets, drop illuminated balls from the sky, and still have the reporters
yawn. What you need in addition to a flashy show is an angle, a hook,
something to pique the news editor’s curiosity. Dave Thomas believes that
Colonel Harland Sanders, founder of Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC), had
one of the best angles he has ever seen.
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
145

Because the Colonel was such a personality, we were able to get him on
local TV and radio shows, which led to plenty of free publicity. He really at-
tracted attention in his famous double-breasted white suit with black string
tie. It could be the middle of winter, and there’d be this guy in a white suit
and goatee, a likable grandfather-type, a master showman, talking about his
“secret” recipe of eleven herbs and spices for cooking chicken, America’s
hospitality dish. Everybody wants in on a secret, so people listened. He’d
get all riled up about the difference between bad fried chicken and good
fried chicken, so you’d think it was a federal case.
If we promised to bring a bucket or two of chicken along, we could get
him on plenty of shows. Sometimes, we could trade them for an outright
ad.This was back before the “payola” stink, so maybe it was “chicken-ola,” I
don’t know.When he was on the radio, sometimes I used to nudge him to
keep him awake. I was always worried he’d go to sleep. I used to think, I’m
sure glad he’s doing those interviews and not me! And today I’m doing the
same thing that he was doing.21
Sanders had the look, a mysterious secret recipe, and of course, a couple of
buckets of tasty “chicken-ola” to clinch the deal.
PR Tip #4: Celebrate Everything
A final way our gurus say you can garner free publicity is by participating
in—or better yet, creating—a public event or celebration. Wal-Marts’
Moon-Pie-eating contest mentioned earlier is such an event. It not only got
local media attention, but after several years it began to attract the attention
of the international press. Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield are masters at
this type of promotion. Here is how Fred Lager described one of their first
such celebrations. Cohen and Greenfield put on an end-of-summer celebra-
tion with the help of several other local merchants:
The celebration, called “Fall Down,” was held at or near the of St. Paul and
College streets [in Burlington,Vermont], and spilled out from in front of the
gas station into City Hall Park, across the street. It featured a round-the-
block stilt-walking contest, an ice-cream-eating and an apple-peeling contest
in which the person with the longest unbroken peel won a dinner for two
at a local restaurant. . . .
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
146

By far the highlight of the day was the Burlington debut of the dramatic
sledgehammer-smashing of a cinder block on the bare stomach of “Habeeni
Ben Coheeni, the noted Indian mystic.” It was a routine that Jerry had
learned in a carnival techniques course he’d taken his senior year at Ober-
lin [College]. Fall Down marked the second time they had done the act. . . .
Jerry had given Ben the option of whether he wanted to be the smasher or
the smashee. (“There was no hesitation on my part,” said Ben.“I didn’t
want the responsibility.”)
As the crowd gathered in anticipation, the song “RubberbandMan,” by
the Spinners, was cranked out over the makeshift PA system, Ben (aka Co-
heeni), draped in a bed sheet and perched on a platform in the lotus posi-
tion, was carried onto the scene by six bearers, while chanting incoherently,
a cross between a hum and a groan.“Feel the vibrations.The profound
mound of round, here before us,” Jerry exhorted to the crowd.“His ever-
expanding consciousness exceeded only by his ever-expanding width. . . .
While Jerry invited a few kids up to verify that the cinder block and
sledgehammer were real, Coheeni went metabolic, falling backward into the
hands of his attendants, who suspended him in a supine position between
two chairs. Once settled in place, Jerry looked for an appropriate opening
in the sheet so as to expose only the belly, on which he placed the cinder
block.
“And now I ask for your total silence as I bring the sledgehammer above
my head. No loud noises, no lighting of matches, no flash. Keep your eyes
on the belly, as this will be over in an instant. Ladies and gentlemen, one
time, and one time only. . . . ”
Whereupon, Jerry took the sledgehammer and, in one fell swoop,
brought it crashing down on the cinder block, smashing it into lots of
pieces that, fortunately for insurance purposes, didn’t go hurtling into the
crowd, but fell away harmlessly.
“Habeeni Ben Coheeni, ladies and gentlemen, the noted Indian Habeeni
Ben Coheeni,” Jerry shouted over and over, as “RubberbandMan” once
again cranked out over the speakers.
Habeeni, restored to his platform, left in triumph, carried out by han-
dlers and tossing flower petals to the pumped-up crowd.22
Before the cinder-block trick, Jerry had done his part in warming up the
crowd with his “Dr. Inferno” routine. He had lined up several cotton-
tipped torches, each of which had been dipped into 151-proof rum. He
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
147

told the audience that he would attempt the “tongue transfer,” wherein he
would transfer the fire from one torch to another using only, as the name
implies, his tongue. Jerry lit one of the torches and, as he reflected later, all
would have gone well if he had just put a little less rum on the cotton.
Some of the flaming rum dribbled out of his mouth and caught his chin on
fire. The crowd didn’t sense Jerry’s panic and thought his flaming chin
was a great addition to the act. Fortunately, Jerry was able to extinguish his
face and even finish his act with a flourish, swallowing three flaming
torches at once in a “flaming triple.” Jerry’s experience does, however, il-
lustrate the dangers of this kind of self-promotion and prompts us to issue
a warning.
OUR VIEW
Don’t try these types of gags without adequate training or, at a minimum,
adequate insurance.
MARKET RESEARCH AND A FORMAL MARKETING PLAN
Short-term promotions and publicity stunts are effective and—perhaps
even more important for the start-up business—low-cost ways of attracting
attention and recruiting customers, but you may find that you want to con-
sider more sophisticated marketing and promotion efforts. At that point,
you will have to determine how much and what type of market research you
should conduct and whether you should develop a formal marketing plan.
Our gurus have mixed opinions about these issues. Some, like Earl Graves
and Wilson Harrell, say that you definitely should conduct market research
and develop a formal marketing plan. They even offer advice on how to go
about doing both. Many other gurus, including Pleasant Rowland, Ted
Turner, Richard Branson, Akio Morita, Edward Land, and Mary Kay Ash,
warn that you may find traditional marketing research and planning of little
if any use, particularly when you are just starting your business. Let’s look
at both sides of this argument, starting with the recommendations of Graves
and Harrell.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
148

Study the Market and Develop a Plan
Earl Graves and Wilson Harrell argue that you should conduct at least some
formal market research and develop a marketing plan, particularly if your
venture involves bringing a new product to market. Exhibit 4.5 contains
Harrell’s process for conducting market research. Harrell notes that only 1
in 1,000 consumer products succeed, so bringing any new product to mar-
ket is always risky. The best way to reduce that risk, he says, is to conduct
some research to gauge likely consumer response to your great idea. You
can then use that information to develop a marketing plan in which Earl
Graves says you should discuss the following:23
I Your product. Discuss the product’s design and development, brand-
ing, and packaging. Who are your competitors? What does your product or
service offer that your competitors’products/services do not? To whom will
the product be sold? Who is the target customer? Earl Graves suggests that
you include information on their per capita income, age, sex, geographic lo-
cation, and attitudes. You should be able to describe the size of the market
for your product/service in dollars and provide an estimate of the share of
the market your product can obtain.
I Pricing. What will you charge for your product/service? Graves notes
that pricing is rarely easy because “much psychology goes into properly
pricing a product or service. [For example,] a premium product that is dis-
count priced may not sell, because people won’t perceive its true value.”24
Also, advises Graves, the price you place on your product or service must
be consistent with your business concept and image. In other words, Nei-
man Marcus and Wal-Mart probably could not successfully charge the same
price for the exact same product.
I Distribution channels. What channels of distribution will you use to
move the product from manufacturing to the buyer? Will you sell your prod-
uct through normal retail outlets, over the Internet, through infomercials, via
telemarketing, or through a combination of these channels? Graves warns
that not all distribution channels are appropriate for all products and services.
I Promotion. What methods will you use to garner attention and pro-
mote your product or service? This includes your use of advertising,
publicity stunts (such as discussed earlier in this chapter), and general
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
149

public relations. The key to successful promotion, say our gurus, is that
all of your promotion activities are integrated and are consistent with the
image you hope to convey. For example, a Moon-Pie-eating contest may
work well for Wal-Mart but would not fit with the image Tiffany seeks to
convey.
I Actions. The key to the success of your marketing plan, say our
gurus, is for you to go beyond the plan to actions. You should map out spe-
cific marketing goals and action plans and then carry them out. “A market-
ing plan’s success,” writes Graves, “depends on the extent to which goals
and action plans become a daily part of the business.”25
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
150
EXHIBIT 4.5.
Wilson Harrell’s “Marketing for the Amateur”
Step #1: Conduct the “Well, I’ll Be Damned!”Test
Assemble a sample of your product or service (or if a sample would be too expensive to
build, create a sketch and/or description) and show it to 20 objective people (i.e., people who
are not your relatives or friends and therefore won’t just tell you what you want to hear).“If
most of them don’t say ‘Well, I’ll be damned!’ or ‘Why didn’t I think of that?’ ” writes Harrell,
“stop right there. . . . If most of the people you ask say the magic words, you’re on the right
track.” Ask your 20 objective people the following questions:
I
What would you be willing to pay for this product if it were on the shelf of a local store?
Insist that they give you a specific price.
I
If this product were available at the price you suggested, would you:
1. Buy it for sure?
2. Maybe buy it?
3. Not buy it?
I
If you would buy the product, how many times a year would you buy it?
I
What similar product are you using now?
I
Are you happy with your present product?
Make careful notes on the answer each person gives to these questions. Finish by obtaining
the age, occupation, income level, and marital status of each person.
(continued)

G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
151
EXHIBIT 4.5.
(continued)
Step #2: Determine What You Can Charge for Your Product or Service
Rank in order answers to the question,“What would you be willing to pay for this product?”
Drop the top and bottom 10 percent of answers.Average the rest to come up with the
“perceived value” of your product. Subtract the approximate amount the retail store or
other distributor will want to make for its markup. Harrell notes that you should plan on a
25 percent markup if your product is something you eat, drink, or clean your house with; 35
percent if it is a household item like an appliance or something you put on your face, hair, or
body.Then, says Harrell, subtract 15 percent for what it will cost you to sell the product to
your distributor, 15 percent for advertising, 10 percent for warehousing and transportation, 5
percent for administration, and 5 percent for miscellaneous things such as your salary.The
remainder, if any, is your profit.
Step #3: Determine the Market for Your Product
Tabulate responses to the question,“Would you buy this product?” Take 100 percent of the
“for sure” answers and 50 percent of the “maybe” answers.According to Harrell, if that total
is over 50 percent of all the answers, you have fighting chance; 65 percent is okay; over 85
percent is great.You can go on to the next step. If your total is under 50 percent, advises
Harrell, you should stop here.You’re wasting your time.
Step #4: Conduct the Rube Goldberg Test
Make enough finished and packaged copies of your product to fill small displays in five or
more retail outlets.Visit independently owned stores and ask the owner to allow you to
display your product in his or her store. Promise to set up and maintain the display yourself
and not to charge the store owner for the product during the period of the test. In return
for letting you run your test, the store owner gets to keep 100 percent of the proceeds from
any sales.The selling price will be the perceived value you calculated in step two.Your
purpose is not to make money from the sales of your product at this stage but rather to get
some idea of how many customers out of every 100 who buy a product similar to yours will
buy your product. Harrell notes that this test will not be easy to arrange because most store
owners will think you are nuts. Still, he insists that you keep trying until you get at least five
or more store owners to agree to go along with your crazy scheme.
At the conclusion of the test period, pick up your display and ask the store owners to
compare your product sales to the sales of the slowest-selling competing product. If your
product didn’t sell as well as the slowest-selling competitor’s, declares Harrell, you are
finished. No store owner is ever going to agree to stock a new product that sells worse than
his or her slowest-moving product. On the other hand, if your product sold better than the
slowest-selling competitor, you have a fighting chance.Ask the store owners if they would
consider continuing to stock your product given the volume of sales they have seen.
According to Harrell, if three out of five agree, you have a potential winner.
(continued)

T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
152
EXHIBIT 4.5.
(continued)
Step #5: Play the “What If” Game
Contact the appropriate national association of producers of the type of product you will be
selling and request information on the total annual dollar sales for products of that type
nationally. (Harrell notes that advertising agencies and people who sell that type of product
locally can also help you arrive at an annual sales figure.) Now, says Harrell, do some
calculations. First, calculate your share of the product sales in your market test. For example,
if a total of 100 products were sold during your test in the five retail stores and your product
accounted for 10 of those, then your market share in the test was 10 percent. If your product
accounted for only 1 of the 100 sales, your market share was only 1 percent. Next, multiply
the national sales figure provided by the national association by the percentage market share
you obtained in your test to come up with an estimate of your dollar volume of sales should
you take your product nationally. Finally, apply some of the percentages discussed in step two
to see what profit you might make and how much you would have available for advertising, to
support a sales force and so on. For example, you need roughly 15 percent for advertising. If
annual national sales are $200 million and your estimated market share from your test is 10
percent, then you could expect $20 million in annual sales. Fifteen percent of that or $3
million would be available for advertising.Ask yourself, or experts in the field, if $3 million is
enough to support a national advertising campaign. (Harrell says it isn’t.) Keep playing with
the numbers and running different calculations until you get a good feeling for the sales and
profits your product is likely to produce.
Step #6: Design a Marketing Plan
At this point, Harrell recommends that you seek the help of someone experienced in
marketing products like yours. Ideally, he advises, you should seek a retired marketing
executive from a company that produces products similar to yours. Harrell suggests you
consult the national association you approached earlier, advertising agencies, and even the
local telephone yellow pages to find an individual to help you. Once you have found the
expert, negotiate a fixed price for his or her help in developing a marketing plan. Give your
expert the results of your “Well, I’ll be damned!” test, your “Rube Goldberg” test, and all of
your calculations.Ask your expert to study all of the data and tell you how much money he
or she feels you will require to launch your product, how slowly or quickly you can roll out
your marketing campaign, whether you must go national right away or whether you can roll
out your product market by market, and so on.Your expert should help you put together a
rollout plan that will include the level and types of media advertising you will need and the
financing you will require.
Source: Wilson Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only (Hawthorne, NJ: Career Press 1994), pp. 67–74.

Go with Your Intuition
Although Graves and Harrell offer sensible advice on market research and
market planning, many of our gurus don’t agree with their approaches. For
instance, Mary Kay Ash notes that, although Mary Kay Cosmetics does
highly sophisticated market research today, when she started out she relied
almost exclusively on her intuition. She writes:
In the beginning, my intuition was my only guide. I didn’t conduct marketing
surveys to find out what other women thought of the cosmetics they
bought over the counter at their local department stores. I didn’t have the
money for such research. But I did know I felt embarrassed to try on
makeup in a store in front of other shoppers. And when I did, no one both-
ered to teach me how to apply it myself. Sure, the store cosmeticians could
make you look like Elizabeth Taylor, but once they were finished, you had no
earthly idea what they had done or how to repeat it.
The more I thought about it, the more I thought it would be wonderful
for a skin care expert to come to my house and, in the privacy of my
home, show me what would be the best look for my face.Then, if she in-
structed me on how to do it myself, I would be able to do it tomorrow and
every day. I believed other women would feel this way, too. Based on that
belief, I decided to conduct skin care classes. Right from the start, instinct
told me a woman wouldn’t mind experimenting with makeup when she was
with a few close girlfriends. How did I know they would feel that way? Be-
cause that’s the way I felt about it.26
Ted Turner and Richard Branson echo Ash’s comments. They both went
with their instincts in starting new businesses. Seldom, if ever, did they rely
upon market research.
Where’s the fun in making a bunch of studies? I usually know what I want
to do. . . . I never even did a marketing study on Cable News Network. . . .
If everybody . . . had said that they hated the idea, I wouldn’t have given a
damn.There’s never a reason for a study if your idea is conceptually sound.
Ted Turner27
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
153

Pleasant Rowland, creator of the American Girl series of dolls, books,
and magazines, states that, in the area of market research, she was the test.
She recalls holding exactly one focus group when she was starting her com-
pany. Giving in to the advice of so-called experts, she says she produced
some sample products, went to Chicago, and hired a person to lead a fancy
focus group. The participants were all mothers of girls, and the question on
the table was “Would anyone buy these products?” Rowland recalls that the
results were awful:
For the first 45 minutes of the focus group it was dreadful.The group hated
everything about The American Girl Collection because we were merely
talking about the idea as a concept.Then we brought out the products. It
was a 180-degree turn. I learned a great lesson. Forget the focus group. Go
do what you believe you’re going to go do. Come from a place of heart.
Come from a place of mission.There will be people out there who will love
this and admire it, if you love it and admire it.
So, the whole criterion for developing our products for a long, long
time—longer than most people would ever have believed and still a huge
part of it today—is,“Do I, Pleasant Rowland, like it?” “Would I have liked it
when I was eight years old?” And if the answer is “yes,” we make it. Bottom
line, if I think it should be pink, it’s pink.28
I do not believe that any amount of market research could have told us that
the Sony Walkman would be successful, not to say a sensational hit that
would spawn so many imitators.
Akio Morita29
So, what gives here? Are gurus like Turner, Branson, Ash, Morita, and
Rowland just stubborn, or do they recognize something about entrepre-
neurship that Graves and Harrell overlook? Maybe the answer is a little of
both. There is no doubt that these gurus in particular can be very stubborn
about pursuing ideas that others reject. It is also true that they offer an im-
portant insight. Morita explains the insight this way: “Our plan is to lead
the public with new products rather than ask them what kind of products
they want. The public does not know what is possible, but we do. So in-
stead of doing a lot of market research, we refine our thinking on a product
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
154

and its use and try to create a market for it by educating and communicat-
ing with the public.”30
Morita, Turner, Branson, and many of our other gurus argue that the kind
of market research and planning gurus such as Graves and Harrell propose
is simply worthless and unproductive for many entrepreneurs for one sim-
ple reason—the product or service they are proposing is so new and unique
that there is no market for it that such research can reveal. “Markets,” says
Edward Land, “are what you look back to. A market is something that has
been created.”31 If your product is sufficiently new or different, such as
Turner’s CNN, Rowland’s American Girl Collection, Ash’s skin-care
classes, Land’s instant camera, and Morita’s Walkman, then it is unlikely
that traditional market research will be of much help.
David Packard on the Origin of the HP Color Printer
[The] DeskJet single-handedly created the revolution in color printing.
Prior to the introduction of the color DeskJet 500C in 1991, color
printers were expensive, purchased only by users whose special needs jus-
tified the price. Our market research clearly showed that customers were
not looking for color printers. Asked to prioritize their requirements for
printers, customers consistently put color printing way down the list. But,
when we asked,“If we satisfied all your black printing requirements and of-
fered you the ability to print in color as well for little or no price penalty,
would you buy such a printer?” the overwhelming response was “Yes.”
Our customers didn’t want color printers, but they were very interested
in printers that could print in color too. In short, HP should offer color as
a feature.
David Packard32
In fact, say these gurus, market research might convince you to abandon
an idea that has real potential. Better, then, just to move ahead with your gut
instincts, recognizing, of course, that if there is no existing market for your
product, you are going to have to educate your customers. What do you do
if you have a product or service your customers don’t understand or view
negatively? How do you change their minds? How do you, in effect, create
a market for an innovative new product or service when none exists? Let’s
look at three situations and examine how our gurus responded to each of
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
155

them. In the first, you have created a product or service that is so new or
unique that would-be buyers simply don’t see its value. Your situation is
similar to that faced by Akio Morita in marketing Sony’s early tape re-
corder. We will show you how Morita convinced Japanese buyers that his
recorder had value. Second is a situation in which you find yourself with a
product or service that has to be repositioned in the customers’ minds.
They associate your new product with an older established product. You
have to convince them of the uniqueness of what you have to offer. White
Castle founders Walt Anderson and Billy Ingram faced such a situation, as
did Robert Mondavi. We will see how they changed their customers’
minds. Finally, we will examine a situation that many entrepreneurs face.
Your product or service has a decided negative. Ted Turner had such an
obstacle to overcome with his SuperStation. We will show you how he
responded by turning not one, but in fact two, severe negatives into pos-
itives.
Situation #1:The Customer Doesn’t Perceive the Value of What You Have 
to Offer
Akio Morita recalls that he and Masaru Ibuka faced the problem of custom-
ers seeing no perceived value in selling one of Sony’s first products, a tape
recorder.
We were engineers and we had a big dream of success.We thought that in
making a unique product, we would surely make a fortune. I was deter-
mined to make this tape recorder a success; when it was ready I dem-
onstrated it every day, wherever I could find an audience. I took it to busi-
nesses, to the universities. I loaded it into the truck and took it to friends
and recorded their voices talking and singing, every day. I was like an enter-
tainer, setting up this machine and recording people’s voices and playing
them back to their delight and surprise. Everybody liked it, but nobody
wanted to buy it.They all said, with variations,“This is fun, but the machine
is too expensive for a toy.”33
Morita says he was baffled by the response. He just couldn’t figure out
what he was doing wrong. He knew he had this great product, and yet no
one seemed to want to buy it. Then, he says, a chance incident helped him
see the light and taught him an important lesson.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
156

I was still trying to figure out what we were doing wrong in trying, but
failing, to sell our tape recorders, when I happened to stroll by an antique
shop not far from my home in Tokyo. I had no real interest in antiques
and I didn’t then appreciate their value. As I stood there looking at these
old art objects and marveling at the high prices marked on them, I no-
ticed a customer buying an old vase.Without hesitation, he took out his
wallet and handed over a large number of bills to the antiques dealer.The
price was higher than we were asking for our tape recorder! Why, I won-
dered, would someone pay so much money for an old object that had no
practical value, while a new and important device such as our tape re-
corder could attract no customers. It seemed obvious to me that the
value of the tape recorder was far greater than that of an antique be-
cause of its ability to enhance the lives of the many people who might
come in contact with it. Few people could appreciate the fine lines of the
vase, and something that expensive could hardly be handled by many
people, for fear of breaking it. One tape recorder, on the other hand,
could serve hundreds, or even thousands of people. It could entertain
them, amuse them, educate them, help them improve themselves.To me
there was no contest the tape recorder was the better bargain—but I re-
alized that the vase had perceived value to that collector of antiques, and
he had his own valid reasons for investing that much money in such an
object. Some of my ancestors had done the same, as I would do later. But
at that moment, I knew that to sell our recorder we would have to iden-
tify the people and institutions that would be likely to recognize value in
our product.34
Morita and his associates began searching for customers who would
more readily derive benefit from their recorder. Tamon Maeda, one of Mor-
ita’s associates, quickly identified such a group.
We noted, or rather Tamon Maeda did, that during that early postwar pe-
riod there was an acute shortage of stenographers because so many people
had been pushed out of school and into war work. Until that shortage
could be corrected, the courts of Japan were trying to cope with a small,
overworked corps of court stenographers. . . . Those people had no diffi-
culty realizing how they could put our device to practical use; they saw the
value in the tape recorder immediately; to them it was no toy.35
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
157

Morita and his associates quickly arranged to demonstrate their machine to
the Japanese Supreme Court. Almost instantly they sold 20 machines.
Armed with that success, they went on to discover an even more lucrative
market.
It seemed to me a logical step to go from the courts into the schools of
Japan. Ibuka pointed out to us in one of the many meetings we had on the
subject of sales that Japanese education had traditionally been centered on
reading, writing, and abacus skills. But when the Americans came at the end
of the war, they felt that verbal communications and audio/visual training
were very important, and the Japanese Education Ministry followed their
lead. But there was little media available in Japan, only some sixteen-
millimeter films with English language soundtracks, which were of very little
use because [they were in] English. . . . Ways had to be found to do the in-
struction in Japanese.The tape recorder was the logical medium.36
Morita later wrote that his experience with the tape recorder taught him
an important lesson about marketing: “A sale cannot be achieved if only the
seller understands the value of the merchandise. The buyer has to under-
stand its value also.”37 A fundamental principle of attracting customers to
new products with which they might not be familiar, explains Morita, is
communication—your ability to effectively and accurately convey to your
customers the value and usefulness of your product.
We used to think that everything started in the lab. Now we realize that
everything spins off the consumer. And while technology is still important,
the consumer has to lead innovation.We have to innovate for a specific
reason, and that reason comes from the market. Otherwise, we’ll end up
making museum pieces.
Phil Knight38
Situation #2:You Find that You Have to Reposition Your Product or Service in
Customers’ Minds
Morita’s challenge was to convince customers of the value of a totally new
product. The second situation is slightly different. In this case, your product
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
158

or service isn’t entirely new; a similar but inferior product or service has
been around for some time. People have become accustomed to thinking
about the product or service in a certain way. You need them to see your
product in a new light, to reposition it in their minds. How do you accom-
plish that? Let’s look at the experiences of three of our gurus—White Cas-
tle founders Walt Anderson and Billy Ingram and Robert Mondavi Win-
ery’s founder, Robert Mondavi. Each of these gurus faced a similar
problem.
For Walt Anderson and Billy Ingram, the problem was finding a way to
expand their customer base.39 Anderson and Ingram had founded the White
Castle hamburger chain in 1921. Throughout the 1920s, their business grew
as hamburgers became increasingly popular, but almost all of the growth
was coming from sales to working-class males. The original White Castles
were located near factories or in industrialized areas that women and the
middle class didn’t frequent. They were small, smoke filled, and awash
with a constant banter about sports, hunting, and other manly diversions.
Ingram and Anderson even refused to hire women to operate their restau-
rants fearing that their predominantly male customers would use language
inappropriate to those of delicate sensibilities. Women and middle-class
people largely avoided White Castle and thought of it as decidedly blue col-
lar. As the country entered the 1930s, that avoidance became a problem.
As the Great Depression deepened, it brought more and more layoffs and
troubling times for the largely male industrial workforce. Ingram quickly
realized that his traditional customer base was rapidly diminishing. If he
was to expand his base and keep growing, he had to reposition his restau-
rants to appeal to the middle class, especially women. Somehow these po-
tential customers had to be convinced that White Castle hamburgers were a
viable and nutritious mealtime option. That was going to be a significant
challenge for two reasons. First, the middle class in general regarded ham-
burgers as very much blue-collar fare. Second, and perhaps more impor-
tant, most middle-class women had read essays about the dangers of ground
meat and hamburgers, which convinced them that ground meat was inedi-
ble and that the quality and nutritional value of hamburgers was not to be
trusted.
For some time, Ingram had been working to change this image. He in-
sisted that White Castles be kept scrupulously clean; even the name White
Castle was intended to signify cleanliness. Additionally, he ordered that
only special cuts of shoulder meat (now called “ground chuck”) be used in
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
159

their hamburgers, and he insisted upon frequent deliveries from butcher
shops to ensure that the meat would be fresh. Still, Ingram knew that he had
to do something to win over women and the middle class. He had to reposi-
tion the product in their minds, so he hired Ella Louise Agniel to help him
do it.
Agniel was a former secretary with no direct experience in the food in-
dustry, but she was outgoing, confident, and most important, a housewife
herself. Ingram gave her the pseudonym of Julia Joyce, a crash course on
White Castle, and sent her out to educate the women of America on the
virtues of hamburger sandwiches. Throughout the 1930s, Agniel traveled
constantly from city to city, speaking to women’s clubs about the nutri-
tional benefits of White Castle products and demonstrating how the “non-
fattening, highly digestible, energy and strength enhancing, vitamin-rich
burgers” could be easily incorporated into weekly menus. Thanks in part
to Agniel’s propagandizing, Ingram was able to gradually remove the
stigma from the hamburger. By 1937 the president of the National Restau-
rant Association was proclaiming that the hamburger had taken its place
alongside apple pie and coffee as a truly national food. Through Agniel,
Ingram had changed the customers’ perception of the product. He had ed-
ucated the consumer.
Robert Mondavi had a similar problem some 30 years later. After clash-
ing with his brother (Charles Krug) over the direction the family winery
should take, Mondavi left Krug and started his own winery in 1965. He was
determined to produce California wines that would match the finest Euro-
pean varieties. His problem was that wine drinkers at that time didn’t think
of California wines as being of particularly high quality; and they weren’t.
Mondavi thus had two challenges. First, he had to produce a high-quality
wine. Second, he had to convince wine drinkers that he had actually done
so. To accomplish the first, he launched a series of experiments to enhance
the subtleties in flavor that American wines lacked. To accomplish the sec-
ond, Mondavi just did what came naturally—he talked:
In the late 1960s and early ’70s . . . when I was on the road two or three
weeks at a time, promoting our wines, what was I doing? Talking and re-
peating myself over and over, at sales meetings, with customers, with
anyone who would listen to what I had to say about fine wines and the
Napa Valley.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
160

When I went on the road with our sales reps and distributors, and even
when I was alone, I had something else I loved to do. . . . [A]t night I’d go to
one of the best restaurants in town. I’d sit down and order dinner and with
it I’d order a bottle of fine Bordeaux, maybe even a First or Second
Growth.Then I’d order another fine Bordeaux.When everyone started to
get interested, I would invite the owner or the chef or the sommelier over
for a taste of these great French wines.
“So what do you think?”
“Lovely,” they’d say, or some such.Then I’d open a bottle of our cabernet
sauvignon and offer them a taste. Chances are they’d be impressed and
often they were downright shocked! Here was a truly fine wine, made in
California, and more reasonably priced than a top-quality French chateau
wine. And they could taste the quality!40
Mondavi’s talking and tasting paid off. By the late 1970s, the Robert
Mondavi Winery was not only producing some good wines but like a
number of other California wineries, was being recognized for doing so.
The customer had been educated. Perceptions had changed.
Situation #3:Your Product Has a Decided Negative
Ingram and Mondavi were battling perceptions. In reality, the White Castle
hamburgers were safe and nutritious, and Mondavi’s California wines were
actually better wines. It was just that the customer wasn’t aware of the
change and had to be educated. But what do you do if your product really
does have a negative? What if, in some ways, it really isn’t as good? Well,
say our gurus, you just have to turn a negative into a positive. Here is how
Ted Turner did just that.
It was in the early 1970s. Over almost everyone’s objections, Ted Turner
had bought a debt-ridden UHF television station in Atlanta, Channel 17,
which he christened WTCG. The station showed mostly wrestling, old
movies, and old syndicated shows. In addition, it had two major negatives
going for it when it came to appealing to prospective advertisers. First, at a
time when most other stations were broadcasting in living color, almost all
of WTCG’s programs were available only in black and white. Second,
being a UHF station, WTCG was hard for viewers to find and tune in. With
an amazing bit of entrepreneurial reasoning, Turner was able to turn both
negatives into positives. Black and white wasn’t a problem, Turner told his
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
161

prospective advertisers. On the contrary, it was a benefit. “You want to
avoid clutter? . . . You want shock value?” he shouted while pounding on
their desks. “You want your message to stand out the way it never could on
any other station? Then run your color commercials on WTCG, where all
[the] programs are black and white!” And, argued Turner, being a UHF sta-
tion wasn’t a problem either. In fact it was a guarantee of intelligent
viewers. How so? “Because,” insisted Turner, “it takes a genius to figure
out how to tune a UHF set, dummy!”41
Well, maybe “dummy” is not the best thing to call your prospective cus-
tomer, but you get the point. For every negative, say our gurus, there is al-
ways a positive you can stress. It’s your job to find that positive and point it
out to your customer. That’s a necessary skill in getting customers. It’s also
fundamental to advertising, our next topic.
USING ADVERTISING EFFECTIVELY
It is highly likely that advertising will be a key vehicle you will use both to
garner attention and to educate your customer. Ray Kroc once said that
there are two kinds of attitudes about advertising—that of the “begrudger”
and that of the “promoter.” Begrudgers, he said, always treat every cent
paid for ad campaigns as if they are strictly expenditures, and they are re-
luctant to spend money for promotions unless they can see an immediate re-
turn. Promoters, on the other hand, are never hesitant to spend money on
advertising because they have a broader vision of its benefits. Kroc viewed
himself as a promoter:
I never hesitate to spend money in this area, because I can see it coming
back to me with interest. Of course, it comes back in different forms, and
that may be the reason a begrudger can’t appreciate it. He has a narrow vi-
sion that allows him to see income only in terms of cash in his register. In-
come for me can appear in other ways; one of the nicest of them is a satis-
fied smile on the face of a customer.That’s worth a lot, because it means
that he’s coming back, and he’ll probably bring a friend. A child who loves
our TV commercials and brings her grandparents to a McDonald’s gives us
two more customers.This is a direct benefit generated by advertising dol-
lars. But the begrudger has a hard time appreciating this.”42
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
162

Our gurus urge you to be more of a promoter than a begrudger when it
comes to advertising, but, they warn, don’t treat your relationship with ad-
vertising agencies lightly. This is an area of your business that requires your
personal involvement. How then should you go about such tasks as select-
ing an ad agency, finding the right account executive, working with the cre-
ative department, avoiding excessive commissions, and measuring the suc-
cess of your ads? Here are four advertising success secrets our gurus offer.
Advertising Success Secret #1: Hire the Biggest Ad Agency in
Your Community
Your first task is to find an advertising agency. Wilson Harrell suggests that
you should begin looking for one even before you open shop. Harrell notes
that, “whatever your product or service, you must tell potential customers
why they need whatever you’re selling. From calling cards to yellow page
ads to full-blown TV campaigns, you need creative ideas that project your
message. [And] that’s not a place for amateurs, specifically not you and/or
your spouse.”43 Start your search for an agency, suggests Harrell, by seek-
ing out the biggest and best advertising agency in your community. Don’t
be intimidated by size, and don’t talk to their lower-level employees. Go
right to the top, to the owners of the agency. Tell them your company is
headed for the Fortune 500 and that you want to develop a long-term rela-
tionship with an ad agency that can help you get there. Don’t assume that
they won’t be interested because you don’t have a lot of money to spend on
ads at the moment, says Harrell; agency owners are usually entrepreneurs
themselves, and entrepreneurs love entrepreneurs. Harrell recalls one small
company he worked with that was able to secure the services of a large and
powerful agency even though the owners of the start-up had very little
money to spend on ads.
I was a consultant to a small company that had developed a dynamite con-
sumer product.What they didn’t have was money.They desperately needed
a lot of startup creative work, such as package design, copy and layout for
sales kits, etc. If things went well, they would soon need print ads, as well as
radio scripts and story boards for TV commercials. Obviously, they needed
a fully staffed advertising agency. But, they figured, no money, no agency.
Right? Wrong.
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
163

We met with the owners of an outstanding agency.They liked the prod-
uct and the people.When the meeting was over, we had an agency that was
willing to bet on the future; to invest their creative talent to accomplish all
the in-house work with no up-front cost. A home run. How? Simple.We
signed a long-term contract, based on sales. Not only did we get a great
agency, but we were assured of special attention. A win-win for everyone.
You see, I knew that an ad agency’s greatest nightmare is to build an ac-
count and then lose it.We swapped money for security.44
Advertising Success Secret #2: Avoid the Top-Dog Ad Executive
Once you have landed an agency, your next critical task is to make sure that
you get the right account executive. He or she is the person in the agency
that will coordinate all of your relationships with the other people in the
agency, such as those in the creative department. The account executive is
also responsible for two other tasks: (1) keeping your account and (2) in-
creasing your ad budget. Harrell offers the following advice to guide your
search for the right account executive:
Don’t try to get any of the top dogs. Agencies are like any other company;
their top management is snowed under.That means you won’t get the time
you need when you need it. On the other hand, if they try to palm off some
“junior” or the owner’s brother-in-law, give them your old tried-and-true
CEO “silent stare” until they try again.What you want is someone who is
bright, who knows the agency well, and who isn’t loaded down with 50
other accounts. Keep staring until they produce someone who gives you a
warm feeling.
Once you’re satisfied, help your account executive to be a better poli-
tician within your company.The more they know about you and your key
players, the better they will function. Encourage your senior executives to
spend time with the AE [account executive].45
Advertising Success Secret #3: Make Sure the Creative Types
Are People You Would Not Hire
Once you have found the right account executive, your next stop is with the
agency’s creative department. You’ll have no trouble recognizing people
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
164

from the creative department, declares Harrell, since they rarely, if ever,
look normal. “Don’t act surprised to meet some strange-looking individual,
with hair down to his waist (if it’s a man), or a crew cut (if it’s a woman). If
they remotely resemble someone you would hire, the chances are you’ve
got the wrong person.”46 Also, don’t expect the creative people to be very
politic. They will probably treat you like a worm and laugh at any ideas for
ads you suggest. Harrell says you should insist on meeting the agency’s cre-
ative people for two reasons:
First, because it will make your day, but more importantly, because they are
one of the major reasons you hired the agency in the first place. Let the
creative people show you their work, face-to-face.What you are looking
for is something that is fresh and different, even outrageous. Contrary to
the advice you may have received, you are not looking for practical or solid
creative ideas.What you are looking for are new and exciting ideas that stir
the imagination.What you don’t want is warmed-over copies of past ef-
forts. Or, even worse, something that was designed to please you, and
wouldn’t sell grits in Georgia.47
When it comes to your ads, you want something that is clever. But you
also want something that isn’t so clever that no one gets the point. Anita
Roddick learned that lesson with one of the Body Shop’s first environmen-
tal ad campaigns. This one was intended to warn about the dangers of acid
rain, as Roddick explains:
We hired a brilliant Polish instructor who produced an extraordinary sur-
real poster showing a dead tree sprouting from a decomposing human head
against an industrial background of smoking chimneys.The quirky copyline
said “Acid Reign,” which we thought was really clever. It was very, very so-
phisticated: the trouble was that our customers and the public hadn’t got a
clue what we were getting at. (In fact, someone came into one of our
shops—I think it was in the Channel Islands—and asked if we were now
selling LSD. I still don’t know if it was a joke or not.) Ninety-eight posters
went up in the UK shops and another 217 abroad, and all we achieved was
to mystify everybody. . . .
We learned from that experience, and we learned very quickly, that sim-
ple, emotive imagery was the key to getting a message across.We learned
that the first bite is taken with the eye and that something very graphic and
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
165

very striking is needed to grab attention.We did better with the next . . .
campaign, on the dangers to the ozone layer with a poster showing a child
in a huge desert landscape, dressed in aluminum like a spaceman and carry-
ing an aluminum umbrella with holes. It bore the copyline “Ozone or no
Zone?” We had a quote from a Roger McGough poem to go with it:“The
way we mistreat the earth, Anyone would think we owned it.”48
Ben and Jerry had a similar experience with a clever advertising slogan
they adopted during their first year of business. The slogan was simple,
consisting of only two words, “Lick It,” referring, of course, to their ice
cream. They printed the slogan on bumper stickers that they gave away and
on the backs of T-shirts that they sold. Then some of Ben and Jerry’s cus-
tomers began to object. Fred Lager recalls the incident this way:
[The slogan] created a bit of an uproar in the local lesbian community, who
had taken to hanging out at the gas station in relatively large numbers.
Commonwoman, an alternative weekly newspaper, cited the bumper stick-
ers as an example of offensive behavior in the local business community.
Ben and Jerry responded by placing an ad in the newspaper that read as fol-
lows:
Despite the fact that Commonwoman displayed our bumper sticker as an
example of sexism in Burlington, and
Despite the fact that Commonwoman published an article advocating
stealing from businesses, and
Despite the fact that Commonwoman disapproves of and threatens
not to accept this ad because they fail to see the humor in it,
Ben & Jerry’s would like to thank Commonwoman for its service to
the community and would like to thank its many readers for supporting
our store these many months.
Ben thought the slogan too good to drop, but Jerry . . . prevailed upon
him, and “Vermont’s Finest” replaced “Lick It” as the slogan of choice on
the bumper stickers and shirts.With the change in slogans, amicable rela-
tions with the lesbian community were restored.49
As you work with the creative department to design, or at least to ap-
prove, ads that get your message across, and with the hope that they don’t
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
166

offend anyone, you may also face the issue of picking a spokesperson.
Someone may even suggest that you take on that role yourself, like Lee Ia-
coca did for Chrysler. If you do decide on such a role, don’t be surprised if
your first efforts at doing a commercial for your company don’t turn out so
well. Asked to evaluate Dave Thomas’s initial foray into spokesmanship,
Jim McKennan, an official at Wendy’s ad agency, could only exclaim,
“Those first commercials, oy gevalt!”50 It seemed that a major problem was
Thomas’s propensity to scramble syntax, mix verbs, and invent words as he
spoke. The agency’s writers had difficulty coming up with complete sen-
tences that Thomas was able to deliver, and Advertising Age proclaimed his
early ads “thoroughly pathetic in every respect.”51 Eventually, however, the
agency learned to adapt the ads to Thomas’s unique style, and his delivery
improved. Within a few years, Advertising Age had changed its opinion and
was now calling Thomas’s ads “hilarious, pointed, tactically sharp, and
beautifully performed.”52 More important, Thomas’s ads were working.
Thanks partly to the advertising campaign, by early 1991 Wendy’s was
earning its highest profit in years. Exhibit 4.6 illustrates what Thomas
learned about making a good ad.
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
167
EXHIBIT 4.6.
Dave Thomas’s Rules for Making a Good Ad
1. Don’t make claims for something you really can’t deliver. No matter who is
speaking for a company, an ad has to be credible. . . .
You have to be very careful that you deliver what you claim in an ad because custom-
ers really measure your products against your claims. If you can’t make a claim you can
live up to, I guess you’re just better off with an ad full of smiling faces.
2. Show a sense of humor. People say I’m funny.They say I’m good at making them smile.
Well, maybe. I know I’m not real good at telling jokes or gags and delivering a great punch
line. My sense of humor has more to do with smiles than with going for the big laugh. . . .
Some of you remember an ad for the Dave’s Deluxe sandwich. I’m at a cocktail party,
where the waiter shoves these ridiculous hors d’oeuvres under my nose.You don’t want
to be rude, but you don’t know what’s in it, and you definitely don’t want to eat it.You say
to yourself.“Who comes up with these crazy ideas?” “Whatever happened to peanuts or
cheese and crackers?” Or:“Why am I here? I’d rather be someplace where I would feel
comfortable.” We were making the point that a Dave’s Deluxe sure beats a crab puff.
People relate to that. It makes them smile.
(continued)

T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
168
EXHIBIT 4.6.
(continued)
3. Don’t think that a down-home, easy-going ad is either cheap or easy to make.
A typical four- or five-day production for a series of television commercials costs about a
million dollars.That’s just to film, edit, and finish the commercials, not the cost of running
them on television.A million-dollar investment can make anybody look good.The last one
I made had dozens of takes and took ten hours to produce.That’s for a commercial that is
only thirty seconds long. So far, I’ve made over a hundred TV ads for Wendy’s. None of
them were made without a lot of effort. Not once did I ever feel that I got it all right.
4. Don’t pretend to be an actor if you’re not.Whether you’re making a presentation
or a commercial, it’s all the same.The big thing is not to be phony. . . .The biggest risk that
a company president or chairman faces when they do a commercial is that they will come
across as having a big ego.You can always tell when the ad agency talked the boss into
starring in the commercial because they wanted to flatter his ego. Everything looks staged,
the boss pretends he’s an actor, and everything falls flat.That’s real risky for the company
because the manager isn’t credible, and the commercial can’t convince the audience to
buy the product.
5. Talk in a believable way. Some companies do “image advertising” that you couldn’t be-
lieve in a thousand years.The employees all look like fashion-show models, the sound
track sounds like it came from Ben Hur, and you get the feeling that the company does
more good works than Mother Teresa. Remember, the words in your message can be hon-
est and real, but if you overdo the effects and visuals, you lose being believable.
6. Make sure your customers can recognize you. In the early days of Kentucky Fried
Chicken,we had all kinds of people coming up with the way Colonel Sanders was supposed
to look.In ads,on bags,and in menus,we had fat Colonels and skinny Colonels,dark-haired
Colonels and fair-haired ones.We had to standardize his image into one professional look.
Only then did we get the real benefits of being a brand.People know how to find you then.
7. Be controversial. At last count, there are 2,931 brands of products competing for atten-
tion on American television. Getting people interested enough to watch your commercial
these days is very tough. Marketing people say good ads have to “bust through all the
clutter.” To do that, they conclude, you have to be controversial. But some of these mar-
keting geniuses go too far.There’s plenty of suggestive, risqué advertising on TV today.We
think you can be controversial without forgetting about good taste. One time, an agency
wanted me to say “up to your keister in biscuits,” and I wouldn’t do it because I felt it
would offend some people.
8. Don’t try to please everyone.This may be the most important marketing lesson I know.
I’ve sat in on plenty of marketing meetings where people tried to make everyone happy,and
it doesn’t work.Go after the customers who will make a difference to your business.Expect
some people not to like you and many more not to even notice that you exist.Spend your
time thinking about the people you really want to be your customers.Then do everything
you can to talk to those customers in a way that will make them feel good about you.
Source: R. David Thomas, Dave’s Way (New York: Berkley Books, 1992), pp. 163–164.

Advertising Secret #4: Beat the Commissions
Whether you appear in your ads yourself or hire someone to do the job, our
gurus caution you to pay attention to the commissions you are paying. One
of the things Harrell disliked about the commission structure of most ad-
vertising agencies is that they continue to collect a 15 percent commission
on media buys even though most media buying today is accomplished by
media-buying firms. If such commissions are the principle source of an
agency’s income, writes Harrell, the possibility exists for a conflict of inter-
est about how much advertising to buy. Instead, there is a better and simpler
way to compensate ad agencies for their efforts:
Agree with your agency that all advertising will be billed to you at their net
cost, no commissions. Instead, you agree to pay them for services per-
formed by the job, or hour, . . . the same way you pay for most professional
services. By all means, let them make a profit on your account; even give
them an incentive kicker based on sales results! I’m not suggesting that you
try to save money, but rather that you try to get more bang for your
bucks.53
Another way to reduce your costs, according to Harrell, is to authorize
your agency to have its media-buying service make “opportunistic” media
buys for your company. Such buys occur when television or radio stations
have a last-minute cancellation or difficulty selling a particular spot or
space. For example, a few years ago, the media-buying company his
agency was working with was able to secure a $200,000 prime-time spot on
a major network for his company for just $40,000 due to a last-minute can-
cellation. Although such fantastic buys don’t come along often, notes Har-
rell, you want to be able to take advantage of them when they do.54
NEVER LOSE SIGHT OF YOUR GOAL
One final word from our gurus—as you go about the process of buying adver-
tising, starring in your own television and radio ads, coming up with clever
print ads, courting the media, and pulling off really funny publicity stunts,
just remember one thing. You’re not doing all of this to win advertising
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
169

awards or to get your face on the cover of Time as “the most interesting per-
son of the decade.” You’re doing this to make sales and to build a long-term
brand image. “Marketing,” says Phil Knight of Nike, “is just getting people
to buy things.”56 It’s about getting customers. Period.
The indicator of how well . . . marketing is working is whether people are
buying the product. . . . Marketing done well results in sales. Effective short-
term marketing results in a short-term sales boost—a cents-off promotion
or a six-week run of ads, for instance, can create a short-term lift. Long-
term, image marketing results in ongoing, sustained sales. Image marketing is
a slow build over time, and it’s based on communicating the essence of the
brand.The positioning statement of Ben & Jerry’s—the essence of the
brand—would be,“Two regular, caring guys living in Vermont, the land of
cows and green pastures, making some world-class ice cream in some
pretty unusual flavors.”
Ben & Jerry55
KEY POINTS
Most entrepreneurs have to use promotions and gimmicks to get the
attention of potential customers.
Successful promotional efforts should be easy to administer and easy
to understand. Customers may miss the point of complex promotions.
Successful entrepreneurs court the press.
Gurus disagree on the usefulness of traditional market research for en-
trepreneurs. Some argue that all entrepreneurs should conduct market
testing and develop a formal marketing plan. Others argue that mar-
keting studies are useless for determining the viability of products that
are truly new because there is no market for such products that market
research can reveal. For really new products, entrepreneurs must go
with their instinct and create a market by educating the consumer.
Educating the consumer involves one or more of the following:
 Demonstrating a need for the new product by illustrating how the
product solves a problem or delivers a benefit.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
170

 Repositioning the product in the customers’minds by showing how
it is better or different from existing competing products.
 Turning a perceived negative into a positive.
Advertising is a key vehicle for garnering attention and educating the
customer. Successful entrepreneurs never hesitate to spend money on
advertising because they recognize its benefits.
Try to avoid paying unnecessary commissions to ad agencies, and use
opportunistic media buys to reduce your costs.
Remember that the real reason for advertising, promotions, and press
relations is not to win awards or get your face on the cover of Time.
The real reason is to make sales and build a brand image. The real rea-
son is to get customers.
G E T T I N G  C U S T O M E R S
171

K E E P I N G  C U S TO M E R S — T h e  G u r u s
Mary Kay Ash, founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics
Arthur Blank, cofounder of Home Depot
Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group
Michael Dell, founder of Dell Computer Corporation
Debbi Fields, founder of Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc.
Bill Gates, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation
Earl Graves, founder, publisher, and editor of Black Enterprise
Bud Hadfield, founder of Kwik Kopy
Howard Johnson, founder of Howard Johnson Company
Herb Kelleher, founder of Southwest Airlines
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s Corporation
Bernie Marcus, cofounder of Home Depot
Konosuke Matsushita, founder of Matsushita Electric Industrial
Company
Edward Miller, cofounder of Spic and Span, Inc.
Tom Monaghan, founder of Domino’s Pizza
Bill Rosenberg, founder of Dunkin’ Donuts
Howard Schultz, founder of Starbucks Coffee Company
172

Keeping Customers
H
aving been through all that we discussed in the last chapter and,
as a result, having gotten some customers to venture into your
store, access your Web site, or sample your products, our gurus
have one piece of advice for you at this point:
For goodness sake, don’t lose them!!!
That’s what this chapter is about—keeping customers. Our gurus say that
the effort you expend to keep customers may be the most important thing
you can do to help your business succeed. Of course you recognize that
customers are vital, but just how valuable is a single customer? Quite valu-
able. Our gurus have done the calculations.
EVERY SINGLE CUSTOMER HAS VALUE
In November 1995, LUV Lines (the corporate newsletter for founder Herb
Kelleher’s Southwest Airlines) featured an article that put the importance of
customer service in perspective. It read in part as follows:
How important is every Customer to our future? Our Finance Depart-
ment reports that our break-even Customers per flight in 1994 was 74.5,
which means that, on average, only when Customer #75 came on board did
a flight become profitable!
Aside from that statistical data, let me share with you a down-to-earth
formula . . . [that] utilizes our annual profit and total flights flown to clearly
173
5

illustrate how vital each Customer is to our profitability and our very exis-
tence.
When you divide our 1994 annual profit by total fights flown, you get
profit per flight:
$179,331,000 (annual profit)
————————————  $287 (profit per flight)
624,476 (total flights flown)
Then, divide profit per fight by Southwest’s system wide average one-
way fare of $58:
$287 (profit per flight)
———————————  5 (one-way fares [Customers!])
$58 (average one-way fare)
The bottom line, only five Customers per flight accounted for our total
1994 profit! In other words, just five Customers per flight—only 3 million
of the 40 million Customers we carried—meant the difference between
profit and loss for our airline in 1994.To take it a step further, to have lost
the business of only one of those Customers would have meant a 20 per-
cent reduction in profit on that flight.That’s how valuable each Customer is
to Southwest and you! . . .
Studies reveal that, on average, for each Customer who was “wronged,”
there are 25 others who remained silent.The studies claim that each per-
son in this silent majority will, by word of mouth, tell between 8 and 16
people—an average of 12—of their complaint. (Over 10 percent will tell
more than 20 people!) When you do the math, a potential 300 people can
be influenced by just one negative situation. Here is what that factor means
to Southwest Airlines:
Last year, we heard from about 60,000 Customers who were dissatisfied
with some aspect of their experience with us. . . .
60,000 (“wronged” Southwest Customers)
 25 (silent majority)
 1,500,000 possible dissatisfied Southwest Customers
Now if those 1.5 million dissatisfied Southwest Customers told 12
others of their experience:
1,500,000
 12 (word of mouth)
 18,000,000 potential “influenced” Southwest Customers
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
174

Do you think that 18 million is enough Customers to put us out of busi-
ness? And, when you compare that 18 million potentially lost or never-
reached Customers with the 3 million which accounted for our total 1994
profit, the significance of each and every Customer becomes even more ap-
parent.
There is, however, a positive aspect of Customer complaints! The afore-
mentioned research also indicates that if you make a sincere effort to
remedy complaints and regain Customers’ good will, 82 to 95 percent of
those Customers will stay with you!1
That may sound good for Kelleher’s airline, but do the same kinds of
statistics about the marginal value of each additional customer apply to
other businesses? They sure do, say our gurus. Let’s look at a business
that is about as far from running an airline as you can get—selling pizzas.
Tom Monaghan claims that in the pizza business the care and attention
you give to existing customers is as important, if not more important, than
all the money you spend on advertising and promotions to attract new
customers. In fact, he declares, caring for existing customers may be the
most important single thing you can do to help your company grow. He
explains:
Suppose a store is delivering 95 percent of its pizzas within thirty minutes.
Sounds pretty good. But let’s look at that 5 percent of orders that are de-
livered late. Let’s say it comes to fifty late orders per week.We know that
more than 10 percent of late deliveries result in lost customers, which
means that this store is losing, at minimum, five customers per week. If you
multiply that out for the year, then multiply that by twenty-six, which is the
average number of times a customer buys from us during the year, you get
6,760 lost orders. It would take a lot of time and money spent on advertis-
ing and promotion to bring in that many orders.And there’s no way to
atone for bad word-of-mouth from the disgruntled customer. . . .
I’ve always said that if you just take care of every single customer, your
business will grow by 50 percent a year. Make sure every pizza gets there in
thirty minutes, make sure every one is good—no burned pizzas and no raw
pizzas—and don’t skimp on the ingredients.That’s it.You don’t need any so-
phisticated marketing programs.The solution is simple, and it’s right before
your nose.2
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
175

Sound too simple? Maybe, but Monaghan swears that it works. In fact,
he points to an example from the early 1980s. Monaghan had visited with a
Domino’s franchisee whose sales at the time were only $2,446 per week
and who wanted some advice on how to grow his business. Monaghan re-
sponded with his “take-care-of-existing-customers” speech. The franchisee
later considered that advice in light of the teamwork he had seen in profes-
sional sports. Teams with a solid defense didn’t get scored on as often, so
even if their offense only scored occasionally, they still had a good chance
of winning games. From that day forward, the franchisee devoted himself
to “defensive management.” He made sure his pizzas were well prepared
and delivered promptly. He took care of every single customer, day in and
day out. Within seven months, his sales doubled to $5,600 per week, with-
out advertising.3
When you’re too busy for customers . . . don’t worry about it. In time, you
won’t be busy at all.
Bud Hadfield4
THE NINE KEYS TO CUSTOMER RETENTION
If, as our gurus say, every single customer has value, then how do you avoid
losing them? Are there secrets to customer retention? Yes. Our gurus main-
tain that there are nine keys to making sure customers come back again and
again. They are summarized in Exhibit 5.1.
In the following sections we look at each of these keys to customer re-
tention in more detail.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
176
EXHIBIT 5.1.
Nine Keys to Customer Retention
1. Be a tough boss.
2. Get the itty-bitty, teeny-weeny things
right.
3. Be nice.
4. Become a trusted advisor.
5. Exceed expectations.
6. Guarantee 100% satisfaction.
7. Spend time with your customers.
8. Make bad news travel fast.
9. Put employees first.

Key #1: Be a Tough Boss
Successful entrepreneurs are almost always obsessed with treating their cus-
tomers right. Consequently, they can get a reputation for being tough bosses.
Bill Rosenberg, founder of Dunkin’ Donuts, admits that his employees often
find him demanding, but, he writes, “anybody who has truly succeeded had
a similar philosophy. They tell you that Howard Johnson was tough to work
for. They tell you that Ray Kroc was tough to work for. They tell you that
Willard Marriott was tough to work for; what they really mean is that we
are all demanding. We will not let you screw our customers.”5 No self-
respecting entrepreneur will. In fact, company legends develop around in-
stances of the founding entrepreneur’s anger at shoddy work. For example,
Howard Johnson is said to have had a problem with one of his franchisees
not keeping his restaurant clean. Johnson had complained several times
without results, so one day Johnson went to the restaurant, called everyone
outside, including the franchisee, and padlocked the door. He then pointed to
the sign over the restaurant and said, “You see that sign up there, it says
Howard Johnson and the way you’re keeping this place says Howard
Johnson is a slob. I’m not removing the lock until you clean up.”6
Debbi Fields describes a similar experience as follows:
I remember walking into our third store . . . and seeing a very unhappy-
looking batch of cookies laid out for the customers.They were flat and
overbaked. A perfect Mrs. Fields cookie is half an inch in thickness, and
these were a quarter of an inch. A perfect Mrs. Fields cookie is three
inches in diameter, and these appeared to measure three and a quarter
inches. They were also a little more golden brown than they should have
been—they’d been left in the oven too long.
My initial response was curiosity, no more than that. As a manager, I try
not to jump to conclusions. Perhaps these people thought the cookies
were perfect. If they did, it was my fault, because it meant they hadn’t been
properly trained. So I turned to the young man standing next to me and
said,“Tell me, what do you think of these cookies?”
“Aw,” he said,“they’re good enough.”
I nodded. I had my answer. One tray at a time, I took the cookies—five
or six hundred dollars’ worth—and slid them gently into the garbage can.
“You know,” I said to him,“ ‘good enough’ never is.”7
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
177

Key #2: Get the Itty-Bitty, Teeny-Weeny Things Right
Like our other gurus, Fields is obsessed with getting every detail right for
her customers. Only the best raisins, nuts, and other ingredients should be
used in her cookies. From the beginning, she says, her cookies had to be
just right.
From the very first,I set up a policy that we still follow today.Our cookies had
to be warm and fresh and when they were two hours out of the oven,what
hadn’t been sold was donated to the Red Cross to be given to blood donors,
or to other deserving charities,and we baked a new batch.We guaranteed ev-
erything we sold.If a customer was not happy with an order,we replaced it.
Whatever it took to serve warm,fresh cookies all day long,that’s what we did.
That meant a lot of staffing,and that made the cookies expensive.We could
have had all our cookies baked by six in the morning;that would have made
them cheaper,but then we’d have been like everyone else.8
Fields recalls that even her husband couldn’t always understand her ob-
session with the quality of ingredients in her cookies.
[A rep for one of our suppliers once] called me and said,“Debbi, you’ve got
to taste this new product! We think it’s terrific. It’s fifty percent butter and
fifty percent margarine. Do you have any idea how much money that will
save you? This is a brand-new product—everybody is using it, they love it,
they can’t tell the difference.”
“I can’t believe you’re even calling me,” I said.“We are definitely not in-
terested.”
I told Randy [Fields’s husband] the story and, playing devil’s advocate, he
insisted that I wouldn’t really know what was going on unless I actually
tried the butter-margarine blend. Finally I agreed, called back, and they sent
some over. I baked up a test batch of cookies with it and they were dread-
ful.The difference was night and day. Couldn’t people tell? I refused to be-
lieve they wouldn’t taste the difference.9
Ray Kroc was also obsessed with getting every little thing right at
McDonald’s, laying out elaborate guidelines for constructing the perfect
hamburger. Hamburger patties were to weigh precisely 1.6 ounces and
measure 3.875 inches in diameter—not 4 inches, but 3.875 inches. Each
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
178

pound of meat was to make 10 hamburgers, and the meat was to contain no
lungs, hearts, or cereal and only 19 percent fat. The meat patty was to be
placed on a bun that had to be exactly 3.5 inches wide and was to be topped
with precisely one-quarter ounce of onions. Everything was to be kept
fresh. French fries were to be thrown away if not sold within 7 minutes.
Hamburgers could be kept only 10 minutes and coffee only 30.10
For Bud Rosenberg, getting the teeny-weeny things right comes down to
being obsessed with something as seemingly mundane as the cream in his
coffee:
I go into Hollywood Circle in Hollywood, Florida, and I go into a store to
taste the coffee many years ago. I say to the operator,“Geez, this coffee
don’t taste right.There’s something wrong, it doesn’t meet Dunkin’ Donuts’
standards.”
The franchise owner tells me there’s nothing wrong with the coffee. So I
said,“Let me see the coffee, let me weigh the grind. Geeze, it smells good, it
weighs right, it’s fresh, what the hell is wrong with it?” So I call up the cof-
fee company and they say everything is alright; so I asked the owner what
kind of cream he uses. So he showed me these little creamers made of
vegetable fat, the kind that never goes bad. So I say to him,“Did you ever
read your manual?” He says,“Yeah.” So I say to him.“The manual says you
got to use 18% butterfat cream.”
The man responds indignantly,“Hey, there’s nothing wrong with these.
You know the Hollywood Beach Hotel; they use these. All the best hotels,
they all use these.” I said to him,“Yeah, well how many rooms do you have
to rent?”
The franchise owner said,“What do you mean?”
I say this to all of my people that we have two things to sell: coffee and
doughnuts. And if we don’t have the freshest coffee and the finest dough-
nuts then we have no reason for existing.We have nothing else to sell.We
don’t have any rooms to rent. So why should the people come here to get
a superior cup of coffee if your coffee is no better than theirs. . . .
Some people just don’t understand.You’ve got to have a niche in life;
you’ve got to satisfy the customer.11
Truly successful entrepreneurs never lose their commitment to their cus-
tomers, even after their business is a resounding success. Take the case of Ed-
ward Miller, cofounder and chairman of Spic and Span, Inc., Milwaukee’s
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
179

premier dry cleaner. Until he died at the age of 93, Miller still showed up each
week at his factory, greeted his employees, and settled in to study the
numbers—for example, 21 garments returned from customers: three pants,
two skirts, one dress, three shirts folded instead of on hangers. That wouldn’t
be such a bad report, considering that Spic and Span handles over ten thou-
sand garments a day. Still, Miller would personally visit with each depart-
ment head to discuss what happened to the 21 problem garments and why. He
would also remind them of the key to Spic and Span’s success—“Quality
comes first, service comes second, and cost comes last.” “I don’t care how
long it takes for them to get it right, Miller would say, “quality comes first.”12
Quality comes first, service comes second, and cost comes last. I don’t care
how long it takes . . . to get it right; quality comes first.
Edward Miller13
Key #3: Be Nice
Howard Schultz claims that the success of Starbucks has as much to do
with relationships as it has to do with the quality of the coffee. Of course,
product quality must be superior, notes Schultz, but Starbucks’ success is
“more than great coffee. It’s the romance of the coffee experience, the feel-
ing of warmth and community people get in Starbucks stores. That tone is
set by our baristas, who custom-make each espresso drink and explain the
origins of different coffees.”14
Part of world-class quality and service, say our gurus, is treating custom-
ers with respect—creating that feeling of warmth and community that
Schultz says makes Starbucks tick. Fred Smith adds that each daily inter-
action with a customer is particularly critical in a service-oriented business
such as his. As he explains: “A positive interaction adds value—a negative
experience can be devastating. And the kicker is [a provider of services]
can’t . . . [reverse] a bad experience with a customer like a manufacturer
can recall a faulty part, fix it, and put it back into service so it works right
the second time.”15
For that reason, Tom Monaghan tells all of his franchisees that the big-
gest little thing they can do to help their businesses succeed is just to be
nice to their customers.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
180

I’ve often remarked in speeches that my objective is to have everyone say
that Domino’s Pizza people are nice. Not brilliant or charming or models of
efficiency, just nice. How can that be achieved? Simply by getting employees
to take every opportunity to be friendly, to smile at the customer and say
“please” and “thank you” and “sir” and “ma’am.” I am very serious about
the proper technique for taking telephone orders, how to say the right
words and get as much friendliness into your voice as possible. It sounds
very basic, and it is. But it’s one of those fundamentals you have to stress
over and over again, like a football coach harping on blocking and tackling.
And though it’s a little thing, it pays off big and in unexpected ways. If you
are nice to other people, they’ll be nice to you. Not only will your business
prosper, but your customers’ return of courtesy will bolster your self-
image and you’ll become a happier person.16
Treat people you do business with as if they were a part of your family.
Prosperity depends on how much understanding one receives from the
people with whom one conducts business.
Konosuke Matsushita17
Earl Graves relates how the importance of treating customers with re-
spect was forcefully brought home to him a number of years ago by none
other than his mother. Graves had been visiting his mother before going to
a sales meeting with Jack Welch, the CEO of General Electric (GE). When
he told his mother about his upcoming trip, Graves recalls that he was sur-
prised at her response. “I always liked that man,” was her reply. “But you
have never met Jack Welch,” Graves said. “Oh no, not him,” said Graves
mother, “[I mean] the other man from GE, the man who took off his hat to
me and called me Mrs. Graves when he came to fix the refrigerator in our
old house.” Then it dawned on Graves. That visit from the GE repairman
had occurred when he was just two years old. Ever since, his mother had
bought GE products whenever she could. “That’s product loyalty,” writes
Graves.18 Indeed it is. And, say our gurus, it is just the kind of loyalty a lit-
tle heartfelt respect can breed.
Even our gurus admit to being vulnerable to a little attention. Debbi
Fields recalls how, during the early days of her company, one chocolate
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
181

salesman won her loyalty and another quickly lost it based not on the quality
of their chocolate chips, which were equivalent, but on the quality of their
respect for her and attention to her company’s needs.
I called up a certain very large and very famous chocolate company.“Hi,” I
said brightly,“my name is Debbi Fields and I’m opening up a new cookie
store and before I open the store I want to test your chocolate. Could you
send me, uhh, maybe twenty-five pounds? I’ll pay for it, of course, and if I
like it I might even buy three hundred pounds.”
The salesman never missed a beat.“Listen, sweetheart, when you want
ten thousand pounds of chocolate, call me. Otherwise, we’re not inter-
ested.” He hung up on me.
I was crushed. Here I was trying to show the world my best business
style, so proud that I was actually going to open a store, and this man had
just stuck a pin in the balloon. I felt three inches tall—just some overambi-
tious female—“sweetheart”—who had deluded herself into believing that
she had the ability to open a business. It was like the bankers all over again
except this guy wasn’t smooth and slippery. He said what he thought and
slammed the phone down.
Anxiously, I looked up another very large and very famous chocolate
company in the telephone directory and dialed the number. . . .
A salesman answered the phone and I didn’t even try to sound sophisti-
cated.“I have a tiny little company,” I said,“and I was wondering if I could
maybe taste a little of your chocolate. I really can’t buy much.”
“Where are you?” he asked. I gave him the address of the store. He said
he’d be right there.
He arrived with the back of his car loaded with chocolate chips, and
staggered into the store with a double armload of plastic bags. He intro-
duced himself and shook my hand.“Well,” he said,“what can I do for
you?” . . .
The salesman listened with all his attention as I told him what I was try-
ing to do, how I envisioned the product, and what my ambitions were for
the little business. All for a sale of twenty-five pounds. . . . He treated me
like the only customer he’d ever had. . . .
Well, guess what. I happen to believe in loyalty and this salesman and his
company still have the Mrs. Fields account today.We did buy more than
twenty-five pounds of chocolate from this man.We bought tons of choco-
late every year, for ten years, simply because he took the time and energy
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
182

to be interested in and involved with a new business run by a very young
woman. And it’s worth noting that this particular company was the second
call I made.The first salesman I encountered was just too important to deal
with somebody he considered beneath his interest.Too bad, really, because
this year alone we’ll be buying about seven million dollars’ worth of choco-
late.19
Key #4: Become a Trusted Advisor
Ultimately, say our gurus, respect and attentiveness to customers means be-
coming their trusted advisor and taking responsibility for their investment
in your product or service. In his presentations to Home Depot trainees,
Bernie Marcus loves to tell stories. One of his favorites concerns the do-it-
yourselfer who needs a saw.
Say there’s a customer. . . . He gets in his car and drives down the street,
stopping at lights and intersections.The do-it-yourselfer gets on the high-
way. He drives for several miles and then gets off the highway and enters
this huge Home Depot parking lot. He finds a parking spot—the store is
crowded so the space is not near the door and gets out of his car and
walks into the store. . . .
You say,“What are you building today?” Or if you ask,“What are you
looking for today?” and the customer says,“a hacksaw,” you take him to the
hacksaw. . . .
If the customer is building a window frame, what he really needs is
another saw. Maybe the customer thinks the saw he needs is called a “hack-
saw,” . . . but if he buys the hacksaw and takes it home and can’t do the job,
he’s going to be frustrated when he can’t finish the project.That do-it-
yourselfer will likely blame Home Depot for not pointing out the right
tools and the right way.20
Instead of simply helping the customer find the hacksaw he thinks he
needs, says Marcus, why not go a step further and offer the customer some
real advice and assistance? Take the example of a do-it-yourselfer who
might arrive at a Home Depot to buy some two-by-fours and a roll of
screening to build a rabbit hutch. The associate could show the customer
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
183

where the two-by-fours and screening are located, or he or she could go fur-
ther. Marcus explains:
With our expert knowledge, we might say,“Well, instead of using white
pine, I would recommend pressure-treated lumber.You can use it outside. It
won’t rot. It will last longer.”
“Oh,” the customer will say,“I didn’t know there was such a thing.”
“Next, I would recommend using hardware cloth. It is galvanized, so rab-
bit feet won’t go down through it.And let me show you how to put a door
on that hutch, how to hang hinges.”
What the customer will go home with are different products that he or
she probably wasn’t aware of, and how-to knowledge of how to assemble
them a little bit smarter.The project will come together easier and we
hope the end product will be better.When the project is done, our ten
minutes of guidance probably increased the customer’s self-confidence.
Along the way, we might also sell the customer a new handsaw or drill
to complement the hammer, screwdriver, and pair of pliers in the kitchen
drawer.21
Marcus says that in his experience the customer who is given the addi-
tional advice and support, like that given the rabbit-hutch builder, will
come back to Home Depot a month or so later with a bigger project. Soon
the customer will start returning again and again. A bond will be formed. A
strong relationship will be developed. And Home Depot will win the cus-
tomer’s loyalty.
It’s the difference, explains Marcus, between merely offering the cus-
tomer good service—“Let me help you find the two-by-fours”—and cus-
tomer cultivation: “Let me share my knowledge to help you succeed at
what you are trying to do.” “Customer cultivation,” writes Marcus, “is just
like cultivating a tomato plant. Prepare the soil, maybe put some additives
in it. Plant the seed. Water it. Prune it. Fertilize it. Apply insecticides. It will
always grow bigger if you cultivate it. If you cultivate it, it will bear
fruit.”22 Marcus declares it was cultivation, not just service, that helped
Home Depot grow from 2 stores to 4, from 4 to 8, from 8 to 16, and so on.
And, he says, customer cultivation can help you grow your own business.
Michael Dell sees customer cultivation as critical to his industry because
it is easy for the customer to become confused with the wide variety of con-
stantly changing technology. Consequently, it isn’t enough for Dell Com-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
184

puters just to provide high-quality products and responsive service. Dell
has to act as an advisor.
In an average month, a customer might hear about new operating system
transitions on the server/workstation side, Intel’s latest micro-processor,
changes in LCD display technology, as well as the latest development in bat-
tery technology and weight for notebook computers.The industry is con-
stantly coming up with improvements in technology, and many of these im-
provements end up in our products. But it’s easy for customers to end up
with too much technology—or technology that doesn’t meet their
needs—if they’re not careful.
In acting as our customers’ advisor, we try to help them make the right
decisions, so that technology actually adds value to their business. It’s
simply a function of looking at our customer’s challenges as our challenges.
If our customers are challenged by the problem of having to support their
PCs, it’s not enough to say,“Here’s your PC. It’s got a manual. Good luck.” If
we don’t take responsibility for their problems, those very same problems
will inevitably resurface in some form—most notably, in our losing them as
customers.
We try to take responsibility for how our customers’ investment is
used.We look at the entire value chain of events and ask: How can we help
customers manage the complexity of the technology so that it drives their
costs down? How can we influence the industry to bring down the cost of
this technology? . . .
We aim to be more than just a computer supplier.We try to become a
customer’s advisor on technology strategy. . . .We help steer our custom-
ers through the storm of technological options.And our customers help us
stay humble.Together, we work to figure out the difference between the
next thing and the next useful thing.23
“In becoming a valued advisor to your customers,” adds Dell, “you need
to look beyond the product you’re selling and seek ways to enhance the
total customer experience.”24 See Exhibit 5.2 for some suggestions.
Ultimately, states Dell, your goal shouldn’t be just to please customers
with quality products and good service but, through the advisor role, to
build a meaningful, memorable total experience that will win customers for
life. At Dell, he writes, “we’ve always tried to exceed [our customers’] ex-
pectations.”25 That’s another key to retaining customers, say our gurus.
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
185

No Aisle Numbers!
You won’t even see aisle numbers in our stores.There is not a retailer on
the face of the globe with 100,000-square-foot stores other than The
Home Depot without some aisle numbers.Why? Well, if we had aisle
numbers, when a customer asks,“Do you know where I can find this
widget?” it would be very easy for our associates to point and say,“Aisle
eight.” If there are no aisle numbers, the employee has to say,“Let’s take a
walk and we’ll find it together.”
Bernie Marcus26
Key #5: Exceed Expectations
To illustrate what it takes to retain customers, Bud Hadfield likes to tell the
story of a man he once knew who owned a small delicatessen. Hadfield
writes:
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
186
EXHIBIT 5.2.
Michael Dell’s Tips on 
Becoming a Valued Advisor to Customers
I
See the big picture. It’s not enough to just respond piecemeal to your customers’ prob-
lems.You’ve got to be willing to invest in coming up with a solution to the immediate
problem and look beyond it to see its bigger potential.
I
Run with the suggestions your customers provide. Ask yourself,“Is this a onetime
event, or indicative of a trend? Is this an opportunity ripe for development?” Go even one
step further and ask,“Is there another whole business here?”
I
Always think bottom line—but not just yours. Consider your customers’ bottom line
as well. Can you save them money, while enhancing your partnership with them? Think
strategically about your customers’ businesses, and find ways to help them cut costs and
increase profits, all the while improving how they can serve their customers.
I
Go beyond selling your products or services, and make yourself valuable to your
customers as an advisor. Delivering expert advice with no strings attached does much
to demonstrate that you are a trustworthy partner.
I
Be a student. It’s as important to listen as to counsel. Customers can provide a much-
needed perspective on products and services you may be too invested in to evaluate ob-
jectively. Since they’re the ones who’ll be buying, it’s always better to know sooner rather
than later.
Source: Michael Dell and Catherine Fredman, Direct from Dell: Strategies That Revolutionized an Industry
(New York: HarperBusiness, 1999), pp. 168–169.

[It was] the kind where the walls and counters were covered with yellow
Formica. His place was so small, he served only sandwiches.
All his business was take-out, but people lined up at the counter and out
the door to place their orders. He had some sandwiches made ahead of
time, and he passed them across the counter as fast as he could.You would
see him grab a big handful of corned beef, roast beef, and salami, slap it on
the bread, wrap it in waxed paper and slide it back in the bag.
This fellow was so successful that he decided to expand. He built a res-
taurant 20 times the size of his original deli.27
Years later, says Hadfield, the delicatessen owner’s promising business
hadn’t grown at all. Why? Hadfield believes he has an idea.
I stopped in shortly after he opened.The owner was at the cash register,
but now he had a man in a white hat behind the counter, putting the meat
on a scale.The customers stood there and watched him carefully weigh the
meat and take a little off.
My guess is that the scale cost $50, but in reality, it may have cost him
$50 million. If he had kept giving the customers what they wanted, he might
have a chain of delis all over the country. He was in business before Ray
Kroc, selling those thick sandwiches as fast as he could bag them. If he
hadn’t decided to measure them, there might be corned beef under the
golden arches instead of hamburgers.28
The moral of the story is that you aren’t going to be very successful if
you repay customer loyalty by teaspooning your services. And surpris-
ingly, says Hadfield, it doesn’t require a lot to go from mere satisfaction to
delightful surprise. The simplest gesture can make a tremendous differ-
ence. It did for him.
In my early days as a printer, I bought an oversupply of air mail envel-
opes. Even my customers couldn’t buy enough to make any appreciable
dent in the stock. One of the men in the shop had an idea that seemed
worth trying. He suggested giving them away by including some with
every order for plain envelopes.We tried it.The results were astonish-
ing; our business soared. In less than a year we were printing more en-
velopes in a single week than we had printed in the busiest month of the
previous year.
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
187

What happened? What caused our sales to jump? There were several
reasons, but in talking with our customers, one factor surfaced more than
any other.Those few air mail envelopes were something extra; they were
more than the customer believed was part of the bargain.29
And Then Some
A very successful businessman was once asked,“To what do you attribute
your success?”
“I can tell you in three words,” he answered.“And then some.”
“What do you mean,‘and then some’?” he was questioned.
“Do everything that’s expected of you,” he explained,“and then some.”
Mary Kay Ash30
For Herb Kelleher, exceeding expectations has much to do with getting
all the teeny tiny things right while simultaneously exhibiting an air of in-
souciance and effervescence. Instead of meeting efficient but serious flight
attendants and gate agents, reasons Kelleher, why shouldn’t passengers be
greeted by ticket agents who, during flight delays, entertain them by award-
ing prizes for the passenger with the largest hole in his or her sock? Instead
of standing at the doorway to welcome passengers as they board, why
shouldn’t flight attendants hide in the overhead luggage bins and pop out
with a greeting? And instead of having to endure another boring safety lec-
ture delivered by an equally bored flight attendant, why shouldn’t pas-
sengers be treated to something like the following, which was once deliv-
ered by Southwest flight attendant Karen Wood:
If I could have your attention for a few moments, we sure would love to
point out those safety features. If you haven’t been in an automobile since
1965, the proper way to fasten your seat belt is to slide the flat end into
the buckle.To unfasten, lift up on the buckle and it will release.
And as the song goes, there might be fifty ways to leave your lover, but
there are only six ways to leave this aircraft: two forward exit doors, two
over-wing removable window exits, and two aft exit doors.The location of
each exit is clearly marked with signs overhead, as well as red and white
disco lights along the floor of the aisle. (Made ya look!)
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
188

Located in the seatback pocket in front of you or to the side of you in
the lounge area, among the peanut wrappers, coffee cups, and newspapers,
you should find an emergency information card supplementing our safety
features.Take note on the back that in the event of a water evacuation,
your bottom . . . your seat bottom, that is, can be used as a flotation device
by removing the cushion, holding onto the straps underneath it, and choos-
ing your favorite stroke.
Please check at this time to make sure your seat belts are securely fas-
tened, seat backs and tray tables are in their full upright and most uncom-
fortable position, and all the carry-on luggage you’ve brought in is crammed
underneath the seat in front of you, or in one of the overhead bins.
FAA regulations require passenger compliance with all lighted passenger
information signs, posted placards, and crew member instructions regarding
seat belts and no smoking. In other words do exactly what we say!
Speaking of smoking, there’s never any smoking aboard our flights.You
know what happens if we catch you smoking here at Southwest, don’t you?
You’ll be asked to step out onto our wing and enjoy our feature movie
presentation, Gone with the Wind.There is never any smoking, even in the
lavatories.
Finally, although we never anticipate a change in cabin pressure, should
one occur, four oxygen masks will magically appear overhead. Immediately
stop screaming, please deposit a quarter, and unlike President Clinton, you
must inhale! If you’re seated next to a child or traveling with someone who
is acting like a small child, secure yourself first and then assist him or her.
Please continue wearing the mask until otherwise notified by a uniformed
crew member—yes, believe it or not, these are uniforms! And we do need
to tell you that the bag does not inflate, but you still are receiving oxygen.
Sit back, relax and enjoy a one-hour flight to San Diego on the best airline
in the universe—Southwest.
Southwest Airlines is determined to offer Positively Outrageous Service
to customers. . . .
Oh, my airline has a first name, it’s S-O-U-T-H; my airline has a second
name, it’s W-E-S-T. Oh, I love to fly it every day and if you ask me why, I’ll
say, ’cause Southwest Airlines has a way of bringing sunshine to your day.31
“Beyond winning and satisfying your customer, the objective must be to
delight your customer—and not just once, but again and again,” advises
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
189

Michael Dell. “The total customer experience is the next competitive fron-
tier.”32
Key #6: Guarantee 100 Percent Satisfaction
One way to exceed your customers’ expectations, say our gurus, is to offer
a guarantee of 100 percent satisfaction. Bill Gates makes a case for such a
guarantee in his 1999 book Business @ the Speed of Thought. Interestingly,
he does not cite the software industry or his own company, Microsoft, as
good examples of such a practice. Instead, he recommends the practice
adopted by Promus Hotels, a Memphis, Tennessee–based operator of a
family of hotels that includes Hampton Inns, Embassy Suites, and Double-
tree Inns.33 Promus, notes Gates, was the first hotel chain to guarantee that
customers would not be charged for their rooms if they had a complaint
about any aspect of their stay. Additionally, all Promus employees, includ-
ing desk clerks, maids, and even maintenance engineers, are empowered to
make good on that promise. Gates explains that a guarantee of satisfaction
such as that offered by Promus is a powerful inducement to customer loy-
alty for several reasons.
[First,] a no-questions-asked guarantee from a service company such as
Promus makes complaints mean something. Customers like the guarantee
going in even if they’re a little skeptical about how hard it will be to get you
to deliver on it and when you do deliver on it, you have a very gratified
customer.
Equally important, the guarantee creates a financial incentive to fix the
underlying problem right away. Because it costs the hotel money immedi-
ately, the problem doesn’t get overlooked. It doesn’t get filed away.Tying
complaints to immediate payouts “lowers the water and exposes the
rocks” relating to service quality.
[Finally,] because every employee is empowered to act on the guaran-
tee, everybody is on the hook for quality.The everyday hotel workers who
make or break quality and who can administer the guarantee, have more
pride in their own jobs and pride in the hotel. Peer pressure comes into
play within the different groups to hold up their end. And if you’re going to
give all hotel employees the power to make a customer’s stay free—a lot of
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
190

power for service personnel—then you’d better train them all to do a
good job.34
Gates notes that Promus management faced considerable skepticism
from their franchisees when they first proposed the total-satisfaction-or-no-
charge policy. The general response was: “You’re nuts. Deadbeats will just
take advantage of us. They’ll kill us.” As it turned out, however, refunds
from the program were much lower than expected—averaging only 0.3 per-
cent of revenues—and the “intent to return” for customers who exercised
the guarantee was 50 percent higher than for other customers. The Promus
guarantee even gained the corporate business of one of our gurus. Gates re-
ports that Debbi Fields complained about the lack of soap and towels in her
room during one visit to a Hampton Inn. On hearing the complaint, the desk
clerk immediate tore up her bill. Fields was so impressed with the response
to her complaint that she designated the Hampton Inn as her company’s
corporate hotel chain. In addition, she later became a member of the 
Hampton/Promus board.35
As Gates mentions, companies such as Promus that offer a 100 percent
guarantee occasionally are taken advantage of by customers who return
“broken” items that aren’t broken or complain of problems that aren’t really
problems at all. Still, argue our gurus, being taken advantage of can be a
good thing. How? Here is the way Bernie Marcus explained it to a young
Home Depot employee.
We have a return policy that says you can bring a product back for any rea-
son. No gimmick, no tricks. . . .
Lina Khano, all of 18, was working our return desk when a woman
brought in a product that she claimed was defective. Somehow, Khano de-
cided the customer was lying through her teeth.
When she turned away from the woman to get approval for the return
from a manager, an indignant Khano found me standing behind her.
“I can’t believe this woman is doing this!” she said under her breath.
“If it were me,” I said,“I would give her her money back.”
Khano did just that, smiled and gave her the money. But as the woman
walked away, Khano was fuming. I put an arm around her shoulders.
“I am going to teach you a lesson that you will remember for the rest of
your life,” I said.“Sometimes, in this business, you have to accept things that
you believe are totally wrong.”
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
191

“Excuse me?” Khano said.
“Sometimes,in this business,you have to do distasteful things,” I repeated.
“Uh, okay.”
“Just think about it, Lina,” I continued.“This woman, she brought this
thing back even though it is not defective. Don’t worry about it. Even if we
have to eat the cost of it or throw it away, it is no big deal, because from
now on, she will have the confidence to come and buy here, and even if she
goes home and tells everybody that we are stupid, that’s okay, too, because
now everybody is going to come shop here and take advantage of us.”
The key to our no-holds-barred return policy is that people talk about
it. It gets them hooked; they know they can never make a bad purchase at
The Home Depot, because we don’t ever want to give them a reason not
to come back.There are probably some dishonest people that will take ad-
vantage of us. But they are a tiny minority.We are not going to punish the
honest folks who need to trust us.36
Like Marcus and Blank, Mary Kay Ash insists on a 100 percent money-
back guarantee for her customers. She tells her people to honor the guaran-
tee regardless of the length of time between the purchase and the request for
refund and even if the product being returned has been used and its con-
tainer is empty. Why does Ash offer such a generous return policy? She
replies, “We make outstanding products, so refund requests affect a very
small percentage of our total sales. [More important,] our refund policy is
generous because we want our customers and company employees to be
happy and proud of what we do. If any one of them isn’t happy, we all
suffer. In our business, satisfying people’s needs is what we’re all about.”37
And sometimes what customers need is the reassurance that a 100 percent
no-questions-asked, money-back guarantee offers.
Key #7: Spend Time with Your Customers
The 100 percent satisfaction guarantee offered by many of our gurus’ com-
panies is, as Gates says, a vivid demonstration of the commitment to get all
the little things right. It is also a way of listening to the customer, and lis-
tening, really listening, is extremely important for retaining customers.
Where does listening begin? Well, say our gurus, just like having a com-
mitment to world-class quality and service, listening begins with you.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
192

A very important part of our philosophy . . . is letting the customers pro-
vide the yellow brick road to success. . . .We have always felt that if we
listen, they’ll give us the answer we need.
Arthur Blank38
Michael Dell notes that, when he tells people he spends nearly 40 per-
cent of his time with customers, the reaction he usually gets is, “Wow—
that’s a lot of time to spend with customers.” His response? “I thought that
was my job.”39 This is the response our gurus say you should give. Almost
all of our gurus report spending much of their time out of their offices,
meeting with and talking to customers. For example, Bernie Marcus and
Arthur Blank donned orange aprons and worked in their Home Depot
stores, waiting on customers, listening to complaints, and asking questions.
Marcus says it was through those personal experiences that he and Blank
found out what they were doing right and wrong during the early years of
building the company. In the beginning, he reports, he would even chase
down customers in the parking lot to find out what they needed.
We had so few customers that if I saw someone leaving a store empty-
handed, I took it personally.
“What is it that we don’t carry that you need? Why didn’t you buy
something?” I’d say, doggedly pursuing them to the parking lot.“I didn’t find
what I came in for,” was usually the answer.“What is it that you need?” I
asked. And whatever the answer, I would say the same thing:“Oh my gosh,
I’m so sorry you didn’t find it.We carry it, we just happened to be out. If
you give me your name and address, I will deliver it to you.”
That’s how I often expanded our merchandise selection. First I would
run back inside and order it so we’d have it in the future.Then I would per-
sonally go buy whatever it was at West Building Supplies, Handy City, or a
wholesale house and personally deliver it to the customer’s home, carefully
removing the other store’s price sticker and charging the customer a lower
price than I paid out of pocket.40
Richard Branson took a similar hands-on approach to listening to cus-
tomers when he was starting Virgin Atlantic Airlines. Among other things,
Branson would call Virgin reservations to see how his people were handling
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
193

calls. He frequently boarded Virgin flights and spent the time aloft talking
to the passengers and cabin crew. He insisted that every Virgin flight have a
visitor’s book where passengers could record their comments. Each month
Branson picked 50 passengers at random who had written comments in the
book and called them to apologize for the airline’s mistake or to comment
on their idea. And when a station manager informed him that a Virgin flight
had been severely delayed, as they had standing orders to do, he would call
the departure lounge and ask his staff to pass along his personal apologies
for the delay. Customers were often astonished at Branson’s personal in-
volvement. Here was the chairman of Virgin Group on the telephone with
an apology. Some were so surprised that they refused to take the call or be-
lieve it was really Branson, thinking it was just a practical joke.41
One of the most surprising things we learned early on from our customers
was that they really valued being asked [their opinion.]
Michael Dell42
Our gurus believe that listening to customers is so important that many
require their entire top management team to spend at least some time each
year working directly with customers. Herb Kelleher, for example, requires
each officer of Southwest Airlines to work in the field as a reservation
agent, baggage handler, dispatcher, or in some similar position where he or
she has hands-on contact with customers. The officers must report back to
Kelleher on what they did, what they found, and the steps they took to im-
prove the job they performed. Kelleher declares that the exposure senior
managers get to line operations can have enormous benefits. For example,
he credits the development and implementation of a major proprietary sales
system to the experience one group of Southwest officers had while work-
ing a late-night shift at the airport. This night there were an unusual number
of weather-related problems and delays. The officers stood helpless as their
employees shuffled through mounds of forms while the passengers became
increasing irritated. They came away from the experience convinced that
the system had to be changed, and it was.43
If you have business customers, one of the best ways to learn how your
product or service does or does not meet their needs, say our gurus, is to
visit them in their place of business. Michael Dell explains that not only has
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
194

he picked up good ideas about how to improve customer service by making
such personal on-site visits but he has created whole new opportunities for
his company as a result of what he has learned. He cites the following ex-
ample:
I remember being in the U.K. once in the late 1980s and visiting one of our
customers, British Petroleum in London.The London real estate market at
that time was very overheated and space was expensive, yet BP’s infor-
mation technology (IT) guy showed me a whole floor in their headquarters
building that they had devoted to configuring PCs. I saw some of their
people taking PCs out of the boxes, installing special features, such as job-
specific software and network interface cards (NICs) and removing the fea-
tures they didn’t use. I was amazed. Not only was BP spending inordinate
amounts of money to configure their machines, but they were also having
to do so in high-cost real estate space that they probably could have used
for other purposes.
We were watching his people custom-configure these PCs when he
asked me,“Do you think you guys could do this for me, so that we don’t
have to be in the PC business?” I gave it a moment’s thought, then replied,
“Absolutely, we’d love to do that.” What was both expensive and time-
consuming for our customer, was relatively easy for us to execute. It also
provided a terrific opportunity for us to add the kind of value we knew our
customers in other industries would benefit from as well.44
Dell states that the key to making your customer contact work for you is
to really make an effort “to engage in a cooperative, mutually beneficial
dialogue—not just talking at, or talking to, your customers, but talking with
them—and really listening to what they have to say.” “When you engage
directly with customers,” explains Dell, “you begin to develop an intimate
understanding of their likes, needs, and priorities. You find out what’s
working for them—and why. You can try out new ideas on them—ideas
worth millions of R&D dollars and countless hours of your people’s valu-
able time—and they’ll tell you whether you’re on track or not.”45
According to Dell, listening to customers is a job that you will likely find
both redeeming and refreshing, not to mention lucrative—the BP learning ex-
perience, for example, eventually led Dell to create Dell Plus, a multi-
million-dollar program of system-integration services. But what happens
when your chain of businesses grows so big that you can’t fly on every flight,
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
195

chase down disenchanted customers in every parking lot, or personally visit
every corporate customer’s business? What do you do then? You create the
infrastructure to keep listening, say our gurus.
When Home Depot began to grow, Marcus and Blank decided they
needed a more formal mechanism for listening to customers, so they
created the position of director of consumer affairs and staffed it with the
now-famous Ben Hill. They posted large signs and freestanding sandwich
boards at the front of every store with a silhouetted profile of Ben and the
words: “Are you satisfied? If not, contact the store manager, ______, or call
me, Ben Hill, director of consumer affairs, at 800-533-3199.” Dissatisfied
customers who called that number reached a main-office switchboard at
Home Depot’s corporate headquarters in Atlanta. What they didn’t know
when they asked to speak to Ben Hill was that there was no such person.
Ben Hill was fictitious. The words “Ben Hill,” however, were a code-red
signal to “expedite the call right now.” And who took those expedited calls?
Bernie Marcus, Arthur Blank, or if they were not available, the 
highest-ranking person in the company free to take the call. Whoever was
free dropped whatever they were doing, even if it was signing a million-
dollar deal, to take the call. It didn’t take long, says Marcus, for word to get
around Home Depot stores that, if you let a customer leave unhappy, the
next call you got could be from Marcus or Blank that might go something
like this: “I just got a call from a customer on the Ben Hill line, and we’re
in trouble. . . . I would like you to run to one of our other stores, get the
product the customer needs, drive it over to the customer’s house, and apol-
ogize.”46 Marcus reports that the Ben Hill system has worked extremely
well, and Home Depot continues to monitor those calls very closely. Stores
with the fewest Ben Hill calls get awards. Those with too many calls . . .
well, as Marcus says, a store doesn’t want to have too many Ben Hill calls.
Herb Kelleher came to realize that Southwest Airlines needed a more
formal structure for listening to customers several years ago during a meet-
ing between his maintenance department and ground-operations personnel.
Maintenance wanted to resolve a particular problem one way. Ground op-
erations wanted to resolve it another. Suddenly, states Kelleher, it occurred
to him that the only person who wasn’t being heard from was the most-
important person of all—the customer. Kelleher immediately set up a 
consumer-relations function in his own office through which he could per-
sonally monitor all customer complaints. Having customer relations report-
ing directly to him, says Kelleher, means that he can keep close tabs on
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
196

what customers are actually saying about all facets of Southwest Airlines’
operations. It also means that he can make phone calls when he thinks they
are needed. “Hey, wait a second. Six letters have shown up in the last two
months about inadequate baggage service in Albuquerque. What’s wrong?
What’s changed?” or, “We never used to get a complaint on your ticket
counter in Las Vegas. How come we suddenly had eight complaints in the
past month?” 47
Key #8: Make Bad News Travel Fast
The practice that Michael Dell refers to as not “perfuming the pig” is the
same as what Bill Gates talks about as making bad news travel fast. Both
see it as a sometimes painful but always critical requirement for listening to
customers. What’s the practice? Identifying problems, facing the dis-
appointment, hunting down the bad news, and then doing something with
that information to change things and make your customers’ experiences
improve. Dell admits it is a hard thing to do. After all, he says, “it’s human
nature to shrink in the face of bad news or disappointments and to hope that
something will just happen to make the situation better.”48 The problem, ex-
plains Dell, is that things don’t usually get better by themselves, and in the
meantime, you have lost valuable time. It is a lot better to find out right
away when something isn’t going right and then get to work fixing it—fast.
Don’t tell me about the good things, tell me about the problems and I don’t
want any surprises.
Wayne Huizenga49
Bill Gates echoes Dell’s sentiments.
I have a natural instinct for hunting down grim news. If it’s out there, I want
to know about it.The people who work for me have figured this out. Some-
times I get an e-mail that begins,“In keeping with the dictum that bad news
should travel faster than good news, here’s a gem.”
A lot goes wrong in any organization, even a good one. A product flops.
You’re surprised by a customer’s sudden defection to another vendor. A
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
197

competitor comes out with a product that appeals to a broad new market.
Losing market share is the kind of bad news that every organization can re-
late to.
Other bad news may have to do with what’s going on internally. Maybe a
product is going to be late, or it’s not going to do what you expected it to
do, or you haven’t been able to hire enough of the right kinds of people to
deliver on your plans.
An essential quality of a good manager is a determination to deal with
any kind of bad news head on, to seek it out rather than deny it. An effec-
tive manager wants to hear about what’s going wrong before he or she
hears about what’s going right.You can’t react appropriately to disappoint-
ing news in any situation if it doesn’t reach you soon enough.
You focus on bad news in order to get cracking on the solution. As
soon as you’re aware of a problem, everybody in your organization has to
be galvanized into action.You can evaluate a company by how quickly it en-
gages all of its available intellect to deal with a serious problem.50
The problem, note Gates, Dell, and many of our other gurus, is that bad
news travels too slowly in most companies. People have to dig information
out of paper files, find someone they can talk to who knows something
about the problem, and then muster up the courage to telephone or meet
with their boss to discuss it. By the time the boss finds out that a problem
exists, it’s already serious. Fortunately, say our gurus, things don’t have to
be that way. You can harness modern technology to flood yourself with bad
news. Gates and Dell have a lot to say about harnessing technology for cus-
tomer listening. They also sell the hardware and software to help you do it,
something you may want to factor into your evaluation of their advice. Re-
gardless, they recommend three steps for effective, “high-tech” listening:
1. Collect and immediately digitize feedback on customer needs, prob-
lems, concerns, and performance results on key metrics such as on-
time delivery.
2. Segment your data to focus on the needs and expectations of different
types of customers.
3. Analyze the data and take action to improve your company’s perfor-
mance.
Each step is discussed in more detail in the subsections that follow.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
198

Step #1: Collect and Immediately Digitize Customer Feedback
Gates recommends that you seek to create a “digital customer feedback
loop” for your company like the one he created at Microsoft.
“We began collecting data about customer problems from support engi-
neers in 1985 and began the steps to create a regular feedback loop in 1991.
First we used a phone system and then developed different tools for gather-
ing data from sources such as e-mail, Internet newsgroups, and the Web.
Then we began to consolidate the data. We’re now in our third generation
of computer-based customer feedback tools. . . .
“[We have] a tool for incident management and analysis that makes
sense of seven to eight million pieces of raw customer data per year. Six
million pieces of data come from support incidents, mostly by phone but
also from the Web. One million come in from Premier, our more sophisti-
cated support service for enterprise [large] customers. The rest of the cus-
tomer data comes from a variety of other sources. Support engineers enter
problems reported via phone into the database as they handle calls. Online
problem reports go directly into the database. E-mails, already electronic,
are easily converted into a structured format for entry.” 51
In addition to entering data on customer comments and complaints into a
computerized database, says Dell, you should enter results on key measures
of product quality, responsiveness, and so on that define your customers’
experience with your company. He writes:
“Not all feedback is created equal. To many companies, feedback means
anecdotal evidence and comments from which they can feel or sense a
trend. But that kind of qualitative feedback is limiting. It’s a self-
reinforcing question to ask someone whether he is satisfied with the com-
puter he just bought. It’s like asking someone if he’s smart. You’re not
going to get a lot of objective—or constructive—feedback. The real answer
to the question comes when he buys a second time. Would he buy from you
again? Would he recommend your product to his friends? We use aggregate
data to sharpen our sense of what customer satisfaction means, and con-
tinue to take their pulse many times over the course of our relationship.
“We try to take the process one step further. We have defined a series of
metrics that define the customer experience in very measurable terms; we
track the order and delivery process, product reliability, and also service
and support from the customer’s point of view. Our results are data-driven
and based on real-time customer input. And we’ve designed our business to
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
199

be flexible enough to respond to those metrics quickly, and to deliver what
we believe to be the best customer experience.” 52
The key to making this system work, explains Gates, is creating com-
puter databases containing—or “digitizing,” as Gates refers to it—data on
customer needs, problems, concerns, and performance results on key met-
rics such as on-time delivery early on in the process. That’s important, he
argues, because critical information won’t otherwise get to the right people
soon enough. “You can collect information from customers even if you
don’t have a digital system” writes Gates, “but you can’t analyze it quickly.
You can’t make nondigital information integral to the development process
for a service or a product. Nondigital systems won’t enable you to route in-
formation directly to product developers. Digital systems give companies
the ability to do all these things and transform into adaptive learning organ-
isms. Customer service changes from add-on activity to an integral part of
product development.”53
Step #2: Segment Your Data
Once you have digitized your data, say our gurus, your next step is to seg-
ment the data to focus on the needs and expectations of different types of
customers. “No matter what your business,” notes Dell, “it’s important to
remember that not all customers are exactly the same.”54 For example, Dell
has learned that among his customers, large businesses and consumers,
notebook and desktop users, all have different requirements.
“A large company, for instance, is most interested in consistency and
will trade minor upgrades in speed and performance for stability in its com-
puting platform. It also wants to feel some modicum of control over its PC
use across a wide number of users. It seeks consistency and reliability in its
network, whether it’s a bank or an airline or a law firm.
“Consumers, on the other hand, have very different concerns. Consis-
tency isn’t as high a priority because a consumer generally has only one
computer. What’s important to a consumer is having the fastest computer,
the latest performance, and the hottest peripherals—like the latest graphics
chip, the latest DVD drive, the fastest connection to the Internet.
“We’ve also found that different customers require vastly different levels
of service and support. A large company often requires a relatively low vol-
ume of support, but support that is very sophisticated and high value-add.
When they call us, they want their technical person to speak to ours. For ex-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
200

ample, one of the biggest issues for the NASDAQ stock exchange is that
they have to provide a stock quote within a few milliseconds—and it has to
be the same quote on both the East and West Coasts. They can’t experience
technical difficulties! So we have dedicated systems engineers who work
onsite with NASDAQ.
“That’s a very different level of communication from that which is re-
quired for an individual consumer who generally needs higher volumes of
support, and support that is clear, but that can most often be delivered easily
by one of our service technicians.
“Service and support requirements also differ by product. Desktop, note-
book, or workstation problems typically occur during the day, when people
are using them. Servers, however, are installed in the middle of the night be-
cause you can’t take them down during the day when people are relying on
them. As a matter of course, most server questions come up in the middle of
the night, so we provide twenty-four-hour, seven-day-a-week service.”55
You need to uncover similar idiosyncrasies among your customers, say
our gurus. You do so by subdividing the data you collect by ever-narrower
customer types, for example, segmenting your data by customer size or
some other distinguishing characteristic.
Step #3:Analyze the Data and Take Action
Finally, say Dell and Gates, you must get the data you have collected, digi-
tized, and segmented into the hands of people who can do something with it
to actually improve your company’s performance. For Microsoft that
means getting the data to the product improvement (PI) team in Microsoft’s
technical services area. Gates calls Microsoft’s PI team the “voice of the
customer” and describes their function this way:
“The people in this group sift through a lot of bad news and some good
news all day long. They focus exclusively on what our customers are telling
us that we might not want to hear but should. They analyze customer feed-
back and lobby on behalf of the customers for fixes and new product fea-
tures to improve the customers’ experience with our software. Although
they sit in the customer support group, they’re not in the customer support
business. They’re in the product improvement business. . . .
“By analyzing the aggregate data, the PI team develops prioritized lists
of problems and recommends to each development team a variety of solu-
tions, including new product features. This structured feedback gets to our
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
201

development teams early enough in the development cycle for appropriate
corrections or new features to be included in the next release. . . .
“We also use our corporate intranet to disseminate information to all in-
terested parties, integrating Web pages with e-mail. For our major products,
any employee can go to our Web site to see the current status of the data on
customer complaints and requests. When a product is released, PI posts re-
ports on immediate customer reaction. More detailed reports are posted
monthly, organized by major product groups. These monthly reports include
a problem’s symptoms, a short-term solution, recommendations for a
longer-term fix, and any response from the product group. Microsoft sub-
scribers get e-mail with links to new monthly reports as they are done. Other
employees will see the most current reports when they browse the intranet
site. The most frequent visitors are the program managers, developers, and
testers for various products. Writers of online articles regularly review the
site to ensure that they develop content focused on the most important issues
to customers, and another team uses the site to evaluate what new software
tools customers may need. The status of customer issues is included in the
major quarterly product reviews that go to senior management.”56
At Dell a major part of analyzing customer feedback is performed at a
regular Friday morning customer-advocate meeting of 175 people rep-
resenting all parts of the company. During the first 90 minutes of the meet-
ing, attendees review key statistics on various indicators of customer satis-
faction. Then, the group as a whole may call a customer to discuss a
difficult problem that occurred during the previous week or call Dell itself
and pretend to be a customer in order to get a sense of what it is like to do
business with the company.57
Ultimately, says Gates, your performance improvement team or customer-
advocate group should be seeking answers to some basic questions, such as
the following:58
I What do customers think about your products? 
I What problems do they want you to fix? 
I What new features do they want you to add?
I What problems are your distributors and resellers encountering as
they sell your products or work with you?
I Where are your competitors winning business away from you, and why?
I Will changing customer demands force you to develop new capabilities?
I What new markets are emerging that you should enter?
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
202

Key #9: Put Employees First
Putting employees first may be the strangest customer-retention secret of
all, but it is one that at least some of our gurus, including Herb Kelleher and
Richard Branson, think is critical. You may have heard the phrase “the cus-
tomer comes first.” Wrong, say Kelleher and Branson. Customers come
second. Employees are, or at least should be, the number-one “customer” of
every company. Here is how Kelleher explains his reasoning:
Once you do determine what customers want, . . . how you deliver it makes
the difference.That difference depends on your employees.We’ve always felt
that we not only deliver a good product, the best on-time performance, the
baggage always arrives with the customer, and that sort of thing, we also de-
liver the product at a very reasonable price, which is value.
However, we wanted still more than that, something that you might call
a spiritual element—a warmth, good humor, entertainment quality, hospital-
ity, altruism.There are a lot of words that you can apply but they amount to
those things that will produce a sense of dedication and togetherness that
leads each employee to believe that he or she is doing something worth-
while as an organization and for society. And we don’t believe a company
can have that kind of atmosphere and that kind of customer service unless
it first realizes that the employees are its number-one customers.Years ago,
business gurus used to apply the business school conundrum to me:“Who
comes first? Your shareholders, your employees, or your customers?” I said,
“Well that’s easy,” but my response was heresy at that time. I said employ-
ees come first and if employees are treated right, they treat the outside
world right, the outside world uses the company’s product again, and that
makes the shareholders happy.
That really is the way it works and it’s not a conundrum at all.Your em-
ployees should be your first customers and it’s very important to com-
municate that to everyone.59
Kelleher backs up his commitment to putting employees first with action.
For example, he has been known to invite customers who abuse his em-
ployees to fly other carriers, as in the story of the rather unpleasant lady
SouthwestAirlines employees nicknamed “Pen Pal.”
This particular woman seemed never to be satisfied. After every flight
she would file a complaint. She didn’t like not having a meal in flight. She
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
203

didn’t like unassigned seating. She didn’t like the absence of a first-class
section. She didn’t like the boarding procedures, the color of the airplanes,
or the uniforms worn by the flight attendants. She didn’t like the casual at-
mosphere on the planes, and most of all, she didn’t like peanuts! In keeping
with company policy, Southwest employees responded to each complaint,
patiently explaining why the company did this and did not do that. Still, the
woman continued to bombard them with her grievances. Eventually, in
frustration, Southwest’s customer-relations people sent Pen Pal’s latest dia-
tribe to Kelleher with a note: “This one’s yours.” Kelleher read the com-
plaint and quickly drafted a response:
Dear Mrs. Crabapple,
We will miss you.
Love, Herb60
If the employees come first, then they are happy. A motivated employee
treats the customer well.The customer is happy so they keep coming back,
which pleases the shareholders. It’s not one of the enduring Green mys-
teries of all time, it is just the way it works.
Herb Kelleher61
What Kelleher and Branson recognize is that it is unreasonable to expect
employees to go out of their way to treat customers well if they themselves
are treated poorly. On the other hand, when employees feel that they are re-
spected, that their opinions are valued, and that their employer demonstrates
a genuine concern for their welfare, then they pass that good feeling and at-
tention along to customers. Ultimately, customer retention comes down to
employee retention. And that is the focus of our next, and final, chapter.
KEY POINTS
Every single customer has value. Taking care of existing customers
may be the most-important thing you can do for your business.
You should be a tough boss. You set the standard of customer care and
attention that your employees will follow.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
204

Insist on getting every minor detail of product quality and service
right. You must set exceedingly high standards for your products and
services.
You should view every interaction with customers as critical, particu-
larly in a service-oriented business. You must be willing to go to ex-
traordinary lengths to ensure that every customer interaction turns out
positively for the customer. Be respectful of customers and highly at-
tentive to their needs and insist that your employees behave in the
same fashion. Understand that customer loyalty can be built on some-
thing as simple as a kind word.
Ultimately, you should seek to become your customers’ trusted advi-
sor. To that end, you must take responsibility for your customers’ in-
vestments in your product or service. Your goal should be not just to
please customers with quality products and good service, but through
your advisory role, to build a meaningful, memorable, total expe-
rience that will win the customer for life.
Always try to exceed your customers’ expectations.
Offer your customers a 100 percent money-back guarantee, and make
it easy for customers to take advantage of the guarantee.
Spend up to 40 percent of your time interacting with your customers
and insist that all of the top managers in your company do the same.
Make sure that bad news travels fast. Hunt out grim news so you can
fix problems quickly.
Harness modern technology to improve customer listening.
Put your employees first. It is unrealistic to expect employees to go
out of their way to treat customers well if they themselves are treated
poorly.
K E E P I N G  C U S T O M E R S
205

M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E — T h e  G u r u s
Paul Allen, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation
Mary Kay Ash, founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics
Arthur Blank, cofounder of Home Depot
Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group
Charles M. Brewer, founder of MindSpring Enterprises
Ben Cohen, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Michael Dell, founder of Dell Computer Corporation
Roy Disney, cofounder of Disney Brothers Studio (later Walt Disney
Productions, Ltd.)
Walt Disney, cofounder of Disney Brothers Studio (later Walt Disney
Productions, Ltd.)
Debbi Fields, founder of Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc.
Bill Gates, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation
Jerry Greenfield, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Wilson Harrell, founder of over one hundred companies, columnist
for Success Magazine and former publisher of Inc. Magazine
Soichiro Honda, cofounder of Honda Motor Company, Ltd.
Masaru Ibuka, cofounder of Sony Corporation
Ken Iverson, former president, chairman, and CEO of Nucor
Corporation
Steven Jobs, cofounder of Apple Computer, Inc., and cofounder of
NeXT
Howard Johnson, founder of Howard Johnson Company
Herb Kelleher, founder of Southwest Airlines
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s Corporation
Charles Lazarus, founder of Toys “R” Us
Konosuke Matsushita, founder of Matsushita Electric Industrial
Company
Robert Mondavi, founder of Robert Mondavi Winery
Akio Morita, cofounder of Sony Corporation
David Packard, cofounder of Hewlett-Packard
Ross Perot, founder of Electronic Data Systems (EDS) and Perot
Systems Corporation
Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop
Colonel Harland Sanders, founder of Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC)
Howard Schultz, founder of Starbucks Coffee Company
Ricardo Semler, president and CEO of Semco, S.A.
R. David (Dave) Thomas, founder of Wendy’s International, Inc.
Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
206

Managing People
W
hen Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield were about to open their
first ice-cream parlor, they asked their landlady-to-be what
she thought the hardest part of running a business would be.
Her reply was “managing people.” The boys write that after she left they
said to each other: “That’s not going to be a problem for us. We’re going to
be really good at that. We’ll have employee meetings weekly. We’ll talk
with everyone about what’s going on, and they’ll feel part of the business.
It’s not going to be a hierarchical thing. It’s going to be a team thing.”1
Their noble intentions aside, Cohen and Greenfield admit that they soon
learned their landlady was right. Managing people quickly became the
hardest part of running their business. It’s a lesson most of our gurus say
they had to learn, usually the hard way. Therefore, it seems fitting to end
this book of entrepreneurial lessons with the toughest subject of all. From
hiring to firing and through all that goes in between, what follows is the col-
lected advice and wisdom from the people who have been there and done it.
(See Exhibit 6.1 for a summary of our gurus’ “people lessons.”)
207
6
EXHIBIT 6.1.
Fourteen People Lessons
People lesson #1: Your employees are the
spinal cord of your business.
People lesson #2: Hire smarts and attitude.
People lesson #3: Inspire those you hire.
People lesson #4: Demand excellence.
People lesson #5: Be open and candid.
People lesson #6: Treat employees as equals.
People lesson #7: Cement a team spirit.
People lesson #8: Listen to employees.
People lesson #9:
Empower employees to
do the right thing.
People lesson #10: Trust your employees.
People lesson #11: Small is beautiful.
People lesson #12: Praise people to success.
People lesson #13: Share the financial re-
wards.
People lesson #14: Firing people is the
hardest part of managing.

PEOPLE LESSON #1: Your Employees 
Are the Spinal Cord of Your Business
It has become popular in recent years for most CEOs to say that employees
are their company’s most-valuable resource. In fact, says Ken Iverson,
former president and CEO of Nucor Corporation, proclamations attesting to
the value of employees have become so common that most people now
react to such pronouncements with a barely disclosed chuckle. While ev-
eryone knows executives like to “say the words,” they also feel that few ex-
ecutives believe the words, much less act in concert with them.2 Well, say
our gurus, you had better start believing the words, because they are true.
People are definitely a company’s greatest asset. It doesn’t make a differ-
ence whether the product is cars or cosmetics.A company is only as good
as the people it keeps.And in order to attract and retain good people, a
business must treat people right.Without people skills, no organization and
for that matter, no manager can make it in today’s highly competitive busi-
ness environment.
Mary Kay Ash3
Our gurus repeatedly emphasize that their employees made the funda-
mental difference in their company’s successes. For example, Richard
Branson argues that based on his experience he is absolutely certain that no
company can be successful unless it hires the right kind of people and mo-
tivates them in the right way.4 Konosuke Matsushita adds that, “over the
long term, the skill, determination, and motivation of employees is almost
always key” to success and that “the idea that a few individuals could build
a great business only by themselves, through one or two clever strategic de-
cisions is absurd.”5 And Sam Walton maintained that, as much as people
like to talk about the elements that went into Wal-Mart’s success, such as
merchandising, distribution, technology, market saturation, real estate
strategy and so on, the truth was that none of those things were the real se-
cret to the company’s unbelievable success. What carried the company and
made the difference, according to Walton, was the relationship the company
developed with its employees. Interestingly, the “partnership” Walton and
other managers at Wal-Mart developed with their employee “associates”
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
208

wasn’t part of some master plan or grand vision for the company.6 It was
something that developed over time—a lesson they had to learn—and one
that our gurus say all entrepreneurs must learn. As Arthur Blank puts it,
your employees are the spinal cord of your company. They are what holds it
upright.7
PEOPLE LESSON #2: Hire Smarts and Attitude
Early in his company’s history, Michael Dell tried very hard to hire just the
right people for every job vacancy. Looking back on the experience, he
notes that he found it both frustrating and futile. Even though his company
was small, it was growing rapidly. Before he knew it, the people he had so
carefully selected for specific jobs found themselves out of their league. Al-
though they were talented, they soon became overwhelmed as the job for
which they had been hired changed. That early experience, explains Dell,
taught him a lesson about hiring that he still applies today—don’t hire
people for a specific job; hire them with the long term in mind. Invite them
to join your company and to grow with it. “If you hire them to grow far be-
yond their current position, you build depth and additional capacity into
your organization.”8 Almost all of our gurus echo these sentiments. Hire for
potential, they say, don’t just hire for the moment. What does it mean to
hire for potential? What should you be looking for in prospective candi-
dates? Two things, say our gurus—smarts and attitude.
It’s not enough to hire to fill a job. It’s not even enough to hire on the basis
of one’s talents.You have to hire based upon a candidate’s potential to grow
and develop.
Michael Dell9
Hire Smarts
When hiring people for the long term, Dell first looks for “people who have
the questioning nature of a student and are always ready to learn something
new.”10 These are people who have an open and questioning mind, who
have a healthy balance of experience and intellect, and who aren’t afraid to
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
209

make a mistake in the process of innovating. They are “people who expect
change to be the norm and are liberated by the idea of looking at problems
or situations from a different angle and coming up with unprecedented so-
lutions.”11
Bill Gates describes these ideal long-term candidates as simply being
“smart.” When asked in a 1994 interview to explain what he meant by
“smart,” Gates replied, “There’s a certain sharpness, an ability to absorb
new facts. To walk into a situation, have something explained to you and
immediately say, ‘Well, what about this?’ To ask an insightful question. To
absorb it in real time. A capacity to remember. To relate to domains that
may not seem connected at first. A certain creativity that allows people to
be effective.”12 Gates’s bias for “smarts” over almost anything else is said
to have led him to devalue previous programming experience, particularly
mainframe experience, in favor of inexperienced young people with de-
grees in math and the sciences. His hiring theory, which seems to have been
proven right by Microsoft’s success, is that candidates with backgrounds in
math or the sciences have proved their intellectual mettle by virtue of their
degree and could easily apply their smarts to computers. To reinforce his
commitment to hiring smarts, Gates insists that Microsoft managers hire
fewer people than they need for a project—“n minus one”—reasoning that
his managers will be forced always to hire only the smartest people because
they know they will never be able to hire as many people as they want.
In addition to looking for academic degrees, Dell likes to ask the follow-
ing questions in his pursuit of smarts.
When I interview people, the first thing I do is find out how they process
information. Are they thinking in economic terms? What is their definition
of success? How do they relate to people? Do they really understand the
strategy of the business they’re involved in today? Do they understand
ours? It’s surprising how many people already in the workforce contribute
in some way to their company’s strategy but don’t really understand it that
well. It’s important to me to know whether potential candidates have the
capacity to understand Dell’s strategy and if they can help us evolve and de-
velop it.
I usually ask candidates to tell me about something they did that they
are particularly proud of.This gives me a few insights into whether they are
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
210

focused on the success of the company they’re currently working for or on
their own personal aggrandizement.13
Hire Attitude
In order to gauge the attitude of job candidates, Dell makes a point of dis-
agreeing with them during the course of their interview. “I want to know if
they have strong opinions and are willing to defend them,” he says. “At Dell,
we need people who are confident enough of their abilities and strong in their
convictions, not people who feel the need to give in the face of conflict.”14
Like Dell, Bill Gates frequently interjects tough questioning and dis-
agreement into interviews with job candidates. In his 1996 book The Mi-
crosoft Way, Randall Stross describes one infamous exchange between
Gates and an aspiring candidate for a Microsoft position: “Once, a senior
vice-president of a leading computer company who was being interviewed
for a position at Microsoft told Gates that she would have to research the
answers to some of his questions. He is said to have demanded of her, ‘Why
don’t you have an answer? Are you stupid?’”15 Stross notes that the ex-
change was widely reported in the press, and when most people read about
it, they took it as simply another example of Microsoft’s hostile “macho”
culture. Yet, writes Stross, there was more to the “Are you stupid?” remark.
“[The] remark obscures the real issue at the heart of Gates’s displeasure,
which was not lack of smarts, which hardly could be determined by Gates’s
question, but lack of another attribute that Gates sought: verbal facility.”16
Gates’s combative posturing, writes Stross, could be taken as just a way of
emphasizing that Microsoft wanted to hire people who were smart and
“who were also pragmatically inclined, verbally agile, and able to respond
deftly when challenged.”17 He was just putting the candidate to a test of at-
titude, according to Stross.
OUR VIEW
Well, maybe. Regardless of how you feel about the appropriateness of such
childish remarks as “Are you stupid?” the point our gurus are making is that
the candidate’s attitude must match the company’s culture. The “right” atti-
tude might be “self-confidence” for one company, “combativeness” for 
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
211

another, and “arrogance” for still another. Every company is unique, so the
key is to match the attitude to your unique culture. Take Southwest Airlines
as an example.
Herb Kelleher explains that he looks for a sense of humor coupled with
the ability to work in a collegial environment and a need to excel. He says:
“We look for people who are unselfish and altruistic and who enjoy life.
The focus is on the intangibles, the spiritual qualities, not an individual’s
educational experience. We can train anybody to do a job from a technical
standpoint. We’re looking for an esprit de corps, an attitude. We try to hire
and promote people who have a humane approach.”18 Kelleher believes
that a person’s values are more important than their experience:
We say,“OK, here’s a guy with 30 years’ experience in the field, a very dis-
tinguished record.The contender is someone with five years’ experience in
the field and doesn’t have the laurels the other guy does.” But what are
their values? We’ll take the one with less experience if he has the values
we’re looking for, and someone else can take the expert.We look for atti-
tudes.We’ll train you on whatever you need to do, but the one thing we
can’t do is change inherent attitudes in people.
I’ve often said, if I could do that, if I could change attitudes, I’d be on Park
Avenue making $5,000 an hour as a psychologist. But you can’t. Once we’ve
got people with the right attitudes, we can do almost anything we want
thereafter.19
And so can you, say our gurus. Of course, it isn’t going to be easy to hire
people with both smarts and the right attitude. Ross Perot notes that, when
he describes the kind of person he is trying to hire, recruiters insist that
finding that person would be like looking for needles in a haystack. Wrong,
Perot replies, I want “needles in a haystack with a red dot—very special
people.”20
Entrepreneurs need employees who are racehorses.We need chargers
who can make things happen.We need people who are creative and innova-
tive, and who don’t know what it means to say something can’t be done. It
helps if they are workaholics with an excess of nervous energy, and even
better if they never sleep. But, above all, they can’t be the kind of people
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
212

who like to follow “proper procedures,” or who value security over the
thrill of the chase.
Wilson Harrell21
PEOPLE LESSON #3: Inspire Those You Hire
According to Michael Dell, “it’s not enough to just hire well. You need to
engender a sense of personal investment in all your employees.”22 If you
want your business to prosper, say our gurus, then you must inspire those
you hire. Ricardo Semler, CEO of Semco, S.A., likes to illustrate the differ-
ence between an employee who is simply hired and one that is inspired by
recalling the parable of the stonecutters. It goes like this:
Three stone cutters were asked about their jobs.The first said he was paid
to cut stones.The second replied that he used special techniques to shape
stones in an exceptional way, and proceeded to demonstrate his skills.The
third stone cutter just smiled and said:“I build cathedrals.”23
Sounds great, you say, but suppose you’re not in the business of building
cathedrals. Suppose, instead, you manufacture pumps or dishwashers like
Semco, sell cosmetics like The Body Shop and Mary Kay, or make ice
cream like Ben & Jerry’s. Suppose your product or service isn’t inspira-
tional in itself. Suppose it is just plain mundane. Can you still inspire your
people? Can you turn your crew of stonecutters into energetic cathedral
builders? Yes you can, say our gurus. In fact, they say, you must, and you
do it by making the workplace inspirational. When asked how she was able
to inspire her employees to sell something as inconsequential as cosmetic
cream, Anita Roddick responded:
You do it by creating a sense of holism, of spiritual development, of feeling
connected to the workplace, the environment and relationships with one
another. It’s how to make Monday to Friday a sense of being alive rather
than slow death. How do you give people a chance to do a good job? By
making them feel good about what they are doing.The spirit soars when
you are satisfying your own basic material needs in such a way that you are
also serving the needs of others honorably and humanely. Under these cir-
cumstances, I can even feel great about a moisturizer.24
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
213

Likewise, at Mary Kay Cosmetics, the inspiration comes from the work
environment and not necessarily the product line. As Mary Kay Ash puts it,
the thrill of Mary Kay Cosmetics comes from “teaching bumblebees to fly.”
She explains:
Aerodynamics has proven that the bumblebee cannot fly. . . .The body is
too heavy, and the wings are too weak. But the bumblebee doesn’t know
that, and so it goes right on flying.Without a doubt, my biggest thrill in this
business is seeing women have their own personal dreams fulfilled in a ca-
reer. So many women don’t know how great they really are, that [like the
bumblebee] they really can fly! They come to us all Vogue on the outside—
and vague on the inside. In the beginning, many women just have no con-
fidence at all. . . .
A woman usually comes into our organization as a tight little rosebud,
sometimes appearing at my door too timid to even tell me who she is.
Then I watch her after six months of praise and encouragement and she’s
hardly recognizable as the same person.25
The secret of inspiration, declares Howard Schultz, is to provide your
employees with a larger purpose for their day-to-day activities. “If people
relate to the company they work for,” he states, “if they will form an emo-
tional tie to it, and buy into its dreams, they will pour their hearts into mak-
ing it better.”26 “If people understand that the work they do produces more
than just profits,” explain Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield, “and they’re in
alignment with the values of the company, there’s no end to what they can
contribute.”27 You’ll tap the discretionary beyond-the-call-of-duty effort
everyone is capable of giving if they are inspired to do so. Cohen and
Greenfield equate the extra effort to that you often see from workers at
some nonprofit agencies.
Most people who work at nonprofit agencies take those jobs—despite the
fact that they earn less money than they would in the private sector—be-
cause they’re highly motivated by what the agency does.Their work has
meaning for them because they’re addressing an issue they’re concerned
about. . . .
Employees can bring the same passion that’s usually reserved for non-
profits to a for-profit workplace, if they see the work they’re doing as sup-
portive of goals and values they believe in.28
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
214

Where do these values and goals come from? From you, say our gurus.
From day one, whether you realize it or not, you will shape the values of
your company through your words and behavior. You will create an envi-
ronment in which your stonecutters will either shape stones or build cathe-
drals. Just be aware, warns Schultz, that whatever values you convey are
likely to be part of your company for a long time: “Once the . . . people of
the company have absorbed those values, you can’t suddenly change their
world view with a lecture. . . . It’s difficult, if not impossible, to reinvent a
company’s culture! If you have made the mistake of doing business one
way for five years, you can’t suddenly impose a layer of different values
upon it. By then, the water’s already in the well, and you have to drink it.”29
Consequently, advise our gurus, it is important to establish the right tone
from the beginning. You may even want to draft and distribute a statement
outlining your values. (See Exhibits 6.2 and 6.3 for value statements from
Ben & Jerry’s and from MindSpring’s founder, Charles Brewer.)
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
215
EXHIBIT 6.2.
Ben & Jerry’s Aspiration
I
To be real:We need to be who we say we are, both inside and outside the company.We
are all custodians of the reputation of Ben & Jerry’s.We will strive to put into practice the
words we use to describe ourselves: Friendly, Enthusiastic, Exciting, Caring, High-Quality,
Progressive, Off-beat, Innovative, Cutting-Edge, Funny, Lighthearted, Encouraging, Informal,
Activist, Honest, Childlike, Down-Home.
I
To be the best: If our customers are euphoric about our products, we will prosper. Our
future together depends upon our ability to outperform the competition.That’s our busi-
ness strategy.We want to be the best ice cream company in the world.We want to be
viewed as master ice cream makers.We are passionate about giving customers what they
want, when they want it, every single time.
I
To improve continuously: Every time we do something, we should be checking to see
if our methods worked and figure out how we can do it better the next time. From the
minute we join the company we are responsible for helping to shape and improve what
goes on around us.
I
To learn continuously:We want people to have the opportunity to develop their po-
tential to contribute to the company.We’ll need to keep growing skills in three areas:
technical skills to achieve excellence in day-to-day work, personal skills to give life and vi-
tality to these aspirations, and business knowledge to understand the companywide impli-
cations and importance of what each of us does.
(continued)

T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
216
EXHIBIT 6.2.
(continued)
I
To be inclusive:We embrace individual differences.The right to be ourselves con-
tributes to our sense of ownership.We perform better and serve the marketplace better
when men, women, gays, lesbians, and people of different races, nationalities, ethnicities,
and backgrounds work together. Building a diverse staff contributes to excellent perfor-
mance, not just to societal good.
I
To be creative: Our creativity is our strength.We want to see beyond conventional think-
ing and come up with ideas that work,that excite our customers and reflect our values.
I
To build community: No one at Ben & Jerry’s should feel alone or apart.When one of
us needs help, we reach out to help. People from outside feel our energy when they visit
us.We have a zest for life, a sense of humor, and we enjoy one another’s company.We
share the excitement of succeeding at the game of business and we’ll try to have fun while
we do it.
I
To be open and trusting: Rationales,strategy,and the truth should be shared.We want to
be open about our concerns and admit our mistakes and failings.We need to make sure
people feel safe to speak up about things they care about.If we trust one another’s good in-
tentions,we’ll feel better about trying new things and about speaking up about things that
concern us.It’s expected that we’ll all do the right thing even when nobody is looking.
I
To celebrate and to give meaningful recognition:When we reach or exceed our
targets, we should cheer. Celebration establishes a sense of accomplishment, which leads
to more accomplishments. Celebrations don’t need to be elaborate. Recognition is the
currency of leadership.We should make recognition a contagious part of everyday life.
I
To use consultive decision making and active listening:When making decisions
we’ll involve people with special expertise and people likely to be affected.We’ll also give
those with a contrary point of view an opportunity to be heard. However, Ben & Jerry’s is
not a democracy. Leaders need to make calls based on facts, data, and input. In order to
practice consultive decision making and to create the conditions for people to contribute
their best thinking, we must be active listeners.
I
To hold ourselves accountable:We all need to do what we said we were going to do
and be clear about who’s responsible and what’s expected.When we don’t do our part it
affects everybody.We put the company at risk when we tolerate poor performance.
I
To be great communicators: Leaders are responsible for effectively and consistently
communicating pertinent information in a timely way. Good leaders have well-informed
teams.We’re each responsible for absorbing the information offered through company
communication vehicles like postings, staff meetings, and The Rolling Cone.
I
To be up-front: People aren’t going to do better unless they understand what they need to do
to improve.Good straight feedback is essential to improvement.Talking about someone’s per-
formance to people other than the person does harm to the individual and to the company.
I
To be profitable by being thrifty:We believe in investing wisely and with a sense of
frugality.When we save the company money, we do a service to our shareholders and
ourselves.
Source: Ben Cohen, Jerry Greenfield, and Meredith Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip: How to Run a Values-
Led Business and Make Money Too (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997), pp. 173–175.

PEOPLE LESSON #4: Demand Excellence
In the previous chapter, we noted that many of our gurus have reputations
for being tough bosses who are obsessed with treating customers right.
Howard Johnson locked a franchisee out of his restaurant because it wasn’t
kept clean. Debbi Fields dumped hundreds of dollars worth of “unhappy-
looking” cookies into the garbage to teach her employees a lesson about
quality. And Ray Kroc insisted that every little thing about his hamburgers
be perfect. This determination to accept nothing less than the highest stan-
dard of performance is a people lesson taught by almost all of our gurus.
Their reasoning, explains Steven Jobs, cofounder of Apple Computer, is
that “people get far more excited about doing something as well as it can be
done than about doing something adequately. If they are working in an en-
vironment where excellence is expected, then they will do excellent work
without anything but self-motivation.”30
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
217
EXHIBIT 6.3.
MindSpring’s Values
I
We respect the individual, and believe that individuals who are treated with respect and
given responsibility respond by giving their best.
I
We require complete honesty and integrity in everything we do.
I
We make commitments with care, and then live up to them. In all things, we do what we
say we are going to do.
I
Work is an important part of life, and it should be fun. Being a good business person does
not mean being stuffy and boring.
I
We are frugal.We guard and conserve the company’s resources with at least the same vig-
ilance that we would use to guard and conserve our own personal resources.
I
We insist on giving our best effort in everything we undertake. Furthermore, we see a
huge difference between “good mistakes” (best effort, bad result) and “bad mistakes”
(sloppiness or lack of effort).
I
Clarity in understanding our mission, our goals, and what we expect from each other is
critical to our success.
I
We are believers in the Golden Rule. In all our dealings we will strive to be friendly and
courteous, as well as fair and compassionate.
I
We feel a sense of urgency on any matters related to our customers.We own Problems,
and we are always responsive.We are customer-driven.
Source: Brad Grimes,“Lessons from MindSpring,” Fortune, June 21, 1999, p. 186[F].

If you don’t like to work hard and be intense and do your best, this is not
the place to work.
Bill Gates31
Our gurus frequently carry their obsessions with perfection to extremes.
For example, Dave Thomas says that Colonel Harland Sanders was a really
nice man but that he had a mean temper. “If something wasn’t right, he’d let
loose with a string of cuss words that could make you feel two feet high.”32
According to Thomas, the colonel didn’t want to cuss and felt really bad
about it. He even prayed to stop but couldn’t.
Soichiro Honda is said to have had a similar fiery temper that actually on
occasion led him to strike workers when their performance didn’t live up to
his expectations. Hideo Sugiura, an engineer who worked with Honda, re-
calls one of his scariest encounters with his boss:
On many occasions Honda struck me. One time, he hit me in front of
twenty or thirty of my subordinates. Earlier that day, I was working in my
office when an employee ran in with a panicked expression, saying that the
president was asking for me. I ran out and asked Honda what was wrong.
Without saying a word, he suddenly hit me.
It turned out that the cause of his anger was a bolt that was supposed
to stick out by a maximum of 2mm but was protruding by 5mm. Honda
screamed,“Who was in charge of such a ridiculous design? It was you!”
Before I could say anything or apologize, wham! He hit me again. Frankly,
I was seething with resentment. As the chief leader of a thousand employ-
ees at the research lab, I had my pride, too. Sure, what he was saying was
true, but he didn’t have to hit me in front of everyone.33
A former president of Honda recalls that the founder would also throw
things at people who displeased him. “When he got mad, he blindly reached
for anything lying around, and started throwing whatever was in reach ran-
domly at people; it was dangerous! The desks in our office were covered
with dents and scratches from the wrenches and hammers that the boss
threw around.”34
Despite such tirades, Soichiro Honda is said to have been worshiped and
respected by many, if not most, of his employees. How could that be true?
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
218

Hideo Sugiura provides an explanation as he recalls the second half of the
hitting incident. Sugiura says he was standing there after being hit the sec-
ond time, thinking that he couldn’t take such abuse any more and was just
going to quit right then. But, recalls Sugiura, when he raised his head to
glare at Honda, he saw something that changed his mind.
His eyes had welled up with tears.When I saw that, I couldn’t say anything. I
thought, he’s serious.The boss just wanted to convey to me how important
vehicle design was, and how rigorous we must be at every step. It was a
small detail, but if we slacked off with even a small part, we could not make
reliable products.
That’s the point he wanted to make. And to teach not just me, but all
the engineers, he hit me.
Believe me, I learned an important lesson that day.35
Many of Honda’s employees learned similar lessons. As Masaru Ibuka
notes, Honda “was a demon when it came to business . . . [who] set goals,
berated people, and even hit them when they made excuses—but all his
subordinates understood how sincere and serious he was about work.”36
Presumably, Honda could get away with such behavior because his em-
ployees understood that he was responding not out of arrogance or mean-
ness but out of concern for their welfare and the welfare of the company
that employed them.
OUR VIEW
Setting high standards for performance is a good idea, but, as you should
have learned in kindergarten, cussing, hitting, and throwing things are not
nice. They may get you sued or even arrested. They may even get you shot.
Consequently, it may be wiser to find a less-aggressive way to show your
displeasure with your employees’ failure to meet your exalted standards.
People . . . generally do what you expect them to do! If you expect them to
perform well, they will; conversely, if you expect them to perform poorly,
they’ll probably oblige.
Mary Kay Ash37
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
219

PEOPLE LESSON #5: Be Open and Candid
Of course, say our gurus, if you are going to hold your people to high stan-
dards of performance, you must tell them what those standards are and
how well they are performing in respect to them. In short, explains Herb
Kelleher, “if you want your employees to do their best for the company,
then you have to give them the necessary information.”38 That means you
have to share information about your company’s performance openly and
freely, and that’s not something most companies do. The arguments
against sharing information are endless: Employees will use the numbers
to argue for higher raises, sensitive information will be improperly dis-
closed to competitors, bad news will frighten employees. Well, maybe, say
our gurus, but the advantages of being open and candid with employees far
outweigh the potential disadvantages.
In reality, maintain our gurus, the more an employee knows about the
operations of a company, the better prepared he or she is to serve the com-
pany’s and the customers’ interests. Herb Kelleher notes that Southwest
Airlines is known for saturating its employees with information about the
company, its customers, and its competition. Such openness, Kelleher be-
lieves, leads directly to better customer service.
Access to critical information grants customer-contact people the knowl-
edge and understanding they need to take ownership and responsibility
for doing the right thing. For example, a Southwest customer service agent
who understands how the company makes its money, where profits come
from and what they mean to the company, is in a better position to serve
a customer who is making a special request.An agent who doesn’t have
access to this knowledge is limited by the company’s rules and regulations.
Customers who deal with Southwest employees rarely get the run-
around. Instead, they are likely to deal with a person who is well informed,
makes sound decisions, and has a flexible, creative problem-solving ap-
proach.Their solid knowledge of the company gives the people of South-
west Airlines the confidence and power to truly make a difference in the
lives of their customers.39
What kind of information should employees be seeing on a regular
basis? Just about anything and everything, say our gurus. For example,
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
220

every month at Semco each employee gets a balance sheet, a profit-and-
loss analysis, and a cash-flow statement for his or her division that they
are taught how to read.40 At Wal-Mart, employees (associates) receive
regular reports on their store’s purchases, sales, profits, and markdowns.41
If you get the information, say our gurus, your employees probably
should get it also.
There are really just two ways to go on the question of information-sharing:
Tell employees everything or tell them nothing. Otherwise, each time you
choose to withhold information, they have reason to think you’re up to
something.We prefer to tell employees everything.We hold back nothing.
Ken Iverson42
PEOPLE LESSON #6: Treat Employees as Equals
Sharing information is an important first step in treating employees as
equals. It is a way to begin building the partnership between employees and
management that all of our gurus believe is necessary for superior perfor-
mance. Exhibit 6.4 summarizes some other ways our gurus suggest you can
treat your employees as equals. These are discussed in detail in the sections
that follow.
Get Rid of Executive Limos and Executive Parking Spaces
Ken Iverson recalls that, when Nucor acquired a new plant several years
ago, one of his first actions was to sell off the company limousine and elim-
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
221
EXHIBIT 6.4.
Three Ways to Treat Employees as Equals
1. Get rid of executive limos and executive parking spaces.
2. Eliminate executive dining rooms, executive bathrooms, and exclusive executive offices.
3. Don’t employ receptionists,executive secretaries,personal assistants,or other support staff.

inate the executive parking spaces. Soon afterward, he was greeting his new
employees outside the plant one morning when he was approached by a
young man who pointed back toward the parking lot and said: 
“Look where I’m parked.That’s the boss’s spot.”
“You mean, that was the boss’s spot,” replied Iverson.
“Yeah, I guess so,” responded the young man.Then, turning serious, he con-
tinued,“You know, that makes me feel a whole lot better about working
here.”43
If you are having difficulty with the idea of giving up your reserved spot,
just pause for a moment, suggests Iverson, and think how your employees
will feel on a rainy day when they have to park all the way across the park-
ing lot and walk past your reserved space as it sits empty because you are
out of town on business.44 Keep in mind that these rain-soaked workers are
the same ones you are depending on to make products, respond to custom-
ers, and generally make your company succeed.
Respect is not a function of the distance from car door to plant door.
Ricardo Semler45
Eliminate Executive Dining Rooms, Executive Bathrooms,
and Exclusive Executive Offices
Ross Perot recalls that an executive from a big company who was visiting
him at EDS was shocked to learn that there was no executive dining room.
“I can’t believe you eat in the cafeteria,” said the executive. “It’s the only
place to eat,” replied Perot. Later, as the executive and Perot went through
the cafeteria line, the visitor tapped him on the shoulder and whispered, “I
can’t believe you stand in line.” “Well,” said Perot, “these guys are bigger
than I am. I have to.” As they sat eating, the executive remarked on how
good the food was. “What do you do to make the food so good in your caf-
eteria?” he asked. “I eat here,” replied Perot.46
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
222

Don’t Employ Receptionists, Executive Secretaries, Personal
Assistants, and Other Support Staff
The elimination of support staff is one of our gurus’ more-controversial
suggestions, but it is one that Ricardo Semler particularly favors. Semler re-
calls that the idea to eliminate, or at least significantly reduce, so-called
support staff came to him one day when he heard about an assistant cashier
who had applied for work at Semco. When asked to describe the job she
was leaving, the clerk responded, “I stamp the pink copies and hand them to
another girl.” Pressed to describe her work in greater detail, the clerk
couldn’t. The only thing she seemed to know was that she was paid to
stamp the pink forms, but she had no idea what the forms were for or what
happened to them once they left her desk. As Semler thought about the hap-
less clerk, several questions came to mind: “Can people truly be inspired by
purely repetitive clerical work performed without any sense of context?
How much of it is really necessary? What if we could eliminate all those
dead-end jobs and keep only positions with the potential for making people
feel gratified? Could we run our company without secretaries, reception-
ists, and personal assistants?”47
Determined to seek answers, Semler decided to try an experiment. He
would ask his support staff to send a copy of a 10-page Harvard Business
Review article to a fellow executive whose office happened to be on the
same floor and, coincidentally, right next door to his own. Semler calcu-
lated that the article would have to travel a grand total of 10 feet. The ques-
tion was, How long would it take for the article to make the trip?
First, I gave the article to Irene Tubertini, one of my secretaries, and asked
her to have it copied, then to bring it back to me so I could write a short
comment on it, then to send it on to Clovis [the executive next door]. But
because the article was long, it first had to go to our central mailroom to
be copied by a clerk who handled long documents.The mail is only picked
up twice a day—between nine and ten in the morning and four and five in
the afternoon. Since my test began at 11 A.M., the article sat in Irene’s out-
basket for most of the first day. By the time it got to the mailroom, the
clerk had left for the day, so it wasn’t copied until the next morning. By
then it missed the morning pickup and sat in the mailroom for most of
that day.48
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
223

In total, it took 22 hours for the article to travel 10 feet—a rate of some 2.2
hours per foot. Armed with the results of his research, Semler announced his
decision to phase out most receptionist and secretarial positions over a pe-
riod of two years. Existing receptionists and secretaries would be offered
different jobs in marketing, sales, or other parts of the firm.
As you might expect, Semler’s proposal was met with opposition from
most receptionists and secretaries and from almost all of Semco’s man-
agers. Still, Semler persisted. As a result, most clerical positions were even-
tually eliminated, and managers learned to fetch their own guests, make
their own photocopies, send their own faxes, type their own letters, dial
their own phones, and even do their own filing. Semco not only saved the
cost of all the previous clerical help, but there were other side benefits.
Forced to file his own papers, Semler found to his amazement that fewer
papers needed filing. He went from filing 50 or 60 documents per week to
filing just 2 or 3. Other managers did the same. As a consequence, Semco
was able to cancel an order for $50,000 worth of new filing cabinets and
even sold off some the company no longer needed.
I do not like to have my managers think they are a special breed of people
elected by God to lead stupid people to do miraculous things.
Akio Morita49
PEOPLE LESSON #7: Cement a Team Spirit
A side benefit of stripping away the unnecessary perks and privileges of
management and treating people equally is that you begin to build a team
spirit, which our gurus consider crucial to the success of their companies.
The ultimate team-spirited company, Southwest Airlines, published the fol-
lowing—based on naturalist Milton Olsen’s description of the behavior of
geese—in their employee newsletter, LUV Lines, to emphasize the impor-
tance of teamwork.
This spring when you see geese heading back north for the summer flying
along in “V” formation, you might be interested in knowing what scientists
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
224

have discovered about why they fly that way. It has been learned that as each
bird flaps its wings, it creates an uplift for the bird immediately following.
By flying in “V” formation, the whole flock adds at least 71 percent
greater flying range than if each bird flew on its own.
Basic Truth No. 1: People who share a common direction and sense of
community can get where they are going quicker and easier because they
are traveling on the thrust of one another.
Whenever a goose falls out of formation it suddenly feels the drag and
resistance of trying to go it alone and quickly gets back into formation to
take advantage of the lifting power of the bird immediately in front.
Basic Truth No. 2:There is strength and power (safety, too) in
numbers when traveling in the same direction as others with whom we
share a common goal.
When the lead goose gets tired, he rotates back in the wing and another
goose flies point.
Basic Truth No. 3: It pays to take turns doing hard jobs—with people
or with geese flying north.
These geese honk from behind to encourage those up front to keep up
their speed.
Basic Truth No. 4: Those who are exercising leadership need to be re-
membered with our active support and praise.
Finally, when a goose gets sick or is wounded by gunshot and falls out,
two geese fall out of formation and follow him down to help and protect
him.They stay with him until he is either able to fly or until he is dead, and
then they launch out on their own or with another formation to catch up
with their group.
Basic Truth No. 5: We must stand by those among us in their times of
need.50
So, how do you go about cementing such a team spirit? The following
sections discuss some techniques our gurus have employed (summarized in
Exhibit 6.5.)
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
225

Parties, Retreats, and Other Fun Activities
In his book Richard Branson, Virgin King, Tim Jackson reports that one of
the primary vehicles Branson used to cement a team spirit during the early
days of Virgin Records was to hold weekend retreats.
Starting on a Friday and ending on a Sunday night, the entire staff of the rec-
ord company, publishing company and studio management team would de-
camp to a country house hotel. Attendance was in theory optional, but those
who did not come were told jokingly that they were expected to spend the
week-end working in the office. At the hotel, other record companies might
fill the days with talk of sales targets or new products.At Virgin, business was
banned. Instead, the guests would spend the weekend playing tennis or golf,
swimming and sunning themselves, eating and drinking with great gusto.51
Similarly, Arthur Blank recalls some festive weekends during the early
days of Home Depot. Once the last customer went home and the doors
were closed, employees would crank up the music on the public address
system and haul out stacks of pizza and six-packs of beer to celebrate the
week’s sales.52
OUR VIEW
Although after-hours parties and weekend retreats may be a good idea,
heavy drinking and other questionable behaviors are not recommended
for obvious moral, ethical, and legal reasons. In fact, Arthur Blank reports
that Home Depot banned alcoholic beverages at company functions fol-
lowing a holiday party at which an exceptionally drunk young man
grabbed the microphone away from Bernie Marcus and proceeded to in-
sult everyone at the party—including Marcus’s wife.53
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
226
EXHIBIT 6.5.
Team-Building Tips and Techniques
Source:Adapted from Tips & Traps for Entrepreneurs, Courtney Price and Kathleen Allen, New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1998.
I
Parties.
I
Retreats.
I
Other fun activities.
I
Sing-alongs.
I
Company cheers.

Singing Songs
Mary Kay Ash is such a fan of songs as a way to build esprit de corps that she
initiated a song contest when she started her company. Employees are invited
to write their own words to well-known tunes and submit them for considera-
tion. The best are sung at company gatherings. One of the most popular Mary
Kay songs is said to be entitled, “I’ve Got That Mary Kay Enthusiasm.”
Another is “If You Want to be a Director, Clap Your Hands,” which ends with
the line, “If you want to be a Director, you’ve got to be a ‘perfecter,’ so do all
three, clap your hands, stomp your feet, and yell hooray.”54 Mary Kay reports
that guests who have never before attended her company’s gatherings some-
times find the singing a bit strange. Eventually, however, even they are caught
up in the enthusiasm and join in the singing.
A Company Cheer
One of Sam Walton’s favorite methods for kicking off company meetings
was to do the University of Arkansas Razorback cheer:
Whoooooooooooooooooooo Pig. Sooey!
Whooooooooooooooooooooooooooo Pig. Sooey!
Whoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo Pig. Sooey!
Razorbacks!!!!!
He would then follow up with the official Wal-Mart cheer:
Give Me a W! 
Give Me an A! 
Give Me an L! 
Give Me a Squiggly! (Here, everybody does a little twist.) 
Give Me an M! 
Give Me an A! 
Give Me an R! 
Give Me a T! 
What’s that spell? 
Wal-Mart! 
What’s that spell? 
Wal-Mart! 
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
227

Who’s number one? 
The CUSTOMER!
Walton admitted that guests at company events sometimes found the
cheers—well, unusual. For example, during a visit to Bentonville, Arkan-
sas, Wal-Mart’s headquarters, President and Mrs. George Bush were treated
to a rousing rendition of the hog calling followed by the Wal-Mart cheer.
Walton said he could tell by the expression on the first couple’s faces that
they weren’t used to witnessing such enthusiasm. 55
Remember:You’ll be left with an empty feeling if you hit the finish line alone.
When you run a race as a team, though, you’ll discover that much of the re-
ward comes from hitting the tape together.You want to be surrounded not
just by cheering onlookers but by a crowd of winners, celebrating as one.
Victory is much more meaningful when it comes not just from the ef-
forts of one person, but from the joint achievements of many.The euphoria
is lasting when all participants lead with their hearts, winning not just for
themselves but for one another.
Success is sweetest when it’s shared.
Howard Schultz56
PEOPLE LESSON #8: Listen to Employees
Mary Kay Ash relates the story of a friend who once purchased a small
manufacturing company at a bargain price. When he asked the previous
owner why he had been willing to sell the company so cheaply, the owner
reported that he was driven to do so by his lousy employees. “My employ-
ees have become very militant, and they just don’t appreciate all I’ve done
for them over the years,” complained the seller. “They’re going to vote for
a union any day now, and I don’t want to deal with those union people.” Not
knowing what kind of trouble he had gotten himself into, reports Ash, her
friend decided to hold an open meeting with his new employees. “I want
you all to be happy,” he told them. “Tell me what I can do to make that
happen.” “We need new fixtures in the bathrooms,” they replied. “And
larger mirrors in the locker rooms. And, we would like some vending ma-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
228

chines in the recreation area.” “And, what else?” asked Ash’s friend. “Noth-
ing,” said the employees, “that’s all—just the bathrooms, lockers, and
vending machines.” Ash’s friend was amazed. These were all minor issues
and easily remedied. He fixed the bathrooms, put up new mirrors in the
locker rooms, and installed vending machines. The union was never voted
in. Everyone was content. Ash’s friend had gotten an excellent company at
a bargain price because the previous owner just hadn’t listened.57 Don’t
make that mistake, say our gurus. Listen to your employees. You will
probably learn a lot, and you may even save your company.
You don’t learn nothing while you’re talking.
Ross Perot58
An important first step in listening to your employees is to get out of
your office and roam around. Intentionally put yourself into situations
where you will have chance encounters with your employees and hear their
spontaneous remarks. Michael Dell describes how he uses this technique.
Some days I show up at our headquarters building; other days, I’ll go to
some of our other facilities. I show up at the factory unannounced to talk
to the people on the floor and to see what’s really going on. I go to brown-
bag lunches two or three times a month, and meet with a cross-section of
people from all across the company. It’s easy to sit in a product meeting and
say,“We have these new products and our salespeople will sell them.” But
this may not be the reality. So I go to a brown-bag lunch and listen carefully
to what the sales force has to say. It’s a great way of learning what people
are really dealing with on a day-to-day basis, and provides a forum for the
exchange of ideas and solutions.
I believe you can learn a lot from incidental interactions. I might be in a
car with an account executive as we drive from one customer to another.
That’s a great opportunity to find out what’s really going on. I’ll ask,“What
are your customers telling you? How do you think the company’s products
are doing? What are you seeing in the competitive market? What are our
biggest challenges? What are the threats to your success? How can the
company support you better?”59
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
229

PEOPLE LESSON #9:
Empower Employees to Do the Right Thing
While you are out listening to your employees’ideas, our gurus suggest that
you spend part of that time encouraging your employees to take initiative
and put their ideas into action. How, you may ask, do you empower em-
ployees to do things their way without ending up with total chaos? Arthur
Blank believes that the best way is to think in terms of the “three bun-
dles”—an idea he credits to GE Chairman Jack Welch:
Bundle 1: This is the nonnegotiable bundle.There are very few Bundle
1s in The Home Depot; those are the things we do the same across the
company. Many of these are operational in nature, areas where investment
in systems dictates a more uniform compliance.They are usually transpar-
ent to the customer, things that have to be done to maintain key consisten-
cies between the stores.
Bundle 2: This is the entrepreneurial bundle. Entrepreneurship comes
into play here because this involves challenges in which the company pro-
vides only a minimum standard. If a store can extend that standard, great!
We say,“Your store will carry such-and-such product lines. How you sell
or display them is up to you.” As a result, we get the benefit of some ex-
traordinary creativity in this bundle; many of these ideas get distributed
company wide as part of the “Best Practices” program.
The entrepreneur[ial] bundle works at every level of the company.We
even use it to further our community programs by giving the stores a
budget for spending in their own communities.We don’t tell them exactly
how to spend the money. Instead, they find causes and become attached to
those causes, emotionally and financially.The empowerment is great.
Bundle 3:This is when we give associates complete autonomy to make
their own decisions in the way they operate their store.They don’t make
the decision about the assortment in the store, although they do talk to
the merchants about what their customers are looking for, so in a sense
they’re responsible for the fine-tuning of the assortment. But they’re totally
responsible for the amount of merchandise that we have in stock.They’re
responsible for being sure our pricing is right in the stores, for building the
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
230

displays, for signing, hiring, and training.And they’re responsible for paying
people what they’re worth, which is the backbone of our entire organiza-
tion.The people in our stores are responsible for moving people along in
the company and for deciding who doesn’t move along.All of those things
come from the individuals making those decisions in their stores.60
Your goal, say our gurus, should be to make Bundle 3 as big as possible.
That means inverting the traditional organizational pyramid. You put your
employees on top and give them the power to make decisions. You support
them; they don’t support you. Herb Kelleher puts it this way:
Take the [organizational] pyramid—and turn it upside down.Turn it on its
point. Down here, at the bottom, you’ve got the people at headquarters.
Up there, at the top, you’ve got the people who are out there in the field,
on the front lines.They’re the ones who make things happen, not us.The
people out there are the experts.You can compare our roles in the front
offices to the military:We’re the supply corps, we’re not the heroes.We
supply the heroes, period.The heroes are out there.61
PEOPLE LESSON #10: Trust Your Employees
Ultimately, it’s about trust. It is the firm belief that, as Arthur Blank writes,
“with the right value system and the right knowledge to do their job people
can be trusted to make the right decisions.” “If you can operate with that
kind of trust,” he goes on, “you don’t have to micromanage. And people
will do more good for the company than anyone could ever dictate.”62
Lack of trust between managers and employees, our gurus warn, causes all
kinds of problems. David Packard says he learned this lesson early in his
career.
In the late 1930s, when I was working for General Electric in Schenectady,
the company was making a big thing of plant security. I’m sure others were,
too. GE was especially zealous about guarding its tool and parts bins to
make sure employees didn’t steal anything. Faced with this obvious display
of distrust, many employees set out to prove it justified, walking off with
tools or parts whenever they could. Eventually, GE tools and parts were
scattered all around town, including the attic of the house in which a
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
231

number of us were living. In fact, we had so much equipment up there that
when we threw the switch, the lights on the entire street would dim.
The irony in all of this is that many of the tools and parts were being
used by their GE “owners” to work on either job-related projects or skill-
enhancing hobbies—activities that would likely improve their performance
on the job.63
Packard recalls that, when he started HP with Bill Hewlett, the memories
of GE were still strong, and he was determined that parts bins and store-
rooms at HP would be kept open. From a practical standpoint, according to
Packard, keeping the parts bins and storerooms open made it easier for
product designers to get access to the parts and tools they needed to work
on new ideas at home and on the weekends. More important, the open bins
and storerooms were symbols of trust.
Perhaps the most-publicized example of trust at HP occurred in the 1960s
when it became the first company in the United States to implement flextime.
Workers were allowed to come to work early in the morning or as late as 9:00
A.M. “To my mind,” asserts Packard, “flextime is the essence of respect for and
trust in people. It says that we both appreciate that our people have busy personal
lives and that we trust them to devise, with their supervisor and work group, a
schedule that is personally convenient yet fair to others.”64 That trust, says Pack-
ard, has paid off, and HP has rarely had a problem with work schedules.
Ricardo Semler reports similar results from flextime at his company. At
Semco factory workers are allowed to arrive anytime between 7 A.M. and
9 A.M. Semler recalls that when the system was first initiated a number of
people expressed concern that workers wouldn’t coordinate their schedules
and that production would suffer. Consequently, the company set up a task
force to mediate any scheduling conflicts. But the task force never met. “Our
workers knew that production would suffer if they didn’t coordinate their
schedules,” writes Semler, “so that’s what they did.”65
PEOPLE LESSON #11: Small Is Beautiful
Of course, it’s easier to trust people you know. That’s not such a problem
when you are just starting. You know everyone well. After all, you work
with them every day. But, what do you do when your company starts grow-
ing? You can’t personally know thousands of employees. How do you grow
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
232

big while still keeping the intimacy that allows trust to flourish? Easy, say
our gurus; think small to grow big. Every time your company starts getting
big, break it into smaller pieces, which is exactly what many of our gurus
did with their companies. Richard Branson is a good example.
Branson’s Virgin Group as a whole employs over twenty thousand
people, but it is in reality just a collection of small companies. Every time a
venture starts to get big, Branson breaks it into several new companies. By
the time he sold Virgin Music, Branson had created as many as 50 different
subsidiary record companies under that label, and none had more than 60
employees. Virgin Records was big, but it didn’t feel big to its employees.
Think small and act small and we’ll get bigger.
Herb Kelleher66
How small is small enough? Semler doesn’t think there is a magic
number. For some companies the limit may be only a few dozen people. In
others, it might be as many as five hundred. The key, advises Semler, is to
keep the organization small enough so that everyone knows and can there-
fore trust almost everyone around them. Generally, he maintains, that
means you will want to limit the size of your company or subsidiaries to no
more than perhaps 150 people.67 Branson places the figure even lower. He
recommends that, “[o]nce people start not knowing the people in the build-
ing and it starts to become impersonal, it’s time to break up a company. . . .
I’d say the number is around 50 or 60 people. By keeping it small, you give
people a chance. A company operates at its peak when people are able to
know each other’s strengths and weaknesses. I don’t want people to get lost
in the corridors of power.”68
When you increase the size [of the company], the important thing to do is
when you see a new product opportunity, have a small team go after that
opportunity.That’s what we always did at Microsoft.We had small teams
working on different areas.
Paul Allen69
But, you might ask, don’t you lose economies of scale when you keep
breaking the company up into ever smaller chunks? Of course you do,
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
233

replies Branson, “But . . . look at what you get! People who have worked
for small companies and then big companies will tell you that it’s not as
much fun. In a small company, you can create a different type of energy.
People feel cared for.”70 That’s the next people lesson.
The smaller you make your company, the better.The only advantage to
large is muscle, but you lose motivation.
Richard Branson71
PEOPLE LESSON #12: Praise People to Success
When is the last time you said to somebody at work, “You know, you’re
really terrific! I admire the fine job that you are doing,” asks Mary Kay
Ash.72 Can’t recall? Well, warn our gurus, you are violating a fundamental
principal of people management. You can literally praise people to success.
As Ash likes to say, people respond to praise like a thirsty plant to water.
Mary Kay Ash admits that, when she endorses praise as a valuable and
universal people-management strategy, she often encounters skeptics.
“Come on, now, Mary Kay,” they say, “it may work for you to award rib-
bons, honor sales leaders on stage before large audiences, and name top
achievers in your publications, but this kind of thing doesn’t work with
men.” When she hears such remarks, she just smiles and asks, “Did you
ever notice the stars on a six-foot-seven-inch, 275-pound linebacker’s hel-
met? Or the medals on a soldier’s uniform? Men are willing to risk bodily
injury and even their lives for praise and recognition!”73
Other gurus add that the ways to making praise work are being sincere—
don’t say it unless you mean it—delivering the praise in public, and making
the praise or reward fit the recipient. Ash relates the story of how she came to
understand the importance of making praise public several years ago when
she was attending a sales convention for a multibillion-dollar corporation.
I noticed several of the salesmen wearing green sports jackets. I could tell
the coats were brand-new because many of the men’s sleeves were too
long or too short, or their jackets simply needed some tailoring.
“What are all these green jackets for?” I asked one of the company’s
vice presidents.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
234

“This year’s top salesmen received the jackets as a gift.”
“When was the ceremony where the jackets were awarded?” I asked.
“Oh, there was no ceremony,” he explained.“The jackets were just sent
to their rooms.”
That evening, at the convention’s main banquet, I eagerly waited for the
big moment when the company would recognize its top salesmen. Finally, at
the end of the meal, hundreds of balloons fell from the ceiling, and I
thought,“Oh, good opening. Now the awards are going to be presented.”
But much to my surprise, the evening ended there. Not a mention of
achievement was made. No applause, no recognition, nothing!
As a guest, I couldn’t say anything, but I thought,“This company missed a
golden opportunity to proudly award the jackets to their star performers
in the presence of their peers!” I was certain the salespeople would have
valued the recognition much more than the actual green jackets.74
To make praise effective, you also need to make sure the praise or tangi-
ble reward you bestow fits the person being honored. Early in her career,
Ash worked very hard to win a sales contest and was excited to discover
that she had won. When her sales manager, an avid fisherman, presented
her with her prize, she accepted it gracefully, although she later admitted
that she had no idea what it was. Then someone explained it was a flounder
light, which would come in handy the next time she tried to gig fish while
wading into water wearing hip boots. Ash was proud of winning the sales
contest but had to admit that a flounder light was somewhere near the bot-
tom of her list of preferred prizes.75
PEOPLE LESSON #13: Share the Financial Rewards
A flounder light may not be right for everyone, but our gurus generally agree
that one prize is on just about everyone’s approved list—money. They have
learned—many of them the hard way—that some form of bonus, profit-
sharing, and/or stock-ownership plan is the best way to reward employees.
Sam Walton, for example, admitted that in the early days of Wal-Mart he
was far from generous when it came to sharing the financial rewards.
We didn’t pay [our employees] much. It wasn’t that I was intentionally
heartless. I wanted everybody to do well for themselves. It’s just that in my
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
235

very early days in the business, I was so doggoned competitive, and so de-
termined to do well, that I was blinded to the most basic truth, really the
principle that later became the foundation of Wal-Mart’s success.You see,
no matter how you slice it in the retail business, payroll is one of the most
important parts of overhead, and overhead is one of the most crucial things
you have to fight to maintain your profit margin.That was true then, and it’s
still true today. Back then, though, I was so obsessed with turning in a profit
margin of 6 percent or higher that I ignored some of the basic needs of our
people, and I feel bad about it.
The larger truth that I failed to see turned out to be another of those
paradoxes like the discounters’ principle of the less you charge, the more
you’ll earn. And here it is: the more you share profits with your associ-
ates—whether it’s in salaries or incentives or bonuses or stock dis-
counts—the more profit will accrue to the company.Why? Because the
way management treats the associates is exactly how the associates will
then treat the customers.76
According to Walton, one of his biggest single regrets in his whole busi-
ness career was that he didn’t include his employees in the initial managers-
only profit-sharing plan that his company put in place in 1970. That is a mis-
take other gurus, such as Bill Gates, didn’t make. Microsoft offers stock
purchases at a 15 percent discount and has long used stock options as a re-
cruiting and retention tool. In the late 1980s, for example, the company of-
fered options for up to three thousand shares of Microsoft stock to pro-
grammers who joined the company right out of college. Although the details
of stock purchase and options packages have changed over time, stock own-
ership by Microsoft employees has been called one of the most-important
employee benefits the company has ever offered. It’s a benefit that has made
Microsoft a financially lucrative place to work. It is, notes Gates, one of the
key things that tie Microsoft employees together and create a common
bond.77 It has also made many of Gates’s employees millionaires.
PEOPLE LESSON # 14:
Firing People Is the Hardest Part of Managing
As we noted at the beginning of this chapter, Ben Cohen and Jerry Green-
field quickly learned that managing people is the hardest part of running a
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
236

business. A corollary to that lesson is that firing people is the hardest part of
managing. No one likes to do it. In fact, Cohen and Greenfield grew to hate
the task so much they invented a persona—the Monster—to do it for them.
Whenever it became obvious that, due to overscooping or slow scooping,
one of their college-student employees wasn’t making the grade as an ice-
cream server, they would begin saying to each other, “The Monster is hun-
gry, the Monster must eat.” That would be the cue for Cohen—who had ac-
cepted the job of firing people because his employment history gave him
the most experience with the matter—to launch into his speech. “You’re a
wonderful person,” he would say. “We really like hanging out with you. But
you don’t scoop fast enough. Therefore, you shouldn’t take this personally,
but you can’t work here anymore.”78
Although Cohen tried to be compassionate, the situation was always dif-
ficult. Some of the college students would even begin to cry. He would try to
reassure them that all wasn’t lost. “Look,” he would say, “you’re in college.
You’re looking to become a philosophy major. Scooping quickly is not a
skill you need for what you’re trying to do with your life.”79 Still, firing was
never easy for Cohen, Greenfield, or the hapless students, and it won’t be for
you. Firing will be the meanest part of your job, but, say our gurus, it is part
of your job and you must do it. Also, don’t think you can avoid it by trying
to change the person in question. It is unlikely that you can.
Robert Mondavi tells us that when he started out in business he operated
on the assumption that he could change people. He was convinced that he
could encourage them, ride them, inspire them, offer them incentives, and
that eventually their performance would improve. For years, Mondavi says,
he tried to do just that. On occasion he was even able to see some improve-
ment in an errant employee’s performance. Yet, he almost always found the
effort frustrating. He finally came to accept a cold, hard truth: “You cannot
change people. Influence them a little, yes. But truly change them, no—un-
less they themselves deeply want to change.”80 His advice? When you find
yourself with a problem employee, work with him or her to see if they can
improve. But if your initial efforts don’t seem to work, face reality. Do what
you have to do. As Cohen and Greenfield put it, let the Monster eat. And
sometimes firing people is the kindest thing you can do even if the reason
for their firing isn’t their fault. Walt Disney said that he learned that lesson
in the early 1940s.
The Disney brothers found themselves in financial trouble during the
pre–World War II years. Their banker had proposed a 20 percent reduction
in expenses, including laying off anyone who could be released without
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
237

affecting work on films already in progress. Roy Disney agreed, citing lay-
offs as preferable to their other options, such as selling their product out
through a franchise or going through receivership or bankruptcy. Walt 
resisted, not wanting to fire anyone. Years later he recalled how personally
difficult the eventual decision to cut their workforce was for him.
My brother went through as much hell as I did. I became all confused. I 
didn’t know where I was. I had a big staff. I hated to lay off anybody. I tried
to hold on to ’em. I tried to think for different ways.The war was not here
yet. But they were still drafting; some of my boys had to go. It was a terrible
period.
I just became so darned confused that I just didn’t know what the heck I
was doing. I should have had a big layoff. I should have practically closed the
doors until I straightened the mess. But no, I tried to keep ’em.The boys
should have had increases because of their time. I couldn’t give ’em an in-
crease; I was fighting like the devil even to pay ’em.81
Disney explained that the experience taught him a lesson. It’s a lesson
our other gurus say they have had to learn and one they recommend your
heeding:
You don’t do a person good sometimes by keeping them. I learned a lot on
that. I think the best thing is to face up to it. I always hated to fire anybody.
I’d always think,“Well, gee, he’s got five kids.” I began to let that enter into
it, and it’s wrong.The best thing is to face up to it. Because sometimes I’ve
seen some of those kids go out and be very successful outside. In other
words, it could have been a favor.82
The most difficult thing which I have had to do, and I think I have done
well, but it was hard, was look at the people who have helped me build this
company, get to half a billion, then billion and so on, and recognize that at
some point along the way, they ran out of steam.They were terrific people,
but they did not have the capacity to take me from a billion to $5 billion,
from $5 billion to $10 billion. Recognizing that and dealing with it will be
your greatest challenge.
Charles Lazarus83
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
238

Of course, say our gurus, the best thing is to never have to have layoffs
or fire anyone at all. How do you do that? Well, there is the advice in
Chapter 1 on how to decide if you should start a business at all. And the
advice in Chapter 2 about picking the right idea. And, of course, the ideas
in Chapter 3 about. . . . Enough said. We think you get the idea.
KEY POINTS
Managing people is the hardest part of running a business.
Your employees are the spinal cord of your business. If they do not
perform well, your business cannot succeed.
Don’t hire people for a specific job; hire them with the long term in mind.
Hire smarts—people who have an open and questioning mind, who
have a healthy balance of experience and intellect, and who aren’t
afraid to make a mistake in the process of innovation.
Hire attitude—people whose personality matches the culture of your
organization.
It is not enough just to hire well. You must inspire those you hire. Even
the production and sale of mundane products and services can be inspi-
rational if you create a work environment in which people feel they are
accomplishing something worthwhile for themselves and others.
Hold people to high standards of performance. They will get more ex-
cited about doing something as well as it can be done than about doing
something just adequately. If they work in an environment in which
excellence is expected, they will do excellent work.
Share as much information about company performance with employ-
ees as possible. The more an employee knows about the operations of
the company, the better prepared he or she is to serve the company’s
and the customers’ interests.
Eliminate all signs and symbols of status such as executive limos,
parking spaces, and dining rooms. Treat people as equals.
Eliminate or significantly reduce the use of receptionists, secretaries,
and personal assistants for managers and executives.
M A N A G I N G  P E O P L E
239

Use parties, songs, cheers, and other social activities to generate a
sense of team spirit.
Manage by roaming around. Get out of your office and get to know
your employees where they work. Listen and learn.
Encourage employees to take the initiative and put their ideas into ac-
tion. Provide them with as much authority as possible to do what they
think needs to be done to satisfy customers.
Trust people to make the right decisions and do the right thing.
Stay small to grow big. Limit the size of your company or its indi-
vidual subsidiaries to a few hundred people at most.
Praise people to success. Be sincere with your praise, do it in public,
and match the tangible rewards to the person being honored.
Share the financial rewards of success. Use bonuses, profit sharing,
and/or stock ownership to reward employees.
Firing is the hardest part of managing, but it is part of your job, and
you must do it when it is required. Don’t assume you can change
people if they do not want to change. You can’t. Sometimes the kind-
est thing you can do is let someone go so they can find success else-
where.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
240

The Gurus
Paul Allen, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation, was born in Seattle, Wash-
ington, in 1954. He attended the same Seattle high school as Bill Gates and
belonged to the same group of computer “geeks.” Allen and Gates first col-
laborated on a computerized traffic-volume analysis system in 1971. Allen
later told Fortune, “We were always interested in business. . . . We talked
about being entrepreneurs. Obviously, it was on a smaller scale, because we
were kids.”1
In 1973 Gates left for Harvard, and Allen moved to Boston to work as a
programmer for Honeywell. Two years later Gates dropped out of Harvard
to join Allen to work together as “Micro-Soft.” Allen recalls: “We both took
part in every decision, and it’s hard to remember who did what. If there was
a difference between our roles, I was probably the one always pushing a lit-
tle bit in terms of new technology and new products, and Bill was more in-
terested in doing negotiations and contracts and business deals.”2
As executive vice president of research and new development at Micro-
soft, Allen contributed to the development of such products as Microsoft
Word, Windows, and the Microsoft mouse. He left Microsoft in 1983, at the
age of 30, after being diagnosed with cancer, which was ultimately treated
successfully. Following his recovery, Allen invested in a variety of busi-
nesses, including the investment research firm Vulcan Ventures, the Egg-
head retail software chain, the National Basketball Association Portland
Trailblazers, the National Football League Seattle Seahawks, and an 80
percent stake in Ticketmaster. Vulcan Northwest is the umbrella organiza-
tion that oversees all of his vast holdings. Allen retains his seat on Micro-
soft’s board, and he remains the company’s second-largest stockholder. In
1999 he was declared to be the second-richest American, second only to his
old school pal and business partner Bill Gates.
J.Walter (Walt) Anderson, cofounder of White Castle, was born in 1880 on a
farm outside St. Mary’s, Kansas. He attended a small business college in
Sedalia, Missouri, then transferred to Baker University for two years.
While attending college, he supported himself working as a school janitor
241

and lived in an abandoned house. He spent several years wandering through
the Midwest, working odd jobs as a dishwasher or cook in restaurants.
In 1905 Anderson’s father bought him his own restaurant in Marquette,
Kansas. That lasted only one year, after which Anderson sold the restaurant
and started a traveling stage show—another failure. He then returned to the
kitchen, working as a cook for the Southern Pacific Railroad and for a se-
ries of local diners.
At a diner in Wichita, Kansas, Anderson experimented with grilling and
serving ground meats in a variety of ways and with a variety of condiments.
The most-popular item on the menu was a flattened meat patty that was
smothered with onions, seared on both sides, and served on a bun. Legend
has it that Anderson stumbled on to this idea while cooking a meatball that
was sticking to the skillet. In a moment of exasperation, he supposedly
smashed the meatball flat with a spatula. To Anderson’s amazement, not only
did the resulting patty cook faster, but his customers actually preferred it. Re-
gardless of the accuracy of the legend, the modern hamburger was born.
Anderson borrowed $80 in 1916 to buy and partially refurbish an old
shoe-repair stand, which he equipped with a counter and three stools, a flat
piece of iron he used as a griddle, and a variety of cooking utensils. He
hung a simple sign over the door that read “Hamburgers 5¢.”
In 1921 Anderson met Edgar Waldo (Billy) Ingram, an insurance and
real estate broker and former employee of Dun and Bradstreet. Ingram and
Anderson forged a partnership by cosigning a lease for property held by a
reluctant owner. Thus began a partnership that would change the nature of
fast food in America. (See Billy Ingram’s biography.)
Marc Andreessen, cofounder of Netscape Communications, was born in
New Lisbon, Wisconsin, in 1971. He showed an early interest in computers,
mastering the Basic programming language at the age of eight or nine. In
the sixth grade, he used his school’s personal computer to write his first
program, designed to help him to do his math homework. Unfortunately,
the janitor turned the power off at the end of the day, and the program was
lost.
After graduating from high school, Andreessen enrolled at the Univer-
sity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to study computer science. During his
stay there, he developed a fascination for the Internet but was unhappy with
the cumbersome software that accessed this seeming wealth of information.
He suggested to a colleague at the university’s National Center for Super-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
242

computing Applications (NCSA) that they develop an easy-to-use interface
to the on-line material. In early 1993, the resulting NCSA Mosaic interface
was released on the Internet, free of charge.
Shortly after the release of Mosaic, Andreessen earned his bachelor of
arts degree and received a fateful e-mail message from James Clark: “You
may not know me, but I’m the founder of Silicon Graphics. I’ve resigned
and intend to form a new company. Would you be interested in getting to-
gether to talk?” A Fortune reporter noted, “For Clark, the partnership was a
chance to start over; for Andreessen, twenty-three, it was a once-in-a-
lifetime opportunity to form a company with a Silicon Valley legend.”3
Clark invested $4 million in the new company, which was christened
Mosaic Communications Corporation but was later changed, as part of a
legal settlement with the University of Illinois, to Netscape Communica-
tions. In December 1994 Netscape released its browser, Navigator.
On August 9, 1995, Netscape made an initial public offering of 10 per-
cent of the company’s stock, amounting to 3.5 million shares at an opening
price of $28 per share. Within minutes, the per-share price had grown to
$743/4 but settled to $581/4 by the end of the day. Even with that decline,
Netscape’s market value was $2.3 billion.4
Mary Kay Ash, founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics, was born Mary Kathlyn
Wagner, in 1918, in Hot Wells, Texas. Mary Kay had to assume responsi-
bility for many household tasks and for the care of her invalid father at the
age of seven because her mother had to work to support the family. She re-
calls this as a positive experience and remembers her mother’s inspiring
words: “Honey, you can do it” and “Anything anyone else can do, you can
do better.”
Ash’s first experience with direct sales occurred in the late 1930s when
she was made an offer by a door-to-door salesperson: If she could sell 10
sets of books, she would receive a free set. Ash sold all 10 sets in a day and
a half. She continued in direct sales for the next 25 years, selling everything
from expensive pots and pans to floor brushes and cleaning materials (for
Stanley Home Products Company). In 1952 she joined the World Gift Com-
pany as the national training director, where she was repeatedly passed over
for promotion. Finally in 1963, when yet another man she had trained was
made her supervisor, she resigned.
In her third marriage—and with her three children grown—Ash didn’t
need the income from work. So, she decided to “retire” and write a career
T H E  G U R U S
243

guide to help other women avoid some of the pitfalls she had encountered.
Instead, she started her own company.
With her $5,000 in life savings, the support of her family, and the direct
help of her son Richard and her husband, who, tragically, died just before
her company’s opening, Ash opened Beauty by Mary Kay on September
13, 1963. She and her nine consultants gave facials and demonstrated the
company’s cosmetics, primarily in people’s homes. Within three-and-a-half
months, sales totaled $34,000. In the first calendar year, wholesale reve-
nues topped $198,000 and reached $800,000 in the second year. Her 9 con-
sultants have become 475,000 in number, and her cosmetics are sold in 25
countries.
The success of  Ash’s company allowed her to achieve her goal of help-
ing women succeed in the business world. Estimates are that more women
have become millionaires from their Mary Kay careers than at any other
company in the world. It has also allowed Ash to fund The Mary Kay Foun-
dation, which gives large sums of money to support social-service pro-
grams and medical research and treatment facilities like the Mary Kay Ash
Cancer Research Laboratory.
Among Ash’s many honors are the Dale Carnegie Leadership Award and
the Horatio Alger Distinguished American Citizen Award. Mary Kay Cos-
metics was listed in both editions of The 100 Best Companies to Work for in
America and was listed as one of the top 10 companies for which women
can work.
James L. (Jim) Barksdale, investor and former president and CEO of Net-
scape Communications, was born in Jackson, Mississippi, in 1943. He was
one of six sons of a well-to-do banker and a mother with high expectations
for her children. The Barksdale parents handed out a weekly “Boy of the
Week Award” for good deeds and were never fully satisfied with anything
short of perfection.
Barksdale was president of his eighth-grade class and president of his
fraternity at the University of Mississippi, from which he graduated with a
degree in business in 1965. After graduation he took a sales job with IBM,
then served as vice president of Cook Industries, Inc., from 1973 to 1979.
He was senior vice president information systems and chief information of-
ficer at Federal Express Corporation (FedEx) from 1979 to 1983, when he
was named chief operating officer. The quality program Barksdale estab-
lished won FedEx the coveted Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
244

In 1992 Barksdale became chief operating officer of McCaw Cellular,
and in 1995 he became CEO of Netscape Communications. The sale of
Netscape in March 1999 netted Barksdale $700 million, much of which he
has invested either in up-and-coming Internet companies or in his native
Mississippi. The Barksdales donated $5.4 million to the University of Mis-
sissippi in 1996 and have since increased their endowment to $130 million.
Phineas Taylor (P.T.) Barnum, was founder of The Greatest Show on Earth®,
a best-selling author, politician, showman, investor, entrepreneur, and mar-
keting genius. He was born on July 5, 1810, in Bethel, Connecticut. A
bright student, excelling in mathematics, he showed a flair for salesman-
ship at an early age. He worked as a clerk in his father’s country store, and
at the age of 12 he sold lottery tickets.
When he was 25, Barnum bought Joice Heth, a black slave who claimed
to be the 161-year-old nurse to George Washington. Barnum exhibited her
in New York and New England, amassing about $1,500 per week for the
show. In 1841 he bought Scudder’s American Museum in New York City—
a sort of Disneyworld of the nineteenth century—where he exhibited cu-
riosities from every corner of the globe. The next year, he added “The Fee-
jee Mermaid,” supposedly an embalmed mermaid, and General Tom
Thumb (Charles Stratton) to the exhibit.
In 1850 Barnum departed temporarily from his curiosity shows to spon-
sor the successful U.S. tour of European opera star Jenny Lind, “The Swed-
ish Nightingale,” but he returned to the world of curiosities with P.T. Bar-
num’s Grand Traveling Museum, Menagerie, Caravan, and Circus. His
traveling museum grossed $400,000 the first year of operation.
By 1872 Barnum was referring to his show as The Greatest Show on
Earth. P.T. Barnum’s Traveling World’s Fair, Great Roman Hippodrome and
Greatest Show on Earth seated 10,000 people in a five-acre area. In 1881 he
joined forces with James A. Bailey and James L. Hutchinson, creating P.T.
Barnum’s Greatest Show on Earth, and The Great London Circus, Sanger’s
Royal British Menagerie and The Grand International Allied Shows United,
soon to become known simply as the Barnum & London Circus. While Bar-
num and Bailey went their separate ways in 1885, they rejoined in 1888 to
create the Barnum & Bailey Greatest Show on Earth.
Because of Barnum’s vast fame in show business, people often overlook
his many other accomplishments. Among other things, he started the first il-
lustrated newspaper in New York City, and he became a famous public
T H E  G U R U S
245

speaker, a best-selling author, a politician, and a successful investor. He
also made a fortune in real estate. But he was always consumed by his
shows. It was reported that, just before he died on April 7, 1891, his last
words were about his show that was appearing at Madison Square Garden:
“Ask Bailey what the box office was at the Garden last night.”
Jeffrey P. Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon.com, was born in New Mex-
ico about 1964. He showed an early interest in computer science and fi-
nance and later studied electrical engineering and computer science at
Princeton University. After earning a bachelor’s degree, summa cum laude,
in 1986, he worked briefly for a fiber-optics company. He then worked for
Bankers Trust Company and for the investment-banking firm D.E. Shaw
and Company, where he earned the reputation of being a computer whiz
kid. By the age of 30, he became what is assumed to be the youngest senior
vice president ever at Shaw.
In 1994 Bezos read a report that claimed that the World Wide Web was
growing at a rate of 2,000 percent per year. He then compiled a list of some
twenty products he thought might sell well on the Internet. The overwhelm-
ing product of choice was books for several reasons, including (1) the large
number of titles in existence and (2) the ability of potential purchasers to
“sample” the product electronically. After settling on his product, Bezos
quit his Wall Street job and, along with his wife, headed for Seattle.
The decision to start Amazon.com—named after the world’s second-
largest river—in Seattle was based on the availability of skilled technology
professionals and on the presence of the large book wholesaler, Ingram. In
July, 1994, Bezos and his four newly hired employees set up shop in the
Bezos’s garage and sold their first book.
With an investment of $8 million to $10 million by the venture-capital
firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, Amazon.com became the most-suc-
cessful retailer on the Internet in only four years. It also became the third-
largest bookseller in the country, behind Barnes & Noble and Borders. The
value of the company’s stock at the time of its initial public offering, May
14, 1997, was $18 per share. One year later it had reached almost $100 per
share and has since ridden the tide of Internet stocks upward. Net sales in
1998 were $610 million, and the company claimed to offer 16 million items
for sale to its 8.4 million customer base.
Despite this phenomenal growth, however, Amazon.com has yet to show
a profit. From the beginning, Bezos emphasized establishing brand-name
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
246

recognition before profits. He has chosen to use the company’s revenues for
advertising and for product expansion, adding a virtual “drugstore,” toys,
videos, greeting cards, and music to his product mix.
Arthur Blank, cofounder of Home Depot, was born in the early 1940s in
Flushing, New York. He graduated from Babson College in 1963 with a
bachelor of science, with distinction, in business administration, after
which he took a position in New York with the accounting firm Arthur
Young & Company. In 1967 he became controller of his family’s business,
Sherry Pharmaceutical, which was bought in 1970 by Daylin Corporation.
While at Daylin, Blank served as controller of a discount drugstore chain, a
subsidiary called Elliott’s Drugs, and two years later was made president
and chief operating officer. Then in 1974 he became controller of Daylin’s
largest subsidiary, Handy Dan, where he met future business partner Bernie
Marcus.
For more information about the evolution of Home Depot, see the biog-
raphy of Bernie Marcus.
Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group, which includes Virgin At-
lantic Airways, Virgin Records, Virgin Megastores, Virgin Cola, and nu-
merous other Virgin companies, was born in 1950 in a suburb of London.
Of his parents, Branson says, “My parents brought me up with this philoso-
phy: You must do things—you mustn’t watch what other people are doing;
you mustn’t listen to what other people are doing.”5
Branson’s first entrepreneurial experience as a child was growing Christ-
mas trees. At the age of 15, he began an “alternative-culture” magazine,
Student, but he quickly gave up his editorial responsibilities to take over the
day-to-day operation of the magazine. Branson tenaciously turned Student
into a huge albeit brief success. From the corner telephone that he used as
an office, he sold tens of thousands of dollars in advertising space for the
magazine. He also persuaded writers like Jean-Paul Sartre, Alice Walker,
and John Le Carré to contribute articles, and he orchestrated interviews
with celebrities like actress Vanessa Redgrave and novelist and essayist
James Baldwin. The first issue of Student reportedly sold 50,000 copies.
Branson dropped out of his exclusive English boarding school, Stowe, at
the age of 16 to commit himself full-time to the magazine.
When Student began to lose money in the late 1960s, Branson came up
with a scheme to raise capital selling discount records by mail. Virgin Rec-
T H E  G U R U S
247

ords, born in 1970, experienced explosive growth in the recording business,
largely by taking chances on unknown artists. The label eventually signed
such names as Boy George, the Culture Club, Human League, and Phil Col-
lins. But Branson’s biggest challenge lay ahead.
In 1984 Branson was approached about financing a new airline that
would provide all-business-class service between London and New York.
He ignored his advisers and reasoned that the airline business was closer in
spirit to the entertainment industry than one might think: “Obviously
you’ve got to make sure you’ve got somebody running it who can safely get
your airplane from A to B, but once you’ve sorted that out, the airline busi-
ness has everything to with entertainment.”6
Virgin Atlantic Airways started with one leased Boeing 747 that flew
round-trip daily between Gatwick Airport, south of London, and Newark
International Airport in New Jersey. The airline’s lack of advertising budget
pressed Branson into the position of unofficial spokesman. Branson staged
outrageous stunts to get media coverage and to distinguish his airline from
his stodgy competitors. For instance, in 1985 he attempted to break the
transatlantic speed record for powerboats, following this with his 1987
crossing of the Atlantic in a hot-air balloon and his 1991 attempt to cross
the Pacific in a 196-foot-tall balloon.
Despite bitter battles with rival British Airways, Virgin has expanded
routes to Singapore, Hong Kong, Sydney, and Los Angeles. The retail divi-
sion has expanded the presence of the Virgin Megastore, and Branson has
started innumerable other companies. His vast wealth has funded the Help
Advisory Center, which provides counseling on birth control and sexually
transmitted diseases, and the Healthcare Foundation, which concentrates on
AIDS education.
Charles M. Brewer, founder of MindSpring Enterprises, was born in Louis-
ville, Kentucky, about 1960. He received a bachelor’s degree in economics
from Amherst College, graduating Phi Beta Kappa. From November 1981
until October 1984, he was employed by the investment banking firm of
Wertheim & Company, after which he returned to college to pursue a
masters in business administration (MBA) from Stanford University. After
graduating from Stanford in 1987, Brewer became a vice president of
Sanders & Company, a venture capital firm. In 1989 he became the chief fi-
nancial officer of Atlanta-based AudioFax, Inc., a fax server software pro-
vider, and subsequently served as that company’s CEO from May 1989
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
248

until April 1992. When he became disillusioned with what he considered an
unfulfilling job, he resigned.
While contemplating what to do next with his life, Brewer decided to
join a growing number of Internet surfers. He spent the next three months
simply attempting to log on. “Once I got on,” says Brewer, “it was great. It
was the setup that was absurd—the lack of help, the busy signals, the poor
quality of the network. It was obvious that it didn’t need to be that way.”7 In
the spring of 1994, with $150,000 of his own money and the assistance of
one software developer, Brewer founded MindSpring Enterprises.
MindSpring’s first customers were actually beta testers who received the
service free of charge. By the end of the summer, the company had a few
hundred paying customers and a growing reputation for quality service and
support. An influx of capital from ITC Holding allowed Brewer to expand
the network and continue to hire development and support staff. The com-
pany went public in March 1996 and subsequently grew to more than a half
million customers, 750 employees, and revenues in excess of $100 million
before its 1999 merger with former rival EarthLink.
Warren Edward Buffett, chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, Inc., was born in
Omaha, Nebraska, in 1930. His father, Howard Homan Buffett, was a
stockbroker and fiscally conservative four-term representative to the U.S.
House of Representatives. While growing up in Washington DC, young
Buffett delivered papers for the Washington Post, gathered lost golf balls
from a golf course and sold them, and even, at the age of 11, dabbled in the
stock market. In high school, he and another student started a pinball-
machine business that grossed $50 dollars a week. Before graduating he ac-
cumulated enough money to buy a 40-acre farm in Nebraska.
Buffett attended the University of Pennsylvania from 1947 to 1949 and
graduated with a bachelor’s degree from the University of Nebraska in
1950. During his studies, he read the works of Benjamin Graham, a propo-
nent of the value approach to portfolio management—as opposed to the tra-
ditional growth approach. Buffett decided to do his graduate work with
Graham at Columbia University and received his MBA in 1951. Buffett
paraphrases a lesson he learned from Graham: “You’re not right or wrong
because 1,000 people agree with you or disagree with you. You’re right be-
cause your facts and your reasoning are right.”8
Buffett returned to Omaha to work as a salesman in his father’s invest-
ment company from 1951 to 1954, and he worked in New York as a secu-
T H E  G U R U S
249

rity analyst for Graham from 1954 to 1956. By the age of 25, Buffett had ac-
cumulated $5,000 of his own money and $100,000 from relatives and friends
to establish the highly successful Buffett Partnership investment fund.
Donald Keough, who later became president of Coca-Cola, was a young
executive in Omaha at the time. In a 1985 interview with New York, Keough
relates the following story: “I had five small kids and left for work each
day. Buffett had three and stayed home. He had a marvelous hobby, model
trains, and my kids used to troop over there and play with them. One day,
Warren popped over and asked if I’d thought about how I was going to ed-
ucate these kids. . . . I told him I planned to work hard and see what hap-
pened. Warren said that if I gave him $5,000 to invest, he’d probably be
able to do better [for me]. My wife and I talked it over, but we figured we
didn’t know what this guy even did for a living—how could we give him
$5,000? We’ve been kicking ourselves ever since. I mean, if we had given
him the dough, we could have owned a college by now.”9
While Buffett Partnership invested in many high-profile companies like
American Express, it also invested in companies like Berkshire Hathaway,
a troubled textile manufacturer in New Bedford, Massachusetts. After dis-
solving the partnership in 1969, Buffett began to build Berkshire Hathaway
into a diversified conglomerate of insurance companies, department stores,
banks, and so on. Even when the textile company became less and less
profitable, Buffett kept it going for the sake of the employees he thought
were too old to retrain. He did not close the textile operation until 1985.
In the 1970s, Buffett began investing in media and advertising. He bought
into a number of newspapers like the Omaha Sun, the Washington Post, Af-
filiated Publications (which owns the Boston Globe), and Time, Inc. He also
bought into General Foods Corporation (1983), purchased See’s Candy
Shops, and became involved in the Capital Cities Communications’takeover
of the American Broadcasting Companies (ABC). These and many other
highly successful investments contributed to Buffett’s being declared the
third-richest person in America in 1999 with $31 billion in assets, following
only Bill Gates with $85 billion and Paul Allen with $40 billion.
Washington Atlee Burpee, founder of Burpee Seed Company, was born in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1858. His boyhood hobby was breeding
poultry—chickens, geese, turkeys, pigeons—and by the time he entered
high school, he was contributing articles to poultry trade journals. One
story recounts the following:
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
250

In 1872 an English poultry fancier traveled to Philadelphia to meet a fel-
low breeder-exhibitor with whom he had been corresponding for several
years.The two knew each other only through letters, and the Briton was
eager for the opportunity to sit down over some brandy with his learned
friend and exchange ideas on the care and mating of high-class fowl.When
he arrived at the train station, however, there was no one to greet him but
an ungainly fourteen-year-old boy.“Would you happen to be the son of 
W. Atlee Burpee, the poultry authority?” asked the fancier.“No sir, I am the
son of Dr. David Burpee. I am W. Atlee Burpee, the poultryman,” came the
startling reply.10
At the age of 17, Burpee started a mail-order business selling purebred
fowl and two instructional manuals. His parents were not impressed by his
entrepreneurial venture and insisted that he enroll in medical school. He en-
tered the University of Pennsylvania in 1875 but made it only one year. He
dropped out when a wealthy investor offered him $5,000 to start a purebred
poultry and livestock business. The partnership was a rocky one, and Bur-
pee finally convinced his father to lend him the money to start his own busi-
ness.
W. Atlee Burpee & Company was established in 1878 as a mail-order
house for purebred livestock and fowl. Burpee, who continued to provide
his customers with instructional material, also offered several varieties of
seed in his catalog. As it turned out, most of the orders he received were for
his seeds and not for his livestock, so Burpee became a seed salesman who
also offered poultry.
Burpee traveled the world in search of new and better varieties of fruits,
vegetables, and flowers. Among the most widely known produce intro-
duced through the Burpee catalog are iceberg lettuce (introduced in 1894)
and the bush lima bean (introduced in 1907).
Burpee turned over the company to his son David in 1915 and died two
years later.
Thomas Matthew (Tom) Chappell, cofounder of Tom’s of Maine, Inc., was
born in 1943 in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, the son of a textiles entrepreneur.
He graduated from the Moses Brown School, a Quaker high school in Prov-
idence, Rhode Island, then attended Trinity College in Hartford, Connecti-
cut. He received his bachelor of arts degree in English in 1966 and spent the
next two years selling insurance. Of this experience he later said, “I grew
T H E  G U R U S
251

up in a family where venturing was normal, and I needed a more creative
environment than a large corporation has to offer.”11
In 1968 Chappell and his wife and cofounder, Kate Cheney Chappell,
moved to Kennebunk, Maine, in search of a community that shared their
concerns for the environment. Two years later, with a $5,000 loan from a
friend, the couple opened the Kennebunk Chemical Center, predecessor to
Tom’s of Maine, in the town’s former Boston and Maine railroad station.
Their first product was a nonpolluting tar remover and cleaner for dairy
equipment, which sold poorly, as did their second product—a phosphate-
free laundry detergent that failed to clean effectively. In 1972 the Chappells
decided to try their hands at personal-care products.
Tom, Kate, and their friends were concerned about products that con-
tained artificial colors and preservatives, chemicals, and animal-based ingre-
dients. They were also frustrated in their search for alternatives, so the idea
of producing such a line of products seemed logical. Over the next several
years they developed and successfully marketed products like Coco Orange
Soap, Pure Skin Lotion, Apple Shampoo, a nonalcoholic mouthwash, an all-
natural baby shampoo, and the market’s first natural toothpaste.
By 1981 Tom’s of Maine dominated the all-natural, personal-care prod-
ucts market, with more than $1.5 million in sales of more than forty prod-
ucts, but their competition was growing. In an effort to ward off their com-
petitors, Chappell raised $75,000 in equity capital, wrote a new business
plan, created a board of directors, and hired marketing professionals. He
wanted Tom’s of Maine to compete as the natural alternative to products
like Crest and Colgate. His strategy appears to have worked because the
company’s annual sales climbed to $5 million by the mid-1980s. Unfor-
tunately, while Tom’s of Maine prospered, Tom Chappell became more and
more unhappy with himself. He had founded the company to create effec-
tive, health-oriented products in a pleasant workplace without harming the
environment, but he found himself chasing the bottom line and losing sight
of his goals.
In 1987 Chappell did something to change his situation—he reduced his
involvement in the company and enrolled in Harvard Divinity School. His
studies there reinforced many of his original ideas and had a significant im-
pact on the way Chappell ran his company. Employees were encouraged to
donate paid time as volunteers in charitable activities. The company com-
mitted 10 percent of its pretax earnings each year to nonprofit groups and
made substantial donations to environmental and other organizations. It
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
252

also redoubled its efforts to reduce the amount of packaging it used and to
use recycled or recyclable materials. Because of his efforts, Chappell and
his company have received a number of awards and honors including En-
trepreneur of the Year by CNBC Television, Corporate Conscience Award
for Charitable Contributors by the Council on Economic Priorities, being
named among the “thirty great companies for dads” by Child magazine
(June–July 1992), and among the “one hundred best companies for working
mothers” by Working Mother magazine every year, starting in 1993. Chap-
pell received his master’s degree in theology in 1991 and continues to in-
fluence the direction of his company.
James (Jim) Clark, founder of Silicon Graphics (1982) and cofounder of
Netscape Communications, was born in 1944 in Plainview, Texas. He was
suspended from high school “for antics such as sneaking in whiskey on a
band trip”12 but eventually earned a master’s degree in physics from Loui-
siana State University (1971) and a doctorate in computer science from the
University of Utah (1974).
Clark taught both at the University of California at Santa Cruz and at
Stanford University. While at Stanford he worked with a group of graduate
students to develop microchips that enhanced computer images. In 1982 he
started the firm Silicon Graphics, Inc., along with his graduate students.
The company manufactured computer workstations that appealed primarily
to engineers and architects, but they soon caught on with filmmakers and
animators. Industrial Light & Magic used Silicon Graphics computers to
create the dinosaurs in the movie Jurassic Park.
In 1994 Clark resigned over a disagreement about the direction the com-
pany should take in the future. Although a wealthy man, he immediately
started looking for a new challenge. That challenge turned out to be the In-
ternet.
Clark e-mailed a recent graduate of the University of Illinois who had
worked on the hottest new software on the Internet—Mosaic. He offered
Marc Andreessen an opportunity to join him in a new venture. Their result-
ing partnership became Netscape Communication. (See Marc Andreessen’s
biography for information about the evolution of Netscape.)
Bennett (Ben) Cohen, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream, was born in
Brooklyn, New York, in 1951. He attended public school in Merrick, Long
Island, where, in a junior high school gym class, he met his future business
T H E  G U R U S
253

partner, Jerry Greenfield. According to Greenfield, “We were the two slow-
est, chubbiest guys in the seventh grade. . . . We were nerds.”13 And so the
friendship began.
During his senior year in high school, Cohen had a part-time job driving
an ice-cream van and selling ice cream to neighborhood children. Follow-
ing high school, he attended Colgate University for a year and a half, then
returned to work as an ice-cream vendor. He later enrolled at Skidmore
College and worked at a variety of part-time jobs, including cashier at a
McDonald’s, guard at a racetrack, night janitor, and assistant superintend-
ent of an apartment complex.
In 1977 Cohen hooked up again with his old friend Jerry Greenfield.
They decided to try their hand at the food business, and according to Green-
field, “We wanted to do something that would be . . . fun.”14 After dismiss-
ing the idea of making and selling bagels, they agreed on ice cream as their
product. Of course, neither knew how to make ice cream, so they both
signed up for a five-dollar correspondence course in ice-cream making
from Pennsylvania State University. They later claimed to have received a
perfect score on their final exams—which happen to have been open book.
Early in their partnership, the pair agreed that they wanted to locate their
business in a small, rural college town, so they moved to Burlington, Ver-
mont. On May 5, 1978, with an investment of $12,000 (one-third of which
was borrowed), they opened the first Ben & Jerry’s Homemade Ice Cream
Shop in a renovated gas station.
Cohen and Greenfield were as committed to social issues as they were to
their business. In fact, “when Jerry and I realized we were no longer ice-
cream men but businessmen, our first reaction was to sell,” says Cohen.
“We were afraid that business exploits its workers and the community. We
listed the company with a broker and actually had a buyer. We ended up
keeping it, but we decided to adapt it so we could feel proud to say we were
the businessmen of Ben & Jerry’s.”15
Contrary to their wishes, however, the company’s rapid expansion meant
bringing in senior executives who did not fully agree with their approach to
the bottom line. In June 1994 Ben Cohen announced that he was giving up
his position as CEO. Today, Jerry Greenfield is the chairperson of the board
and Ben Cohen is vice chairperson of the company.
Finis Conner, cofounder Shugart Associates (purchased by Xerox in 1978),
cofounder Shugart Technology (later renamed Seagate Technology), and
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
254

founder Conner Peripherals, was born in rural Alabama in 1943. He grew
up in various locations in Alabama, Texas, and Florida and later admitted
that his high school education consisted mainly of “going to the beach al-
most every day.”16 In 1961 he headed for California with $100 in his
pocket, half of which he lost in a poker game before arriving. Conner ex-
plained, “I was just a naive country boy.”17
That same naive country boy enrolled in San Jose State University’s in-
dustrial management program and took a job as a clerk/typist for IBM to
support himself. It was during his time at IBM that Conner had his first en-
trepreneurial experience with a small company that designed circuit boards.
Conner later took his experience and his degree to Stewart Warner Micro-
circuits and eventually to the Memorex Corporation, where he met his fu-
ture and long-time business partner Alan Shugart.
When Memorex refused to fund their idea for developing and marketing
floppy disk drives, Conner and Shugart formed Shugart and Associates.
The company was so successful that Xerox Corporation bought it in 1978.
Although he stayed with the company until 1979, Conner needed a new
challenge. While working at International Memories, Inc., Conner found
his next product—the hard disk drive. He contacted his old friend and part-
ner, Alan Shugart, and the two founded Shugart Technology, Inc., later re-
named Seagate Technology, Inc. By 1984 Seagate was the leading manu-
facturer of 5.25-inch hard disk drives, but Conner was getting restless. He
felt that Seagate had lost its innovative edge, and he resigned.
After a year of spending time with his family, playing golf, and sailing
his yacht, Conner, 42, decided he was not ready to retire. He founded
Conner Peripherals in 1985 and went in search of a product to sell. That
product was the 3.5-inch hard disk drive. The next year he met an old busi-
ness acquaintance, Rod Canion (cofounder of Compaq Computers, Inc.), at
the Comdex trade show and came away with $12 million with which to de-
velop and market his product. Conner Peripherals’ revenues soared to $113
million in 1987, $256 million in 1988, and $700 million in 1989, becoming
the undisputed leader in the hard disk drive industry. On February 5, 1996,
Seagate Technology and Conner Peripherals merged under the name Sea-
gate Technology, Inc., forming the single-largest company in the storage in-
dustry.
Joshua Lionel Cowen (originally Cohen), cofounder of Lionel Manufactur-
ing Company, was born in 1877 in New York to Eastern European Jewish
T H E  G U R U S
255

parents who immigrated to the United States in the mid-1860s. Cowen’s
father became a prosperous hatmaker and expected his son to excel in
school and in a profession. His parents enrolled him in the Peter Cooper In-
stitute, but Cowen was bored with all of his classes except technical shop
class.
Cowen was always a tinkerer and was attracted to gadgets. He even de-
veloped an early electric door bell while at Peter Cooper. He also invented
an “electric flowerpot,” which illuminated a plant inside, and sold the in-
vention to Conrad Hubert. (When Hubert failed to sell the gadget, he de-
cided to detach its tubes and sell them for their illuminatory value. He re-
named his product the Eveready Flashlight and became a multimillionaire.)
Cowen enrolled for a short time both at the City College of New York and
at Columbia University, but he dropped out to take an apprentice position as-
sembling battery lamps. He received the first of his many patents for a de-
vice that ignited a photographer’s flash—the Flash Lamp—in 1899, and in
the same year he received $12,000 from the U.S. Navy for a mine detonator
he had developed. With that money, he and his friend Harry C. Grant co-
founded the Lionel Manufacturing Company on September 5, 1900.
The partners initially attempted to sell a portable electric fan, but Cowen
came up with another idea based on a childhood fascination. He wanted to
develop an electric train that merchants could use in their display windows
to attract attention. The train would pull merchandise around a circular strip
of track. A Manhattan toy-store owner bought the first of Cowen’s trains
and returned the next day with an order for six more, explaining that cus-
tomers wanted to buy the display out of his window.
In 1902 Lionel issued its first catalog featuring two electrically powered
rail cars, a metal suspension bridge, and various track configurations. By
the 1950s, Lionel’s became the third most popular catalog in the country,
surpassed only by Sears and Montgomery Ward in distribution. Although
hit hard by the depression, the company survived to introduce a new
streamlined train and another with a realistic whistle in 1935. They later in-
troduced their biggest seller, a handcar with Mickey Mouse and Minnie
Mouse, and following World War II they introduced their all-time best-
seller, the Santa Fe diesel. By 1952—the company’s 50th anniversary—it
was producing 622,209 engines and 2,460,760 cars. But this popularity
wasn’t to last.
By 1958 railroads had been replaced by airplanes, and the toy-railroad
industry suffered the consequences. The next year a disillusioned Cowen
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
256

sold his 55,000 shares of Lionel stock to his great-nephew Roy Cohn and
retired to Palm Springs, Florida. When Cowen died in 1965, his headstone
read simply “Joshua L. Cohen,” with no mention of his legacy to the history
of toys.
Cecil B. Day, cofounder of Days Inns of America, Inc., the son of a Baptist
minister, was born in a small town near Savannah, Georgia. His cofounder
of Days Inn, Richard Kessler, and Kessler’s family lived in the same small
community. Kessler joined Day in 1970, just as Days Inns of America, Inc.,
began.
Cecil Day had seen an opportunity to grab a significant portion of the
hotel/motel market by offering accommodations that looked like Holiday
Inn but that cost 30 percent less. He sold an apartment building in Atlanta to
get the $350,000 he needed to finance the venture. Days Inns offered no
meeting rooms, no lavish lobbies, and no bars, and they all looked the
same. Day targeted retired people, families, and business and government
travelers who traveled on small expense accounts.
After the first Days Inn opened in Savannah, Day sent Kessler to Florida
to identify a second location. Kessler’s trip occurred during the exciting
early days of Disney World, and he returned to Atlanta convinced that Or-
lando was the perfect location for Days Inn’s next site. Day sent Kessler
back to Orlando with an agreement to give him 30 percent equity in each
motel he built.
Kessler concentrated on the East Coast while Day started opening motels
in Texas, but the recession of 1974 endangered the fledgling company.
Days Inns had $20 million in assets, $19 million in debts, and only
$100,000 in cash. In response, Day and Kessler put up all of their motels as
collateral and personally guaranteed loans to buy $18 million worth of mo-
tels, including two Holiday Inns and a Sheraton, doubling Days Inns’ as-
sets. The chain became one of the most profitable of its type in the country,
with a pretax margin per site 50 percent greater than for Holiday Inns and
Sheratons.
Michael Dell, founder of Dell Computer Corporation (established as PCs
Ltd. in 1984), was born in 1965 in Houston, Texas. Dell told Fortune
magazine, “I always knew I wanted to run a business someday.”18 “When
I was in second grade I was selling candy at school. My teacher told me
then I was going to be an entrepreneur.”19 At the age of 12, he worked as a
T H E  G U R U S
257

dishwasher at a Chinese restaurant and earned enough money to start a stamp
collection. He later sold that collection by mail order, making a $2,000 profit.
By the age of 16, he had saved enough to buy his first computer, which he
used to support his next entrepreneurial venture—selling newspaper sub-
scriptions. He bought his first BMW with the $17,000 he made.
In 1983 Dell entered the University of Texas in Austin where, to please
his parents, he enrolled in premed courses. His real interest, however, was
in selling computers, so he set up shop in his dorm room and sold them
door-to-door and through the mail. When his parents came to visit, he
would hide the computers in his roommate’s bathtub so they wouldn’t find
out what he was doing. When they discovered his sideline business, they
insisted he quit, but when he sold $180,000 worth of PCs during the next
summer’s break, there was no stopping Michael Dell. He set up PCs Ltd.
(later to be renamed Dell Computer Corporation) in Austin and by the end
of 1984 had sales of $6 million. Sales skyrocketed to $34 million in 1985,
$546 million in 1990, and $2 billion in 1992, at which time Dell became the
youngest CEO to make the Fortune 500.
Dell is now a multibillionaire and the richest man in Texas. He could re-
tire comfortably but chooses to stay actively involved in his company. “I
don’t really think of it as working,” he says.20
Anthony Desio, cofounder of Mail Boxes Etc., was born in 1930. He grew
up in the Bronx section of New York City and worked his way through the
University of Connecticut, graduating in 1958 with a degree in electrical
engineering. For the next 25 years, he had a successful engineering man-
agement career with Lockheed, Western Union, and General Electric, and
he served two years as a member of a presidential executive exchange pro-
gram. It was only when he reached the age of 50 that he acted upon his en-
trepreneurial impulses.
Approaching retirement, Desio decided to “do something for myself be-
fore it was too late. . . . I had often considered starting a business of my
own, but I was always too busy to do it,” Desio says. “As I approached my
50th birthday, I figured that I had better do it then, or I wasn’t going to do it
at all.”21 His search for a business opportunity ended with the identification
of a major irritant to busy Americans—the U.S. Postal Service: “I saw that
companies like Federal Express and DHL had become successful by offer-
ing alternatives to the post office, and I thought the same alternatives could
work for retail postal services.”22
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
258

Desio and four partners each invested $100,000 to open a store they
called “U.S. Mailboxes” in 1979. They provided many of the same services
available at the post office—rented post-office boxes, shipping packages,
and stamps—but they also offered 24-hour access to the boxes, suite-
number addresses for customers, and a call-in service to check on mail or
packages. They soon expanded these services to include printing, copying,
messaging, telegrams, and faxes. “The public liked the idea from the begin-
ning,”23 says Desio.
With their business booming, the partners started looking for venture
capital that would allow them to expand, but banks and venture capitalists
weren’t interested. So the partners decided to go public in order to raise the
money they needed. In November 1980, the first Mail Boxes Etc. franchise
opened in Solana Beach, California, followed by three stores in the San
Diego area.
In 1983 Desio and one partner bought out the remaining partners. Desio
describes the buyout as “one of the scariest decisions I’ve ever made. By
1983, we had about 100 units but we were still just breaking even. There
were months we took little or no salary and some of the partners got dis-
couraged and wanted out.”24 To raise the money he needed for the buyout,
Desio collateralized everything he owned—even his wife’s jewelry.
The company’s 1984 profits on sales reached $1.1 million, and in 1985
revenues hit $2.2 million. A 1986 public offering raised $5.1 million and in-
creased the company’s assets to $10.25 million. Both revenues and the
number of locations continued to grow steadily until, in 1997 when Desio
sold out, retail sales hit $1 billion at some 3,500 stores in more than fifty
countries.
Desio was named Entrepreneur of the Year first by Inc. (1989) and then
by the International Franchise Association (1996). He started a company
called Memories on Canvas, which was acquired in June 1998 by IDTec.
He was made chairman of IDTec’s Advisory Committee and subsequently
CEO and chairman of the board.
Roy Oliver Disney, cofounder of Disney Brothers Studio (later Walt Disney
Productions, Ltd.), was born in Chicago in 1893, the third son of Flora and
Elias Disney. When he was 12 years old, his family moved to a small farm
in Missouri where Roy and his younger brother, Walt, enjoyed the pleasures
and rigors of farm life. It was during this period that the two brothers
formed the bond that would only strengthen with time.
T H E  G U R U S
259

Older brothers Herb and Ray “escaped” the farm when Roy was 16,
leaving him with the responsibility of its maintenance. Elias, who had
been ill for some time, and Flora decided that it was more responsibility
than the boy could handle if he was to continue his education, so the
family regretfully put their farm up for auction and relocated to Kansas
City.
Roy enrolled at the Manual Training High School, at which he excelled
in academics and athletics and participated in after-school activities, in-
cluding acting with the school’s drama group. Elias had purchased a distri-
bution list for the Kansas City Star, and Roy delivered papers for an allow-
ance of $3 per week.
Like many of his contemporaries, Roy enlisted in the navy during World
War I. His service included three hazardous Atlantic crossings on the USS
Adonis and the USS Houston and ended with his discharge in February
1919. He returned to Kansas City only long enough to learn that he had
contracted tuberculosis—probably while in service—and that he was being
assigned to a hospital in Santa Fe, New Mexico, for treatment. Unhappy
with Santa Fe’s weather and the austerity of the hospital, he transferred
himself, without permission, to a hospital in Tucson, Arizona. After suffer-
ing Tucson’s heat and desolation, Roy decided that he was well enough to
leave the hospital and headed for California.
The post–World War I years were difficult ones for returning ser-
vicemen, and Roy had to take a job selling vacuum cleaners door-to-door to
survive. After experiencing angry housewives and slamming doors, Roy
decided to give up his new-found career. As he recalled, “One day I got fed
up. I left the sample vacuum cleaner on the curb and caught a bus home. I
called the company and told them where their vacuum was. When they
went to get it, it was still there.”25
To make matters worse, Roy suffered a relapse of his tuberculosis and
had to enter the veterans’ hospital at Sawtelle, near Los Angeles. Roy re-
membered: 
That was when Walt came to Hollywood. . . . I was in the hospital at Saw-
telle. By correspondence he sold somebody in New York on a series of pic-
tures. One night he found his way to my bed, which was on a row of beds
on a screened porch. It was eleven or twelve o’clock at night, and he
shaked me awake and showed me a telegram of acceptance of his offers.
He said,‘What can I do now? Can you come out of here and help me to
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
260

get this started?’ So I left the hospital the next day, and I’ve never been back
since.26
Walter Elias (Walt) Disney, cofounder of Disney Brothers Studio (later Walt
Disney Productions, Ltd.), was born in 1901 in Chicago. Shortly after his
birth, his family moved to a farm near Marceline, Missouri. It was there that
Walt developed a love for animals and began drawing.
His first job as a commercial artist was probably doing weekly sketches
for a barber, in exchange for which Disney received either 25 cents or a
haircut. The family returned to Chicago, where Walt attended McKinley
High School and studied at the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts.
Disney left high school in 1918 to enlist as a Red Cross ambulance
driver in World War I. Following the war, he continued to study and to work
in commercial art, and in 1923 he set out for Hollywood with $40 and
sketches for an experimental film—Alice in Cartoonland, which combined
a live girl with animated cartoon figures.
Disney and his bother Roy combined their savings of $290 and a $500
loan from an uncle to form Disney Brothers Studio—eventually to become
Walt Disney Productions, Ltd. Some highlights of the next few years in-
clude the following:
I 1928: Launch of Mickey Mouse series.
I 1933: Release of Three Little Pigs, which popularized the song
“Who’s Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf.”
I 1937: Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, the first feature-length car-
toon work ever filmed.
I 1940: Fantasia introduced visual interpretation of orchestral music.
I 1942: Release of Bambi.
I 1947: Release of Song of the South.
I 1950: Release of Cinderella.
I 1954: Disney enters television with the one-hour show, Davy Crockett.
I 1955: Disneyland opens.
Disney died from lung cancer on December 15, 1967.
Charles Ferguson, cofounder of Vermeer Technologies, Inc., received a
bachelor of arts degree in mathematics from the University of California,
Berkeley, in 1978. In May 1994 he joined forces with Randy Forgaard to
T H E  G U R U S
261

found Vermeer Technologies, Inc., in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The pair
developed FrontPage, an HTML editor and Web-page builder that would
soon revolutionize Web publishing for the average computer user. The
menu-driven Web authoring tool and server received raved reviews and
was soon snapped up by Microsoft for the tidy price of $130 million in
stock.
Debbi Fields,founder of Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc., was born in 1956 in East
Oakland, California, where she grew up as the youngest of five sisters. She
learned to bake cookies at an early age and enjoyed sharing them with
friends and relatives.
At the age of 13, Debbi earned her first paycheck as a ball girl for the
Oakland A’s baseball team, a job that she maintains prepared her to deal
comfortably with large crowds. At 15 she worked part time for Mervyn’s
department store, where she learned the value of making the customer
happy.
Soon after graduating from high school, Debbi met and married Randy
Fields. Once again, she baked warm cookies—this time for Randy and his
friends—but she wanted to make more of her life. She wanted to sell those
warm cookies.
Despite overwhelming advice to the contrary, Fields borrowed $50,000
from her husband and opened Mrs. Fields’ Chocolate Chippery in a re-
vamped arcade of specialty shops in Palo Alto, California, in 1977. Cus-
tomer reception was so bad she had to take her first batches of cookies out
into the street and give them away. But that’s all it took. People were
hooked on the large, warm, high-quality cookie that was served over a nap-
kin by smiling, friendly people.
By 1981 there were 14 Mrs. Fields Cookies stores, followed by a flurry
of new store openings. But, the growth took its toll. In 1988 the company
was forced to close 97 stores and posted a $19 million net loss for the year.
After refocusing its strategy, the company posted a profit the next year and
opened 35 stores in 1990.
Today there are more than 650 Mrs. Fields locations in the United States
and over 65 international locations in 11 different countries.
William Henry (Bill) Gates, III, cofounder of Microsoft, Inc., was born in
1955 in Seattle, Washington. As a youth, he was nicknamed “Trey” because
of the III following his name. Gates became engrossed with computers at a
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
262

very young age—as young as 12. He and a group of students, which in-
cluded future partner Paul Allen, started the Lakeside (School) Program-
ming Group. They soon started cutting classes and hanging out at the
school’s computer center. They even raided the garbage cans of nearby
CCC (Computer Center Corporation) in search of information on the latest
technology. Gates relates, “Paul [Allen] would hoist me up on the garbage
cans and I’d get the notes out with the coffee grounds on them and study the
operating system.”27
At the age of 14, Gates joined Allen once again in a venture—this time to
develop a traffic-counting system. Gates was made president of Traf-O-
Data, which had earned $20,000 before its customers learned that the com-
pany’s employees were still in high school. At that point, Traf-O-Data’s
business declined. Gates graduated from high school in 1973 and enrolled
at Harvard University as a prelaw major.
In 1975 Paul Allen read an article in Popular Electronics about the Altair
8800, the world’s first commercially available microcomputer, which was
manufactured by MITS. Allen immediately contacted his old friend Gates
and suggested he leave Harvard and collaborate with him in developing an
operating system for the 8800. Gates agreed, “We realized that the revolu-
tion might happen without us. After we saw that article, there was no ques-
tion of where our life would focus.”28
Gates joined Allen in Albuquerque, New Mexico, in June 1975, at which
time they established a partnership known as Microsoft. Not only did Mi-
crosoft sell its operating system to MITS, but it also sold the program to
emerging hardware companies like Apple and Commodore. In 1977 Tandy
Corporation hired Microsoft to develop software for its Radio Shack com-
puters, and in 1980 IBM contacted the company about developing an oper-
ating system for IBM’s new entry into the personal computer market. The
rest, as they say, is history.
Gates became a billionaire at the age of 31 and was declared the wealth-
iest man in America in 1999.
Earl Gilbert Graves, founder, publisher, and editor of Black Enterprise is
also president and CEO of Earl G. Graves, Ltd., parent corporation of Earl
G. Graves Publishing Company. Graves was born in New York City in
1935 and grew up in Brooklyn with his three younger siblings. Graves at-
tended Morgan State University, where he established himself as an entre-
preneur with various ventures, including selling flowers the week of
T H E  G U R U S
263

homecoming. After graduating with a bachelor’s degree in economics in
1957, Graves entered the army and rose to the rank of captain. He was a
member of the 19th Special Forces Group, the Green Berets.
After marrying in 1960, Graves left the military and returned to Brook-
lyn. He was an immediate success at real estate, selling nine houses the first
three months on the job. In addition, he served as commissioner for the
local office of the Boy Scouts and did volunteer work for the Democratic
Party in New York.
While organizing a Christmas party for underprivileged children in
1964, Graves met Senator Robert Kennedy. He later joined the senator’s
staff as an administrative assistant. Graves describes this experience thus:
“Over the next three years, I received an education in the use of power and
money in this country. . . . For the first time in my life, I was exposed to the
white power elite and how it operated. . . . I saw firsthand what sort of free-
dom could be had with wealth and power. I became even more determined
to claim at least some of it.”29
Following Kennedy’s assassination in 1968, Graves started a consulting
business for black-owned businesses and began to consider the possibility
of starting a magazine targeted at helping African Americans start their own
business. With a $150,000 loan—made under a minority economic devel-
opment program—and the support of several well-known black leaders,
Graves faced the last big hurdle in starting his magazine. He knew he had to
get white business owners to advertise in his magazine. His strategy for
dealing with that was to emphasize “the green side of black,” that is, the po-
tential earnings from advertising to a black audience.
The first issue of Black Enterprise went to print in August 1970, and the
magazine was showing a profit by its tenth issue. In June 1973 the first
Black Enterprise 100 listed the top 100 black-owned business in the coun-
try. The subscriber base grew to 300,000 by mid-1997, and the magazine
claims to have an estimated 3.1 million readers.
In addition to his publishing interests, Graves bought and sold two radio
stations and a marketing research firm. He also entered into a partnership
with “Magic” Johnson to purchase the Pepsi bottling franchise in the Wash-
ington DC area. In 1997 Graves teamed with the Travelers Group to estab-
lish an $11 million fund for minority businesses.
Robert Greenberg, cofounder of L.A. Gear, was born in 1940 and raised in
Boston, Massachusetts. After graduating from high school, he attended
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
264

beauty school in Los Angeles and developed a fondness for the LA mys-
tique of sun and surf. Greenberg returned to Boston and opened five hair sa-
lons, which he sold for what he described as “more money than I had ever
seen in my life.”30 He sold wigs for a while and then jumped on the mid-
1970s jeans bandwagon, selling his own line of jeans.
Greenberg returned to California in 1979 to pursue a new entrepreneu-
rial venture. He saw an opportunity in the roller-skating craze of the day
and opened a store that rented and sold skates. He even started building his
own line of skates from sneakers. When the skating fad cooled, he saw
another opportunity in the popular movie character “E.T.” In 90 days,
Greenberg grossed $3 million by selling shoelaces with the character’s
image on them.
In 1983 Greenberg opened a shop on Melrose Avenue in Los Angeles,
called L.A. Gear. Since he wasn’t sure which line of products—footwear,
jeans, or apparel—would sell best, he sold them all and let his customers
decide. “When shoes became the hottest sellers, Greenberg closed the store,
sold the apparel business and declared in 1984 that he was ‘officially in the
shoe business.’”31
Greenberg decided that traditional department stores were not respond-
ing to the public’s demand for the “hot” new aerobic shoes offered in ath-
letic stores. “I saw an opportunity for department stores and women’s shoe
stores to sell fashion athletic shoes,”32 he said. So he began making and
marketing “shoes for show”—athletic-type shoes decorated with buckles,
neon trims, fringe, and rhinestones. L.A. Gear’s advertising, aimed prima-
rily at young girls between the ages of 9 and 16 (the so-called Valley Girl
niche), tied the L.A. Gear name to the image of the southern California life-
style.
By the end of the first year of operation, L.A. Gear’s sales reached $11
million. In 1986 the company went public at $11.50 per share and closed
the first day at $24.75. That year also saw sales reach $36 million. Green-
berg expanded his line of products in 1987 to include infant’s wear, pushing
sales to $70.5 million. His company was named one of the best companies
in the United States by Business Week, an accomplishment that it repeated
in 1988. The year the company began trading on the New York Stock Ex-
change (1989), it was named as the exchange’s best-performing stock, with
sales of $617 million. But this success was not to last.
In September 1991, L.A. Gear shareholders approved the sale of 34 per-
cent of the company’s stock. Shortly afterward, Greenberg stepped down as
T H E  G U R U S
265

president but remained chairman and CEO. By 1998 L.A. Gear had filed
Chapter 11 and Greenberg had moved on to a new venture—Skeechers
U.S.A., another footwear manufacturer.
Jerry Greenfield, cofounder of Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream, was born in Brook-
lyn, New York, in 1951. He attended public school in Merrick, Long Island,
where he met future business partner Ben Cohen.
Greenfield enrolled as a premed student at Oberlin College in Ohio.
While attending Oberlin, he worked as an ice-cream scooper in the school
cafeteria. After graduating from Oberlin, Greenfield applied to and was re-
jected by two medical schools, so he took a position as a lab technician.
Following another medical school rejection in 1974, he moved to North
Carolina with his girlfriend. After two years in North Carolina, Greenfield
returned to New York and moved in with roommate and old friend Ben
Cohen. Three years later, Ben & Jerry’s was born. (For more information
on the evolution of the company, see Ben Cohen’s biography.)
Today, Jerry Greenfield is the chairperson of the board of Ben & Jerry’s.
Bud Hadfield is the founder of Kwik Kopy.
A 1995 article in Franchising World sums up Bud Hadfield’s life as fol-
lows: “Career-wise, Hadfield ‘walked’ for a good while before his franchis-
ing career took flight. He was a high school dropout labeled ‘rebellious’ by
administrators at Cranston (Rhode Island) High. By age 24, he had rough-
housed his way through the Merchant Marine and gone through myriad
business projects including selling eggs, pig farming, and operating an ice
cream parlor, gas station, frozen food business, fireworks stand and person-
nel agency.”33
But in 1948 Hadfield followed his brother to Houston where the pair
scraped together $250 of the $1,000 they needed to buy a small print shop.
The balance they financed. Bud eventually bought out his brother and
struggled to keep the small business going. Then in 1966 his life took a dra-
matic turn.
Hadfield attended a demonstration of a new camera that transferred a
photographed image onto a printing plate. He recognized the potential for
quick, low-cost printing and bought one of the cameras. It was the first step
in starting the company he called Instant Print—changed to Kwik Kopy
after threats of a lawsuit over the name. He also decided to franchise the
concept.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
266

By 1969 Hadfield had opened 12 Kwik Kopy centers and was showing a
profit. By 1977 there were 500 domestic franchises and the company ex-
panded to Britain, where they were named Kall Kwik. Today, there are
Kwik Kopy centers in 20 countries.
In March 1992, Hadfield formed the International Center for Entrepre-
neurial Development, which is an alliance for all of his other printing op-
erations—Cypress Publishing, American Wholesale Thermographers and
Canadian Wholesale Thermographers, The Inkwell, and Copy Club. He
stopped opening more Kwik Kopy centers when their numbers topped
1,000. According to Hadfield, “Our goal isn’t to go on to two thousand, but
to be sure that the thousand we have are strong and successful.”34
Wilson Harrell, founder of almost one hundred companies and a columnist,
was born in Georgia about 1919. During the Great Depression, he was a
hobo and rode the rails. Later, he was a World War II fighter pilot and re-
ceived the Purple Heart, the Air Medals with four Oak Leaves, and the
Presidential Citation.
After the war Harrell started Wilson Harrell & Company, which distrib-
uted Kraft products to the huge military PX market. The company grew to
$200 million in sales, but Harrell soon became bored with it. He sold the
distribution company and bought the manufacturer of a household cleaner
called Formula 409 for $30,000. Through some brilliant marketing ma-
neuvers, Harrell went head-to-head with consumer-products giant Procter
& Gamble and won the battle. He eventually sold the company to Clorox
for $7 million and used the funds to purchase 60-food brokerage compa-
nies, with total sales exceeding $500 million.
In the mid-1960s, Harrell and two partners—David Woodstock and tele-
vision personality Art Linkletter—formed Harrell, Woodstock, & Linkletter.
Harrell and his partners “learned a lot and had a lot of fun”; Harrell defined
“fun” as “working 80 hours a week, not sleeping, begging for money, fight-
ing with suppliers, hating bankers.”35 He started or bought almost one hun-
dred companies and turned around a few others. He also suffered some co-
lossal failures, like Toasta Pizza, a pizza that baked in the toaster but melted
all over everything. Then there were the giant, one-pound shrimp that died
en masse just as they were supposed to go to market.
In 1995 and 1996 Harrell was named America’s number-one columnist
by The American Society of Business Press editors for his monthly column
in Success Magazine. He lectured at Wharton Business School at the Uni-
T H E  G U R U S
267

versity of Pennsylvania, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
and Emory University. He is a past publisher of Inc. Magazine and the
founder/chairman emeritus of the Council of Growing Companies. He also
wrote a regular column for the Atlanta Business Chronicle.
Harrell was described by Success Magazine’s Scott DeGarmo as “an ir-
reverent, colorful, cigar-loving, brandy-sniffing, yarn-spinning, poker-
playing, country-bred master of one-up-manship [who] has little use for
piety or sanctimoniousness.”36 For example, Harrell liked to invoke “The
Entrepreneur’s Prayer”—“Good Lord, please let me find some way to com-
pete with those stupid asses.”37 He also believed that entrepreneurs should
have their own national anthem and that it should be the Frank Sinatra song
“My Way.”
Harrell died at the age of 78 in December 1997 from lung cancer.
Frank Hickingbotham, founder of TCBY (This Can’t Be Yogurt), was born
in McGehee, Arkansas, in 1936. He attended the University of
Arkansas–Monticello, where he received a bachelor’s degree in business.
He then returned to McGehee to run an insurance agency.
In the late 1960s, Hickingbotham and a group of investors purchased an
AQ Chicken franchise. Hickingbotham later bought the franchisor com-
pany, then sold it in 1976 and bought Dallas-based Olde Tyme Foods.
When he grew tired of commuting between Dallas and Little Rock, Hick-
ingbotham started looking for a business closer to home.
It was Hickingbotham’s wife, Georgia, who found his next venture. She
invited her husband to join her for lunch at Neiman Marcus in Dallas. She
wanted him to taste an unusual frozen yogurt dessert, but Hickingbotham
did not like yogurt and resisted the idea. Nonetheless, to satisfy his wife, he
agreed to taste the dessert, and as legend has it, he exclaimed, “This Can’t
Be Yogurt.”
The couple contacted the yogurt manufacturer and arranged to purchase
and distribute the product through a single store, which would be manned
by their son. The product proved to be so popular, however, that they soon
opened two more “This Can’t Be Yogurt” stores and put them in the charge
of their two sons “I decided to franchise when I ran out of relatives,” Hick-
ingbotham quipped.38 He started franchising in 1982, one store at a time,
primarily to friends and customers.
In 1984, the same year the company went public, it opened its one-
hundredth shop and by 1988 had 1,000 locations. During the next 10 years, the
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
268

company expanded internationally, cobranded with companies like Subway,
Nathan’s, and Host Marriott, and expanded its product lines to include juices.
In 1998 the company had approximately three thousand locations worldwide.
Soichiro Honda, cofounder of Honda Motor Company, was born in 1906 in
the remote Japanese province of Hamamatsu. He was the first of nine chil-
dren born to a poor blacksmith, five of whom died from malnutrition before
reaching maturity. Honda showed an early aptitude for the mechanical and
learned bicycle repair from his father, but he did not fare so well in his for-
mal schooling. He managed to graduate from elementary school in 1922,
completing only the tenth grade, then accepted an apprenticeship in a
Tokyo auto-repair shop. After six years of apprenticeship, he borrowed the
money to open a repair shop in his home town and received the first of his
numerous patents—for the design of metal spokes to replace wooden ones
in automobile wheels.
In 1938 Honda was working day and night to develop a cast piston ring
for the Toyota Corporation. He had invested all of his money—even pawned
his wife’s jewelry to raise more—to finance the endeavor, but Toyota re-
jected the first batch of rings. It took two more years to perfect his design, by
which time Japan was gearing up for war. When he was ready to build his
piston-ring plant, Honda could not get access to cement, so he and his men
learned how to make their own. Honda’s product was in such demand in
wartime Japan that Toyota advanced him $260,000 of badly needed working
capital, and Honda began to train women to replace his male workers. As
David Silver describes in Entrepreneurial Megabucks, “His factories were
bombed out twice, but after each attack, Honda rushed out to pick up the
extra gasoline tanks U.S. fighters threw away as they flew by. Honda called
these cans ‘Truman’s gifts,’ because they provided raw materials for his
manufacturing process. When an earthquake finally leveled his factory,
Honda sold his piston-ring operation to Toyota Corporation for $125,000.”39
After the war, the gasoline shortage in Japan made it impossible to get
around. Honda found it so frustrating, he attached a small motor to his bi-
cycle, and he was soon overwhelmed by the demand for his new invention.
When he ran out of gasoline-powered motors for his new motorized bicycle,
he developed one that ran on pine resin. As he described, “We squeezed the
resin from the pine root then mixed it with gasoline bought on the black
market. The mixture gave off such a stench of turpentine that I could insist
we were violating no gasoline controls by operating the motorbike.”40
T H E  G U R U S
269

In 1948 Honda took the income from his motorbikes and, along with Takeo
Fujisawa, founded the Honda Motor Company. Their initial investment of
$3,200 was not adequate to get the company going, so Fujisawa decided to
go directly to potential customers for funds. Five thousand dealers anted up
the necessary funds, and Honda was off and running. Initially, only hard-
core motorcyclists were interested in Honda’s cycle, but a brilliant market-
ing campaign featuring the slogan “You meet the nicest people on a Honda”
captured the casual, leisure-time rider. By 1965, 50 percent of the motor-
cycles sold in the United States were Hondas, and the company’s two-year-
old car business was beginning to establish itself as the producer of a su-
perefficient, environmentally friendly automobile.
During his lifetime, Honda was responsible for some four-hundred fifty
inventions and more than one-hundred fifty patents. He received honorary
doctorates from Michigan Technical University and Ohio State University
and he also won the Japanese Blue Ribbon in 1952. Honda died on August 5,
1991, in Japan.
H.Wayne Huizenga, founder of Waste Management, Inc., was born in 1939
in Evergreen Park, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago. He was raised in a “strict
and disciplined” environment “with old-fashioned, workingman’s val-
ues.”41 His family regularly attended the Dutch Christian Reformed Church
and lived its rigorous precepts.
In 1953 the Huizenga family moved to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, where
Wayne attended and graduated from the private Pine Crest School. After
graduation he worked as a bulldozer driver, attended Calvin College in
Grand Rapids, Michigan, for three semesters, served briefly in the U.S.
Army, then returned to Florida to drive a garbage truck in Pompano Beach.
In 1962 Huizenga followed in the footsteps of his paternal grandfather,
who owned a garbage-collection business in Chicago, and started his own
company—Southern Sanitation Service—with a single truck and $500
worth of accounts. “He collected trash from 2:00 A.M. until noon and then
canvassed the neighborhood door-to-door to solicit new business. ‘I didn’t
know anything about the business. . . . I just worked hard and gave good
service. If I was late picking up the garbage, the customer would call me at
home to complain about the driver. I was the driver.’”42
By the late 1960s, Huizenga was operating 20 garbage trucks up and
down the East Coast of Florida, as far south as Key West, and he had be-
come a millionaire. In 1968 he established Waste Management through the
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
270

merger of his company with three Chicago companies, including one that
was headed by a cousin, Dean Buntrock. Buntrock brought with him the
idea of creating a nationwide sanitation company, and Huizenga made it
happen. They took Waste Management public in 1971 and the next year
bought 90 competing companies. By the early 1980s, the company became
the biggest of its kind in the world, with revenues of more than $1 billion,
and Huizenga was becoming bored with his deskbound job. He retired in
1984 but remained the major stockholder in the company.
Huizenga soon tired of retirement and began using his earnings from
Waste Management to buy a plethora of small businesses, hotels, and office
buildings. Tagged as a “deal junkie” by an associate, Huizenga bought
more than one hundred businesses, which were generating $100 million in
annual revenues by the end of 1986. In 1987 a Waste Management execu-
tive introduced Huizenga to a Dallas-based chain of video-rental stores
known as Blockbuster Video. Within a week, Huizenga and two partners
bought almost 35 percent of Blockbuster for $18 million, and Huizenga
soon took over as chairman. By the end of 1991, Blockbuster had more than
two thousand locations, and in 1993 revenues reached $2.2 billion. The
next year, Viacom purchased Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation for
$7.6 billion.
Huizenga’s interests were not restricted to garbage and videos. In 1990
he began purchasing interest in professional sports teams, starting with a 15
percent share in the Miami Dolphins. The next year, he successfully bid for
a National League baseball franchise—the Florida Marlins—and in 1992
he won a franchise for a National Hockey League expansion team, the Flor-
ida Panthers.
Through it all, however, Huizenga maintained, “I’d rather build a com-
pany than manage one.”43 In May 1995, he gave up his positions at Block-
buster and assumed the responsibilities as chairman and CEO of Republic
Waste Industries, Inc.
Huizenga has received many honors, including the Entrepreneur of the
Year award from the Wharton School, CEO of the Year bronze award from
Financial World magazine, and a Horatio Alger Award.
Masaru Ibuka, cofounder of Sony Corporation (originally Tokyo Tsushin
Kogyo [Tokyo Telecommunications Company]), was born in 1908 in west-
ern Japan’s Nikko City. He graduated from the Waseda University School
of Science and Engineering in 1933 and, failing the entry exam for lifetime
T H E  G U R U S
271

employment at Toshiba, joined the staff of the Naval Research Center,
where he met his future partner, Akio Morita.
After the war, Ibuka found work repairing radios. Morita and he also de-
veloped and produced a line of automatic rice cookers. Unfortunately,
many of the cookers burned the rice, so they were forced to look for other
opportunities. They sold Morita’s truck to get enough capital to form Tokyo
Telecommunications Engineering Company (later renamed Sony Corpora-
tion) in 1946. (See the biography of Akio Morita for more detailed infor-
mation on the evolution of the Sony Corporation.)
Ibuka served as president of Sony from 1950 to 1971 and as chairman
from 1971 to 1976. He died in Tokyo on December 19, 1989, at the age
of 89.
Edgar Waldo (Billy) Ingram, cofounder of White Castle, was born in Lead-
ville, Colorado, in 1880, “in a two-room slab house roofed with tin cans.”44
His father held a variety of jobs and moved his family from Colorado to
Nebraska and then to Missouri. He finally bought a hand laundry in St. Jo-
seph, Missouri, where young Billy worked until he graduated from high
school.
After high school, Billy moved to Omaha and worked for five years as a
reporter and an editor for the Omaha Bee. Leveraging this experience, In-
gram eventually moved to a job at the Omaha Excelsior, for which he did
reporting, editing, bookkeeping, sales of advertising, and even the printing
of the paper. In 1905 he found a job with R.G. Dun and Company (later
Dun and Bradstreet) as a traveling agent based in Wichita. Two years later
he cofounded the firm of Ingram, Yankey and Company and spent the next
13 years building successful partnerships in insurance, oil, and real estate.
No one knows exactly how Billy Ingram met Walt Anderson, but in 1921
they entered into a partnership that would change the future of fast food in
America. As David Hogan describes in Selling ’Em By the Sackful:
Distinguishing Walt Anderson’s business [White Castle] from . . . other up-
start competitors is where Billy Ingram made a profound difference. He
brought to the partnership a sound understanding of the financial world
and a vision for growth and expansion. As soon as Ingram entered the busi-
ness in 1921, he implemented many changes in both the company’s philoso-
phy and its operation. . . . Ingram intended to repackage Anderson’s existing
operation completely. He first selected both a new company name and a
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
272

symbolic architecture.Accordingly, the Anderson-Ingram partnership was
legally organized in March under the name of the White Castle System of
Eating Houses. Ingram later explained that the rationale for this new name
was to convey a more positive image of their business, with “White” signi-
fying purity and “Castle” signifying strength, stability, and permanence.45
F. Kenneth (Ken) Iverson, is former president, chairman, and CEO of Nucor
Corporation.
When Iverson joined Nucor Corporation (then named Nuclear Corpora-
tion) in 1962, the company did not manufacture any steel. By 1998 it was
the second-largest steelmaker in the United States, second only to USX’s
U.S. Steel Group. Iverson, who received a master’s degree in mechanical
engineering from Purdue University, was hired to run Nucor’s newly ac-
quired unit, Vulcraft Corporation, which manufactured construction joists.
In 1966 Iverson convinced the board of directors to invest in steelmaking,
so the company could save money by producing its own steel for joist fab-
rication. Under Iverson’s leadership, Nucor’s sales went from $17.5 million
in 1964 to $4.18 billion in 1997—a 23,811 percent increase.
Steven Paul Jobs, cofounder of Apple Computer, Inc., and cofounder of
NeXT, was adopted in February 1955, shortly after his birth, by Paul and
Clara Jobs. The youngster exhibited an early interest in electronics and
while in high school attended lectures at the nearby Hewlett-Packard plant
in Palo Alto, California. He attended Reed College in Portland, Oregon, for
one semester, then dropped out of school and immersed himself in philoso-
phy. According to one biographer, he “meditated, learned the I Ching, ex-
perimented with psychedelic drugs, and became a vegetarian.”46
In 1974 Jobs took a job with Atari, Inc., where he worked on the early com-
puter game Breakout just long enough to finance a trip to India. After shaving
his head and backpacking through India, he returned to California where he
“capped off his spiritual journey with a sojourn at a farm commune.”47
Jobs joined a local group of computer enthusiasts, who called themselves
the Homebrew Computer Club, in 1975. The acknowledged genius of this
Palo Alto group was a Hewlett-Packard employee named Stephen Wozniak,
whom Jobs convinced to join him in a business venture. With a total of
$1,300, which they acquired by selling Jobs’s Volkswagen microbus and
Wozniak’s Hewlett-Packard calculator, the pair set out to design and build
what would become the Apple I computer—named for a summer Jobs had
T H E  G U R U S
273

spent working in an apple orchard. In 1976, the partners sold 600 com-
puters, grossing $774,000. The next year they introduced the enormously
popular Apple II, a user-friendly computer that came equipped with color
graphics, a keyboard, and a power supply. Within three years, the company
earned $139 million, which was a 700 percent growth in revenues. When
Apple went public in 1980, the stock closed after the first day at $29 per
share, setting Apple’s market value at $1.2 billion and making the 25-year-
old Jobs a multimillionaire ($239 million to be exact).
Jobs and Wozniak’s next offering, the LISA, was less successful than it
predecessor, but the Apple Macintosh, released in 1984, eventually became
another smash hit. At the same time, sales of Apple products began to slow
and Jobs often clashed with the company’s board of directors. Eventually,
he was removed from the board.
Late in 1984, Jobs took part of the $100 million he earned from selling
his Apple stock and started another company, NeXT. He intended to build
the ultimate personal computer and poured himself and his money into the
project. He and his team of developers created a new and innovative oper-
ating system, named NeXTStep, which made their computers easy to use
and easy to program. Jobs hoped that NeXTStep would compete with Mi-
crosoft’s MS-DOS and Windows and even convinced IBM to license his
operating system for their PCs. The deal with IBM never fully materialized
because, as explained by a NeXT cofounder: “[Jobs] got afraid that IBM
was going to take away some of NeXT’s hardware business. So he kept
control over the development of NeXTStep, and that eliminated the chance
that IBM would back it because IBM will not ship a product that they
cannot at least shape the future of.”48
The NeXT computer was introduced in October 1989, but despite its
sleek styling, optical-disk drive, enhanced video monitor, and CD-quality
music, it was a phenomenal flop. Production of the units stopped in Febru-
ary, 1993. NeXT changed its focus from hardware to software, and Jobs
turned his attention to another company he had purchased from filmmaker
George Lucas in 1986, Pixar Animation Studios. Jobs sold a three-film deal
to Disney, the first of which was the 1995 blockbuster Toy Story, which
grossed $38 million. Pixar went public on November 29, 1995, at $22 per
share and closed at $39, making Jobs’s personal worth almost $1.17 billion.
Shortly afterward, Apple bought NeXT. They rehired Jobs as an adviser to
the CEO and reappointed him to the board.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
274

In mid-1997 Jobs agreed to “assume an expanded role as a key adviser to
Apple’s board and executive management team,”49 after which the com-
pany appeared to be reinvigorated. An alliance with Microsoft provided a
much-needed influx of capital to finance the production of new product
lines like the Power Mac, PowerBook, and iMac. After the company posted
a profit for the third consecutive quarter in mid-1998, an Apple executive
proclaimed, “Apple is back.”50
Howard Dearing Johnson, founder of Howard Johnson Company, was born
in 1897. He entered his first retail business after returning from France and
World War I. After Johnson’s father, John Hays Johnson, died, Howard in-
herited both a cigar store and his father’s debts. He ran the cigar store until
1924, then liquidated it—although he couldn’t liquidate the $10,000 debt.
Johnson’s next retail attempt was a run-down drugstore near the railroad
station in Wollaston, Massachusetts. When the owner died, his heir offered the
store and its $28,000 in debts to Johnson in exchange for $2,000 in working
capital. So in 1924, Johnson started his first food business, complete with soda
fountain, candy counter, tobacco, and newspaper stand. Initially, the news-
paper stand supported the rest of the operation, grossing $30,000 per year and
employing 75 delivery boys. Then Johnson bought an ice-cream recipe from a
German pushcart vendor for $300. The essence of the peddler’s secret was that
it doubled the usual amount of butterfat in the ice cream and used only natural
flavorings. Johnson began cranking out ice cream in his basement, using an
old hand-cranked freezer, and by 1928 he was grossing about $240,000 from
ice cream sold in the store and on nearby beaches.
Johnson began to open ice-cream stands in the Boston area and soon
had a dozen stands that also offered “grilled-in-butter frankforts.” He con-
tinued to expand the number of flavors of ice cream he offered, eventually
topping out at 28. Then in 1929, he convinced a family friend, Reginald
Sprague, to open a quality restaurant and ice-cream stand on Cape Cod—
the first Howard Johnson’s restaurant. Sprague agreed to sell Howard
Johnson’s ice cream exclusively and “to buy other foodstuffs that Johnson
could produce. As long as his name and design were to be used, Johnson
was to set the standard for all food products used in the restaurant. This
agreement served as a precedent for franchise arrangement that Howard
Johnson Company [the pioneer in restaurant franchising] has maintained
with restaurant owners.”51
T H E  G U R U S
275

By 1940 Johnson had 135 profitable restaurants scattered along the en-
tire East Coast of the United States, and he became a millionaire. He con-
trolled the quality of the food served in his franchises, preparing and pro-
cessing it in centrally located, company-operated facilities and then
shipping it to the restaurants for final preparation. His post–World War II
marketing strategy targeted vacationing families by offering simple but
high-quality food, insisting on immaculate cleanliness, hiring courteous
staff, and providing special accommodations for children.
By 1951 the company operated or licensed 300 restaurants, with annual
sales of $31,880,000. Those numbers grew to 450 restaurants and over $66
million in revenues by 1956. During the intervening years the company
opened a chain of steak houses, known as Red Coach Grills, and began
franchising motor lodges, the first of which opened in Savannah, Georgia,
in 1954.
In 1959 Johnson decided to turn the reigns of the company over to his
son, Howard Brennan Johnson. However, the elder Johnson continued to
scout out new locations for restaurants and motel sites and continued to
enjoy the products of his $200 million-a-year empire. “He never lost his
taste for the ice cream that made him famous. It was his favorite dish. He
kept at least 10 flavors in the freezer of his Manhattan penthouse. Every day
of his life Howard Johnson enjoyed at least one ice cream cone.”52
Herbert David (Herb) Kelleher, cofounder of Southwest Airlines, was born
in Camden, New Jersey, in 1931. He received a bachelor of arts (cum laude)
from Wesleyan University in 1953 and a law degree (cum laude) from New
York University in 1956. He passed the bar in New Jersey in 1957 and in
Texas in 1962, after clerking in the New Jersey Supreme Court from 1956 to
1959. He worked with a series of law partnerships before joining forces with
Rollin King to start “a different kind of airline.” According to the Southwest
Airlines Web site, “They began with one simple notion: If you get pas-
sengers to their destinations when they want to get there, on time, at the low-
est possible fares, and make darn sure they have a good time doing it, people
will fly your airline.”53 And apparently that’s true because since their maiden
voyage in 1971, Southwest has become the fifth-largest major airline in the
United States, flying some 52 million passengers per year.
Kelleher, who has served as general counsel, president, chairman, and
CEO of the airline, has received a number of honors and awards over the
years including CEO of the Year by Financial World in 1982 and 1990, Best
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
276

Chief Executive Regional Airline Industry by Wall Street Transcript in
1982, Texas Business Hall of Fame in 1988, and Master Entrepreneur
award by Inc. Magazine in 1991.
Philip H.(Phil) Knight, cofounder of Nike, Inc., was born in 1938 in Oregon.
“Buck,” as he was nicknamed, enjoyed running as a youth, but few people
at the time considered that a real sport. He continued running at the Univer-
sity of Oregon, where he met running coach Bill Bowerman. The coach,
who was known as the “Professor of Competitive Responses,” was con-
stantly trying to make shoes lighter because, he reasoned, “carrying one
extra ounce for a mile was equivalent to carrying something like an extra
thousand pounds in the last 150 yards [of a race].”54 Knight often played
guinea pig for Bowerman’s experiments.
Knight graduated from the University of Oregon with a degree in ac-
counting in 1959 and then enrolled in the Stanford University business
school. He is said to have had an epiphany when one professor told his stu-
dents to write a term paper about something they liked. Knight, of course,
thought of running, but he reconsidered his favorite sport in light of the way
Japanese manufacturers had been able to produce inexpensive cars and con-
sumer electronics. His term paper explored how high-quality, low-cost
shoes could be made using cheap Asian labor.
When Knight graduated from Stanford in 1964 with an MBA, he and
former coach Bowerman split the cost of a shipment of shoes manufactured
by the Onitsuka Tiger Company, which also produced knock-off Adidas
shoes. The new partners peddled their Blue Ribbon Sports shoes out of the
trunk of Knight’s car. Knight also worked as an accountant and taught at
Portland State University to supplement his income from the fledgling shoe
business. By 1972 shoe sales reached $3 million, and Knight decided that
he was ready to design his own line. He paid an art student at Portland State
$35 to create the company’s logo—the swoosh symbol—and an employee
supplied the brand name, Nike, the name of the Greek mythological winged
goddess of victory.
The first Nikes went on sale in 1972. Over the next few years, the com-
bination of innovative designs, athlete endorsements, and a new fitness
craze skyrocketed Nike to the top. For example, when tennis player John
McEnroe hurt his ankle, he started wearing Nike’s three-quarter top shoe.
Sales for that style went from ten thousand pairs to over a million pairs in
just a few months. In fact, by 1980 Nike was producing about a hundred
T H E  G U R U S
277

styles of shoes for 12 different sports and reached sales of $270 million. But
Nike made one serious misstep. The company had concentrated so much on
designing shoes for sports professionals that it missed the emerging market
for stylish aerobic shoes. By 1986 Reebok had captured that market and
taken over the position of highest-grossing shoe company. It would take
Nike four years to regain its position as number one. In 1996 Nike showed
net profits of $550 million on sales totaling $6.5 billion, making Knight the
sixth-richest person in the United States.
C. James (Jim) Koch, founder of Boston Beer Company, is a sixth-generation
brewmaster. His great-great grandfather, Louis Koch, who originally
brewed beer in Germany, founded a brewery in St. Louis in 1860, brewing
Louis Koch Lager. Although one of the largest breweries in St. Louis, it was
eventually eclipsed by neighboring giant Anheuser-Busch. Jim Koch’s
great grandfather, Charles Jerome Koch, was brewmaster at several St.
Louis breweries in the late nineteenth century, and his grandfather, Charles
Joseph Koch, who received a diploma from America’s only brewmaster’s
school, the Siebel Institute, in 1908, was in great demand at local breweries
and later invented and patented an important malt process.
Prohibition closed the doors of all breweries by the end of 1919, but
Charles Joseph Koch stayed in business by making supplies for home
brewers. When prohibition ended, he was one of the few experienced
brewers left in the United States. His son, and Jim’s father, Charles Joseph
Koch Jr., began apprenticing as a brewmaster in 1942 and received his de-
gree from the Siebel Institute in 1948. But with the advent of lighter, less-
flavorful beers produced by the large national brewers, small, specialized
breweries like the Koch’s began to close. Jim’s father left the beer business.
To his father’s dismay, Jim decided to leave his management consulting
job in 1983 and continue the family’s brewing tradition. Armed with Louis
Koch’s recipe, Jim began producing test batches. He changed the name of
the family beer from Louis Koch Lager to Samuel Adams Boston Lager. In
April 1985, Koch introduced his beer to Boston, the company’s new home.
Six weeks later Samuel Adams Boston Lager was voted the Best Beer in
America.
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s Corporation, was born in 1902 in Chi-
cago. “When I was a kid, I saw my dad struggling to make ends meet on a
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
278

meager salary,” Kroc later recalled.55 So, at an early age, he resolved to
make money—lots of it.
Kroc attended public school in Oak Park, Illinois, a Chicago suburb,
until he was a high school sophomore. At 15, he falsified his age, joined the
Red Cross ambulance corps, and became an ambulance driver during World
War I. (He was in the same company as Walt Disney, who was only 16
years old at the time.)
After the war, Kroc returned to high school but dropped out again to be-
come a jazz pianist. His early career as a musician, however, was cut short
by the realization that marriage and a musician’s hours don’t mix. He took
a more traditional job as a salesman for the Lily-Tulip Cup Company for a
while and then became musical director for radio station WGES in Chi-
cago. (One of his discoveries was a song-and-dance team that later became
famous as Amos ’n’Andy.)
Kroc was drawn to the promise of wealth from Florida real estate during
the land boom of the 1920s. He attempted to sell property in Fort Lauder-
dale but was caught in the 1926 collapse in the real estate market. He was
so broke he had to play piano in a nightclub to send his wife and daughter
back to Chicago by train. He followed them in a Model T Ford: “I will
never forget that drive as long as I live. I was stone broke. I didn’t have an
overcoat, a topcoat, or a pair of gloves. I drove into Chicago on icy streets.
When I got home, I was frozen stiff, disillusioned and broke.”56
Kroc returned to his job at Lily-Tulip and in 1937 invented a machine
that could mix five milk shakes at a time. He became the exclusive distrib-
utor for the “multimixer” and started a small company to sell it.
In 1954 Kroc’s curiosity was aroused when he learned that one of his
customers was operating eight multimixers in one location. He went to see
for himself why Maurice (Mac) and Richard (Dick) McDonald needed so
many milk-shake mixers. When he arrived at their San Bernardino, Califor-
nia, restaurant, he was shocked. “They had people standing in line clamor-
ing for hamburgers. I figured that if every McDonald hamburger place had
eight Multimixers, I would get rich.”57
The McDonald brothers were not interested in expanding their operation
beyond the six franchises they had sold in California, but before he left
town, Kroc had a 99-year contract to represent McDonald’s exclusively. He
opened the first McDonald’s franchise in Des Plaines, Illinois, on April 15,
1955, followed the same year by franchises in Fresno and Reseda, Califor-
T H E  G U R U S
279

nia. By 1960 there were 228 restaurants, with annual sales in excess of $37
million.
The partnership between Kroc and the McDonald brothers was always
strained. The brothers attempted to put restrictions on the franchises that
Kroc found unacceptable, so he bought them out in 1961 for $2,700,000—
lock, stock, and Golden Arches. When he discovered that the brothers were
not willing to give up their San Bernardino store, he built a brand-new res-
taurant directly across the street. They were soon out of business.
In 1972, McDonald’s opened its two-thousandth restaurant, reported sales
in excess of $1 billion, and sold more than 10 billion hamburgers. Kroc
served as president until 1968, as chairman (1968–77), and later as senior
chairman (1977–84) of McDonald’s board of directors. He also owned the
San Diego Padres baseball team from 1974 to 1979. Kroc died in San Diego
on January 14, 1984.
Edwin Herbert Land, founder of the Polaroid Corporation, was born in 1909
in Bridgeport, Connecticut. He became interested in photography as a child
and later explained, “To a child, a photograph gives a permanent thing that
is both outside himself and part of himself.”58 His first photograph was of
the family dog, which was always running away. The photograph, he ex-
plained, made a difference, “There [in the picture] I had him. He couldn’t
get away.”59
Land attended the Norwich Academy, where he showed an aptitude for
physics. After graduating in 1926, he entered Harvard University, taking an
18-month sabbatical to continue his research on the polarization phenom-
ena. He returned to Harvard for a while but left before graduation to join
George Wheelwright III, a physics professor at Harvard, in establishing the
Land-Wheelwright Laboratories in 1932.
In 1934 Land-Wheelwright manufactured the first polarizer for commer-
cial uses, the Polaroid J-sheet. The next year, Eastman Kodak began using
polarized filters in its cameras, and in 1936 the American Optical Company
began marketing polarized sunglasses.
Land founded the Polaroid Corporation in 1937, with financial backing
by a number of Wall Street businessmen, just in time to become a major
contributor to the United States’ war efforts. Land, who eventually patented
more than five hundred inventions, developed a number of weapons im-
provements, including optical elements used in infrared night-vision instru-
ments. He consulted with the navy on guided missiles and participated in
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
280

the project to create computerized thermal homing heads for large bombs.
The company also produced filters for periscopes, range finders, aerial
cameras, goggles, and gun sights.
With the return of peace, Land was able to pursue an idea he had while
on vacation in 1943. He had taken a picture of his three-year-old daughter,
who wanted to know why she couldn’t see the picture “right now.” During
the remainder of his vacation, Land mentally designed a camera and film
that would produce an immediate photograph. He later described the
process as “cumulative creativity.” “All that we at Polaroid had learned
about making polarizers and plastics, and the properties of viscous liquids,
and the preparation of microscopic crystals . . . was preparation for that
day in which I suddenly knew how to make a one-step photographic
process.”60
Land demonstrated his photographic process to the American Optical
Society in February 1947 and released the Model 95 camera at Christmas
1948. It weighed four pounds, made sepia-toned prints, and was an imme-
diate commercial success, grossing $5 million in the first year. Polaroid in-
troduced black-and-white film in 1950, followed by faster-developing film
in 1955 and color film in 1963. When it released the “no-garbage” SX-70 in
1972, the Polaroid Company expected the same enthusiastic reception they
had gotten for their earlier products, but they sold only 700,000 of the cam-
eras. Land later explained that “several small problems for the customer,
one of them with focusing, affected the sales and that in introducing the
SX-70, the company ‘did underestimate how infinitely important a small
amount of instruction is.’”61 The SX-70 eventually lived up to its potential,
becoming a best-seller for the Polaroid Corporation.
Land retired as president in May 1975 and as CEO in 1980, although he
remained chairman of the board and continued to support Polaroid’s re-
search program as a consulting director. He received many honors and
awards, including the National Medal of Science and the Presidential
Medal of Freedom. He also received honorary doctoral degrees from Co-
lumbia, Yale, Harvard, and several other colleges and universities. He was
elected to the National Inventors Hall of Fame in 1977. Land died in 1991.
Chris Larsen, cofounder of E-Loan, holds a bachelor of science degree from
the San Francisco State University and an MBA from Stanford University.
He worked with Chevron Corporation and NASA/Ames Research before
cofounding Palo Alto Funding Group, a successful mortgage brokerage,
T H E  G U R U S
281

with Janina Pawlowski. In 1991 Larsen and Pawlowski developed the E-
Loan interface which allows mortgage customers to search an extensive da-
tabase of loan products and apply for loans.
Charles Lazarus, founder of Toys “R” Us, was born in 1923 in Washington,
D.C. His father rebuilt bicycles and sold them in the family shop. When
Charles asked his father why they didn’t sell new bicycles, his father told
him that it was because the big chain stores could sell them cheaper—an
idea the young Lazarus would remember.
After his service as a cryptographer during World War II, Lazarus took
over the family business but changed the merchandise from rebuilt bicycles
to baby furniture. The business thrived for a while, with all the returning
GIs and their brides starting families, but eventually Lazarus noticed that
families didn’t buy more than one crib. He needed to find a line of mer-
chandise that would keep customers coming back for more. In 1953 he
switched to selling toys and changed the company name to Children’s Su-
permarket, with the “r”s printed backward.
Following the lead of the superstore discounters, Lazarus promised to
undercut his competition by at least 20 percent and to have a bigger and
better selection than any other toy store. The Children’s Supermarket
thrived, but Lazarus was unhappy with the new name. He wanted a name
with shorter words so he could use larger letters on his signs. He decided on
Toys “R” Us, retaining the backward “R.”
In 1966 Lazarus sold his chain to Interstate Stores for $7.5 million but
retained a seat on the board. Although Interstate failed in 1978, Toys “R”
Us survived and regrouped under Lazarus’s leadership.
William Powell (Bill) Lear, founder of Lear, Inc., (1939), Lear Jet Corpora-
tion (1963), and Lear Motors Corporation, was born in 1902 in Hannibal,
Missouri. His parents divorced when he was six, and his mother, whom he
described as “a dominating woman with a violent temper,”62 moved him to
Chicago, where she remarried. Lear attended public school and worked
shining shoes and at other odd jobs. He was stymied in his early efforts at
inventing by the lack of funds and by his mother’s “unsympathetic atti-
tude.” “I remember working out a blueprint for my future when I was
twelve years old. I resolved first to make enough money so I’d never be
stopped from finishing anything; second, that to accumulate money in a
hurry—and I was in a hurry—I’d have to invent something that people
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
282

wanted; and third, that if I ever was going to stand on my feet, I’d have to
leave home.”63
After completing eighth grade, Lear quit school to work as a mechanic.
At 16 he lied about his age and joined the navy, where he studied radio
communications during World War I. After the war, he flew war-surplus
planes and worked as a radio engineer. During this time, he designed one of
the first nonbattery home radio receivers and the first home radio with a
built-in speaker.
In the early 1920s, Lear invented the first automobile radio, but failing to
get sufficient financial backing to produce it commercially, he sold the idea
to the Motorola Corporation in 1924. Over the next three decades, Lear
made one attempt after another at maintaining a company of his own (the
Quincy Radio Laboratory [1922], Lear Radio Laboratory [1924–1928],
Lear Developments Company [1931–1934], Lear Avia Corporation
[1934–1949]). He also invented hundreds of electronic devices, including
the first commercial radio compass for airplanes (1935) and the first light-
weight autopilot for jets (1949).
In 1939 Lear founded Lear, Inc., which produced motors and other de-
vices for the U.S. Air Force during World War II. The company’s war con-
tracts totaled $100 million. Following the war, Lear developed a miniature
autopilot for smaller fighter planes and later for jets. By 1962 Lear’s sales
reached $90 million, and the company added stereophonic sound systems
and miniature communication satellites to its product line. Lear wanted to
add small, low-priced jets as well, but the board of directors refused to sign
off on the investment. His response was to sell his share of the company for
$14,300,000 and found Lear Jet Corporation.
The first of Lear’s “baby jets” hit the market in the summer of 1963 to a
cool reception. By late 1964, Lear was forced to take his company public,
selling 500,000 shares of stock, in order to keep it afloat. The relatively low
cost of the planes began to attract attention; by mid-1966, 120 jets had been
delivered to customers.
In addition to jets, Lear Jet Corporation also manufactured gyros, autopi-
lots, compressors, and stereotape systems for cars. Lear recalls, “When the
stereo tape came along, it was a natural for cars. The trouble was size. The
experts were saying you couldn’t put eight tracks on a quarter-inch tape and
still house the entire package including a radio in no more room than that
required for the standard auto radio. Since it was ‘impossible,’ the industry
leaders stayed out. We did it.”64
T H E  G U R U S
283

A Saturday Evening Post article summarized Lear’s persona as follows:
All his life Lear has regarded himself as a rebel who despises the classical
approach.To the dismay of his business-minded directors, he will affirm his
belief that the earth is under observation by flying saucers from other plan-
ets, or predict that it may be possible someday to transport humans by
breaking them into atomic particles, transmitting the atoms over electric
waves and reassembling them at the end of the circuit. . . .When rocket ex-
presses are blue-printed, it’s a good bet that somewhere in the vanguard of
planners there will be a place for Bill Lear.65
Lear died in Reno, Nevada, on May 14, 1978.
Bernard (Bernie) Marcus, cofounder and chairman of the board of Home
Depot, was born in 1929 in Newark, New Jersey. Raised in a tenement, he
learned to survive in a tough neighborhood. During his teens, he started earn-
ing money for college by working as a waiter, busboy, and even an emcee.
Marcus graduated from Rutgers University in 1952 with a bachelor of
science degree in pharmacy. After graduating, he opened a small pharmacy,
which he later sold to the Two Guys discount chain. He took a job running
the chain’s cosmetic departments, where he first learned about the concept
of box retailing. His success in that position led to his promotion to vice
president of hard-goods merchandising and advertising for Two Guys’ par-
ent corporation, Vornado, Inc.
In 1972 Marcus left Vornado to become president and chairman of the
board of Handy Dan Home Improvement Centers, a subsidiary of the Day-
lin Corporation. It was at Daylin that Marcus began experimenting with the
concept of discounting and that he met Arthur Blank, who was the com-
pany’s comptroller. Both of them were caught in a 1978 corporate buyout,
after which they lost their jobs.
Rather than follow the corporate path once again, Marcus decided to try
to make a go of it on his own—or at least in the company of Blank and
another ousted Daylin employee, Ronald Brill. One year later, they opened
their first Home Depot store in Atlanta, Georgia, followed the same year by
a second. Since they took their company public in 1981, Home Depot’s
stock has increased more than 37,000 percent. Sales in 1999 exceeded $38
billion at more than nine hundred ninety locations. Other Home Depot
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
284

companies include EXPO Design Center, Villager’s Hardware, Home
Depot Special Order Center, and Home Depot Maintenance Warehouse.
Konosuke Matsushita, founder of Matsushita Electric Industrial Company
(makers of Panasonic, Technics, and Quasar brand products), was born in
1894 in a small Japanese farming village. He quit school at the age of nine
and left home to work as an apprentice to a hibachi maker in Osaka. A nerv-
ous and sickly youth, Matsushita was only a mediocre student. In 1910 he
joined the Osaka Electric Light Company as an employee and seven years
later started an electrical business of his own—Matsushita Electric Indus-
trial Company (MEI).
The first major success of MEI was a bicycle lamp with a new type of
battery, followed by a diversified line of batteries, radios, and related prod-
ucts. The company expanded into household appliances in the 1930s, dur-
ing which time Matsushita developed his philosophy of business and lead-
ership. Following a visit to a temple of the Tenrikyo sect, Matsushita
became nearly obsessed by the image of happy, hard-working people who
donated their time to the temple. He concluded that if a corporation could
be made meaningful like a religion, then people would be both more pro-
ductive and more satisfied.
In May 1932, Matsushita addressed the workers and executives and Mat-
sushita Electric. He reminded them of the company’s accomplishments
over the previous 15 years—280 registered patents, factories in 10 loca-
tions, and more than a thousand employees. Then he proclaimed: “This is
what the entrepreneur and the manufacturer should aim at: to make all
products as inexhaustible and as cheap as tap water. When this is realized,
poverty will vanish from the earth.”66 After 1933 MEI’s emphasis on serv-
ice, honesty, and teamwork became a source of competitive advantage. In a
1935 directive, Matsushita urged: “No matter how large Matsushita Elec-
tric might become in the future, never forget to maintain the modest attitude
of a merchant. Think of yourselves as being employed in a small store, and
carry out your work with simplicity, frugality, and humility.”67
Matsushita lost a number of factories during World War II, but he
emerged with a new vision of where he wanted to take his company. He
became convinced that he had much to learn from Europe and the United
States, and in 1951, at the age of 56, he traveled to the United States for a
three-month crash course. He subsequently built an $80 billion-a-year
T H E  G U R U S
285

(1997) home appliance and consumer electronics company, manufactur-
ing such brands as Panasonic, Technics, and Quasar.
Matsushita died on May 8, 1989.
James W. ( Jim) McLamore, cofounder of Burger King, was born in New
York City in 1926 to wealth and culture, but his world changed drastically
in the first three years of his life. His maternal grandfather died shortly after
the stock-market crash wiped out the family fortune, and his mother was
soon committed to a sanitarium, where she died in 1933. The family was
forced to sell its city townhouse and suburban home and to move to the
family farm (Edgehill) in Central Valley, New York. After his father lost his
job with Chase National Bank, the family had to sell cherished possessions
as well as 200 acres of the farm. Eventually, they began renting out their
home and bungalow to vacationers and moved into the farmhouse where
the farm manager had lived.
Jim started first grade at the age of five in the Central Valley Public
Schools. He later claimed that, because he was always younger than his
classmates, he learned to compete at an early age. He attended high school
at Mount Hermon School for Boys in Massachusetts, a nondenominational
school at which students performed many of the chores, from cleaning to
yard work to working in the dairy. McLamore recalls having a severe case
of homesickness when he arrived at Mount Hermon, but his father re-
sponded: “Jimmy, I’m not going to take you home. You are going to stay
here and tough it out, so you had better prepare yourself for it.”68 McLa-
more poured himself into his studies and athletics and began to assume
leadership roles, including being elected president of the junior and senior
classes.
While a senior, McLamore took an aptitude test that advised him to pur-
sue a business career in sales or marketing. It was no surprise to him. After
all, he had been intrigued by an Edgehill neighbor, the very wealthy Ed-
ward Henry Harriman, and had enthusiastically read the Horatio Alger sto-
ries. McLamore writes: “My goal after leaving Mount Hermon and entering
college was to ultimately build a successful business career. Quite candidly,
I hoped to get rich in the process. I was determined to succeed.”69
McLamore enrolled at Cornell University because, as a New York res-
ident, he received lower tuition. The fact that Cornell offered a business
program only in the School of Hotel Administration didn’t faze him, but the
$200 tuition was a real stumbling block. A tuition loan and a $50 scholar-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
286

ship from the American Hotel Association saved the day. McLamore ad-
mits: “I had no way of knowing in 1943 how big the hospitality industry
would become. I happened to be standing right in the path of progress,
though I didn’t realize it then.”70
After one year at Cornell, McLamore found himself eligible for the draft,
so he joined the U.S. Merchant Marine, primarily because of its relatively
high pay. He was assigned to the Naval Reserve Officer’s Training Corps at
Cornell where he could fortunately continue taking his electives at the hotel
school. McLamore was still at Cornell when the war ended, and he had met
his future wife, Nancy. The couple began their marriage when the postwar
job market was at its bleakest, but Jim finally landed a job as the food-
service director for the Wilmington, Delaware, YMCA. McLamore recalls:
“It was during my tenure as director . . . at the Wilmington YMCA that I
began to think in terms of organizing people and developing operating sys-
tems. This seemed to me the necessary first step in building a profit-making
enterprise.”71 Little did he know that this job would lead to his association
with Burger King.
McLamore had noticed the success of a 24-hour-a-day restaurant across
the street from the YMCA. The Toddle House, a clone of the highly lucra-
tive White Castle chain, was part of the trend toward short-order restau-
rants, and McLamore was convinced that he could ride this trend to suc-
cess. In 1949 he rented a shop for $300 a month and began redesigning the
interior. As McLamore described it:
I decided to make the interior of the restaurant different. . . . Instead of put-
ting in a ten-seat, straight counter, which was standard at the time, I in-
stalled a horse-shoe-shaped counter with 14 seats. And instead of having a
small space for food preparation, I designed a much larger production
area. . . . I also felt that the larger area inside the restaurant could be made
very attractive by using linoleum floor and wallpaper.This would give the
customers a pleasant view of the food preparation processes and provide a
certain amount of ambience. . . . I also installed one of the first air-
conditioning units that were just coming onto the commercial market. A
distinct competitive advantage:The Toddle House didn’t have one!72
The first restaurant, called The Colonial Inn, opened in Wilmington on
January 4, 1950. It was an immediate success, even receiving the rec-
ommendation of restaurant critic Duncan Hines. According to McLamore,
T H E  G U R U S
287

“The Colonial Inn whetted my appetite for business growth. I was anxious
to keep moving.”73 Then he met David Edgerton.
Edgerton was the sole proprietor and owner of the Insta Burger King in
Miami, Florida. McLamore was impressed with Edgerton and with his res-
taurant’s simple food-service concept—simple menu, low prices, high mar-
gins, and fast service—which could easily be expanded into a chain of res-
taurants. In 1954 McLamore and Edgerton cofounded Burger King of
Miami, Inc., which became Burger King Corporation in 1972. The com-
pany was bought by Pillsbury Company in 1967 and today has more than
10,600 locations worldwide.
Edward Miller, cofounder of Spic and Span, Inc. was born in 1907 in Cedar
Rapids, Iowa. His mother died six weeks after his birth, and his father, an
immigrant tinsmith from Poland, was forced to put young Edward and his
two-year-old sister in an orphanage for two years. When Miller was seven,
his father remarried and moved the family to Madison, Wisconsin, where
young Edward was known as a quiet and studious child who worked hard to
help support his family. According to Miller, “In high school, I used to
make and sell arm bands on a Saturday for Badgers games. I sold programs.
Then I started selling newspapers. . . . I had enough to put myself through
college from my newspaper earning.”74
While attending the University of Wisconsin, Miller met his future busi-
ness partner, Harry Plous. The two were fraternity brothers, and in 1928
Plous asked Miller if he would help out one summer in the Plous family
business—the Union Dye Works of Kenosha. After graduating with a de-
gree in marketing, Miller joined the company full time. He recalls that he
had no intention of going into the dry-cleaning business—his first love was
advertising—but the Great Depression had begun, and jobs were scarce.
His plans were to move on one day, but then he fell in love with and mar-
ried the boss’s daughter, Shirley.
In 1934 Miller opened a branch in Milwaukee, which was called Spic
and Span. In less than two years, his store overshadowed the Kenosha head-
quarters, and the entire operation was moved to Milwaukee. Miller ap-
proached the dry-cleaning business the same way he had approached other
challenges in his life, learning all he could about the business and con-
stantly innovating. He invented the “Steaming Susie,” a tailor’s dummy
with vents through which steam is forced to smooth out wrinkles from the
inside, avoiding seam impressions. He later sold the patent, but the equip-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
288

ment is still used worldwide. He also perfected a process called Aqua-
Kleen, which uses special detergents and timed cycles to clean garments
with water.
When Louis Plous died in 1950, Miller (president) and Harry Plous (vice
president) expanded the operation further. By 1959 they had 43 stores, and
they later expanded into Los Angeles, Atlanta, and Florida. They closed
these out-of-state stores in the 1980s when Spic and Span bought out one of
its largest competitors. Miller turned over the day-to-day operation of the
company and the presidency to his son Robert, but he remained actively in-
volved in the business until his death in 1999 at the age of 93.
Thomas Stephen (Tom) Monaghan, cofounder of Domino’s Pizza, was born
in 1937 in Ann Arbor, Michigan. His father died when he was only four
years old, and his mother found it difficult to deal with Tom and his
younger brother Jim. She placed them in the first of a series of foster
homes, eventually placing them in St. Joseph’s Home for Boys when Tom
was six.
Mrs. Monaghan settled in Traverse City, Michigan, and brought her two
sons home the year Tom was in sixth grade. Shortly afterward, he exhibited
his early entrepreneurial skills by growing vegetables in their backyard and
selling them door-to-door. He also caught and sold fish and sold news-
papers on street corners. Unfortunately, young Tom and his mother did not
get along very well, and she sent him to another foster home before he en-
tered eighth grade.
While attending St. Francis High School in Traverse City, Monaghan de-
cided that he wanted to become a priest, but the rigors of seminary proved
too much for him. He was expelled in less than a year.
After another altercation with his mother that resulted in his spending a
night in jail and being placed in a detention home for six months, Monag-
han went to live with an aunt and uncle in Ann Arbor. His poor performance
in high school kept him from realizing the dream of studying architecture at
the University of Michigan. Instead, he enrolled in the architectural trade
school at Ferris State College and worked a series of jobs to pay his tuition.
When his improved performance still failed to get him into the University
of Michigan, he enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps to obtain its educational
benefits. He was discharged from the marines in July 1959 with $2,000 that
he saved for tuition, but he invested his savings in a get-rich-quick scheme
and wound up broke.
T H E  G U R U S
289

Monaghan finally got his dream of attending the University of Michigan
in the fall of 1958, but he floated in and out of school, working at a variety
of odd jobs, for the next two years. Then in September 1960, his brother
called him with a business proposition.
Jim Monaghan, who was a mailman, overheard a conversation about a
pizza shop in the college town of Ypsilanti, Michigan, that was for sale. The
selling price for DomiNick’s was $500, plus the takeover of some debts,
and Jim suggested that his brother and he buy the restaurant. Tom reasoned
that he could work there at night and attend the university during the day.
The brothers gave the owner, Dominick DiVarti, $75 as a down payment
and borrowed the rest—about $900—from the post office credit union.
The partnership between Tom and his brother lasted less than a year, at
which time he exchanged the restaurant’s delivery car for Jim’s share of the
business. The pizzeria did well, primarily because of its student customers,
so Monaghan began to look into the possibility of opening a second shop in
another college town, and, with it, acquiring a new partner. Jim Gilmore
took over the operation of the original restaurant, and Monaghan opened a
new shop in Mount Pleasant, Michigan. He then opened a third shop in Ann
Arbor in 1962, another in Ypsilanti in 1963. The partnership with Gilmore
was dissolved in 1965, and Monaghan renamed his chain Domino’s. The
name “was Italian, it was unique, . . . and it was close to DomiNick’s both
in sound and in spelling, so if someone were to look up our old name in the
phone book, the new name would be in the same vicinity.”75
Monaghan believed that he could compete on the basis of quality, using
only the best ingredients, freshly made dough, and whole-milk cheeses. He
limited his menu to pizzas and introduced the concept of 30-minute deliv-
ery. In 1967 he sold his first franchise site—his second Ypsilanti store—and
opened his first out-of-state store in Vermont in 1968. By January 1969,
there were 12 stores with 12 more in development. Growth was steady at
100 stores in 1975, 200 in 1978, 500 in 1979, 2,000 by 1985, and 5,000 by
1989, with an additional 260 in other countries.
In 1989 Monaghan announced that he was handing over the presidency
of Domino’s so that he could devote more time to charities and to the
Catholic church. He continued to act as chairman and CEO until 1998,
when he sold 93 percent of the company to Bain Capital, Inc.
Robert Gerald Mondavi, founder of Robert Mondavi Winery, was born in
Virginia, Minnesota, in 1913. When he was 10 years old, his family moved
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
290

to the Napa Valley town of Lodi, California, where his father, Cesare, be-
came associated with the Sunnyhill Winery in St. Helena. Mondavi recalls,
“My father suggested I become a winemaker. It was a new industry, and I
decided to grow with it.”76 First, however, he attended Stanford University
where, in 1936, he received a bachelor’s degree in economics. After gradu-
ating, he joined his father on the production staff at the Sunnyhill Winery.
In 1943 Robert recommended that his father buy the failing Charles
Krug Winery. Cesare agreed on the condition that Robert and his younger
brother Peter work there. Peter took over production, and Robert handled
marketing and development. But the two brothers didn’t agree on the way
the company should be run. Robert wanted to grow the company rapidly,
Peter resisted, and Cesare intervened to keep the peace. Following their
father’s death, the brothers clashed, and Robert left Krug in 1965. While re-
taining 24 percent of the Krug stock, he wanted to start his own vineyard.
Mondavi started the Robert Mondavi Winery with two partners and a
total investment of $200,000. In 1969 the two partners sold their shares 
of the vineyard to Ranier Companies, a Seattle beer merchant that con-
trolled the Canadian beer manufacturer Molson. While Ranier invested
heavily in the vineyard, let Mondavi keep his name, and did little to inter-
fere with the company’s operation, Mondavi was unhappy with the fact
that he held only a 25 percent share in the company. By 1978 he was able
to orchestrate the purchase of enough shares of Ranier to control more
than 60 percent of his winery.
Mondavi approached winemaking more as an art than a science. He
wanted to enhance the subtleties in flavor that American wines lacked at
the time. Through his research and experiments, he discovered a number
of factors that effected the resulting wine, including differences in room
temperature during fermentation and the use of oak barrels rather than the
steel or redwood vats commonly used in American wineries. He also pro-
duced new classes of wines such as the chenin blanc (a sweeter pinot
blanc) and the fume blanc (a drier version of sauvignon blanc combined
with wine made from the semillon grape). Both creations became popular
sellers.
In 1978 Mondavi also forged a partnership with the Baron Philippe de
Rothschild, under which Mondavi provided the land and production facili-
ties and the baron provided the expertise of his wine master. The result was
a premium California cabernet, sold under the label Opus One. Mondavi
later brokered similar successful deals with winemakers in Chile and Italy.
T H E  G U R U S
291

In 1990 Mondavi turned operation of the winery over to his two sons,
Michael and Tim. In 1993 the company became only the third winery in
this country to offer public shares (the family retained 70 percent own-
ership) and has performed well since.
Robert Mondavi has received numerous awards, including the Medal of
Honor from L’Ordre Mondial, the Merit Award from the American Society
of Enology and Viticulture, and nine Man of the Year awards.
Akio Morita, cofounder of the Sony Corporation (originally named Tokyo
Tsushin Kogyo [Tokyo Telecommunications Company]), was born in 1921
in Kasugaya, Japan. His family were wealthy sake brewers who expected
the eldest son to take over management of the family’s brewery some day,
but Morita was only interested in electronics. He eventually convinced his
father to groom his younger brother for the brewery job, while he studied
physics at Osaka Imperial University.
When he graduated in 1944, Morita was commissioned as a lieutenant in
the Imperial Japanese Navy and was assigned as a technical engineer at the
Naval Research Center, where he met his future partner Masaru Ibuka. In
1946 Morita and Ibuka founded the Tokyo Telecommunications Company
with $500 in funds provided by the Morita family.
The electronic manufacturing company, renamed Sony 12 years later,
first produced vacuum-tube voltmeters, amplifiers, communications de-
vices, and a commercially unsuccessful tape recorder. When Morita read
about the transistors developed by Bell Laboratories, he was convinced that
he could produce a commercially successful transistorized radio. Sony sub-
sequently released the first AM transistor radio in 1955, the first pocket-
sized transistor radio in 1957, the first two-band transistor radio in 1957,
and the first FM transistor radio in 1958, followed by the introduction of an
all-transistor television set in 1959, a transistorized video tape recorder in
1960, and the first small-screen transistorized television set in 1961.
Morita and his family lived in Manhattan in the early 1960s while he was
setting up the Sony Corporation of America. Highly sophisticated, yet low-
key, ads introduced the new company to the American public without hint-
ing at the company’s foreign base. The ads also introduced the buying pub-
lic to previously unknown products they would learn to want. In 1963 Sony
became the first Japanese company to offer stock for sale in the United
States and seven years later became the first Japanese company to be listed
on the New York Stock Exchange. The company enjoyed unprecedented
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
292

success over the next two decades; however, Sony’s 1989 buyout of Co-
lumbia Pictures for $3.4 billion, one of Morita’s last initiatives, turned sour.
Morita had been convinced that if Sony had owned a studio that could pro-
duce movies in Beta format, they would not have lost the VCR war. Unfor-
tunately, the buyout was perceived as just another in a wave of Japanese
buyouts of U.S. companies and property. This backlash was accompanied
by a series of management blunders that resulted in a $3.2 billion loss for
Sony in 1994.
Morita suffered a cerebral hemorrhage while playing tennis in No-
vember 1993, and shortly after announcing the huge loss in 1994, he re-
signed as chairman. After that he spent much of his time in rehabilitation at
his home in Hawaii. Morita died of pneumonia in a Tokyo hospital on Oc-
tober 3, 1999.
David Packard, cofounder of Hewlett-Packard, was born in 1912 in Pueblo,
Colorado, where he grew up and attended public school. After graduating
from Centennial High School in 1930, he enrolled in Stanford University,
majoring in electrical engineering. He graduated from Stanford in 1934
with a bachelor’s degree and entered graduate school at the University of
Colorado. After only a few months of graduate study, he took a job with the
General Electric Company in Schenectady, New York.
Packard returned to Stanford in 1939 and obtained a degree in electrical
engineering. He also renewed his friendship with fellow student William R.
Hewlett. The future partners set up a workshop in Packard’s garage, using
$538 in capital to equip it. The Hewlett-Packard Company soon invented a
weight-reducing machine, a bowling alley foul-line indicator and an elec-
tronic harmonica tuner. Their first commercial sale was to Walt Disney in
1939. Disney ordered eight audio-oscillators for the sound track of the
movie Fantasia.
Packard and Hewlett reinvested all of their profits into the company, a
policy they would continue to follow. They also strategically located their
plant near Stanford so they could recruit bright students and keep current
with cutting-edge research. Early on, they decided to concentrate on elec-
tronic measuring and test instruments, as well as medical and chemical in-
struments, including heart-monitoring instruments and atomic clocks for
the Apollo spacecraft. They later became leaders in the design and manu-
facture of computers and participated in the development of handheld cal-
culators and ink-jet printers.
T H E  G U R U S
293

When the company was incorporated in 1947, Packard became president
and remained so until 1964. He served as CEO and chairman of the board
from 1964 to 1968, then took a leave of absence from 1969 to 1971 to serve
as deputy secretary of defense in the Nixon administration. He returned to
the position of chairman of the board of Hewlett-Packard in 1972 and re-
signed that position in 1993. When he resigned, Hewlett-Packard was sec-
ond only to IBM among U.S. computer manufacturers. Packard died on
March 26, 1996.
Ross Perot, founder of Electronic Data Systems (EDS) and Perot Systems
Corporation, was born Henry Ray Perot in 1930 in Texarkana, Texas. He was
the second son of Gabriel Elias (“Big Ross”) Perot, whose first son, Gabriel
Ross Perot, died in 1927 at the age of three. Henry Ray Perot had his name le-
gally changed to Henry Ross Perot when he was 12 years old, “partly in an ef-
fort to assuage his father’s grief over the death of his namesake.”77
Ross attended school, first at the private Patty Hill Elementary School
and then in public schools, in Texarkana. Beginning at the age of seven or
eight, he always had a job—breaking horses for a dollar a horse, selling
garden seeds, selling Christmas cards, and delivering newspapers. He also
achieved the rank of Eagle Scout only 16 months after becoming a Boy
Scout, a rank that takes most scouts three to five years to attain. He later
said, “The day I made Eagle was more important to me than the day I dis-
covered I was a billionaire.”78
After graduating from Texarkana High School (1947), Perot attended
Texarkana Junior College for two years, all the while applying for an ap-
pointment to the U.S. Naval Academy. In 1949 he received an appointment
and was sworn in as a midshipman. He studied engineering and “thrived on
the discipline and regimentation.”79 He was elected president of the class of
1953 and, among other positions, served as chaplain, shore-patrol officer, al-
cohol and narcotics officer, and first-aid officer. Due to the outbreak of the
Korean War, Perot’s initial two-year commitment was extended to four
years, during which he served on board the destroyer USS Sigourney and the
aircraft carrier USS Layte. He was honorably discharged from the navy in
1957 as a lieutenant. One biography reports that it was also during this pe-
riod that Perot began pronouncing his surname in the French manner—pe-
ROH—rather than the way it was pronounced in Texarkana: PEE-roh.80
Perot moved to Dallas after his discharge from the navy and took a job as
a salesman for IBM. He was soon outselling all of his colleagues, but in
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
294

1961 IBM set quotas on how much salesmen could earn. The next year,
when Perot reached his quota limit by January 19, he decided to leave IBM
and start his own business.
With a $1,000 loan from his wife and his salary as a part-time consultant
for Texas Blue Cross, Perot incorporated EDS on June 27, 1962—his
thirty-second birthday. He planned to sell not just hardware but a package
of hardware, software, and technical support. His first significant sale did
not come until 1965 when he anticipated the huge market that Medicare and
Medicaid would create for data-processing companies. He captured con-
tracts with Blue Cross/Blue Shield in 11 states, computerizing their billing
systems. He then expanded to service the private sector and by 1968 was
showing a profit of $2.4 million.
Perot’s success was partly due to his ability to anticipate a very lucrative
market, but it was also due to the exacting standards he set for employees—
EDS’s motto was “Eagles don’t flock; you find them one at a time.” But,
EDSers began to resemble their IBM counterparts. A strict dress code re-
quired dark suits, white shirts, conservative ties, closely cropped hair, and no
facial hair (most employees were male and many were military veterans).
The code of personal conduct forbade such behaviors as marital infidelity.
As Perot put it: “We clearly codified what EDS is, what an EDSer is. Every-
thing is just nailed down as succinctly as possible. I want people who are
smart, tough, self-reliant, have a history of success since childhood, a history
of being the best at what they’ve done, people who love to win.”81
In 1984 Perot sold EDS to General Motors (GM) for $2.5 billion ($1
billion in cash and 11.3 million shares of GM stock). He remained chair-
man of EDS but joined the GM board of directors—a relationship that
was troubled from the first day. Perot publicly criticized GM saying, “Re-
vitalizing GM is like teaching an elephant to tap dance. You find the sen-
sitive spots and start poking”82 The unholy alliance between Perot and
GM ended in December 1986 when GM bought Perot out for a reported
$700 million.
General Motors’ agreement with Perot stipulated that he could not start
another for-profit computer-service company for at least three years and
that he could not compete, even without compensation, for 18 months. Ex-
actly 18 months later, on June 1, 1988, he established Perot Systems Cor-
poration. In 1989 he invested $20 million in Steve Jobs’s new venture, the
NeXT Computer, but it was his decision to run for president in 1992 that
thrust Perot back into the limelight. His first run for the presidency cost him
T H E  G U R U S
295

$60 million and netted only 19 percent of the popular vote, but he was back
again for a run in 1996, netting only 8 percent of the vote.
Perot has received numerous awards and honors, including the Winston
Churchill Award and the Raoul Wallenberg Award. He was inducted into
the National Business Hall of Fame and received the Smithsonian Compu-
terworld Award. For public service he received the Jefferson Award and the
Patrick Henry Award, and he received the Horatio Alger award for succeed-
ing in defiance of obstacles.
Ross is a noted philanthropist. He has contributed more than $100 mil-
lion to various causes including the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts, and the
Salvation Army.
Stephen M. Pollan, attorney, financial consultant, and career adviser, was
born in 1929. As an attorney and career adviser, he has offered advice to
clients, including such companies as AT&T, for more than thirty years. He
has appeared on CNBC, the Today Show, Good Morning America, and The
Nightly Business Report, and he is also a regular contributor to a variety of
magazines, including Working Woman, Personal Finance, Worth, and New
York. Pollan has written and edited a number of books, including Live Rich:
Everything You Need to Know to Be Your Own Boss, Die Broke: A Radical,
Four-Part Financial Plan, Lifescripts for the Self-Employed, Starting Over:
How to Change Careers or Start Your Own Business, Turning No into Yes,
and The Business of Living.
Anita Roddick, née Perella, founder of The Body Shop, was born in Little-
hampton, Sussex, England, in 1942. Like other Italian immigrant families
in this seaside town, Roddick’s family operated a restaurant—The Clifton
Café. Her mother cooked, her grandmother prepared vegetables, and the
children helped after school and on weekends, taking orders, clearing ta-
bles, cleaning up. According to Roddick, “The work ethic, the idea of serv-
ice, was second nature to us.”83
When Roddick’s mother married Uncle Henry, the man Roddick would
later learn was her biological father, he transformed the Clifton Café into an
American-style diner, complete with jukebox, ice-cream sundaes, and
Coca-Cola. Roddick remembers this transformation as her first lesson in
marketing aesthetics. “I remember being dazzled by the Americana, by the
Vargas girls on the Coca-Cola promo cards, by the brilliant colours on the
jukebox and the style of everything. I absorbed it all.”84
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
296

Roddick attended Catholic school at St. Catherine’s convent, where she
learned the power of trading. Uncle Henry had brought a lot of bubble gum
and comic books back with him from the United States, and she swapped
these commodities for collections of cigarette cards and movie albums. She
tightly controlled the flow of goodies into her market, whetting her custom-
ers’ appetites.
After Uncle Henry’s death, Roddick and her siblings returned to work in
the family café, but this time their presence was required to make ends
meet. She was enrolled in the Maude Allen Secondary Modern School for
girls, where she proved to be a “deeply unpromising pupil for the first
year”85 but where she later learned the joys of learning. Both her teachers
and her mother encouraged her to “Be special,” to “be anything but me-
diocre.”86
Roddick attended the Newton Park College of Education at Bath for
three years and credits one instructor at Newton for helping her develop an
appreciation for art and design. In 1962 she traveled to Israel on a scholar-
ship to complete her thesis on “The Children of the Kibbutz” and spent time
hitchhiking around the country immersing herself in history and ideology.
Her travels there taught her that she could go anywhere she chose by her-
self. Over the next few years she returned to Littlehampton to teach in her
old school, hitchhiked to Greece for a holiday and returned through Geneva
where she worked for a short time for the United Nations, took her savings
from the United Nations job and took a boat to Tahiti, traveled to Australia
by way of the New Hebrides and New Caledonia, and wound up being
thrown out of South Africa for going to a jazz club on “black night.” She
met her future husband—Gordon Roddick—after she returned to Little-
hampton.
The Roddicks purchased and ran a small hotel in Littlehampton, later
adding a restaurant. They then opened the very successful Paddington’s
Restaurant, where they took advantage of the British attraction to
American-style hamburger restaurants. Their lives were consumed with
running these businesses until one day when Gordon crawled into bed and
said, “This is killing us. I can’t cope with it any more. Let’s pack it in.”87
And pack it in they did. Gordon decided to take a couple of years off and
pursue a childhood ambition—riding a horse from Buenos Aires to New
York. In the meantime, Anita was supposed to “find a little shop” to run.
The “little shop” turned out to be an idea of Anita’s to sell natural cos-
metic products in different sizes and in cheap containers. As Anita rea-
T H E  G U R U S
297

soned, if you can buy an ounce of candy or cheese, why can’t you buy an
ounce of lotion? She even had a name for her new venture—The Body
Shop, after the garages she had seen in the United States that banged the
dents out of cars. With Gordon’s support, Anita opened her first Body Shop
in Kensington Gardens, Brighton, on March 27, 1976. She offered 25 hand-
mixed products.
Franchising allowed the company to expand rapidly to its current fifteen
hundred-plus stores in 47 countries, with sales of £605.8 billion for the 52
weeks ending February 27, 1999.
Roddick has continued to pursue other passions, including pushing for a
ban on animal testing in Britain, the Save the Whales campaign, the Roma-
nian Relief Drive, the Brazilian Healthcare Project, the Children of Cherno-
byl charity, and support of women’s rights at the Fourth World Conference
of Women in Beijing, China.
William (Bill) Rosenberg, founder of Dunkin’ Donuts, was born in Boston,
Massachusetts, in the late 1930s, educated in public schools, and forced to
leave school in the eighth grade to help support his family during the Great
Depression. At the age of 17, Rosenberg started working for a company that
distributed ice cream from refrigerated trucks. At 20, he was promoted to
assistant manager, and by 21 he was made branch manager. Eventually, he
became national sales manager.
During World War II, Rosenberg worked for Bethlehem Steel, becoming
a union delegate and contract coordinator. After the war, he invested $5,000
in a mobile industrial catering business known as Industrial Luncheon and
shortly thereafter had 140 catering trucks, 25 in-plant outlets, and a vending
operation. When he realized that 40 percent of his revenues was coming
from doughnuts and coffee, he started a retail shop—the Open Kettle—for
those products. In 1950 he opened the first shop known as Dunkin’ Donuts
in Quincy, Massachusetts. In 1955, after opening six Dunkin’ Donuts, he
decided to franchise further operations, and the first franchise agreement
was signed. By 1990, when Allied Comecq PLC purchased Dunkin’
Donuts, there were 2,000 open shops.
Rosenberg remains chairman emeritus of the company.
Pleasant Rowland, founder of Pleasant Company and developer of the
American Girl collection, describes an influential part of her childhood as
follows: “I can remember discovering the books in my grandmother’s
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
298

second-floor bookshelf that my dad had had when he was little. I discov-
ered the Oz books there. I remember just delving into them, barely moving
for days at a time, flung across my bed. I was an avid reader. And I had
three sisters. We played with our dolls. It was just a simpler time. . . . The
real inspiration for The American Girl’s Collection came somewhere from
that childhood experience.”88
In the intervening years, Rowland taught kindergarten through third
grade, became a television news reporter in San Francisco for a short while,
and developed the first reading program for kindergarten children. She
spent the decade of the 1970s writing textbooks; she then married and
moved to Wisconsin.
On a fateful trip to colonial Williamsburg, Virginia, with her husband,
Rowland was moved by “the entire experience of walking in the footsteps
of that colonial world. I realized,” she says, “we have not done a good job
bringing history alive for kids in schools. . . I thought, isn’t there some
way that I can make the magic of this historic place come alive for little
girls?”89 This idea stayed with her over the next several months, but it
took one more event to set The American Girl’s Collection into motion—
Christmas 1983. She was searching for special gifts for her nieces, prefer-
ably the same sweet romantic types of dolls that she and her sisters had
played with as girls; it was the same year that Cabbage Patch dolls hit the
market. She laments, “Neither of my choices [Cabbage Patch or Barbie]
were particularly pretty and I didn’t think they were of a very high qual-
ity. But most important, they didn’t say anything about what it meant to
be a girl growing up in America. And they weren’t something I thought
anybody was going to treasure.”90 Thus, in 1986 the Pleasant Company
was born.
Rowland combined her love for history with a commitment to educa-
tional products. “It was an idea of books and dolls that would bring his-
tory alive, that would provide girls with role models, showing that the es-
sentials of growing up haven’t changed very much, in spite of the
differences in the world in the last two hundred and fifty years.”91 She
took her total lack of business experience, her entire life savings, and no
marketing research and within 10 years built a profitable doll, clothing,
and publishing empire. Today she dominates the 7-to-12-year-old girls’
market with American Girl magazine, American Girl Gear, and The
American Girl Collection. The company has sold over 50 million books
and 4 million dolls. Sales in 1998 topped $287 million.
T H E  G U R U S
299

Harland Sanders, founder of the Kentucky Fried Chicken Corporation
(KFC), was born near Henryville, Indiana, in 1890. His culinary experience
began at the age of six when, following the death of his father, he was left
to care for his two younger siblings. A New Yorker profile of the Sanders in-
dicates that by the age of seven he “was excelling in bread and vegetables
and coming along nicely in meat.”92 His mother remarried when he was 12,
and the young Harland was sent to work as a farmhand near Greenwood,
Indiana, where he stayed until he was 15. After that, he worked at a variety
of jobs, including insurance salesman, buggy painter, plowman, streetcar
conductor, ferryboat operator, and eventually as an “ashdoodler” on various
railroads. While working on the railroads, he took a correspondence course
in law, earning a doctor of law degree from Southern University.
In 1929 Sanders opened a filling station in Corbin, Kentucky. In addition
to cooking meals for his family, he began preparing meals for the occa-
sional traveler who showed up. His meals were simple, Southern-style fare
of pan-fried chicken, fresh vegetables, and homemade bread. When de-
mand for his food outstripped demand for gasoline, Sanders closed the sta-
tion and opened Sanders Café. As he related later, he even “hightailed it up
to Cornell University and took an eight-week course in Restaurant and
Hotel Management, learnin’ all about table d’hote and things like how
many potatoes to cook.”93 But, the colonel, as he could rightly call himself
since receiving his honorary military title from the governor of Kentucky in
1936, had one problem that Cornell could not solve—pan-fried chicken
took too long to prepare, and deep-fried chicken did not meet his standards.
In 1939 Sanders found the solution to his frying dilemma—the pressure
cooker. With this new gadget he could prepare perfectly cooked chicken,
seasoned with his own concoction of 11 common herbs and spices, in eight
or nine minutes.
Sanders’s restaurant prospered until 1956, when a new interstate high-
way bypassed the café and he was forced to sell it at auction for only
$75,000. Rather than retiring on his little bit of savings and Social Security,
Sanders decided to explore another business option he had initiated in 1952
when he sold his recipe for chicken to a select number of restaurateurs.
Under their arrangement, Sanders received four cents for every chicken
they prepared with his process. Maybe others would be willing to do the
same.
So, at the age of 66, Harland Sanders set out to establish a franchise busi-
ness, adopting his now-famous attire of a white suit, white shirt, white
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
300

moustache and goatee, black string tie, black shoes, and cane, all of which
were suppose to create an image of old Southern gracious living. The first
two years were a struggle, but by 1960 there were more than two hundred
restaurants paying to use the colonel’s process. By 1963 there were more
than six hundred outlets, grossing Sanders $300,000 per year, but as he put
it, “The popularity of Kentucky Fried Chicken was beginning to run right
over me and mash me flat.”94 After several rejections, he finally agreed to
sell his company to John Y. Brown Jr. and Jack Massey for $2 million and a
lifetime salary of $40,000 per year (later increased to $75,000). In ex-
change, Sanders served as advisor, spokesman, and member of the board of
directors until his resignation in 1970. Sanders died near Shelbyville, Ken-
tucky, on December 16, 1980.
Howard Schultz, founder of Starbucks Coffee Company, was born in 1953
in Brooklyn, New York, and was raised in the city’s Bay View housing proj-
ect. He later cited his father’s financial hardships (as a truck and cab driver
and factory worker) as the source of his drive for success and his concern
for his employees. “What I remember most was the way [my father] was
treated in his adult life, which beat him down. He didn’t have the self-
esteem to feel worthy of a good job. So I try to give people hope and self-
esteem through a company that respects them.”95
Schultz became the first member of his family to graduate from college,
earning a bachelor of science degree in business from Northern Michigan
University in 1975. After graduating he took a job in the sales and market-
ing division of Xerox Corporation. After three years at Xerox, he was re-
cruited to be the vice president and general manager of Hammerplast,
U.S.A., an American subsidiary of a Swedish company that specialized in
housewares. One of his clients was a Seattle-based coffee store named Star-
bucks Coffee Company.
Starbucks, founded in 1971, started as a single store that featured freshly
roasted gourmet coffee beans and an assortment of imported teas and
spices. A second store opened near the University of Washington in 1972.
The owners were so impressed by Schultz’s energy and marketing skills
that they offered him part ownership to join the company in 1982. He be-
came their head of marketing and retail operations.
While on vacation in Italy in 1983, Schultz had what he described as an
epiphany. He realized that coffee—its selection, brewing, and consump-
tion—was a vital part of most Italians’ social life. They started and ended
T H E  G U R U S
301

their days mingling with their friends and sipping their coffee. “Why not
open a coffee bar in Seattle? Coffeehouses in Italy are a third place for
people, after home and work. There’s a relationship of trust and confidence
in that environment. As Americans, there are very few things we have con-
fidence in.”96
When Schultz returned to Seattle, he failed to convince his two partners
of the potential of his idea and left Starbucks in 1986 in frustration. He
started his own chain of espresso bars, called Il Giornale, in Seattle but soon
heard that the Starbucks chain was up for sale. With the financial support of
Seattle investors, Schultz bought Starbucks’ 11 stores for $3.8 million. He
then began to overhaul the company completely, first expanding his offer-
ings to include exotic coffees like espresso, cappuccino, café latté, iced cof-
fee, mocha, and many others. He then tackled the atmosphere of the stores
themselves, providing bright, clean interiors with tables, artwork, and classi-
cal and jazz music in the background. Finally, he turned his attention to his
employees. He trained them not only to brew a good cup of coffee but also
to understand the importance of customer service. “Service is a lost art in
America. . . . It’s not viewed as a professional job to work behind a counter.
We don’t believe that. We want to provide our people with dignity and self-
esteem, so we offer tangible benefits. The attrition rate in retail fast food is
between 200 and 400 percent a year. At Starbucks, it’s 60 percent.”97
On June 26, 1992, Starbucks went public with an opening price of $17
per share, generating $110 million in capital that funded its expansion. By
1994 the company had 470 locations, growing to 1,000 stores by early
1997. Schultz has also orchestrated strategic business alliances with com-
panies like Barnes & Noble Bookstores, Pepsi-Cola, Dreyers Grand Ice
Cream, Westin Hotels, ITT Sheraton Hotels, and United Airlines.
Schultz is a major sponsor of CARE, receiving the CARE Humanitarian
Award in 1992. Starbucks received an American Business Ethics Award
and the Corporate Conscience Award in 1996.
Ricardo Semler, CEO and President of Semco, S.A., was born about 1958.
His Austrian-born father worked as an engineer for DuPont in Argentina
until 1953, when he moved to São Paulo, Brazil, and founded Semler &
Company. The company began by manufacturing centrifuges and expanded
its product line to include marine pumps.
After earning his MBA from Harvard at the age of 20, Ricardo Semler
returned to Brazil to work for his father. The two clashed over management
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
302

styles from the very beginning. The elder Semler followed the traditional,
autocratic, paternalistic approach to management, while his son was a pro-
ponent of participatory management. When Ricardo threatened to leave the
company over these differences, his father retired and transferred majority
ownership to him.
In 1982 Ricardo Semler took control of Semler & Company. On his first
day, he fired two-thirds of the company’s top management, began planning
for product diversification, and changed the company name to Semco. He
subsequently dismantled his father’s management structure and replaced it
with a more flexible organization based on three core values: employee par-
ticipation, profit sharing, and the free flow of information.
Frederick W. (Fred) Smith, founder of Federal Express, was born in 1944 in
the Memphis, Tennessee, suburb of Marks, Mississippi. His father, who
died when Fred was four years old, was a successful entrepreneur in his
own right, founding the Dixie Greyhound Bus Lines and cofounding the
restaurant chain Toddle House. Young Fred inherited two important things
from his father—the money he would later use to start his company and a
letter urging his son to put his inheritance to work to build something great
and not to become part of the idle rich.
Smith took his father’s admonition to heart, and despite having to over-
come a congenital bone disease that forced him to wear braces and walk
with crutches as a youth, he eventually played basketball and football in
prep school and was voted “Best All-Around Student.” He learned to fly at
the age of 15, and the next year he and two of his school friends founded a
recording studio, Ardent Record Company, which is still in business.
In 1962 Smith entered Yale University, majoring in economics and po-
litical science. As a junior, he wrote a term paper analyzing the existing
freight services and suggesting that there might be a market for high-
priority, time-sensitive delivery of goods such as medicines and electronic
components. His professor was not impressed with the idea and gave Smith
a “C” on his paper, but the idea stayed with Smith throughout his two-tour
career in the U.S. Marine Corps and even after he purchased controlling in-
terest in Arkansas Aviation Sales.
Smith engaged two consulting firms to investigate the viability of creat-
ing his delivery service and learned from their reports that there was a high
degree of dissatisfaction with the dependability of existing services. In ad-
dition, customers in smaller, less-accessible locations had to wait for sched-
T H E  G U R U S
303

uled carriers to pick up or deliver their packages. Smith was convinced that
he could fill these gaps. All he had to do was find the money.
As an inducement to other investors, Smith committed more than $8 mil-
lion of his family money to his project. Private investors, including Peter
Wilmott, Roger Frock, Michael Fitzgerald, Arthur Bass, and Vincent
Fagan, add $40 million, and several banks rounded out the total investment
of $90 million, the largest single venture-capital start-up in American his-
tory at that time. Federal Express was incorporated on June 1, 1971, and
began operation on April 17, 1973, with service to 22 cities.
The first three years of business were difficult ones, with heavy debts
and many personal sacrifices. Company lore includes Smith’s selling his
private plane to raise capital, using his $27,000 gambling winnings to meet
payroll, and stories of couriers leaving behind watches as collateral for gas-
oline to fuel the company’s planes and trucks. But it all paid off in 1976
when Federal Express’s revenues grew to $109 million, a net income of
$8.1 million. Subsequent deregulation of the airline industry helped boost
earnings to $20 million in 1977, and in the first public stock offering in
1978, 1,075,000 shares were sold at $3 per share.
Smith’s personal honors include two Purple Hearts, Silver and Bronze
Stars, and the Vietnamese Cross of Gallantry. Federal Express was voted
one of the best-managed companies in 1981, was named one of Fortune’s
“Top 10 Business Triumphs of the 1970s,” and won the Malcolm Baldrige
National Quality Award in 1990.
Thomas G. Stemberg, cofounder of Staples, Inc., was born in Orange, New
Jersey, on January 18, 1949. Following the death of his father when he was
13 years old, Tom and his mother returned to his parents’ native Vienna,
Austria, where he attended the American International School. He returned
to the United States to attend Harvard University, from which he received a
bachelor’s degree in 1971 and an MBA in 1973.
Stemberg began his career with the Jewel Company’s Star Markets,
where he became vice president for sales and merchandising. While at
Jewel, he introduced the first line of generic foods sold in the United States,
as well as the concept of warehouse specials. In 1982 he moved to First Na-
tional Supermarkets, where he served as president of the Edwards-Finast
division and established the Edwards Food Warehouse chain. It was during
this period that he developed the concept of an office superstore, a chain of
discount stores that would serve businesses with fewer than 100 employees
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
304

by providing a broad selection of products sold at an average of 50 percent
below list price.
Stemberg met his Staples cofounder, Leo Kahn, in 1980 when they par-
ticipated in a televised debate on marketing concepts. Kahn “virtually in-
vented the idea of no-frills, deep discount supermarket retailing,”98 and he
admired Stemberg’s success in warehousing. Backed by a group of invest-
ors that included Bain Capital, Hambro International Ventures, Harvard
Management, Bessemer Ventures, and Adler & Company, the two opened
their first store in Brighton, Massachusetts, in 1986.
The company continued to grow steadily and methodically, completing
its initial public offering in April 1989. A total of 3,250,000 shares were
sold at $19 per share. By 1999 the company’s revenues topped $7 billion
through more than a thousand superstores, mail order catalogs, e-commerce
outlets, and contract business.
R. David (Dave) Thomas, founder of Wendy’s Old Fashioned Hamburgers,
was born in Atlantic City, New Jersey, in 1932 and was adopted soon after-
ward by Rex and Auleva Thomas from western Michigan. Thomas’s
adopted mother died when he was five years old, and his father moved him
from town to town over the next 10 years. Thomas estimates that he lived in
a dozen places by the time he was 15 and as a result never felt that he be-
longed. To make matters worse, his maternal grandmother told him when
he was 13 that he had been adopted. “It really hurt that nobody told me be-
fore. It is a terrible feeling to know my natural mother didn’t want me.”99
Thomas started working when he was about 12 years old to help his
father make ends meet. He delivered groceries and worked behind a drug-
store soda fountain. He and his father also ate many meals at cheap restau-
rants, resulting in Dave’s decision to own his own restaurant: “I thought if I
owned a restaurant, I could eat all I wanted for free. What could be better
than that?100
When Thomas’s family moved to Fort Wayne, Indiana, in 1947, he found
a job as a busboy in a Hobby House restaurant. He dropped out of school
after the tenth grade to work full-time at Hobby House and refused to leave
Fort Wayne when his father decided to move again. Instead, he moved into
the local YMCA and later joined the U.S. Army. Thomas was assigned to
the army’s Cook and Baker’s School at Fort Benning, Georgia, and then as
a cook and staff sergeant in Germany where he was responsible for feeding
up to two thousand people.
T H E  G U R U S
305

After his discharge from the army in 1953, Thomas returned to the
Hobby House in Fort Wayne as a short-order cook. When his boss bought
into Kentucky Fried Chicken, he offered Thomas a proposition: If Thomas
could make the four failing chicken outlets profitable, his boss would trans-
fer to him 45 percent of the ownership of the restaurants. Thomas recalls,
“The stores were practically bankrupt. I had four kids and a wife, and I was
making $135 a week. But I made up my mind that I was going to be in busi-
ness for myself.”101
Thomas was so successful at turning around the Columbus restaurants,
he attracted the attention of Harland Sanders, the real Colonel Sanders, who
became a mentor for the young restaurateur. In 1968 Thomas sold his share
of the franchises back to the corporation for more than $1 million in KFC
stock and took a position in the corporate office. A conflict with the new
owners, however, forced Thomas out within a year.
Thomas then took part of the money from the sale of the franchises to
build his own chain of restaurants. He intended to specialize in hamburgers
but to distinguish his chain from others by offering a variety of toppings,
using fresh meat, and making burgers to order. He wanted a wholesome
logo for his company, so he decided to use the likeness of his daughter
Wendy, who was eight years old when the first Wendy’s Old Fashioned
Hamburgers opened on November 15, 1969. Wendy’s showed a profit
within six weeks of opening. By 1963 Thomas began to expand aggres-
sively, selling citywide and regional franchises instead of single-site fran-
chises.
An incident in the late 1970s made Thomas question his ability to con-
tinue running Wendy’s. Senior officers in the company recommended in-
stalling salad bars, but Thomas resisted. He eventually gave in, and when
the change proved to be enormously profitable, he thought others might
be more qualified to run the company. “Here’s a company I didn’t want
to screw up. I see a lot of entrepreneurs start something they can’t fin-
ish.”102 In 1982 he resigned as CEO and took the position of senior chair-
man.
By the end of the 1980s, service at some of the restaurants began to de-
cline and they were losing money. A new CEO accepted his position in
1989 only if Thomas would return as a guiding force in the company. Tho-
mas had no management duties, but he would serve as Wendy’s “spokes-
man, in-house cheerleader, and roaming quality-control man.”103 Thus
began Dave Thomas’s career in advertising.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
306

One of the ad agency executives who produced the Wendy’s commerci-
als exclaimed, “Those first commercials, oy gevalt!”104 According to a Chi-
cago Tribune reporter, despite Thomas’s “immense fortune,” he “still talks
like the grillman he was when he got his start. He mixes up his verbs and
comes up with words that can’t be found in any dictionary.”105 So, Tho-
mas’s lines were limited to phrases like “I sure could go for a Big Dave’s
Deluxe” and “If you make a grilled chicken sandwich at Wendy’s, they will
come.” The new spots were a huge hit, and as Bob Garfield of Advertising
Age reported, Thomas was “still playing the part of a guileless bumpkin,
but now . . . it’s obvious he’s playing a part.”106
Thomas also became actively involved in promoting adoption, establish-
ing a program within the company that paid medical and legal bills for em-
ployees who adopted. He serves on the board of directors of Children’s
Hospital in Columbus and St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Mem-
phis, Tennessee. He received the Horatio Alger Award in 1979 and deciding
to lead by example, earned a high school general equivalency diploma. His
classmates voted him “most likely to succeed.”
Robert Edward (Ted) Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting System, Cable
News Network (CNN), and Turner Network Television (TNT), who is
sometimes called “the Mouth of the South,” was born in 1938 in Cincinnati,
Ohio. Turner had a tumultuous relationship with his father who by many
accounts was verbally and physically abusive to his son. Even Ted’s mother
is quoted as saying that 90 percent of the arguments she had with her hus-
band were over his beating Ted too hard. His father even charged him for
his room and board, which Ted paid by working at his father’s outdoor-
advertising company during the summer.
Turner spent most of his early school years in boarding and military
schools, including the Georgia Military Academy, outside Atlanta, and the
McCallie School in Chattanooga, Tennessee. After resisting the rigid struc-
ture of these environments for several years, he grew to appreciate his life
at McCallie. He became a company commander of company and won a
Tennessee state high school debating contest. “Probably no single thing or
institution has influenced my life more [than the McCallie School],”107 he
later related.
After high school, Turner attended Brown University, where he majored
in economics. He had a reputation for partying and was eventually sus-
pended from Brown. He spent six months in the U.S. Coast Guard, returned
T H E  G U R U S
307

to Brown, and this time was expelled for good, for having a female visitor
in his room.
In 1960 Ted began working as a junior salesman for his father’s com-
pany, Turner Advertising Company. Then in 1963, Ed Turner shot and
killed himself, six months after overextending himself financially by pur-
chasing additional billboard operations. What triggered this act of desper-
ation may have been stress, alcoholism, or even manic depression. Ted later
said of his father’s death that it left him alone, “because I had counted on
him to make the judgment of whether or not I was a success.”108 At the age
of 24, Ted became president and CEO of Turner Advertising, and the com-
pany thrived under his leadership.
In 1970 Turner bought a debt-ridden UHF television station in Atlanta,
Channel 17, which he christened WTCG (Turner Communications Group).
Shortly afterward he bought a second station in Charlotte, North Carolina,
which he named for himself—WRET (Robert Edward Turner). He ran
relatively inexpensive reruns of sitcoms, did not try to compete with the
“big three” networks in programming areas like the news, and used his
own billboards to advertise his stations. Then in 1976, he bought his own
professional sports teams—the last-place Atlanta Braves baseball team
and the last-place Atlanta Hawks basketball team—which guaranteed
sports programming for the stations.
When Turner learned about cable systems in the early 1970s, he began
broadcasting to regional cable systems on land-based microwave delivery
systems. Then when RCA launched its first satellite, Turner was one of the
first businessmen to decide to invest in the new technology. On December
27, 1976, Channel 17 beamed a signal around the country and Superstation
TBS was born.
In 1980 Turner sold WRET for $20 million to help fund the launch of a
24-hour live-news network—CNN. When ABC and Westinghouse at-
tempted to compete with his new network by offering a news report that
was updated every half hour, Turner countered by launching Headline
News.
Then in 1986, Turner added another jewel to his broadcasting crown by
purchasing MGM’s library of films, which he used for programming on Su-
perstation TBS. Turner later added two more networks—TNT in 1988 and
TCM (Turner Classic Movies) in 1994, to capitalize on the library’s wealth
of films. He later purchased Hanna-Barbera’s library of 8,500 cartoons and
launched the Cartoon Network; and he acquired New Line Cinema and
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
308

Castle Rock production companies. Finally, he established an in-house pro-
duction company, Turner Pictures.
Turner’s biggest deal, however, was completed with the merger of TBS
and Time Warner in 1996. He became the vice chairman of Time Warner,
holds 2 of the 17 seats on the board, and his stock in TBS was transferred
into new Time Warner stock, which accounts for 11 percent of its shares.
His responsibilities involve overseeing Time Warner’s cable networks divi-
sion, which consists of Turner Broadcasting Systems, HBO, Cinemax, and
Time Warner’s interests in Comedy Central and Court TV.
Turner’s social and philanthropic activities include staging the Goodwill
Games and forming the Better World Society to support socially conscious
television programming. In 1997 he became one of the largest individual
donors in the United States when he pledged $1 billion to the United Na-
tions over the next 10 years. In 1998 the list of Turners awards and honors
took 32 lines in Who’s Who in America, 1998.
Jay Van Andel, cofounder of Amway Corporation, was born in Grand Rap-
ids, Michigan, in 1924. He attended Pratt Junior College (1945), Calvin
College (1942 and 1946), and Yale (1943–1944), and served as a first lieu-
tenant in the U.S. Air Force from 1943 to 1946.
Van Andel met his future business partner and cofounder of Amway,
Rich DeVos, while in high school. The pair planned to start a business to-
gether as soon as their military tours ended. They first partnered in the Wol-
verine Air Service in the 1940s and then owned Western Michigan’s first
drive-in restaurant, bought a boat, and set off to sail to South America.
Their personal success as independent distributors of Nutrilite vitamins
convinced the partners that this method of person-to-person selling could
make them and others wealthy. They created what they called the Amway
Sales and Marketing Plan and launched their business with one product.
By the early 1960s, Amway’s sales topped $500,000 from a single prod-
uct, and by the end of the decade they topped $100 million from 200
products.
The second generation of Van Andel and DeVos families took over the
company in the 1990s. Steve Van Andel and Dick DeVos succeeded their
fathers as chairman and president, respectively. Retail sales continue to
grow, and in fiscal 1997 Amway reached a record $7 billion year.
Jay Van Andel holds numerous honorary degrees and awards, just a few
of which include being knighted as a Grand Officer of Orange-Nassau, The
T H E  G U R U S
309

Netherlands, receiving the George Washington Medal of Honor, and receiv-
ing the UN Environment Program Achievement Award.
Lillian Vernon, founder of Lillian Vernon Corporation, was born Lillian Me-
nasche in Leipzig, Germany, in 1927. At the age of five, she fled with her
family to the Netherlands to escape the Nazis, and five years later the
family relocated to the United States. The family lived in Manhattan, where
her father started a zipper-manufacturing business and later sold leather
products like camera cases, handbags, and belts.
Vernon quickly became Americanized, perfecting her English by watch-
ing movies while working as an usher in a theater. In 1949 she married
Samuel Hechberg, the owner of a small clothing store. While pregnant with
her first son in 1951, she began to worry about the family’s income. Her
husband’s earnings of $75 a week was not going to be sufficient to support
a family, so she decided that she needed to earn about $50 a week to help
out. But how? “It was very unfashionable for women to work in those days.
So I thought mail order was a wonderful thing I could do out of the house,
stay home, change diapers, do the whole thing.”109
Vernon decided to market items that her father could produce—hand-
bags and belts—but to personalize them with gold monograms. She named
her business Vernon Specialties Company, after Mount Vernon, New York,
where she lived, and spent $495 to place a five-inch ad in the September
1951 issue of Seventeen. Within three months of placing that first ad, she
had received $32,000 worth of orders, and she expanded her offerings to
combs, buttons, and cuff links. All items were delivered with free mon-
ogramming. As she explained, “Monogrammed items make such nice gifts.
You simply can’t rush out to a store and buy a present that’s instantly mon-
ogrammed. It takes planning and thought. That makes the gift all the more
special to the recipient. No one can start a mail-order business today the
way I did in 1951, but if I had to start over now, I’d definitely begin with
monogrammed merchandise again.”110
By 1954 Vernon’s operation filled three rented buildings in Mount Ver-
non, which housed a warehouse, a shipping department, and a monogram-
ming workshop. When she grew dissatisfied with the merchandise she
could buy, she set up her own manufacturing plant for items like charm
bracelets and bobby-pin holders. She later produced customized containers
for some of the large cosmetic companies, including Revlon, Elizabeth
Arden, Avon, and Max Factor.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
310

While pregnant with her second child in 1965, Vernon decided to change
her advertising technique from magazine ads to a catalog. She later de-
scribed the response to her first 16-page catalog, of which she mailed
125,000 copies, as “fabulous.” She received “thousands and thousands” of
orders for a one-dollar sterling silver monogrammed ring. At the same time,
she managed to keep the entire enterprise a secret. “I was a closet worker.
Nobody knew for years that I had a job.”111
In 1965 Vernon renamed her business the Lillian Vernon Corporation
and assumed the titles of chairman and CEO. The corporation posted sales
of $1 million in 1970, a figure that grew to $112 million in 1987 when Ver-
non sold 35 percent of the company’s stock. The sale yielded about $28
million, with $12 million of it reportedly split among Vernon and her chil-
dren. The balance was used to develop a computerized national distribution
center in Virginia Beach, Virginia.
The company began to move into specialty markets with the release of
its “At Home” catalog in 1989, followed by “Lilly’s Kids” in 1990. By
1995 the Vernon Corporation was publishing 26 editions of seven different
catalogs and had a total circulation of over 179 million.
Vernon remarried in 1970 and was known as Lillian Vernon Katz until
1990, when she had her named changed legally to Lillian Vernon. She has
received numerous awards and honors, including induction into the Direct
Marketing Association Hall of Fame, the Ellis Island Medal of Honor, and
the Big Brothers/Big Sisters National Hero Award. She has five honorary
college degrees and served as chairperson of the White House National
Business Women’s Council.
Samuel Moore (Sam) Walton, founder of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., was born in
Kingfisher, Oklahoma, in 1918. When he was five years old, his family
moved to Columbia, Missouri, where he attended Hickman High School.
Walton excelled at athletics, playing quarterback on the football team, cap-
taining the basketball team, and participating on the track team. He was
class president, student council president, and star of the senior play. He
graduated in 1936 and enrolled at the University of Missouri, where he
studied economics and served as senior class president. After receiving his
bachelor of arts degree in 1940, Walton took his first retailing job at a JC
Penney store in Des Moines, Iowa.
Walton was drafted in 1942 and served as a communications officer in
the army intelligence corps at a stateside assignment. He was released from
T H E  G U R U S
311

the military in 1945 and intended to pursue an MBA at the University of
Pennsylvania, but a lack of funds forced him to return to his trainee’s job at
JC Penney. The same year, Walton bought a Ben Franklin variety store in
Newport, Arkansas. He built the store into a success, but because he lost his
lease, he was forced to start over—this time in Bentonville, Arkansas. Sam
and younger brother James bought into the Ben Franklin franchise, even-
tually controlling 15 stores in Arkansas and Missouri.
During his travels for Ben Franklin, Walton developed the theory that
large retailers should locate in smaller towns. “There was a lot more busi-
ness in those towns than people ever thought.”112 When Ben Franklin’s man-
agement nixed his idea, Walton went out on his own in 1962 and opened the
first Wal-Mart Discount City, in Rogers, Arkansas. By 1970 there were 25
stores, and by 1983 the chain had become the eighth-largest retailer in the
United States. At the time of his death, April 5, 1992, Walton was pro-
claimed to be the richest man in the United States by Forbes magazine.
An Wang, founder of Wang Laboratories, was born in Shanghai, China, in
1920. When he was six years old, his family moved to Kun San, where his
father taught English in a private elementary school. The school did not
offer a kindergarten or first or second grades, so Wang began his formal
education in the third grade. He later commented that this experience was
“a little like being thrown in the water when you don’t know how to swim.
You either learn how to swim—and fast—or you sink.”113 His parents rec-
ommended that he take a year off between elementary and junior high
school to get his age and grade back in sync, but he insisted on taking the
entrance exam, scoring the highest of any of the applicants. His perfor-
mance in junior high school was mixed. He was gifted in mathematics but
did poorly in the humanities.
At 13, Wang entered Shanghai Provincial High School, where he was
first exposed to English through many of his textbooks. Because he was
much younger and therefore smaller than his peers, he did not participate in
many of the team sports, but he learned that he could play individual sports
like table tennis. Upon graduation from high school, he entered Chiao Tung
University in Shanghai, a school that Wang called the MIT of China, where
he studied electrical engineering with an emphasis on communications. His
experience at Chiao Tung was greatly effected by the Japanese seizure of
Beijing and the coming of World War II. To protect students, the Chinese
government moved the university to buildings within the International Set-
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
312

tlement. Wang recalled that “there was war all around me, but not in the
nine square miles within which I spent the next three years.”114
After graduating from Chiao Tung in 1940, Wang worked for a short
time as a teaching assistant, then took a job with Central Radio Corpora-
tion, designing and building transmitters and radios for government troops.
As the end of World War II approached, he heard about a program to send
Chinese engineers to apprentice in American industry. He jumped at the
chance and arrived in the United States in June 1945, along with several of
his colleagues. Wang described what happened next as a “piece of luck.”
As his fellow Chinese engineers began to find positions in various in in-
dustries, Wang decided that he would prefer spending his two-year appoint-
ment at Harvard University. He applied to Harvard in the summer of 1945,
and as luck would have it, there were openings at the school because of the
war. He completed the work for his master’s degree in 1946 and, after a
short assignment in Canada, completed his doctorate at Harvard in 1948.
After receiving his doctorate, Wang began working at the Harvard Com-
putation Laboratory along with such computer pioneers as Howard Aiken
and Jay Forrester. While there, Wang invented the magnetic pulse control-
ling device—the principle on which magnetic core memory is based—
which he licensed to IBM. Using the funds from this transaction, he set up
his first factory over a garage, and in 1951 Wang Laboratories was born.
An Wang died on March 24, 1990.
T H E  G U R U S
313


Notes
Chapter 1
11 Wilson Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only (Hawthorne, NJ: Career Press, 1994), p. 18.
12 Ibid.
13 Ibid., p. 19.
14 Ibid.
15 Ibid.
16 Mary Kay Ash, Mary Kay on People Management (New York: Warner Books, 1984),
p. 123.
17 Diane Jennings, Self-Made Women: Twelve of America’s Leading Entrepreneurs Talk
about Success, Self-Image, and the Superwoman (Dallas: Taylor Publishing, 1987),
p. 41.
18 Ibid., p. 41.
19 Ray Kroc and Robert Anderson, Grinding It Out: The Making of McDonald’s (Chi-
cago: Contemporary Books, 1977), p. 192.
10 Brian O’Reilly, “What It Takes to Start a Startup,” Fortune, June 7, 1999, p. 140.
11 Jennings, Self-Made Women, p. 127.
12 Bob Thomas, Building a Company: Roy O. Disney and the Creation of an Entertain-
ment Empire (New York: Hyperion, 1998), p. 190.
13 Bud Hadfield, Wealth within Reach (Dallas: Word Publishing, 1988), p. 37.
14 Ibid., pp. 40–41.
15 An Wang, with Eugene Linder, Lessons: An Autobiography (Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley, 1986), p. 109.
16 Debbi Fields, One Smart Cookie, (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987), p. 137.
17 Victor K. McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible: The Life of Edwin Land (Reading,
MA: Perseus Books, 1998), p. 45.
18 Ash, Mary Kay on People Management, pp. 124–125.
19 Sam Walton and John Huey, Sam Walton: Made in America—My Story (New York:
Bantam Books, 1993), pp. 38–39.
20 Wilson Harrell, “Swapping Principle for Profit Will Not Pay Off in the Long Run,”
Atlanta Business Chronicle, January 31, 1997, p. 1D.
21 David Carnoy, “Richard Branson,” Success, April 1998, pp. 62–63.
22 Steve Hamm, “The Education of Marc Andreessen,” Business Week, Industrial/
Technology Edition, April 13, 1998, p. 92.
23 Randall E. Stross, The Microsoft Way: The Real Story of How the Company Out-
smarts Its Competition (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1996), pp. 233–234.
315

24 Christian Williams, Lead, Follow, or Get Out of the Way (New York: Times Books,
1981), p. 111.
25 Howard Schultz and Dori Jones Yang, Pour Your Heart into It: How Starbucks Built
a Company One Cup at a Time, (New York: Hyperion 1997), p. 332.
26 Richard Branson, Losing My Virginity: How I’ve Survived, Had Fun, and Made a
Fortune Doing Business My Way (New York: Times Books, 1998), p. 343.
27 Tom Monaghan, Pizza Tiger (New York: Random House, 1986), p. 7.
28 Forbes: Great Minds of Business (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997), p. 155.
29 Earl G. Graves and Robert L. Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being
White: Straight Talk on Making It in America (New York: HarperBusiness, 1997),
p. 123.
30 Timothy Patrick Cahill, Profiles in the American Dream: The Real-Life Stories of the
Struggles of American Entrepreneurs (Hanover, MA: Christopher Publishing House,
1994), p. 37.
31 Porter Bibb, Ted Turner: It Ain’t as Easy as It Looks (New York: Crown, 1993), p. 106.
32 Gene N. Landrum, Profiles of Genius: Thirteen Creative Men Who Changed the
World (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1993), p. 222.
33 Vincent Alonzo, “Cutting Loose,” Incentive, May 1995, p. 35.
34 James W. McLamore, The Burger King: Jim McLamore and the Building of an Em-
pire (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998), p. 43.
35 Gail Degeorge, The Making of a Blockbuster: How Wayne Huizenga Built a Sports
and Entertainment Empire from Trash, Grit, and Videotape (New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 1996), p. 102.
36 Jennings, Self-Made Women, p. 133.
37 Landrum, Profiles of Genius, p. 223.
38 Jay Van Andel, An Enterprising Life: An Autobiography (New York: HarperBusiness,
1998), pp. 16–18.
39 Landrum, Profiles of Genius, p. 169.
40 Cahill, Profiles in the American Dream, p. viii.
41 Landrum, Profiles of Genius, p. 127.
42 Lloyd E. Shefsky, Entrepreneurs Are Made Not Born (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1994), p. 97.
43 Anita Roddick and Irene Prokop, Body and Soul: Profits with Principles—The Amazing
Success Story of Anita Roddick and the Body Shop (New York: Crown, 1991), p. 87.
44 Fred Lager, Ben & Jerry’s: The Inside Scoop—How Two Real Guys Built a Business
with a Social Conscience and a Sense of Humor (New York: Crown, 1994), pp. 20–29.
45 Ben Cohen, Jerry Greenfield, and Meredith Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip: How
to Run a Values-Led Business and Make Money Too (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1997), pp. 24–25.
46 Monaghan, Pizza Tiger, pp. 62–64.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
316

47 Degeorge, The Making of a Blockbuster, pp. 45–46.
48 Forbes: Great Minds of Business, p. 49.
49 Fields, One Smart Cookie, pp. 56–59.
50 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 65.
51 Ibid.
52 Robert Mondavi and Paul Chutkow, Harvests of Joy: My Passion for Excellence;
How the Good Life Became Great Business (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1998),
pp. 24–25.
53 Landrum, Profiles of Genius, p. 221.
54 Satoru Otsuki, Good Mileage: The High-Performance Business Philosophy of Soi-
chiro Honda (Japan: NHK Publishing, 1996), pp. 169–171.
55 Thomas Stemberg, Staples for Success (Santa Monica, CA: Knowledge Exchange,
1996), p. 150.
56 Jennings, Self-Made Women, p. 42.
57 Ron Lieber, Upstart Start-Ups (New York: Broadway Books, 1998), p. 15.
58 A. David Silver, Entrepreneurial Megabucks: The 100 Greatest Entrepreneurs of the
Last 25 Years (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1985), p. 17.
Chapter 2
11 Lillian Vernon, An Eye for Winners: How I Built One of America’s Greatest Direct-
Mail Businesses (New York: HarperCollins, 1996), p. 63.
12 Warren Buffett, “Track Record Is Everything,” Across the Board, October 1991,
p. 59.
13 Ibid.
14 Walton and Huey, Sam Walton, pp. 258–259.
15 Stemberg, Staples for Success, pp. 72–73.
16 Ibid.
17 Ibid., pp. 70–71.
18 Ibid., p. 71.
19 Michael Dell and Catherine Fredman, Direct from Dell: Strategies That Revolution-
ized an Industry (New York: HarperBusiness, 1999), pp. 201–202.
10 Ibid., 82.
11 Wilson Harrell, “Hog Hunt,” Success, August 1997, p. 96.
12 Ibid.
13 Roddick and Prokop, Body and Soul, p. 68.
14 Ibid.
15 Ibid.
16 Landrum, Profiles of Genius, p. 88.
17 Stemberg, Staples for Success, p. 28.
N O T E S
317

18 Craig E. Aronogg and John L. Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs: Profiles of En-
trepreneurs and the Businesses They Started, Representing 74 Companies in 30 In-
dustries (Detroit, MI: Omnigraphics, 1992), p. 127.
19 Bernie Marcus and Arthur Blank, Built from Scratch: How a Couple of Regular Guys
Grew the Home Depot from Nothing to $30 Million (New York: Random House,
1999), p. xvi.
20 Mary Kay Ash, Mary Kay, (New York: Harper & Row, 1981), p. 29.
21 Mondavi and Chutkow, Harvests of Joy, p. 24.
22 Stemberg, Staples for Success, p. 148.
23 Williams, Lead, Follow, or Get Out of the Way, p. 14.
24 Tom Chappell, The Soul of a Business, (New York: Bantam Trade Paperbook, 1994),
p. 113.
25 Forbes: Great Minds of Business, p. xx.
26 Aronogg and Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs, p. 227.
27 Shefsky, Entrepreneurs Are Made Not Born, pp. 126–127.
28 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 77.
29 Mondavi and Chutkow, Harvests of Joy, p. 77.
30 McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible, p. 403.
31 Ash, Mary Kay, pp. 119–120.
32 “Hall of Fame Inductees: Phineas Taylor (P.T.) Barnum,” <http://www.ltbn.com
/tribbarnum.html>, (May 13, 1999).
33 David Packard, The HP Way, (New York: HarperBusiness, 1995), pp. 97–98.
34 Chris Roush, Inside Home Depot: How One Company Revolutionized an Industry
through the Relentless Pursuit of Growth (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999), p. 14.
35 Aronogg and Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs, p. 111.
36 Ibid., p. 182.
37 Joseph J. Fucini and Suzy Fucini, Entrepreneurs: The Men and Women behind Fa-
mous Brand Names and How They Made It (Boston: G.K. Hill, 1985), p. 4.
38 Ibid., pp. 6–7.
39 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 200.
40 Vernon, An Eye for Winners, p. 206.
41 David G. Hogan, Selling ’Em by the Sack: White Castle and the Creation of Ameri-
can Food (New York: New York University Press, 1997), p. 131.
42 Forbes: Great Minds of Business, p. 154.
43 Vernon, An Eye for Winners, p. 212.
44 “Hall of Fame Inductees: Phineas Taylor (P.T.) Barnum.”
45 Branson, Losing My Virginity, pp. 352–353.
46 Williams, Lead, Follow, or Get Out of the Way, p. 55.
47 Richard Branson, “Risk Taking,” Journal of General Management, Winter 1985, p. 8.
48 Ibid., p. 10.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
318

49 Bill Gates, with Collins Hemingway, Business @ the Speed of Thought: Using a
Digital Nervous System (New York: Warner Brothers, 1999), p. 162.
50 Echo Montgomery Garrett, “Branson the Bold,” Success, November 1992, p. 25.
51 Branson, “Risk Taking,” p. 7.
52 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 76.
53 Gregory K. Ericksen, What’s Luck Got to Do with It? Twelve Entrepreneurs Reveal
the Secrets behind Their Success (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997), pp. 50–51.
54 Walter Guzzardi, “Wisdom from the Giants of Business: A Directory of the Laure-
ates,” Fortune, July 3, 1989, p. 80.
55 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 206.
56 Ibid., pp. 206–207.
57 Lesley Hazleton, “Profile: Jeff Bezos,” Success, July 1998, p. 60.
58 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 208.
59 Landrum, Profiles of Genius, p. 221.
60 Mondavi and Chutkow, Harvests of Joy, p. 53.
61 Ibid.
62 Degeorge, The Making of a Blockbuster, p. 17.
63 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 35.
64 “A Fable concerning Ambition,” Economist, June 21, 1997, p. 69.
65 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 109.
66 Jaclyn Fierman, “Winning Ideas from Maverick Managers,” Fortune, February 6,
1995, p. 80.
67 Michael A. Cusumano, Competing on Internet Time: Lessons from Netscape and Its
Battle with Microsoft (New York: Free Press, 1998), pp. 93–95.
68 Williams, Lead, Follow, or Get Out of the Way, p. 13.
69 Cusumano, Competing on Internet Time, p. 94.
70 Walton and Huey, Sam Walton, pp. 229–230.
71 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, pp. 203–205.
72 John P. Kotter, Matsushita Leadership: Lessons from the Twentieth Century’s Most
Remarkable Entrepreneur (New York: Free Press, 1997), p. 6.
73 Ash, Mary Kay on People Management, p. 91.
74 Mary Kay Ash, Mary Kay You Can Have It All: Lifetime Wisdom from America’s
Foremost Woman Entrepreneur (Rocklin, CA: Prima, 1995), p. 4.
75 Ibid., p. 92.
76 Ash, Mary Kay You Can Have It All, p. 4.
77 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 200.
78 Cohen, Greenfield, and Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip, p. 48.
79 Ibid., pp. 49–50.
80 Roddick and Prokop, Body and Soul, p. 16.
81 Graves and Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being White, pp. 136–138.
N O T E S
319

82 R. David Thomas, Dave’s Way (New York: Berkeley Books, 1992), pp. 105–111.
83 Warren Buffett, “Warren Buffett: How I Goofed,” Fortune, April 9, 1990, pp. 95–96.
84 Ibid., p. 95.
85 Branson, Losing My Virginity, p. 343.
86 Roush, Inside Home Depot, p. 213.
Chapter 3
11 Cohen, Greenfield, and Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip, pp. 90–93.
12 This discussion is adapted from Stephen M. Pollan and Mark Levine, The Field
Guide to Starting a Business (New York: Fireside, 1990), pp. 121–131, 183–186.
13 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 78.
14 Pollan and Levine, The Field Guide to Starting a Business, p. 135.
15 Roddick and Prokop, Body and Soul, p. 73.
16 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 73.
17 Ibid., pp. 73–74.
18 Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only, pp. 134–135.
19 Graves and Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being White, p. 164.
10 Ibid., p. 165.
11 Ibid., pp. 164–165.
12 Thomas, Dave’s Way, pp. 102–103.
13 Monaghan, Pizza Tiger, pp. 251–252.
14 Ibid., p. 249.
15 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 186.
16 Ibid., p. 188.
17 Ibid., p. 187.
18 Fields, One Smart Cookie, pp. 63–64.
19 Cohen, Greenfield, and Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip, pp. 91–92.
20 Graves and Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being White, p. 164.
21 Ibid.
22 Cahill, Profiles in the American Dream, p. 40.
23 Roddick and Prokop, Body and Soul, pp. 71–72.
24 Ibid., 72.
25 Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only, p. 135.
26 Monaghan, Pizza Tiger, pp. 252–254.
27 Graves and Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being White, p. 163.
28 Based on a story in Cecil B. Day Jr., Day by Day, (Middle Village, NY: Jonathan
David Publishers, 1990), p. 154.
29 Charles H. Ferguson, High Stakes, No Prisoners: A Winner’s Tale of Greed and Glory
in the Internet Wars (New York: Times Books, 1999).
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
320

30 Charles H. Ferguson, “True Finance: The Education of an Internet Entrepreneur,”
Fast Company, October 1999, p. 286.
31 Ibid., p. 294.
32 Ibid., p. 296.
33 Stemberg, Staples for Success, p. 38.
34 Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only, p. 94.
35 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, pp. 49–50.
36 Ibid., pp. 50–51.
37 Ibid., p. 70.
38 Ibid., pp. 70–73.
39 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 68.
40 Mondavi and Chutkow, Harvests of Joy, p. 153.
41 Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only, p. 98.
42 Ibid.
43 Lager, Ben & Jerry’s: The Inside Scoop, p. 28.
44 Vernon, An Eye for Winners, p. 208.
45 Ibid., p. 51.
46 Ibid.
47 Gates, with Hemingway, Business @ the Speed of Thought, p. 205.
48 Fields, One Smart Cookie, pp. 9–10.
49 Gates, with Hemingway, Business @ the Speed of Thought, p. 214.
50 Vernon, An Eye for Winners, p. 66.
51 Hadfield, Wealth within Reach, p. 53.
52 Bibb, Ted Turner, pp. 83–84.
53 Vance H. Trimble, Overnight Success: Federal Express and Fredrick Smith, Its Rene-
gade Creator (New York: Crown, 1993), pp. 161–162.
54 Lager, Ben & Jerry’s: The Inside Scoop, p. 18.
55 Ibid., pp. 19–20.
56 Stemberg, Staples for Success, p. 105.
57 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 186.
58 Ibid., pp. 186–189.
59 Stemberg, Staples for Success, p. 108.
60 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 93.
61 Robert D. Hof, “Inside an Internet IPO,” Business Week, September 6, 1999,
pp. 60–73.
62 Ibid., p. 68.
63Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, p. 188.
64 Ibid.
65 Lager, Ben & Jerry’s: The Inside Scoop, pp. 124–125.
N O T E S
321

Chapter 4
11 Roush, Inside Home Depot, p. 13; Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 80. Ac-
cording to Roush, the kids had $250, but Marcus recalls that they were given $700.
We use Marcus’s figure.
12 Aronogg and Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs, p. 460.
13 Fields, One Smart Cookie, pp. 80–81.
14 Ibid., p. 81.
15 Ibid.
16 Walton and Huey, Sam Walton, pp. 205–206.
17 Ibid., pp. 207–208.
18 Ibid., p. 208.
19 Lager, Ben & Jerry’s, p. 29.
10 Joe Vitale, There’s a Customer Born Every Minute: P.T. Barnum’s Secrets to Busi-
ness Success (New York: AMACON, 1998), pp. 33–34.
11 Roddick and Prokop, Body and Soul, p. 79.
12 Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only, p. 109.
13 Ibid., pp. 110–111.
14 Cusumano, Competing on Internet Time, p. 72.
15 Carnoy, “Richard Branson,” p. 63.
16 Tim Jackson, Richard Branson, Virgin King: Inside Richard Branson’s Business Em-
pire (London: HarperCollins, 1995), pp. 248, 305–306.
17 Des Dearlove and Stuart Crainer, Business the Richard Branson Way: Ten Secrets of
the World’s Greatest Brand Builder (New York: AMACOM, 1999), p. 99.
18 Katherine Callan and Michael Warshaw, “Secrets of the Empire Builders,” Success,
September 1996, p. 29.
19 Michael Adams, “Fly Boy,” Successful Meetings, August 1992, p. 36.
20 Callan and Warshaw, “Secrets of the Empire Builders,” p. 29.
21 Thomas, Dave’s Way, pp. 61–62.
22 Lager, Ben & Jerry’s, pp. 31–33.
23 Graves and Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being White, pp. 151–153.
24 Ibid., p. 151.
25 Ibid., p. 153.
26Ash, Mary Kay You Can Have It All, pp. 192–193.
27 Williams, Lead, Follow, or Get Out of the Way, p. 120.
28 Forbes: Great Minds of Business, pp. 133–134.
29 Landrum, Profiles of Genius, p. 195.
30 Akio Morita, with Edwin M. Reingold and Mitsuko Shimomura, Made in Japan:
Akio Morita and Sony (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1986), p. 79.
31 McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible, p. 459.
32 Packard, The HP Way, p. 120.
33 Morita, with Reingold and Shimomura, Made in Japan, p. 58.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
322

34 Ibid., pp. 58–60.
35 Ibid., pp. 59–60.
36 Ibid.
37 Akio Morita, From a 500-Dollar Company to a Global Corporation (Pittsburgh, PA:
Carnegie Mellon University Press, 1985), p. 20.
38 Gerandine Willigan, “High-Performance Marketing: An Interview with Nike’s Phil
Knight,” Harvard Business Review, July 1992, p. 92.
39 This discussion of White Castle is based on Hogan, Selling ’Em by the Sack, pp. 74–77.
40 Mondavi and Chutkow, Harvests of Joy, pp. 159–160.
41 Bibb, Ted Turner: It Ain’t as Easy as It Looks, p. 79.
42 Kroc and Anderson, Grinding It Out, pp. 106–107.
43 Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only, p. 104.
44 Ibid., pp. 104–105.
45 Ibid., p. 105.
46 Ibid., p. 106.
47 Ibid.
48 Roddick and Prokop, Body and Soul, pp. 113–114.
49 Lager, Ben & Jerry’s, p. 31.
50 Current Biography Yearbook 1995 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1996), p. 564.
51 Ibid.
52 Ibid., p. 565.
53 Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only, p. 107.
54 Ibid., p. 106.
55 Cohen, Greenfield, and Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip, p. 130.
56 Donald Katz, Just Do It: The Nike Spirit in the Corporate World (New York: Random
House, 1994), p. 150.
Chapter 5
11 Kevin Freiberg, Jackie Freiberg, and Tom Peters, Nuts! Southwest Airlines’ Crazy
Recipe for Business and Personal Success (New York: Broadway Books, 1996),
pp. 121–122.
12 Monaghan, Pizza Tiger, p. 246.
13 Ibid.
14 “Hall of Fame Inductees: Bud Hadfield,” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribhadfield.html>,
(May 13, 1999).
15 Cahill, Profiles in the American Dream, pp. iv–v.
16 Ibid., p. iii.
17 Fields, One Smart Cookie, p. 132.
18 Ibid., p. 89.
19 Ibid., pp. 89–90.
N O T E S
323

10 Maxwell Boas and Steve Chase, Big Mac: The Unauthorized Story of McDonald’s
(New York: Dutton, 1976), pp. 26–27.
11 Cahill, Profiles in the American Dream, p. iv.
12 “Spic and Span Follows a Clean Philosophy,” Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel, August
3, 1997. Also found at <http://www.onwis.com/business/news/0804cleaners.stm>,
(August 4, 1997).
13 Ibid.
14 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, pp. 5–6.
15 Blueprints for Service Quality: The Federal Express Approach—AMA Management
Briefing (New York: AMACOM, 1997), p. 14.
16 Monaghan, Pizza Tiger, p. 9.
17 Kotter, Matsushita Leadership, p. 5.
18 Graves and Crandall, How to Succeed in Business without Being White, pp. 35–36.
19 Fields, One Smart Cookie, pp. 74–76.
20 Roush, Inside Home Depot, pp. 10–12.
21 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, pp. 135–136.
22 Ibid., p. 135.
23 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, pp. 163–166.
24 Ibid., p. 165.
25 Ibid., p. 169.
26 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 135.
27 Hadfield, Wealth within Reach, p. 115.
28 Ibid.
29 Ibid., pp. 145–146.
30 Ash, Mary Kay You Can Have It All, pp. 213–214.
31 Freiberg, Freiberg, and Peters, Nuts! pp. 209–210.
32 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, pp. 139–140.
33 Gates, with Hemingway, Business @ the Speed of Thought, pp. 187–188.
34 Ibid., p. 188.
35 Ibid., p. 187.
36 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, pp. 140–141.
37 Ash, Mary Kay on People Management, p. 104.
38 Roush, Inside Home Depot, p. 82.
39 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, pp. 167–168.
40 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, pp. 133–134.
41 Jackson, Richard Branson, Virgin King, pp. 247–248.
42 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 144.
43 Herb Kelleher, “Customer Service: It Starts at Home,” Secured Lender, May–June
1998, p. 69.
44 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, pp. 158–159.
45 Ibid., p. 140.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
324

46 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 142–143.
47 Kelleher, “Customer Service,” p. 70.
48 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 130.
49 Degeorge, The Making of a Blockbuster, p. 136.
50 Gates, with Hemingway, Business @ the Speed of Thought, pp. 159–160.
51 Ibid., pp. 192–193.
52 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, pp. 144–145.
53 Gates, with Hemingway, Business @ the Speed of Thought, pp. 197–198.
54 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 151.
55 Ibid., pp. 151–152.
56 Gates, with Hemingway, Business @ the Speed of Thought, pp. 193–194.
57 Michael Dell, “Service Sells,” Executive Excellence, August 1993, p. 8.
58 Gates, with Hemingway, Business @ the Speed of Thought, p. 4.
59 Kelleher, “Customer Service,” p. 68.
58 Freiberg, Freiberg, and Peters, Nuts! pp. 269–270.
59 Nora Wood, “Still Crazy after All These Years,” Incentive, February 1997, p. 30.
Chapter 6
11 Cohen, Greenfield, and Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip, p. 165.
12 Ken Iverson and Tom Varian, Plain Talk: Lessons from a Business Maverick (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1998), p. 21.
13 Ash, Mary Kay You Can Have It All, p. 221.
14 Manfred F.R. Kets de Vries, “Charisma in Action: The Transformational Abilities of
Virgin’s Richard Branson and ABB’s Percy Barnevik,” Organizational Dynamics,
Winter 1998, p. 8.
15 Kotter, Matsushita Leadership, p. 216.
16 Walton and Huey, Sam Walton, pp. 161–162.
17 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 104.
18 Dell and Fredman. Direct from Dell, p. 110.
19 Ibid., p. 109.
10 Ibid., p. 110.
11 Ibid.
12 Michael A. Cusumano and Richard W. Selby, Microsoft Secrets: How the World’s
Most Powerful Software Company Creates Technology, Shapes Markets, and Man-
ages People (New York: Free Press, 1995), p. 58.
13 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 111.
14 Ibid.
15 Stross, The Microsoft Way, p. 37.
16 Ibid.
17 Ibid.
N O T E S
325

18 Michael A. Verespej, “Flying His Own Course,” Industry Week, November 20, 1995,
pp. 22–23.
19 William G. Lee, “A Conversation with Herb Kelleher,” Organizational Dynamics,
Autumn 1994, p. 72.
20 Ross Perot, “Change Is Fun,” Executive Excellence, September 1996, pp. 10–11.
21 Harrell, For Entrepreneurs Only, p. 79.
22 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, p. 121.
23 Ricardo Semler, Maverick: The Success Story behind the World’s Most Unusual
Workplace (London: Century Press, 1993), p. 42.
24 Roddick and Prokop, Body and Soul, pp. 22–23.
25 Robert L. Shook, The Entrepreneurs: Twelve Who Took Risks and Succeeded (New
York: Harper & Row, 1980), p. 106.
26 Liz Harman, “Starbuck’s Schultz Reveals How Firm Keeps Perking,” San Diego
Business Journal, September 29, 1997, p. 4.
27 Cohen, Greenfield, and Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip, p. 165.
28 Ibid., pp. 165–166.
29 Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, pp. 80–81.
30 G. Gendron and B. Burlingham, “The Entrepreneur of the Decade,” Inc., April 1989,
p. 119.
31 Daniel Ichbiah and Susan L. Knepper, The Making of Microsoft: How Bill Gates and
His Team Created the World’s Most Successful Software Company (Rocklin, CA:
Prima, 1991), p. 226.
32 Thomas, Dave’s Way, p. 64.
33 Otsuki, Good Mileage, p. 39.
34 Ibid., p. 40.
35 Ibid., pp. 39–40.
36 Ibid., p. 175.
37 Ash, Mary Kay on People Management, p. 17.
38 Ronald B. Lieber, “Why Employees Love These Companies,” Fortune, January 12,
1998, p. 72.
39 Freiberg, Freiberg, and Peters, Nuts! p. 285.
40 Ricardo Semler, “Managing without Managers,” Harvard Business Review,
September–October 1989, p. 81.
41 Walton and Huey, Sam Walton, p. 177.
42 Iverson and Varian, Plain Talk, p. 67.
43 Ibid., pp. 58–59.
44 Ibid., p. 59.
45 Semler, Maverick, p. 58.
46 Ross Perot, “Caring Leaders,” Executive Excellence, April 1996, p. 6.
47 Semler, Maverick, p. 114.
48 Ibid.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
326

49 Morita, with Reingold and Shimomura, Made in Japan, p. 154.
50 Freiberg, Freiberg, and Peters, Nuts! pp. 118–119.
51 Jackson, Richard Branson, Virgin King, p. 51.
52 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 126.
53 Ibid., p. 130.
54 Ash, Mary Kay, p. 40.
55 Walton and Huey, Sam Walton, p. 200.
56Schultz and Yang, Pour Your Heart into It, pp. 337–338.
57 Ash, Mary Kay on People Management, p. 30.
58 Perot, “Caring Leaders,” p. 6.
59 Dell and Fredman, Direct from Dell, pp. 117–118.
60 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, pp. 242–243.
61 Lee, “A Conversation with Herb Kelleher,” 74.
62 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, p. 107.
63 Packard, The HP Way, pp. 135–136.
64 Ibid., p. 137.
65 Semler, Maverick, p. 5.
66 Jane Applegate, “Acting Like an Entrepreneur,” Denver Business Journal, No-
vember 8, 1996, p. 3B.
67 Semler, Maverick, p. 100.
68 Garrett, “Branson the Bold,” p. 26.
69 Ichbiah and Knepper, The Making of Microsoft, p. 227.
70 David Sheff, “The Interview: Richard Branson,” Forbes, February 24, 1997, p. 100.
71 Garrett, “Branson the Bold,” p. 26.
72 Ash, Mary Kay on People Management, p. 23.
73 Ibid., p. 27.
74 Ash, Mary Kay You Can Have It All, pp. 200–201.
75 Ibid., p. 201.
76 Walton and Huey, Sam Walton, pp. 162–163.
77 Stross, The Microsoft Way, pp. 24–26.
78 Cohen, Greenfield, and Maran, Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip, p. 164.
79 Ibid.
80 Mondavi and Chutkow, Harvests of Joy, p. 142.
81 Thomas, Building a Company, pp. 142–143.
82 Ibid., p. 143.
83 Marcus and Blank, Built from Scratch, pp. 244–245.
Appendix
11 Henry Goldblatt, “Billionaires,” Fortune, October 2, 1995, p. 68.
12 Ibid.
N O T E S
327

13 Alison L. Sprout and Kimberly Beals McDonald, “The Rise of Netscape,” Fortune,
July 10, 1995, p. 140.
14 Current Biography Yearbook 1997 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1998), pp. 10–13.
15 F. Goodman, “The Virgin King,” Vanity Fair, May 1992, p. 172.
16 Ibid.
17 Ben Brown, “The Man behind MindSpring,” Southern Living, February 1999,
pp. 30GL–37GL.
18 Current Biography Yearbook 1987 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1988), p. 74.
19 “Outsmarting Smart Money Men,” New York, April 22, 1985, p. 52.
10 Fucini and Fucini, Entrepreneurs, pp. 5–6.
11 L. Jereski, “Heart, Minds, and Market Share,” Forbes, April 3, 1989, p. 80.
12 Amy Cartese, “Win 95, Lose ’96?” Business Week, December 18, 1995, p. 34.
13 K. Hubbard, “For Ice Cream Moguls Ben and Jerry, Making ‘Cherry Garcia’ and
‘Chunky Monkey’ Is a Labor of Love,” People, September 10, 1990, p. 73.
14 Ibid.
15 Ibid.
16 Aronogg and Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs, p. 107.
17 Ibid.
18 David Kirkpatrick and Patty De Llosa, “PC Competition: Now Everyone in PCs
Wants to Be like Michael Dell,” Fortune, September 8, 1997, p. 76.
19 Aronogg and Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs, p. 119.
20 Current Biography Yearbook 1998 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1999), p. 156.
21 Aronogg and Ward, p. 126.
22 Ibid., p. 127.
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid., p. 129.
25 Thomas, Building a Company, p. 41.
26 Ibid., p. 44.
27 E. Zuckerman, “William Gates III,” People, August 20, 1990, p. 91.
28 Current Biography Yearbook 1991, p. 239.
29 Current Biography Yearbook 1997, p. 202.
30 Aronogg and Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs, p. 182.
31 Ibid., p. 183.
32 Ibid.
33 Cindy Murphy, “Karing, Kan-do Kopy King,” Franchising World, January–February
1995, p. 48.
34 Ibid., p. 52.
35 Scott DeGarmo, “Wilson Harrell: He Did It His Way,” <http://www.ltbn.com/Ar-
ticles/Harrelltrib.html>, (October 21, 1999).
36 Ibid.
37 Ibid.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
328

38 Aronogg and Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs, p. 226.
39 Silver, Entrepreneurial Megabucks, p. 232.
40 Ibid.
41 Current Biography Yearbook 1995, p. 261.
42 Ibid.
43 Diane Mermigas, “A Blockbuster Change,” Advertising Age, October 3, 1994, p. 1.
44 Hogan, Selling ’Em by the Sack, p. 28.
45 Ibid., p. 30.
46 Current Biography Yearbook 1998, p. 319.
47 Ibid.
48 Current Biography Yearbook 1998, p. 320.
49 Ibid., p. 321.
50 Ibid.
51 Current Biography Yearbook 1996 (New York: H.W. Wilson), p. 201.
52 Gelbert, Doug, So Who the Heck Was Oscar Mayer: The Real People behind Those
Brand Names, (New York: Barricade Books, 1996), p. 336.
53 “We Weren’t Just Airborne Yesterday,” (Southwest Airlines Web site),
<http://www.southwest.com/about_swa/airborne.html>, (November 10, 1999).
54 Current Biography Yearbook 1997, p. 271.
55 Current Biography Yearbook 1973 (New York: H.W. Wilson), p. 230.
56 Ibid.
57 Gelbert, So Who the Heck Was Oscar Mayer, p. 339.
58 Current Biography Yearbook 1981 (New York: H.W. Wilson), p. 262.
59 Ibid.
60 Ibid.
61 Ibid.
62 Current Biography Yearbook 1996, p. 238.
63 Ibid.
64 Current Biography Yearbook 1966 (New York: H.W. Wilson), p. 239.
65 Ibid., p. 238.
66 John P. Kotter, “Business as a Moral Undertaking: The Matsushita Story,” American
Enterprise, July 1997, p. 56.
67 Ibid.
68 McLamore, The Burger King, p. xviii.
69 Ibid., p. xx.
70 Ibid., p. xxi.
71 Ibid., p. xxix.
72 Ibid., pp. xxxi–xxxii.
73 Ibid., p. xxxiii.
74 Kathleen Gallagher and Avrum D. Lank, “Spic and Span Follows a Clean Philoso-
phy,” Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, August 3, 1997, p. 3.
N O T E S
329

75 Current Biography Yearbook 1990 (New York: H.W. Wilson), p. 452.
76 J.D. Reed and Vicki Sheff, “The Patriarch,” People, October 10, 1998, p. 151.
77 Current Biography Yearbook 1996, p. 429.
78 Ibid., 430.
79 Ibid.
80 Ibid.
81 Ibid, p. 431.
82 “Ross Perot’s Crusade,” Business Week, October 6, 1986, p. 60.
83 Roddick and Prokop, Body and Soul, p. 34.
84 Ibid., p. 35.
85 Ibid., p. 39.
86 Ibid., p. 43.
87 Ibid., p. 66.
88 Forbes: Great Minds of Business, p. 126.
89 Ibid., p. 128.
90 Ibid., p. 124.
91 Ibid.
92 Current Biography Yearbook 1973, p. 374.
93 Ibid.
94 Ibid., p. 375.
95 Current Biography Yearbook 1997, p. 497.
96 Ibid.
97 Ibid.
98 Aronogg and Ward, Contemporary Entrepreneurs, p. 459.
99 Marilyn Achiron, “Dave Thomas,” People, August 2, 1993, p. 86.
100 Ibid.
101 Current Biography Yearbook 1995, p. 563.
102 L. Killian, “Hamburger Helper,” Forbes, August 5, 1991, p. 106.
103 Current Biography Yearbook 1995, p. 564.
104 Ibid., 563.
105 Ibid., 564.
106 B. Garfield, “Dave’s Way Is Right Way for New Wendy’s Ads,” Advertising Age,
September 30, 1991, p. 52.
107 Current Biography Yearbook 1998, p. 575.
108 P. Painton, “The Taming of Ted Turner,” Time, January 6, 1992, p. 22.
109 Lisa Coleman, “I Went Out and Did It,” Forbes, August 17, 1992, p. 102.
110 Current Biography Yearbook 1996, p. 607.
111 “CEO of Catalog Business: Lillian Vernon,” Working Woman, June 1986, p. 62.
112 Current Biography Yearbook 1992 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1993), p. 590.
113 Wang, with Linder, Lessons: An Autobiography, p. 17.
114 Ibid., p. 25.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
330

Select Bibliography
“About ‘TCBY’.” <http://www.tcby.com/smoothie/about/newhistory.html>, (Sep-
tember 21, 1999).
“About ‘TCBY’: The TCBY Timeline.” <http://www.tcby./smoothie/about/newtimeline
.html> (September 21, 1999).
Achiron, Marilyn. “Dave Thomas,” People, August 2, 1993, p. 86.
Adams, Michael. “Fly Boy.” Successful Meetings, August 1992, pp. 32–41.
Adler, Carlye. “What Do Modern Girls Really Want?” Fortune, June 21, 1999,
pp. 186[H], 186[J].
Akasie, Jay. “Learning from Mistakes.” Forbes, April 7, 1997, pp. 20–22.
Alioto, Maryann. “Lawrence Ellison.” Directors and Boards, Fall 1997, pp. 79–80.
Allen, Jamie. “Netscape Co-Founder Relives the Internet Revolution.” <http://www.cnn
.com/books/news/9906/18/netscape/>, (June 19, 1999).
Allen, Margaret. “Oh Nuts!” Dallas Business Journal, April 11, 1997, p. 18.
Allen, Robin Lee. “Kroc, Monaghan Exemplify Industry’s Charity as Season of Good
Will Nears.” Nation’s Restaurant News, October 12, 1998, p. 33.
Allerton, Haidee. “Mind over Matter.” Training and Development, March 1996, p. 9.
Allman, W.F. “Power to the People, Etched in Silicon.” U.S. News and World Report,
June 18, 1990, p. 8.
Alonzo, Vincent. “Cutting Loose.” Incentive, May 1995, pp. 35–36.
Alsop, Stewart. “Stewart Alsop Industry Achievement Award: Marc Andreessen.” Info-
World, January 29, 1996, p. 59.
“Amazon vs. Everybody.” Fortune, November 8, 1999, pp. 120–128.
“America’s Smart Young Entrepreneurs.” Fortune, March 21, 1994, pp. 34–48.
“An Wang,” <http://www.invent.org/book/book-text/106.html> (November 16, 1999).
Anderson, Duncan Maxwell. “Freedom Fighter.” Success, June 1998, pp. 26–27.
Anderson, Duncan Maxwell, and Michael Warshaw. “The Number One Entrepreneur in
America.” Success, March 1995, pp. 32–43.
Angrist, Stanley W. “Entrepreneur in Short Pants.” Forbes, March 7, 1988, pp. 84–85.
“Anthony Desio, Founder and Former Head of Mail Boxes, Etc., Takes Over Helm at
IDTec in Vista.” <http://www.newswire.cal/releases/November1998/10/c3210.html>
(September 21, 1999).
Applegate, Jane. “Acting Like an Entrepreneur.” Denver Business Journal, November
8, 1996, p. 3B.
———. “Quirky CEO: Think Like an Entrepreneur.” Triangle Business Journal, No-
vember 15, 1996, p. 13.
331

Aronogg, Craig E., and John L. Ward. Contemporary Entrepreneurs: Profiles of Entre-
preneurs and the Businesses They Started, Representing 74 Companies in 30 Indus-
tries. Detroit, MI: Omnigraphics, 1992.
“Arthur Blank.” Atlanta Business Chronicle, July 28, 1995, p. 49.
Ash, Mary Kay. Mary Kay. New York: Harper & Row, 1981.
———. Mary Kay on People Management. New York: Warner Books, 1984.
———. Mary Kay You Can Have It All: Lifetime Wisdom from America’s Foremost
Woman Entrepreneur. Rocklin, CA: Prima, 1995.
“Bagehot: Richard Branson, MP.” Economist, May 28, 1994, p. 59.
Banks, Howard. “When the Going Gets Tough. . . . ” Forbes, January 2, 1995, p. 16.
Bartholomew, Doug. “Successful? Try, Try Again.” Industry Week, February 2, 1998,
p. 56–62.
Bartlett, Richard C. “Mary Kay’s Foundation.” Journal of Business Strategy, July–
August 1995, pp. 16–19.
Bartz, Carol, Kenneth Iverson, Bridget Macaskill, Ann Richards, Bill Gates, George
Bush, Charlotte Beers, Joan Lappin, Lynn St. James, and Ross Perot. “A New
Agenda.” Working Woman, November 1992, pp. 55–65.
Becklund, Laurie, and J.B. Strasser. Swoosh: The Unauthorized Story of Nike and the
Men Who Played There. New York: Harcourt Brace Javonovich, 1991.
Bedi, Hari. “Right Attitude Is the Key to Success.” Asian Business, January 1996, p. 9.
Bell, Christopher, and Jeremy Dann. “The Man Who Can Say ‘No’: Views on
Japanese–U.S. Relations.” Harvard International Review, Fall 1990, p. 23.
“Berkeley’s Entrepreneur Forum.” <http://www.haas.berkeley.edu/alumni> (March 18,
1999).
“Bernard Marcus.” <http://sbe.nova.edu/alumni/bios/bernard.htm> (May 5, 1999).
Berss, Marcia. “The Next Pizza—Pasta?” Forbes, November 8, 1993, p. 200.
“The Best Advice I Ever Got.” Working Woman, September 1994, p. 31.
“The Best Entrepreneurs.” Business Week, January 13, 1997, p. 74.
“The Best Entrepreneurs.” Business Week, January 12, 1998, p. 56.
Bibb, Porter. “I’ll Be the Most Powerful Man in America.” Success, December 1993,
pp. 46–49.
———. Ted Turner: It Ain’t as Easy as It Looks. New York: Crown, 1993.
Bing, Jonathan, Maria Simson, and Jeff Zaleski. “An Enterprising Life.” Publishers
Weekly, August 3, 1998, pp. 68–69.
Blank, Arthur. “They Sweat the Small Stuff.” Canadian Business, May 28, 1999,
pp. 51–55.
Blueprints for Service Quality: The Federal Express Approach—AMA Management
Briefing. New York: AMACOM, 1997.
Boas, Maxwell, and Steve Chase. Big Mac: The Unauthorized Story of McDonald’s.
New York: Dutton, 1976.
Bose, Mihir. “High Flyer.” Director, April 1995, p. 82.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
332

“Boston Beer History.” <http://www.samadams.com/company/background> (October
11, 1999).
Branch, Shelly. “The Brand Builders.” Fortune, May 10, 1999, p. 132.
Brandt, Richard L. “Dell Computer Corp.’s Michael Dell.” Upside, April 1998,
pp. 98–102.
———. “Internet Kamikazes: Yahoo’s Tim Koogle.” Upside, January 1998, pp. 100, 102.
———. “Interview: Netscape’s Marc Andreessen.” Upside, March 1998, pp. 76–79.
———. “Larry Ellison.” Upside, September 1997, pp. 86–97.
“Branson Builds with Open Mind.” Marketing, September 22, 1994, p. 3.
Branson, Richard. Losing My Virginity: How I’ve Survived, Had Fun, and Made a For-
tune Doing Business My Way. New York: Times Books, 1998.
—-. “Risk Taking.” Journal of General Management, Winter 1985, pp. 5–11.
Brewer, Charles. “Pulp Fiction.” Inc. (Technology Supplement), 1995, p. 79.
Brock, Pope. “Anita Roddick.” People Weekly, May 10, 1993, pp. 101–106.
Brokaw, Leslie, and David Whitford. “Then and Now.” Inc., September 1994,
pp. 69–77.
Brown, Ben. “The Man behind MindSpring.” Southern Living, February 1999,
pp. 30GL–37GL.
Brown, Bob. “Marc Andreessen Gets a Real Job.” Network World, September 15, 1997,
pp. 31, 36.
Brown, Thomas L. “Lessons from CNN.” Industry Week, April 1, 1991, p. 23.
Brownstein, Mark. “Conner’s Back: Finis Conner Does What He Knows Best.” Com-
puter Technology Review, Fourth quarter 1998, pp. 52–55.
Buckley, J. “The Pizza Man Chooses God.” U.S. News and World Report, July 29,
1991) p. 43.
Buffett, Warren. “Warren Buffett: How I Goofed.” Fortune, April 9, 1990, pp. 95–96.
Burlingham, Bo. “This Woman Has Changed Business Forever.” Inc., June 1990,
pp. 34–47.
“Business: Behind Branson.” Economist, February 21, 1998, pp. 63–66.
Butcher, Lee. Accidental Millionaire: The Rise and Fall of Steve Jobs at Apple Com-
puter. New York: Paragon House, 1988.
Butler, Charles. “The Magnificent Seven.” Sales and Marketing Management, No-
vember 1994, pp. 41–50.
Button, Graham. “Sam and Libby Try Again.” Forbes, March 15, 1993, p. 19.
Button, Kate. “Larry Ellison.” Chief Executive, July–August 1993, p. 22.
Byfield, Ted, and Virginia Byfield. “Sometimes the Wealthy Actually Do Sell Every-
thing and Give to the Poor.” Alberta Report/Western Report, October 26, 1998, p. 38.
Byman, Jeremy. Ted Turner, Cable Television Tycoon. Greensboro, NC: M. Reynolds,
1998.
Byrd, Alan. “Former Days Inn CEO Now Developing Orlando Hotels.” Atlanta Busi-
ness Chronicle, June 2, 1995, p. 6B.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
333

Cahill, Timothy Patrick. Profiles in the American Dream: The Real-Life Stories of the
Struggles of American Entrepreneurs. Hanover, MA: Christopher Publishing House,
1994.
Calderbank, Alison. “Robert Noyce.” Computer Reseller News, June 1, 1997, p. 116.
Callan, Katherine, and Michael Warshaw. “Secrets of the Empire Builders.” Success,
September 1996, pp. 29–33.
Carlino, Bill. “Ray Kroc.” Nation’s Restaurant News, February 1996, pp. 96–105.
Carlton, Jim. Apple: The Inside Story of Intrigue, Egomania, and Business Blunders.
New York: Times Books, 1997.
Carney, Karen E. “Kwik Kopy Printing Corp., Cypress, Texas.” Inc., November
1995, p. 53.
Carnoy, David. “Richard Branson.” Success, April 1998, pp. 62–63.
Carter, John Mack, and Joan Feeney. Starting at the Top: America’s New Achievers:
Twenty-Three Success Stories Told by Men and Women Whose Dreams of Being Boss
Came True. New York: Wm. Morrow, 1985.
Cartese, Amy. “Win 95, Lose ’96?” Business Week, December 18, 1995, p. 34.
Case, Steve. “Ten Commandments for Building the Medium: Setting Priorities.” Vital
Speeches of the Day, May 1, 1998, pp. 431–435.
“CEO Interview: Michael Dell.” Sales and Marketing Management, October 1997, p. 52.
“CEO of Catalog Business: Lillian Vernon.” Working Woman, June 1986, p. 62.
Chakravarty, Subrata N. “The Vindication of Edwin Land.” Forbes, May 4, 1987,
pp. 83–84.
Chappel, Tom. “The Soul of a Business.” Executive Female, January-February 1994,
p. 38.
———. The Soul of a Business. New York: Bantam Trade Paperbook, 1994.
Charan, Ram. “Managing to Be Best.” Time, December 7, 1998, p. 145.
“Charles Schwab: The Cut-Rate Cowboy Ups the Internet Ante.” Journal of Business
Strategy, September–October 1996, p. 38.
Chouinard, Yvon. “Coming of Age: Yvon Chouinard.” Inc., April 1989, p. 54.
Chowdhury, Neel. “Matsushita’s Legacy Lives On.” Fortune, March 31, 1997, p. 111.
“Chris Larsen.” <http://www.econference.org/content/bios/larsen.html> (November
10, 1999).
Clancy, Heather. “Dynamic Duos: Andrew Grove and Gordon Moore.” Computer Re-
seller News, June 1, 1997, pp. 13–18.
Cohen, Andy. “The 80 Most Influential People in Sales and Marketing History.” Sales
and Marketing Management, October 1998, p. 70.
Cohen, Ben, Jerry Greenfield, and Meredith Maran. Ben & Jerry’s Double-Dip: How to
Run a Values-Led Business and Make Money Too. New York: Simon & Schuster,
1997.
Coleman, Lisa. “I Went Out and Did It.” Forbes, August 17, 1992, p. 102.
Colvin, Geoffrey. “How to Be a Great eCEO.” Fortune, May 24, 1999, pp. 104–110.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
334

“Company History.” <http://www.dominos.com/Press/CompanyHistory.cfm> (April 25,
1999).
“Company History.” <http://www.lillianvernon.com/lv/about/abt12com.html> (April 25,
1999).
Cone, Edward. “Beyond Business.” Informationweek, July 21, 1997, pp. 46–54.
“Conner Peripherals.” <http://www.conner.com> (September 21, 1999).
Conlon, Ginger. “Mark Andreessen.” Sales and Marketing Management, July 1996, p. 53.
Coolidge, Carrie. “A Promise Kept.” Forbes, August 10, 1998, pp. 92–93.
Corry, John. “The Amway Way: Seeking the Profit of Many.” American Spectator, Oc-
tober 1998, pp. 82–83.
Coursey, David. “Egad! Larry Ellison Just Might Be Right!” Computerworld, Sep-
tember 23, 1996, p. 133.
Cullis, Michael D. “Advice from the Experts.” Franchising World, January–February
1996, p. 45.
Current Biography Yearbook 1940 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1941).
Current Biography Yearbook 1952, pp. 590–591. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1953.
Current Biography Yearbook 1966, pp. 238–240. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1967.
Current Biography Yearbook 1967 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1968).
Current Biography Yearbook 1969 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1970).
Current Biography Yearbook 1973, pp. 230–232, 374–376. New York: H.W. Wilson,
1974.
Current Biography Yearbook 1981, pp. 262–265. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1982.
Current Biography Yearbook 1987, pp. 74–76. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1988.
Current Biography Yearbook 1990, pp. 452–454. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1991.
Current Biography Yearbook 1991 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1992).
Current Biography Yearbook 1994 (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1995).
Current Biography Yearbook 1995, pp. 261–263, 562–565. New York: H.W. Wilson,
1996.
Current Biography Yearbook 1996, pp. 201–203. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1997.
Current Biography Yearbook 1997, pp. 10–13, 496–498. New York: H.W. Wilson,
1998.
Current Biography Yearbook 1998, pp. 575–577. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1999.
Current Biography, April 1999. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1999.
Curtis, Carol E. “All Pleasure, No Guilt.” Forbes, March 25, 1985, pp. 194–198.
Cusumano, Michael A. Competing on Internet Time: Lessons from Netscape and Its
Battle with Microsoft. New York: Free Press, 1998.
Cusumano, Michael A., and Richard W. Selby. Microsoft Secrets: How the World’s
Most Powerful Software Company Creates Technology, Shapes Markets, and Man-
ages People. New York: Free Press, 1995.
Daniels, Linda. “Twelve Years and 12 Winners: Where Are They Now?” Atlanta Busi-
ness Chronicle, April 24–30, 1998, p. 2B.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
335

Darrow, Barbara. “Michael Dell.” Computer Reseller News, November 16, 1998,
pp. 126–127.
Davey, Tom. “One-Hit Wonders: Tech Stars Here Today, Gone Tomorrow.” San Fran-
cisco Business Times, March 17, 1995, p. 4A.
Davidson, Andrew. “The Davidson Interview: Anita Roddick.” Management Today,
March 1996, pp. 42–46.
Davidson, Charles. “Brewer Is Building MindSpring on Core Values.” Atlanta Business
Chronicle, February 7, 1997, p. 10A.
Day, Cecil B., Jr. Day by Day. Middle Village, NY: Jonathan David Publishers, 1990.
Dearlove, Des, and Stuart Crainer. Business the Richard Branson Way: Ten Secrets of
the World’s Greatest Brand Builder. New York: AMACOM, 1999.
DeGarmo, Scott. “Why He’s Number One.” Success, March 1995, p. 4.
Degeorge, Gail. The Making of a Blockbuster: How Wayne Huizenga Built a Sports and
Entertainment Empire from Trash, Grit, and Videotape. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1996.
Dell, Michael. “Making the Right Choices for the New Consumer.” Managing Service
Quality, 1994, pp. 22–25.
———. “Maximum Speed.” Executive Excellence, January 1999, pp. 15–16.
———. “Service Sells.” Executive Excellence, August 1993, pp. 6–8.
———. “Where House.” Forbes, November 30, 1998, p. 217, 236.
Dell, Michael, and Catherine Fredman. Direct from Dell: Strategies That Revolution-
ized an Industry. New York: HarperBusiness, 1999.
Dennehy, Robert F. “The Executive as Storyteller.” Management Review, March 1999,
pp. 40–43.
Denton, D. Keith. “Keeping Employees: The Federal Express Approach.” SAM Ad-
vanced Management Journal, Summer 1992, pp. 10–13.
DeTar, Jim. “A Disk Drive Company for Basic PCs.” Electronic News, September 21,
1998, pp. 16–18.
Doescher, William F. “Short-Changing Black Capitalists.” D&B Reports, May–June
1993, pp. 10–11.
Doler, Kathleen. “Interview: Jeff Bezos, Founder and CEO of Amazon.com Inc.” Up-
side, September 1998, pp. 76–80.
Downer, Lesley. “Branson’s American Invasion.” Fortune, December 9, 1996,
pp. 32–36.
“Dunkin’ Donuts.” <http://dunkindonuts.com/corpinfo/> (November 9, 1999).
Dunlap, Charlotte. “Top 25 Executives: Marc Andreessen.” Computer Reseller News,
November 13, 1995, p. 135.
Edstrom, Jennifer, and Martin Eller. Barbarians Led by Bill Gates: Microsoft from the
Inside. New York: Henry Holt, 1998.
Edwards, David. “Honda at 50.” Cycle World, December 1997, p. 10.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
336

Edwards, Owen. “Gordon Moore.” Forbes (ASAP Supplement), December 5, 1995,
p. 158.
“E-Loan at a Glance.” <http://www.eloan.com/s/show/corpsummary/> (October 11,
1999).
Ericksen, Gregory K. What’s Luck Got to Do with It? Twelve Entrepreneurs Reveal the
Secrets behind Their Success. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
Ewing, Terzah. “Eight Revolutionaries.” Forbes, September 11, 1995, p. 166.
“Executive Profile: Robert Mondavi.” San Francisco Business Times, February 28,
1997, p. 9.
“A Fable concerning Ambition.” Economist, June 21, 1997, p. 69.
Faltermayer, Edmund. “Does Japan Play Fair?” Fortune, September 7, 1992, pp. 38–52.
Farnham, Alan. “Mary Kay’s Lessons in Leadership.” Fortune, September 20, 1993,
pp. 68–77.
Ferguson, Charles H. “True Finance: The Education of an Internet Entrepreneur.” Fast
Company, October 1999, pp. 282–296.
Ferguson, Tim W. “Mondavi Bucks the Tide.” Forbes, October 23, 1995, pp. 203–206.
Fernandes, Lorna. “Mr. Nice Guy.” San Francisco Business Times, June 26, 1998, p. 17.
Fields, Debbi. One Smart Cookie. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987.
Fierman, Jaclyn. “Winning Ideas from Maverick Managers.” Fortune, February 6,
1995, pp. 66–80.
“Fifty for the Future.” Newsweek, February 27, 1995, p. 42.
Fisher, Anne. “Excuse Me, Please, Do You Mind If I Sell You Something?” Fortune,
June 21, 1999, p. 190.
Fisher, Maxine P. Walt Disney. New York: Franklin Watts, 1988.
“For the Two Biggest Failures of All Time, Life Couldn’t Be Better.” Inc., May 1998,
p. 78.
Forbes: Great Minds of Business. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
Freiberg, Kevin, Jackie Freiberg, and Tom Peters. Nuts! Southwest Airlines’Crazy Rec-
ipe for Business and Personal Success. New York: Broadway Books, 1996.
Frumkin, Paul. “Alan Stillman.” Nation’s Restaurant News (Special Issue), February
1996, p. 157.
Fucini, Joseph, and Suzy Fucini. Entrepreneurs: The Men and Women behind Famous
Brand Names and How They Made It. Boston: G.K. Hall, 1985.
———. Experience, Inc.: Men and Women Who Founded Companies after the Age of
40. New York: Free Press, 1987.
Gage, Deborah. “Scott McNealy.” Computer Reseller News, (Special Fall Comdex
Issue Supplement), November 18, 1996, p. 159.
Gallagher, Kathleen, and Avrum D. Lank. “Spic and Span Follows a Clean Philoso-
phy.” Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, August 3, 1997, p. 3.
Garfield, B. “Dave’s Way Is Right Way for New Wendy’s Ads.” Advertising Age, Sep-
tember 30, 1991, p. 52.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
337

Garrett, Echo Montgomery. “Branson the Bold.” Success, November 1992, pp. 21–26.
Garvey, Martin J. “Sun’s McNealy Stumps Again.” Information Week, September 14,
1998, p. 499.
Gates, Bill. The Road Ahead. New York: Viking, 1995.
Gates, Bill, with Collins Hemingway. Business @ the Speed of Thought: Using a Dig-
ital Nervous System. New York: Warner Brothers, 1999.
“The Gateway Story.” <http://www.gateway.com/about/info/index.shtml> (June 1, 1999).
Gaudin, Sharon. “Scott McNealy: Q&A.” Computerworld, November 4, 1996, p. 30.
Geer, C.T., and J. Zweig. “Paulson’s Pride.” Forbes, October 29, 1990, p. 156.
Gelbert, Doug. So Who the Heck Was Oscar Mayer: The Real People behind Those
Brand Names. New York: Barricade Books, 1996.
Gendron, G., and B. Burlingham. “The Entrepreneur of the Decade.” Inc., April 1989,
p. 114.
Gibbs, Edwina. “Sony Marketing Master Morita Dies.” USA Today, October 4, 1999.
Gillin, Paul. “Monticello Memoirs.” Computerworld, August 5, 1996, pp. 67–70.
———. “Net Essentials: Larry Ellison.” Computerworld, January 4, 1999, p. S45.
Girishankar, Saroja. “InternetWeek Interview: Michael Dell.” InternetWeek, April 13,
1998, p. 8.
———. “Interview.” Internetweek, October 6, 1997, p. 177.
Gitomer, Jeffrey. “Debbi Fields Proves Success Is Oh-So Sweet in the Cookie Busi-
ness.” Business Press, March 6, 1998, p. 161.
———. “Mrs. Fields’ Sales Success with Cookies: How Sweet It Is.” Business Journal
Serving Charlotte and the Metropolitan Area, May 20, 1996, p. 19.
———. “Passion Is the Secret Ingredient to Sweet Success.” Atlanta Business Chron-
icle, April 18, 1997, p. 4C.
Gof, Janet. “Matsushita Leadership: Lessons from the Twentieth Century’s Most Re-
markable Entrepreneur.” Japan Quarterly, July 1998, pp. 101–102.
Goff, Leslie. “Inside Intel.” Computerworld, May 17, 1999, p. 99.
Goldblatt, Henry. “Billionaires.” Fortune, October 2, 1995, p. 68.
Goodman, F. “The Virgin King.” Vanity Fair, May 1992, p. 172.
Graves, Earl. “The Entrepreneur in You.” Black Enterprise, September 1998, p. 11.
———. “Higher Learning, Higher Earning.” Black Enterprise, January 1999, p. 9.
———. “LWB: Living While Black.” Black Enterprise, May 1999, p. 15.
———. “Memoirs of a Serious Player.” Directors and Boards, Spring 1997,
pp. 16–21.
———. “Serious Advice for All for Success.” Directors and Boards, Spring 1997, p. 19.
Graves, Earl, and Robert L. Crandall. How to Succeed in Business without Being White:
Straight Talk on Making It in America. New York: HarperBusiness, 1997.
Greco, Susan, and Alessandra Bianchi. “What Am I in For?” Inc., July 1992, p. 66.
Grimes, Brad. “Lessons from MindSpring.” Fortune, June 21, 1999, pp. 186[C]–186[H].
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
338

Gross, Thomas, and John L. Neuman. “Picking the Best Strategists’Brains.” Marketing
News, October 10, 1988, p. 16.
Grube, Lorri. “Lillian Vernon.” Chief Executive, March 1994, p. 23.
Guthey, Eric. “Of Business Biography, Media Romance, and Corporate Family
Drama.” Business and Economic History, Winter 1997, pp. 290–297.
Guzzardi, Walter. “Wisdom from the Giants of Business: A Directory of the Laureates.”
Fortune, July 3, 1989, pp. 78–91.
“H. Wayne Huizenga.” <http://www.sbe.nova.edu/alumni/bios/huizenga.htm> (June 1,
1999).
Hadfield, Bud. “Creative Management.” Success, November 1993, pp. 95–100.
———. Wealth within Reach. Dallas: Word Publishing, 1988.
Hafner, Katie. “Fred Smith: The Entrepreneur Redux.” Inc., June 1984, pp. 38, 40.
Hagendorf, Jennifer.” Ted Waitt: Gateway.” Computer Reseller News, November 9,
1998, p. 131.
Haight, Timothy. “James Clark and Marc Andreessen.” Network Computing, Sep-
tember 15, 1995, p. 76.
“Hall of Fame Alumni: Bernard Marcus.” <http://www.sbe.nova.edu/alumni/bios
/bernard.htm> (May 5, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Alumni: H. Wayne Huizenga.” <http://www.sbe.nova.edu/alumni/bios
/huizenga.htm> (June 1, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Alumni: Jack A. Smith.” <http://www.sbe.nova.edu/alumni/bios/jack
.htm> (June 1, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Alumni: R. David Thomas.” <http://www.sbe.nova.edu/alumni/bios-
/thomas.htm> (June 1, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Anita Roddick.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribroddick.html>
(June 1, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Bill Gates.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribgates.html> (May 13,
1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Bill Rosenberg.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribrosenberg.html>
(June 1, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Bud Hadfield.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribhadfield.html>
(May 13, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Debbi Fields.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribfields.html> (May 13,
1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Earl Graves.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribgraves.html> (May 13,
1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Edward Lowe.” <http://www.ltbn.com/triblowe.html> (June 1,
1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Edwin Land.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribland.html> (June 1,
1999).
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
339

“Hall of Fame Inductees: Fred Deluca.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribdeluca.html>
(May 13, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Mary Kay Ash.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribash.html>
(May 13, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Phineas Taylor (P.T.) Barnum.” <http://www.ltbn.com
/tribbarnum.html> (May 13, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Richard Branson.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribbranson.html>
(May 13, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Ted Turner.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribturner.html> (June 1,
1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Warren Buffett.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribBuffett.html>
(May 13, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Wayne Huizenga.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribhuizenga
.html> (May 13, 1999).
“Hall of Fame Inductees: Wilson Harrell.” <http://www.ltbn.com/tribharrell.html>
(October 21, 1999).
Hallett, Anthony, and Diane Hallett. Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurs. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1997.
Halper, Mark, and Rich Karlgaard. “Larry Ellison: Samurai Interview.” Forbes (ASAP
Supplement), April 8, 1996, pp. 54–55.
Hamblen, Matt. “A Search for New Heroes: IT Innovators Lauded.” Computerworld,
June 15, 1998, p. 28.
Hamm, Steve. “The Education of Marc Andreessen.” Business Week (Industrial/
Technology Edition), April 13, 1998, pp. 84–92.
———. “Jim Barksdale, Internet Angel.” Business Week, May 10, 1999, pp. 60–61,
64–65.
Harari, Oren. “Turner and Gates: An Essay on Paradigms.” Management Review, April
1996, pp. 49–52.
Harman, Liz. “Starbuck’s Schultz Reveals How Firm Keeps Perking.” San Diego Busi-
ness Journal, September 29, 1997, p. 4.
Harrell, Wilson. “Creative Courage.” Success, June 1997, p. 98.
———. “Decision Power.” Success, April 1996, p. 96.
———. “Do You Venture Forth as Buccaneer or Farmer?” Atlanta Business Chronicle,
January 17, 1997, p. 1C.
———. “Entrepreneurial Personalities from Start-Up to Fortune 500.” Atlanta Busi-
ness Chronicle, November 29, 1996, p. 1B.
———. “Entrepreneur’s Insurance.” Success, March 1997, p. 88.
———. “Entrepreneurs Minimize Risk with Creativity and Aggression.” Atlanta Busi-
ness Chronicle, October 4, 1996, p. 1C.
———. For Entrepreneurs Only. Hawthorne, NJ: Career Press, 1994.
———. “The Good Fight.” Success, February 1996, p. 102.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
340

———. “Hire a Financial Translator Who Speaks the Language of Bankers.” Atlanta
Business Chronicle, August 15, 1997, p. 1C.
———. “Hog Hunt.” Success, August 1997, p. 96.
———. “A Leader Like You.” Success, February 1997, p. 102.
———. “The Measure of a Man.” Success, October 1997, p. 108.
———. “Move to the Future.” Success, October 1996, p. 104.
———. “Outside Boards Help Owners to Vault Clear of Their Egos.” Atlanta Business
Chronicle, August 23, 1996, p. 1C.
———. “A Piece of the Action.” Success, December 1995, p. 104.
———. “Scotland Could Teach the U.S. How to Support Entrepreneurs.” Atlanta Busi-
ness Chronicle, September 6, 1996, p. 1C.
———. “Shrink to Fit.” Success, November 1997, p. 124.
———. “The Soul of Selling.” Success, May 1997, p. 100.
———. “Start a Business, Win Inclusion in Club of Terror.” Atlanta Business Chron-
icle, June 20, 1997, p. 5C.
———. “A Start-Up with a Jump-Start Will Not Stay Small for Long.” Atlanta Busi-
ness Chronicle, February 14, 1997, p. 1C.
———. “Swapping Principle for Profit Will Not Pay Off in the Long Run.” Atlanta
Business Chronicle, January 31, 1997, p. 1D.
———. “A Tale of Two Cities.” Success, November 1995, p. 128.
———. “Terror Straps Risk Takers in for Long Roller-Coaster Ride.” Atlanta Business
Chronicle, July 4, 1997, p. 1C.
———. “This Is Your Future.” Success, September 1996, p. 100.
———. “Time to Step Outside.” Success, October 1995, p. 98.
———. “Winning the Future.” Success, April 1997, p. 98.
———. “Without a Contingency Plan, You’re Flying without a Net.” Atlanta Business
Chronicle, November 1, 1996, p. 1C.
———. “Your Biggest Mistake.” Success, March 1996, p. 88.
Haynes, P. “Where East Meets West.” Economist, March 2, 1991, p. 20.
Hazleton, Lesley. “Profile: Jeff Bezos.” Success, July 1998, pp. 58–61.
Hein, Kenneth. “Kwik Kopy Printing.” Incentive, June 1996, pp. 36–37.
Henderson, Danna K. “American West Airlines: Making Reorganization Work.” Air
Transport World, February 1995, pp. 26–34.
Hewitt, Bill, and Gail Cameron Wescott. “Crunch Time.” People Weekly, October 28,
1996, pp. 117–118.
Hickman, Angela. “Wilson Harrell Column Debuts in Small Business Strategies in
June.” Atlanta Business Chronicle, May 31, 1996, p. 11B.
Hof, Robert D. “Inside an Internet IPO.” Business Week, September 6, 1999,
pp. 60–74.
Hof, Robert D., and Linda Himelstein. “eBay vs. Amazon.com.” Business Week, May 31,
1999, pp. 128–132.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
341

Hogan, David G. Selling ’Em by the Sack: White Castle and the Creation of American
Food. New York: New York University Press, 1997.
“Hold the Flamboyance.” Time, February 4, 1991, p. 60.
Holzinger, Albert G. “Netscape Founder Points, and It Clicks.” Nation’s Business, Jan-
uary 1996, p. 32.
“Home Depot: History.” <http://www.homedepot.com/> (October 7, 1999).
Howard, Theresa. “Frank Carney.” Nation’s Restaurant News, (Special Issue), Febru-
ary 1996, p. 48.
———. “Robert Rosenberg.” Nation’s Restaurant News, January 1995, pp. 177–178.
Hubbard, K. “For Ice Cream Moguls Ben and Jerry, Making ‘Cherry Garcia’ and
‘Chunky Monkey’ Is a Labor of Love.” People, September 10, 1990, p. 73.
Huey, John, and Geoffrey Colvin. “The Jack and Herb Show.” Fortune, January 11,
1999, pp. 163–166.
Hughes, Jonathan R.T. The Vital Few: The Entrepreneur and American Economic Prog-
ress. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Hwang, Diana. “Chapter Two: Pen Pioneer Surfs Internet.” Computer Reseller News,
May 15, 1995, pp. 51–52.
Hyatt, Joshua. “Betting the Farm.” Inc., December 1991, p. 36.
———. “What Business Would You Start?” Inc., November 1994, p. 40.
Hyten, Todd. “Thomas Stemberg.” Boston Business Journal, September 16, 1994,
p. 21.
Ichbiah, Daniel, and Susan L. Knepper. The Making of Microsoft: How Bill Gates and
His Team Created the World’s Most Successful Software Company. Rocklin, CA:
Prima, 1991.
Iida, Osamu. “Accept New Challenges.” Executive Excellence, December 1996,
pp. 11–12.
Inamori, Kazuo. A Passion for Success: Practical, Inspirational, and Spiritual Insight
from Japan’s Leading Entrepreneur. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.
Inamori, Kazuo, and T.R. Reid. For People—and for Profit: A Business Philosophy for
the Twenty-first Century. New York: Kodansha International, 1997.
Ingram, Edgar Waldo. All This from a Five-Cent Hamburger! The Story of the White Cas-
tle System. New York: Newcomen Society in North America, 1964.
“Inside an Internet IPO.” Business Week, September 6, 1999, pp. 60–73.
“An Interview with Herb Kelleher.” Directorship, April 1996, pp. 1–3.
“An Interview with Scott McNealy.” Manufacturing Systems (Supplement), October
1992, pp. 2–3.
Iverson, Ken. “How Nucor Works.” Iron Age Steel, November 1997, pp. 56–57.
———. “My Biggest Mistake.” Inc., October 1998, p. 119.
———. “The Virtues of Smallness.” Across the Board, February 1998, pp. 11–12.
Iverson, Ken, and Tom Varian. Plain Talk: Lessons from a Business Maverick. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
342

Jackson, David S. “Andrew Grove.” Time, March 3, 1997, p. GB3.
Jackson, Tim. Inside Intel: Andy Grove and the Rise of the World’s Most Powerful Chip
Company. New York: Plume, 1998.
———. Richard Branson, Virgin King: Inside Richard Branson’s Business Empire.
London: HarperCollins, 1995.
Jakubovics, Jerry. “Domino’s Pizza Founder Really Delivers.” Management Review,
July 1989, pp. 11–13.
“Japan’s Other Maverick.” Chief Executive, January–February 1993, pp. 38–41.
“Jeff Bezos.” Forbes (Supplement ASAP), April 6, 1998, p. 56.
“Jeff Bezos: Selling Books, Running Hard!” Forbes, April 6, 1998, pp. 56–57.
Jennings, Diane. Self-Made Women: Twelve of America’s Leading Entrepreneurs Talk
about Success, Self-Image, and the Superwoman. Dallas: Taylor Publishing, 1987.
Jennings, Reg, Charles Cox, and Cary L. Cooper. Business Elites: The Psychology of
Entrepreneurs and Intrapreneurs. New York: Routledge, 1994.
Jereski, L. “Heart, Minds, and Market Share.” Forbes, April 3, 1989, p. 80.
Joachim, David, Julie Anderson, and Mitch Wagner. “InternetWeek Interview: Michael
Dell.” InternetWeek, November 9, 1998, p. 10.
Johnson, Jay L. “Top 10 Retailers: Thomas Stemberg.” Discount Merchandiser, March
1997, p. 28.
Johnson, Maryfran. “‘I’m Not a Visionary’: Scott McNealy.” Computerworld, January
4, 1999, pp. S18–S20.
“Just One Question: Larry Ellison.” Computerworld, December 26, 1995, p. 41.
Kaelble, Steve. “It Could Have Been Indiana Fried Chicken.” Indiana Business Maga-
zine, November 1996, p. 7.
Kahn, Joseph P., et al. “Steven Jobs of Apple Computer: The Missionary of Micros.”
Inc., April 1984, pp. 81–91.
Kaplan, Jerry. “The Start Up.” Fortune, May 29, 1995, pp. 110–120.
———. Startup: A Silicon Valley Adventure. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1995.
———. “You’re Not Wrong, You Know.” Inc., May 19, 1998, pp. 119–121.
Kapner, Suzanne. “Robert Mondavi.” Nation’s Restaurant News, January 1995,
pp. 148–149.
Kapner, Suzanne, and Peter O. Keegan. “Fred DeLuca.” Nation’s Restaurant News,
January 1995, pp. 49–52.
Karlgaard, Rich. “ASAP Interview: Larry Ellison.” Forbes (ASAP Supplement), June
7, 1993, pp. 71–74.
Katz, Donald. Just Do It: The Nike Spirit in the Corporate World. New York: Random
House, 1994.
Kelleher, Herb. “Customer Service: It Starts at Home.” Secured Lender, May–June
1998, pp. 68–73.
Kelly, Jason. “Core Values Eclipse Technology at MindSpring.” Atlanta Business
Chronicle, April 25, 1997, p. 2B.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
343

Kets de Vries, Manfred F.R. “Charisma in Action: The Transformational Abilities of
Virgin’s Richard Branson and ABB’s Percy Barnevik.” Organizational Dynamics,
Winter 1998, pp. 6–21.
———. “The Virgin Iconoclast.” Across the Board, February 1996, pp. 36–41.
Killian, Kelly, and Francisco Perez. “Ricardo Semler and Semco S.A.” Thunderbird,
the American Graduate School of International Management, 1998, pp. 1–2.
Killian, L. “Hamburger Helper.” Forbes, August 5, 1991, p. 106.
Kirkpatrick, David, and Patty De Llosa. “PC Competition: Now Everyone in PCs
Wants to Be like Michael Dell.” Fortune, September 8, 1997, p. 76.
Klein, Calvin, Catherine Crier, and Ruth Westheimer. “How to Do Everything Better. . . .”
Self, January 1994, pp. 63–71.
“Koch Family History.” <http://www.samadams.com/company/background/kochhist
.html> (October 11, 1999).
Koprowski, Gene. “AOL CEO Steve Case.” Forbes (ASAP Supplement), October 7,
1996, pp. 94–96.
Korczynski, Ed. “Moore’s Law Extended: The Return of Cleverness.” Solid State Tech-
nology, July 1997, p. 364.
Kotter, John P. “Business as a Moral Undertaking: The Matsushita Story.” American
Enterprise, July 1997, pp. 56–59.
———. Matsushita Leadership: Lessons from the Twentieth Century’s Most Remarka-
ble Entrepreneur. New York: Free Press, 1997.
———. “Matsushita: The World’s Greatest Entrepreneur?” Fortune, March 31, 1997,
p. 104.
Kramer, Louise. “Col. Harland Sanders.” Nation’s Restaurant News, (Special Issue),
February 1996, p. 138.
Kroc, Ray, and Robert Anderson. Grinding It Out: The Making of McDonald’s. Chi-
cago: Contemporary Books, 1977.
Kupfer, A. “America’s Fastest-Growing Company.” Fortune, August 13, 1990, p. 48.
LaBarre, Polly. “Patagonia Comes of Age.” Industry Week, April 3, 1995, pp. 42–48.
Labich, Kenneth. “Is Herb Kelleher America’s Best CEO?” Fortune, May 2, 1994, 
pp. 4–52.
Lager, Fred C. Ben & Jerry’s: The Inside Scoop–How Two Real Guys Built a Business
with a Social Conscience and a Sense of Humor. New York: Crown, 1994.
Landrum, Gene N. Profiles of Genius: Thirteen Creative Men Who Changed the World.
Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1993.
“Larry Ellison.” Network World, December 26, 1994, p. 43.
Lazarus, Charles. “Perspectives on Discount Retailing: Worldwide Strategic Planning.”
Discount Merchandiser, April 1987, pp. 48–50.
“Leadership Lessons from Matsushita.” Executive Edge Newsletter, April 1997, p. 1.
Lee, Jeanne. “Why eBay Is Flying.” Fortune, December 7, 1998, p. 255.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
344

Lee, William G. “A Conversation with Herb Kelleher.” Organizational Dynamics, Au-
tumn 1994, pp. 64–74.
Lenzner, Robert. “The Reluctant Entrepreneur.” Forbes, September 11, 1995,
pp. 162–166.
———. “Whither Moore’s Law?” Forbes, September 11, 1995, pp. 167–168.
Lesczynski, Jim. “Allen E. Paulson.” Chief Executive, July–August 1991, p. 22.
Leuchter, Miriam. “Steve Case.” Journal of Business Strategy, September-October
1996, p. 39.
Levine, Daniel S. “Help for the Novice Entrepreneur.” PC World, November 1997, p. 80.
Lewis, Reginald, and Blair S. Walker. Why Should White Guys Have All the Fun? How
Reginald Lewis Created a Billion-Dollar Business Empire. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1995.
Liddle, Alan. “Howard Schultz.” Nation’s Restaurant News, January 1995, p. 183.
———. “Leon W. Pete Harman.” Nation’s Restaurant News, October 14, 1996, p. 145.
Lieber, Ron. Upstart Start-Ups. New York: Broadway Books, 1998.
———. “Why Employees Love These Companies.” Fortune, January 12, 1998, p. 72.
Linden, Eugene. “Frederick W. Smith of Federal Express.” Inc., April 1984, p. 89.
Lorge, Sarah, and Michele Marchetti. “The Brand That Case Built.” Sales and Market-
ing Management, August 1998, p. 86.
Lowe, Janet C. Bill Gates Speaks: Insight from the World’s Greatest Entrepreneur. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
———. Warren Buffett Speaks. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
Lubove, Seth. “American Gothic.” Forbes, November 21, 1994, pp. 120–121.
———. “The Growing Gets Tough.” Forbes, April 13, 1992, pp. 68–70.
Magretta, Joan. “Power of Virtual Integration: An Interview with Dell Computer’s Mi-
chael Dell.” Harvard Business Review, March–April 1998, pp. 72–84.
Maloney, Janice. “Larry Ellison Is Captain Ahab and Bill Gates Is Moby Dick.” For-
tune, October 28, 1996, pp. 75–78.
Maloney, Jeffrey. “Legends of the Valley.” Information Week, October 23, 1995, p. 54.
Manes, Stephen, and Paul Andrews. Gates: How Microsoft’s Mogul Reinvented an
Industry—and Made Himself the Richest Man in America. New York: Doubleday,
1993.
Mangelsdorf, Martha E. “Entrepreneur of the Year.” Inc., December 1992, pp. 71, 73.
———. “Entrepreneurial Traits by Nationality.” Inc., April 1994, p. 33.
———. “How Entrepreneurs Stay Motivated.” Inc., March 1998, p. 94.
Mangelsdorf, Martha E., and Alessandra Bianchi. “The Hottest Entrepreneurs in
America.” Inc., December 1992, p. 88.
“Marcel Bich.” U.S. News and World Report, June 13, 1994, p. 26.
Marchetti, Michele. “Mary Kay.” Sales and Marketing Management, November
1996, p. 68.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
345

Marcus, Bernie, and Arthur Blank. Built from Scratch: How a Couple of Regular Guys
Grew the Home Depot from Nothing to $30 Million. New York: Random House,
1999.
Mardenfeld, Sandra. “Mary Kay Ash.” Incentive, January 1996, pp. 54–55.
Maren, Michael, and Dan Wallace. “Masters of the Impossible.” Success, February
1992, pp. 22–32.
Marrier, Michael. “Entrepreneurs Who Excel.” Nation’s Business, August 1996,
pp. 18–28.
Martin, Michael H. “The Next Big Thing: A Bookstore?” Fortune, December 9, 1996,
pp. 168–170.
Martin, Reed. “Recipes of the Rich and Famous.” Forbes, October 17, 1994, p. 64.
Martin, Scott. “Is There an Ultra Marathoner in the House?” Bicycling, October 1996,
pp. 25–26.
“Mary Kay: A Retrospective.” <http://www.marykay.com/marykay/about/company
/retro.html> (September 9, 1999).
“Masaru Ibuka.” Compton’s Encyclopedia Online. <http://optonline.com/comptons
/ceo/20059_Q.html> (November 10, 1999).
Mason, Julie Cohen. “On Target: Lillian Vernon Focuses on Customers.” Management
Review, May 1993, pp. 22–24.
Maynard, Roberta. “Building a Winner from Scratch.” Nation’s Business, October
1997, pp. 65–70.
Mazur, Laura. “Follow the Leader.” Marketing, February 29, 1996, pp. 20–21.
McCarthy, Terry. “Akio Morita’s Voice of Reason.” World Press Review, April 1992,
p. 12.
McCune, Jenny C. “Consensus Builder.” Success, October 1990, pp. 42–45.
———. “The Entrepreneurial Revolution.” Success, November 1991, pp. 7–10,
62–63, 66, 70–71, 74–75.
———. “In the Beginning. . . . ” Management Review, September 1996, p. 47.
McElheny, Victor K. Insisting on the Impossible: The Life of Edwin Land. Reading,
MA: Perseus Books, 1998.
McInerney, Tom. “Double Trouble: Combining Business and Ethics.” Business Ethics
Quarterly, January 1998, pp. 187–189.
McLamore, James W. The Burger King: Jim McLamore and the Building of an Empire.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.
McLaughlin, Rachel, and Hallie Mummert. “The Great Mentors.” Target Marketing,
October 1998, pp. 74–81.
McNealy, Scott. “A Winning Business Model for the ’90s.” Directors and Boards, Fall
1995, pp. 4–8.
Meeks, Fleming. “The Man Is the Message.” Forbes, April 17, 1989, pp. 148–152.
Melymuka, Kathleen. “Sky King.” Computerworld, September 28, 1998, pp. 68–70.
Mercer, Joye. “Packard’s Legacy.” Chronicle of Higher Education, April 5, 1996, p. A31.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
346

Mermigas, Diane. “A Blockbuster Change.” Advertising Age, October 3, 1994, p. 1.
———. “Still a Cyber-Pioneer.” Electronic Media, November 9, 1998, p. 32.
Mescon, Michael H., and Timothy S. Mescon. “MindSpring Provides Lesson in Ba-
sics.” Atlanta Business Chronicle, January 22, 1999, p. 47A.
Metzger, Mark K. “F. Kenneth Iverson of Nucor: Man of Steel.” Inc., April 1984, p. 85.
“Michael Dell’s Plan for the Rest of the Decade.” Fortune, June 9, 1997, p. 138.
“Microsoft Timeline: Pre-Computer Timeline.” <http://www.microsoft.com/MSCorp
/Museum/timelines/microsoft/timeline.asp> (September 9, 1999).
Miller, Matthew. “Cookie Dough.” New Republic, July 29, 1996, pp. 11–12.
Milliot, Jim. “Bezos, Milken, Rubin Address AAP Annual Meeting.” Publishers
Weekly, March 29, 1999, pp. 16–17.
Millman, Joel. “Zen and the Art of Fresh Produce.” Forbes, February 15, 1993, p. 220.
Min, Janice, and Vicki Sheff-Cahan. “Wizard of Woz.” People Weekly, February 14,
1994, pp. 61–62.
Mitchell, Russ. “Why AOL Really Clicks.” U.S. News and World Report, December 7,
1998, p. 52.
Moeller, Michael, Steve Hamm, and Timothy J. Mullaney. “Remaking Microsoft: Why
America’s Most Successful Company Needed an Overhaul.” Business Week, May
17, 1999, pp. 106–116.
Monaghan, Tom. Pizza Tiger. New York: Random House, 1986.
Mondavi, Robert, and Paul Chutkow. Harvests of Joy: My Passion for Excellence; How
the Good Life Became Great Business. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1998.
Moore, Gordon E. “Intel: Memories and the Microprocessor.” Daedalus, Spring 1996,
pp. 55–80.
Moreau, D., and S. Buri. “Change Agents.” Changing Times, November 1990, p. 112.
Morita, Akio. “Changing Trade Winds: A New Look on U.S.-Japan Trade Relations.”
Executive Speeches, June–July 1994, pp. 33–35.
———. From a 500-Dollar Company to a Global Corporation. Pittsburgh, PA: Carne-
gie Mellon University Press, 1985.
Morita, Akio, with Edwin M. Reingold and Mitsuko Shimomura. Made in Japan: Akio
Morita and Sony. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1986.
Moscow, Alvin. Building a Business: The Jim Walter Story. Sarasota, FL: Pineapple
Press, 1998.
Murdoch, Rupert. “Reinventing Socialism.” National Review, September 1, 1997,
pp. 38–40.
———. “Remarks on the News Corporation and the Median Industry.” Executive
Speeches, August-September 1996, p. 16.
Murphy, Cindy. “Karing, Kan-Do Kopy King.” Franchising World, January–February
1995, pp. 48–52.
———. “A Surprise Package: Entrepreneur of the Year Anthony Desio, Founder and
CEO Mail Boxes Etc.” Franchising World, January–February 1997, pp. 25, 27.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
347

Nee, Eric. “Larry Ellison.” Upside, September 1994, pp. 16–33.
———. “Scott McNealy.” Upside, May 1997, pp. 112–124.
“A New Electronic Messiah.” Economist, August 5, 1995, p. 62.
Newsmakers 92. Detroit, MI: Gale Research Institute, 1993.
“No Cookie Monster, She.” Business News New Jersey, May 12, 1997, p. 2.
Noack, David. “I Can’t Believe It’s Not the Times.” Editor and Publisher, April 10,
1999, p. 27.
Nocera, Joseph. “Do You Believe? How Yahoo! Became a Blue Chip.” Fortune, June 7,
1999, pp. 76–80, 84, 86, 88, 92.
Norman, James R. “A New Teledyne.” Forbes, September 27, 1993, pp. 44–45.
Ohmae, Kenichi. “Guru of Gadgets: Akio Morita.” Time, December 7, 1998,
pp. 193–195.
“One-on-One with Scott McNealy.” VARBusiness, February 1, 1999, p. 46.
Oppenheimer, Jerry. Martha Stewart—Just Desserts: The Unauthorized Biography.
New York: William Morrow, 1997.
O’Reilly, Brian. “From Intel to Amazon: Gordon Moore’s Incredible Journey.” Fortune,
April 26, 1999, pp. 166–190.
———. “What It Takes to Start a Startup.” Fortune, June 7, 1999, pp. 135–136, 138, 140.
Ortega, Bob. In Sam We Trust: The Untold Story of Sam Walton and How Wal-Mart Is
Devouring America. New York: Times Books, 1998.
Otsuki, Satoru. Good Mileage: The High-Performance Business Philosophy of Soichiro
Honda. Japan: NHK Publishing, 1996.
“Outsmarting Smart Money Men,” New York, April 22, 1985 p. 52.
Owen, Ted. “Habits Often a Double-Edged Sword.” San Diego Business Journal, April
12, 1999, p. 42.
Packard, David. “Birth of a Giant: The Incredible Journey of Hewlett-Packard.” Suc-
cess, June 1995, pp. 44A–44H.
———. The HP Way. New York: HarperBusiness, 1995.
———. “Trust in People.” Research-Technology Management, July-August 1996,
pp. 10–11.
Painton, P. “The Taming of Ted Turner.” Time, January 6, 1992. p. 22
Paquet, Laura Byrne. “Risking It All.” Home-Office Computing, June 1995, pp. 54–58.
Paris, Ellen. “Rhinestone Hightops, Anyone?” Forbes, March 7, 1988, pp. 78–84.
Pender, Lee. “The Big Giveaway.” Computer Reseller News, May 11, 1998, p. 103.
Pepin, Jacques. “Ray Kroc.” Time, December 7, 1998, p. 176.
Perot, Ross. “Caring Leaders.” Executive Excellence, April 1996, pp. 6–7.
———. “Change Is Fun.” Executive Excellence, September 1996, pp. 10–11.
Phillips, Debra, G. David Doran, Elaine W. Teague, and Laura Tiffany. “Young Mil-
lionaires: Thirty Entrepreneurial Superstars under 40 Reveal How They Made It to
the Million-Dollar Club.” Entrepreneur, November 1998, pp. 118–126.
Picarille, Lisa. “Steve Jobs.” Computer Reseller News, November 16, 1997, pp. 51–52.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
348

———. “Steve Wozniak.” Computer Reseller News, November 15, 1998, p. 53.
“Pick a Fast Horse.” Success, September 1990, p. 12.
Pile, Robert B. Top Entrepreneurs and Their Businesses. Minneapolis, MN: Oliver
Press, 1993.
“Pioneers.” Life, Fall 1988, pp. 99–102.
“Pleasant Company: Company Profile.” <http://www.americangirl.com/corporate
/aboutpc.html> (October 11, 1999).
Pochna, Marie-France. Christian Dior: The Man Who Made the World Look New.
Translated by Joanna Savill. New York: Arcade Publishers, 1996.
Pogrebin, Robin. “What Went Wrong with Mrs. Fields?” Working Woman, July 1993,
p. 9.
Pollack, Andrew. “Akio Morita, Co-Founder of Sony and Japanese Business Leader,
Dies at 78.” New York Times, October 4, 1999.
Pollan, Stephen M., and Mark Levine. The Field Guide to Starting a Business. New
York: Fireside, 1990.
Posner, Gerald. Citizen Perot: His Life and Times. New York: Random House, 1996.
Prendergast, Alan. “Learning to Let Go: Holding On Too Tight Almost Made the
Cookie Crumble at Mrs. Fields.” Working Woman, January 1992, pp. 42–45.
Prenon, Mary T. “The Earl of Enterprise.” Westchester County Business Journal, No-
vember 20, 1995, p. 31.
Price, Courtney, and Kathleen Allen. Tips and Traps for Entrepreneurs. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1998.
“Professional Resources—Maverick: The Success Story behind the World’s Most Unu-
sual Workplace.” HR Focus, October 1995, p. 21.
“Profile: Boston Beer Co.” <http://biz.yahoo.com/p/s/sam/html> (October 11, 1999).
“P.T. Barnum.” <http://www.ringling.com/history/barnum/> (October 21, 1999).
“P.T. Barnum: The Original Master of Hype.” <http://www.yk.psu.edu/~jmj3
/sna_chu1.html> (October 21, 1999).
“Q&A with Jeff Bezos.” Catalog Age, June 1996, pp. 59–60.
Quittner, Joshua, and Michelle Slatalla. Speeding the Net: The Inside Story of Netscape
and How It Challenged Microsoft. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1998.
“R. David Thomas.” <http://www.sbe.nova.edu/alumni/bios/thomas.htm> (June 1, 1999).
Ramo, Joshua Cooper, with Daniel Eisenberg. “Man of the Year: A Survivor’s Tale.”
Time, December 29, 1997, p. 54.
Reed, J.D., and Vicki Sheff. “The Patriarch.” People, October 10, 1998, p. 151.
Reese, Jennifer. “PeopleSoft, Pleasanton, California.” Fortune, July 10, 1995, p. 156.
Reid, Calvin. “Amazon.com’s Jeff Bezos.” Publishers Weekly, January 5, 1998, p. 12.
Reitman, Janet. “Computer Entrepreneur: Marc Andreessen.” Scholastic Update
(Teacher’s Edition), May 11, 1998, p. 6.
“Repealing Moore’s Law.” OEM Magazine, December 1996, p. 82.
Ressner, Jeffrey. “Online Flea Markets.” Time, October 5, 1998, p. 48.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
349

“Rich Man, Poor Man.” Forbes (ASAP Supplement), October 9, 1995, pp. 100–101.
Richman, Tom. “Mrs. Fields’ Secret Ingredient.” Inc., October 1987, pp. 65–72.
Roddick, Anita. “Corporate Responsibility.” Executive Excellence, September 1997, p. 9.
———. “Corporate Responsibility: Good Works Not Good Words.” Competitiveness
Review, 1996, pp. 1–7.
———. “Four-Letter Words!” Executive Excellence, February 1998, p. 19.
———. “Not Free Trade but Fair Trade.” Across the Board, June 1994, p. 58.
———. “Resolving International Conflict: What Role for Business?” Vital Speeches of
the Day, September 15, 1996, pp. 724–728.
Roddick, Anita, Lord Hanson, Robert Ayling, and Martin Sorrell. “Beat the Clock.” Di-
rector, March 1997, p. 34.
Roddick, Anita and Irene Prokop. Body and Soul: Profits with Principles—The Amaz-
ing Success Story of Anita Roddick and the Body Shop. New York: Crown, 1991.
Rogers, Amy. “CRN Business Close-Up: An Interview with Marc Andreessen, AOL.”
Computer Reseller News, March 29, 1999, p. 208.
Rohm, Wendy Goldman. The Microsoft File: The Secret Case against Bill Gates. New
York: Times Business Books, 1998.
Rosner, Hillary. “Lance Weatherby.” MC Technology Marketing Intelligence, January
1999, pp. 28–29.
“Ross Perot’s Crusade,” Business Week, October 6, 1986, p. 60.
Rotenier, Nancy. “Fancy Footwork.” Forbes, September 27, 1993, pp. 154–156.
Rouse, David. “Burger King: Jim McLamore and the Building of an Empire.” Booklist,
November 1, 1997, p. 441.
Roush, Chris. Inside Home Depot: How One Company Revolutionized an Industry
through the Relentless Pursuit of Growth. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Salva-Ramirez, Mary-Angie. “McDonalds: A Prime Example of Corporate Culture.”
Public Relations Quarterly, Winter 1995/1996, pp. 30–32.
Schaaf, Dick. “Inside Hamburger University.” Training, December 1994, pp. 18–24.
Schickel, Richard. The Disney Version: The Life, Times, Art, and Commerce of Walt
Disney. New York: Touchstone, 1985.
Schlender, Brenton R. “How Sony Keeps the Magic Going.” Fortune, February 24,
1992, pp. 76–84.
———. “Larry Ellison: Oracle at Web Speed.” Fortune, May 24, 1999, pp. 128–136.
Schmerken, Ivy, and Karen Corcella. “Exclusive Interview with Scott McNealy.” Wall
Street and Technology, June 1994, pp. 10–16.
Schrader, Michael. “Stories of Success, Inspiration for the Entrepreneur.” Nation’s Res-
taurant News, February 2, 1998, p. 26.
Schuller, Robert, Ross Perot, et. al. “For Achievers Only.” Manager’s Intelligence Re-
port, August 1995, p. 5.
Schultz, Howard, and Dori Jones Yang. Pour Your Heart into It: How Starbucks Built a
Company One Cup at a Time. New York: Hyperion, 1997.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
350

“Science and Technology Almanac 1999: 1998 Obituaries.” <http://www.science-
almanac.com/ibuka.html> (November 10, 1999).
Sellers, Patricia, and Andrew Erdman. “Companies That Serve You Best.” Fortune,
May 31, 1993, p. 74.
Semler, Ricardo. “Managing without Managers.” Harvard Business Review, Sep-
tember–October 1989, pp. 76–84.
———. Maverick: The Success Story behind the World’s Most Unusual Workplace.
London: Century Press, 1993.
———. “Who Needs Bosses?” Across the Board, February 1994, pp. 23–25.
———. “Why My Former Employees Still Work for Me.” Harvard Business Review,
January–February 1994, pp. 64–74.
Seremet, Patricia. “The Queen of the Catalog: Lillian Vernon, Entrepreneur.” Market-
ing News, June 8, 1998, p. 17.
Shawcross, William. Murdoch: The Making of a Media Empire. New York: Touchstone
Books, 1997.
Sheff, David. “The Interview: Richard Branson.” Forbes, February 24, 1997,
pp. 94–102.
Shefsky, Lloyd E. Entrepreneurs Are Made Not Born. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
Sheridan, John H. “Tale of a ‘Maverick.” Industry Week, June 8, 1998, pp. 22–28.
Shook, Carrie. “Subway Owners, Beware: CEO May Be Coming.” Baltimore Business
Journal, May 26, 1995, p. 35.
Shook, Robert L. The Entrepreneurs: Twelve Who Took Risks and Succeeded. New
York: Harper & Row, 1980.
Silver, A. David. Entrepreneurial Megabucks: The 100 Greatest Entrepreneurs of the
Last 25 Years. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1985.
Simpson, Roderick. “Redmond’s Front Page.” <http://www.wired.com/wired/4.04
/eword_pr.html> (March 18, 1999).
Sischy, Ingrid. Donna Karan: New York. New York: Universe Publishers, 1998.
“Sketchers U.S.A., Inc.” Industry Standard. <http://thestandard.net/companies
/company_display/0%2C1591%2C57738%2C00.html> (September 21, 1999).
Slovan, Margie. “Bound for the Internet.” Nation’s Business, March 1997, pp. 34–35.
Smith, Maura. “Crash Landing.” Forbes, May 18, 1998, pp. 16–17.
Smith, Scott S. “Dell On. . . . ” Entrepreneur Online. <http://zeus.flashpoint.com
/page.hts?N=7704&Ad=S> (April 25, 1999).
Sobel, Robert, and David B. Sicilia. The Entrepreneurs: An American Adventure. Bos-
ton: Houghton Mifflin, 1986.
“Soichiro Honda.” U.S. News and World Report, August 19, 1991, p. 16.
“Sony Chairman Says Burden Is on Tokyo to Improve.” Japan Times Weekly Inter-
national Edition, February 1–7, 1993, p. 7.
Southwick, Karen. “An Interview: Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com.” Upside, October 1996,
pp. 29–34.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
351

“Spic and Span Follows a Clean Philosophy.” Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel, August 3,
1997.
Sprout, Alison L., and Kimberly Beals McDonald. “The Rise of Netscape.” Fortune,
July 10, 1995, p. 140.
Stapinski, Helene. “Entrepreneurs with Clout.” Success, June 1997, p. 41.
“Staples, Inc.” Boston Business Journal, October 13, 1995, p. 16.
Stedman, Craig. “Computer Industry: David Packard 1912–1996.” Computerworld,
April 1, 1996, p. 32.
Stein, Tom. “Masters of the Web.” Success, December 1996, pp. 31–35.
Stemberg, Thomas. Staples for Success. Santa Monica, CA: Knowledge Exchange,
1996.
“Steve Case.” Washington Business Journal, November 6, 1998, p. 16.
“Steven M. Pollan.” <http://geocities.com/Hollywood/7000/stephen.htm> (November
30, 1999).
Stevens, Tim. “Father of the American Minimill.” Industry Week, November 20, 1995,
pp. 25–26.
———. “Service with Soul.” Industry Week, February 5, 1996, pp. 29–30.
Stodghill, Ron, II. “A Tale of Pizza, Pride, and Piety.” Time, October 26, 1998, p. 66.
Stross, Randall E. The Microsoft Way: The Real Story of How the Company Outsmarts
Its Competition. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1996.
———. “Millionaire High.” U.S. News and World Report, April 21, 1997, p. 62.
Suarez, Ruth. Superstar Entrepreneurs of Small and Large Businesses Reveal Their Se-
crets. Piscataway, NJ: Research and Education Association, 1998.
Sullivan, Michael, and Lorri Grube. “Michael Dell.” Chief Executive, June 1993, p. 20.
Surowiecki, James. “Steven Jobs’ Imperial Ambition.” Across the Board, February
1998, pp. 40–41.
Swisher, Kara. AOL.com: How Steve Case Beat Bill Gates, Nailed the Netheads, and
Made Millions in the War for the Web. New York: Times Books, 1998.
Taft, Darryl. “Larry Ellison.” Computer Reseller News, November 14, 1994, p. 127.
Taninecz, George. “Kazuo Inamori: ‘Respect the Divine and Love People.’ ” Industry
Week, June 5, 1995, pp. 47–51.
Taylor, Alex, III. “Kings of the Road.” Fortune, June 7, 1999, pp. 150–154.
Taylor, Alex, III, and Shaifali Puri. “The Man Who Put Honda Back on Track.” For-
tune, September 9, 1996, p. 92.
Taylor, Russell R. Exceptional Entrepreneurial Women. New York: Praeger Publishers,
1988.
Tetzeli, Rick. “What It’s Really Like to Be Marc Andreessen.” Fortune, December 9,
1996, pp. 136–156.
“Think Globally, Bake Locally.” Fortune, October 14, 1996, p. 205.
Thomas, Bob. Building a Company: Roy O. Disney and the Creation of an Entertain-
ment Empire. New York: Hyperion, 1998.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
352

Thomas, R. David. Dave’s Way. New York: Berkeley Books, 1992.
———. “My Biggest Mistake.” Inc., September 1998, p. 129.
———. “Treat People Right.” Executive Excellence, February 1996, p. 91.
———. “What Makes for Success? ACHIEVING Excellence.” Speeches of the Day,
September 15, 1996, pp. 720–724.
Thurm, Scott. “How an Entrepreneur Sparked 11—Yes, 11—High-Tech Start-Ups.”
Wall Street Journal, June 3, 1999, pp. A1, A10.
Tiazkun, Scott. “Larry Ellison.” Computer Reseller News, November 16, 1998,
p. 155.
Toll, Erich E. “Hands Off.” World Trade, May 1995, pp. 66–70.
Trachtenberg, Jeffrey A. Ralph Lauren: The Man behind the Mystique. Boston: Little,
Brown, 1988.
“Tribute to Wilson Harrell.” <http://www.ltbn.com/Articles/Harrelltrib.html> (October
21, 1999).
Trillin, Calvin. “American Chronicles: Competitors.” New Yorker, July 8, 1985,
pp. 31–45.
Trimble, Vance H. Overnight Success: Federal Express and Fredrick Smith, Its Rene-
gade Creator. New York: Crown, 1993.
Tucker, Robert B. “Federal Express’s Fred Smith.” Inc., October 1986, pp. 34–50.
Tweney, Dylan. “Who Should Be Named Netpreneur of the Year?” InfoWorld, De-
cember 14, 1998, p. 54.
Upbin, Bruce. “Have Fun, Kill the Enemy.” Forbes, January 27, 1997, p. 68.
Useem, Jerry. “The New Buzzword in Disk Drives: Cheap.” Fortune, May 10, 1999,
p. 140.
“User-Friendly Wins the Race.” Business Week, November 2, 1998, p. 114.
Van Andel, Jay. “Enduring Legacy.” Saturday Evening Post, January 1999, pp. 46–51.
———. An Enterprising Life: An Autobiography. New York: HarperBusiness, 1998.
———. “The Home Team.” Saturday Evening Post, November 1998, pp. 54–57.
———. “The Trials of Being Very Rich.” Across the Board, November-December
1998, p. 10.
Verespej, Michael A. “Flying His Own Course.” Industry Week, November 20, 1995,
pp. 22–24.
Vernon, Lillian. “Entrepreneurs and Professional Managers.” Management Review,
February 1999, p. 13.
———. “An Eye for Winners.” Success, November 1996, pp. 45–52.
———. An Eye for Winners: How I Built One of America’s Greatest Direct-Mail Busi-
nesses. New York: HarperCollins, 1996.
———. “How I Created One of America’s Greatest Direct Mail Businesses.” Direct
Marketing, October 1996, p. 24.
Vitale, Joe. There’s a Customer Born Every Minute: P.T. Barnum’s Secrets to Business
Success. New York: AMACON, 1998.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
353

Vizard, Michael, and Katherine Bull. “Oracle’s Mission.” InfoWorld, September 14,
1998, pp. 1, 22.
Vizard, Michael, and Katherine Bull. “Piloting PeopleSoft.” InfoWorld, August 24,
1998, pp. 1, 57.
Wallace, James. Overdrive: Bill Gates and the Race to Control Cyberspace. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
Walton, Sam, and John Huey. Sam Walton: Made in America–My Story. New York:
Bantam Books, 1993.
Wang, An, with Eugene Linder. Lessons: An Autobiography. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley, 1986.
“We Weren’t Just Airborne Yesterday.” <http://www.southwest.com/about_swa
/airborne.html> (November 10, 1999).
Weil, Nancy. “Netscape’s Andreessen Sees Freewaring Coming of Age.” InfoWorld,
May 4, 1998, p. 68.
Weiner, Adam J. “Internet Innovators Searching for ‘Morethandollars.com.’ ” Boston
Business Journal, February 26, 1999, p. 43.
Weisman, K. “Succeeding by Failing,” Forbes, June 25, 1990, p. 160.
Welles, Edward O. “Captain Marvel.” Inc., January 1992, pp. 44–47.
Wetherbe, James C. The World on Time: The 11 Management Principles That Made
FedEx an Overnight Sensation. Santa Monica, CA: Knowledge Exchange, 1996.
Wheeler, David, Maria Sillanpaa, and Anita Roddick. The Stakeholder Corporation:
The Body Shop: Blueprint for Maximizing Stakeholder Value. London: Pitman Pub-
lishing, 1997.
“Who’s Who: A Look at the Backgrounds of the Most Influential Executives in the PC
Industry.” Computer Reseller News, November 13, 1995, p. 171.
Who’s Who in America, 1998, Chicago: A. N. Marquis, 1997.
Who’s Who in America, 1999, Chicago: A. N. Marquis, 1998.
Wiesendanger, Betsy. “Labors of Love.” Working Woman, May 1999, pp. 43–44,
47–48, 50, 52, 54, 56, 59.
Wilcox, Joe. “Scott McNealy.” Computer Reseller News, November 16, 1998, p. 149.
Willett, Shawn. “Database Dynamo: Larry Ellison.” Computer Reseller News, No-
vember 15, 1998, pp. 35–36.
———. “Larry Ellison.” Computer Reseller News, November 17, 1997, p. 131.
Williams, Christian. Lead, Follow, or Get out of the Way. New York: Times Books,
1981.
Williams, Tish. “Larry Ellison and the No-Good, Very Bad Day.” Upside, September
1997, pp. 36–37.
Williford, Steve. “Speaking from Experience, Author Welcomes First-Time Entrepre-
neurs to Club of Terror.” Memphis Business Journal, September 11, 1995, p. 47.
Willigan, Gerandine. “High-Performance Marketing: An Interview with Nike’s Phil
Knight.” Harvard Business Review, July 1992, pp. 90–101.
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
354

Wilson, Steve. “Busy Year for Black Enterprise.” Folio, October 1, 1995, p. 22.
Wingfield, Nick. “Web Opens IS.” InfoWorld, October 23, 1995, pp. 57–59.
“The Wit and Wisdom of Ted Turner.” Across the Board, July–August 1997, pp. 13–14.
Wolfe, Tom. “Robert Noyce and His Congregation.” Forbes (ASAP Supplement), Au-
gust 25, 1997, pp. 102–106.
Wolff, Carlo. “Creativity Is His Theme Song.” Lodging Hospitality, October 1998,
pp. 27–28.
Wood, Nora. “Still Crazy after All These Years.” Incentive, February 1997, p. 30.
Yamada, Ken. “Andrew Grove.” Computer Reseller News, November 18, 1996, p. 142.
Yang, Catherine, Heather Green, and Andy Reinhardt. “AOL Has to Do Something
Quickly.” Business Week, May 17, 1999, p. 38.
Yochum, David. “Six Tips from a Lady Who Started Empire in Kitchen, in Spare
Time.” Washington Business Journal, November 22, 1996, p. 50.
Yosi, Umberto. “Best of Breed: Yahoo!’s Tim Koogle.” Forbes (ASAP Supplement),
October 7, 1996, p. 80.
Yu, Albert. Creating the Digital Future: The Secrets of Consistent Innovation at Intel.
New York: Free Press, 1998.
Zuckerman, E. “William Gates III” People, August 20, 1990, p. 91.
S E L E C T  B I B L I O G R A P H Y
355


Index
advertising, 162–169
ad agency, selecting, Wilson Harrell
on, 163–164
ad executive, selecting, Wilson Harrell
on, 164
agency commissions, Wilson Harrell
on, 169
commissions, 169 
creative department, Wilson Harrell on
working with, 164–165
Kroc, Ray, on, 162
rules for making good ad, 
R. David (Dave) Thomas,
167–168
simplicity of ads, importance of, 
Cohen, Ben, on, 166
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 166
Roddick, Anita, on, 165–166
spokesperson for company, 
R. David (Dave) Thomas on,
167–168
success secrets, Wilson Harrell on,
163–169
advising customers, 183–186 (see also
under customers)
Airborne, 63 
Allen, Paul, 233
Microsoft Corporation, x, 241
Amazon.com, xi
Bezos, Jeffrey P., 34 
American Girl doll, 19  
Amway Corporation, xii, 22
Van Andel, Jay, xvi 
Anderson, J. Walter (Walt), 54
White Castle, x, 34, 130, 
241–242 
Andreessen, Marc
money as goal, 16 
Netscape Communications, x, xvi,
242–243 
Apple Computer, xii
Jobs, Steven, 206 
Ash, Mary Kay, 10–11, 32, 148, 208,
214, 219, 227–229, 234–235 
customer retention 
exceeding expectations, 188
guaranteed customer satisfaction, 192
failure, dealing with, 13 
foundations for a successful business,
66–67
learning from failure, 13 
Mary Kay Cosmetics, x, xvi, 34, 172,
243–244 
rejection, dealing with, 48 
sharpening your idea, 51–52
Aveda Corporation, 67  
bankers 
dealing with, 90–91, 93–103  
Blank, Arthur, on, 94–96 
Day, Cecil B., on, 102–103 
Marcus, Bernie, on, 94–96 
Monaghan, Tom, on, 93–94 
Thomas, R. David (Dave), on, 93 
questions to ask yourself before meet-
ing with, 101–102 
relations with, 96–101
Cohen, Ben, on, 98 
Fields, Debbi, on, 96–98 
Graves, Earl, on, 98 
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 98 
Johnson, Howard, on, 99 
Monaghan, Tom, on, 100–102 
Roddick, Anita, on, 99–101 
Barksdale, James L. (Jim), xi
foundations for a successful business,
63–64
Netscape Communications, 34, 244–245 
sharpening your idea, 55
Barnum, Phineas Taylor (P.T.), xi 
attention getters, 138–139 
Greatest Show on Earth, 34, 130,
245–246 
sharpening your idea, 55
357

belief in idea, 27–32
Fields, Debbi, on, 27–29 
Harrell, Wilson, on, 27 
Honda, Soichiro, on, 30 
Ibuka, Masaru, on, 30 
Mondavi, Robert, on, 29 
Schultz, Howard, on, 29 
Smith, Fred, on, 27 
Turner, Ted, on, 30 
Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream
Cohen, Ben, xi, xvi, 34 
Greenfield, Jerry, xi, 34 
mission statement, 19 
Ben Franklin Stores, 13–14, 64 
Ben Hill, 196 
Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.
Warren Buffett, xi, 34 
Bezos, Jeffrey P., xi 
Amazon.com, 34, 246–247 
foundations for a successful busi-
ness, 61
Black Enterprise, xi 
Graves, Earl, xvi, 34, 172 
Blank, Arthur, xi, 94–96, 131–132,
192–193, 230–231 
Home Depot, 34, 80, 172, 247 
keys to customer retention, 193, 196
rejection, 48
sharpening your idea, 52–53
Blue Fish Clothing, 67 
Body and Soul (Roddick), 68 
Body Shop, The Roddick, Anita, xii, xvi,
20, 34, 46–47, 67–68, 139 
Boeing, 57 
Boston Beer Company, xii, 59
Koch, C. James (Jim), 34 
Branson, Richard, xi, 148, 153, 155, 208,
226, 233–234
customer retention
listen to your customers, 193–194
put employees first, 203–204
determination, 20 
finding the perfect idea, 37 
foundations for a successful busi-
ness, 63
leveraging by linking, 55–56 
limiting risk, 57 
money as goal, 15 
press, 142–145 
risk-taking, 12 
sharpening your idea, 55–58
success, meaning of, 18
suspending disbelief, 58 
underdog, 63 
Virgin Group, xvi, 34, 172, 247–248 
Brewer, Charles M., xi, 215, 217
MindSpring Enterprises, 206,
248–249 
British Airways, 63 
British Petroleum (BP), 195 
Buffett, Warren, xi, 37, 40 
Berkshire Hathaway, Inc., 34,
249–250 
buying an existing business, 
76–77 
Burger King, xii 
McLamore, James W. (Jim), xvi 
Burpee Seed Company, xi, 53, 
250–251 
Burpee, Washington Atlee, 34 
Burpee, Washington Atlee, xi, 
250–251 
Burpee Seed Company, 34 
listening to customers, 53 
sharpening your idea, 53
Business @ the Speed of Thought
(Gates), 190 
business plan
Graves, Earl, on, 70–72 
standard format for, 71–72 
buying an existing business
Buffett, Warren, on, 76–77 
mistakes in, 76–77 
Cable News Network (CNN), xii, xiv
Turner, Ted, xvi, 35 
cash flow, managing, 115–120 
Hadfield, Bud, on, 117 
Vernon, Lillian, on, 117
Chappell, Tom, 19, 66 
foundations for a successful business,
69–70
incorporating values into corporate
strategy, 69–70 
perfect idea, on finding, 49 
rejection, dealing with, 49
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
358

Tom’s of Maine, Inc., xi, 34, 251–253 
values led, 69–70 
checking out the competition, 40–43
Dell, Michael, on, 43 
Stemberg, Thomas, on, 41–42 
Walton, Sam, on, 41 
Clark, Jim, xi
Netscape Communications, 130, 253 
public relations specialist, 142 
Silicon Graphics, 130 
cloning, 54 
Club Terror, 8–10 
CNN. See Cable News Network. 
Coca Cola, 60, 63 
Cohen, Ben, xi, xvi, 98, 114–115,
126–127, 139–140, 146–148, 166,
207, 214–216, 236–237
being values led, 67–68 
Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream, xvi, 34,
253–254 
foundations for a successful business,
67–68
ice-cream-for-life program, 
119–120 
personal sacrifice, 24–26 
start-up costs, estimating, 82–83 
success, meaning of, 19
Compaq, 43 
compensation
Gates, Bill, on, 236 
Walton, Sam, on, 235–236 
competition. See checking out the com-
petition
Cone Communications, 67 
Conner, Finis, xi, 53, 254–255 
Conner Peripherals, 34, 255 
Cook, David, determination, 21
Cowen, Joshua Lionel, xi 
Lionel Manufacturing Company, 34,
255–257 
listening to customers, 53 
sharpening your idea, 53
customer feedback
analyzing data and taking action,
201–202 
collecting and digitizing, 199–200 
customer relations, 180–183 (see also
under customers
customers
advising, 183–186
getting, 131–171
marketing
new product, 156–158
repositioning product, 158–161
turning negative into positive,
161–162
marketing plan, 148–162 
market research, 148–162 
promotions, 132–140 
public relations
free publicity, 140–142
press, 142–148
keeping, 173–205 
dealing with problems promptly
analyzing data and taking action,
201–202
collecting and digitizing customer
feedback, 199–200
Dell, Michael, on, 197–202
Gates, Bill, on, 197–202
high-tech listening, 198–202
Huizenga, Wayne, on, 197
segmenting data, 200–201
exceeding expectations, 186–190
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 188
Hadfield, Bud, on, 186–188
Kelleher, Herb, on, 188–189
good customer relations
Fields, Debbi, on, 181–183
Graves, Earl, on, 181
Matsushita, Konosuke, on, 181
Monaghan, Tom, on, 180–181
Schultz, Howard, on, 180
Smith, Fred, on, 180 
guaranteed customer satisfaction
Ash, on, 192
Gates, Bill, on, 190–191
Marcus, Bernie, on, 191–192
high expectations
Fields, Debbi, on, 177
Johnson, Howard, on, 177
Kroc, Ray, on, 177
Rosenberg, Bill, on, 177
listen to your customers
Blank, Arthur, on, 193, 196
Branson, Richard, on, 193–194
I N D E X
359

customers, keeping, listen to your cus-
tomers (continued)
Dell, Michael, on, 193, 194–196
Gates, Bill, on, 192
Kelleher, Herb, on, 194, 196–197
Marcus, Bernie, on, 193, 196
providing advice
Dell, Michael, on, 184–186
Marcus, Bernie, on, 183–184, 186
putting employees first 
Branson, Richard, on, 203–204
Kelleher, Herb, on, 203–204
quality 
Fields, Debbi, on, 178
Kroc, Ray, on, 178–179
Miller, Edward, on, 179–180
Rosenberg, Bill, on, 179
value of customers 
Monaghan, Tom, on, 175–176
Northwest Airlines, 173–175
Day, Cecil B., xi, 102–103
Days Inn of America, Inc., xi, 80, 257 
Dell Computer Corporation, xi, 34, 43,
60, 172, 184–185, 206, 257–258 
Dell, Michael, xi, 34, 43–44, 172, 190,
206, 209–211, 213, 229, 257–258,
184–186
advisor to customers, 186 
checking out the competition, 43 
customer retention, 184–186, 193–202
dealing with problems promptly,
197–202
listen to your customers, 53,
193–196
providing advice, 184–186
first to market, 63 
foundations for a successful business,
60–65
first to market, 63
turning disadvantage into profits,
64–65 
Dell Plus, 195
Desio, Anthony, 47
Mail Boxes Etc., xi, 34, 258–259 
determination 
Bibb, Porter, on, 20 
Branson, Richard, on, 20 
Cook, David, on, 21 
Fields, Debbi, on, 21, 23 
Graves, Earl, on, 20 
Huizenga, Wayne, on, 21 
Johnson, Howard, on, 20 
Lear, Bill, on, 24 
McLamore, Jim, on, 21 
Turner, Ted, on, 20 
Van Andel, Jay, on, 22 
DHL, 47 
Disney Brothers Studio, xvi 
Disney, Roy, xi, 206, 259–261 
Disney, Walt, xi, 261–262 
Disney Brothers Studio, xvi 
firing employees, 237–238
risk-taking, 12 
Walt Disney Productions, xvi 
Domino’s Pizza, xii, 181 
Monaghan, Tom, xvi, 172 
Doubletree Inns, 190 
Drucker, Peter, 55 
Dunkin’ Donuts, Bill Rosenberg, xii,
172, 177, 179 
Electronic Data Systems (EDS), Ross
Perot, xii, 80 
E-Loan, 122–125 
Larsen, Charles, xii, 80 
Embassy Suites, 190 
employee empowerment, 230–231 
employees 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 208 
Branson, Richard, on, 208 
Iverson, Ken, on, 208 
Matsushita, Konosuke, on, 208 
Walton, Sam, 208 
Blank, Arthur, on, 230–231 
Kelleher, Herb, on, 231 
entrepreneurial opportunities, 38–40 
equal treatment
Iverson, Ken, on, 221–222 
Perot, Ross, on, 222 
Semler, Ricardo, on, 222, 223–224 
executing better, 59–63 
Bezos, Jeffrey P., 61 
Dell, Michael, 60–61 
Huizenga, Wayne, 62 
Koch, C. James (Jim), 59 
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
360

Kroc, Ray, 60 
Mondavi, Robert, 61–62 
Schultz, Howard, 62 
Turner, Ted, 61 
failure, learning from 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 13
Land, Edwin, on, 13
Walton, Sam, on, 13–14
failure, persevering through
Fields, Debbi, 12–13
Hadfield, Bud, 12–13
Wang, An, 12
failure, response to fear of, 11–15 
faith in idea
Branson, Richard, 12 
Disney, Walt, 12 
Fields, Debbi, 11–12 
Harrell, Wilson, 11 
Kroc, Ray, 11 
Federal Express, xii
Smith, Fred, xvi, 35, 47, 63
Ferguson, Charles, 103–108 
Vermeer Technologies, Inc., xi, 80 
Fields, Debbi, xi, 43, 47–48, 60–61,
63–65, 116–117, 140, 191,
193–202, 217, 262 
bankers, relations with, 96–98 
belief in idea, importance of, 27–29 
customer retention, 177–178,
181–183
emphasis on quality, 178
high expectations, 177
determination, 21, 23 
failure, 13 
faith in idea, 11–12 
money as goal, 16 
Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc., xvi, 172 
optimism, importance of, 31 
promotional ideas, short-term,
132–135 
promotions, product giveaways,
132–135
risk-taking, 11–12 
Fields, Randy, 11–12
optimism, importance of, 31 
on risk-taking, 11 
financial rewards, 235–236 
finding the perfect idea, 36–47 
firing people, 236–239,
Cohen, Ben, on, 236–237 
Disney, Walt, on, 237–238 
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 236–237 
Lazarus, Charles, on, 238 
Mondavi, Robert, on, 237 
first to market, Michael Dell, 63 
focusing on a market or product, 55 
Barksdale, James L. (Jim), 55 
Barnum, Phineas (P.T.), 55 
Vernon, Lillian, 55 
foundations for a successful business,
58–70
franchise, 73–77
Thomas, R. David (Dave), on, 74–76
Frontier Cooperative Herbs, 67 
Gardner, David, optimism, 31–32 
Gates, Bill, xi, xvi, 1, 16, 24, 34, 57–58,
77–78, 116, 120, 142, 172,
210–211, 218, 236, 262–263 
customer retention, keys to, 190–192,
197–202
Microsoft Corporation, xvi, 34, 172 
money as goal, 16 
personal sacrifice, 24 
sharpening your idea, 57
suspending disbelief, 57 
gathering ideas, 36–40 
General Electric (GE), 181 
going public, advantages and disadvan-
tages, Thomas Stemberg on, 120
Graves, Earl, xi, xvi, 8, 70–74, 91–92,
98, 148–155, 263–264 
advice on buying a franchise, 73–74 
bankers, questions to ask yourself be-
fore meeting with, 101–102 
Black Enterprise, xvi, 34, 172 
business plan, 70–72 
customer retention, good customer re-
lations, 181
determination, importance of, 20 
entrepreneurship, self-test, 3–5
friends and relatives as investors, 
91, 92 
Greatest Show on Earth, Phineas Taylor
(P.T.) Barnum, xi, 34, 130 
I N D E X
361

Greenberg, Robert, xi, 264–266 
L.A. Gear, 34 
listening to customers, 53 
sharpening your idea, 53
Greenfield, Jerry, xi, 82, 88, 98,
114–115, 139–140, 146–148, 166,
207, 214–216, 236–237, 266 
Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream, xvi, 34 
ice-cream-for-life program, 
119–120 
personal sacrifice, 24–26 
start-up costs, estimating, 82–83 
success, meaning of, 19
Gretzky, Wayne, 63 
Gumble, Bryant, optimism, 31 
Hadfield, Bud, xi, xvi, 117, 
266–267 
customer retention, exceeding expecta-
tions, 186–188
failure, 12–13 
Kwik Kopy, 172 
value of customers, 176 
Hampton Inns, 190–191 
Harrell, Wilson, xi, 8–11, 32, 109,
113–114, 148–155, 163–169,
212–213, 267–268 
belief in idea, 27 
Club Terror, 8–10 
Inc. Magazine, xvi, 34 
investor relations, 90–91, 114 
money as goal, 15 
perfect idea, 44–45
press relations, getting free publicity,
140–142
recognize opportunities, 44–45 
risk-taking, 11 
Success Magazine, xvi 
wild boar hunt, 44 
Harvard Business School, 59 
Hewlett-Packard, xii, 34, 43, 52, 130 
Hewlett-Packard, David Packard, xii,
34, 43, 52, 130 
Hewlett, William (Bill), 52 
Hickingbotham, Frank
perfect idea, 49 
rejection, 49 
TCBY, xi, 34, 49, 268–269 
high expectations 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 219 
Fields, Debbi, on, 217 
Gates, Bill, on, 218 
Honda, Soichiro, on, 218–219 
Ibuka, Masaru, on, 219 
Jobs, Steven, on, 217 
Kroc, Ray, on, 217 
Sanders, Colonel Harland, on, 218 
Thomas, R. David (Dave), on, 218 
hiring 
Dell, Michael, on, 209–211 
Gates, Bill, on, 210–211 
Harrell, Wilson, on, 212–213 
Kelleher, Herb, on, 212 
Perot, Ross, on, 212 
Home Depot, xi, xii, 48, 52–53, 94–96,
183–184, 191–193, 196 
Blank, Arthur, 34, 80, 172 
Marcus, Bernie, 34, 80, 172 
Honda Motor Company, Ltd., xi, xvi 
Honda, Soichiro, xi, xvi, 30, 218–219,
269–270 
belief in idea, 30 
Honda Motor Company, Ltd., xvi 
Howard Johnson Company, Howard
Johnson, xii, xvi, 172 
Huizenga, Wayne, xi
customer retention, 197
determination, 21 
foundations for a successful busi-
ness, 62
personal sacrifice, 24, 26–27 
Waste Management, Inc., xvi, 34 
IBM, 43 
Ibuka, Masaru, xi, xvi, 30, 219, 271–272 
belief in idea, 30 
Sony Corporation, xi, xvi 
idea, perfect, 36–80 (see also perfect
idea, sharpening your idea) 
Inc. Magazine, xi, xvi, 34 
Harrell, Wilson, xvi, 34 
incorporating values into corporate
strategy, 69–70 
Ingram, Edgar Waldo (Billy), 54,
272–273 
White Castle, xi, 34, 130 
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
362

Initial Public Offering, 120–125
E-Loan experience, 122–125 
inspiring employees 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 214 
Brewer, Charles M., on, 215, 217 
Cohen, Ben, on. 214–216 
Dell, Michael, on, 213 
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 214–216 
Roddick, Anita, on, 213 
Schultz, Howard, on, 214–215 
Semler, Ricardo, on, 213 
Instant Print, 12 
investor relations 
Graves, Earl, on, 91–92 
Harrell, Wilson, on, 90–91, 109, 113 
Marcus, Bernie, on, 109–113 
Mondavi, Robert, 113 
Schultz, Howard, on, 113 
investors (see also venture capitalists) 
IPO. See Initial Public Offering
Iverson, Ken, xi, 221–222, 208, 273 
Nucor Corporation, 206 
Jobs, Steven, xii, 206, 217, 273–275 
Apple Computer, xii, 206 
NeXT, xii, 206 
Johnson, Howard, 20, 24, 99, 177,
275–276 
customer retention, 177
determination, 20 
Howard Johnson Company, xii, 
xvi, 172 
personal sacrifice, 24 
Just Desserts, 67 
Katz, Lillian, 2 (see also Lillian Vernon) 
Kelleher, Herb, xii, 172–173, 175, 212,
220, 224–225, 231, 233, 276–277 
customer retention, 188–189, 194,
196–197, 203–204,
Southwest Airlines, 172, 206
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC), xii, 74,
93, 130 
Sanders, Colonel Harland, xii, 93, 130 
KFC. See Kentucky Fried Chicken 
Khano, Lina, 191–192 
Knight, Phil, xii, 170, 277–278 
Nike Corporation, 130 
Koch, C. James (Jim), xii, 278 
Boston Beer Company, 34 
foundations for a successful busi-
ness, 59
Kroc, Ray, xii, xvi, 11, 34, 162, 172, 187,
217, 278–280 
customer retention, 177–179
executing better, 60 
McDonald’s Corporation, 134, 172 
risk-taking, 11 
Kwik Kopy, 12 
Hadfield, Bud, xi, xvi, 172 
L.A. Gear, xi, 34, 53 
Greenberg, Robert, xi, 34, 53,
264–266
Land, Edwin, xii, 50, 148, 280–281 
learning from failure, 13 
Polaroid Corporation, xvi, 34 
Larsen, Charles, 122–125, 
281–282 
E-Loan, xii, 80 
Lazarus, Charles, Toys “R” Us, xii, 206,
238, 282 
Lear, Bill, xii, xvi, 34, 282–284 
determination, 24 
Lear Jet Corporation, xii, xvi, 34 
leveraging by linking, 55–56
Branson, Richard, 55–56 
Turner, Ted, 56 
Lillian Vernon Corporation, xii, 
xvi, 35 
Vernon, Lillian, xii, xvi, 35 
limiting risk, 56–57 
Branson, Richard, 57 
Linkletter, Art, 141–142 
Lionel Manufacturing Company
Cowen, Joshua Lionel, xi, 34 
listening to customers 
Blank, Arthur, 52–53 
Burpee, Washington Atlee, 53 
Cowen, Joshua Lionel, 53 
Greenberg, Robert, 53 
Marcus, Bernie, 52–53 
listening to employees 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 228–229 
Dell, Michael, on, 229 
Perot, Ross, on, 229
I N D E X
363

Mail Boxes Etc., xi, 34, 47 
Desio, Anthony, xi, 34, 47 
managing money
Vernon, Lillian, 115–116
Cohen, Ben, on, 114–115 
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 114–115 
managing people, 207–240
compensation, 235–236
Gates, Bill, on, 236
Walton, Sam, on, 235–236
difficulty of, 207
Cohen, Ben, on, 207 
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 207 
employees, importance of, 208–209
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 208
Branson, Richard, on, 208
Iverson, Ken, on, 208
Matsushita, Konosuke, on, 208
Walton, Sam, 208
empowering employees 
Blank, Arthur, on, 230–231
Kelleher, Herb, on, 231
equal treatment of employees,
221–224
Iverson, Ken, on, 221–222
Perot, Ross, on, 222
Semler, Ricardo, on, 222, 223–224
financial rewards, 235–236 
firing people, 236–239
Cohen, Ben, on, 236–237
Disney, Walt, on, 237–238
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 236–237
Lazarus, Charles, on, 238
Mondavi, Robert, on, 237
high expectations 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 219
Fields, Debbi, on, 217
Gates, Bill, on, 218
Honda, Soichiro, on, 218–219
Ibuka, Masaru, on, 219
Jobs, Steven, on, 217
Kroc, Ray, on, 217
Sanders, Colonel Harland, on, 218
Thomas, R. David (Dave), on, 218
hiring 
Dell, Michael, on, 209–211
Gates, Bill, on, 210–211
Harrell, Wilson, on, 212–213
Kelleher, Herb, on, 212
Perot, Ross, on, 212
inspiring employees 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 214
Brewer, Charles M., on, 215, 217
Cohen, Ben, on. 214–216
Dell, Michael, on, 213
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 214–216
Roddick, Anita, on, 213
Schultz, Howard, on, 214–215
Semler, Ricardo, on, 213
listening to employees 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 228–229
Dell, Michael, on, 229
Perot, Ross, on, 229
motivating employees 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 214
Brewer, Charles M., on, 215, 217
Cohen, Ben, on. 214–216
Dell, Michael, on, 213
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 214–216
Roddick, Anita, on, 213
Schultz, Howard, on, 214–215
Semler, Ricardo, on, 213
open book policy, 220–221 
openness and candor 
Iverson, Ken, on, 221
Kelleher, Herb, on, 220
organizational size, keeping small 
Allen, Paul, on, 233
Branson, Richard, on, 233–234
Kelleher, Herb, on, 233
pay practices 
Gates, Bill, on, 236
Walton, Sam, on, 235–236
rewards, recognition, and reinforcement
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 234–235
team building
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 227
Branson, Richard, on, 226
Kelleher, Herb, on, 224–225
Schultz, Howard, on, 228
Walton, Sam, on, 227–228
team spirit, encouraging, 224–226 
trust, importance of 
Blank, Arthur, on, 231
Packard, David, on, 231–232
Semler, Ricardo, on, 232
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
364

Marcus, Bernie, xii, 34, 52–53, 80,
94–96, 109–113, 131–132, 172,
183–184, 186, 191–193, 196,
284–285
Home Depot, 34, 80, 172 
customer retention, 183–184, 193, 196
listening to customers, 52–53 
marketing plan, 148–162 
marketing
measure of success, 
Cohen, Ben on, 170
Greenfield, Jerry on, 170
new product, Akio Morita on,
156–158
purpose of, Phil Knight on, 170
repositioning product, 158–161
Anderson, J. Walter (Walt) on,
159–160
Ingram, Edgar Waldo (Billy) on,
159–160
Modavi, Robert on, 160–161
White Castle, 159–160
turning product negative into positive,
Turner, Ted, on, 161–162 
market research, 148–153
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 153 
Graves, Earl, on, 149–150 
Harrell, Wilson, on, 150–152 
Morita, Akio, on, 154–158 
Packard, David, on, 155 
Rowland, Pleasant, on, 154–155 
Turner, Ted, on, 153 
Marriott, Willard, 177 
Mary Kay Cosmetics, x, 10, 34, 67, 172 
Ash, Mary Kay, x, xvi, 172
Matsushita Electric Industrial Company,
xii, 34, 66, 172 
Matsushita, Konosuke, xii, 34, 172, 206,
208, 285–286 
customer retention, 181
foundations for a successful business, 66
meeting a need
Ash, Mary Kay, 51–52 
Packard, David, 52 
McDonald’s Corporation, xii, xvi, 34, 54,
60, 172, 178 
Kroc, Ray, xii, xvi, 11, 34, 60, 162,
172, 177–179, 187, 217, 278–280
McLamore, James W. (Jim), 286–288 
Burger King, xii, xvi
on determination, 21 
Microsoft Corporation, xi, xvi, 63, 202 
Allen, Paul, x 
Gates, Bill, xvi, 34, 172 
Miller, Edward, xii, 288–289 
customer retention, 179–180
Spic and Span, Inc., 172 
million-dollar ideas, 46
MindSpring Enterprises 
Brewer, Charles M., xi, 206 
mission statement, Ben & Jerry’s Ice
Cream, 19 
Monaghan, Tom, xii, 96, 100–102,
289–290 
and bankers, 93–94 
and customers, 175–176, 
180–181
Domino’s Pizza, xvi, 172 
personal sacrifice, 26 
success, meaning of, 18
Mondavi, Robert, xii, xvi, 29, 34, 48,
113, 237, 290–292 
foundations for a successful business,
61–62
rejection, dealing with, 50
Robert Mondavi Winery, xii, xvi, 34 
money as goal, 15–20
Andreessen, Marc on, 16 
Branson, Richard, on, 15 
Fields, Debbi, on, 16 
Gates, Bill, on, 16 
Harrell, Wilson, on, 15 
Turner, Ted, on, 16–17 
Walton, Sam, on, 16–17 
money, raising and managing, 81–129
going public, 120–125
IPO (Initial Public Offering),
122–125
Wall Street, 125–127
managing money, 114–120
cash flow, 116–117
liquidity, 115–116
reinvesting profits, 117
raising money, 88–114
bankers, 90–91, 93–103
debit financing, 88–89
I N D E X
365

equity financing, 88–89
friends as investors, 91–92
investor relations, 108–114
rejection, dealing with, 89–90
relatives as investors, 91–92
venture capitalists, 103–108
start-up costs, 81–88
Ben and Jerry’s approach,
82–84
“expert” approach, 84–88
austerity budget, 84
estimating
break-even point, 87
cash flow, 87
contribution margin, 87
fixed costs, 85
initial cash outlay, 84
pricing, 85–86
variable costs, 85
working-capital requirements,
84–85
Wall Street, 125–127 
Morita, Akio, 148, 154–158, 292–293
and optimism, 32 
Sony Corporation, xii, xvi 
motivating employees
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 214 
Brewer, Charles M., on, 215, 217 
Cohen, Ben, on, 214–216 
Dell, Michael, on, 213 
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 214–216 
Roddick, Anita, on, 213 
Schultz, Howard, on, 214–215 
Semler, Ricardo, on, 213 
Motley Fool, 31
Mrs. Fields Cookies, Inc., xi, 11 
Fields, Debbi, xvi, 172 
MTV, 57
Music Box, 57
Netscape Communications, 63, 142
Andreessen, Marc, x, xvi 
Barksdale, James L. (Jim), xi, 34 
Clark, Jim, xi, 130 
NeXT, xii, 206
Jobs, Steven, xii, 206 
Nike Corporation, xii, 130 
Knight, Phil, xii, 130 
Northwest Airlines
Kelleher, Herb, xii, 172–173, 175,
188–189, 194, 196–197,
203–204, 212, 220, 224–225,
231, 233, 276–277
Nucor Corporation, xi 
Iverson, Ken, 206 
Odwalla, Inc., 67
Office Depot, 41–43, 54
open book policy, 220–221
openness and candor
Iverson, Ken, on, 221 
Kelleher, Herb, on, 220 
opportunities, entrepreneurial, 38–40 
opportunities, recognizing, 44–45 
optimism
Fields, Debbi, on, 31 
Fields, Randy, on, 31 
Gardner, David, on, 31–32 
Gumble, Bryant, on, 31 
Morita, Akio, 32 
Stemberg, Thomas, 31 
organizational size
Allen, Paul, on, 233 
Branson, Richard, on, 233–234 
Kelleher, Herb, on, 233 
Packard, David, xii, 155, 231–232,
293–294 
Hewlett-Packard, 34, 130 
meeting a need, 52 
Patagonia, Inc., 67
Pawlowski, Janina, 122–125
pay practices, 235–236
pay
Gates, Bill, on, 236 
Walton, Sam, on, 235–236 
perfect idea, 36–80
business plan, Earl Graves, on, 70–72
cloning, 54 
competition
Dell, Michael, on, 43
Stemberg, Thomas, on, 41–42
Walton, Sam, on, 41
finding, 36–47
and competition for, 40–43
Branson, Richard, on, 37
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
366

Buffett, Warren, on, 37, 40
constantly gather ideas, 36–40
Desio, Anthony, on, 47
Harrell, Wilson, on, 44–45
recognizing opportunities, 44–45
Roddick, Anita, on, 45–47
Smith, Fred, on, 47
Stemberg, Thomas, on, 47
Vernon, Lillian, on, 36–37
four million-dollar ideas, 46 
franchising vs. buying, 73–77 
rejection of an idea, 47–50
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 48
Blank, Arthur, on, 48
Mondavi, Robert, on, 48
Stemberg, Thomas, on, 48
sharpening your idea, 50–58
perfuming the pig, 197
Perot Systems Corporation, xii, 80
Perot, Ross, 109–111, 212, 222, 229,
294–296 
Electronic Data Systems (EDS), xii, 80 
Home Depot investment, 109–113 
Perot Systems Corporation, xii, 80 
personal sacrifice
Cohen, Ben, on, 24–26 
Gates, Bill, on, 24 
Greenfield, Jerry, on, 24–26 
Huizenga, Wayne, on, 24, 26–27 
Johnson, Howard, on, 24 
Monaghan, Tom, 26 
Roddick, Anita, on, 24 
Pleasant Company, xii, xvi, 19, 35, 54 
Rowland, Pleasant, xii, xvi, 19, 35, 54,
148, 154–155, 298–299 
Polaroid Corporation, xii, xvi, 13, 34 
Land, Edwin, xii, xvi, 13, 34, 50, 148,
280–281 
Pollan, Stephen M., xii, 80, 82, 296
start-up costs, 84–88
press relations. See public relations
Price Club, 41 
Price, Robert, 41 
Price, Sol, 41 
promotions, 132–140
Barnum, Phineas Taylor (P.T.), on,
138–139 
Ben & Jerry on, 139–140
Body Shop, The, 139
contests and games, 135–137 
Fields, Debbi, on, 132–135 
give away product, 132–135 
holiday celebrations, 137 
Roddick, Anita, on, 139 
Walton, Sam, contests and games,
135–137
Promus Hotels, 190–191
proprietary ideas or technologies Schultz,
Howard, on, 58–59 
public relations, 140–148
Ben and Jerry’s, “Fall Down” celebra-
tion, 146–148
Branson, Richard, on, 142–145 
free publicity, 140–142 
Harrell, Wilson, on, 140–142 
press, dealing with, 142–148 
quality, 178–180
rejection, dealing with
Ash, Mary Kay, 48 
Blank, Arthur, 48 
Chappell, Tom, 49
Hickingbotham, Frank, 49
Mondavi, Robert, 48, 50
Roddick, Anita, on, 89 
Schultz, Howard, 49–50, 89–90
Smith, Fred, 49
Stemberg, Thomas, 48 
rewards, recognition, and reinforcement,
234–235 
Rhino Entertainment, 67 
risk, reducing, 11–12 
risk-taking
Branson, Richard, on, 12 
Disney, Walt, on, 12 
Fields, Debbi, on, 11 
Harrell, Wilson, on, 11 
Kroc, Ray, on, 11 
Robert Mondavi Winery, xvi, 34, 61 
Robert Mondavi, xii, xvi, 29, 34, 48,
50, 61–62, 113, 237, 290–292
Roddick, Anita, 20, 66, 99–101, 139,
165–166, 213, 296–298
Body Shop, The, xii, xvi, 34 
finding the perfect idea, 45–47 
I N D E X
367

personal sacrifice, 24 
raising money, 89 
and values, 68 
Roper Research, 67
Rosenberg, Bill, xii, 177, 298 
customer retention, 179
Dunkin’ Donuts, 172 
Rowland, Pleasant, xii, xvi, 35, 54, 148,
154–155, 298–299 
Pleasant Company, xii, xvi, 35 
success, meaning of, 19
sacrifice. See personal sacrifice 
Samuel Adams Beer, 59 
Sanders, Colonel Harland, xii, 130,
145–146, 218, 300–301 
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC), 
xii, 130
Schultz, Howard, 18, 29, 113, 121,
125–126, 214–215, 228, 301–302
customer retention, 180
foundations for a successful business,
58–59, 62, 67
proprietary ideas or technologies,
58–59 
rejection, dealing with, 49–50, 
89–90
Starbucks Coffee Company, xii, xvi,
35, 172 
success, meaning of, 18
and values 
Semco, S/A, xii, 206
Semler, Ricardo, xii, 206, 213, 222,
223–224, 232, 302–303 
sharpening your idea, 50–58
focusing on a market or product, 55
Barksdale, James L. (Jim), on, 55
Barnum, Phineas (P.T.), on, 55
Vernon, Lillian, on, 55
leveraging by linking 
Branson, Richard, on, 55–56
Turner, Ted, on, 56
limiting risk, 56–57
Branson, Richard, on, 57
listening to customers, 52–53
Blank, Arthur, on, 52–53
Burpee, Washington Atlee, on, 53
Cowen, Joshua Lionel, on, 53
Greenberg, Robert, on, 53
Marcus, Bernie, on, 52–53
meeting a need 
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 51–52
Packard, David, on, 52
questionnaire, 51 
suspending disbelief, 57–58
Branson, Richard, on, 58
Gates, Bill, on, 57
uniqueness
Rowland, Pleasant, on, 54
Vernon, Lillian, on, 54
Silicon Graphics, xi, 130
Clark, Jim, xi, 130
Smith, Fred, 27, 47, 118–119, 303–304 
customer retention, 180
Federal Express, xii, xvi, 35 
rejection, dealing with, 49
Sony Corporation, xi, xii, xvi 
Ibuka, Masaru, xii, xvi 
Morita, Akio, xi, xvi 
Southwest Airlines, xii, 172, 188–189,
194, 196–197, 203–203, 206
Kelleher, Herb, xii, 172, 206 
Spic and Span, Inc., xii, 172, 179–180
Miller, Edward, 172 
Staples Inc., xii, xvi, 35, 41–43, 47, 54 
Stemberg, Thomas, xii, xvi, 35 
Starbucks Coffee Company, xii, xvi, 35,
125–126, 172, 180 
Schultz, Howard, xii, xvi, 35, 172 
start-up cost, estimating, 81–88 
Stemberg, Dola, 41–42 
Stemberg, Thomas, xii, xvi, 35, 47, 108,
120, 131–132, 304–305 
and competition, 41–42 
Office Depot, 41–43 
optimism, importance of, 31 
rejection, dealing with, 48 
Staples, Inc., xvi, 35, 41–43 
Stonyfield Farm Yogurt, 67 
strategy, corporate, steps for incorporat-
ing values, 69–70 
Success Magazine, xi, xvi, 8, 34 
Harrell, Wilson, xi, xvi 
success, meaning of 
Branson, Richard, on, 18
Cohen, Ben, on, 19
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
368

Greenfield, Jerry, on, 19
Monaghan, Tom, on, 18
Rowland, Pleasant, on, 19
Schultz, Howard, on, 18
suspending disbelief
Branson, Richard, on, 58 
Gates, Bill, on, 57 
TCBY, xi, 34, 49 
Hickingbotham, Frank, ix, 34 
team building
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 227 
Branson, Richard, on, 226 
Kelleher, Herb, on, 224–225 
Schultz, Howard, on, 228 
Walton, Sam, on, 227–228 
Thomas, R. David (Dave), xii, xvi, 35, 96,
145–146, 167–168, 218, 305–307 
and bankers, 93 
checking a franchise out, 74–76 
entrepreneurship, self-test, 5–8
franchising vs. buying, 74–76
Wendy’s International, Inc., xii, xvi, 35 
Thorn EMI, 57 
TNT. See Turner Network Television
Tom’s of Maine, Inc., xi, 20, 34, 49, 67 
Chappell, Tom, 34 
Tommy Boy, 67 
Tosta Pizza, 141–142 
Toys “R” Us, xii, 206 
Lazarus, Charles, xii, 206 
trust
Blank, Arthur, on, 231 
Packard, David, on, 231–232 
Semler, Ricardo, on, 232 
Turner, Ted, 30, 45, 49, 55, 61, 64, 118,
148, 155, 161–162, 307–309 
Cable News Network (CNN), xii, 
xvi, 35 
determination, 20, 22
money as goal, 16–17 
Turner Broadcasting System, xii, xvi, 
16, 35 
Turner Network Television, xii, xvi 
underdog
Barksdale, James L. (Jim), on, 63–64 
Branson, Richard, on, 63 
Turner, Ted, on, 64 
Walton, Sam, on, 64–65 
underdog, role of, 63–65 
Uniform Franchise Offering Circular
(UFOC), 74
uniqueness
Rowland, Pleasant, on, 54 
Vernon, Lillian, on, 54 
UPS (United Parcel Service), 63
value of customers, Northwest Airlines,
173–175 
value of excellence in execution, 62–63 
values
Ash, Mary Kay, on, 66–67 
Chappell, Tom, on, 69–70 
Cohen, Ben, on, 67–68 
list of values-led companies, 67 
Matsushita, Konosuke, 66 
Roddick, Anita, 68 
Schultz, Howard, 67 
Van Andel, Jay, xii, xvi, 22, 66, 
309–310
Amway Corporation, xii, xvi 
venture capitalists, dealing with,
103–114 (see also investors)
Ferguson, Charles, on, 103–108 
Stemberg, Thomas, on, 108 
Vermeer Technologies, xi, 80, 103–108 
Ferguson, Charles, xi, 80 
Vernon, Lillian, xii, xvi, 2, 8, 35–37,
54–55, 115–117, 310–311 
entrepreneurship, self-test, 2–3
focus on a market or product, 55 
Lillian Vernon Corporation, xii, 
xvi, 35 
Virgin Cola, 55–56 
Virgin Group, xi, xvi, 12, 34, 172, 194
Branson, Richard, xi, xvi, 12, 15, 18,
20, 34, 37, 55–58, 63, 142–145,
148, 153, 155, 172, 193–194,
203–204, 208, 226, 233–234,
247–248
Virgin Atlantic Airlines, 12, 55–57,
193–194 
Virgin Megastore, 55–56 
Virgin Radio, 55–56 
Virgin Records, 15 
I N D E X
369

Wall Street, 125–127
Cohen, Ben, on, 126–127 
Schultz, Howard, on, 125–126 
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., xii, xvi, 13, 35,
60, 64, 140, 149–150 
Walt Disney Productions, xi, xvi 
Disney, Walt, xi, xvi, 12, 237–238,
261–262
Walton, Sam, xii, xvi, 1, 13–16, 35,
64–65, 135–137, 208, 227–228,
235–236, 311–312 
and competition, 41 
learning from failure, 13–14 
money as goal, 16–17 
Price Club, 41 
promotions, contests and games, 135–137
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., xii, xvi, 35 
Wang, An, xii, xvi, 12, 312–313 
failure, 12 
Wang Laboratories, Inc., xii, xvi
Wang, An, xii, xvi, 12, 312–313
Waste Management, Inc., xi, xvi, 34 
Huizenga, Wayne, xi, xvi, 21, 24,
26–27, 34, 62, 197
Welch, Jack, 181
Wendy’s International, Inc., xii, xvi, 5, 35 
Thomas, R. David (Dave), xii, xvi,
5–8, 35, 74–76, 93, 96, 145–146,
167–168, 218, 305–307 
White Castle, x, xi, 34, 54, 130 
Anderson, J. Walter (Walt), x, 34, 54,
130, 241–242
Ingram, Edgar Waldo (Billy), xi, 34,
54, 130, 272–273
Whole Foods Market, 67 
Wood, Karen, 188 
working assets funding service, 67 
Yeats, 19 
Yorkshire Television, 57
T H E  G U R U  G U I D E
370


