
The Organic Composting
Handbook
Techniques for a Healthy,
Abundant Garden
DEDE CUMMINGS
Foreword by Cheryl Wilfong
2

3

Copyright © 2014 by Dede Cummings
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in
any manner without the express written consent of the
publisher, except in the case of brief excerpts in critical
reviews or articles. All inquiries should be addressed to
Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West 36th Street, 11th Floor, New
York, NY 10018.
Skyhorse Publishing books may be purchased in bulk at
special
discounts
for
sales
promotion,
corporate
gifts,
fund-raising, or educational purposes. Special editions can
also be created to specifications. For details, contact the
Special Sales Department, Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West
36th
Street,
11th
Floor,
New
York,
NY
10018
or
info@skyhorsepublishing.com.
Skyhorse®
and
Skyhorse
Publishing®
are
registered
trademarks of Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.®, a Delaware
corporation.
Visit our website at www.skyhorsepublishing.com.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Library
of
Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication
Data
is
available on file.
Cover photo credit: Thinkstock
Print ISBN: 978-1-62914-172-5
Ebook ISBN: 978-1-63220-088-4
4

Printed in China
5

6

7

CONTENTS
Foreword by Cheryl Wilfong
Introduction
Chapter 1
What is Composting?
Chapter 2
Why is Composting Important?
Chapter 3
Composting 101
Chapter 4
Containers
Chapter 5
Urban Composting
Chapter 6
What Do You Do With It?
Chapter 7
Timing Is Everything
Chapter 8
Composting Is Easy
Chapter 9
What
Goes
In
Your
Pile,
Getting
Started,
and
Troubleshooting
8

Chapter 10
How the Science Works
Chapter 11
Using What You Make—Starting a Garden or Donating to a
Community Garden
Chapter 12
Success Stories
Chapter 13
Don’t Worry! Your Questions Answered
Chapter 14
Going Forward
Appendix
Glossary
Resources
Photo Credits
Index
9

10

FOREWORD
by Cheryl Wilfong
We know intuitively that organic compost is good for us,
good for our garden, and good for our planet. We can join the
green planet movement without moving any farther than our
own backyards!
We begin simply with our very own organic compost: rich,
dark brown, crumbly humus for our houseplants or our
flowerbeds. Good enough for our plants to eat. Whether we
use compost in our entire vegetable garden or only for the
cherry tomato in a pot on our patio, compost nourishes our
plants and produces lettuce or tomatoes, beans or broccoli,
which in turn nourish us.
As a master gardener and a master composter, I am often
asked my advice on compost. All the answers lie within these
pages.
Dede Cummings is an author committed to making the world
a better place, and this book is an example of her leadership
in conservation and in trying to make a difference.
Reading this book, you will have the opportunity to stroll
with Dede and her friends through the ins and outs of organic
composting. The choice is yours: turn your kitchen waste into
a wealth of compost you can use in your garden or waste
those nutrients by throwing them in the trash and hauling it to
the landfill. Much better of course is filling your own land
with the same nutritious food you and your family eat and
11

turning your compost into a haul of treasure. It’s as easy as
feeding your family, and then feeding the leftovers—your
own compostable waste—to your garden.
Another great thing about going, growing, and gardening
“green” is that we can save some greenbacks in our wallet by
supplying our garden with the rich fertilizer of compost.
Composting ties us into the web of life. We pitch our dead
plants onto the pile, and the following spring, new life springs
up. Compost is a miracle. Our garden is a miracle, and our
planet, well, it’s a miracle too. Now, let’s start growing our
own green miracles with organic compost.
—Cheryl Wilfong, author of The Meditative Gardener:
Cultivating Mindfulness of Body, Feelings, and Mind
12

The author’s neighbor down the road in Vermont has a
perfectly good compost system made with palettes, and it
even works well in winter.
13

INTRODUCTION
“It must be this voice that is telling me to do something . . . to
be concerned about the fate of the world, the fate of this
planet.”
—Wangari Maathai, Nobel Peace Prize winner, founder of
the Green Belt movement in Kenya
I opened up the top of the black plastic bin that always looked
to me like Darth Vader sitting silently in my backyard. I
imagined it quietly waiting, breathing that same breath from
the movie—that scary, wheezing, asthmatic sound that came
from under his mask. Really it was just the compost container
I purchased at the town dump for $36 about thirteen years
ago.
I remember that when I bought it I had no idea what I was
doing. I set it up in about five minutes in the backyard as my
children hung around and watched. The little one had his
hand on my shoulder and occasionally patted my back and
said, “Good work, Mommy!”
It was good work when I thought about it. At its very essence,
compost is a key ingredient in organic farming because it is
made up of organic matter that has been decomposed and
recycled as fertilizer and soil amendment. I was creating new
and vibrant life while recycling at the same time. In my mind,
there was nothing better.
14

I followed the instructions, setting the thing up on the edge of
the yard, slightly in the bushes to keep the black plastic from
view, with just enough sun to beat down on it and heat it up.
That’s the whole idea isn’t it? To heat up the compostable
matter, give it some air, and turn it occasionally and . . . voilà!
You will have rich black soil in a matter of weeks, or a year,
depending on how quickly you want to use it.
I really had no clue about composting, so I just started
throwing in vegetable scraps and occasional grass clippings
from my hand-operated lawnmower.
I used a small plastic bucket that I placed on my kitchen
counter by the sink, and any time I ate an apple or a banana or
chopped vegetables, I put the peels and cores or other scraps
in there.
15

When it was full and starting to smell, and fruit flies began to
gather around it when I opened the lid, I would take it outside,
lift the lid of the plastic container, and unceremoniously dump
it in the composter.
The beauty of my completely unscientific and carefree system
is that it got me excited and interested in composting. The
next year, I kept adding to the compost. Once I even used a
shovel and turned over the heavy, thick, oozing material,
getting a great workout in the process. I realized, however,
that I wanted to know how and why it was working, and I
began to do research and volunteer for our “cow composting
project” in the town where I live. I read about layering the
pile, adding twigs and straw, manure, water, and turning. The
little black “Darth Vader” was my introduction, and this book
is the fruit of the knowledge gained. I want to spread this
message, and the book is a way to get more people involved.
The spring after my first composting experiment began, I
decided to try using the soil at the bottom of the compost bin
to fertilize my flower garden.
16

It was a Saturday morning, and the kids were still sleeping. I
got up, made a cup of tea, and stared outside my kitchen
window. There I saw the Darth Vader contraption lurking in
the bushes, as if to taunt me, or dare me to come out there and
see what lay at the bottom of the pile.
I approached the black plastic cylinder cautiously. The top lid
I noticed had words on it that said, “vent, hi, and low.” I had
never noticed these words before. Oh well, I thought, better
late than never.
17

I turned the lid so that the arrows lined up, and lifted it off. I
peered in cautiously. Always fearful of some critter—perhaps
a snake lying there in wait—
I definitely had a respectful relationship with my composter.
When I lifted the lid, I saw that the bin was about
three-quarters full, and looked like a gigantic science
experiment, with worms and bugs crawling, flies buzzing
around, and smells that rose up with the steam.
I stood staring down at my compost pile in wonderment. I felt
as if I had created a great work of art. I was quiet, meditating
on the power of decay. I realized how connected we are: what
we grow, what we eat, and what we throw away is somehow
all tied together. It was a powerful moment, and I recall
feeling very small, yet at the same time, a part of a great
mystery.
I had my wheelbarrow with me, the one that has the slow leak
in the tire so that I have to pump it full of air before every use
(I’m too lazy to patch it). I bent over and slid open the small
rectangular panel on the lower half of the composter. I felt a
tingling of excitement as I watched the rich earth tumble out
of the lower half of the panel. I began to shovel the dirt into
my wheelbarrow, feeling the amazement of having created
18

something I would pay a lot of money for at the garden
center!
I began walking around my flower gardens, from bed to bed,
dumping shovelfuls of this rich earth around the base of the
flowers. As soon as the three kids woke up, I dragged them
outside to look at what I had accomplished—no, what we as a
family had accomplished!
Much to my chagrin, they were not impressed at all—they
yawned and went back into the house to play video games
and watch Saturday morning cartoons.
I stood outside in my backyard, with my hands on my hips,
surveying the flowerbeds. The rich earth glowed in the early
morning sunlight, and, to my mind, the plants looked
healthier already.
19

Through the magic of my composting, the flowers were
taking in the rich nitrogen from the new soil through their
roots, absorbing it with the old soil and making it all richer. I
was increasing the yield and production of my flower beds
and this was a memorable moment. I knew I was hooked—as
a gardener and now, an avid composter. It isn’t that hard to
do, and if I can do it, so can you. I hope this book will inspire
you, whether you live on a farm or a rural area, in the
suburbs, or in a city.
Don’t put it off. Start now and you will be amazed at the
results. It doesn’t take a lot of money, or time, and I will show
you how.
The benefits of composting are manifest in the peace of mind
you feel when you know you are cutting down on the waste
stream
to landfills,
saving money, and improving the
horticulture where you live.
20

21

22

Chapter 1
WHAT IS COMPOSTING?
“In the spring, at the end of the day, you should smell like
dirt.”
—Margaret Atwood, Bluebeard’s Egg
When you go for a walk, whether it’s in the woods or along a
public trail in mid-city, the surrounding ground appears in
your peripheral vision. You see leaves pile up in the fall,
swirling about you as they fall from the trees, and wedging
themselves among broken-down tree limbs that are scattered
about. All this will decay and become part of a timeless
system of breakdown and rebirth. But the system is not for the
impatient. The process takes a thousand years or so just to
make about an inch of composted soil.
You don’t have a thousand years, though, so I’m here to tell
you how to speed up this natural process while yielding
similar results. This book is meant to be a guide, sometimes
humorous, but always with the goal of respect for the planet
Earth and all its inhabitants.
23

The view from the author’s land of an adjoining farmer’s
hayfield, left, and her tools for a spring garden, above.
What is composting?
First things first. Of course, I will go into much great detail
later, but as we start here, a simple explanation:
Composting is the decomposition of organic matter into a
nutrient-rich soil amendment. Finished compost is an earthy
humus-rich material that helps soil retain nutrients and
moisture to improve plant growth.
Anything that can decompose is biodegradable material.
Biodegradable materials include wood chips, twigs, straw,
paper, leaves, manure, fruits, and vegetables. Some less
common materials are dryer lint, kelp, junk mail, and old
cotton clothes. All of these materials can be composted at
home.
24

The author adding a thin layer of compost to one of her raised
beds in the fall.
Why should I compost?
Food scraps make up one third of a typical household’s trash.
When food scraps are sent to the landfill, they take up limited
space and contribute to increased production of methane and
toxic
leachate.
According
to
Highfields,
a
center
for
composting research and education, if all the food scraps in
Vermont—where
I
live
and
compost—were
composted
instead of being sent to the landfill, it would offset the same
amount of carbon as not burning twelve million gallons of
gasoline a year! By composting organic waste, we close the
loop on our food system. The valuable nutrients in our food
scraps are used to regenerate soil and grow more food.
Before You Begin: A Few Tips
As we begin the process of learning how to compost, it is
important to remember and understand that compost is not a
fertilizer! Although it contains many plant-available nutrients,
compost is primarily a soil-conditioning amendment.
Apply compost when you are preparing your garden soil in
the spring, or when you are putting your garden to bed in the
fall. Compost is typically applied to gardens annually—a thin
layer (1/2”–2” thick) can be spread on the garden and worked
into the soil.
25

The author’s garden “put to bed” in the fall.
For potted plants, mix compost into your potting media at
roughly 25 percent by volume. For seasonal maintenance,
“top-dress” potted plants with a thin layer of compost.
Testing our soil for nutrient deficiencies and our compost for
nutrient content will give you more precise information about
how to improve your specific soil conditions. Using compost
together with cover crops and organic fertilizers is a
sustainable way to maintain your soil’s fertility.
By taking the first step to begin composting your food scraps
and your garden debris, you are on your way to reaping the
finished product, which is a mixture of decomposed organic
26

matter rich in nutrients and perfect for adding back to your
own garden soil or donating to a community garden.
HOW TO USE A BLACK PLASTIC COMPOSTER
A black plastic composter is a good way to get started
composting. Then once you have your composting routine
established, you’ll better know your needs and be able to
customize your personal compost system.
Black plastic compost bins and tumblers are great for
collecting and containing kitchen scraps, and they are good at
keeping smells and critters away, to some extent, but they’re
not so good at producing finished compost. The types of
things you can put in them are limited.
A black plastic composter is a finicky eater. It is built to
digest kitchen scraps with some dead leaves or maybe a bit of
hay for balance. Throw in a shovelful of dirt occasionally to
add micro-organisms.
Since the diet of a black plastic composter is somewhat
restricted, you can collect many of the things you would
otherwise throw into a compost bin and take them to the
composting program at your landfill: paper napkins, paper
towels, and pizza boxes. Because orange peels and grapefruit
rinds and eggshells take a long time to decompose in a
composter, you can also take those.
27

You can dig a few trowelfuls of compost out of the bottom,
but then you run the risk of the garbage inside collapsing into
the space you’ve created, and that’s the end of your compost
collection.
The tumblers can be heavy to turn and thus become an
unwanted chore.
Some persistent critters do try to burrow into the composter
from the bottom. And it will take less than a week for
raccoons to figure out how to take off the lid, if there is one.
Dogs will also tear off the lid.
If you outgrow your composter, you can use it as a storage
bin rather than for actual composting. You can store your raw
garbage in the composter during the winter when very little
composting is actually happening. Or you can store your
finished compost in the composter so the nutrients won’t
leach out.
A black plastic composter looks neat, contains smells, and
gives the illusion of keeping critters out. Those benefits are a
definite perk for anyone new to composting. —Cheryl
Wilfong
28

The author’s fancy new composter—see directions on page
35.
Composting is really quite simple.
To activate the billions of microbes that are alive and thriving
in such things as food scraps and garden waste and a vital part
of the process of decomposition, build them a structure in
which they can creep and crawl into your compost pile. Inside
the structure will be not only the food scraps and garden
wastes, but also brown debris, like leaves and sticks. Just
make sure that there’s plenty of air and moisture in the pile.
Sounds simple, right? It really is.
In this book, you’ll hear the voices of other composters, most
notably master composter and author of The Meditative
Gardener, Cheryl Wilfong, who happens to be a neighbor.
Since everyone
is different, and people move at their own pace, there isn’t
any fast and fixed rule how, what, or where to compost. In the
sidebar below, there is even a story about a woman who just
puts everything in a pile wrapped simply with chicken wire,
and she creates the best “leaf mold” this way. She never
touches it until she needs it to mix it into her garden as a soil
conditioner.
Leaf Mold
Leaf mold is good for your soil.
29

Our local garden columnist, Henry Homeyer, wrote about leaf
mold as a soil conditioner a few years ago, so I thought I’d try
it. I made a cylinder of chicken wire, about four or five feet in
diameter, and I staked it into the ground with some old broom
handles and a couple of stray fence posts I happened to have.
I cut the chicken wire so that I simply bent and hooked the
end wires onto the beginning mesh.
That fall I filled the wired cylinder to the brim with leaves
from the yard. Then I forgot about it for two years.
I recently looked at it, and, oh my, that humus is dark and
beautiful. Four feet of leaves settled down into six inches of
leaf mold.
If you pay more attention to your leaves than I did, the leaves
will decompose faster if they are wet. Watering them once a
week prevents them from drying out and thereby slowing
down the decomposition process.
If you feel energetic, you can line your enclosure with
cardboard, which will help maintain dampness. And if you
feel really energetic, you can shred the leaves with the lawn
mower before dumping them into the wire cage. That way
you can fit more in. Or, build a bin out of four pallets, and fill
it with leaves. A pallet bin and a four-foot wide chicken-wire
cylinder will both hold about sixteen trash bags of leaves.
If you leave the pile high and dry, it will take two years to
mold. This mold is an excellent soil amendment that offer
good water retention qualities along with additional nutrients.
It helps to increase soil structure and aids soil fertility.
—Cheryl Wilfong
30

Workers at Vermont Compost harvesting potatoes on the
farm.
31

Chapter 2
WHY IS COMPOSTING IMPORTANT?
“What you do every day is what forms your mind and
precious few of us can or would spend most days outdoors.”
—Bill
McKibben,
350.org
leader
and
renowned
environmentalist
The Good That Will Come Out of It
Once you decide to begin composting, you will begin to
nurture and improve your home environment. You are
preserving the Earth, and making your landfill load much
lighter—maybe even eliminating it altogether! You will have
fewer runs to the dump, and more money to spend on
beautiful shrubs or supplies from the garden center.
It’s Natural
Composting works with nature by using recycled yard waste
and
kitchen
scraps
and
breaking
them
down
using
microorganisms and earthworms.
32

Good for the Soil
Composting will return beneficial nutrients like nitrogen
potassium, phosphorus, and many other minerals back into
the soil to be released over a few years to improve the overall
health of the plants or garden.
Good for the Spirit
In this book, I emphasize that composting is also a way to
increase one’s “happiness quotient.” By composting you are
improving the natural environment where you live, and you
may gain some friends in the process: like neighbors, for
instance, who might be curious about what you are doing, or
your fellow community gardeners, who might want to share
ideas which may lead to, well, friendship.
33

THE MORE BINS, THE BETTER
What’s the best method of composting? It depends where you
live.
If you live in an urban area or even a busy and tightly-packed
town where your outdoor space is limited, you will want a
smaller black plastic unit. They are fairly easy to find. Our
landfill sells them cheaper than you can buy them from
catalogs. Consider buying two so you can add to one while
the other is “resting.” It is difficult to get at the compost while
the unit is still “working.” Otherwise, you suffer the
frustration of trying to ladle out a trowelful of compost from
the underside of a digesting black plastic belly.
If you live in bear country, you’ll need a really big, heavy,
black plastic unit that the lid screws onto. The bears may roll
it away, but they (hopefully) won’t be able to get into it.
I live in the country and have plenty of room, so I have three
open bins—each made of four pallets set in a square and
simply tied together with rope at each corner. Very easy and
uncomplicated. You can build one in ten minutes and take it
apart in five. I live near a company that uses a lot of paper
34

products and is always giving away pallets. A local company
(that uses a lot of paper products) always has a pile of pallets
to give away. Once a year, I drive my truck over there and
load up.
I line up the three bins beside each other—one I am “adding
to”; one is resting; and one I am “subtracting from,” using the
cooked compost for planting or to scatter on various garden
beds.
I add to the newest one every day—garbage and leaves,
flower deadheads, and garden trimmings. The middle-aged
pile was topped off last fall with a layer of manure from the
local farm. It just sits there, resting and gestating, lost under
an accumulation of last fall’s leaves.
The third pile—the one that I’m subtracting from—collected
a winter’s cap of leaves to keep itself warm, but in the spring,
I rake it clean and toss the leaves into the neighboring “add
to” bin. Having removed the skim of leaves, I finally see the
sunken heap, only half as high as it was in the fall—this is
composting at work. Dead leaves, dead mums, dead flowers,
and garbage have all been miraculously
digested
and
transformed into living soil. This pile is the one I dig into
almost every day—using its rich black humus to transplant
plants or to pot up extra plants I find volunteering in places I
don’t want them.
When the “subtract from” bin is totally empty, the pallets that
surrounded have become quite decrepit. After two or three
years of holding compost, the pallets themselves have also
rotted. I haul them off to a brush pile and erect new pallets.
The now empty bin becomes the new “add to” pile, the old
35

“resting” heap becomes the “subtract from” pile, and the
former “add to” agglomeration can now “rest.”
All this adding to and subtracting from “adds up” to beautiful
compost for the garden. —Cheryl Wilfong
A Great Way to Save Money
Composting will decrease the amount of household waste sent
to the landfill, as much as thirty-five percent in some cases!
The fact that there will be less garbage to send out will save
money all around. You’ll also see lower water bills when the
compost eventually becomes excellent mulch for the garden,
because more moisture will be retained. It appears that this
form of recycling is a win-win situation!
36

Last but Not Least
As I mentioned composting will conserve water, but once it’s
used it will also protect the plants by covering up their roots
from exposure and when it’s mixed into the soil, it will add
drainage and create more beneficial places in which to plant.
It will reduce the risk of soil disease as well and help keep
weeds from growing in your garden.
Closing the Loop
The mission of Highfields Center for Composting, in
Vermont was “to close the loop on community-based,
sustainable food and agricultural systems, thus addressing soil
health, water quality, solid waste, farm viability, and climate
change.”
37

According to Highfields founder Tom Gilbert, composting
has been around for thousands of years.
Bacteria have been breaking down organic materials for
billions of years, but the credit for discovering compost may
go to the settlers of the Fertile Crescent over ten thousand
years ago. They noticed that plants grew better when they
were next to manure and soon started spreading manure on
their crops. Native Americans were hip to the benefits of
compost
and
taught
the
first
New
Englanders
their
recipe—ten parts muck to one fish, turn periodically until the
fish disintegrates.
In the early part of the twentieth century, chemical fertilizers
were used for agricultural purposes and proved to be so
successful very few people believed there could be anything
bad about them. Chemical fertilizers are the bane of most
organic farmers and gardeners. Not only have they been
proven to trickle down into rivers via runoff from farmland,
they ultimately kill the soil even in the backyard garden.
Purchasing a fertilizer that is labeled as “organic” can be
misleading—many of these so-called fertilizers are harmful.
However, back in the early twentieth century, on many farms,
especially in places like Vermont with an agrarian society, the
old-fashioned
composting
techniques
were
still
being
used—they were just somewhat dormant.
38

Nowadays farming has gone back to traditional methods of
using manure as compost, rotating crops, and cycling through
organic soil preparations that restore balance and increase
productivity.
A
biodynamic
approach
to
farming
with
compost preparations was first introduced by Rudolf Steiner
around 1924 and is a fermenting practice involving herbs that
is still being used today.
Benefits of Composting
Compost can significantly improve soil quality and protect
the environment in a number of ways:
• Improves soil structure
• Increases nutrient content in soil
• Improves moisture retention
• Increases soil aeration
• Remediates contaminated soil
• Reduces plant diseases and pests and thus reduces
need for pesticides and fungicides
• Reduces or eliminates need for chemical fertilizers
• Improves organic matter and carbon in soils
• Reduces storm-water runoff and soil erosion
• Feeds the soil-to-food cycle of sustainability and
keeps soil and plants pesticide-free
39

For information and tools, see the Resources section on
Highfields
Center
for
Composting
(highfieldscomposting.org).
The benefits of using compost to enrich soil are myriad. The
bottom line is that composting creates rich and nutritious soil
that will be aerated and not subject to as much erosion. The
newly composted soil, when mixed into garden beds at the
beginning of the season, will create a home for earthworms,
micro-organisms, and bacteria that will ultimately protect
plants against disease.
Generally speaking, the decomposition process involves both:
Aerobic:
oxygen
decomposes
and
stabilizes
the
composting materials.
Anaerobic: a lack of oxygen breaks down composition by
the actions of living organisms.
The dual process of aerobic and anaerobic decomposition
balances wet/dry conditions in the pile and creates an
atmosphere most suited to attracting the best organisms for
the job. Organisms like fungi, mold, and bacteria literally feed
upon this decaying vegetation of the compost pile. Later in
40

the process, other organisms come into the “kingdom” of the
compost pile: critters like earthworms and centipedes (I must
admit, not my favorite creatures) further break down and
enrich the compost.
GOOD COMPOST TAKES TIME
My neighbor complains that her compost pile barely produces
any compost. She piles up all the brown stuff in the fall, and
in the spring, it’s still brown. After forty-five minutes of
sorting through all the phlox stems and squash vines from last
year, she finally finds some compost—just enough to fill a
wheelbarrow.
“Your compost looks so great,” she tells me. “How do you do
it?”
“Time” is my answer. The soil in my compost bin is rich and
dark, there’s plenty of it, and it’s three years old. I build a
compost pile and leave it alone for two or three years. I do not
pull it apart the following spring. I am not tempted to just
throw a handful of compost on top of an old bin.
To help my patience and my composting, I use three compost
bins: one for this year, a second from the last year, and a third
from the year before that. The bin I’m taking rich, dark
compost from now was put together three years ago; I know
41

this because I just found the not-yet-decomposed bamboo
paper plates from a neighbor’s daughter’s outdoor wedding
three summers ago. I pitched those flimsy remains into the
current “new” bin to which I’m adding. Maybe they’ll finally
be biodegraded the next time I see them, three years from
now.
I am as busy in my life as the next person. I do not have the
time, energy, or desire to turn a compost pile, and neither do
you. So, instead of using your precious time for the care and
feeding and turning of the compost pile, don’t give yourself a
hard time about your pathetic compost pile. Just let Nature
take her time and do the work of composting for you.
—Cheryl Wilfong
THE COLORS OF COMPOST
An active compost pile has a mixture of high nitrogen, moist
materials called “greens,” and drier, carbon-rich materials
called “browns.” (For a more detailed list of green and brown
material, turn to Compost Alphabet on page 28 in Chapter
Three.) There is nothing better to add to your soil, and the
folks at Highfields describe it in their educational material as
follows:
GREENS
INCLUDE:
Food
scraps
(such
as
fruit
and
vegetable peels, coffee grounds, tea bags, and prepared
42

foods), fresh grass clippings, fresh weeds and manures.
“Green” refers not to color but to composting potential.
BROWNS INCLUDE: Dry weeds, straw, fallen leaves,
shredded paper, sawdust, and wood chips.
BENEFITS FOR THE SOIL
All
our
food—including
animal
products
and
processed—originates from the Earth, according to the
“Teachers’ Guide to Compost Activities: Do the Rot Thing,”
a
pamphlet
published
by
the
Alameda
County
Waste
Management Authority 8 Source Reduction and Recycling
Board in San Leandro, California with contributions from
Highfields. We trace our food back to its original form, and
from there back to the soil, which illustrates the importance of
healthy soil. When we send our biodegradable materials to the
landfill, we waste valuable nutrients that our soil needs to
give
new
life.
Through
composting,
we
recycle
our
biodegradable materials and give them back to the soil.
Compost feeds the billions of soil organisms that are essential
in healthy soil. Healthy soil means healthy plants, which
means healthy people and animals.
43

Source: Composting Across the Curriculum, Marin County
Department of Solid Waste
Benefits for Plants
Without decomposers such as bacteria, fungi, worms, ants,
beetles, and mites, decomposition would stop and resources
that sustain life would be depleted. A seemingly endless
variety of decomposers all serve different functions in the
decomposition process.
A cosmos flower from the author’s garden.
As compost breaks down in the soil, it provides the fertilizing
nutrients of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in forms that
are readily available to plants. Unlike most inorganic
fertilizers, compost functions as a slow-release store of
nutrients, so that the nutrients are available as the plants
require them instead of in one intense flush. Compost also
provides a wide range of important micronutrients not found
in commercial fertilizers.
44

Added to sandy soils, the organic matter in compost increases
the soil’s water-holding ability so that both rain and irrigation
water are held in the root zone for plant use. This can
significantly lower the irrigation requirements in the orchard
industry and other applications where water use is restricted
or prohibitively expensive. Compost lightens heavy (high
clay) soils, allowing better infiltration of both air and water
into the root zone. This improves plant health and helps to
prevent sealing of the soil surface caused by water pooling.
Organic matter functions like a sponge, enabling soil to retain
nutrients and moisture in the root zone. Inorganic fertilizer
nutrients as well as those released by the compost itself are
kept from leaching down into ground water. Soil structure is
improved, allowing effective drainage, extensive root growth,
and soil aggregate stabilization, so that soil is less subject to
erosion by either water or wind. Earthworm activity is
encouraged, further enhancing soil fertility.
An organic vegetable garden with improved soil structure.
Benefits for People
In their “Guide to Home Composting,” the folks at Highfields
begin with this helpful paragraph:
“Remember that every compost pile is unique. It may take
time to create the right recipe for proper decomposition,
so be patent and have fun!”
45

You can help your children learn about the benefits of
composting by asking them to look through their lunches and
think of ways to reduce the amount of garbage—this simple
activity helps them find their own way of helping the earth.
Children will also have the opportunity to learn what natural
resources were consumed to make this waste. Other benefits
include:
Less Smelly Trash—Reduces Odor Problems
Many new composting individuals, families, schools or
businesses find that composting drastically reduces odor
problems associated with their trash.
Reduce Trash Collection Costs
By weight, food scraps can be 50 percent or more of a food
service business’s waste stream. Participating in a composting
program reduces the weight of your trash, which could result
in reduction in your trash disposal costs.
Introduce the Reduce, Reuse, Recycle Hierarchy
Reducing the amount of packaging is best. Reusing a package
is second best. Recycling/composting comes in third, with
landfilling as a last resort.
46

The
author’s
containers
for
reducing
the
amount
of
packaging. At local food coops, and many supermarkets with
bulk buying options, you can bring your own containers to fill
up, thereby reducing packaging.
Benefits for the Planet
We use materials from the Earth every day for everything we
do. We eat food, drink from aluminum cans or glass bottles,
live in wooden houses, wear clothing made from cotton or
synthetic fibers, and use many plastic appliances. Some of
these
materials,
such
as
metals
and
plastics,
are
non-biodegradable.
These
materials
do
not
decompose,
although many of them can be recycled. Biodegradable
materials decay; examples include wood, food scraps, paper,
and grass clippings. Anything that is biodegradable can be
composted.
The author’s containers she uses at home for bulk purchases
that save packaging.
A Tangible Way to Go Green
Composting as little as five gallons of food scraps prevents
the release of greenhouse gasses equivalent to burning over
one gallon of gasoline.
47

Reduce Your Carbon Footprint
Composting as little as five gallons of food scraps prevents
the release of greenhouse gasses equivalent to burning over
one gallon of gasoline.
Students
at
Cambridge
(Vermont)
Elementary
School
composting their food scraps.
We Are What We Eat
Once when my children were little, I looked out the kitchen
window to see my daughter, Emma, then probably four, out in
our garden on her hands and knees eating beans from the
garden right off the vine.
“Emma! You really need to bring those beans inside so I can
wash them and then you can eat them.”
“Why?” she asked, clearly perplexed.
Well, I didn’t really know why. Since I wasn’t using any
chemical fertilizers or pesticides, there wasn’t anything I
could think of that might harm her. If she accidentally ate a
bit of soil, at least it would be clean. So, I let her stay out
there in the garden and eat the raw vegetables right from the
vine. How wonderful to feel confident that the food we were
producing was perfectly safe and healthy!
48

A tomato plant with morning glories in full bloom in the
author’s garden.
THE BOTTOM OF THE COMPOST PILE
Yes, I know you’re not supposed to put animal products in a
compost pile, and most composters agree not to put animal
waste or dairy in the pile, but sometimes Vermonter Cheryl
Wilfong does it anyway:
I come to the bottom of one compost pile in early May. I love
the
excavation,
perhaps
because
I
wanted
to
be
an
archaeologist when I was eleven.
I find desiccated chicken bones. Nowadays I cremate bones
and bacon grease in my wood stove before I add them to the
pile.
In addition to the chicken bones, I find the bamboo plates
from my neighbors’ daughter’s wedding, now three years old,
and rib bones the from barbeque place that catered it. While
the bamboo plates are biodegradable, they’re still completely
recognizable. The plastic cups made from corn have now
splintered. And if I opt to throw them in the trash I’m not
counting on their biodegradability.
49

I wheelbarrow loads of compost to the vegetable garden and
sprinkle bucketfuls on my former herb garden that I’m
refurbishing as a flower-vegetable medley garden.
I pot up my extra plants. Really, this is the main reason I
garden: so that I can give plants away.
I pot up plants for the Perennial Swappers that meet every
two weeks, for the Brattleboro Garden Club plant sale on
Memorial Day weekend, and for the Putney Library plant sale
in early June. Every Saturday morning, I scavenge free
flowerpots at the Swap Shop at the landfill. I recycle every
yogurt container, hummus container, and take-out box, and
reuse them for potting up little plants.
Now I’m digging up and dividing the biggest clumps of
gone-by daffodils. These require medium-size pots and
several handfuls of compost in each one. As I paw through
the compost, I toss the desiccated bones into the woods
behind the compost bins. After a number of years, the soil
around the bins becomes quite dark and rich too.
When I reach the bottom of the compost pile, I drive the truck
to Mail-Rite to pick up some new pallets and reconstruct the
old bins whose pallet sides look like decayed teeth. I tie the
new pallets together at the corners and lay down a black
plastic floor to prevent tree roots from sucking up the
compost from the bottom.
Then I toss in the latest offerings: dead daffodils and coffee
grounds still in their brown paper filter, orange and grapefruit
rinds, banana peels, and, well, I can’t help myself, a few fish
bones. —Cheryl Wilfong
50

51

Chapter 3
COMPOSTING 101
“If you have a garden and a library, you have everything you
need.”
—Cicero
Composting is a biological process that breaks down organic
waste and turns that into humus that has the same look and
feel as ordinary dirt.
But it is far from ordinary. Compost is the end result of a
complex process that involves worms and insects, fungi and
bacteria, and it leads to this organic material being broken
down slowly in a pile in your backyard or as quickly as you
start collecting in a container under your sink.
HIDDEN IN PLAIN VIEW
Your compost pile must be handy and easy to get to,
otherwise, you won’t go there. If you want to actually use
52

your compost bin, put it close to a path you regularly travel.
In other words, hide it in plain view.
My driveway is bordered by trees and shrubs. I put my three
compost bins in a parking area is off to the left, hiding behind
a forsythia bush. I usually park my car in front of the bins.
When visitors turn into the driveway, they see the house with
eye-popping magenta trim. They see an arbor beckoning them
into the garden beyond. The corner of their eye may register a
green bush and a blue car, but not the compost bins that are
ten feet from where they park.
These focal points of house, arbor, and garden distract the
visitor’s eye. They are not seeing what’s on the left side of the
driveway. Many people don’t even see that there’s a parking
area for their car, right beside my car! Instead they park in
front of the garage door.
When they get out of their car, they are looking at the gardens
or the front door, and not at those camouflaged compost bins
behind them. In the summer, I further disguise the bins with
morning glories growing over the compost bin fencing.
You also want your compost bin to be accessible in winter.
For those of us in the North Country, this means placing it
within a few, and I mean a very few, feet of your snowplowed
driveway. You don’t want to wade through knee-deep snow
and have to snowshoe over there. Nor do you want to have to
shovel a path through three feet of snow. My compost pile is
eighteen inches from the driveway. In the winter, that’s a
mere two shovelfuls of snow.
53

Every day, when I walk out to my car, my sweetie reminds
me to take out the little kitchen bucket full of compost.
Maybe that compost pile is too handy? —Cheryl Wilfong
WINTER COMPOSTING
If you’re not keen on trudging out to the winter compost pile,
then you can accumulate more compost before you trek out to
the deep freezer of the great outdoors.
My compost bucket holds less than two quarts, so I have to
walk to my compost pile at least once and usually twice a
day. Fortunately, my compost pile is inches away from my
driveway, so I have easy access, even in deep snow.
My neighbors keep a step-on trashcan under their sink.
Although this is very convenient, I do sometimes suspect the
smell in their house emanates from their three-gallon
collection of kitchen scraps.
Ben keeps a five-gallon bucket on his unheated back porch
and collects his compost there. Then once a month, when the
weather is good, he trudges out to his compost heap in the
backyard. Yes, the compost is probably frozen into the
bucket, but he simply turns the bucket upside down on the
compost heap, and gives it a few good thwacks with a shovel
until the giant compost ice cube falls out.
54

The author’s trek to her compost bin in winter . . . and what
she finds there.
Barbara, who lives in town, keeps her compost in a small box
in her car in the winter. Most nights, it freezes solid. Then,
when she happens to be driving by the landfill, she can
deliver
her
frozen
dinner
leftovers
to
the
composting
program.
How close is your winter compost? Too close (in the
kitchen)? Too far away (through the snowy yard or on the
other side of town)? Or just right (beside the driveway)?
55

How often you need to go depends on whether you can hold
it. But then, when you’ve gotta go, you’ve gotta go. —Cheryl
Wilfong
The author emptying her kitchen compost bucket.
Decomposers turn our garbage into plant food.
There are many different animals that help break down
organic materials into the rich soil helper we know as
compost. A compost pile and worm bin has an entire network
of different bugs. Bacteria do most of the work, even though
they are invisible to the naked eye. Other animals large
enough to see, such as beetles, worms, centipedes, millipedes,
and sow bugs, are also important decomposers. Without
decomposer animals, all life would stop because new plants
would not have the necessary nutrients needed to grow.
Foodscraps at Highfields.
The composting cycle works as follows:
56

The carbon/nitrogen ratio—
The material that comes into the compost is referred to as
“green material,” and can include fresh vegetable debris, like
stems and stalks you don’t want to eat, and grass clippings.
You can also add brown material to your compost pile, like
dried
leaves.
To
create
an
optimal
carbon/nitrogen
ratio—which is a crucial balancing act, throw in two parts
brown material to one part green material.
RECYCLED COMPOST BINS
My friend, Mary Lou, recycles whatever she has on hand
rather than going out and buying something new.1 Her
husband is a contractor, so she constructed her compost bins
out of cement blocks held in place with metal fence posts in
every other block to prevent them from collapsing.
She divided her ten-foot-long U-shaped bin into three sections
by salvaging some corrugated translucent fiberglass roofing
panels left over from a cold frame. Sections of metal roofing
work just as well. The panels are held in place by more metal
fence posts.
Here’s how Mary Lou’s three-bin system works:
57

She adds to the bin on the left. The middle bin “rests.” The
bin on the right is “finished.” When the “finished” bin is
empty or when the first “receiving” bin is full, whichever
comes first, she forks the middle bin into the third, then forks
the first into the middle.
Mary Lou has a big house and a small yard in town. Her
upstairs tenant and a couple of friends contribute their kitchen
scraps to her compost bin too. Mary Lou not only recycles
found materials, she also recycles her friends’ materials.
—Cheryl Wilfong
1
Freecycle.org is an excellent way to find free materials near
you. Join your city or regional freecycle and post your
requests for whatever you have to give away or whatever
materials you might be searching for.
Temperature—
Heat is important to accelerate the compost process. The best
temperature for your compost is between 90 and 135°F
(30–60°C). The composting process will slow down when the
temperature falls below this range.
58

Smaller Waste Products—
Chopping up your green kitchen scraps into smaller pieces
can really speed up the composting process is chopping up
your kitchen green scraps into smaller pieces. You can shred
and chip brown garden clippings and make them smaller, too.
The author recommends chopping up hard to breakdown
fruits and veggies like this melon in order to accelerate the
process once the food scraps get thrown in the pile.
Oxygenation—
Oxygen is crucial for all inhabitants within the compost pile,
including microbes, which decompose at a much faster rate
than anaerobic waste material. Proper ventilation is achieved
through turning the compost pile and making sure that it is
here rated in the next pile may take three to four times longer
to create beneficial humus.
59

Water—
If the compost pile is too dry, it will decompose very slowly.
During dry spells, it is necessary to add a little water to the
compost to help speed up the process. However, if it is too
wet, the, process can begin to create a foul odor and the
density will create compression that isn’t conducive to proper
balance of the carbon-nitrogen ratio.
What to Put into Your Compost
All greens that are nitrogen-rich, such as vegetable and fruit
scraps, eggshells, grass clippings, coffee and tea grounds, and
(non-toxic) flowers or plants are safe to put into your compost
pile.
You can also compost brown material, like dry leaves or
wood chips, hay, or small twigs. Newspapers and paper can
be added if they are crumpled or ripped into small pieces, but
it’s better to recycle them if you can.
What Not to Put in Your Compost
60

Meat, bones, fish, cheese, or other dairy products, pet or
human waste, metal or plastic, any fat (like buttered bread), or
diseased plants or weeds. It’s very important not to put weeds
in your compost because the weeds will come back into your
garden.
DANCING RACCOONS
At my annual month-long meditation retreat, my daily chore
was to take out the trash, the compost, and the recycling.
What a perfect job for this master composter!
As I walked out the kitchen door with a five-gallon bucket of
kitchen waste, I would sometimes be met by a dancing
raccoon torn between wanting the contents of the bucket and
being too shy to come close. Wanting and not wanting. How
many times a day is this same civil war re-enacted in our own
minds? the raccoons want the pleasant (garbage in a bucket),
and don’t want the unpleasant (People! People!). We want the
pleasant
(beautiful
compost),
but
not
the
unpleasant
(raccoons!).
This ongoing dance of attraction and repulsion is one
definition of stress. We, like the raccoons, want to approach
the goodies, but we also want to avoid some unpleasantness
or other. We build our compost pile, and then it doesn’t look
as good as we wanted. We want beautiful compost, but what
we get is gush with dried stems. We want a garden that looks
like the one in the magazine and what we have is a weed
patch.
61

This is the dance of life: pleasant-unpleasant, want-don’t
want. Knowing that pleasant and unpleasant are constantly
arising and ceasing, we could just dance with life. —Cheryl
Wilfong
NOS AND YESSES FOR YOUR COMPOST PILE
No.
Weeds: Do not put any weeds you dig up from your garden or
flower beds into the compost because the seeds will spread
and come back to haunt you!
Hay: grass, alfalfa, clover, etc. cut and dried for use as fodder.
A farmer feeds hay to his cows when fresh green grass isn’t
available.
Yes.
Straw: hollow stalks of grain after threshing, used for
bedding, for weaving hats, baskets, mulch, and more.
62

Easy Steps to Begin Composting Today:
What is Compost?: Compost is alive, stable, aerobic, earthy,
dark, cool, and regenerative.
1. Choose Your Bin—Any old receptacle will do, but
you want to make sure it is in a sunny spot. Bins
come in all shapes and sizes. There is no “right” one
to make and/or buy. The pallet bin I talk about in this
book came about after years of composting and lots
of research—it is a relatively simple thing to make.
2. Add a productive mix of high-in-nitrogen, moist
materials called “greens,”(food scraps, such as fruit
and vegetable scraps, coffee grounds, tea bags—with
staple removed—or tea grounds from tea balls, fresh
grass clippings, and manure) and drier, carbon-rich
material called “browns (fallen leaves, shredded
paper, wood chips, and straw).”
3. Layer by adding the greens and browns alternately.
Each time you add food scraps, cover them with
brown or with partially degraded materials to deter
unwanted creatures from intruding.
4. Let bugs do the work. Fungi and bacteria are
microorganisms that do the majority of the work for
you in the compost pile.
5. Let the compost breathe by turning, or mixing, the
pile approximately two times per month (though
some composters do things differently, or never turn
63

their
piles!).
Composting
organisms
need
oxygen—adding more air will speed up the process.
6. Keep the pile moist by adding water—if too dry, add
leaves or shredded newspaper. One surefire way to
test your pile for moisture quality is to take a handful
of material from the center of the pile and squeeze it.
It should feel like a “wrung-out sponge,” according to
the folks at Highfields.
CRITTER FEEDER
Yes, critters come to my compost pile. I see chipmunks and
bluejays picking their way through it in the morning, and I’m
sure raccoons come at night, because someone is licking the
eggshells clean.
64

One May morning, I saw a red squirrel jump out of the
compost bin and on to a nearby pine tree with an avocado
shell in its mouth. Up the tree it dashed, leaving me with the
image of a red squirrel in a sombrero eating guacamole and
chittering “Ai-yi-yi-yi.”
You could think of your compost pile as a big, perhaps
somewhat unsightly, bird or squirrel feeder. Cute. But when it
comes to bigger critters, you or your neighbors may express
some concern. You really don’t want a neighborhood dog
pawing through the remains of last night’s dinner. And you
do not want to attract bears. As to the mid-sized mammals
who are happy to dine at the buffet table of the compost pile
for their own moonlight dinner, well, that’s your decision.
Fear of critters is the number-one reason people decide not to
compost. But there are ways around this issue. One is to avoid
putting your kitchen waste on the pile. You can still run it
through the garbage disposal and send all those nutrients
downstream. Or you could bury it eight inches deep in the
garden. Another way is to compost indoors using red worms
in a Rubbermaid tub.
Your compost is dinner in disguise for someone. Who will
that be? —Cheryl Wilfong
Critters in the Compost and the Job They Do
When I turn over my compost pile, or dump shovelfuls into
the wheelbarrow, I usually have a moment when I hesitate
before sinking in the shovel. Why? I’ve been composting for
some twenty years, and I still hesitate with this tiny, almost
65

imperceptible, sense of fear at what I might find under that
shovel!
I decided to get serious, and I began to learn about what was
in the pile—this, obviously, will be a great activity for kids! If
you have the time and the motivation, you can start a little
science experiment in your backyard.
The bacterium in your compost pile is so small you can’t even
see it. It is everywhere. There’s fungus, or mold, like you
sometimes see growing on a decaying piece of food in your
refrigerator or in your worm bin.
Oh, and the bugs! They are legion and fascinating when you
turn your compost pile with a shovel, and it is amazing what
you will discover. Though the sight of a centipede always
sends horror movie tingles down my spine, I can’t stop
looking at them, and don’t even try to count their legs!
Earthworms are my favorite! They don’t have eyes or legs
and have a soft body that is divided into segments—they just
move around sensing the light, but they prefer dark moist
places like the compost pile where they eat bacteria and fungi.
There are so many more I can’t even begin to name, but here
are a few to look out for when you bend down low: pill bugs,
ants, fruit flies, mites, slugs, snails, and one of my personal
favorites, spiders, who help eat insects and control pests that
can harm the garden, and build webs that sparkle in the
morning dew. How these bugs work in the compost pile could
be the subject of another book!
BACKSTAGE IN THE GARDEN
66

When I visit a garden, I’m always on the lookout for where
the gardeners hide their inventory. Every beautiful garden has
a back stage, and I want to see it.
Where do they hide the compost? The brush pile? In the
heaps of woodchips or bark mulch? Where do they put the
dead plants? Do they pot up their divided plants? How do
they camouflage the inner workings?
I like this treasure hunt. Where are the tools of the trade
located? The shovels, the flowerpots, the clippers and
loppers? Where do they keep the stuff that makes the garden
beautiful?
The set and the scenery of the garden itself might be
something I can only fantasize about, but more than garden
gnomes are at work. Real people have been sweating,
digging, and hauling, although by the time I arrive, their
tracks have been covered, the walks have been swept, and all
is calm.
Sometimes, the storage area is beautiful too. (Although that’s
nearly beyond my personal comprehension.) A few gardeners
actually do find a place for everything, and put everything in
67

its place. But, more often, behind the scenes looks not unlike
the back staging area of my garden—heaps of unused or
disused garden material.
Then I stroll contentedly back into the garden and greet the
owner in her clean clothes and clogs. —Cheryl Wilfong
COMPOST ALPHABET —Cheryl Wilfong
Green = Nitrogen
Apple cores
Banana skins
Coffee grounds in filters
Daffodil deadheads
Eggshells
Feathers
Grapefruit skins
Grass clippings
Horseradish leaves
Iceberg lettuce
Juice pulp
Kiwi skins
68

Lettuce leaves
Manure (herbivores)
Nasturtium leaves
Orange rinds
Pumpkin
Quinoa
Rhubarb leaves
Seaweed (wash off salt)
Teabags
Urine
Vegetables
Watermelon rinds
Ximenia (sourplum)
Xanthorhizus (yellow root)
Yams
Zucchini
Brown = Carbon (and Carbohydrates)
69

Agave syrup (sugar)
Brown paper bags
Corncobs
Dried fruit
Egg cartons (shredded)
Flour products, fruitcake
Gummy bears
Halloween candy
Hay
Icing
Jellybeans (sugar)
Ketchup
Leaves
Muffins
Newspaper (shredded)
Onion skins
Paper, paper towels
70

Quantity = 40 to 50 percent
Raffia
Stalks 8 stems, straw
Toilet paper tubes
Used napkins, tissues
Underpants (cotton)
Vacuum (no synthetic
rug fibers though)
Wool
Xerox paper
Yard debris (chopped up)
Zweibach, zero, zone
No-No’s
Ashes
Bones
Charcoal
Dairy products
71

E-coli (fresh cowpies)
Fat
Grease (e.g., bacon)
Herbicide-treated weeds
or grass clippings
Ice cream
Junket
Kefir
Lint (synthetic fibers)
Meat
Needles, pine (acidic and decompose too slowly)
Oils
Pet poop
Quilts, quackgrass
Rugs (synthetic fibers)
Sawdust (too acidic)
Thistles (spread by root)
72

Urethane
Velvet and velour
(synthetics)
Weeds with seeds or
roots that spread by
rhizome
X This No-No List
Yogurt
Zippers
73

The author and a bouquet of kale.
74

Chapter 4
CONTAINERS
“When I pass a flowering zucchini plant in a garden, my heart
skips a beat.”
—Gwyneth Paltrow
When my kitchen compost bucket is full, I continue to jam in
food scraps on a daily basis, wondering if and when my
husband will get the picture and take the bucket out across the
backyard to our beautiful new four-tiered compost bin built
just last summer by his capable hands.
I have to laugh when I think about how I continue to stuff
fruit and vegetable scraps into that bucket. A few of our
university/commercial kitchen buckets (given to us by the
college where my husband works—any restaurant will gladly
give you a used commercial-size sour cream container if you
ask) have literally cracked because of my stubbornness!
Sometimes, I glance longingly at beautiful, sleek, kitchen
compost buckets in catalogs and on websites, and think how I
could integrate such beauty into my kitchen. But then I get
sidetracked by working, cleaning, hanging out my laundry
(my goal is to never to use the dryer, unless I have towels to
dry), socializing, gardening, weeding, etc., and I just don’t get
around to ordering one. And really, the old plastic bucket is
just fine.
75

Regardless of your design tastes, you just need to have
something convenient in which to collect veggie scraps and
fruit waste. My bucket is ugly and utilitarian, but it does the
job.
POLITICALLY CORRECT COMPOST
I’m master composter, and I wonder if this means my own
compost should be “Politically Correct” compost with no
half-decayed woolen socks in it. Since 1993, my compost has
76

been inspired by Vera Work, a social worker and Holocaust
survivor, who offered a weekend workshop on post-traumatic
stress disorder while I was studying to be a mental health
counselor at Antioch University New England. Vera brought
in a jar of compost that included a large rusty nail, a bit of
rag, and a chicken bone. The message to the traumatized
client was clear: everything eventually composts.
For years, I threw old ripped woolen or cotton shirts or
sweaters into my compost—clothes that had no future even in
a big yellow Planet Aid box. I thought decrepit clothes could
aid the soil of my garden instead.
But then, digging into a three-year-old compost bin, I’d
shovel out a more or less whole green sweater matted with
fibrous roots. Maybe it wasn’t wool after all? A braided rug
decayed into one or two foot lengths. I’d pull out the partial
braids and snake them into the neighboring bin where I’d run
into the blue strands a year or two later. The leather remains
of a moccasin from Alaska lined with rabbit fur—I had worn
holes in the sole at the heel and the ball of the foot. A shred of
a filmy cotton blouse my mother gave me for Christmas in
1977 still floats around my vegetable garden.
Now, when I pull what remains of a leather glove or a hot pad
out of the compost, I put it in the trash bag that’s headed for
the dumpster. I wonder what archeologists a thousand years
from now will make of a grimy, dirt laden, and ripped black
cotton t-shirt?
77

I’ve stopped throwing my ratty old clothes in the compost.
Instead, I toss a hole-y wool sock into the trash. I’ll toe the
line and keep a politically correct compost. No clothes. Just
naked compost. —Cheryl Wilfong
78

Compost Bin Plans
The most beautiful and practical compost bin ever!
Last summer, I finally said goodbye to my handy old Darth
Vader compost bin. It had lasted over a decade, and I was
getting tired of shoveling the humus out of the bottom and
straining my back.
I convinced my husband to take a few hours off to help me
build a new one. If you’re handy with tools, allow yourself
about three hours to build this, after you have all the materials
and tools together. (If you’re new to building things from
scratch, it may take you half a day.) All the materials are
available from Home Depot or any good lumberyard. Cost for
all new materials from Home Depot: about fifty dollars, not
including the finish.
79

The picture below of the inside corner of the finished compost
bin actually gives you everything you need to know to build
this bin. Every corner is identical. It really is a gem of a
compost bin!
Materials Needed for the Best Homemade Compost Bin Ever
The author’s finished pieces, ready for assembly!
• 8 - 5/8” x 6” x 6’ cedar fence boards (caution: don’t
buy the pine ones that are stained and treated to look
like cedar, and make sure your boards are flat and
square with no twist or warp)
• 1 - 1-lb box of #10 x 1 ½” hex/washer self-drilling
screws
• 1 - 10’ cedar 2x4”
• 1 - quart finish (your choice)
Tools Needed
• Power drill with nut-driver bit (to fit a #10 screw)
• Hand or power saw (I used a small saber saw—use a
tablesaw or radial arm if you have it!)
• Measuring tape
• Pencil
• “Poly
Square”
plastic
carpenter’s
square
(not
necessary, but sure is handy!)
80

Step-by-Step Instructions
1. Cut the fencing cedar into sixteen 28”-long pieces.
2. Cut sixteen 7 ½”-long pieces from the 2x4. (Cut them
about a pencil line’s width less than 7 ½”, or you’ll
be a quarter of an inch short of lumber when you get
to the last one.)
3. Make a little “jig” (a pattern) that will make it easy to
evenly space the legs down 1” from the top of the
board while attaching them. Take a scrap of the
leftover cedar fence board, and cut it to 6” x 2 ⅛”.
Cut a 1” piece (as close to 1” and as square as you
can cut it) off the end of a scrap of 2x4, and screw it
onto one end of the 6 x 2 ⅛piece you just cut. The
picture below shows the jig on the right.
This jig doesn’t get attached to anything—it is just a
spacer block to allow you to easily screw the legs
onto the boards exactly 1” down from the top,
quickly and consistently, without having to measure
each one each time.
4. You are now going to make sixteen identical leg/
board units (pictured on the left in the photo above).
Use the little jig to position the leg 1” down from the
top of the board, and screw the leg on through the
board. Use three screws, positioned as shown in the
picture.
5. Now you’re going to assemble the leg/board units
into the four independent tiers that will make up your
homemade compost bin. It helps if you have a second
pair of hands to help you hold things square when
you screw the corners together.
81

Use two (not three) screws on these sides, positioned so that
they do not run into the three screws already in place (see
outside corner detail photo below).
The author stands proudly next to her finished composter.
After two sides are screwed together, the corner should look
like this (it’s upside down with the leg sticking up):
I didn’t have a second pair of hands, so I laid them out on a
flat patio and pressed them up against a roof post so I could
put my strength behind the drill to drive the screws.
At any rate, when you have four of these screwed together at
the corners, you have the first tier of the homemade compost
bin made. Make three more exactly like it, and you have
become the proud owner of your very own Best Homemade
Compost Bin Ever!
82

See more at: www.vegetable-gardening-with-lorraine.com/
compost-bin-plans.html
Compost in a Bucket, a Space-Saving Approach
(This composting method is ideal for apartment dwellers or
those with little backyard space to a full operation.)
Materials
• 5-gallon bucket with lid
• Trowel or spade
• Tarp
• 1 gallon of compost, soil, or sawdust
• Compostable materials (grass clippings, paper, food
scraps from participants)
• Non-compostable materials (e.g. plastic cups)
• Water
• Worksheet
• “Greens”
and
“browns”
(see
Background
for
“Building a Compost Pile,” pages 13-14)
Background Information
Soil is one of the Earth’s most precious natural resources. It is
composed of rocks, minerals, living organisms, and organic
83

matter. Organic matter in soil comes from the decomposition
of plants and animals. Minerals in soil are needed for plant
growth. The nutrient cycle, which converts dead plants or
animal tissue into a form that can be absorbed by new plants
and animals, is essential to all life on Earth.
Tiny microscopic animals in soil eat and transform the dead
tissues of plants and animals into nutrients easily absorbed by
plants. These bacteria are the most numerous creatures in the
world.
One handful of soil can contain five billion creatures, as many
as all the people in the world. It happens anywhere there is
sufficient organic matter, moisture, and air to nurture the
microscopic
bacteria,
fungi,
and
other
organisms
that
decompose organic matter.
It is important to maintain the buckets by opening and turning
the material with a trowel every few days to keep the compost
aerated. It is also a good idea to add more browns than greens
to your bucket. It will not heat up as fast, but it will avoid
potentially bad odors.
THE CARE AND TENDING OF COMPOST BINS
84

The experts say you should layer your compost with equal
amounts of green and brown; you should turn your compost;
and you should chop your compost into bits and pieces.
But my compost pile is not the focus of my life. I want to be
good to the environment and good to my garden, but I also
want to be good to my back. I am never going to be turning
over my compost pile with a pitchfork. I don’t have a spare
teenager around the house to send outdoors with a shovel to
work off some steam. I am not going to be putting my
compost on a cutting board and slicing and dicing (or hacking
and thwacking) like Julia Child. I just don’t have that kind of
time in my life. And I don’t expect you to either.
Instead, I do my best at layering the green and the brown as I
go along. In the spring and the summer, there’s a lot of green.
In the fall, there’s a lot of brown. Sigh. My “layers” are
thicker (way thicker) than what the university extension
service recommends.
I do make an extra effort to add a lot of green. Rhubarb leaves
are excellent for this purpose and so are carrot tops. Dividing
the plants in your perennial garden, as hard as it is, and
tossing the extras into the compost is another excellent source
of green.
Manure also counts as “green,” even though it’s brown. If I
have the inclination or the time or the truck, I add a big slug
of manure to the bins at any time of the year. But definitely in
November, I pick up a load of manure at the local farm and
use it to “top off” three bins of compost that have already
reached the brim with fall clean-up. Then they can sit and
“cook” all winter.
85

Since you and I are not turning, watering, or chopping up our
compost, the actual decomposing of the compost will take
longer. We are simmering our compost, not roasting it.
Therefore, it won’t cook as fast as the gourmet compost. But
both varieties will “taste” the same to the garden.
Let that heap simmer in its own juices for a year or two.
Don’t rush it. Just simmer down, my friend. In order to
“tenderize” our compost, we are tending it by being tender to
it and to ourselves. —Cheryl Wilfong
INTERVIEW WITH ALYSSA HOLMES, MEDICINAL
GARDENER
I’ve been a gardener all my life, and then really got into it
through my college experience. I got my bachelor’s degree in
Sustainable Agriculture at Sterling College in the Northeast
Kingdom of Vermont. It was during this time that I knew I
would continue to garden for the rest of my life! I have been
growing food, herbs, and raising some animals ever since, and
composting is a huge part of all of this.
I live on a 10 acre homestead, and I consider it an organism.
It all works together, and ideally, at times, a closed loop can
86

be created. This loop can only be created by the building of
soil through the maintenance and use of compost.
Now—though I studied compost in ag-tech classes in college,
and have visited many places that are doing it masterfully and
scientifically—I choose to take a pretty laid back approach.
Here on Harvest Hill where I live, we have laying hens, so
they get to eat a lot of our food scraps, but many go onto the
compost pile as well. At the end of the season, before winter
sets in, we clean out the chicken coop (where they spend their
nights) and this partially composted chicken manure goes
onto garden beds along with leaves and other crushed garden
matter. By spring—through all the frosting and heaving and
thawing—it is fully composted. It’s magical, really.
I strive for a little more organization in the compost
realm—like this book suggests—because when we’re too lax
about it and not aware of materials and the carbon to nitrogen
ratio, funky things start to happen! Rats! Sliminess! And
squmpkins (squmpkins are those cross-pollinated squash/
pumpkin/zucchini seeds that sprouted). Right now in fact, we
have squmpkins taking over the pile and ravaging it for all its
nutrients. This is a sure sign that the pile isn’t hot enough, and
in our case, has too many nitrogen-rich materials and not
enough carbon (the dry stuff).
We usually apply finished good compost onto the garden beds
after one year of successful transformation. It’s just soil at
87

that point, but the best of the best! So the trick here is to know
how old each of the piles in the rotation is, and also to make
sure we chop and turn frequently.
I’ve had issues with smelly compost inside and flies—we’re
still trying to figure this out. I suppose I can just buy a fancy
counter-top compost container, rather than using a bucket
with a lid that does not quite fit!
Urban composters in Tribeca, New York City. Photo by
Vitaliy Piltser.
88

Chapter 5
URBAN COMPOSTING
“I’m a chef, I’m a cook, I was created by this industry, and I
like to think I’m giving back. But I’m not giving back
because I can make a scallop soufflé, I’m giving back because
I can make compost.”
—Arthur Potts Dawson
Just because you don’t have a sprawling backyard and room
to
spare
doesn’t
mean
you
can’t
get
in
on
the
composting—and help our Earth at the same time! There are
composting systems suitable even for cramped city kitchens,
whether you have a full balcony garden, a windowsill herb
collection, or you just want to reduce your impact on local
landfills.
For those who don’t have room for full composting systems
in their backyards, smaller systems that don’t take as long to
produce composted earth can be suitable alternatives. There
are many options—some use microorganisms to speed
decomposition and others use electricity to generate heat and
cut down on waiting time. Traditional compost containers
designed specifically to fit in tight places are another
alternative.
89

Urban gardeners are sometimes concerned about the smell of
collecting compost indoors or the prevalence of pests.
Many cities, such as Seattle and Portland, Oregon, to name
two, provide curbside composting programs and will collect
kitchen scraps from participants as they would collect
recycling. Other cities mandate that their residents compost;
San Francisco collects six hundred tons of compost every day
since making composting mandatory.
For those who want to keep their waste out of landfills but
don’t have a garden (or houseplants) in need of fertilizing,
these programs can be very helpful. In cities without
municipal programs, compost can sometimes be donated to
local community gardens, farmers markets, nurseries, or even
given as gifts to friends with gardens!
90

Bokashi
According to Stuart Franklin, the co-owner of The Green
Buffalo and Nature’s Lawn 8 Garden in upstate New York,
composting is part of his family’s daily life. He uses the
Bokashi method, which is a tub in which you put your fruit
and vegetable scraps, which is basically like “pickling your
garbage,” he says.
Bokashi (Japanese for fermented organic matter) is a good
hands-off option that can be tucked away under your sink or
in some corner of your kitchen. The key to Bokashi compost
is the microbial powder that is sprinkled on top of compost
material. After the microbes get to work fermenting your
scraps, you’re left with soft, bio-active material which can be
added to a garden, fed to worms or a traditional compost pile,
or used to create a “soil factory.” When the material is mixed
with dirt, it quickly breaks down, leaving rich soil behind
with very little time or effort. Since the fermenting process
happens in a sealed container, there shouldn’t be a pest or
smell concern and you can compost things in it that would not
traditionally be a good idea (i.e. meat, small bones, etc.).
Weeds and diseased plants are other traditional no-nos that
can be added to the Bokashi system! Although most compost
piles don’t heat up enough to kill diseases or seeds, the acidic
environment created by the fermentation process will keep
those concerns at bay. Fermentation is perfect for people who
don’t have enough space or time for turning and sorting
91

through waste, as this method is not concerned with nitrogen/
carbon ratios.
Stuart adds that the tub ferments and kills off diseases without
the addition of the usual compost rotting smell, and there is
no nutrient loss. When your bucket is done, there is a light
mold on it, but it isn’t broken down. You can bury the
contents right in the ground, or dump it outside in a compost
pile. You can also put the contents in a tub of soil and let it
break down that way. In the long winters of upstate New
York near Buffalo, Stuart keeps and stores a few tubs in his
basement until spring. In summer, he keeps the bucket near
the compost pile outside. You can collect the juice, and use as
a fertilizer—it is very bioactive and has lots of nutrients, but
he noted that it must be diluted, because the liquid smells bad
and is very potent. The way he composts is he saves up the
scraps in the kitchen for a few days, and then they are put in
the bucket. He usually keeps two going at once—once one
bucket is full he lets it ferment for two to three weeks before
burying, while filling up the next bucket.
The Bokashi method is terrific for apartment dwellers or
winter use. You can make your own “soil factory” by mixing
it with good soil in a storage tub, where it will break down
completely within a matter of weeks.
GARDEN SURPRISES
It’s a good thing I like surprises.
Last spring I took buckets of compost to my community
garden plot. I planted only winter squash and onions there,
since I figured they wouldn’t need much care, and I only visit
92

once a week. By July, I had a forest of tomatillos growing
among the squash. That didn’t surprise me. My compost has
jillions of tomatillo seeds.
Meanwhile, most of the “weeds” were growing in my onions
beds were flowers. I dug out eight dozen Nicotiana (flowering
tobacco) and one dozen Verbascum (a sweet perennial
mullein that is only two feet tall). I didn’t have the heart to
weed out Cleome (spider flower), Nigella (love-in-a-mist),
Chinese forget-me-not (Cynoglossum), or the opium poppy
(Papaver somniflorum) that blooms in late June. Trying to
have both flowers and onions was counter-productive, so I
had to separate them like rambunctious children.
The community garden at the Putney Food Coop, Putney,
Vermont.
In September, I harvest three winter squash, bushels of
tomatillos, and growing right beside the garden gate, ground
cherries!
Also
called
Cape
gooseberries,
these
little
yellow-orange globes combine the sweetness and size of
berries with a hint of tangy tomato-pineapple. Hiding in a
paper husk, these little treasures love the heat of summer. I
offer these surprises-from-the-compost to my community
garden mates and watch them smile at the surprising taste and
gift of little berries so late in the growing season.
93

In October, it’s time to pull out the tomatillo bushes, the
squash vines, and all the dead flowers, and put them in the
compost bin. Perhaps you have a pretty good guess as to what
I’m going to find growing in my vegetable garden next
summer.
You just never know what surprises your compost has in store
for you. —Cheryl Wilfong
Compost in the City
“Composting is when you throw all of your garbage outside
in a lidless box, right?” said every New Yorker with whom
I’ve ever worked. Aside from the saints of the community
garden world, I’m not sure who out here in NYC is turning
eggshells and leaf litter into gardener’s gold.
I know that urban composting exists and that it is a worthy
and gratifying endeavor. But my stories of urban composting
have been nothing but hilarious failures. I’ve stood on a
massive twelve-foot mountain of “compost” created by a
prestigious landscaping firm trying to be greener only to
eventually shovel it all into a dumpster. “This is too hard, too
gross, and we’re probably doing it wrong” was the general
consensus. We were definitely doing it wrong.
94

I live in Brooklyn, Manhattan’s bohemian sister. You can
compost here even if you don’t have a garden. You can
compost just because you want to go the extra mile in your
recycling habits. We have farmers markets where you can
bring your compost, have it picked up and taken back upstate
by farmers who fertilize their crops then sell vegetables back
to you at the farmers market. You can then pat yourself on the
back for contributing to the magical carbon cycle. Like many
professional gardeners here, I do not have my own garden and
am waaay too self-absorbed to compost charitably for
somebody else’s benefit. As far as my clients are concerned,
it is hard for the city’s rich and glamorous to wrap their minds
around the concept that trash contributes to beauty; therefore
a compost bin is a rare, almost mythical, object in an Upper
East Side garden. There is a stigma, a stereotype, about one
who composts. The perceived divide is something like those
who buy bulgur and drink out of old mason jars and those
who don’t. One of my favorite clients, a true and perfect lady
of Park Avenue, was being teased over tea by her friends
about her style being a little too “Brooklyn.” She immediately
retorted “Yes, but I’ll never compost.”
Photo of Courtney Wilder by Ian McNaughton.
I have, at times, used a well-known fertilizer called Nature’s
Wisdom “Liquid Compost,” that I believe yielded favorable
results. It works like a concentrate that you mix in your
watering can and you use like any water-soluble fertilizer.
95

Ideal for the container garden, which is my specialty, this
particular product is derived from mostly chicken manure and
unsurprisingly smells terrible. I certainly enjoyed utilizing
Nature’s Wisdom without having to turn and stir a pile of
half-decaying banana peels and worm colonies, but I also felt
I wasn’t getting the same, gratifying results that a real
composting gardener achieves after mastering the craft.
—Courtney Wilder,
Professional Gardener who lives in
Brooklyn and works in Manhattan
GREENMARKET IN NYC
In New York City, shoppers at select Greenmarkets can drop
off fruit and vegetable scraps for composting. The program is
extremely successful, and really making a difference. Their
slogan is, “Make landscape, not landfill!” Here are some
highlights, courtesy of GrowNYC:
Photo courtesy GrowNYC
Why compost?
Food comprises about seventeen percent of New York City’s
waste stream. When this material is sent to a landfill it
contributes
to
NYC’s
disposal
costs
and
can
create
greenhouse gas emissions. When composted, food scraps and
other organic waste become a useful product that adds
96

nutrients and improves the quality of soil for street trees,
gardens, and more.
Photo by Erik Martig
What happens to food scraps dropped off at Greenmarket?
Your household food scraps will be transported to one of
several NYC compost sites to be transformed into a fertile
soil amendment for use on local urban farming and gardening
projects.
Can businesses drop off materials to compost?
No. Commercial food scraps are not accepted at these sites.
Businesses
should
contact
a
hauler
who
can
handle
commercially-generated organic waste.
What can I bring to the compost collection sites?
Accepted
materials
include
fruit
and
vegetable
scraps,
non-greasy food scraps (rice, pasta, bread, cereal, etc.), coffee
grounds and filters, tea bags, egg and nut shells, pits, cut or
dried flowers, houseplants, and potting soil. [Please NO meat,
chicken, fish, greasy food scraps, fat, oil, dairy, animal waste,
litter or bedding, coal or charcoal, coconuts, diseased and/or
insect-infested
houseplants/soil,
or
biodegradable/
compostable plastics.]
97

Photo by Jessica Klajman
How should I store my food scraps?
Food scraps can be collected in large yogurt containers or
other covered plastic containers, plastic bags, milk cartons, or
in commercially-available compost pails. To reduce odors at
home and at the Greenmarket, store items in the freezer or
refrigerator. A layer of shredded newspaper at the bottom of
your storage container also helps.
Photo by Christina Salvi
The food scrap collection tent is stationed next to a drop-off
for
clothing
and
textiles
at
the
Grand
Army
Plaza
Greenmarket in Brooklyn.
GOING GREEN AT THE MARKET
98

Note: This article, by GROW NYC’s Laura MacDonald, first
appeared in the Summer 2014 issue of New York Organic
News, the quarterly publication of the Northeast Organic
Farming Association of New York (NOFA-NY)
Promoting social and environmental issues at farmers
markets reflects the growing trend of “green living.”
Photo by Vitaliy Piltser
Stroll through your local farmers market, and you’ll be
surrounded with the season’s bounty of fresh fruits and
vegetables, local dairy, and meats. It’s easy to become lost in
a sea of bright summer berries or mesmerized by huge heads
of lettuce still specked with moist soil, a reminder of just how
recently that lettuce was growing in a farmer’s field. These
days, however, more and more farmers markets are becoming
not only showcases where local farmers, fishers, and bakers
sell goods but also neighborhood centers of sustainability.
GrowNYC’s
Greenmarkets
are
proud
pioneers
of
this
movement. GrowNYC has introduced sustainability centers
under bright orange tents at many of our fifty-four New York
City Greenmarkets. The centers are run by Greenmarket’s
sister program, GrowNYC’s Office of Recycling Outreach
and Education. At select Greenmarkets, New Yorkers can
drop off food scraps for composting; unload old clothing, cell
phones, and rechargeable batteries for recycling; and learn
about other recycling resources, all while supporting the
environmental benefits of purchasing food from regional
farms.
99

COMPOSTING: A NATURAL FIT
Farm-fresh
produce
at
a
farmers
market
often
comes
packaged as nature intended, with skins, husks, leafy tops,
and seeds intact. Food-scrap composting at greenmarkets has
proved a natural fit and huge success with city dwellers who
are happy to tote pumpkin guts and coffee grounds alike to
their local market to feed a garden and starve a landfill.
Begun as a pilot program with funding from the New York
City Council, GrowNYC’s food waste collection program has
demonstrated the potential to divert a significant amount of
food scraps from disposal through composting. In partnership
with the NYC Department of Sanitation (DSNY), the
GrowNYC 8 DSNY Food Scrap Compost Program launched
in April 2012, and today thirty-five Greenmarket locations
collect food scraps forty-one times weekly.
Photo by Meghan Kanady
Our urban composters save their fruit and vegetable scraps,
non-greasy food scraps (rice, pasta, bread, and cereal), coffee
grounds and filters, tea bags, egg and nut shells, pits, cut or
dried flowers, houseplants, and potting soil. They stockpile
the material in reusable containers and paper or plastic bags,
store them in their freezers to prevent odors, and bring them
to market on buses, trains, or bikes, or even on foot. The food
scrap compost crew ensures that the bins of collected
materials are then sent to one of several local composting
sites to be turned into a rich fertile soil amendment for use on
urban farming and gardening projects. Each week the
100

compost crews break records with the amount of food scraps
collected, even in the middle of winter. To date the program
has diverted more than two and a half million pounds of food
waste from landfills and introduced thousands of New
Yorkers to the practice of composting.
RECYCLING IS IN STYLE
Many greenmarkets also offer a place to drop off textiles such
as clothing, shoes, and linens. Items collected at a market tent
are sorted for reuse or divided into different grades for
recycling into rags, insulation, and fiber for car-door panels.
As an added incentive for saving those textiles from the trash
can, all donations are tax deductible and donors can ask for
and receive a receipt. Since the program began in 2007, 2.6
million pounds of textiles have been collected for reuse or
recycling at twenty-six greenmarkets, with more locations
planned in the coming year.
Photo by Erik Martig
TECHNO TRASH
In November 2009, GrowNYC expanded its recycling efforts
at select Greenmarket locations by adding collection boxes
for
rechargeable
batteries
and
cell
phones.
GrowNYC
established this recycling program in cooperation with the
Rechargeable Battery Recycling Cooperation (RBRC), a
nonprofit
public
service
organization
that
operates
the
Call2Recycle program. With technology evolving at a rapid
101

pace, people are replacing their cell phones every few years,
thus creating a huge amount of technology waste. Many
cities, including New York City, have implemented laws
prohibiting rechargeable batteries and certain electronics from
being discarded in landfills. Greenmarkets have proven to be
convenient locations for unloading these items for recycling.
LEARNING BY EXAMPLE
Beyond just places for people to drop off their food scraps,
old t-shirts, and cell phones, sustainability centers serve as
information hubs where shoppers can get answers to recycling
questions
and
find
resources
such
as
collections
for
electronics and harmful household products, as well as
GrowNYC’s hugely popular Stop ‘N’ Swap® community
reuse event.
Photo by Vitaliy Piltser
Greenmarkets also host one-off programs offering shoppers
the opportunity to learn about other ways to live more
sustainably. At-market tutorials on indoor composting with
worm bins have been a pull for those wanting nutrient-rich
soil for their own plants and gardens. At “That’s not trash,
that’s dinner” demonstrations, shoppers learn how to cook
delicious dishes that make use of frequently discarded parts of
fruits and vegetables. Some markets also host popular
Halloween costume swaps and feature community-based
programming, such as eyeglass collections, paper-shredding
events, and pop-up repair shops.
102

Photo by Vitaliy Piltser
Greenmarket’s success incorporating programs like food
scrap composting and recycling at markets has shown that
there is an appetite for the farmers market shopper to connect
with more than just their local farmers each week. Farmers
markets are no longer just places you can find fresh, healthy,
local food; they offer eco-minded individuals a one-stop shop
for gaining the knowledge and tools to help reduce their
ecological footprint. Helping the environment while loading
up on the fruits of Mother Nature’s bounty—sounds like the
perfect way to spend a Saturday morning.
TIPS
FOR
ESTABLISHING
A
SUCCESSFUL
SUSTAINABILITY CENTER
• Start by contacting your local municipal waste and
recycling centers. They can be a great resource,
offering existing programs you can partner with or
help in finding facilities that accept particular items
for recycling, such as rechargeable batteries.
• Look for community groups, churches, charities, or
businesses that might benefit from what you want to
collect;
they
may
be
willing
to
provide
the
infrastructure for the program in exchange for
collection materials.
• Establish a realistic schedule and stick to it. Develop
a system to quickly communicate any changes to the
103

collection
schedule
to
avoid
wasted
trips
and
discouraged recyclers.
• Dedicate someone to oversee logistics, such as
monitoring tonnage collected to ensure an ample
supply of collection containers and trucks to transport
materials.
• An adequate and knowledgeable staff is a must. Train
employees and volunteers on what can and cannot be
accepted, how to prevent onsite contamination, where
materials end up, and who benefits. Encourage them
to be vocal and energetic.
• Outreach and advertising is very important. Make
your drop-off areas stand out with banners, A-frames,
recycling demonstrations, and displays of items
accepted.
Provide
printed
postcards
and
post
information online.
Volunteers
process
food
scraps
collected
at
Brooklyn
Greenmarkets at the Added Value Red Hook Farm.
104

Photo by Meghan Kanady
Photo by Meghan Kanady
105

Photo by Meghan Kanady
Recently, in Brooklyn, New York, composting was made
easy by giving each apartment or brownstone dweller a
freezer compost bin with which to collect scraps of veggies,
and even dry food scraps like pasta and bread, by setting up a
weekly municipal collection. The chance to watch the process
of the green waste and the brown waste doing the dance of
decomposition
is
missed
but
nevertheless
the
urban
composters are contributing to the noteworthy goal of cutting
out organic waste in the landfill.
According to the Urban Garden Center, “Small batch
composters, such as the Urban Compost Tumbler (UCT), fit
nicely into an urban setting where people have neither the
space nor the time to maintain a traditional backyard compost
pile.”
It is a good idea to see the process of composting to fully
appreciate it. Organizations like GrowNYC offer workshops
and tours so urban residents can really see how it all works
and what a great benefit it is.
COFFEE GROUNDS, WHO KNEW?
According to the Environmental Protection Agency, many
coffee shops, restaurants, and individuals throw away their
food scraps, including their used grounds, to the tune of
thirty-six million pounds of wasted food that reach landfills
each year! If coffee grounds are composted the way one
Washington, DC entrepreneur named Eric Steiner does, they
help create the ideal soil climate for plant growth, instead of
releasing methane as they break down in landfills. In a recent
106

news article about Eric, journalist Heather Brady writes, ”Few
people are building coffee composting businesses specifically
to make a profit from using the nation’s widely available
supply of grounds.”
After more than a decade of producing compost, Steiner has
been selling it to suburban gardeners for three years through
the
grounds-focused
company
he
created,
EarthBrew
Compost. It’s a one-man operation, run with a bright red
pickup truck and a tiny patch of land at the back corner of a
farm in Brookeville, MD.
Eric Steiner wheels the bin outside to the bed of his truck and
begins putting bags of used grounds in it. Photo and story by
Heather Brady, WTOP contributor.
Once Steiner mixes the used coffee grounds and horse
manure that he collects into his pile, he lets it sit. The one he
is making now has been breaking down since May and
Steiner feeds it each time he picks up more waste.
When it is done, he will be left with rich, dark compost to sell
next year. He keeps two piles at the farm in Maryland and
each pile can grow to be more than 20,000 gallons in size.
Steiner is developing one pile for future years and selling the
other, a finished pile, to customers now.
107

The forty-six-year-old Baltimore resident intends to scale his
business up, taking advantage of the growing popularity of
compost and urban gardening. Steiner’s secret recipe, coffee
grounds and horse manure topped off with vegetable scraps,
works particularly well. The grounds provide a large amount
of carbon, while the horse manure contains just enough
nitrogen to maintain a balance between the two elements.
Photo by Meghan Kanady
Food scraps from greenmarket collections are composted in
windrows on Governor’s Island in New York City.
Urban composting is a relatively new trend. In cities that have
active composting programs, like San Francisco, composting
is thriving and the benefits are not only cost-saving, but they
are rewarding to the landscape and the participants.
When I lived in Cambridge, Massachusetts, I put my name on
a waiting list for a community garden plot. It was a long
waiting list, but eventually I got a very small plot, about 4’ x
9’. I was eager to get started.
I drew sketches and planned raised beds for this little plot.
Gardening was one of my favorite things to do, and during the
spring before my first child was born, I went over there every
day. Working in the soil, with my pregnant belly balanced on
my knees, was very satisfying.
108

The year before, when I was in Seattle, I composted and had a
year-round garden, mostly in containers. My landlady gave
me permission to expand my garden to the curb and I had
vegetables growing right along the sidewalk!
If you live in an apartment or a small house in the city, don’t
be discouraged. You can accumulate food scraps and put
them in a bucket in your kitchen. Then, you can add the food
scraps to the municipal program like GrowNYC. If you want
to try composting at home to enrich the soil for houseplants or
a small garden on the patio, you can try using a worm bin,
which takes up very little space and is wonderfully efficient.
If you want to get started right away and use compost for your
community garden or your urban collection area, you can just
store the food scraps in your freezer so they don’t smell. If
you don’t think you cook enough to compost, think again.
One individual who composts can really make a difference!
According
to
Californians
Against
Waste,
compostable
organics make up 30 percent of California’s overall waste
stream, contributing more than twelve million tons annually
to the state’s landfills. In landfills, this material undergoes
anaerobic decomposition and produces significant quantities
of methane, up to 80 percent of which is not captured by a
landfill gas system. Composting, on the other hand, is a
109

fundamentally aerobic process, and well-managed compost
facilities do not produce any methane.
110

Chapter 6
WHAT DO YOU DO WITH IT?
“Live in each season as it passes; breathe the air, drink the
drink, taste the fruit, and resign yourself to the influence of
the earth.”
—Henry David Thoreau, Walden
Whether you diligently turn your compost, or adopt a layering
technique, after you have adding the proper ingredients, you
should be left with soft, dark, crumbly earth that is ready to be
used by plants. Compost can be mixed with existing soil,
added on top, or soaked in water to create liquid fertilizer.
Compost is called “soil amendment” when it is mixed with
soil to create optimum growing material for your plants.
Compost used as a soil amendment should be applied and
incorporated into the soil before planting crops, grasses, or
plants. For best results, use only finished compost as a soil
amendment. This can either be to increase the nutritional
content of the dirt or to balance soil that is rich in clay.
Compost can be mixed with potting mix to plant seeds or
seedlings (the young plants can’t handle direct compost) or
added to the soil as you dig your garden beds for built-in
fertilizer.
How to Use Compost
There are many ways to use compost. Some of the most
common uses of compost include:
111

• Soil Amendment
• Mulch
• Potting Mix
• Compost Tea
Use Compost as a Soil Amendment
Use compost as a soil amendment to increase the organic
matter in the soil. For best results, use only finished compost
as a soil amendment. Organic matter is critical for plant
development and growth (see benefits of compost). Tropical
and subtropical soils are notorious for their lack of this
material. Whereas temperate soils may have up to 50 percent
organic matter, sub-tropical soils typically have 1 percent or
less. Compost can help raise organic matter in soils.
The author used compost mixed with potting mix for this
Globe Amaranth by her front door.
112

Because tropical and subtropical soils never freeze, microbial
activity continues year-round. As a result, organic material is
used up quickly. Because of biological soil activity and
year-round warm weather, gardeners are advised to apply
compost annually, or as needed, to increase soil organic
matter content.
For best results, use only finished compost as a soil
amendment. Compost used as a soil amendment should be
applied and incorporated into the soil before planting crops,
grasses, plants, etc. Apply one to three inches of compost to
the soil surface and work it in to the soil to a depth of about
three to four inches.
Plants already in the ground can benefit greatly from
mulching, or adding a layer of compost on top of the existing
dirt. The compost acts much the same as fallen leaves,
keeping the soil protected from extreme temperatures and
dehydration. And, as your garden is watered, the compost will
provide your plants with nutrients for growth. For houseplants
that are already potted, sprinkling a layer of compost on top
of the existing soil will keep them looking fresh and green.
Another way to provide your plants with the nutrients they
need is by using your compost to brew a pot of compost
“tea.” The nutrient-rich liquid can then be fed to your plants
to provide moisture as well. One reason to make compost tea
is to spread the benefits of the compost over a large area.
It
is
crucial
that
you
allow
your
compost
to
finish
decomposing entirely before feeding it to your plants. If you
add the compost too soon the bacteria it contains will
113

compete with your plants for nitrogen. This can result in
stunted, yellow plants and seedlings.
How to Make Compost Tea
Compost tea is a liquid fertilizer that can be used on plants
and seedlings to deliver necessary nutrients and suppress
plant diseases and fungal activity. Compost tea can be brewed
by soaking mature compost in an equal part water and simply
stirring, every day, over a period of days or by a slightly more
complicated system that uses tubing to aerate the mixture.
You can customize your tea depending on what type of plants
you plan to use it on. Some gardeners add molasses to
increase bacterial production, for grasses, while others add
liquid seaweed or fish oil, to encourage fungi, which is
particularly beneficial for trees and shrubbery.
The idea behind the concoction is that by allowing compost to
brew in the water, sometimes with added seaweed or fish oil,
the beneficial microorganisms in it will have the chance to
flourish before being applied to the plants. Applying a liquid
fertilizer to plants, instead of solid compost, can deliver your
plants necessary nutrition as well as hydration. While the
scientific community has not officially decided on whether a
cup of home-brewed tea will “hit the spot” for your garden,
there is much anecdotal evidence that shows—and happy
gardeners who claim—that compost tea is well worth a try!
114

Compost as Tea
Compost tea is a method of using your compost nutrients for
indoor plants, potted plants with no room for additional soil,
and foliar applications (spraying on plant leaves).
To Make Compost Tea, Follow This Procedure:
• Step 1 - Fill a woven bag (e.g., burlap) with finished*
compost.
• Step 2 - Place the bag in a barrel or bucket of water.
• Step 3 - Let sit an hour.
• Step 4 - Remove the bag.
• Step 5 - Use the resulting liquid, “compost tea,” to
water plants.
• Step 6 - Empty the contents of the bag into the
garden and use as compost mulch or soil amendment.
The Benefits of Compost Tea
Compost tea extracts nutrients and microorganisms from the
compost and allows you to apply these beneficial components
to plants. Therefore, compost tea acts as a weak liquid
fertilizer, low in nitrogen but high in micronutrients.
115

If your plants are container grown, there may be no room to
add compost to the pots. Additionally, soil should not be built
up against the stems of many plants. Therefore, compost tea is
a good option for applying the benefits of compost to
container grown plants.
*Using unfinished compost is not recommended due to
possible pathogens and compounds that could damage plants.
Only finished compost should be used.1
COMPOST TEA
After brewing the mixture, you need to strain the tea. Use
cheesecloth and strain the tea/compost mixture into another
bucket. (You can put the compost solids back into the
compost pile or in the garden.) The tea should smell sweet
and earthy. If it smells bad, do not use it on your plants, but
dump the mixture back into your compost pile.
Apply the compost tea to your flower and vegetable plants
immediately. The beneficial microbes will begin to die
shortly after the air source is removed.
You can sprinkle the compost tea onto the foliage and the soil
around each plant. The tea will provide nutrients and an
energy boost to your garden plants. You can apply compost
tea every two weeks to your garden.
FOOD PYRAMID
116

The Healthy Eating Food Pyramid recommends people eat
three or more servings of vegetables every day plus two or
three servings of fruit. We can serve the same balance to our
compost pile: more or less equal servings of green, leafy
vegetables balanced with the carbohydrates of sweet fruit plus
the high fiber of woody stalks and stems. A plant-based diet is
healthiest not only for us, but for our compost pile as well.
The Healthy Eating Pyramid encourages us to eat a balanced
diet for the well-being of our bodies. Our compost pile also
works best if it has a balanced diet of green (nitrogen) and
brown (carbon and carbohydrates). —Cheryl Wilfong
How to Use Compost as Mulch
Compost is nutritious and attractive when used as mulch.
Once your compost has completely decomposed and is dark
and crumbly, you can spread it onto your beds as you would
mulch (being careful not to touch stems or leaves with the wet
compost). The compost will release nutrients more quickly
than wood mulch
so will need to be replenished more often (about once a year)
but your plants will be better for it! Using compost as mulch
will also mean that you don’t have to worry about the fungus
which wood sometimes harbors. Spread two to four inches
depending on your climate. Those in arid climates should use
more, while those is cooler climates don’t have to use as
much mulch. Be sure to give your plants space—four to six
inches around trunks—so that they do not become “pot
117

bound.” This can happen when plants don’t spread their roots
because of high nutrient mulch being right near them.
How to Amend Your Soil with Compost
Does my soil need amendment? There are tests one can
conduct to identify the exact type of soil you have and
whether it needs nutrients, but the easiest way to tell is just by
getting your hands dirty! The next time you’re in your garden,
burrow your fingers into the soil. Is it cool, moist, and
crumbly? Can you dig with just your fingers? If the answers
are yes, then your soil is probably good. If not, try adding
more compost! Compost can help soil with clay or sand bind
together to provide better drainage or help retain moisture.
Even soil without clay or sand can often use some help from
compost for better drainage.
Use compost as a soil amendment to increase the organic
matter in the soil. Organic matter is critical for plant
development and growth (see benefits of compost, page 11).
Compost can help raise organic matter in soils.
118

Because tropical and subtropical soils never freeze, microbial
activity continues year-round. As a result, organic material is
used up quickly. Because of biological soil activity and
year-round warm weather, I recommend that gardeners in
warmer climates apply compost annually, or as needed, to
increase soil organic matter content.
END OF GARDENING SEASON
When the growing season is over, but you still have a little
let’s-go-outdoors-and-garden energy, you can still twiddle
your green thumbs by using the last of the thin fall daylight to
sprinkle or shovel compost onto your flowerbeds.
November in colder climates is a good time to get a head start
on spring. In the spring, the garden becomes a hive of
activity. It’s good to do as many of those spring chores as
possible in late fall, sort of like prepping for a big dinner
party by doing some things days (or, in this case, months)
ahead.
Go ahead and use up all the compost you have. Compost,
unlike a savings account, doesn’t accrue interest in the bin.
The return on your investment comes from spreading it
119

around on your flower or vegetable gardens. And a good time
to do that is when the plants are falling asleep for the winter.
Two seckel pears from the author’s fruit trees, and one lone
tomato from the harvest in the fall.
Yes, it’s chilly outdoors, but you’ll warm up quickly by
exercising those big muscle groups. Even if your compost
isn’t warm, you will be.
When I come indoors on a fall afternoon, in my dirty garden
clothes, my sweetie hugs me and says, “You smell good. You
smell like the outdoors.”
Your compost smells and feels like delicious earth. And you
are wearing the fragrance of happiness. —Cheryl Wilfong
If you already have a garden that needs a bit of a boost, add
some compost, then mix it in a couple of inches deep. This
should revive your garden without needing a lot of digging.
(If you’ve already mulched, just move the mulch aside and
then replace after mixing.)
With either method, be sure to always mix your compost
evenly, as opposed to simply adding it to the plant’s hole,
which can result in poor drainage as well as roots that never
spread.
Unfinished Compost
120

Using unfinished compost as a soil amendment may stress
plants, causing them to yellow or stalling their growth. This is
because the decomposition process is continuing near the
plant roots and the microorganisms in the compost are
competing with the plants for nitrogen. You may want to
compensate for this nitrogen imbalance by adding nitrogen
fertilizer to soil applications of immature compost.
As an alternative, use compost as a mulch, and you don’t
have to worry about whether the compost is “finished” or not.
This is because any additional decomposition is occurring
above the root zone. The plants still benefit from the compost.
Compost as Mulch
The forest floor is a natural composting system in which
leaves are mulch on the soil surface, and then gradually
decompose, recycling nutrients and conditioning the soil.
Likewise, yard debris such as leaves, grass clippings, or
shredded branches can be used as mulch in the landscape and
allowed to compost on the soil surface. Over time, the mulch
will compost in place.
Finished or unfinished compost can be applied as a mulch
three to four inches thick on the soil surface. Do not
incorporate into the soil. Keep compost mulch two to three
inches away from plant stems. Nutrients will filter into soil,
without robbing nitrogen from the root zone. The benefits are
similar to those of regular mulch: soil moisture retention,
insulation from extreme temperatures,
and nutrients and organic matter for soil structure. One
disadvantage of using compost as mulch is that it will not act
as a barrier to weed growth, but, in fact, will promote weed
121

growth if not covered with a standard mulch material.
Compost or mulch should be reapplied yearly to replenish the
decomposing layer.
Compost as Potting Mix
Compost can be used as an excellent potting soil for your
container nursery. Compost offers good water retention
qualities and some basic nutrients. However, gardeners
should
use
only
fully
decomposed
(called
“finished”)
compost as a potting mix.
COMPOST PARAPHERNALIA YOU DON’T LIKELY
NEED
I
think
I’ve
bought
every
single
piece
of
compost
paraphernalia in the catalog:
• a black plastic composter
• compost aerator (a giant corkscrew)
• compost activator
• compost thermometer
• a sifter
• shredder
• compost bin cover
After all that shopping, I don’t use any of these gadgets.
I need shovelfuls of compost, and when I realized that the
bottom outlet of the black plastic unit was only big enough
122

for a trowel, I put the composter on the sidewalk with a sign
that said “Free.” It was gone in fifteen minutes.
About the compost aerator, well, I just never found the time
to stand at the compost pile and twist the big corkscrew into
it. After seven years of seeing the aerator lollygagging around
the compost bins, I finally took it to the Swap Program at the
landfill. My trash is now someone else’s treasure.
The compost activator is a waste of money. Microorganisms
already exist in your kitchen scraps and in your dirt. They will
activate your compost just as well as something from a bag or
a jar. Just shovel a scoop of dirt on your pile and voila! The
vast number of microorganisms that are in the dirt are now in
your compost pile and maybe some worms, too. You also can
read the label of the compost activator to find out what’s so
active about the “activator.” You can buy the ingredients,
such as blood meal and bone meal, at your garden supply
store.
I never even tried my compost thermometer because it was
pretty obvious that my compost pile was frozen in the winter.
The summer temperature was the same inside the pile as out.
The sifter also hangs around the compost pile. I use it a few
times a year when I need fine compost to add to potting soil.
Yes, I actually bought a used leaf shredder and used it once.
Since I do not relish dealing with mechanical equipment, I
sold it on Craig’s List two years later and, fortunately, broke
even.
123

A compost bin cover—what was I thinking? I have a roll of
black plastic sitting in my basement that I can cut to size and
cover my finished compost.
Oh, those compost gadgets are so enticing. They’re so
beautiful when they’re new. Enthusiasm and my credit card
carry me away. But now I’m older and wiser, and my
compost pile just carries on and does its own thing, never
missing all those costly gadgets. —Cheryl Wilfong
Container grown plants need a potting soil that retains
moisture, but is well drained. Most gardening enthusiasts
blend compost with coarse sand, perlite, vermiculite, etc. to
make optimal planting media.
If your compost still has large chunks in it, but is otherwise
finished, you may want to filter the compost through a 1/2
inch screen to remove un-decomposed material that could rob
nitrogen from the plant roots. Smaller chunks in the mix will
help maintain a well-drained planting media.
INDISPENSABLE COMPOST EQUIPMENT
124

A compost bucket sitting beside your sink in the kitchen is an
absolute need.
My mother used to have a triangular garbage strainer sitting
in the corner of our porcelain kitchen sink. A colander would
work just as well.
Nowadays, you can buy a purpose-built little compost bucket
with a lid. I bought a ceramic cookie jar twenty years ago. My
sweetie broke the lid soon afterward, so my kitchen compost
is lid-less. Since we take it out every day, smell is not an
issue. The cookie jar “look” hides the garbage contents, so
visitors to my home have a hard time finding the compost,
even if they’re looking for it.
I found a plastic container with a wide mouth (baby wipes, if
you must know) that fits perfectly inside this compost/cookie
jar. This “insert” is easy to carry back and forth and to wash
out.
Five-gallon buckets are the handmaidens of any gardener. For
a while, I coasted along on buckets leftover from a
construction project. Then I found some buckets at a garage
sale. Then I found my next generation of buckets at the farm
and garden supply store in the horse department.
Stroll through your garden with clippers in one hand and a
bucket in the other. Clip off deadheads, cut down old stems,
pick up leaves, and throw them in the bucket. Carrying the
bucket to the compost bin constitutes gardener’s exercise.
Instead of weights, we use buckets for much more interesting
repetitions.
125

I love my garden cart. Mine is forty-eight inches long,
twenty-nine
inches
wide
and
eighteen
inches
high.
I
recommend buying one this size or even a little smaller.
Really now, how much heavy stuff do you want to haul?
I prefer the two-wheeled garden cart to a wheelbarrow partly
for balance, partly for volume, and partly because you can lift
out the front panel and slide any number of heavy items into
the cart—garden statues or shrubs, for example. After you’ve
lifted a sheaf of yard and garden waste into the compost, you
can easily tip up the cart and let the dirt crumbs slide out.
That’s what I call easy cleaning.
From summer solstice until fall equinox, I count on my
garden cart to haul volumes of gone-by perennials, weeds
(pre-seed, hopefully), and rotten vegetables to the compost
pile.
Little by little or lot by lot, we just keep adding to our
compost pile. —Cheryl Wilfong
126

Photo by Vitaliy Piltser
127

VERMONT COMPOST COMPANY
The Vermont Compost Company was founded by organic
crop growing professionals in 1992 to meet the need for high
quality composts and compost based living soil mixes for
certified organic crop production. The mission and principles
of the company are formed by concern for the integrity of
food and the soil from which it grows.
In 1960, when Karl was eight years old, his parents left their
home on Manhattan’s West Side with one thousand dollars
and drove north until they could buy more than a hundred
acres with it. They got as far as Vershire, Vermont, where
they purchased 125 acres of pasture and forest at the top of
the watershed, for $1,250.
Karl Hammer of Vermont Compost in one of the green
houses.
Karl was fascinated with farming from his earliest memories,
and in Vershire in the 1960s he found manure-based, horse or
mixed horse/tractor powered farms still operating using the
traditional methods. From his farmer neighbors, Charles Orr,
Bill Perkins, Stanley Kendall, Gile Kendall, Ralph Brown,
and others he learned these traditional farming methods, like
how to stack loose hay and drive a horse and a tractor. Karl
said, “they showed me how to go out in the woods and get the
guts of hollow logs in a wheelborrow to feed to hogs. They
128

fed horse and cow manure to hogs. They bedded cows with
grass and leaves . . .”
When Karl was in his teens he left public education behind to
begin an unusual path. In 1969 he traveled to Spain where he
worked with the local farmers and started a bagel baking
business. As a teenager he also traveled to New Mexico to
farm, and by the time he was 19 he came back to Vermont
and began to clear land, starting an organic farm on his
family’s land in Vershire. He said, “We started farming in
1970. Milking goats, cows, selling vegetables at the farmer’s
market, Norwich market, and to New England Produce,
which later became Squash Valley Produce.”
Karl remembers a local Hardwood bobbin mill on a 10 acre
river bottom where there was a “library” of different piles of
bark, all separated by species and age. With access to this
resource he experimented. “When I got there you could buy
an eight yard bucket for $2.00. Any species and any age: Ash,
yellow birch, maple, oak, all of different ages. When you first
clear hardwoods you get incredibly vigorous plants.”
With learning partners like the well-known organic grower,
Eliot Coleman, who was then at the nearby Mountain School,
Karl began to realize that fertilizers and potting soils that
were commercially available didn’t have any labeling to say
what they contained. Karl began experimenting with making
his own compost and potting soil.
During this period, Karl also began to read extensively about
organic growing. Among his influences were Sir Robert
Howard who had developed the “Indore process,” named
after a town in the Punjab in India, where Sir Howard had
129

farmed in the 1920s. Sir Howard’s book Soil Testament
established one of the central principles of organic farming:
“feed the soil, and the soil will feed the plants.” From this
principle in a nutshell comes the Vermont Compost motto,
“Feed the Soil.”
Karl has been instrumental in starting a number of other
manure processing and composting operations, as well as
having begun a large organic farm in Millerton, New York. In
1987, Karl started Moody Hill Farm in Millerton, an
extensive greenhouse growing operation that also produced
its own compost and potting soils. That operation continues
an extensive organic growing operation today, under the
name of MacEnroe Organics.
Karl helped to found the Intervale Compost facility in
Burlington, Vermont, the manure composting operation at
Leemax farms in Hartland, and at Lylehaven Farm in East
Montpelier, Vermont. The current Vincent Flats
composting facility in East Montpelier operated by Vermont
Compost is an integral part of the operations of Fairmont
Farms, a large dairy operation. Karl continues to offer
consulting services in the development of composting and
organic growing operations.
Karl has developed into a compost specialist, a humus
connoisseur, who combines a comprehensive understanding
of soil and plant science with a practical knowledge of the
challenges organic growers face, and an ability to judge a
windrow of compost that verges on the sort of magic
employed by wine connoisseurs and chefs. Karl sticks his
nose directly into a handful of compost and sniffs, like he is
sampling fine brandy.
130

From
that
potent
combination
of
knowledge,
practical
experience, and intuitive comprehension, Karl has developed,
taught, and largely systematized a process for consistently
producing very high quality composts and soil blends.
In 1996 Karl bought the Main Street Farm. Since then
Vermont Compost has grown from a small, mostly local
operation to a company that now supplies the six largest
CSAs in the upper mid-west, supplies Martha Stewart with
her potting soils, and is the soil of choice for many of the
cutting edge, professional organic growers in Vermont and
the northeast. These growers are making money with
Vermont Compost products, and so can you.
Farm visit: Green Mountain Girls Farm. Photos from
Vermont Compost
1 Source: University of Florida Composting Center
131

132

Chapter 7
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
“To cherish what remains of the Earth and to foster its
renewal is our only legitimate hope of survival.”
—Wendell Berry
The first step of composting is just to start. It is easy to get
caught up in the science of aeration and bio nutrients, how
they
break
down
the
material
and
create
the
end
result—compost as a soil amendment and garden mulch. But
at some point, you just have to go for it and begin. A lot of it
comes down to common sense.
The compost pile at Miller Orchard near the author’s home in
Brattleboro, Vermont. Photo by Lynne Jaeger Weinstein.
A mantra for creating a successful home composting system
is to tell yourself that you are keeping waste out the landfill
and giving back to the earth by improving the soil. A sign of
an avid gardener is one who reacts to the question of “Do you
compost?” with glee and speaks passionately about it as a
newfound avocation.
133

Recently, I attended an environmental writing conference and
got into a lively discussion about composting at the dinner
table, it seemed that everyone at the table had a story to tell!
According to the Urban Garden Center, “An important issue
with composting in small batches is—when is it really
compost? While an oversimplification, since all composts are
not the same, if you do everything right, you can produce
fresh compost, which is like fresh manure and not aged, in
about two to three weeks in many of the fully enclosed
compost bins. However, if you want cured compost, which is
the process of slow stabilization after high-temperature
decomposition, it will take at least another two to three
months. You can empty your compost bin and set the
compost aside to cure for two to three months before using.
Or, for outdoor applications, just spread/mix it on the ground
and let it finish curing in place. For indoor applications (e.g.
house plants) you might consider curing it outside for at least
thirty days before using it in a living space. Curing time will
vary based on temperatures and conditions.”
134

FUNERAL FLOWERS
I like to send flowers to the family when someone dies, even
though the obituary says “In lieu of flowers, . . .” Since I like
flowers and I like to receive flowers, I just assume other
people do, too. I often send the flowers directly to the
family’s home rather than the funeral home.
To support local businesses, I go to whitepages.com and type
in “florist” and the zip code where my friend lives. Then I call
and order cut flowers rather than an arrangement. Doesn’t
everyone already have enough vases at home? I assume my
friends do not need another vase.
Photo by Vitaliy Piltser
Funeral flowers remind us of the impermanence of life. One
day, one year, we are in full bloom. A few days or decades
later, we start to wilt. And finally death and the compost pile.
Flowers don’t have personhood, so we can easily see how
decaying compost gives rise to new life. When it comes to
people though, our attachment to personhood, to “self”
135

interferes with this simple, straightforward understanding of
nature.
Really, how are our physical bodies really any different from
flowers? —Cheryl Wilfong
To Air or Not
It isn’t a complex procedure and the timing is easy to gauge
when you have a chance to look into the bin and mix it up a
bit with a shovel. When you add air—oxygen—to the pile it
speeds up the decomposition of the organic material by
allowing the microorganisms to do their work. If you don’t
ever turn your compost or create tunnels of air inside of it by
mixing in stocks and other larger yard waste, it will still break
down and decompose, but anaerobically, or without air. It
really is a simple process, but fascinating nevertheless. You
get to watch a biology experiment take place in your tiny
yard, or worm bin.
STORIES FROM “THE FIELD. . . ”
She Loves to Take Out the Compost in the Winter
Diana loves to take out her kitchen compost bucket in the
winter even though she has to trek across a hundred feet of
136

snow. While she walks, she is busy looking for the tracks of
animals who have been visiting her lidless black plastic
composter.
She sees the blue jays fly away. She can hear the crows an
hour after sunrise. But she is on the lookout for the calling
cards of smaller visitors: mouse tracks, squirrels (both gray
and red), foxes (both gray and red), chipmunks (in February
and March), turkeys, raccoons, rabbits, and deer. Once in a
while, she is surprised by less common visitors.
Diana’s neighbor, Lynn Levine, has written an easy and
excellent
guide:
Mammal
Tracks
and
Scat
(www.heartwoodpress.com), which Diana can refer to if she
has a question about who has left their footprint. She herself
is so committed to leaving a smaller carbon footprint, that she
doesn’t mind trekking out to the winter compost. —Cheryl
Wilfong
To Turn? Or Not to Turn?
Ben has one compost pile out in the back corner of his
yard—just a loose heap unconstrained by bins. Every couple
of weeks, he takes ten minutes and turns the pile from right to
137

left, layering leaves and grass clippings as he goes. Two to
four weeks later, when he’s walking by with a shovel in his
hand, he turns the pile from left to right. Basically, he’s
turning the pile upside down at least once a month.
The key to Ben’s ease with turning is that he’s not turning his
pile in place. He has one compost pile, but two “compost
spots,” and he’s moving his pile from one spot to the other.
Mary Lou gave up on turning her compost piles because she
didn’t see that turning every three weeks hurried the process
of decomposition.
Tatiana calls herself a lazy gardener when it comes to turning
compost, but if you saw her tiny organic farm and her dozen
compost bins, you would not call her lazy. “I only turn my
compost once a year, in the spring,” she says. No wonder.
Her definition of “turning” is taking the under-composted top
layer off the most mature pile, and throwing it back onto the
resting pile or into an empty bin.
“Dig down until you get to the good stuff,” she says.
Now it’s your turn to decide: To turn? Or not to turn?
Sifting Compost
Mary Lou has a clinker sifter that her father gave her decades
ago. Back in the days of coal furnaces, a clinker sifter was
used to filter the coal ashes and then throw the bigger, usable
bits of coal back in the stove. The round sifter, about a foot in
diameter, has a half-inch mesh screen.
138

She uses the big flat sieve to sift her finished compost. The
large mesh holes enable small clods of compost to fall
through to the five-gallon bucket sitting underneath. She sifts
out stalks and stems and rocks and throws the uncomposted
bits back into the “unfinished” compost pile.
I use a flat or plant tray that has solid sides and medium-sized
holes in the bottom. I fill the tray with compost and jiggle it
over the wheelbarrow.
Mary Lou uses her sifted compost to fill old window boxes.
Because compost has a tendency to be dry, she saturates the
window boxes with water for a couple of days. Then she
seeds them with lettuce, spinach, and arugula in April and
again in August. She sets her window boxes in her ratty old
greenhouse, where she does have to water the greens in her
window boxes every day. She transplants the seedlings into
her garden, and harvests fresh greens from April through June
and again from August through October.
After sifting through all this advice about your compost, you
could buy a fancy sifter from the gardening catalog, but you
can also make do with hardware cloth, deer fencing, or a
hole-y plant tray as your compost sifter. If you even sift at all.
Lobster Shell Compost
139

Friends who rent a summer house in Maine come home with
a five-gallon bucket full of lobster shells. They’ve already
taken a shovel and crunched the lobster shells into bits to
compact them. When they arrive home, they dump the
pulverized lobster shells onto the compost pile.
The main component of crustacean exoskeletons is chitin,
which can improve overall crop yields by building strong cell
walls. Strong lobster shells make strong plant cells. Chitin
also induces defense mechanisms in plants, strengthening
their immune systems.
Yes, my Maine friends do occasionally find bits of red lobster
shell in their garden, but eventually it breaks down.
Seaweed
Ben spends a week at the coast every summer with his family.
While he’s there, he gathers up five-gallon pails of seaweed
from the beach. He gets a lot of weird looks, and people ask
him, “Are you going to eat it?”
Well, not exactly. Not as seaweed, anyway.
He hoses the kelp off back at the beach house to de-salt it. By
the end of the week he has three or five buckets full of
seaweed, which he loads into trash bags and drives back to his
mountain home.
140

Living in the mountains, Ben buys Ice Melt by the five-gallon
bucket, so he has a good supply of buckets. He uses the salt in
the winter to de-ice his sidewalk, and then, in the summer, he
adds de-salted seaweed from the beach into his bucket.
Ben has a smallish compost heap, so he mixes the seaweed
into the pile so that he doesn’t overwhelm it. Seaweed
qualifies as “green,” so he layers it with brown leaves.
One great thing about seaweed—it doesn’t have any weed
seeds!
EVER-GREEN
COMPOST
IN
VERMONT:
AN
INTERVIEW WITH CO-FOUNDER, SÍLE POST
Síle Post from Ever-Greenhouses, as someone who grows
year-round even in the cold harsh climate of northern
Vermont, you must require a steady supply of compost.
What’s your philosophy of composting?
I like to approach my composting as I do my cooking and
baking—Homemade, Local and always Organic. Like the
food I prepare from scratch, I make my compost from local
ingredients that either I have grown myself, sourced myself,
or have identified their origins. My mantra is always fresh,
always local and always organic.
141

Secondly, I like to be as holistic as possible. As someone who
tries to ‘live in each season’, as Thoreau urged, living
according to daily and seasonal cycles, I like to consider how
I can recycle on a holistic scale. By heating with wood,
baking in a wood-fired oven, and/or by simply enjoying a lot
of fires during the long winter months, for example, I recycle
my wood ash to my compost, thereby adding a significant
level of potassium. (Otherwise, greensand will do!)
I like to use my own homegrown vegetables and food scraps
as essential ingredients to my compost. I grow greens
year-round, so I am always adding extra greens, legumes and
herbs to my compost pile, as well as the spent stems and
leaves of my greenhouse produce, hence the term, ever-green,
as
in
our
new
Vermont
business,
Ever-Greenhouses!
(www.ever-greenhouses.com)
Síle Post, I am so happy I now own one of your first
greenhouses and plan to start my seedlings for lettuce in the
fall and tomatoes in early February. Tell me about your
philosophy of composting since you are a master gardener
and composter.
142

The author mixes organic soil with compost for her fall raised
beds in the greenhouse where she will grow lettuce and cold
weather herbs like cilantro, parsley, and arugula through the
winter.
A holistic approach to composting is really about creating a
loop that regenerates itself.
All our greens go to waste—through composting. During the
summer months, when we are ‘growing’ our compost, we use
the top layer to grow, in turn, squash, which loves growing
atop compost! When we’re ready to harvest the squash, we
simply turn in the remains of the plants, adding to its richness.
Síle Post, I want to try this next season!
I also grow medicinal flowers and herbs, as well as
perennials. When fall arrives, and the flowers have gone by, I
turn them into the compost as well, adding essential nutrients
to the compost. Nothing goes un-re-used!
What are some of the advantages to your local, homemade
approach?
I like to maximize the health of my soil and subsequently, my
fruits, vegetables and herbs. I like to think about composting
from a common sense point of view: Can rotting vegetables
that contain deleterious substances, such as GMOs and
residues from chemicals and drugs, be eradicated in a heating
process? I studied enough chemistry in college to know if I
want (even organically labeled) compost that is chemically
free of such residues, I must make it myself!
143

What’s your secret recipe for ever-green compost?
I add to the compost four seasons a year. In addition to my
wood ash (for potash), extra cool and cold season greens,
such as Asian greens, mustards, spinach and kale, for
example, grown in the cool (and cold) greenhouse provide
much-needed winter nourishment for my compost pile.
During summer months into fall, all extra and leftover warm
soil vegetables, fruits, flowers and herbs are added as they
mature.
While all (organic) food scraps find their way to the compost
year-round, I enhance the pile by adding an additional level of
nutrition—what
I
call
‘earth
elements.’
For
the
micro-nutrients and trace elements, I use seaweed that I dry
myself, or when unavailable, add dried kelp meal, while other
essential earth elements such as boron, I add directly to the
pile. Boron, available as borax in North America, has been
shown to contain amazing health benefits including hormonal
balancing, increased bone density and anti-arthritic qualities.
And as you have pointed out, compost benefits immensely
from
finely
ground
eggshells,
from
organically-
and
pasture-fed laying chickens!
Finally, I go a-gleaning, as we say up here. Various weeds
actually contain powerful medicinal qualities and nutrients. I
144

compost entire stands of wild Burdock, which grows in
abundance, as well as various other seasonal weeds and
wildflowers.
Let’s put it this way: From such composting practices, I’ve
been able to preserve 135 quarts of tomato sauce each fall,
just by growing in my family’s own ever-greenhouse!
Thank you, Síle, for your insights. I’m looking forward to
growing in my new greenhouse this winter!
See information about this new approach to year-round
gardening and composting in the Resources section.
145

Kids with compost bucket having fun at a Highfields
(Vermont) school workshop.
146

Chapter 8
COMPOSTING IS EASY
“The glory of gardening: hands in the dirt, head in the sun,
heart with nature. To nurture a garden is to feed not just on
the body, but the soul.”
—Alfred Austin
While composting is fun and educational for adults, it can be
especially so for kids. When we compost, we learn about and
are connected to the larger world as well as our local habitats
and even the food we eat. Composting can be an entertaining
way to introduce basic scientific principles to younger
children and can help develop more advanced concepts for
older
children.
It
requires
problem
solving,
creativity
and—best of all—playing in the dirt!
Composting
requires
four
things:
oxygen,
appropriate
temperature, moisture, and a proper carbon to nitrogen ratio.
Learning about each of these parts and how they work
together to create rich fertilizer for plants can help children
become better connected with their Earth as well as
understand the world around them.
If your compost is going into a vegetable garden that provides
you with food, your children will not only better understand
where their food comes from, but also will be more invested
in it. Try involving the kids in the cooking, too!
147

Kids can do anything—and everything—from sorting their
scraps into a collection bucket to helping to turn the pile to
spreading it in a garden. Although they will need guidance,
and often physical help, from adults, their interest can help
motivate you to take care of your pile!
Preschool
For the youngest kids, composting can begin at meal times.
Explain which food scraps can be composted and which ones
should be
put into the garbage. (If your food scrap collection bucket is
kid-friendly, your little one can even be responsible for
putting their scraps directly into it.) While their arms may be
too small to help turn the compost, letting them watch and
introducing them to the “creepy crawlies” who live in the
compost will help them begin to understand where their food
comes from.
Elementary School
148

Composting is an excellent way to teach students about the
life cycle: birth, death, decay, and rebirth. When we teach
composting, we are teaching how nature recycles. Students
learn that by composting, they care for their communities and
the natural environment. By adding compost to plants,
students learn that healthy soil makes healthy plants and that
all humans and animals depend on healthy plants to live.
As your child gets older, the composting experience can
increase from mealtime participation to playing in the garden.
When the food scrap bucket is emptied, you can explain
where food would go if it wasn’t composted and what the
benefits of composting are. Even those who cannot fully
understand the math and science behind composting can
begin to develop an appreciation and responsibility for their
earth.
If you have a couple of square feet of soil to spare, your child
can experiment with his own composting! Have him collect
his food scraps separately and then at the end of the week take
them out to your spare land. Insert six wooden stakes into the
ground about a foot apart. Your child can dig a hole at the
first stake, bury his scraps, and return to do the same thing at
the second hole the next week. By the time she has filled all
six staked holes, finished the cycle and returned to the first
stake his first buried scraps should be decomposed! For
children who are interested in the way the world works—and
who like playing outside—this can be a perfect introduction
to decomposition without having to worry about mixing the
materials. If your child is interested, let her plant some simple
plants between the stakes and see firsthand the benefits of
composting. Let your child experiment with what she buries,
149

how deeply, etc., and perhaps even keep a journal about what
she “discovers.”
Middle/High School
By middle school many kids are developing a sense of
responsibility for their Earth. Composting can be a great way
for a person to not only feel connected to the planet that
provides for him but also to take care of it. This is a good age
to share more of the composting responsibility as well as
more of the technical side of composting. Experimenting with
ratios can be a fun, hands-on math experience while turning
and spreading compost can be meditative and relaxing—you
can also get some extra energy and help with the turning
process with an easy activity that kids can do with a shovel
and supervision. If your child gets excited about composting,
ask how she would feel about teaching others how it works.
She can start a composting program at school or ask local
businesses to leave their coffee grinds out for composters.
People who are passionate about an issue can bring about real
change, and it’s wonderful for young people to experience
this firsthand.
Maia Hansen, the Outreach and Education Coordinator at
Highfields
Tell us a bit about yourself.
My name is Maia Hansen. I am twenty-six and work as the
outreach and education coordinator at Highfields Center for
Composting.
I
started
school
at
Whitman
College
in
Washington State and transferred to the University of
150

Vermont, where I graduated with a BA in biology and a
minor in geology.
What is your personal experience with composting? How
did you get interested in it?
I’ve been composting all of my life, so the practice of
separating food scraps is purely habit. I grew up in a very
rural community with a lot of woods and not much else. My
idea of fun as a kid was “fishing” in mud puddles, hiding in
the pea plants, and making rock houses for snakes and toads. I
spent countless hours helping my parents spread compost on
the garden, plant seeds, weed, and harvest vegetables. I’ve
always been fascinated by the way a plant grows and what it
needs to be successful.
Since working at Highfields, I have learned so much about
the organisms that live in a compost pile and the symbiotic
relationships that make nutrient uptake by plants possible.
Yes, I work with dirt, but it is living, breathing, vibrant dirt
that has countless benefits.
Do you know how to compost indoors? Do you have any
experience with that, personally?
My only experience composting indoors is in keeping a worm
bin. My household worm bin, which is also my travel worm
bin for training sessions, was built by a group of students and
has
been
working
great!
I
use
a
simple
plastic
Rubbermaid-type bin with holes drilled in the top, sides, and
bottom. I feed the worms vegetable peels once every week or
two and add plenty of moistened strips of newspaper. Our
office worm bin has had more issues with fruit flies and my
151

research on this subject shows that fruit flies are attracted to
low pH conditions, so keeping acidic foods (like citrus and
coffee grinds) out of the bin is key. Worms break down
material pretty quickly, but they don’t need much to keep
them busy, so keeping a compost bucket/bin for the majority
of kitchen waste is still necessary.
Maia Hansen, Close the Loop! Regional Coordinator. Photo
by Vchem Pierce
Any tips for troubleshooting smelly compost, dry compost,
and other problems?
If a compost pile is smelly, it is usually too wet or too
nitrogenous. Quick tips are to add plenty of carbon-rich
materials such as dried leaves, dried garden material, hay,
woodchips, or peat moss. Having a stockpile of these
materials helps, especially in the winter. Aerating a pile is
also crucial in keeping it from going anaerobic (without
oxygen) and producing methane. Turning or fluffing a pile
with a pitchfork can usually remedy this problem.
I’ve been living off the grid for the last three years and so I’ve
also been composting urine with peat moss. I find this can be
smelly, but letting it sit without any turning gives the
nitrogen-fixing
bacteria
plenty
of
time
to
convert
the
ammonia. I usually let it sit for at
least six months before adding it to my compost pile, and then
give it at least another six months to decompose further. I
152

worried about burning my plants with too much nitrogen, but
my garden seemed pretty happy with the soil!
How and when do you apply the compost to your garden
beds? How do you put the garden to bed and/or wake it up
in the spring?
We usually apply compost to the garden in the spring after
we’ve tilled in the winter rye and beds have been made,
making sure to incorporate it deep enough into the soil, but
also being careful not to spread it in the walkways where
weeds will monopolize the nutrients. As we harvest, we
replace portions of the garden with a cover crop—typically
buckwheat and field peas during the growing season. In the
fall, we rototill the cover crop into the soil and replace it with
winter rye. Acid lovers like blueberry bushes are mulched
with pine needles on top of the compost.
Any funny stories about composting? We like those a lot!
Going into schools to teach kids about composting is
perpetually a treat. Students seem most shocked to hear that
compost is jam packed with bacteria (one billion bacteria in
one teaspoon of compost) and that these tiny creatures are
capable of producing such hot temperatures (160 degrees F)!
Disgusted looks aside, this information sticks with them.
My all-time favorite story came from a kindergarten class that
was learning what happens to our food scraps if they end up
in the landfill. I asked what the name of the gas was that goes
into our atmosphere from the landfill. I gave them a hint,
starts with an M. Hands flew up and we called on a boy who
stood up in excitement stuttering . . . “Muh, muh, muh . . .
153

MOIL!” I hated to break to him that he was combining the
word soil with methane and we didn’t bother to mention that
a “Mohel” is, in fact, the man who performs circumcision.
College Age
Oberlin College students recently initiated a new composting
system in their dormitories and housing. There are now
fourteen compost hubs on campus that student volunteers
coordinate. At the forefront of this program is the Oberlin
College
Resource
Conservation
Team
(RCT),
a
seven-member student group employed by the college to
reduce waste production on campus.
The RCT manages this new program with the help of student
volunteers called Compost Captains. Since the program is in
its first year, only fourteen compost hubs were accepted. The
program is modeled from the new sustainable freshman dorm
on the Oberlin campus, Kahn Hall, where the entire building
has been composting food waste since August 2010. Compost
Captains coordinate the location of the bins within the dorm
or the student house and teach the students living there about
what can go into the compost bins. The education component
is important because it familiarizes students with compost
systems
and
requires
them
to
reflect
before
throwing
something in the garbage.
154

Each week the RCT picks up the compost bins from the
fourteen locations and drives the compost to the student
garden, Johnson House Garden, which uses the compost
throughout the year. The food from the garden is sold to the
student dining halls and to the student cooperatives on
campus. This closed-loop system will educate Oberlin
College and peer institutions about the possibilities for
compost and local food.
The RCT hopes to expand the program within the next few
years depending on the success of the fourteen compost hubs
on campus. Eventually, every dorm may have a compost
system so that recyclable waste and food waste are all dealt
with
properly.
Properly
disposing
of
waste,
including
compost, will reduce Oberlin College’s environmental impact
and provide a working model for peer institutions to follow.
From Food to Flowers
New York’s Ithaca College began composting food scraps
from its dining halls in January 1993 using an aerated static
pile system installed in a forty-by-eighty-foot steel building
on campus. Food-scrap composting was instituted as a solid
waste management strategy that would reduce the cost of land
filling. An added benefit is the production of a small amount
of high quality humus, an excellent soil amendment.
155

In October 2000, operations funded with a matching grant
from
the
New
York
State
Department
of
Economic
Development began in a new compost facility designed
specifically to meet the needs of the college.
All food scraps, including plate scrapings, are collected in
“food only” containers located at food preparation and
dishwashing areas.
Full containers are taken to the trash collection areas at dining
hall loading docks. These containers are emptied into a
forklift mounted dumpster that is used for daily collection.
Currently, the college is collecting and composting about
twenty cubic yards (20,000 lbs) of food scrap per week, or
approximately 20 percent of the total waste stream.
After extensive experimentation with compost to soil ratios in
seed germination, transplants, and field tests, a mixture of
one-third compost to two-thirds topsoil is used in all
ornamental planting beds on campus. Compost is also applied
as a top dressing to lawns.
Irene Canaris, Westminster West School Garden, Westminster
West, Vermont
156

Award-winning Vermont educator, Irene Canaris, with one of
her students at Vermont’s Westminster West Elementary
School.
Tell us a bit about yourself. How did you get interested in
working with kids and growing a school garden?
When I was eight years old, I organized the kids in my
neighborhood to plant a flower garden in our backyard, and
when I was twelve, my grandmother helped me to plant my
first small vegetable garden beside her house. Ever since then,
I’ve had a vegetable garden at home. I became a teacher in
Vermont in the 1980s, when I was in my early twenties, and
one of my student’s parents was a young organic farmer.
When he saw what kids were bringing in for morning snacks,
he suggested planting a small vegetable garden outside our
classroom door as a way of showing students where real food
comes from. After twenty years of successfully growing our
large two-classroom garden and healthy snack program, a
new principal
helped us create an “all school garden” for 170 students,
grades K–6. A parent wrote a grant for an all school healthy
snack program and now all students get a daily free nutritious
snack. I retired from classroom teaching a few years ago and
I’m now “rehired” as the Westminster Schools Garden
Coordinator.
157

Elizabeth Ungerleider
Tell us what you can and can’t throw on your compost pile.
No meat products; they take too long to decompose and
attract carnivorous animals (dogs). Any vegetable matter can
go into our compost. I would imagine that if we begin
composting in earnest next year, I would contact local mills to
obtain clean sawdust. This is a helpful addition to compost. I
would also get the support and guidance of farmers who’ve
been composting for decades.
When we “put the garden to bed” each fall, students join
together to clear large organic matter from our garden (like
sunflower stalks and cabbage roots). This helps ready us for
tilling so that we can plant winter rye to add nutrients to the
garden in the fall. It’s a great way for kids to see how
teamwork gets things done more efficiently and pleasantly.
It’s also a good opportunity for students to move around
outdoors. Physical activity promotes focus; good learning
results from this complement to endless classroom sitting.
They also make great connections between what’s on the
compost pile and what those same plants looked like last
spring—the cycle of life, death, and regeneration.
Do you have any experience with how to compost indoors?
When we first started our large classroom garden, we weren’t
allowed to build a compost area outdoors, so we created a
158

worm farm in our classroom. It was so successful that we
donated worms to other teachers who wanted to start
classroom composters. The kids could measure how much of
their cantaloupe rinds, for instance, were eaten over the
weekend. Fruit flies were a big drawback, however. We
would vacuum them out of the air every week or so.
Elizabeth Ungerleider
What challenges have you run into with composting and
gardening at the school?
Our all school garden is far enough away from the school
now so that school board members probably wouldn’t raise
the same issues against outdoor composting that they raised
years ago. Their concerns back then were that compost would
attract vermin and it would smell. (Actually, composting
materials have a pleasant smell. It’s all in how you approach
things.)
A problem with having the garden so far from the school,
though, is that kids can’t get all the way out to the garden
daily during the snowy winter months in Vermont.
We have a new custodian who is on board to help explore
composting options for us this spring. I’m hopeful that we can
get rolling with our composting program.
159

When and how do you apply the compost to your garden
beds?
Compost takes many forms. Winter rye, once it grows to a
certain height, fixes nitrogen into the soil. It can be planted
after harvest in the fall. It is then cut down and becomes an
important part of our garden mulch.
In the spring, we have dairy farmers and organic farmers/
parents in our community who volunteer to spread manure
and to till our garden in May for our June Planting Day.
Children love to watch these big machines do their work.
(Our garden is 75x150 feet . . . a lot of growing space.)
The kids help us spread composted mulch over the garlic beds
we plant in November. The best compost is horse manure or
rabbit manure because there are no hayseeds in it. Hayseeds
tend to create more weeding work in the summer months. We
mulch with straw. It keeps moisture in and keeps weeds from
growing between rows.
Elizabeth Ungerleider
160

Photos by Elizabeth Ungerleider
Students at Westminster West School in Vermont are active
composters and educator, Irene Canaris, has established an
interactive
program
that
stimulates
health,
intellectual
curiosity, science, and fun.
161

162

Chapter 9
What
Goes
In
Your
Pile,
Getting
Started,
and
Troubleshooting
“A garden requires patient labor and attention. Plants do not
grow merely to satisfy ambitions or to fulfill good intentions.
They thrive because someone expended effort on them.”
—Liberty Hyde Bailey
Now that you’ve learned the basics of composting, you are
ready to get started. This chapter is devoted to the practical
steps for creating a stress-free environment for your brand
new organic composting system. Remember, whether it is
chicken wire and a few posts and a staple gun, or wood
pallets stacked in a square, your compost pile is part of the
whole process.
According to Susan Antler, the executive director of the
Compost Council of Canada, “An important first step to
getting started is to place your composter in a sunny area with
good drainage. Make sure that the location is convenient and
accessible year round.”
GETING STARTED . . .
• Turn the soil under which the composter will sit.
163

• After placing the composter, cover the floor of it with
a layer of small branches. This will allow for air
movement and drainage.
• Alternate wet (e.g. kitchen scraps) and dry (e.g. yard
material) waste.
• If available, add some “finished” compost, garden
soil, or a compost starter (available at most garden
centers) to the pile. This helps speed up the
composting process.
CONSTIPATED COMPOST
You know what too much roughage (and not enough water) in
your diet leads to: constipation. Your compost pile can also
get constipated with too many stalks, stems, and dead plants.
In composter-ese, this impacted condition is called “too much
brown.”
Dousing your pile with water might help, but it can also lead
to compost diarrhea—a very unpleasant gooey mess with
attendant icky smells.
The remedy for dry and scratchy compost is to add more
vegetable matter—more green—into the diet of your compost
pile. Kitchen scraps are an easy solution, unless you are
concerned about varmints. The suburban gardener can add
grass clippings (if the lawn has not been treated with
chemicals). Add big green leaves such as rhubarb leaves,
squash leaves, carrot tops, or bolted lettuce. If you’re not
getting around to eating your kale and collards, add those.
They’re as good for the digestive health of your compost as
they are for you. Manure will also solve the blockage.
164

In any case, it will probably take a few months for your
compost pile to relax its cramped belly. Be patient with your
sickly (or stick-ly) compost. It just needs to get some rest.
Continue feeding your cold compost healthy doses of greens
while you wait for the cold to run its course. Time heals all.
—Cheryl Wilfong
Clues on Composting
• The composting process works best when the organic
pieces are small. Weeds and trimmings should be
shredded.
• Don’t add thick layers of any one kind of waste.
Grass should not be more than 2 ½ inches deep,
leaves up to 6 inches deep (cut or chop or dry and
crumble them). If you can, let grass dry first or mix it
with dry, coarse material such as leaves to prevent
compacting.
• The composter contents should be moist like a
wrung-out sponge. If the contents are too dry, it will
take overly long to compost; and if too wet, the
contents may begin to smell.
• Turn or mix the compost every couple of weeks or
each time you add new material. This keeps the
compost well aerated.
• Composting can be done in the winter, so go ahead
and add materials to your composter all winter long.
The breakdown process slows down or stops when
the pile is frozen, but it will start up again in the
spring. Thorough turning in the spring will reactivate
165

the pile. Empty the composter in the fall to make
plenty of room.
SHOULD YOU COMPOST ASHES?
Those of us with wood-burning stoves would love to put
those wood ashes in the compost. It seems like such a natural
place to dispose of them but don’t do it.
Here’s why: Ashes are alkaline. They’re good for the acidic
soils of the Northeast and places that receive acid rain, but
they’re too powerful for compost. Wood ashes soaked in
rainwater for three days creates lye, a caustic potash. We
don’t want the ashes in our compost to convert to lye and kill
the microbes.
It’s generally advised to add ashes to the garden in the fall.
The problem with this scenario is that we don’t have ashes in
the fall—we have ashes in the winter and spring. So just
sprinkle those ashes directly on your lawn or flowerbeds or on
the snow covering them. Ashes are excellent for melting ice,
but remove your shoes at the door if you don’t want ash
tracks throughout the house.
Areas with alkaline soils have absolutely no need for alkaline
wood ashes. One possible exception is to kill viral weeds with
extreme pH so that nothing will grow on the site where the
wood ashes are applied.
We want our plants to grow, but we don’t want to overpower
them with too much of a good thing, or they may not rise
from the ashes. —Cheryl Wilfong
166

Troubleshooting
Composting is not difficult but sometimes the process
requires a little extra attention. Here are some easy solutions
to correct certain situations that might occur.
• If the pile does not decrease in size or generate heat,
composting may need a boost. If the pile is dry, add
water, mixing it in thoroughly. If the pile is wet and
muddy, spread it in the sun and add dry material.
Remember to save “old” compost to mix with
incoming material.
• If the center of the pile is damp and warm, but the
rest is cold, the pile may be too small. Try to keep
your composter as full as possible. Mix new with old,
dry with wet, breaking up mats and clumps.
• If the pile is damp and sweet smelling but not heating
up, it may need nitrogen. Add grass clippings, table
scraps, or a sprinkling of organic fertilizer from the
garden center.
• If the compost pile develops a foul odor, it may not
be getting enough air. Loosen up the pile, break up
clumps, unblock vents and perhaps add some wood
chips to help the pile “breathe.” Turning the pile
always helps aeration.
• Keep your compost in a container with a cover to
prevent animals from getting into the composting
materials. A wire mesh around the base can help to
prevent pests from digging under the pile. Dig in or
cover food waste immediately.
167

THE LIVING DEAD
Although we typically think of our compost pile as composed
of dead matter, this is not quite true. A dead tree, for instance,
is home to fifty-two species of creatures. And our compost
heap is also home to many living creatures, some so small we
cannot see them.
Into the compost pile go dead plants and dead leaves, along
with rotting fruits and vegetables that have overstayed their
welcome in our refrigerator.
What we usually call “dead” is precious life for someone or
something else.
Little mites, sowbugs, centipedes, and various larvae come to
feast and thereby hasten the process of decomposing.
Nematodes, mitochondria, and other invisible bacteria and
microbes are also at work, converting death into life.
(Continued on next page)
When you open your black plastic unit in the spring, stand
aside for a minute and let life fly out. Then carry your living
compost to your garden, and let life begin to feed the new
growth of seedlings and plants.
168

It’s a miracle, isn’t it? Life springs from all those dead and
rotting plants. It’s enough to give us hope. —Cheryl Wilfong
IS IT FINISHED YET?
The composting process can take from two months to two
years, depending on the materials used and the effort
involved.
Compost is ready to be used when it is dark in color, crumbly,
and has an “earthy” smell. You can sift the compost to
eliminate material that has not yet finished composting.
Return this back to the pile to complete its transformation into
humus.
PUT COMPOST TO GOOD USE
Composting can benefit your soil and plants in many ways. It
increases
the
soil’s
organic
matter
content
and
its
moisture-holding capacity. Compost improves soil porosity
and helps to control soil erosion. It also enhances plant and
flower growth and helps plants develop a sound root
structure.
Use it on your lawn, in your garden, around trees, or combine
it with potting soil for your plants. From the Composting
Council of Canada.
THAWING THE COMPOST PILE
169

It’s early spring and my compost pile is an iceberg.
Yes, I know the heap is supposed to be hot, but mine is cold.
Really cold. Frozen solid. I managed to scrape two inches off
the top before I hit the tundra.
This is just one more good reason to spread compost on the
garden in November. Otherwise, when spring rolls around,
and you’re ready to use it, the compost pile is permafrost.
So now it’s time to practice patience. I know the snow bank
on the north side of the house sometimes doesn’t totally melt
until early May. But it does melt. And my compost will thaw
out too. My impatience heats me up but does nothing to thaw
the compost. So chill out, my friend. The warmth of spring is
coming.
My iceberg compost reminds me of how I sometimes prepare
dinner. At 5 p.m., I pull a container of food or maybe a frozen
chicken breast out of the freezer. How am I going to work
some magic on it so dinner will be ready by six? Sometimes I
microwave it, but sometimes I put it in a covered saucepan
and slowly scrape the thawed part off, layer by layer, as if that
will hurry it up. I’m not going to microwave the compost, nor
am I going to take an ice ax to it. I just have to wait for the
sun to add the heat. —Cheryl Wilfong
COMPOSTING WITH CHICKENS
170

Chicken manure can be wonderfully beneficial for your plants
with more nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium than either
horse or cow manure. It does, however, need to be processed
differently from just food scraps and garden waste. Chicken
manure—if
used
raw—can
damage
roots,
kill
plants,
and
spread
pathogens, so it is important to let it fully decompose before
spreading. Some people like to have a separate compost
system for use with chicken manure, as compost takes much
longer to mature when manure is being used. It will take some
experimenting to figure out the appropriate carbon to nitrogen
ratio, which will depend on the type of bedding you use for
your chickens. Due to the high level of nitrogen in chicken
manure, you may try mixing it with an equal part brown
material or even two parts brown. Since there is a risk of
spreading pathogens through chicken manure, it is important
that your compost pile heat to a temperature of 130 to 150
degrees and maintain that temperature for three days. (If
you’re not sure about how hot the core of your compost is
getting, you can purchase a compost temperature gauge to
help.) To do this, collect about a cubic yard of material in
your first composting location, add water so that it is about as
damp as a wrung out sponge, and let sit until it has reached
the
appropriate
temperature.
After
reaching
the
peak
temperature it will begin to cool and need to be turned so that
the material on the outside edges can be heated. This should
be done three times, after which your pile should be loosely
covered and left for two-and-a-half to three months. At that
point
you
should
have
dark,
crumbly,
sweet-smelling
fertilizer ready to be added to your garden.
171

The author composting her tea leaves which she buys in bulk
at the local food co-op to save money and packaging.
The author’s compost system.
My compost pile is four feet square and four feet high. It is
just my husband and I at home now, so I dump the kitchen
scraps for the two of us about once a week. I dig the finished
stuff out of the other bin that is further along once or twice a
year and that decreases the volume by half when I harvest.
I definitely do not have enough to cover all the plants and
gardens around my house, so I recommend applying the
composted humus on a rotating basis: you can topdress one
area each year and record it in a garden journal. It is a good
idea to keep some compost stored to mix with potting soil, to
use for potting or transplanting during houseplants and
kitchen herbs during the year.
172

One of the author’s raised beds at her home in Vermont.
173

The author mixes her aged compost with organic garden soil
for her winter greenhouse made by Vermont company
Ever-Greenhouses.
The author at home dumping her kitchen compost into her
backyard compost bin.
174

Chapter 10
How the Science Works
“A garden is a grand teacher. It teaches patience and careful
watchfulness; it teaches industry and thrift; above all it
teaches entire trust.”
—Gertrude Jekyll
Keeping Your Microorganisms Happy
Your compost pile relies on a community of microorganisms
all living together. When these microorganisms thrive, your
compost will thrive as well. There are several factors that we
can control to create the most efficient compost possible. One
factor is what we add to begin with. As discussed in previous
chapters, the two main categories for compost ingredients are
nitrogen-rich and carbon-rich components, green and brown.
In order to maintain an optimal compost pile (and avoid
smelly anaerobic bacteria) there needs to be a balance
between the two.
Although the perfect ratio depends on the type of soil to
which your compost will be added, thirty parts carbon and
one part nitrogen is a good initial ratio. Keeping the nitrogen
levels high enough will ensure that your pile heats up enough
for efficient decomposition. However, compost piles with too
much
nitrogen
can
become
too
hot,
killing
the
microorganisms
living
in
the
piles.
If
the
balance
is
maintained though, your microorganisms—and therefore your
compost—will be able to use these nutrients to thrive.
175

Since we want to maintain the bacteria, worms, and other
organisms which make decomposition possible, we want to
not only feed them properly but to be sure not to poison them.
This
means
adding
organic
materials
that
are
not
contaminated by pesticides or fungicides. Even if your
microorganisms survive to decompose the material, plants
fertilized with compost containing pesticides, herbicides, or
fungicides may suffer.
HARVEST: BOUNTY OR COMPOST?
In the harvest season, I try to cook two or three vegetables
from the garden for dinner every evening—broccoli or
zucchini, chard or kale, and a salad entirely of tomatoes. I
leave the leftovers in the fridge for my sweetie. When I return
from a long weekend away, they’re still there.
“You’re supposed to have eaten these,” I say, with one eye on
the overflowing harvest basket I just brought in from the
vegetable garden.
“Oh, I did,” he says. “Except for that yellow squash. You deal
with that.”
176

This is when the bounty of the garden takes a dive into
exasperation. Too much of a good thing leads to some form of
stress or other. There’s nothing to do but throw the week-old
leftovers into the compost. Then I spend an hour after dinner
slicing tomatoes for the food drier or blanching broccoli for
the freezer.
For years, after reading The Magic of Findhorn, I worried that
the tomato devas might have their feelings hurt by wasting the
food they guarded into fruition. But lately, I’ve come to see
that waste is waste—whether it goes through my digestive
system or straight into the compost pile.
And
the
great
thing
about
waste—human,
animal,
or
compost—is that you can use it to grow more vegetables.
Humanure, moo doo, zoo doo, or leftovers—it’s not being
wasted. It’s all just compost. —Cheryl Wilfong
RED RUSSIAN KALE
Russian red kale easily survives our New England winters, so
in early April, I harvest enough for dinner. Braised with
onions and garlic from last summer’s garden, our supper costs
nothing. Dinner leftovers from two years ago went into the
177

pile to become compost last spring and spread on the
vegetable garden to grow the kale and onions that we eat for
dinner tonight. Any leftovers or onion skins go into the
compost bucket and . . .
Kale—an exemplar of the circle of life that flows through us.
—Cheryl Wilfong
Plant-Available Nutrients and Micronutrients
• As compost breaks down in the soil, it provides the
fertilizer nutrients of nitrogen, phosphorus, and
potassium in forms that are readily available to
plants.
• Unlike most inorganic fertilizers, compost functions
as a slow-release store of nutrients, so that the
nutrients are available as the plants require them
instead of in one intense flush.
178

• Compost also provides a wide range of important
micronutrients not found in commercial fertilizers.
Benefits of Organic Matter in Soil
• Added to sandy soils, the organic matter in compost
increases the soil’s water-holding ability so that both
rain and irrigation water are held in the root zone for
plant use. This can significantly lower the irrigation
requirements in the orchard industry and other
applications
where
water
use
is
restricted
or
prohibitively expensive.
• Compost lightens heavy (high clay) soils, allowing
better infiltration of both air and water into the root
zone. This improves plant health and helps to prevent
sealing of the soil surface caused by water pooling.
• Organic matter functions like a sponge, enabling soil
to retain nutrients and moisture in the root zone.
Inorganic fertilizer nutrients as well as those released
by the compost itself are kept from leaching down
into ground water.
• Soil
structure
is
improved,
allowing
effective
drainage, extensive root growth, and soil aggregate
stabilization, so that soil is less subject to erosion by
either water or wind.
• Earthworm activity is encouraged, further enhancing
soil fertility.
179

Biological Activity
• Compost is biologically active, supplying a range of
microorganisms that enhance the health of both soil
and crops.
• Compost appears to suppress some types of plant
disease—the
exact
mechanism
is
not
yet
fully
understood.
The author’s other compost bin, the one she calls “Darth
Vader.”
NO WEEDS, PLEASE
180

Oh, it is so tempting to toss the weeds into the compost pile.
But don’t do it! You’re just recycling weeds. This means you
need an easy alternative. Where are you going to put your
weeds?
In the spring, I do throw weeds into my compost with this
caveat: they aren’t blooming, and they have not set seed yet.
Some grasses don’t set seed until late summer, so I can toss
their greenery into the compost until then.
But once a weed is flowering (and some of them have tricky
green flowers) or definitely when a weed has gone to seed,
you really shouldn’t compost them in your final bin destined
for the garden. Here are some possibilities:
Throw weeds into the woods. I live in the country, so I can
throw my weeds into the woods. Good luck growing in the
shade, I think as I toss them into the trees.
Create a dry-and-die pile. Set out a square of black plastic and
put your weeds onto it. On a sunny day, they’ll bake to death
in just a few hours. Perhaps even cover them loosely with the
black plastic so they’ll double bake in the sun. A day or two
later, you can add your sun-dried weeds to your trash, where
they’ll take up a lot less space than when they were green. I
live in an area where burning is permitted, so I throw my
dried weeds onto a brush pile. If you have a fire pit, pitch
them in there.
181

The author’s other compost bin, the one she calls “Darth
Vader.”
Another version of the dry-and-die pile is to use a bucket or a
trug that you won’t need for the foreseeable future. I have one
invasive weed that I call “Enemy.” Enemy can gallop through
a flowerbed in no time. And here is its secret: it grows from
the tiniest rootlet left in the ground. I definitely do not want to
spread Enemy around, so I carefully put it and all the roots I
can find into a bucket. If I only have one bucketful, I cremate
it in the wood stove. But if I have a trug-ful, I let them molder
until it’s time for my next campfire.
After all, we don’t want s’more weeds. —Cheryl Wilfong
Compost as Mulch
When used as a mulch, compost can:
• Conserve
soil
moisture,
reducing
the
need
for
irrigation in dry areas
• Minimize weed growth
• Insulate soil to slow temperature changes; dark color
may also help soils to warm more quickly in spring
and retain heat longer in the fall.
Vermicomposting
182

An earthworm in the author’s garden.
The long, squishy earthworms that children toy with on
playgrounds and fishermen use for bait can also be used to
make nutrient-rich compost without much effort. In nature,
worms naturally feed on decaying organic material but when
they live in your compost pile these fertilizer-making
machines can be harnessed for the good of your garden.
Worms help keep balance in the soil by providing plants with
necessary nutrients and microbes in forms that plants can
access. Their connection with soil fertility has long been
recognized: Aristotle referred to worms as “the intestines of
the earth,” the removal of earthworms from Egypt under
Cleopatra’s rule was punishable by death, and after years of
studying them Darwin said, “It may be doubted that there are
many other animals which have played so important a part in
the history of the world as have these lowly organized
creatures.”
But what is it exactly that they do? When worms swallow
organic material it passes into their gizzards where it is
processed to release enzymes that convert the material into
energy the worm can use. The excreted waste, or vermicast, is
especially high in levels of available nitrogen, phosphorus,
magnesium, carbon, calcium and potassium. On top of its
183

exceptional range of nutrients, worms also live in symbiotic
relationships
with
lots
of
microbes
that
populate
the
vermicasts.
Although the idea of raising living worms in your compost
pile may sound daunting, it is very easy—it doesn’t even
require turning, as the worms will do that for you. Worms can
be kept inside or outside (depending on your area’s climate)
and they can be fed most things you’d put into your compost
pile. Due to the rate at which worms eat, vermicomposting is
much faster than traditional composts and the worms keep it
at the optimal temperature. Vermicomposts can be smaller
than traditional composts and are virtually odorless so they
are perfect for the urban gardener as well.
Setting Up a Worm Bin
More than seven thousand species of worms inhabit the
world, and they are important to ecosystems.
Worm composting is an excellent way to introduce living
decomposers in the classroom. By keeping an active worm
bin inside, students can observe the natural cycles of
decomposition and gain new appreciation of earthworms as
the “guts” of the soil.
Worms are incredible decomposers. The worms we use for
composting in boxes are surface feeders called eisena foetida.
They are also called manure worms, red wigglers, or
redworms. Today, there are engineers in India who are
learning how to clean sewage water using worm systems.
There are lots of fun facts to know about redworms. They
have five pairs of hearts, no eyes, and no teeth. They breathe
184

through their skin, and need dark, moist surroundings. Eight
adult redworms can produce 1,500 offspring within six
months, if conditions are favorable. Each worm is both male
and female and can eat over half of its weight in food every
day.
SETTING UP A WORM BIN
Materials Needed (Described below)
• Worm bin
• Bedding materials
• Handful of soil
• One pound of worms
• Water
• Collection container
Worm
composting
is
a
fun,
low-maintenance
way
of
recycling your organic kitchen scraps. Worms eat your
vegetative food scraps, turning them into a high quality
fertilizer known as worm castings. You provide the living
environment for the worms—the bin, bedding, and food—and
the worms do the rest. Worm composting can be done inside
or outside (depending on climate), requires no turning, is
odorless if done correctly, and can be done in small spaces.
Worm composting is most appropriate for food scraps. The
compostable matter we throw away—such as apple cores,
melon rings, and soggy bread—are things that worms like to
eat. Redworms eat food scraps and break them down into
rich, dark brown, earthy-smelling material called worm
castings. Castings, which are nitrogen-rich fertilizer, can be
returned to the earth and are good for lawns, gardens, and
houseplants.
185

Procedure
Buy, scrounge, or build a worm bin:
• A worm bin can be made of wood, plastic, or
other materials.
• The size of your worm bin (for home or
classroom) should be at least 1-1/2 square feet,
and about 16 inches deep.
• Good
ventilation
is
essential
for
aerobic
decomposition and a healthy environment for
worms.
Prepare Worm Bedding:
• Tear newspaper into 1/2-inch to 1-inch wide
strips (tear lengthwise, with the grain).
• Dunk newspaper strips in water and add to bin.
• Add a handful of soil and fluff.
• Toss everything like a big salad.
Add worms and food:
• Purchase or obtain about 1 pound of red worms
(about 500 to 1,000 worms)
• Gently place you worms in the moist newspaper
bedding near the bottom of the bin.
• Put a handful or so of food waste near the worms
and
cover
well
with
the
moist
newspaper
bedding.
• Add more dry shredded newspaper to fill the bin,
and then a layer of burlap or cloth.
186

Using worms to compost our food scraps makes sense for a
lot of reasons:
• We will reduce the amount of garbage we create.
• Compost improves the soil and makes it hold
water better.
• Using compost reduces the need for chemical
fertilizers, which helps prevent the creation of
more pollution.
• Composting with worms is fun!
Let your worm bin rest by not adding additional food for one
to two weeks. This allows the worms a chance to get used to
their new environment and for the food to begin to
decompose.
For ongoing maintenance, feed every three to seven days,
always burying the food under paper. Do not overfeed. Bad
smells or large amounts of uneaten food indicate overfeeding.
Add more paper as needed to cover food. Harvest castings
after three to six months.
The Worm Bin Environment
The worm bin environment includes worms, bedding, food,
worm box animals, food, moisture, and more. Through
exploration, participants can learn what worms need to live
and how to go about setting up a worm bin. Worms, like
humans, need air, water, and food to live, and a worm box
should be cool and moist. Worms are amazing animals that
breathe through their skins. If their skin dries out, they will
die. Worms can eat more than half their weight in food every
day. They have no teeth but grind the food in their gizzards.
187

Did you know that they don’t have eyes? Worms sense light
without seeing it.
A worm box is an ecosystem all in itself. There are many
other animals that live in the bin besides the red wigglers.
You may see mites, beetles, ants, or sowbugs, to name just a
few. All of these animals are important and play a vital role in
your worm box.
Harvesting a Worm Bin
Harvesting a worm bin allows you to see the magic of the life
cycle and it is a fun family project. By remembering the kinds
of foods or other materials that were placed in the bin, we can
marvel at the compost (or castings) worms have made. Worm
castings are very high in available nitrogen, so they are a
high-quality organic fertilizer for plants. There are several
methods for harvesting and everyone seems to have a
favorite.
For this type of home composting, it is important to have
access to a worm bin, which has been fed for at least three
months. Here are the three basic techniques used for home
harvesting:
• Bucket method (requires a tarp, bucket, and water)
• Sunlight method (requires a tarp, bucket, and a sunny
day or bright light)
• Hand-picking (requires a tarp and bucket)
188

The process show at “Down To Earth Worm Farm” of
Greensboro Bend, Vermont, is an indoor vermi-composting
facility, where they tend large drawers full of red wiggler
composting worms. The worms are feed basic compostables,
(i.e., kitchen scraps, coffee grounds, garden waste, manure,
leaves, etc.). In turn, they render worm castings (worm poop)
which is the best natural plant food 8 soil revitalizer.
Bucket Method:
Place all contents of the worm bin in a bucket. Gently pour
cool water in the bucket. The worms will be okay for a
minute or two. Pour the contents of the bucket through the
colander. Retrieve the worms and uneaten food and bedding
from the colander and return them to the bin. The brown
liquid is compost tea that can be used to water plants.
Sunlight Method:
Mound compost in small piles on the tarp and let them sit in
the sun or under a bright light for a few minutes. The worms
will move to the center of the pile to avoid the light. The outer
part of each pile, now without worms, can be removed and
put in the five-gallon bucket. As the castings are removed, the
newly exposed worms will head to the middle out of the light
and the process can be repeated until you are left with a ball
of worms. This ball of worms can be returned to the worm
bin.
Hand-Picking:
You can also sort through one big pile of compost on the tarp,
picking out any worms you come across, and return them to
189

the bin. Continue until the pile seems to be relatively
worm-free.
Using:
The castings will need to sit for two or three days before they
are ready, then they can be applied directly to plants. The
compost tea may be put into empty beverage bottles and used
right away.
Red Wiggler worms with casings from Down to Earth Worm
Farm in Vermont, indoor vermicomposting facility.
THE RON FINLEY PROJECT
Join Ron as he embarks on his next project: igniting a
(horti)cultural revolution! Ron envisions a world where
gardening is gangsta, where cool kids know their nutrition,
and
where
communities
embrace
the
act
of
growing,
knowing, and sharing the best of the earth’s fresh-grown
food.
190

Ron is realizing his vision for community gardening and
rejuvenation. Let’s grow this seed of urban guerilla gardening
into a school of nourishment and change. Help spread his
dream of edible gardens, one city at a time. It’s time for
Americans to learn to transform food deserts to food forests,
to regenerate their lands into creative business models! Let’s
make Ron’s philosophy mushroom across the country, and
the world.
In part of this effort, Ron is planning to build an urban garden
in South Central LA that will serve as an example of a
well-balanced, fruit-and-veggie oasis called “HQ.” Inspired
by the idea of turning unused space such as parkways and
vacant lots into fruitful endeavors, this garden and gathering
place will be a community hub where people learn about
nutrition and join together to plant, work, and unwind. HQ
will create a myriad of jobs for local residents and the plot of
land will be a self-sufficient ecosystem of gardening,
education, cooking, business learning, and management. The
community will get their hands dirty together, shovel
together, work together, and be healthy together.
MEET RON FINLEY
Ron Finley is a man who will not sit still and watch a problem
take root. Having grown up in the South Los Angeles food
desert, Ron is familiar with the area’s lack of fresh produce.
He knew what it’s like to drive 45 minutes just to get a fresh
tomato. In 2010, he set out to fix the problem. Right outside
his front door! Ron planted vegetables in the curbside dirt
strip next to his home. And quietly, carefully, tenderly started
a revolution.
191

“I wanted a carrot without toxic ingredients I didn’t know
how to spell,” says Ron.
His was an exceptionally creative, cost-effective, and simple
solution; however, it was also an act of spirited rebellion that
led to a run-in with the authorities. The City of Los Angeles
owns the “parkways,” the neglected dirt areas next to roads
where Ron was planting. He was cited for gardening without
a permit. This slap on the wrist did little to dissuade his green
thumb and Ron fought back. Hard. He started a petition with
fellow green activists, demanding the right to garden and
grow food in his neighborhood—and the city backed off. This
caught the eyes of creative leaders and media voices that
lauded his courageous act of ebullient defiance. Ron has
continued to share his story and vision with the world, giving
a TED talk and planning many exciting ways to continue his
involvement in mitigating Los Angeles food deserts.
His
dreams have been reshaped into a thriving garden of
pumpkins, peppers, sunflowers, kale, and corn. But more than
being a guerilla gardener, Ron is a community leader.
Determined to change South Los Angeles from food desert to
food forest, he wants his actions to be educational, inspiring,
and nutritious. He wants kids to grow up with the option of
healthy food, instead of fried, fattening staples. He wants to
sweep up and transform his street, his hood, the city of LA,
and communities everywhere.
http://ronfinley.com
Donations to help Ron pay the staff and continue changing
lives can be made here:
192

QUOTES FROM RON:
“Gardening is the most therapeutic and defiant act you can
do, especially in the inner city. Plus, you get strawberries.”
“If kids grow kale, kids eat kale. If they grow tomatoes, they
eat tomatoes.”
“We gotta flip the script on what a gangsta is—if you ain’t a
gardener, you ain’t gangsta.”
193

Chapter 11
USING WHAT YOU MAKE—STARTING A GARDEN OR
DONATING TO A COMMUNITY GARDEN
“Nature does nothing uselessly.”
—Aristotle, Politics
It is hard to imagine ever being able to actually use the stuff
you make! After two years of dumping veggie scraps and fruit
rinds, eggshells, coffee grounds, tea bag entrails, and other
kitchen debris (never dairy, or meat!), I was ready to use what
I had made. I was too busy to pay much attention to what was
going on inside the pile (now that I have worked on this book
I know how exciting those bugs are!), and I just couldn’t
bring myself to shoveling out the compost and setting up the
garden and the flower beds. Building our own house had long
been a dream of ours, and when we finally moved in, it was
as if there wasn’t time or energy to devote to things like
painting the trim, or starting a vegetable garden.
I have always loved freshly-cut flowers, so that was one of
my first projects: I started a small, sloping flower garden
194

filled with roses and annuals (dahlia, nasturtiums, gladiolas);
and then a lower garden filled with annuals, like poppies,
daisies, and peonies.
Since my budget for my gardening is small, I did what I could
to save money, and found the process to be rewarding in
return. I started my seeds indoors in the late winter, early
spring. I studied how to start morning glories (a little nick in
the seed a twenty-four-hour soak in water would speed up the
process), and other indoor seedlings. I have a wonderful
south-facing kitchen with a row of windows and a counter
upon which to set up my garden six-packs. The organic soil is
store-bought and easy to use for the process of growing
seedlings—you want the plants to have a good start, with
plenty of sun and water.
195

I made sure I worked a little bit each day—it helped that my
children were getting older and liked to play outside, or read
books. And occasionally they would binge out by watching
their TV hour (we had strict rules on television watching, but
often let them watch longer, though in the summer we
disconnected the TV entirely, much to our children’s dismay.
But I am glad we did!), and I could find a little time to work
in the garden.
Many times, I found myself transplanting seedlings in the
dark, or in the moonlight, not wanting to use even a flashing
light for fear of attracting bugs. It was actually a good time to
transplant and water the seedlings, it turns out, to avoid the
heat of the day and give them a less stressful start!
It was one of those late afternoons that had offered a respite
from the work of a household with three kids under the age of
twelve, and I had some time at the beginning of the summer
to mix in the new compost with the soil. I didn’t buy new soil,
as I already had wonderfully rich topsoil I had already
purchased from the local organic gardening center. (I was
looking for sales constantly, and even found a place you
could drive to a load up the back of your car, or truck, with
soil and save a great deal of money—all that was needed was
a tarp so your car didn’t get dirty, and a shovel).
196

I remember I worked quickly, and when I mixed in the
compost from the black composter bin, I had the sudden
feeling of accomplishment, the pride of making something
useful and healthy and beneficial.
The rest, as they say, is work, but it is work that yields
tangible results.
JOHNNY-JUMP-UPS AS A COVER CROP
The purpose of a cover crop is to increase fertility of the soil,
to decrease weeds and pests, and to create biodiversity. Cover
crops are called green manure because farmers plow these
nitrogen-rich crops into the ground where they improve the
soil.
Most cover crops are in the legume family (alfalfa, vetch,
clover) or in the grasses family (rye, oats, wheat, or
buckwheat), but they also include mustard and arugula of the
Brassica family. Every spring, my vegetable garden and the
nearby strip beds are covered in Johnny-jump-ups (Jjus).
They’re cute, and to me, they’re a weed. But now, I’ve
197

decided I’m using Johnny-jump-ups as my cover crop. Here’s
why:
• Jjus don’t prevent weeds exactly, but each plant
covers half a square foot, and nothing grows in the
shade of a Jju.
• They bloom profusely in April and May and are a joy
to behold.
• In late June, they become leggy, so I pull them out
wholesale and fill one compost bin completely full of
Jjus. Although they don’t fix nitrogen, they add a lot
of “green” manure to my compost bins.
Too many Johnny-jump-ups is a win-win situation. You’ll
have beautiful flowering beds in April and May and an
overflowing green compost bin in June to really get that
compost working. —Cheryl Wilfong
Planting in Compost
The structure of soil is improved when you add compost,
which increases the soil’s ability to hold water, helps soil to
achieve a good airflow, and adds nutrients for plants.
Compost will reduce the risk of plants getting diseases and
will give life and vitality to your soil. Healthy soil means
healthy plants. Healthy plants mean healthy animals and
people. It is possible to do this activity with worm compost. If
you choose to do so, keep in mind that worm compost acts as
a highly efficient organic fertilizer and you only need to add
one part worm compost to two parts soil.
198

Materials Needed
• Compost
• Empty six-pack planter
• Drip trays for planters
• Potting soil (buy organic soil)
• Seeds, such as bean or sunflower (for beginners, as
they are easier to manage, and since they sprout
easily)
1. Fill the six-pack containers with one part
compost, one part soil.
2. Place three seeds in each of the sections.
3. Water the seeds as directed on seed packet.
4. Set aside in a warm, sunny area.
DEFENDING YOUR COMPOST
The number-one reason people don’t compost is fear of
varmints. Predator pets—a dog or a cat—that spend time
outdoors are your first line of defense against the four-legged
critters you don’t want raiding your compost. The pet patrol
can be very effective at keeping bandits, masked or otherwise,
at bay. Cats will crouch nearby for hours, staking out the
compost pile for little furry tidbits.
199

Your pets may never actually take the varmints into custody.
Just the smell of carnivore poop and pee can be enough to
deter visits from bothersome herbivores who find a compost
pile to be a handy grocery store. But you do not want your
pets to cross the line and get into the compost themselves.
You may have to arrest your dog’s tendency to joyfully leap
into the bin for a snack. You especially do not want pet poop
in your compost.
If your pets abide by the rules you set, they will defend your
compost pile against raiders of every stripe. —Cheryl
Wilfong
Start a Garden
Even before you launch into the planning, take the time to
first ask yourself a few questions that will help determine if a
new garden site or group is what’s actually needed.
• Is there another community or school garden in your
area that is already serving the people you’re hoping
to reach? If so, is there a way you could support or
further their goals?
• Is there a garden group in your area that is open to
expanding its reach? If so, could you work with an
existing group to create a new garden site?
• Is a community or school garden something that will
meet the needs and desires of your community? Is
there another project that would better suit your
goals?
Stages of Garden Development
200

Once you’ve taken the time to think over the suitability of
your project, you’re ready to start planning! Remember: every
garden and every community is unique. With that in mind,
there are steps to building a new garden community that many
new garden groups have found helpful to see them through
the process. Rather than using the following information as a
checklist, I hope that these tips can give you guidance where
needed. I wish you the best as you begin to build your garden!
• Get your group together.
• Define your goals.
• Develop your garden management plan.
• Pick a site.
• Design your garden site (phased development).
• Develop your garden budget and fundraising plan.
• Build your garden site.
• Grow your team.
Establishing a Garden Project
1. Get your group together.
• Seek out dedicated, motivated individuals to
be a part of your garden planning committee.
• Engage a diverse group of people that
represent stakeholders in your soon-to-be
garden.
• Establish clear lines of communication and
regular meetings for the group.
• Define roles and responsibilities for your
garden.
• Good leadership and management skills will
help to build your garden leadership team.
2. Define your goals.
201

• Meet as a group to discuss and determine the
purpose or mission for your garden.
• Develop goals that will bring you closer to
the overall mission.
• Identify concrete tasks and a timeline for
achieving them. This planning checklist can
get you started on your task list and will help
keep you on track.
3. Develop your garden management plan.
• Discuss
management
roles,
gardener
outreach, registration, fee structure, etc.
• Creating community garden guidelines is a
great way to get everyone on the same page
from day one.
• When
thinking
through
roles
and
responsibilities, it may be helpful to think
through the year based on monthly tasks.
4. Pick a site.
Look for a site that meets your garden’s purpose and
goals. When choosing the potential garden site, keep
in mind several considerations, including:
• Light: At least six hours of direct sun daily.
• Drainage: Little to no standing water after
heavy rains.
• Slope: As level as possible.
• Exposure: Protected from high winds; Avoid
low-lying frost pockets.
• Surrounding vegetation: Few trees; look for
problematic plants (i.e. poison ivy, stinging
nettles).
202

• Soil: Test the soil for heavy metals and other
contaminants. The University of Vermont, or
other
regional
agricultural
extension
universities,
provides
services
for soil-testing.
• Water: Ideally a close water source is
available.
• Safety: Site promotes personal safety; If
digging, make sure not digging on utility
line—Call Before You Dig—811.
• Accessibility: Location and layout of site
suitable for potential gardener population and
for bringing materials onto the site.
• Size: Space large enough for the number of
potential gardeners, garden infrastructure, a
diversity of garden activities, and room for
growth.
• Ownership: If the potential site is not owned
by you or your gardening team, find out who
owns the site to see if you can rent or buy the
land.
5. Design your garden site (phased development).
• Conduct a site analysis to determine what
your site needs to become a garden and
where you should place various features.
What’s included in a site analysis? One way to
analyze a site is to map it out and overlay your map
of
the
site
with
an
analysis
of
physical,
programmatic, and design considerations.
• Create a garden site plan that lays out
landscape and garden features.
203

• Divide the site development into multiple
phases, as budgeting and time allows.
What features should you consider including in your
garden?
6. Develop your garden budget and fundraising plan.
• Based on your site analysis and site plan,
make a list of supplies, materials, and other
resources needed.
• Outline
the
budget,
considering
your
garden’s various developmental stages, from
budgeting
for
garden
construction,
to
ongoing needs, to future development and
garden sustainability.
1. Develop a fundraising plan. Consider various
fundraising strategies to match your garden’s
developmental stages, from seeking donated
and recycled materials, to conducting bake
sales, to writing grants.
2. Build your garden site.
• Determine a timeline for phased
development of your garden site.
• Gather people together for a garden
work party, with an emphasis on
party! This is a fun opportunity to
bring more people into your garden
project and build the community
spirit of the garden from the get-go.
From
The
Vermont
Community
Garden
Network
204

The author waters her raised bed gardens either early in the
morning, or at sundown, in order to let the plants absorb the
most water.
The author’s harvest for the day from one of the productive
raised bed gardens on her five-acre parcel of land in Vermont.
HOW TO BUILD A RAISED BED
205

Notes: The instructions provided are just one way to build a
raised
garden
bed.
Many
other
designs
have
proven
successful. If four-by-four timbers are hard to come by, try
using two by eight-inch boards or other sizes that may lower
your cost. If you are using thinner boards you can use long
screws rather than timber ties, which can be less expensive.
Depending
on your gardening needs, you may also want to consider a
shorter or higher raised bed design. Hemlock is often used in
New England for its longevity, decent price, and availability.
Cedar and wood/plastic composite are also options, but can be
prohibitively expensive. Due to chemical residue which may
impact your organic garden, do not use pressure-treated wood
if you are using the beds for food gardens.
Supplies:
• Circular
saw
and
accompanying
safety
equipment
• Square (tool)
• Level
• Measuring tape
• Pencil
• Shovels
• Hammer
• Scissors
• Wheelbarrow or buckets
Twelve
eight-foot
four-by-four
timbers
are
needed
to
assemble a four-layer, four-foot by eight-foot raised bed.
206

The lumber will be stacked and each layer will overlap the
layer below it at the corners. Here are the four different
measurements to prepare:
1. First, trim all timbers to the maximum possible
common length, as they may not all be exactly eight
feet. Set aside four boards. These will be used for the
sides of layers 1 and 3.
2. Measure the width of a timber (as it may not be
exactly four inches). Double this width and subtract
from the length of the timbers cut in step 1. This will
be the length to cut the four timbers used for the sides
of layers 2 and 4.
3. The end pieces of layers 2 and 4 are made by cutting
two timbers in half.
4. Subtract the doubled timber width from the length of
the end pieces of layers 2 and 4. This will be the
length to cut the two boards used for the ends of
layers 1 and 3.
*Note: A simpler option is to cut all the timbers to the
maximum possible common length, then cut four timbers in
half for the ends and follow the stacking process as outlined
below. The bed will end up slightly larger than four feet by
eight feet.
The first layer is the most important as all other layers are
built on it. The raised bed box will be sturdiest if the first
layer is dug into the ground. Use a square and level to ensure
that the first layer is as square as possible.
207

The author’s raised bed in Vermont: getting ready to add
compost to the soil and plant a row of garlic.
If
the area under the raised bed is grass, the sod can be stripped
and composted. If the soil underneath the raised bed is
determined by a soil test to have contaminants and/or heavy
metals, a layer of landscape fabric can be put under the bed as
a semi-permeable barrier that excess water in the bed can seep
through. When constructing the frame, each layer is nailed to
the layer below it with 6-inch long 60d galvanized timber ties,
spaced every 16 inches. The final step is to fill the raised beds
with a topsoil/compost mix. The beds shown below are 16
feet, 12 feet, and 8 feet long.
FOR ONE 4x8x1’ RAISED BED
MATERIALS
208

Harvesting kale and garlic from the author’s raised beds.
209

Chapter 12
SUCCESS STORIES
“The garden is growth and change and that means loss as well
as constant new treasures to make up for a few disasters.”
—May Sarton
All around the world individuals and municipalities, schools,
and universities are starting to compost with enthusiasm and
the results are showing that it saves money and helps the
environment—a win-win situation to be sure! Where I live,
Brattleboro,
Vermont,
we
have
one
of
the
first
up-and-running municipal composting systems in the country.
The local hardware store sells composting bags for now and
we hope eventually they will be free. The town solid waste
district is also selling the kitchen collector bins and the
outside composting collector bin, and the town subsidized
some of the cost with money that is expected to be saved on
tipping fees by the reduction in heavy household waste.
Vermont will be one of the first states in the country to
require municipalities to compost their own household food
scraps. Moss Kahler, head of municipal composting in
Brattleboro, says there is going to be interest in how the town
does as it rolls out the new system.
“Vermont communities are starting to look at this and there is
a lot of interest in what we are doing,” he said. “People are
going to be watching how we do here.”
210

The new Curbside Compost Bins offered for sale, cheaply, by
the town of Brattleboro for their highly successful program
for homeowners and apartment dwellers to easily compost
their kitchen scraps, paper products, cotton, dryer lint, meat
scraps, fish, cheese, etc.
MUNICIPAL
COMPOSTING
IN
BRATTLEBORO,
VERMONT (MOSS KAHLER)
The town saves fifty-five dollars for every ton of compost that
is diverted form the landfill, and another $105 for every ton of
recyclable material that stays out of the trash stream.
When the curbside compost program starts, the town will also
move toward weekly recycling pickup.
Kahler says studies show that when more people compost it
also increases the recycling rate, so Brattleboro is poised to
keep tons of trash out of the landfill, as well as save real
money on its tipping fees.
Vermont has also passed legislation that will require all
municipalities to offer curbside compost and recycling
programs, so Kahler said Brattleboro is going to lead the rest
of the state in starting its programs.
211

“It is amazing how the town, and the select-board have gotten
behind this,” Kahler said. “The writing is on the wall and
more towns are going to have to do this. It is good to be
proactive so you don’t have to scramble.”
The town is asking anyone in Brattleboro who has trash
picked up by the town’s service to contact the compost
coordinator to sign up for the new program.
Kahler
says
that
while
recycling
is
still
required
in
Brattleboro, the compost program will be voluntary.
The three-month pilot program was wildly successful, Kahler
said.
Not only did all 153 voluntary participants say that they
would continue on with the program, but Kahler said he also
received comments that the service was easier and less of a
nuisance than some of the participants anticipated.
More than seven hundred households have signed up for the
new curbside system and Kahler said he hopes, and expects,
to gain another few hundred in the coming months when word
gets around about how convenient and effective it is to keep
the heavy household solid waste out of the regular trash pail.
There are about 2,700 stops on the town’s trash pickup route.
212

“It’s a very good start,” Kahler said. “We received a lot of
good feedback during the pilot study and I think more people
are going to want to take part once we get going.”
The town ran a voluntary pilot study of the curbside compost
program in the fall with about 150 households taking part.
Kahler said it was largely a complete success and he said the
town is now ready to extend to the service to anyone on the
regular trash route who wants to take part.
Curbside compost pickup is completely voluntary.
He acknowledges that just about everyone who took part in
the pilot study was motivated and committed to making it
work; still, participants were surprised at how easy it was and
at how much lighter their weekly trash load was, he said.
About 25 percent of the households that took part in the pilot
study had never composted before and Kahler says the
experience for most part was positive.
Howard Weiss-Tisman, The Brattleboro Reformer
COMPOST EXERCISE ROUTINE
Mavis, the thinnest woman on the block, loves to go out and
turn the compost piles in her community garden. She says that
using the compost pile as your exercise is so rewarding. It’s
not a waste.
Her routine goes like this: the community garden has four
bins, and gardeners always add to the bin closest to the
213

garden. The instructions to the other gardeners are simple:
add to #1 and take compost from #4.
Meanwhile, Mavis-the-compost-maven is taking care of
what’s happening in the middle. In the spring, as soon as the
compost thaws, Mavis forks #3 into #4.
Then she turns #2 into the now-emptied #3, and #1 into the
now-emptied #2. As she is turning #1 into #2, she can layer
and water as needed. If she runs into a batch of garbage, then
she adds a layer of mulch hay or leaves. Then the first bin, the
one closest to the plots, is empty again and ready to be filled
up during the spring, summer, and fall.
And Mavis feels great! —Cheryl Wilfong
“Zero Waste” in San Francisco, California
According to Zero Waste, San Francisco’s city-mandated
recycling program has ambitious goals.
Zero waste means products are designed and used according
to the waste reduction hierarchy (prevent waste, reduce and
reuse first, then recycle and compost) and the principle of
highest and best use, so no material goes to landfill or
high-temperature destruction.
What prompted San Francisco to push for zero waste?
After San Francisco successfully achieved the state-mandated
50 percent landfill diversion by 2000, San Francisco wanted
to extend its commitment to landfill diversion and set a goal
of seventy-five diversion by 2010 and zero waste by 2020.
214

Increasing diversion and pursuing zero waste achieves three
key sustainability goals:
1. Conserves valuable resources;
2. Reduces environmental impacts, such as climate
change and pollution; and
3. Creates green jobs.
When materials are not reused or recycled and sent to the
landfill, valuable resources are wasted and greenhouse gasses
are emitted into the atmosphere. Compostable materials, like
food scraps and yard trimmings that are sent to landfills
produce methane, a potent greenhouse gas which is up to
seventy-two times more potent than carbon dioxide. San
Francisco’s Zero Waste program significantly reduces these
emissions, making it an essential component in achieving the
City’s ambitious greenhouse gas reduction goals.
In addition, recycling and composting greatly increase the
amount of recyclable materials available to make new
products, reducing the need to extract more virgin materials.
Food
scraps
create
nutrient-rich
compost—a
natural
fertilizer—to help grow fruits and vegetables in local farms.
Compost also helps farms retain water, a precious resource.
San Francisco’s zero waste program benefits the economy, as
composting and recycling save residents and businesses
money and create green jobs.
More Success Stories from Biocycle
215

In the spring of 2014, the town of Bridgewater, Connecticut,
began the first curbside collection program for food scraps in
the state. Town officials are working with the Housatonic
Resources Recovery Authority (HRRA) to operate a program
that
will
provide
interested
residents
with
EcoSafe’s
two-gallon kitchen counter collection bin, six-gallon curbside
bin and compostable bags, and an information packet so
households can successfully participate in the program. Jen
Iannucci, HRRA’s Assistant Director, initiated the program
and did much of the leg work to make it happen, including
surveying residents to gauge interest and developing public
education tools, like brochures and website content necessary
to support the program.
The City of Austin is expanding its residential food scraps
curbside collection pilot. In 2013, nearly two thousand tons of
source-separated organics were collected from eight thousand
homes as part of the city’s pilot project. In February 2014,
6,500 more homes were added, for a total of fourteen
thousand homes currently participating.
The city collects food and green waste from residences
weekly
in
ninety-six-gallon
carts.
Waste
eligible
for
composting is described in outreach materials as “If it grows,
it goes!” and includes meat and dairy products. City haulers
deliver collected materials to Organics by Gosh, a composting
facility in Austin. Contamination has not been a huge issue
according to Vidal Maldonado, division manager at Austin
Resource Recovery. An audit of all routes indicated a
216

contamination rate of approximately 1 percent, with most
coming from plastics and trash, followed by glass. “We don’t
allow compostable bags or any other bags so that we can see
what is going into the bins,” says Maldonado. “Our biggest
challenge is that participants use the cart just for food waste,
instead of mixing it with yard waste. Operationally that is
inefficient for us.”
The San Diego International Airport has been participating in
the
City
of
San
Diego’s
Commercial
Food
Scraps
Composting Program since 2009, diverting an average of
sixty tons a year of coffee grounds and fruits. During this
time, the airport had one central kitchen and thirty-two food
providers managed by HMS Host, which also donated an
average of 1,500 pounds of food annually, generating
approximately 1,700 meals for food insecure San Diegans. In
2013
the
airport
completed
its
major
renovation
and
expansion, adding two new central kitchens managed by High
Flying Foods (HFF) and SSP America (SSP). It now offers a
total of fifty-seven food vendors that include twelve sit-down
restaurants, seventeen fast food eateries, eleven food kiosks,
and coffee shops. Twenty-nine of these vendors prepare food
at their site. Once construction of the new terminals was
concluded, Airport and City staff started working on a
logistics plan for the comprehensive food scraps composting
program including all foods, and a food donation program.
In February 2014, Synagro Technologies opened a $4.3
million composting facility in Charlotte County, Florida.
Synagro worked with local and county officials, the Florida
Department of Environmental Protection, and the US EPA to
ensure
that
the
plant’s
development,
construction
and
operation
received
approval
and
met
all
regulatory
217

requirements. The facility will operate under a ten-year lease
with the Charlotte County Public Works department.
Missoula, Montana: Carcass Composting Project Protects
Bears, Wolves
On many ranches, livestock carcasses are deposited in
“boneyards” where they decompose. But when a ranch is near
deep
wilderness,
boneyards
may
easily
attract
large
carnivores to what seems like a free lunch, as well as
increasing the chances of carnivore-human conflict and the
risk that the bear or wolf will be put down. To avoid the
problem, says Seth Wilson, a biologist for a coalition of
ranchers and landowners in Montana called the Blackfoot
Challenge—and
cofounder
of
People
and
Carnivores—ranchers
had
sent
carcasses
to
the
local
rendering plant. When that facility closed, the carcasses had
to be landfilled, which is costly.
In 2007, Wilson, known as “Dr. Carcass,” asked Montana’s
Department of Transportation (MDT) if it would take some
livestock carcasses to the composting facility that MDT had
started in Clearwater Junction to handle road-killed wildlife
on a trial basis. That experiment evolved into a partnership
with
MDT,
the
Montana
Fish,
Wildlife
and
Parks
Department, US Fish 8 Wildlife Service (US FWS), and
approximately thirty ranches, to compost dead livestock at
MDT’s predator-resistant central facility. Livestock carcasses
from the ranches go into one of ten outdoor bins constructed
of Jersey barriers and ground-up asphalt flooring. A five-wire
electrical fence surrounds all of the bins and finished
compost, which has “taken care of” incursions by wolves or
bears, says Bruce Friede, former MDT area supervisor for
218

Upper Blackfoot who has worked with Wilson since the
project’s inception.
Carcasses are piled onto a twelve-to-eighteen-inch layer of
wood chips, covered completely with higher temperature
compost. A final layer of ten to fourteen inches of chips helps
absorb odor, says Friede. Once the bin is full, MDT waits
thirty days before “stirring” the pile. “We have to stir it
because the pile is fairly large, and, as the animals are
digested, it will shrink,” he explains. “We take the loader,
back drag [the pile], roll it back into the bin and cover it with
wood chips.” MDT adds more wood chips to control odors. In
drier seasons, the pile is watered for about fifteen minutes
twice a day to maintain needed moisture. “If you keep it
well-watered, it’s very low-odor,” notes Wilson. “When we
first got started, everyone was like, is this going to be a total
mess? But it’s pretty contained.” After another thirty days,
MDT typically unloads the bin and puts the material into a
large pile it labels “Done.”
MDT has used the compost in various revegetation projects,
such as rocky terrain surrounding a new sewer system, says
Friede, noting that it got vegetation growing very quickly.
“We have done some tests at the Clearwater site, where we
put out five or six inches of the compost on some scree, and
[the revegetation] was just amazing,” adds Wilson. “With
everyone
contributing,
composting
costs
about
$22/per
carcass, which is about a third what it would cost to landfill.
It’s a public-private partnership 365 days a year that has kept
cost down and efficiency up.”
Sonoma County, California: Worms and Worm Bins For Sale
219

The Compost Club started in 2003, while Rick Kaye,
cofounder, was volunteering as the “recycling coordinator”
for his daughter’s school in Healdsburg, California. Kaye’s
mission was to divert organics that the school produced
without sending the material offsite. He saw vermicomposting
with worm bins as the solution. In its first year, the small,
150-student West Side School converted its twenty pounds of
weekly compostable waste into worm castings. Students,
teachers, and parents harvested, sifted, bagged, and labeled
five-pound bags of vermi-compost, then sold them at the
Healdsburg Farmers Market. About a half-ton of material was
composted; nine hundred dollars was raised for school field
trips.
The Compost Club has grown from diverting nine hundred
pounds of food scraps in 2003 to 44,000 total pounds diverted
in 2013. It now includes fifteen area schools and four regional
businesses. The Club relies on grants and donations, and sells
its worms and bin systems to the public to sustain the
community project. Worms can be purchased for $25/pound.
Two sizes of bins (two feet and three feet in diameter and
both eighteen inches high) are sold locally. The Healdsburg
High Construction and Sustainability Academy constructs the
frames.
Ordering
information
can
be
found
at
www.compostclub.org.
In late October, entrepreneur Susannah Castle launched Blue
Earth Compost, a food waste collection service in Hartford
and West Hartford, Connecticut. Castle makes weekly
pick-ups at residences and a local juice bar using her VW
Jetta wagon. Collected organics are delivered to Harvest New
England
in
Ellington,
about
twenty
miles
away.
The
certified-organic compost produced is periodically “returned”
220

to Castle’s customers. For weekly pick-ups, customers pay
$8/week, $30/month or $170 for six months. Blue Earth
Compost supplies customers with four-gallon bins that each
hold up to thirteen pounds of food waste, along with BioBag
compostable liners. Castle says that she has found a lot of
demand from people interested in recycling their food waste,
contrary to those that believe it is difficult to change behavior
in terms of getting folks to separate their organics from the
waste stream and properly sort them. “We’ve audited all of
our subscribers at least once and there have been no problems
with contamination,” Castle adds.
Composting activity is continuing to gain momentum in
Connecticut. In the beginning of 2014, state regulations came
into effect that require each commercial food wholesaler or
distributor,
industrial
food
manufacturer
or
processor,
supermarket, resort, or conference center that generates more
than 104 tons of organic waste per year to send that waste to
an organic materials recycling facility, pending a permitted
facility that is willing to accept the material exists within
twenty miles of the generator. In 2020, the law will affect all
generators in the above-mentioned categories, regardless of
the volume of organic waste that they generate. “With the
new recycling
221

mandate, the climate has become more and more encouraging
for composting, and there’s a lot of buzz around it,” notes
Castle. After an article about Blue Earth Compost was
published in a local newspaper, Castle says she was inundated
with calls from prospective customers. The fact that she
delivers finished compost to customers has been “a big
driver” in stimulating interest.
It has been about three months since Castle began pick ups in
a five-square-mile area, and she is now servicing thirty
household accounts, the juice bar, and a recycling pilot
project at a local grade school. Blue Earth has been adding
about three new household residences per week. “We’ve been
ramping up very fast, faster than our projections,” Castle
adds. “Our capacity is 150 subscribers total. We are small by
design. We want to innovate as we scale and grow
efficiently.”
The Rich Earth Institute in Brattleboro, Vermont, is dedicated
to advancing and promoting the use of human waste as a
resource. Through research, demonstration, and education
projects, they strive to illustrate the positive effect of this
approach in important areas including water quality, food
security, energy use, soil health, economic sustainability,
carbon footprint, public health, and emergency preparedness.
They seek to bring together the knowledge of many
disciplines and professions in order to create workable
solutions. For this reason, the various perspectives of sanitary
engineers, farmers, water quality advocates, businesspeople,
agricultural scientists, and regulators are all represented
among their board members and collaborators.
222

The Institute was founded in 2011, and is developing quickly.
In 2012 and 2013, they conducted the first controlled field
trials in the United States using source-separated human urine
as a fertilizer. They envision being involved in the creation of
a regional system for recycling source-separated human waste
back into agriculture, as well as serving as an intellectual hub
for researchers, writers, professionals, and other practitioners
who
are
exploring
the
intersection
of
agriculture
and
sanitation.
More than 170 volunteers in the Brattleboro, Vt., area have
contributed urine to the Rich Earth Institute field trials.
Abraham Noe-Hays, research director of the Rich Earth
Institute in Vermont, applies urine to a five-by-five-meter test
plot on a hay farm.
223

The author’s side garden with bluebird house, flowering
annuals and perennials, and fresh compost and mulch. You
can do a lot with not much space if you have good organic
compost and soil to mix it in. The decaying woodpile from
old apple trees in the background is a good source of nutrients
to the soil and the author spreads the wood chips around the
beds.
224

Chapter 13
DON’T WORRY! YOUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED
“Garden as though you will live forever.”
—William Kent
Why Should I Bother to Compost?
According to the Council of Canada Compost website, there
are basically ten reasons who you should love to compost,
and in the tradition of the “Top Ten Hits,” here they are:
1. Send
less
to
landfill.
Organics
represent
over
one-third of the materials being sent to landfills.
Whether through backyard or large-scale composting
or anaerobic digestion, those banana peels, apple
cores, and other organic materials can be recycled.
2. Reduce
greenhouse
gases.
According
to
Environment Canada, landfill sites account for about
38 percent of Canada’s total methane emissions. It’s
the organics that are buried in the landfill that are a
key contributor to this production of greenhouse
gases.
3. Recover valuable materials. Composting produces
compost, the single most important ingredient for
healthy and productive soil.
4. Decrease soil erosion. Soil erosion can remove
nutrients from the soil, reducing its productivity, as
well as reducing runoff that can carry sediment,
nutrients and chemicals into waterways thereby
225

creating new sources of pollution. Compost helps
enhance soil
structure and binds soil particles together.
5. Revitalize soil. Compost helps provide sustenance
for the very necessary biological diversity in the soil.
Plants depend on this to convert materials into plant
available nutrients and to keep the soil well-aerated.
6. Reduce the need to water. By improving the soil
structure through the addition of compost, water is
retained and available for plants.
7. Reduce the need for pesticides. Compost can help
suppress plant diseases.
8. Save money. Through backyard composting, you can
turn your leftover organics into a valuable soil
amendment without spending a dime.
9. Make
your
garden
grow.
Compost
provides
essential organic matter for the soil, which is of
fundamental importance to its health, vitality, and
fertility.
10. Make a positive environmental difference. With
compost, you can take resources otherwise regarded
as waste—organic residuals—and turn them into
something of value while at the same time realizing
landfill and greenhouse gas reductions, improved soil
productivity and water quality.
226

A late summer zinnia blooming in the author’s raised bed
garden.
Will It Improve my Soil?
A healthy, flourishing garden begins with healthy soil. By
learning as much as you can about your soil, you will be
better able to match plants to your conditions.
You can determine the type of soil you have by conducting a
simple test that will reveals its composition (whether it’s
predominantly clay, loam, or sand), the nutrient levels in your
soil and the soil’s pH (its acidity or alkalinity).
Scoop a handful of soil and give it a squeeze. If you have
sandy soil, it will be crumbly and won’t hold its shape in your
hand; sandy soils don’t retain much moisture. If you have
clay soil, it will form a lump when you squeeze it; clay soils
get sticky when wet and turn very hard when dry. Loam, the
ideal garden soil, will form into a ball when you squeeze it
but will break apart easily. To improve any soil—sand, clay,
and loam—add compost.
Another way to determine whether your soil is clay, loam, or
sand is to put a handful of garden soil in a jar, fill it with
water, shake, and then leave it to settle for a day. Sand will
settle to the bottom, and silt will be the next layer with clay
on top (organic matter will float on the water’s surface).
Compare the percentage of
each layer to determine whether you’ve got loam (20 percent
clay, 40 percent silt, 40 percent sand), clay (60 percent clay,
30 percent silt, 10 percent sand), or sand (5 percent clay, 10
percent silt, 85 percent sand).
227

Sod roof, above a homemade sauna, on the author’s property
that needs some soil amendment from compost mixed with
topsoil.
To test the pH levels in your garden—to tell whether your
soil’s pH is acidic, neutral, or alkaline—a home pH testing kit
is available at most nurseries. This will help you determine
which plants will do best in your soil conditions.
To determine the drainage capacity of your soil, dig a hole
one foot deep and one foot wide. Fill it with water, let it drain
completely, then fill again until the soil is saturated.
Depending on how long it takes for this last batch to drain,
you’ve either got adequate drainage (less than two hours) or
poor drainage (more than two hours).
Whatever your soil type, pH, drainage and nutrient levels, you
can improve the health of your soil by adding compost. Dig in
lots of compost when first preparing your garden bed for
planting. In already established gardens, add a three-inch inch
layer of compost around your plants in spring, summer, or
fall.
Will Composting Save Water?
228

Water is a resource too precious to waste. More and more
cities are enacting watering bans or restrictions during the
summer months when water use increases by 30 to 50
percent. By taking a few simple steps, you can ensure that
your green garden conserves water and still looks beautiful.
Enhance the water-retention capability of your garden’s soil
by digging in compost in spring, summer, or fall. Not only
will this organic matter improve your soil’s texture and
water-retention
capabilities,
it
will
also
add
important
nutrients.
Mulch your plants, shrubs, and trees with a three-inch layer of
compost, shredded bark, straw, or chopped leaves during the
growing season. Make sure the mulch doesn’t touch the base
of the plant. The mulch layer will conserve moisture in the
soil and prevent weeds from sprouting.
When planting young seedlings, create a saucer-like area
around the base of the plant so rainwater will be directed to
the plant’s root zone.
If you live in an area with regular dry periods during the
summer months, choose plant drought-tolerant species that
thrive with no watering. A local nursery can help you choose
drought-tolerant
plants,
many
of
which
are
prolific
bloomers—an attractive bonus.
229

Spaghetti squash in the author’s garden.
Place plants with similar moisture needs together in the
garden. This way, instead of watering the whole garden
indiscriminately, you can water only those plants that need it.
Install a rain barrel, connected to your downspout, so you can
collect rain for garden use.
Consider planting native species as these plants are adapted to
the climate and rainfall patterns in your region. A great
resource
for
urban
action
especially
is
the
Chicago
Community Climate Action Toolkit. (More info in the
Resources.)
How Do I Go Organic with My Home Garden/Composting
System?
For every problem that may arise in your garden, there’s a
green, organic solution. Instead of using synthetic chemicals,
which
may
leach
into
and
contaminate
the
soil
and
groundwater, use these time-tested, organic methods. And
remember, the best organic practice is prevention—healthy
soil and healthy plants are more resistant to pests and
diseases.
230

A ripe bell pepper in the author’s garden.
Keep your soil healthy by adding lots of organic matter, in the
form of compost, throughout the growing season. Compost
contributes to the health of the soil by supplying nutrients,
improving soil texture and drainage, conserving soil moisture
and encouraging earthworms and soil microorganisms.
Keep your plants healthy by making sure they’re not too
crowded and that they’re getting the proper amount of water
(neither too much nor too little). Divide overcrowded plants
and plant divisions in another spot in your garden or give
them to friends.
Hand-pull weeds when they first appear—before they go to
seed. By dealing with weeds immediately, you’ll save lots of
time later.
Inspect your plants regularly, and at the first sign of insect
infestation, learn to identify what particular creature is
affecting your plant. (Not all bugs are bad! Many are
beneficial.)
For a good all-purpose, organic spray to control insects, mix
one whole garlic bulb, a generous pinch of cayenne pepper,
231

and two cups of water in a blender. Mix thoroughly, let the
solids settle, and then pour the liquid into a spray bottle.
Spray on the leaves (tops and undersides) and stems of
insect-infested plants. You can also use a commercially
available organic insecticidal soap, such as Safer’s.
Birds eat bugs—celebrate when you see earthworms and birds
to your garden. Research some tips on how certain plantings
will attract birds.
Remove diseased plants from the garden and clean your tools
regularly.
Consider companion planting in the vegetable garden to keep
pests to a minimum. For example, plant marigolds around the
tomato patch—the marigolds’ strong smell repels insects.
What Is Permaculture and How Can My Compost and Garden
Share Space with Wildlife?
The green garden is alive with creatures. Birds, butterflies,
and pollinating insects all bring life to the garden and pleasure
to the gardener. Hang out the welcome mat by creating a
habitat that meets the needs of wild creatures.
232

The best way to attract wildlife is to plant a diversity of
species: trees, shrubs, and perennials. These different layers
in the garden will provide a variety of habitats for the specific
needs of various creatures.
Include a variety of flowers that bloom throughout the
growing season from spring to fall, ensuring a long-lasting
food source for nectar-loving creatures such as butterflies.
Leave seedpods on perennial plants over the winter to provide
an important food source for birds. If you have the space,
consider planting both deciduous and evergreen trees that will
provide year-round habitat for birds.
Choose shrubs that produce berries for birds. A local nursery
will be able to suggest appropriate shrubs for your area.
If you have a lawn, consider replacing at least a portion of it
with either a flowerbed or a low-growing groundcover.
Lawns provide little in the way of wildlife habitat.
Consider adding a water feature to your garden. This is one of
the best ways to create wildlife habitat. Your water feature
can be as simple as a bowl of water left on the ground in an
open area or, better yet, it can be a birdbath. A pond requires
more work (both in planning and in maintenance) but has
enormous wildlife benefits.
To attract wildlife, it’s important to garden organically.
Synthetic chemicals kill butterflies and beneficial insects.
Keep a list of the creatures that visit your green garden habitat
and share the news of sightings with others in your
233

neighborhood. It may inspire them to create wildlife habitats
too.
I Am a Beginner, But How Can I Encourage All This
Biodiversity?
Quite simply, biodiversity means the variety of life on earth.
Think of it as a web: the more links and strands of connection
there are, the stronger the whole web becomes. It’s the same
for the green garden: with a variety of plants and life forms,
the garden as a whole is stronger, healthier, and more
resilient.
Biodiversity begins below the ground—a healthy soil teeming
with diverse microorganisms. The best thing you can do to
contribute to the life of the soil is to add compost and lots of
it. Compost is full of beneficial bacteria and microorganisms
that create a healthy, living soil.
Monocultures, such as lawns or the same vegetable crop
planted year after year in the same place, are an invitation to
infestation! Rotate vegetable crops by planting them in
different places within the garden bed each year.
Plant a variety of different species throughout the flower
garden, aiming, in particular, for a variety of blooming times,
from spring through fall. This way, your biodiverse green
garden will meet the needs of a variety of wild creatures—the
plant biodiversity will encourage animal biodiversity, too.
234

Avoid the use of synthetic chemicals in the garden, which
destroy good bugs along with bad.
The author’s west-side garden with a bluebird house.
Keep a list of all the diverse creatures that visit your green
garden—you’ll be amazed by the amount of life buzzing in
your yard!1
SUMMER SOLSTICE BONFIRE
Author’s note: Cheryl has a very creative approach to her
compost pile! The author does not put bones anywhere near
her compost pile, cremated or otherwise!
I bought an organic chicken at the Farmers’ Market and
boiled it up to make chicken soup and chicken salad. But
what to do with the skin and bones? You’re not supposed to
compost them, though my compost is full of chicken bones
and spare ribs. I suppose they add a slow-release calcium to
the garden. In the winter, I cremate the bones in my wood
stove.
But how to dispose of meat bones during the summer? Surely,
there’s a biodegradable alternative to the trash.
On summer solstice, I have a bonefire. Yes, that’s where the
word bonfire comes from—burning. . . . Well, maybe we
235

don’t want to think too closely about who was being burned.
Women. Enemies. Minorities. People who were “different.”
In
India, still today, dead bodies are cremated in bonfires on
platforms along the Ganges River and its tributaries. The
ashes are then swept into the holy river, a visible reminder of
the cycle of life.
What to do with chicken bones during the summer? Celebrate
the summer solstice with a bonfire as the long summer days
begin to die in length. —Cheryl Wilfong
Now that My Compost is Producing, What Should I Plant in
My Garden?
Native plants are species that existed in an area prior to
European settlement. They’ve developed over millennia and
are adapted to local conditions. The big advantage for the
green gardener is that native plants tend to be lower
maintenance, requiring little in the way of supplementary
watering and no synthetic chemicals.
Learn about the native plants that grow in your area as well as
which type of habitat they prefer in the wild (for example,
woodland, meadow, prairie, wetland). Contact local naturalist
groups, gardening organizations, and environmental groups to
find out if they’ve compiled lists of native plants or if they
can recommend local wild areas to explore.
Visit a specialty native plant nursery to find out which native
plants are commercially available in your area. (Never dig
plants from the wild.)
236

Compare the conditions found in your garden (shade or sun,
dry or moist, etc.) to the conditions required by a variety of
native plants that you’re interested in growing and that are
commercially available in your area. The native plants will
thrive in your garden when you match the plants to the
condition—woodland plants for shade, sun-loving plants for
meadows and prairies, wetland plants for moist areas.
Water young transplants for the first six weeks after planting.
After
that,
they
should
thrive
without
supplementary
watering. Design your native plant garden in whatever style
appeals to you—from formal to informal—mandala-shaped
gardens are beautiful, or if you are like me, you like the ease
of a raised bed.
Now That I Am Composting and Gardening, How Can I
Make My Lawn “Greener”?
It is possible to have a healthy lawn without using synthetic
chemicals, simply by practicing more sustainable lawn care.
The principles are the same as those followed throughout the
green garden: maintaining soil health and vitality, watering
wisely, and recycling nutrients.
To maintain soil health, top-dress with a fine sprinkling of
compost a few times during the growing season.
Lawns require approximately one inch of water a week. If
rain doesn’t provide enough water, you may need to do some
supplementary watering. This should be done in the early
morning on a windless day (too much water is lost to
evaporation by the sun during the middle of the day or on
windy days).
237

Place a small can by the sprinkler to see how long it takes for
an inch of water to accumulate.
The author’s native blueberries with compost, organic soil,
and mulch applied in the fall.
Set your lawn mower blades at three inches. This is the ideal
height for grass to shade out weeds and to keep the soil cool
and moist.
Cut no more than a third of the grass height in one cutting and
make sure your mower blades are sharp.
Leave grass clippings on the lawn to slowly decompose and
return their nutrients to the soil—you can use some to layer
your compost pile as well. A mulching mower/blade will
distribute clippings evenly throughout the lawn.
Gently remove thatch buildup in your lawn using a stiff rake.
Compost the accumulated debris.
Aerate compacted soil in the spring or fall.
Leave any clover that appears in your lawn—clover fixes
nitrogen in the soil and thus improves soil fertility.
238

Hand pull weeds before they go to seed—this will prevent
them from spreading in the garden.
STINKY THOUGHTS
One spring evening, I made my final run to the compost pile
at nine and beaned a skunk on the nose with a watermelon
rind. I didn’t stick around for a closer sighting once I saw that
furry white tail start to twitch. When my sweetie came home
fifteen minutes later, he said he smelled skunk.
Our thoughts and actions go into a “compost pile” from
moment to moment. A thought arises, then it passes. A deed
happens, then it’s over. Even though it’s gone, it leaves the
track of its valence. A wholesome thought or deed—of
kindness or generosity—lays the path for more wholesome
thoughts and deeds. An unwholesome thought or deed lays
the pathway for more of the same. In the language of
neuroscience, “Neurons that fire together, wire together.” In
the language of gardeners, “You reap what you sow.”
So be careful what you compost. Those stinky thoughts may
come back to haunt you. —Cheryl Wilfong
239

The author doing some weeding and harvesting cherry
tomatoes from her garden.
240

The author’s house with solar panels and space to plan more
gardens.
1 The above text is courtesy of Compost Council of Canada,
www.compost.org.
241

Chapter 14
GOING FORWARD
“Adopt the pace of nature: her secret is patience.”
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
Without a doubt, composting remains one of the most
satisfying and rewarding things I do. My family is involved,
too, and my children (now grown), are impressed that most of
our waste is now composted, at home and by the town’s
successful “curbside composting program,” and we have very
little trash take out to the dump.
When houseguests visit us at our home in Vermont, they
sometimes forget about composting, since many of them live
around Boston or New York. Usually, I gently remind them
that we can put things in the compost bucket in the kitchen.
This
humble
directive
creates
a
lot
of
surprise
and
appreciation for the fact that we are composting and trying to
reduce our waste.
Rather than coming down in a condescending way on a
houseguest who may not be familiar with composting, I like
to talk about the benefits of doing it, and help spread the
word. People really seem to appreciate it, and, for some, it
may be the very first time they’ve heard about composting.
242

Schoolchildren take to it immediately. Since they are more of
a tabula rasa, in terms of their experience, they love and
appreciate the earth in ways that, as adults, we can easily
forget. Sometimes our old habits become ingrained, and we
instinctively put the trash right in one container without
separating it, without thinking about where it goes. . . . It’s
almost as if young kids grasp the concept of composting and
recycling without a lot of explanation. For them the air, wind,
the water, and the dirt in the ground, form part of the natural
cycles of the earth, and composting turns into more dirt, with
added benefits for their diet.
It’s so exciting to see the schools embracing composting!
Here in the United States, our culture became obsessed with
cleanliness during the early part of the 1990s and into the next
decade. Now, however, medical studies show that there are
many beneficial bacteria in the world and in our guts, and it
might be time to trend away from the antiseptic hand washes,
and get our kids out digging in the garden.
My compost pile remains, for me, a thing of beauty. I’ll never
forget that first year when I was able to use the rich dark
humus! As I shoveled it out, I kept exclaiming how great it
was, basking in the glow of sunlight as if I wanted the whole
world know that I created something magical, something
243

useful, something that would benefit my diet, and something
that would return nutrients to what I eat and grow and that I
return all that, yet again, to the earth.
So, you see, composting is a cycle. It is a process that
involves little skill and brings great joy and rejuvenation to
one’s life. It is something I can be proud of; it is something
tangible, and something I can leave behind.
244

APPENDIX
This Appendix includes recipes and tips from some master
composters, like Cheryl Wilfong, Lars Hundley, and Vern
Grubinger. There are many resources out there on the web
and other books, all the more reason to celebrate that
composting is much more than a fad and is here to stay.
Composting Recipes
These are just some starter recipes. The list of combinations
could go on forever. Note that adding too much finished
compost to a new batch of compost material may slow
composting
time
some,
but
it
adds
a
lot
of
good
microorganisms to the mix. Adding a shovel full of your local
soil will do the same.
Based on volume and listed in approximate descending order
from hottest to least hot mixes:
Recipe #1
2 parts Dry leaves
2 parts Straw or shredded newspaper (black print only)
1 part Manure
1 part Fresh grass clippings
1 part Fresh garden weeds
1 part Food scraps
245

1 cup Compost starter/activator per 20 lbs of material
1 cup Blood or Alfalfa meal per 20 lbs of material
Recipe #2
3 parts Dry leaves
1 part Fresh grass clippings
1 part Fresh garden weeds
1 part Food scraps
1 cup Compost starter/activator per 20 lbs of material
Recipe #3
6 parts Dry leaves
3 parts Food scraps
3 parts Fresh grass clippings
2 lbs Finished compost and/or 1 cup compost starter/activator
per 20 lbs of material
Recipe #4
3 parts Dry leaves
3 parts Fresh grass clippings
246

2 lbs Finished compost and/or 1 cup compost starter/activator
per 20 lbs of material
Recipe #5
3 parts Dry grass clippings
3 parts Fresh grass clippings
1 part Peat moss
1 cup Compost starter/activator per 20 lbs of material
2 lbs Coffee grounds per 20 lbs of material (include filters)
Recipe #6 (experiment more)
4 parts Fresh grass clippings
1 part Peat moss
3 parts Shredded newspaper or cardboard
2 lbs Coffee grounds per 20 lbs of material (include filters)
1 part Food scraps
1 cup Compost starter/activator per 20 lbs of material
1 cup Blood or alfalfa meal per 20 lbs of material
Knowing Your Soil pH is Important
247

The pH of your soil is important to know as it should
influence what you put in your compost mix. The term pH
describes the alkalinity (sweetness) or acidity (sourness) of
soil or compost. The pH scale runs from one (indicating pure
acidity) to fourteen (which is purely alkaline). Something
neutral
would
be
a
seven.
Most
plants
like,
and
microorganism operate best in, a pH median between six and
seven. Average garden soils range from five to seven. A
swamp peat is around three, arid desert soils range from nine
to eleven and pure water is seven.
There are many ways of testing for the pH of your soil. One
way is to dig a hole in your yard two to four inches deep and
clean out twigs and debris, then fill it with distilled water.
After you let it sit for a while. It should be muddy. With a pH
test probe, you then hold it in place for sixty seconds.
The pH is measured on a scale of one to fourteen and a
measurement of seven is neutral soil; above is too alkaline
and below is too acidic. It is a good idea to take several
measurements from around the yard and then take an average.
According to Organic Gardening, one of the best deals for
gardeners is a soil test, available through local cooperative
extension offices or private laboratories.
Health and Safety Guidelines
There are two potential hazards in working with compost. The
first concerns the materials used in composting that could
contain disease-causing organisms or pathogens. For example
this is why it is best to avoid meat, dairy products, and the
other materials listed as not recommended. While not a
widespread problem, the second concern relates to allergic
248

reactions to airborne spores. Here are some specific points
from
Cornell
University’s
Guidelines
for
Prudent
Composting:
1. Avoid certain inputs to the compost pile such as raw
poultry or meat wastes and plate scrapings from
people who are ill.
2. Consider
managing
your
composting
system
to
ensure that it gets and stays hot long enough to
reduce pathogens.
3. Practice
good
personal
hygiene
when
handling
compost. Proper personal sanitation is the most
effective method for controlling the impact of any
pathogens that may be in the compost. Wash hands
after handling compost and/or use gloves. If the
compost is particularly dusty, watering is an option.
4. Persons with weakened immune systems or medical
conditions that compromise the body’s ability to fight
infection should use caution when handling compost.
5. If possible, allow composts that are produced in a
small-scale setting to age for at least a year before
use.
Composting Leaves
This information is from the useful website, The Compost
Guide,
by
Lars
Hundley
(see
Resources
for
more
information). Some people complain to us that they have no
luck composting leaves. “We make a pile of our leaves,”
these people say, “but they never break down.” That is indeed
a common complaint.
249

There are two things you can do that will guarantee success in
composing leaves:
1. Add extra nitrogen to your leaf compost. Manure is
the best nitrogen
supplement, and a mixture of five parts leaves to one
part manure will certainly break down quickly. If you
don’t
have
manure—and
many
gardeners
don’t—nitrogen
supplements
like
dried
blood,
cottonseed meal, bone meal, and Agrinite will work
almost as well. Nitrogen is the one factor that starts
compost heap heating up, and leaves certainly don’t
contain enough nitrogen to provide sufficient food for
bacteria.
Here
is
a
rough
guide
for
nitrogen
supplementing: add two cups of dried blood or other
natural nitrogen supplement to each wheelbarrow
load of leaves.
2. The second thing to do to guarantee leaf-composting
success is to grind or shred your leaves. We will deal
with this in detail later on, but let me tell you right
now that it will make things simpler for you in the
long run. A compost pile made of shredded material
is really fun to work with, because it is so easily
controlled and so easy to handle.
3. A compost pile can be made in almost any size, but
most people like to make rectangular-shaped piles,
because they are easier to handle. It is a good idea to
put the material in the heap of layers. Start with a
six-inch layer of leaves, either shredded or not
shredded. Then add a two-inch layer of other organic
material that is higher in nitrogen than leaves. Try to
pick something from this list: manure, garbage, green
weeds, grass clippings, or old vines from your
250

garden.
You
can
add
low-nitrogen
things
like
sawdust, straw, ground corn cobs, or dry weeds if you
put in a nitrogen supplement such as described above.
It is important to mix leaves from packing down in a
dry mat. Keep the heap moist, but not soggy.
Turn the heap every three weeks or sooner if you feel up to it.
If you can turn it three or four times before late spring comes,
you will have fine compost ready for spring planting use.
You can make compost out of leaves in as little time as
fourteen days by doing these things:
1. Shred or grind the leaves.
2. Mix four parts ground leaves with one part manure or
other material liberally supplemented with nitrogen.
3. Turn the heap every three days. Turning a heap made
of shredded leaves is not difficult because the
compost is light and fluffy.
One more tip: why not experiment with covering your heap
with a plastic sheet? It will keep in the warmth and prevent
the heap from getting too wet or too dry.
Potting Mixes for Organic Gardeners
Vern Grubinger, vegetable and berry specialist
University of Vermont Extension
Soilless potting mixes have long been used for greenhouse
production of bedding plants, vegetable transplants, and
container-grown ornamentals. By avoiding the use of topsoil,
the risk of pathogenic microorganisms in this media may be
251

reduced, avoiding problems with diseases like damping-off.
In addition, topsoil is relatively heavy and dense so it can
contribute to poor aeration and drainage in a potting mix.
Soilless mixes should be formulated to have optimal physical
and chemical properties that promote germination and healthy
seedling growth.
Qualities of a good mix. Poor performance in a potting mix is
costly, since greenhouse space is expensive and so is having
to toss out some seedlings or replant entirely. Optimal mix
characteristics include the right density and porosity to
provide good aeration and also good water holding capacity;
proper pH; enough available nutrients to get plants off to a
good start; and the absence of excess salts and plant
pathogens. On organic farms, the mix must not contain any
prohibited ingredients.
Organic vs. conventional mixes. Generally speaking, all
soilless potting mixes contain a ‘base’ ingredient, usually
sphagnum peat, or sometimes coir. These provide a good
physical environment for root growth but are relatively inert
in terms of nutrient content and biological activity. Other
materials may be added to improve drainage, adjust density,
and/or
alter
water
holding
capacity,
such
as
perlite,
vermiculite, or builder’s sand. Ground limestone may be
needed to raise the pH. Fertilizers are added to provide
available nutrients and obviously that’s where conventional
and organic mixes differ. In addition, organic mixes typically
contain mature compost to provide slow release nutrients and
contribute to good physical and biological conditions for plant
growth, whereas conventional mixes rarely contain compost.
252

Issues with compost in potting mix. In some ways, compost is
like snowflakes—no two batches of compost are exactly
alike. So while compost usually adds value to a potting mix, it
can also add a measure of uncertainty about performance that
is not the case with conventional mixes. Immature compost in
particular can harm seedlings by releasing ammonia, or tying
up nitrogen, or stunting growth because of organic acids that
have not fully decomposed. To avoid these problems it is
important to use only mature compost, and to buy it from a
reputable source or to carefully make your own using a
consistent supply of high quality ingredients.
It’s a good idea to keep organic potting mixes warm and
moist for a week or two before planting with them. That
allows microbial activity to kick in, and can reduce potential
potting mix problems by allowing excess ammonium or
organic acids to dissipate.
Compost is rarely used by itself as a potting medium.
Compost alone does not have the optimal water holding
characteristics, and soluble salt levels may be higher than
optimal for potting mix. Plus, high quality compost can be
relatively expensive so it makes sense to dilute it with other
ingredients like peat. Organic potting mixes are typically
made with 20 percent to 50 percent compost by volume,
depending on the type of crop that will be grown in the mix,
the container size, and the growing conditions.
Common potting mix ingredients. Sphagnum peat moss is a
stable organic material that holds fifteen to thirty times its
weight in water and decomposes very slowly. It contains
about 1 percent nitrogen, but little is released because it
breaks down so slowly. It has a pH of about four so lime must
253

be added to the mix to along with sphagnum peat, at the rate
of 8.5 lb. per cubic yard of peat to neutralize the acidity.
Coir comes from coconut husks and is a waste product of the
coco fiber industry. It has physical properties much like peat
but a higher pH of about six. It holds up to nine times its
weight in water. It can have a high salt content.
Limestone is either calcitic (high calcium) or dolomitic (high
magnesium; both are used to increase the pH of a mix but
dolomite is preferable for supplying both Ca and Mg.
Vermiculite helps hold water and fertilizer in the potting mix,
and it also contains some calcium and magnesium. It has a pH
near neutral. Vermiculite
comes in different grades; medium grade is usually used for
starting seeds, a coarse grade may be used for larger plants.
Perlite is a volcanic rock that has been heated and expanded.
It is lightweight, sterile, and has a neutral pH. It can be used
to improve reduce the weight of a potting mix and increase its
aeration and drainage.
Coarse washed sand, also called builder’s sand, can be used to
add air space to the potting mix and increase its weight. It has
a neutral pH and provides almost no fertility to plants. Sand
may be used when added weight is needed for growing tall or
top heavy plants that might fall over if grown in a lightweight
mix.
Fertilizers for organic mixes. In some cases, compost can
provide
adequate
amounts
of
nutrients
for
transplant
production but usually some fertilizer is added to the mix,
254

especially if larger plants are to be produced or if small cell
sizes are used that will require relatively high levels of
available nutrients in order to sustain plant growth over time.
Common organic fertilizers to provide phosphorus include
bone meal, bone char, or rock phosphate; potassium can be
provided by potassium sulfate, sul-po-mag or greensand;
magnesium can come from epsom salts or sul-po-mag. In
some cases a blended fertilizer may be used, such as
pelletized chicken manure compost but such materials are
usually reserved for field use rather than potting mix due to
their slower nutrient availability.
Nitrogen availability. Assuring sufficient nitrogen in a form
plants can use is often a concern with organic potting mix
formulations, as nitrogen release may be quite variable
depending on the compost that’s used and the extent to which
it is source of nitrogen. Most organic potting mixes are
supplemented with fertilizers: sources such as blood meal,
crab meal, fish meal, or plant meals like alfalfa or soybean
provide additional nitrogen to feed plants for several weeks or
months. Note that Chilean nitrate is expected to be prohibited
for use in organic production sometime in 2012.
Some growers water with fish emulsion or other soluble
organic nitrogen fertilizers to keep their transplants ‘growing
on’ if a mix has run out of available nitrogen. Re-potting
some plants, like tomato seedlings, into fresh mix is another
way to keep them growing well.
When using blood meal, partially composted manure or
poultry-manure-based
fertilizer,
be
aware
that
these
high-in-nitrogen sources need some time to allow for
microbial activity start breaking the organic forms of nitrogen
255

and drive them to nitrate (the process called mineralization).
If used for planting too soon, when first wetted and just
starting to break down, these materials may give off
ammonia, organic acids, and other compounds that can
damage germinating seeds and young plants. It is best to
moisten the potting mix at least a week or two before you
plant into it, making sure it stays warm and allowing time for
phytotoxic compounds to dissipate.
Many things can lead to poor germination, including a mix
with excess salts, improper pH, unfinished compost, or
nutrient imbalances. Old seeds, improper watering, and root
disease can also be to blame.
Avoiding performance problems. While many growers have
had
success
with
compost-based
potting
mixes,
the
performance of such mixes, whether commercially produced
or homemade, has sometimes been inconsistent. In the worst
cases, growers have experienced significant financial loss due
to poor
seedling growth associated with a problem mix. Poor seedling
growth in compost-based mixes can result from low levels of
available nutrients, high levels of soluble salts, excessive
density of the mix, and/or the lingering presence of the
harmful
byproducts
of
initial
decomposition
mentioned
above. In some cases the problem is not due to the mix but to
management
issues,
like
cold
temperatures,
improper
watering, or root disease.
Test your mix. It is a very good idea to test your organic
potting mix well in advance of using it. Send a sample to a
soil test lab at a land grant university or at a private company
that specializes in horticulture. Do not request a regular field
256

soil test, since potting mixes differ from field soil; they are
much higher in organic matter and usually much higher in
available nutrient content. A potting soil test will also
measure soluble salts (electrical conductivity) and nitrogen in
the nitrate and ammonium forms, which a field soil test
doesn’t measure.
Growers should use the low-cost saturated media extract test
(also called greenhouse media test), to get data on the pH,
soluble salt, and nutrient levels of their potting mix well in
advance of planting. Here are the results of one sample.
The soil test to use for potting mixes is the saturated media
extract (SME), also called a greenhouse media test or soilless
media test. Unlike field soil tests that extract nutrients with
weak acid solutions, the SME sample is mixed with distilled
water at a standard dilution and then analyzed. Since different
labs may use different dilutions, stick with one lab. To get an
accurate reading, be sure that the potting mix has been moist
and warm for at least a week prior to sampling. Most labs
require a pint of mix to work with, and turnaround time is
similar to a regular soil test: a week or two. It’s a good idea to
test each batch of potting mix, and to be able to compare
results from mixes that performed well to those that didn’t.
The cost is low, about fifteen or twenty dollars per SME
sample.
‘Bioassays’ are another way to test the quality of a potting
mix. All you have to do is sow some fast-growing crops in the
mix several weeks before you plan to use it. Cress, oats, and
beans are just a few to consider. Some growers also like to
test their mixes with slower-growing crops. Onions can be
useful for bioassays as they seem to require a very high
257

quality mix for good germination and growth. It makes sense
to include any key crops that you grow as part of your
bioassay.
Compare potting mixes. Without a side-by-side trial, it’s hard
to evaluate the relative performance of your current potting
mix. So even if you have one you like, plant a few trays of the
same seeds using another potting mix brand or recipe. It may
surprise you to see how poorly your plants do next to a
different formulation.
If things go wrong. Go ahead and submit sample(s) for SME
testing; better late than never. Having this data in hand is part
of the process of elimination to identify the problem. Is the
pH off? Are soluble salts too high? Is there sufficient
available nitrogen for plant growth? Once you have that data
in hand, contact your potting mix supplier and ask if others
growers have reported problems. A good supplier will
appreciate communication from their customers, and be able
to provide technical advice.
“Buying potting mix from a company like ours means you are
buying into a network of organic growers” says Karl
Hammer, owner of Vermont Compost Company. “That has
great value for both buyers and sellers of the product.
Sometimes I get a
call about a problem but when I follow up with other growers
using the same mix to grow the same crops, I find that they
have no issues. Then it’s probably related to a greenhouse
management practice. In fact, 90 percent of the problems I see
have to do with overwatering in short daylight and cold
weather conditions.
258

Overwatering cools the growing medium, reducing microbial
activity and root growth, and it can leach out available
nutrients. It’s much better to keep your growing medium on
the
dry
side,
and
if
possible,
provide
bottom
heat.
Over-the-top watering by hand with cold water creates a lot of
plant growth problems in organic potting mixes.”
Photo by Meghan Kanady
Well-made compost piles contain enough porous material like
leaves or straw to promote passive aeration; since these
materials
are
high
in
carbon,
sufficient
high-nitrogen
ingredients like manures are also needed to stimulate
microbial activity.
(Note: Greenmarket collections do not accept manure, but
food scraps provide plenty of nitrogen!)
259

GLOSSARY
Acid: A substance with pH between zero and seven.
Actinomycetes: Decomposer organisms that are part bacteria
and
part
fungus,
with
a
grayish
cobwebby
look.
Actinomycetes live in medium temperatures in backyard
compost. Actinomycetes break down woody, carbon-rich
material and give finished compost its sweet, earthy smell.
Aeration: A way of allowing air to get into compost.
Aerobic: With oxygen. Decomposer organisms that require
oxygen to carry out their life functions will produce sweet,
earthy-smelling compost.
Anaerobic: Without oxygen. Anaerobic conditions breed
decomposer organisms that live in the absence of oxygen and
give off rotten-smelling odors.
Bacteria: A group of microorganisms primarily responsible
for decomposition in a backyard compost bin. Also present in
worm composting systems.
Bedding: Material such as dead leaves or shredded paper
used to retain moisture, create air space, and cover food
scraps in a worm composting system.
Biodegradable: Any material that can be broken down into
smaller components by the biological processes of digestion
and decomposition.
260

Carbon: A basic element found in compostable material.
Materials high in carbon should be mixed with materials high
in nitrogen to provide the microorganisms an optimal balance
of thirty parts carbon to one part nitrogen (or fifty/fifty by
volume). Materials high in carbon are usually brown, dry, and
woody; some examples include twigs, dead leaves, straw,
newspaper, or sawdust.
Cocoon: Egg cases in which red worms lay their eggs. These
egg cases usually hatch two to three baby worms.
Compost: The end result of living organisms digesting and
reducing organic material into a dark, rich, earthy-smelling
soil amendment. The process is called composting.
Decomposers: Organisms that feed primarily on dead organic
material, reducing and digesting it into humus.
Decomposition: The process of materials being digested and
broken down into simpler substances, making nutrients more
available to plants. Decomposition happens all the time in
nature and in human-managed systems such as compost piles.
Energy Flow Cycle: The movement of the sun’s energy
through an ecosystem. Plants convert the sun’s energy into
food through photosynthesis. Animals consume the plants.
Decomposers eat the dead animals and plants, retuning
nutrients that plants need to grow back to the soil.
Erosion: The loss of humus and topsoil through the
movement of water, wind, or animals. Compost can help
replace lost topsoil. Mulches protect topsoil from being lost to
erosion.
261

Food Scraps: Food that can be put in a compost pile,
typically fruit and vegetable scraps. To avoid attracting pests,
meat, dairy, and oils should not be composted.
Fungus: A group of decomposer organisms, commonly found
in compost piles, which break down organic material into
humus.
Humus: The result of organic material being decomposed
into a complex, highly-stable material containing plant
nutrients. Humus is formed in nature and in managed systems
like compost piles.
Landfill: A place where solid waste is buried in the ground.
Modern landfills have clay bottoms and a liner, as well as
leachate and gas collection systems. Solid waste needs to be
covered daily with soil or other material. Many landfills are
reaching capacity.
Leachate: Liquid that has passed through solid material and
has soluble materials suspended in it. Leachate from landfills
can be hazardous and can leak into groundwater supplies.
Macroorganisms: Organisms that are visible to the naked
eye, such as worms, sow bugs, and beetles.
Microorganisms: Organisms too small to be seen with the
naked eye, such as bacteria and some fungi.
Mulch: Material placed on top of garden beds or around
plants. Mulches help deter weeds, hold water, and stop
erosion. Shredded or decomposed organic matter makes
excellent mulch.
262

Nitrogen: An element
found in compostable
material.
Materials high in nitrogen should be mixed with materials
high in carbon to give the microorganisms a balanced diet of
thirty parts carbon to one part nitrogen (or fifty/fifty by
volume). Materials high in nitrogen are usually wet and
green; some examples include manures, fresh plant clippings,
and food scraps.
Nutrient Cycle: The movement of nutrients cycling from
living plants, to animals, to decomposers, and returned to the
earth in the form of humus.
Organic: Any material that was once living, or material
produced by a living organism. “Organic” may also be used
to describe food grown using sustainable agriculture methods.
Red Worms: The type of earthworm typically used in worm
composting systems. Red worms can be found in leaf mold
and manure piles and can be bought in bait shops and
gardening stores. Their Latin (scientific) name is Eisena
foetida.
Topsoil: The soil on the surface that accumulates humus and
organic matter.
Veri-compost: Compost produced using red worms.
Worm Castings: Worm manure. This high quality soil
amendment is the final product from worm composting and
can be used as a rich soil amendment.
Worm Bin: The container in which worms, bedding, and
composting food waste are kept.
263

RESOURCES
Vermont Compost Company
Vermont Compost Company was founded by organic crop
growing professionals to meet the need for high quality
composts and compost-based living soil mixes for certified
organic plant production. They are committed to solving the
sometimes difficult problems of producing vigorous plants in
containers by organic methods. They make their blended soils
from ingredients selected with the benefit of many years of
experience in protecting their farms from contamination.
Vermont Compost Company
1996 Main Street
Montpelier, VT 05602
http://vermontcompost.com
Highfields Center for Composting
The mission at Highfields, now closed, was to close the loop
on
community-based,
sustainable
food
and
agricultural
264

systems, thus addressing soil health, water quality, solid
waste, farm viability, and climate change. They researched,
educated, and provided technical services for composting and
comprehensive food waste recycling programs.
http://highfieldscomposting.org
Books and Publications:
Here is a bibliography of sorts, of books that have influenced
Karl Hammer’s philosophical and practical approach to his
life and business at Vermont Compost.
Agriculture, by Rudolf Steiner
An Agricultural Testament, by Sir Albert Howard
Chicken Man, by Michelle Edwards
Empty Shells, by Thea Lowry
Farmers of Forty Centuries: Permanent Agriculture in China,
Korea and Japan by F.H. King
Media and Mixes for Container-Grown Plants, by A.C. Bunt
Out of the Earth: Civilization and the Life of the Soil, by
Daniel Hillel
Physics of Agriculture by F.H. King
Sherry and the Sherry Bodegas, by Jan Read
265

Soil & Civilization, by Edward Hyams
Soil management: Compost Production and Use in Tropical
and
Subtropical
Environments,
by
H.W.
Dalzell,
A.J.
Biddlestone, K.R. Gray, and K. Thurairajan
Soil
Microorganisms
and
Higher
Plants,
by
N.A.
Krasil’nikov
Soils and Men: Yearbook of Agriculture 1938, by the United
States Department of Agriculture
Starting Early Vegetable and Flowering Plants Under Glass,
by Charles H. Nissley
Backyard Composting by Harmonious Technologies
Composting In The Class Room by Nancy Trautmann 8
Marianne Krasny of Cornell University
How to Compost: Everything You Need to Know to Start
Composting, and Nothing You Don’t! by Lars Hundley
Let it Rot! by Stu Campbell
The Meditative Gardener: Cultivating Mindfulness of Body,
Feelings,
and
Mind,
by
Cheryl
Wilfong,
www.meditativegardener.com
Composting Across the Curriculum
266

Marin County Department of Solid Waste, “D
o the Rot Thing.” This guide was originally published in July
1997 by the Alameda County Waste Management Authority 8
Source
Reduction
and
Recycling
Board,
San
Leandro,
California, and permission to copy the materials was freely
given in the original booklet. This guide was reproduced and
republished for access via the Internet by the Central Vermont
Solid Waste Management District, Montpelier, Vermont, in
January 2007.
Useful Websites
Worms
http://downtoearthwormfarmvt.com/worm-farm
Down
to
Earth
Worm
Farm
of
VT
is
an
indoor
vermicomposting facility, where you’ll find large drawers full
of
red
wiggler
composting
worms.
They
are
fed
compostables, i.e., kitchen scraps, coffee grounds, garden
waste, manure, leaves, etc. In turn, they render worm castings
(worm poop), which is the best natural plant food and soil
revitalizer. The castings are harvested and packaged for sale
to gardeners and houseplant lovers.
www.organicnation.tv
Kids and Composting
EnviroMom.com
267

EnviroMom.com launched in March 2007. It is a site for
anyone who wants to live lightly on the planet. Heather
Hawkins and Renee Limon are the co-founders of this group.
Heather and Renee are stay-at-home
moms, best friends, and neighbors who met in the Hillsdale
neighborhood of southwest Portland. They each have two
children who happen to be the same ages (nine and six) and
attended
the
same
schools.
Renee
and
Heather
both
completed the Master Recycler course offered through
Portland’s regional government, which gave them a greater
understanding
of
Reduce/Reuse/Recycle
and
how
their
choices and actions impact the natural environment. When
they launched EnviroMom in March 2007, they formed their
first GreenGroup—a group of moms who meet monthly and
exchange ideas on green living with children. They are trying
to raise their kids to care about the environment and manage
healthy households.
KidsGardening.org
KidsGardening.org is a resource of the National Gardening
Association. Check it out for lots of great ideas for gardening
with kids. www.kidsgardening.org.
Compost Bin Plans
The most beautiful and practical compost bin ever!
268

For an introduction to why and how the compost bin made
from these particular compost bin plans works so well, please
visit homemade compost bin.
www.vegetable-gardening-with-lorraine.com/
compost-bin-plans.html
The Author’s New Greenhouse Information
Growing year-round in northern climates requires protection
from the elements. Ever-Green Houses provide a rugged,
weather-proof environment for year-round growing with
heavy-duty, and self-assembly, 2x6 construction, which
protects against wind and snow.
Website: www.ever-greenhouses.com
Contact: info@ever-greenhouses.com
Additional Online Resources
Chalker-Scott, Linda. Washington State University, “The
Myth of Compost Tea, Episode III: “Aerobically-brewed
compost tea suppresses disease.” http://puyallup.wsu.edu/
~lindachalker-scott/horticultural myths_files/Myths/Compost
tea
3rd
time.pdf
chalker-scott/horticultural
myths_files/
Myths/Compost tea 3rd time.pdf.
Cournoyer, Caroline. Governing: The States and Localities,
“Curbside Composting Added to a Major City: Is It Yours?.”
Last modified February 2012. www.governing.com/topics/
energy-env/
gov-curbside-composting-added-to-major-city.html.
269

Full Cycle, “Vermiculture” www.fullcycle.co.za/index.php/
Information/more-information.html.
Grover, Sami. TreeHugger, “How to Make Compost Tea 8
Why You Should.” Last modified February 04, 2011.
www.treehugger.com/lawn-garden/
how-to-make-compost-tea-why-you-should.html.
Halepis, Harriette. Mother Nature Network, “The ultimate
urban composting guide.” Last modified September 30, 2010.
www.mnn.com/your-home/at-home/stories/
the-ultimate-urban-composting-guide.
Hundley, Lars. How to Compost: Everything You Need to
Know to Start Composting, and Nothing You Don’t! Amazon
Digital Services, 2012.
Hundley,
Lars.
“Compost
Guide:
Tips
for
Home
Composting.”
http://compostguide.com/.Ibiblio.org.
“Class
Summary, Organic Gardening.” http://ibiblio.org/rge/course/
Louisiana.gov.
“Did
you
know.
.
.
Earthworms.”
http://deq.louisiana.gov/portal/Portals/0/assistance/educate/
DYK-earthworms.pdf.
North Coast Gardening, “Gardening Basics: How to Amend
Soil.”
http://www.northcoastgardening.com/2009/06/
organic-gardening-101-soil/
Organic
Gardening.
“How
to
Brew
Compost
Tea.”
www.organicgardening.com/learn-and-grow/compost-tea.
270

Priebe,
Maryruth
Belsey.
EcoLife,
“Urban
Composting
Overview.”
www.ecolife.com/garden/composting/
how-to-urban-compost.html.
Seattle
Tilth,
“Composting
Chicken
Manure.”
http://seattletilth.org/learn/resources-1/city-chickens/
compostingchickenmanure
University
of
Florida.
“How
to
Use
Compost.”
http://sarasota.ifas.ufl.edu/compost-info/tutorial/
how-to-use-compost.shtml.
University
of
Illinois
Extension.
“Composting
for
the
Homeowner.” http://web.extension.illinois.edu/homecompost/
benefits.cfm.
UPenn,
“Earthworms”
www.sas.upenn.edu/~rlenet/
Earthworms.html.
Vegetable
Gardening
with
Lorraine.
www.vegetable-gardening-with-lorraine.com.
Vermont Community Garden Network, The. http://vcgn.org/
garden-organizer-toolkit/coordinating-tools/start-a-garden/
WikiHow, “How to Use Your Compost.” www.wikihow.com/
Use-Your-Compost.
STILL HUNGRY FOR MORE INFO? CHECK OUT THESE
GREAT SITES, TOO!
http://compostingcouncil.org/index.cfm
(US
Composting
Council)
271

http://csanr.wsu.edu/compost (Washington State University
Compost Connection)
http://sarasota.ifas.ufl.edu/compost-info/tutorial/
quick-tutorial.shtml
(University
of
Florida
Composting
Center)
www.biodynamics.com/content/
biodynamiccompost-preparations
www.cfe.cornell.edu/compost/Composting_homepage.html
(Cornell Composting)
www.compost.org (the Compost Council of Canada)
www.cornell.edu
www.deeproot.com/blog/blog-entries/whatis-compost
www.epa.gov
www.epa.gov/compost
(US
Environmental
Protection
Agency Composting)
www.gardenweb.com
www.motherearthnews.com
www.organicgardening.com
www.recycle.cc (Recycling and Composting Online)
272

Live on the west coast? Check out these compost education
and resources specifically for Western agriculture
www.2.aste.usu.edu/compost/
www.ithaca.edu/staff/mdarling/Composting.htm
www.epa.gov/osw/conserve/pubs/food6.pdf
http://eartheasy.com/grow_compost.html#a
273

274

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The book was an evolution into itself, and there are many
people to thank for making it possible. First and foremost, I
want to thank my editor, Abigail Gehring, who believed in
this project from the beginning, and was its champion. Being
a beginning composter myself, I was able to write a book
from that perspective, and Abigail was the development
editor who saw the need for such a book. It is with much
gratitude toward her that I write this now, looking out my
office window at the simple wooden compost that stands at
the edge of my back yard—nearby sits my “Darth Vadar”
composter that is full of decaying dry brown leaves that I use
for layers—a perfect symbiosis to this scene, at least to my
eye.
The publishing house of Skyhorse in New York City is in the
forefront, publishing books about meaningful topics that
make a difference in the world, and for that I am proud to say
I am a Skyhorse author. I’d like to thank Tony Lyons, and the
staff at Skyhorse for making a beautiful book, and believing
in it as well.
Since no book is ever made in isolation, there is someone else
I’d really like to extend my gratitude toward, the author of the
foreword and many of the sidebars that grace the book’s
pages, Cheryl Wilfong. I first met Cheryl when I worked on
her second book, The Meditative Gardener. I have to admit, I
was a bit intimidated before I met her because she is well
known in southern Vermont as a master gardener and one of
the founders of the Insight Meditation Group in Brattleboro.
But once we met and began spending time together, I found
275

her to be one of the most generous and supportive people I
know. She is also a master composter! When I started
working on The Organic Composting Handbook, I felt like it
needed “something to make it different”; something fun to
read on a winter’s night when you are dreaming about the
garden you will endeavor to plant in the spring. Here, in
Vermont, we get a lot of snow, so many of us spend long
hours at home dreaming of gardens. That special touch came
in the form of Cheryl’s whimsical and touching “sidebar text
stories” that I asked her to write. I wrote a few also, and we
began to go back and forth via email, and each time she sent
me a new one, I delighted in their subjects and how they
related to composting! From the Buddhist perspective of the
death of a loved one with the cycle of rebirth in the art of
composting, to finding a Christmas decoration at the bottom
of the pile, to dealing with critters and burning bones, Cheryl
“says it all.” I am delighted to share the spotlight with my
dear friend and fellow avid composter!
There are many others I’d like to thank: First, my husband,
Steve Carmichael, who built our house himself (with the help
of a great crew) using locally-sourced lumber and even had
cabinet timbers cut and milled from our property with a
portable saw mill. It was Steve who helped me build the “best
composter ever,” the one I describe in the book. His patience
in supporting me as a writer and now a publisher is legion,
and for that I am very grateful. Others, too, helped in the
process: my three children, Sam, Emma, and Joe Carmichael,
heard countless stories about composting and grew up
listening to me expound on the merits of doing it—they are
also incredibly supportive of my gardening,
276

and writing. My mother, Shirley Ellis Cummings, wonderful
editor and supportive parent and friend, was also a great
source of inspiration and help.
Next, I’d like to thank the folks at Highfields. When I first
called Kim Mercer, the director of communications, she was
so supportive and wanted to help immediately. Another great
connection at Highfields came from Maia Hansen, who also
wanted to help make this book a reality. I am grateful to
everyone there for the good work they did in Vermont to
educate children, farmers, and regular people about the
benefits of composting.
I received the same welcome from the folks at GROW NYC.
From Amanda Gentile and Laura McDonald in the press
corps, I received tremendous support; also one of the first
people I spoke with was Christina Salvi, Assistant Director in
the Office of Recycling Outreach and Education, who was
incredibly
helpful
from
the
beginning.
Everyone
at
GROWNYC is doing a terrific job! Go NYC: Show the world
how it is done!
Karl Hammer at Vermont Compost Company was and is my
new hero. I haven’t met him yet, but love what he is doing,
and on a national scale! Ron Finley, in Los Angeles, is
another personal hero of mine . . . what a great thing he is
doing with kids in the inner city!
My friend and Vermont neighbor, Vern Grubinger, was
another supporter of this book. Vern is the extension
professor and the vegetable and berry specialist at the
University of Vermont. I am grateful for his help and support
277

and his work to support organic farming and sustainable
initiatives.
Lastly, the work of my editorial intern Cheyenne Vaughn was
incredible! Cheyenne earned college credit from Bennington
College while she researched and wrote sections of this
book—she is an incredibly talented young woman and I am
going to follow her career, fully expecting her to end up an
editor at Skyhorse perhaps!
I am grateful, lastly, to all the composters out there! Whether
you live in an apartment, a country home, or a dorm room,
you are making a difference and I salute you all for living on
the earth in a sustainable manner. Thanks to all!
278

279

PHOTO CREDITS
All photos by the author with the following exceptions:
Abigail Gehring: ii, vi, xii (top), xiii (bottom left), xv, xvi, 1,
3 (top), 4 (bottom), 8 (right), 9 (right), 21 (bottom), 31, 39
(bottom), 54, 56, 63, 94, 98, 99 (top), 106, 107, 108 (top left),
128, 130, 131, 135, 136, 137
Christina Salvi/GrowNYC: 46
Elizabeth Ungerleider: 84, 85
Erik Martig/GrowNYC: 47
Heather Brady: 52
Highfields: 10, 16, 76, 78, 79
Ian McNaughton: 44
Jerry Hiam: 132
Jessica Klamnan/GrowNYC: 46
Lynne Jaeger Weinstein: viii, 23, 69
Meghan Kanady/GrowNYC: 47, 48, 50, 52, 146
Oberlin College: 80
280

Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection:
59
Rich Earth Institute: 125
Ron Finley: 104
Thinkstock: v, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 22, 23, 24, 25,
29, 30, 41, 42, 59, 62, 64, 68, 70, 73, 75, 77, 88, 109, 110,
118
Vermont Compost: 6, 64, 65, 66, 67, 149
Vitaliy Piltser: 40, 47, 48, 65, 70
281

INDEX
Note: Sidebars are marked with a b after the page number.
A
activators, compost, 62b
aerators, 62b
aerobic decomposition, 12
alfalfa, 144
anaerobic decomposition, 12
animals, 26b, 71b, 89, 131
Antler, Susan, 87
ants, 27
Aristotle, 107
ashes, 75b, 88b
Atwood, Margaret, 1
Austin, Alferd, 77
Austin, Texas, 122
282

B
bacteria, 12, 21, 25, 27, 89b, 95–96, 132
Bailey, Liberty Hyde, 87
bears, 8b
beetles, 21
berries, 131
Best Homemade Compost Bin Ever, 35–37
bins. see composters
bioassays, 145
biodiversity, 132
biodynamic farming, 11
birds, 130–131
black plastic composters, 4b, 8b, 62b
blood meal, 144
Blue Earth Compost, 124–125
Bokashi method, 42–43
bone char, 144
283

bone meal, 144
bones, 17b, 24, 132b–133b
bonfires, 132b–133b
borax, 75b
Brady, Heather, 52b
Brattleboro, Vermont, 119, 120b, 125
Bridgewater, Connecticut, 122
Brown, Ralph, 66b
“brown”
ingredients,
13b,
22,
25,
38b.
see
also
carbon-nitrogen ratio
buckets, 31–32, 37–38, 63b
bugs, 25, 27
butterflies, 131
C
calcium, 143
Call2Recycle, 48b
Canaris, Irene, 82b–84b
carbon, 2, 12, 13b
284

carbon footprint, 16
carbon-nitrogen ratio, 13b, 22, 25, 38b–39b, 88b, 95. see also
ingredients for compost
carcasses, livestock, 123
carts, garden, 63b
Castle, Susannah, 124–125
cats, 110b
centipedes, 12, 21, 89b
Charlotte County, Florida, 122
cheese, 24
chemical fertilizers, 11–12
Chicago Community Climate Action, 130
chicken manure, 39b, 90b–91b, 144
children. see kids
Cicero, 19
clay soil, 15, 97, 128–129
clothing, 32b, 47b
coconut husks, 143
285

coffee grounds, 13b, 24–25, 52b
coir, 143
Coleman, Eliot, 66b
college composting programs, 80–82
community gardens, 52–53, 111–113
companion plants, 131
compost
animals, 26b
benefits, 127–128
bins. see composters
Bokashi method, 42–43
“browns,” 13b
defined, 1–2
economical, 9, 128
environmental benefits, 15–16, 128
equipment, 62b–63b
fertilizer, not, 3
286

“greens,” 13b
health guidelines, 141
history of, 11
ingredients. see ingredients for compost
layering, 25, 38b, 88
leaf mold, 5b
mulch, 59–62
municipal programs, 119, 120b, 121–125
organic, 130–131
people benefits, 15
plant benefits, 14–15
planting in, 110
potting soil, 62–63, 142–146
recipes, 140
rotating application, 91
soil amendment, 55–56, 60–61
soil health, 7, 10–12, 14b, 90b, 128
287

spiritual benefits, 8
tea, 57–58, 59b
temperature, 23
thawing, 90b
time required, 13b, 68, 90b
timing of application, 3, 61b, 80b
troubleshooting, 89
turning, 25–26, 72, 88, 121b
unfinished, 61
urban composting, 41–42, 44b–49b, 51–53
ventilation, 23, 26, 89
water, 24, 26, 88–89
winter, in, 20b–21b, 88–89
year-round, 75b
Compost Council of Canada, 87, 127–128
The Compost Guide (Hundley), 141–142
composters
288

Best Homemade Compost Bin Ever, 35–37
black plastic, 4b, 8b, 62b
bucket, 37–38
choosing, 25
hidden, 20b, 27b
leaf molders, 5b
pallets, made of, 5b, 8b–9b
recycled, 22b
triple bins, 8b–9b, 22b, 153–154
crab meal, 144
crop rotation, 11
D
dairy products, 24
Darwin, Charles, 100
decomposers, 12, 21, 25–27, 95–96
decomposition, 12, 14
dogs, 111b
289

drainage capacity of soil, 129
E
EarthBrew Compost, 52b
earthworms, 12, 27, 99. see also worms
eisena foetida, 101. see also worms
electronics recycling, 48b
elementary school kids, 78, 83b–84b
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 137
Environment Canada, 127
environmental benefits of composting, 15–16, 128
epsom salts, 144
equipment, composting, 62b–63b
erosion, 12, 127
Ever-Greenhouses, 74b, 93, 151
exercise, 121b
F
fat, 24
290

Fertile Crescent, 11
fertilizer, 3, 11–12, 97, 144
field soil tests, 145
Finley, Ron, 104b–105b
fish, 24
fish meal, 144
flowers, 24, 68b, 107
food pyramid, 59b
food scraps, 2, 13b, 16, 25
Franklin, Stuart, 42–43
Freecycle.org, 22b
Friede, Bruce, 123
friendships, 8
fruit flies, 27
fruit peels, 13b, 24–25
funerals, 68b
fungi, 12, 25, 27
291

fungicides, 12
G
garden carts, 63b
gardens, 27b, 111–113
Gilbert, Tom, 11
grass clippings, 13b, 16, 22, 25, 88–89
“green”
ingredients,
13b,
22,
25,
38b.
see
also
carbon-nitrogen ratio
greenhouse gases, 127
greenhouse media test, 145
Greenmarkets, 45b–49b
greensand, 144
GrowNYC, 45b–49b, 51
Grubinger, Vern, 142–146
“Guide to Home Composting,” 15
H
Hammer, Karl, 66b–67b, 145
Hansen, Maia, 79b–80b
292

“happiness quotient,” 8
hay, 24, 25b
Healdsburg, California, 123–124
heath guidelines, 141
HHF (High Flying Foods), 122
High Flying Foods (HHF), 122
high school kids, 78, 80
Highfields Center for Composting, 2, 11–12, 15, 79b–80b,
149
history of composting, 11
HMS Host, 122
Holmes, Alyssa, 39b
Homeyer, Henry, 5b
Housatonic Resources Recovery Authority (HRRA), 122
Howard, Sir Robert, 66b
HRRA (Housatonic Resources Recovery Authority), 122
human waste, 24. see also urine
humus, 2, 90b
293

Hundley, Lars, 141–142
I
Iannucci, Jen, 122
Indore process, 66b
ingredients for compost. see also individual ingredients
alphabet of ingredients, 28b
avoid, ingredients to, 24–25
biodegradable, 2, 16
“brown” vs. “green” ingredients, 13b, 22, 24–25, 38b, 88b.
see also carbon-nitrogen ratio
chopping, 23
clothing, 32b
food pyramid, 59b
food scraps, 2
insect spray, 130
Ithaca College, 81–82
J
Jekyll, Gertrude, 94
294

Johnny-jump-ups, 110b
K
Kahler, Moss, 120b
kale, 96b
Kaye, Rick, 123–124
kelp meal, 75b
Kendall, Gile, 66b
Kendall, Stanley, 66b
Kent, William, 127
kids, 15, 137–138
elementary school, 78, 83b–84b
middle/high school, 78, 80
preschool, 77
resources for, 150–151
L
landfills, 2, 7, 53b, 67, 127
larvae, 87b
295

lawns, 133–134
layering compost, 25, 38b, 88
leachate, 2
leaf mold, 5b
leaves, 13b, 22, 24–25, 141–142
Levine, Lynn, 69b
life cycle, 78
limestone, 143
liquid fertilizer, 57–58
livestock carcasses, 123
lobster shells, 73
M
Maathai, Wangari, xi
MacDonald, Laura, 47b
The Magic of Findhorn (Hawken), 96b
magnesium, 143–144
Maldonado, Vidal, 122
296

Mammal Tracks and Scat (Levine), 69b
manure, 13b, 25. see also chicken manure
marigolds, 131
McKibben, Bill, 7
meat, 24
The Meditative Gardener (Wilfong), 4
metal, 24
methane, 2
microbes, 4, 12, 89b
microbiome, 138
micronutrients, 14, 58, 75b, 97
microorganisms, 95–96, 98, 132
middle school kids, 78, 80
millipedes, 21
mindfulness, 134b
Missoula, Montana, 123
mites, 27, 89b
297

mitochondria, 89b
mold, 12, 27
monoculture, 132
mulch, 59–62, 100, 129
municipal composting programs, 119, 120b, 121–125
N
Native Americans, 11
native plants, 133
Nature’s Wisdom, 45b
nematodes, 89b
newspaper, 24
nitrogen, 7, 13b, 14, 141–142, 144
nitrogen-carbon ratio. see carbon-nitrogen ratio
Noe-Hays, Abraham, 125
nutrients in soil, 7, 11, 14, 97. see also individual nutrients
O
Oberlin College, 80–81
298

organic composting, 130–131
organic matter, 97, 130
Organics by Gosh, 122
organization, 27b
Orr, Charles, 66b
oxygen, 23, 26, 71
P
packaging, 15
pallets, 5b, 8b–9b
Paltrow, Gwyneth, 31
paper, 13b, 16, 24–25
peat moss, 143
Perkins, Bill, 66b
perlite, 144
permaculture, 131
pesticides, 12, 128
pet waste, 24
299

pets, 111b
pH of soil, 128–129, 141
phosphorus, 7, 14
piles. see composters
pill bugs, 27
plant disease, 99
planting in compost, 110
plastic, 24
plastic composters, 4b, 8b, 62b
pollinators, 131
ponds, 131
Post, Síle, 74b–75b
potash, 75b
potassium, 7, 14, 144
potassium sulfate, 144
potting soil, 3, 62–63, 142–146
preschool kids, 77–78
300

R
raccoons, 24b
rain barrels, 130
raised beds, 114b–116b
RBRP (Rechargeable Battery Recycling Program), 48b
RCT (Resource Conservation Team), 80–81
Rechargeable Battery Recycling Program (RBRP), 48b
recipes for compost, 140
recycling, 15, 48b
reducing packaging, 15
redworms, 101. see also worms
Resource Conservation Team (RCT), 80–81
reusing packaging, 15
Rich Earth Institute, 125
rock phosphate, 144
rotating crops, 11
Russian red kale, 96b
301

S
safety guidelines, 141
San Diego, 122
San Francisco, 121
sand, 144
sandy soil, 14–15, 97, 128–129
Sarton, May, 119
saturated media extract (SME), 145
sawdust, 13b
seaweed, 73, 75b
shredders, 62b
sifters, 62b, 72
slugs, 27
SME (saturated media extract), 145
snails, 27
soil
amendment, 55–56, 60–61
302

clay, 15, 95, 128–129
drainage capacity, 129
health, 10–12, 14b, 90b, 97, 128
nutrients, 7, 11, 14, 97. see also individual nutrients
pH, 128–129, 141
potting, 3, 62–63, 142–146
sandy, 14–15, 97, 128–129
subtropical, 57, 60
tests, 3, 145
tropical, 57, 60
Soil Testament (Howard), 66b
Sonoma County, California, 123–124
sow bugs, 21, 89b
soybeans, 144
sphagnum peat moss, 143
spiders, 27
spiritual benefits of composting, 8
303

squmpkins, 39b
SSP America, 122
Steiner, Eric, 52b
Steiner, Rudolf, 11
Stop ‘N’ Swap, 48b
storage, 27b
storm-water runoff, 12
straw, 13b, 25, 25b
subtropical soils, 57, 60
sul-po-mag, 144
surprises, 43b
sustainability centers, 49b
Synagro Technologies, 122
T
tea, compost, 57–58, 59b
tea bags, 13b, 24–25
“Teacher’s Guide to Compost Activities: Do the Rot Thing,”
14b
304

temperature of compost, 23
testing soil, 3, 145
textiles, 47b
thawing compost, 90b
thermometers, compost, 62b
Thoreau, Henry David, 55, 74b
time required to compost, 13b, 68, 90b
timing of application of compost, 3, 61b, 80b
tomatoes, 131
trash, 15
triple bin composters, 8b–9b, 22b, 153–154
tropical soils, 57, 60
troubleshooting compost, 89
turning compost, 25–26, 72, 88, 121b
twigs, 24
U
unfinished compost, 61
305

urban composting, 44b–49b, 51–53
Urban Garden Center, 51, 70
urine, 79b–80b, 125. see also human waste
V
varmits, 26b, 111b
vegetable peels, 13b, 22, 24–25
ventilation, 23, 26, 89
vermicomposting, 100–103
vermiculite, 143–144
Vermont Composting Company, 66b–67b, 147
W
water, 24, 26, 88–89, 128–130
water feature, 131
weeds, 13b, 24, 25b, 88, 99b, 130
West Hartford, Connecticut, 124–125
Wilder, Courtney, 44b–45b
wildlife, 131
306

Wilfong, Cheryl, 4, 17b
Wilson, Seth, 123
winter composting, 20b–21b, 88–89
wood, 16
wood chips, 13b, 24–25, 89
wool, 32b
Work, Vera, 32b
worm bins, 79b, 101b–102b, 102–103
worms, 12, 21, 27, 100–103, 150
Y
year-round compost, 75b
Z
Zero Waste, 121
307

ALSO AVAILABLE
The Medicinal Gardening Handbook
A Complete Guide to Growing, Harvesting, and Using
Healing Herbs
by Dede Cummings & Alyssa Holmes
Foreword by Barbara Fahs
Dig into the world of herbal medicine with this complete
guide to cultivating and harvesting plants with healing
properties. For thousands of years people have been utilizing
herbs and cultivating weeds found to speed the healing of
wounds, soothe skin irritations, calm uneasy stomachs, and
ward off illnesses. Now you can plan and grow your own
garden first-aid kit.
In these pages, you’ll learn the basics of gardening in your
backyard—or
on
your
windowsill
or
porch—including
instructions for preparing soil, composting, and weeding.
You’ll then find detailed descriptions of the twelve most
common, easy-to-grow, most useful healing herbs, with
308

instructions for growing, harvesting, and utilizing them.
These powerful plants include:
• Garlic,
which
boosts
immunity,
reduces
blood
pressure, and combats cancer
• Echinacea,
which
reduces
inflammation,
boosts
immunity, and has antiviral properties
• Yarrow, which accelerates the healing of wounds, is
an
anti-inflammatory,
and
can
relieve
PMS
symptoms
• Elderflower, which is an astringent and can relieve
arthritis and soothe sore throats
• Mint, which soothes digestive problems, sweetens
breath, and can reduce fevers
• Elecampane, a respiratory tonic with antibacterial and
antifungal properties
• And more!
$14.95 Paperback • ISBN 978-1-62914-195-4
Companion Planting for the Kitchen Gardener
Tips, Advice, and Garden Plans for a Healthy Organic Garden
309

by Allison and Tim Greer
Companion planting techniques have been used for centuries
to facilitate better, more nutritious, and more abundant crops.
Did you know that beets will grow better if surrounded by
mint or garlic, but tomatoes should not be planted near
cabbage? Flax helps protect some root vegetables from pests,
and tomatoes will thrive when planted near carrots (though
the carrots may wind up stunted). Your celery will be happier
if it’s far away from corn, but broccoli and dill make a terrific
garden pair. It’s a lot to think about, but there’s no reason to
feel overwhelmed. With Companion Planting for the Kitchen
Gardener, you’ll have all the information you need in clear,
concise terms and with charts and garden plans you can copy
or modify to suit your family’s needs.
Starting with the basics of organic gardening, such as how to
prepare quality soil and the importance of cover crops and
organic fertilizer, authors Allison and Tim Greer explain the
principles of companion planting, how plants interact, and
how you can use that information to your garden’s benefit.
There is an entire chapter devoted to each of the fifteen most
popular vegetables, with charts, diagrams, and descriptions of
each—a treasure for gardeners with busy lives who want an
easy reference guide for planning their ideal kitchen garden.
Full of gorgeous, full-color photographs and easy-to-follow
diagrams, this is a beautiful, useful guide for the home
organic gardener.
$14.95 Paperback • ISBN 978-1-62914-171-8
310

The Urban Garden
How One Community Turned Idle Land into a Garden City
and How You Can, Too
by Jeremy N. Smith
Fifteen people—plus a class of first graders—tell how local
food, farms, and gardens changed their lives and their
community . . . and how they can change yours, too.
The Urban Garden includes:
• Fifteen first-person stories of personal and civic
transformation from a range of individuals, including
farmers
and
community
garden
members,
a
low-income senior and troubled teen, a foodie, a food
bank officer, and many more
• Seven in-depth “How It Works” sections on student
farms, community gardens, community supported
agriculture (CSA), community education, farm work
therapy, community outreach, and more
• Detailed
information
on
dozens
of
additional
resources from relevant books and websites to
government
programs
and
national
non-profit
organizations
311

• Over eighty full-color photographs showing a diverse
local food community at home, work, and play
Read The Urban Garden to:
• Learn how people like you, with busy lives like
yours, can and do enjoy the many benefits of local
food without having to become full-time organic
farmers
• Gain the information you need to organize or get
involved
in
your
own
“growing
community”
anywhere across the country and around the world
$24.95 Paperback • ISBN 978-1-62914-399-6
The Mini Farming Guide to Vegetable Gardening
Self-Sufficiency from Asparagus to Zucchini
by Brett L. Markham
Make the most of your vegetable garden with Brett Markham,
author of Mini Farming: Self-Sufficiency on ¼ Acre. This
comprehensive new handbook covers everything you need to
312

know about maximizing and harvesting the best vegetables
you can possibly produce. With each chapter addressing a
different vegetable, you’ll learn tips and tricks about varietal
selection, nutritional merits, how to begin, special hints for
growing, and how to deal with particular pests and diseases,
plus one or two creative recipes to get you started. With over
150 of Markham’s own photographs guiding you every step
of the way, you’ll find this an honest, straightforward guide
and a must-have for any vegetable minifarmer.
$14.95 Paperback • ISBN 978-1-61608-615-2
313

