
THE AISLES HAVE EYES

This page intentionally left blank 

THE AISLES 
HAVE EYES
HOW RETAILERS TRACK YOUR 
SHOPPING, STRIP YOUR PRIVACY, 
AND DEFINE YOUR POWER
J O S E P H  T U R O W
NEW HAVEN & LONDON

Published with assistance from the foundation established in memory of Calvin 
Chapin of the Class of 1788, Yale College.
Copyright © 2017 by Joseph Turow.
All rights reserved.
This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, including illustrations, 
in any form (beyond that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the 
U.S. Copyright Law and except by reviewers for the public press), without 
written permission from the publishers.
Yale University Press books may be purchased in quantity for educational, 
business, or promotional use. For information, please e- mail sales.press@yale.
edu (U.S. ofﬁ ce) or sales@yaleup.co.uk (U.K. ofﬁ ce).
Set in Meridien and Futura type by IDS Infotech, Ltd.
Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016947155
ISBN 978- 0- 300- 21219- 8 (cloth : alk. paper)
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48- 1992 
(Permanence of Paper).
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For Judy

This page intentionally left blank 

1 
A Frog Slowly Boiled 1
2 
The Discriminating Merchant 24
3 
Toward the Data- Powered Aisle 66
4 
Hunting the Mobile Shopper 107
5 
Loyalty as Bait 144
6 
Personalizing the Aisles 179
7 
What Now? 221
Acknowledgments 273
Notes 277
Index 315
CONTENTS

This page intentionally left blank 

THE AISLES HAVE EYES

This page intentionally left blank 

1
It’s said that a frog placed in a boiling pot of water will escape, 
but if the water is slowly heated the frog will habituate and even-
tually die. Although scientists dispute the accuracy of this state-
ment, no one in the audience of marketers objected—or even 
said it was ethically inappropriate—when a digital- advertising 
executive used the image in an off- the- cuff suggestion of how 
marketers ought to treat people in physical stores. The occasion 
was a conference called The Internet of Things: Shopping that the 
online trade journal MediaPost convened in Manhattan during 
August 2015. The speaker, vice president of one of the world’s 
largest interactive agencies, wasn’t invoking the frog image 
because he wanted to kill shoppers; he was addressing the 
concern that people would push back against beacon surveil-
lance. Department stores, supermarkets, pharmacies, discount 
chains, and other retailers have among them already placed 
hundreds of thousands of these inexpensive devices throughout 
their stores.1 If shoppers carry the right apps on their smart-
phones and have the correct technology turned on, the beacons 
will alert the merchants and they can send the shoppers person-
alized coupons or other messages associated with the goods in a 
1 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED

2 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
beacon’s proximity. “We need to do a lot of hand- holding with 
our customers in the new environment,” he urged. The goal had 
to be to treat shoppers like “a frog in a pot of boiling water”: they 
had to be introduced to all the changes slowly so that they would 
come to consider them as a normal part of their lives.
Brandon Fischer, director of predictive insights at the inﬂ uen-
tial GroupM Next consultancy, offered a view of the in- store 
surveillance future that seemed to embrace the frog comparison. 
In a keynote talk at the meeting, he predicted that by 2028 half of 
Americans (and by 2054 nearly all Americans) will carry in their 
bodies device implants that communicate with retailers as they 
walk down the aisles and inspect various items.2 Based on how 
long you hold an item the retailer’s computers will tell whether or 
not you like it. Other signals from the implant will indicate 
whether you are nervous or cautious when you look at the price 
of the product you are holding. The analysis may lead, Fischer 
suggested, to a conclusion that a discount on the product may 
reduce your nervousness and lead you to purchase it. His argu-
ment was a blunt, optimistic case for biometric monitoring in 
stores. And just as with the frog- invoking executive, no one in the 
room protested. No one wondered, either, whether in just thir-
teen years people would realistically consider this activity natural.
The attendees’ nonchalance might seem strange, but the 
retailing business was changing so drastically and confusingly that 
such statements may well have seemed plausible. The message 
the marketers were hearing at the meeting and throughout their 
industry was that retailing is entering a new, hypercompetitive 
era with internet sellers. Brick- and- mortar merchants—the 
department stores, supermarkets, specialty stores, and chain 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 3
stores that are still the center of the retailing universe—will 
succeed only if they ﬁ gure out how to trace, quantify, proﬁ le, and 
discriminate among shoppers as never before. But for stores to 
survive this transition, shoppers will have to slowly learn to 
accept, even welcome, those eyes in the aisles as part of their 
natural environment—sort of like the frog in the pot of water.
This book is about how and why all of that is taking place, and 
the impact it is having on individuals as well as on society at large. 
I’ll show how a new generation of merchants—Walmart, Target, 
Macy’s, Stop & Shop, Safeway, Lord & Taylor, and many more—is 
working with a set of technology organizations to build a new 
future for physical retailing. They are reorganizing shopping to 
capture data about us through the very media we carry, even wear 
(such as a Fitbit). The goal is to routinely track us, store informa-
tion about what we buy and when, and score us based on that and 
other information. Different forms of these activities are already 
under way in many stores. Retailers are using increasingly sophis-
ticated electronic monitors, which show up ﬁ rst as experiments 
and then become ordinary elements of shopping. We typically feel 
their presence through personalized discounts often linked to our 
rewards cards. Depending on who you are and where you shop, 
you may already have experienced early versions of the following 
situations—scenarios some shoppers would consider wonderful:
• As you walk into an upscale department store, you may 
or may not realize that your phone signaled your arrival. The 
store cares because you belong to its loyalty program and 
have achieved high- value- customer status. Your presence is 
indicated to a store representative, whose tablet calls up your 

4 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
photo so she can recognize and greet you. The tablet also 
reveals which clothes you looked at on the store’s website 
during the past week as well as the clothes you clicked on 
when you accessed the store’s ads while visiting other 
websites during that period. Based on previous purchases and 
the information it has concerning your age, income, occupa-
tion, and family status, the store’s computer predicts which of 
those garments you will buy. It also suggests matching acces-
sories, again based on your website visits, previous purchases, 
and the special predictive sauce that mixes these behaviors 
with demographic information. When you complete your 
shopping and go to pay, you are pleasantly surprised to ﬁ nd 
that the computer is rewarding your loyalty in the form of a 
20 percent discount on your purchases that day.
• You enter your local supermarket, with the store’s app 
on your smartphone. The app instantly springs to life as you 
walk toward the ﬁ rst aisle. It retrieves your shopping history 
and loyalty score from the ﬁ rm’s computers and links them 
to the shopping list and Web coupons you had loaded on the 
app at home. The computer analyzes this information and 
concludes that this is a stocking- up visit rather than a drop- in 
for only a few items. Complex personalization formulas, 
which evaluate your shopping list and your location in the 
store, present you with ideas about what to buy, recipes 
based on what’s in your cart, and discounts. The formulas 
also factor in information the supermarket has bought from 
data ﬁ rms about your socioeconomic status, and assessments 
on where you are on various product buying cycles. Do 
your purchase patterns suggest you are at moderate risk 
for switching away from a particular shampoo? Does your 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 5
increasingly less frequent purchase of a speciﬁ c brand of 
diapers suggest a situation that can be countered with a $2 
coupon (through a deal with the manufacturer), or is it likely 
your child is now potty- trained and so no longer needs them? 
Based on your shopping history, the formulas predict the 
extent of discounts that are needed to make you feel good 
about your shopping experience while also getting you to 
spend at least 10 percent more than you did the last time you 
came in to stock up.
• A similar scenario takes place in the big- box discount 
chain you visit often to buy household items. In addition to 
the information the supermarket used to send you messages 
and deals, this merchant has bought predictive data about 
your likes and dislikes based on the products you discuss on 
Facebook. The chain also bases its formulas for offering you 
discounts partly on an “inﬂ uence” score it has bought from a 
company that evaluates the number of friends you have on 
social media and your degree of inﬂ uence on them. For this 
trip you use the store’s app on your phone to scan the products 
you want to buy, incorporating the personalized discounts as 
you go. Your loyalty status and checkout history give you the 
ultimate reward: by using your phone to scan your purchases, 
you bypass the long checkout lines and instead simply push 
a button at a station near the store’s exit. There the retailer’s 
computers also compare your scanned items with your 
purchase history and conclude you have not stolen anything. 
No one searches your bags (as sometimes can happen at stores 
that allow product scanning throughout the store as opposed 
to a single designated checkout location near the exit), so 
you’re out superfast. No sweat.

6 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
Then again, depending on who you are and where you shop, 
you may already have experienced early versions of these 
personalized experiences many would consider unpleasant:
• No store representative greets you when you walk into 
the upscale department store, because your customer status 
doesn’t warrant it even though you belong to the store’s 
loyalty program. The store’s computer knows from your 
shopping history and background that you typically purchase 
clothes with greatly reduced sale prices, and that you are 
likely to continue doing this. Representatives therefore prefer 
not to spend time with you, but you don’t mind not being 
shepherded through the store; in fact, you rather like 
wandering alone. However, at checkout you see people in 
front of you joyfully surprised with 20 percent discounts, and 
you’re envious. If you were given an extra 20 percent off that 
already on- sale sweater you were admiring, you might be 
able to justify buying it.
• You live in a lower- income neighborhood and typically 
rely on a local independent grocer for all your shopping. 
This merchant doesn’t accept electronic coupons, and the 
paper ones you receive in the mail or encounter in the store 
don’t match your needs terribly well. You occasionally do go 
to the chain supermarket in a different part of town, and 
you’ve found that your smartphone app does give you some 
relevant offers. It seems, though, that the supermarket’s 
computer doesn’t know enough about you to give you the 
various good deals that you hear other customers discussing 
with friends as they circulate among the aisles. In fact, at the 
checkout you notice some shoppers getting great deals on 
products you would like to try, but you have to pay full price. 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 7
Even a coupon for $2 off on one of those goods would be 
nice to have. You wonder if providing the app with more 
information about yourself would bring you better deals. But 
even if that would work, you don’t know how to do it.
• You stop at a convenience store to pick up a few things. 
Once inside you notice a sign stating that the store’s cameras 
use facial recognition technology to search databases for 
people who have criminal records. You actually have such a 
record, though it’s several years in the past. The presence of 
the data- retrieval software may or may not explain why an 
employee seems to be following you as you move through the 
store. It also may or may not explain the curt treatment from 
the clerk when you go to the register to pay, as well as his 
prolonged examination of the $20 bill you offer as payment.
Before you feel too relaxed because you are the recipient of 
great service and a lot of coupons, realize that the behind- the- 
scenes tracking may well have consequences you might not like. 
Retailers might hire statistical consultants to generate reports 
about your eating habits based on the food you buy or about 
your weight based on the clothes you look at online and in the 
store, or to develop more speciﬁ c health prognostications based 
on the groceries and nonprescription drugs you purchase. Their 
portrait of you may result in some nice coupons for you to 
redeem now, but it may turn sour later as you age, as statistical 
formulas may well make unﬂ attering inferences about you and 
your family. Consider, too, that some retailers sell or trade the 
information they compile about their customers; some even 
assign “attractiveness” scores to shoppers based on this data. The 
scores and the many points of information about you may affect 

8 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
the sorts of insurance offers, food and clothing advertisements, 
and travel deals you receive. And in the not- too- distant future 
the knowledge that companies have developed about you may 
lead news organizations to highlight, and even rewrite, certain 
stories for you, and advertisers to provide you access to certain 
pay television programs but not to others. Much of this will be 
happening—and so much is already happening—without your 
consent or knowledge.
Oddly, although these practices relate to the ongoing and 
widespread public discussion about privacy—many government 
hearings and papers, advocacy- organization reports, academic 
meetings, and popular press pieces discuss the ways online 
marketers and government agencies track citizens—retailers 
only barely ﬁ gure in the debate. The shopping aisle has, in fact, 
received almost no attention even among academics who focus 
on the social implications of consumer surveillance—an unfortu-
nate trend, because the trafﬁ c that retailers can track through 
those physical doors is huge. According to the Food Marketing 
Institute, in 2015 Americans made an average of 1.5 trips per 
week to a supermarket.3 The National Association of Convenience 
Stores (NACS) reports that in 2014 customers made nearly 160 
million visits per day to the 152,794 convenience stores in the 
United States—58 billion visits per year.4 And according to the 
leading retail analysis company ShopperTrak, during November 
and December 2013 Americans paid 17.6 billion visits to malls, 
department stores, “big- box” stores such as Walmart and Target, 
and specialty retailers such as Express.5
Although visits to supermarkets and convenience stores have 
remained rather steady in recent years, foot trafﬁ c to the stores 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 9
that ShopperTrak audits has decreased substantially; the 17.6 
billion in 2013 had been 33 billion in 2010.6 Industry insiders 
generally believe that this drop is the result of increasing numbers 
of purchases over the internet. Because people can now shop 
electronically and have access to quick- delivery options, physical 
stores are competing with sellers not just in the same city or 
country, but from all over the United States, and even the world. 
What’s more, even when shopping in a physical store, customers 
access the internet from their smartphones to use as a competi-
tive weapon: product ratings, price comparisons, comments of 
friends via social media, and ads from competitors all affect 
whether and how much people buy. For their part, most brick- 
and- mortar merchants have tied part of their fortunes to elec-
tronic sales, and in the process now can also successfully track 
and proﬁ le shoppers, largely without their permission. Yet despite 
the huge growth of online commerce in the past decade, 
numerous studies indicate that over 90 percent of product 
purchases in 2015 still occurred at checkout counters in physical 
stores, and few in the industry are close to suggesting that they 
will fade away in the near future.7 Industry experts do agree that 
brick- and- mortar merchants will succeed only by making the 
tracking abilities of their physical stores at least as good as or 
better than the virtual ones for targeting individuals with prod-
ucts and pricing. This includes using their data sources to create 
personalized messages for shoppers as they track them entering 
the store and proceeding through the aisles.
The implications are profound. The retail industry’s data- 
centered activities are restructuring the architecture of both 
physical and digital retailing as well as the relationship between 

10 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
the two in ways that turn enormous information gathering into 
something customers take for granted. To make shoppers they 
care about feel good about making purchases, merchants are 
fashioning new visions of “rewards” that remake the retail phrase 
“owning the customer” for the internet age. “This is an era of 
unprecedented change for retail,” Target’s chief ﬁ nancial ofﬁ cer 
told the New York Times in 2014. “In order to win,” he said, stores 
must keep “guests engaged with you as a business.”8 For Target 
and many other merchants, building relationships with indi-
vidual shoppers today requires monitoring and discrimination. 
Retail monitoring involves gathering or purchasing information 
about shoppers’ backgrounds and activities with or without their 
explicit permission or knowledge. Retail discrimination has two 
meanings, numerical and prejudicial. In the ﬁ rst sense, discrimi-
nation is a human and organizational impulse to note differences 
among things and among people. In stores it means maintaining 
records on individuals and performing complex quantitative 
analyses on that data—for example, determining which incen-
tives will get particular individuals to buy more goods. Prejudicial 
discrimination follows as a result of the value the retailer places 
on each individual based on perceived differences: the retailer 
will offer speciﬁ c shoppers different discounts on particular prod-
ucts reﬂ ecting the data’s statistical portraits of those individuals 
and their families.
Part of retail discrimination is to identify customers deemed 
to have a relatively high “lifetime value” (a shopper’s lifetime 
being typically deﬁ ned as ﬁ ve years). These proﬁ table shoppers 
receive tailored deals aimed to keep them coming back. Customers 
on the lower- valued end of the shopping spectrum typically 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 11
aren’t treated poorly; they may even get personalized discount 
offers in the hope that their value to the store might increase. 
But they will not enjoy anything like the attention and value the 
loyal customers enjoy. Moreover, some retailers downgrade the 
beneﬁ ts of their loyalty program for customers judged to be of 
less value to the store based on the amounts they spend.9
These monitoring and discrimination activities usually ﬂ y 
under the public’s radar. An exception was a New York Times 
article discussing Target’s analysis of customer purchase patterns 
to identify pregnant customers. In the case of one family a father 
discovered his teenage daughter’s pregnancy only because the 
retailer had mailed her a package of pregnancy- related deals.10 
These occasional press accounts no doubt cause at least some 
concern among those who also worry about contemporary 
government and corporate surveillance, but this coverage ignores 
a deeper development. The transformation of retailing is, at the 
core, a rethinking of the ways merchant- customer relationships 
should take place in the twenty- ﬁ rst century. Monitoring and 
discrimination are certainly critical to this rethinking, but they 
are only part of an accelerating project to redeﬁ ne relationships 
with shoppers. Retailers’ strategy is to mix shrewd loyalty 
programs, high- tech tracking instruments, and esoteric statistical 
manipulation with soothing brand images and smoke screens in 
such a way that shoppers accept systematic biases about them. 
Merchants ramp up “rewards” regimes (which they internally 
call “loyalty programs”) that position store monitoring and 
discrimination as useful twenty- ﬁ rst- century values. In the 
process, the retail industry develops ever- evolving technologies 
to identify desirable prospects, encourage and maintain customer 

12 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
loyalty, and personalize attractive deals for individuals declared 
winners by the algorithms—and less- attractive deals for algo-
rithmic losers.
We are only at the beginning of this new road. Stores are still 
struggling with how, when, and where to implement their data- 
driven regimes. The reshaping of retailing will likely add data- 
driven anxieties to both buying and selling. Stores will become 
centers of stress as dueling shopper and retailer technologies 
reach sometimes diverging conclusions about price and preferen-
tial treatment. Sellers will have to change prices constantly; 
introduce new products rapidly; and continually adopt new ways 
to deﬁ ne, identify, track, reevaluate, and keep wanted customers. 
Shoppers, who will continue to experience traditional stress 
about product quality and cost, will also now feel uneasy about 
what particular stores know about them and how the stores 
score them, and concerned about the impact this information 
will have on their shopping experience. They will also learn that 
trying to get on the good side of their favorite merchants means 
opening spigots to their personal information.
As of this writing policy experts, advocates, executives, and 
academics are arguing ﬁ ercely about the legality and ethics of data 
mining by online advertisers and the National Security Agency. 
Trade magazines, general magazines, newspapers, books, and a 
wide range of internet sites are sounding boards for many of these 
debates. In response, the Federal Trade Commission, Federal 
Communications Commission, Congress, the White House, and 
advertising industry groups propose and even push through regu-
lations, laws, and self- regulation principles regarding concerns 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 13
about social and individual harms. Ironically, at the same time, in 
a corner of society rarely mentioned by data policy makers, the 
retailing industry is working tirelessly to convince Americans to 
accept the notion that offering up information about themselves is 
a natural part of life. The very activities that dismay privacy and 
antidiscrimination advocates are already beginning to become 
everyday habits in American lives, and part of their cultural 
routines. Retailing is at the leading edge of a new hidden curriculum 
for American society—teaching people what they have to give up 
in order to get along in the twenty- ﬁ rst century.
Why is this happening, and how? And what do these changes 
mean for physical stores, the people who shop in them, and the 
larger society? The chapters that follow explore these questions, 
but ﬁ rst we should outline a social framework to help us under-
stand what is taking place. Central to this framework are the 
meaning and the role of retailing’s hidden curriculum—how it 
entered society, and how it spreads. The term hidden curriculum 
historically hasn’t been applied to the world of merchants and 
customers. Philip Jackson coined it for his 1968 book Life in 
Classrooms to mean unintended lessons which are learned in 
school.11 The basic idea goes back much earlier. The renowned 
turn- of- the- twentieth- century sociologist Emile Durkheim wrote 
in his book Moral Education about the generalizations students 
inevitably stitch together as an unspoken behavior code. “There 
is a whole system of rules in the school that predetermine the 
child’s conduct,” Durkheim said. “He must come to class regu-
larly, he must arrive at a speciﬁ ed time and with an appropriate 
bearing and attitude. He must not disrupt things in class. He must 
have learned his lessons, done his homework, and have done so 

14 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
reasonably well, etc. There are, therefore, a host of obligations 
that the child is required to shoulder. Together they constitute the 
discipline of the school. It is through the practice of school disci-
pline that we can inculcate the spirit of discipline in the child.”12
Using hidden curriculum as a term to encapsulate Durkheim’s 
meaning, Jackson and others followed him in exploring under- 
the- hood concepts young children pick up as part of their 
schooling. Much of their writing centers on how the hidden 
curriculum connects young people to the structures of power in 
society and deﬁ nes their relationships to them. Some analysts 
describe ways schools implicitly lay out norms and values that 
are crucial for navigating the outside world; these ideals teach 
students “an approach to living and an attitude toward learning.”13 
Jean Anyon echoes French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu in stressing 
the importance of cultural capital in the kinds of hidden curricula 
students learn about how they should relate “to physical and 
symbolic capital, to authority, and to the process of work.”14 
Similarly, Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis argue that a connec-
tion exists between the unstated lessons schools teach children 
on one side, and the social classes to which the children belong 
on the other. “Schools do different things to different children,” 
they insist. “Boys and girls, blacks and whites, rich and poor are 
treated differently.”15 The result, they contend, is a silent message 
about the future paths they should take—for example, the low- 
income or high- income occupational choices that best ﬁ t them. 
Paul Willis adds that the hidden curriculum of schools stubbornly 
reproduces the existing power structure of the society; even the 
ways student cliques form and resist administration policies 
within schools often echo the class distinctions of the students.16

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 15
Of course, any kind of situation can teach unintended lessons. 
Moreover, the notion that an institution—for example, religion, 
medicine, the law, and retailing—tends to re- create the domi-
nant economic and political structures of the society is at least as 
old as Karl Marx. What makes the concept of a hidden curric-
ulum attractive is not so much that it stresses broad, mechanistic 
lines of capitalist social power. Rather, the idea refers to patterns 
that quietly encourage students to absorb and act out their 
present and future social roles through the repetition of rules, 
stories, and performances that reﬂ ect, sometimes inconsistently, 
on a range of social status levels.
George Gerbner broadened the context of the hidden curric-
ulum when he used it in relation to popular culture in general. 
An undergraduate folklore major who received his PhD in educa-
tion, Gerbner spent most of his professional life as a professor 
and dean of communication studies. He received federal grants 
to study the portrayal of teachers in movies and television during 
the late 1950s, and the nature of violent images on television 
during the 1960s and 1970s. Conducting this work through the 
lens of folklore studies, he understood that telling stories is 
fundamental to every society. No stories are objective reproduc-
tions of reality. Folklorists emphasize that tales of all sorts serve 
up systems of messages that parade norms, values, and moral 
deﬁ nitions, and tell people how to frame the world. Gerbner 
noted that the key difference between a society’s traditional 
stories and those told by television, movies, and magazines lies in 
folklore’s “handicraft” nature. Created and diffused organically 
through society, folklore is a product of the individuals who tell 
the stories. Modern media tales, news and entertainment, are by 

16 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
contrast created by industries where the concerns of organiza-
tions take precedence over all else. The stories result from media 
ﬁ rms’ need to satisfy marketers, investors, and, sometimes, poli-
ticians who beneﬁ t from showing people certain views of reality 
and not others. In a 1972 article Gerbner goes on to apply the 
term hidden curriculum not just to the educational institution but 
to the education people receive via widespread media—particu-
larly television—about all institutions from their depictions in 
news and entertainment. He writes:
The facts of life in the symbolic world form patterns that I call 
the “hidden curriculum.” . . . [It] is a lesson plan that nobody 
teaches but everyone learns. . . . Culture power is the ability 
to deﬁ ne the rules of the game of life that most members of a 
society will take for granted. That some will reject and others 
will come to oppose some of the rules, or the game itself, is 
obvious and may on occasion be important. But the most 
important thing to know is the nature and structure of the 
representations that most people will assume to be normal 
and inevitable.
Following Gerbner’s logic, it’s no great stretch to port the 
idea of the hidden curriculum to the retailing scene. For one 
thing, stores are cavalcades of media depictions reaching out to 
people with ideas about what’s good, bad, and ugly. Images on 
underwear packaging suggest the ideal body. Photos of athletes 
on cereal boxes suggest the sports that society should consider 
important—and the idea that people, especially kids, should be 
interested in sports at all. Tables of data and testimonials on all 
sorts of food containers call out norms of health and how to get 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 17
there. The puzzles on kids’ snack boxes quietly deﬁ ne intelligence 
and measure where a child falls within this deﬁ nition. These sorts 
of representations suggest certain ways of thinking about the 
world in line with various alleged ﬁ tness, health, sports, and 
education authorities. But stores and the malls in which they are 
often enclosed also provide learning opportunities about what 
social characteristics mean. Different settings bespeak different 
notions of style in relation to various social distinctions of gender, 
race, ethnicity, lifestyle, and, especially, age and income.
The display photos of people in store windows and around 
selling spaces are often the most obvious signals of who is an 
anticipated customer and who isn’t. Senior citizens, for example, 
are not poster people for clothing chains that want to appeal to a 
more contemporary crowd. Outdoor recreation stores tend to 
depict mobile, active enthusiasts, not individuals who are 
conﬁ ned to wheelchairs. A store that wants to attract a wealthier 
clientele typically places upscale decor at the entrance, has wider 
aisles, and outﬁ ts its clerks in more formal wear. By law anyone 
can enter any of these places and make a purchase. And in fact 
many do cross the boundaries, for example shopping at both 
Walmart and Tiffany, Target and Louis Vuitton. Yet mall opera-
tors understand the meanings of these distinctions quite well, 
and they train shoppers accordingly. Mall planners cluster stores 
based on age, wealth, and lifestyle; establishments aimed at 
young adults, the rich, discount seekers, and outdoor enthusiasts 
are among those that each get their respective areas, often with 
distinct architectural designs and signage. Americans may or may 
not agree with the features the retailing establishment uses to 
draw attention to particular goods, but they do not actively rebel 

18 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
against them. The prevalence of the symbol systems that desig-
nate trendy clothing, outdoor happiness, and wealth suggests 
that, to the contrary, many shoppers take them for granted and 
accept that they accurately reﬂ ect the way of the world.
Retailers did not intentionally create these distinctions any 
more than schools or television created their hidden curricula. 
Nevertheless, these hidden curricula serve an institutional 
purpose: to cultivate and maintain discipline in the case of schools; 
to present readily understandable elements for telling stories (and 
generating proﬁ ts) in the case of popular media; and to tie goods 
and shopping to certain meanings (also to generate proﬁ ts) in the 
case of retailing. Now we are on the cusp of a retailing era that is 
adding an entirely new layer of routine surveillance activities and 
that carries with it the accompanying underlying lesson that it is 
common sense for shoppers to accept individualized proﬁ ling and 
deal making as part of the process of buying things. The impor-
tance of accruing data to learn about individuals certainly did not 
originate with the world of shopping. Yet, as with schools and 
media, retailers felt a strong need for such activity. In the trade 
press, at trade conferences, and in more than two dozen inter-
views for this book, people associated with retailing stated the 
need to retrieve a tsunami of data from customers, and this 
information is changing the ways merchants think about their 
businesses and about the people who frequent them.
Moreover, recalling George Gerbner’s view of the modern 
symbol system, the engines powering this new world with its new 
hidden curriculum go beyond the retailers and their traditional 
suppliers. True, Walmart has built its own audience- tracking- and- 
analysis division, but most other retailers are tying into a large 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 19
and growing subindustry of ﬁ rms that aim to be part of the steps 
that turn customer data into gold. Terry Kawaja of the investment 
banking ﬁ rm Luma Partners has attempted to chart the players in 
the online and mobile app part of this new world. He calls his 
pictorialization the “Commerce Lumascape,” encompassing 
hundreds of competing companies involved with retailing under 
labels such as “order management,” “analytics,” “white label 
solutions,” “software as a service,” and “price comparison.” 
Kawaja has not, so far at least, created a chart that describes these 
sorts of ﬁ rms in the physical retailing space. Yet they, together 
with their online counterparts and major retailers, are building 
monitoring into people’s routine daily activities. The transforma-
tion of physical retailing as a result of this work is creating the 
new hidden curriculum for our time. The word transformation is 
important. The world of physical retailing is a radically mutating 
place. Neither Gerbner nor the writers who focused on school-
ing’s hidden curriculum dealt with a part of society that was 
transforming radically. My goal is to show how the retailing insti-
tution creates a hidden curriculum as retailing re-creates itself.
Of course, not all of what people learn about how an institu-
tion works is unstated. Some of it, such as not to shoplift, may be 
quite direct. But people do absorb many unstated messages from 
schools, the media, retailing, and other institutions about how 
the world works. They integrate them into everyday interactions 
with those and other institutions. This is not a straightforward 
process. We may be taught to believe that the ways we deal with 
stores stem from our individual needs, resources, and personali-
ties. Yet we often don’t consider the possibility that many within 
retailing often force, encourage, cajole, or otherwise get people in 

20 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
relationships with them to perform certain basic activities in ways 
that beneﬁ t their organizations. Doing that routinely leads shop-
pers to translate the organization’s hidden curriculum into the 
“common sense” of everyday life. Sociologists Thomas Berger and 
Peter Luckman, authors of the classic book The Social Construction 
of Reality, wouldn’t be surprised; it’s simply how institutions 
work.17 They note that institutions, “by the very fact of their exis-
tence, control human conduct by setting up predeﬁ ned patterns 
of conduct, which channel it in one direction as against the many 
other directions that would theoretically be possible.” They add 
that the institutional world requires “the development of speciﬁ c 
mechanisms of social control” that encourage people to do things 
that support the continued existence of those institutions.18
Although it may not seem so at ﬁ rst glance, the creation of 
loyalty is a key mechanism of social control retailers try to make 
into common- sense. That is, through loyalty, merchants aim to 
lead customers to engage in everyday activities that strengthen 
the merchants’ businesses. In a long and thoughtful treatise on 
loyalty, legal philosopher George Fletcher implies that you gain 
loyalty from others—that is, you cause them to stay with you—
by offering two fundamental beneﬁ ts, protection and privilege. 
We don’t like to think of friendships, marriages, or citizenship in 
these terms. But people’s loyalty to individuals and to countries 
involves a sense that the other person—or the country—will 
treat them in a special way compared to others who are not in 
that relationship. These bonds also bring with them an expecta-
tion that the relationship is reciprocal. The person receiving 
protection and privilege knows that he or she has responsibilities 
toward the other person, country, or organization offering those 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 21
resources. That will involve offering protection and privilege in 
return. For example, in a marriage this would mean assistance in 
times of illness and exclusivity in sexual relations; in the case of 
a country it may be a decision to serve in the military or volun-
teer to help the government with expert advice during a war. 
Individuals will ascribe their own meaning to “privilege” and 
“protection,” and the deﬁ nition can also vary depending on the 
cultural norms of the time.
The same holds for retailing. Merchants often let shoppers 
know quite clearly that they can beneﬁ t from consistent 
purchases, though the deﬁ nition of “consistent purchases” may 
vary by era and by individual store. Similarly, the retailer’s repay-
ment of that ﬁ delity with privilege and protection can mean 
many things. Privilege can mean access to better prices, better or 
more relevant assortments of merchandise, advance knowledge 
of new merchandise, higher- quality items, gifts after a string of 
purchases, or superior credit terms. Protection might mean offers 
of security, safety, or other forms of help—for example, ensuring 
that a purchased tool works, a food is not contaminated, or the 
merchant’s suppliers are careful. Exactly how loyalty plays out in 
any given era is the result of the retailing institution’s hidden 
curriculum and ways particular retailers enact it by reinforcing 
shopper behaviors for certain everyday activities. It may also 
have to do with what the retailer sells, how it deﬁ nes itself among 
its competitors, and whether it can afford to buck the institu-
tion’s existing norms.
Now consider what is taking place in the new data- driven 
retailing system. The ways stores deﬁ ne a customer’s loyalty and 
how they should reward it are increasingly dependent on complex 

22 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
analyses of the data retailers accumulate from tracking shoppers 
and buying additional information about them. One major 
change from the past is how retailers reward loyalty. Instead of 
being a straightforward tit for tat based on frequent visits, loyalty 
rewards have become tools that stores use to track customers, 
with or without their knowledge. Moreover, retailers and their 
consultants are increasingly applying loyalty as just one of many 
metrics to decide which announcements, deals, and discounts 
they should offer to certain individuals and not to others.
While mainstream retailers continue to encourage shoppers 
to consider loyalty a reward, it is actually giving way to complex 
algorithms that often punish people for ﬁ delity. Indeed, a marketing 
executive of a major retailing chain notes that his company actu-
ally lowers prices for individuals deemed less loyal while keeping 
the prices higher for the ones identiﬁ ed as more loyal.19 Other 
executives point to the different kinds of messages individuals 
receive from their companies based on the proﬁ les the companies 
have gathered and the value they see in those proﬁ les. Yet loyalty 
is only one element of new retailing regimes being organized to 
personalize messages in physical stores based on tracking and 
targeting shoppers virtually everywhere they go. As we will see, 
department stores, grocery stores, and discount chains are over-
turning more than a century of democratic impulses regarding 
loyalty. At the same time, shoppers are reinforced for following 
a new hidden curriculum that makes the giving up of data—
and the bringing in of numerical and prejudicial discrimination—
part of the shopping experience.20 In the following pages I 
detail the behind- the- scenes activities that are changing our 
everyday shopping experiences in ways we as a society may not 

A FROG SLOWLY BOILED 23
want. The activities represent a quantum technological and 
philosophical departure from how stores operated even at the 
end of the twentieth century. What we see now, though, is just 
the beginning. The institutional apparatus seems pretty well oiled, 
with determined executives and cutting edge technologies. This 
book follows this group as they create maps for a world that will 
redeﬁ ne buyers’ relations with sellers. More than that, the new 
retail system will encourage shoppers to accept a new, tougher 
reality in which the old saw that every person’s dollar is worth 
the same increasingly no longer holds sway. And that means 
giving up on the historical ideal of egalitarian treatment in the 
American marketplace.
Today the shopper’s phone stands at the heart of the change 
taking place. “A consumer essentially carries around a whole 
store on the smartphone in his or her pocket,” notes a retailing 
consultant.21 And, as improbable as it may seem, in a few years a 
chip implant in the shopper may also be part of the in- store 
messaging system, if technologists can convince enough people 
that the chips will help them be winners in the aisles. But ﬁ rst it 
is important to understand what started this transformation and 
why it’s begun, as well as what is pushing it forward. As Berger 
and Luckman note, “Institutions always have a history of which 
they are products. It is impossible to understand an institution 
adequately without an understanding of the historical process in 
which it was produced.”22 That’s certainly true about retailing, 
but it’s a story not commonly told. The journey is outlined in the 
next chapter.

24
2  THE DISCRIMINATING 
MERCHANT
“When I ﬁ rst began my experience as a consumer,” Christine 
Frederick told a congressional hearing in 1910, “I thought that the 
best way to do my family marketing was to ask the dealer his price 
and then Jew him down.” Her anti-Semitic comment notwith-
standing, Frederick was a famous household efﬁ ciency expert and 
consulting editor to the Ladies Home Journal. She learned, she said, 
that bargaining “was the attitude of all consumers in this country 
50 years ago [in 1860]. This condition existed because at that 
time all dealers and merchants overpriced their articles, and the 
shrewd buyer was the only one who could get the best trade or 
bargain, after hours of talk and discussion.” Price negotiating, she 
continued, “is still extant in some European countries and almost 
all Asiatic countries, where I myself have been ﬁ rst asked two 
dollars a yard for cloth and ﬁ nally secured it at ﬁ fty cents. But [the 
American department- store merchants] John Wanamaker and 
Marshall Field saw the fallacy of these methods as affecting more 
important lines of merchandise. The reason why today 99% of all 
merchandise is no longer sold after these Asiatic methods is 
because common sense has demonstrated that the one price plan 
is more honest and more efﬁ cient for all concerned.”1

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 25
The 1910s marked a period in retailing when it was not hard 
see how the old world of the previous decades was passing, but 
difﬁ cult to understand the new world that was being born. People 
knew things were changing dramatically, and tensions ran high. 
Christine Frederick was on Capitol Hill to support a bid by 
packaged- goods manufacturers to set their products’ prices so 
that grocers could not lower them. Stores and brand name 
makers were struggling for new ways to exert primary inﬂ uence 
over the shopper’s purchases. All sides realized price would be 
only part of a solution that would encourage repeat purchases 
and satisfactory proﬁ ts. Producers failed in their attempt to 
dictate the price by law, but they tried other forms of leverage 
over grocery stores and other retailers. The retailers, for their 
part, realized they had lost some inﬂ uence over customers by 
abandoning “Asiatic methods” that involved one- to- one give- 
and- take. They tried to establish new ways to control their rela-
tionships with them in an era when the opportunities of 
face- to- face personalization were hard to ﬁ nd, if not lost.
To arrive at an understanding of the transformation of today’s 
retail spaces, we ﬁ rst have to explore approaches to customer 
relationships, what they meant for the formation of retailing in 
the twentieth century, and the legacy they created for retailing in 
the twenty- ﬁ rst. I’ll focus here on the development of two pace- 
setting shopping environments of the twentieth century, the 
department store and the supermarket. The time span cuts across 
three periods: the age of peddlers and small store merchants 
before the mid- nineteenth century; the rise, growth, and travails 
of department stores and supermarkets from the mid- nineteenth 
century to around 1995; and the birth of new forms and norms of 

26 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
selling with the rise of the Web, the smartphone, and new forms 
of industrial competition. Traditional pre- nineteenth- century 
selling techniques centered around prejudice and discrimination, 
with peddlers and small merchants determining which shoppers 
were “winners” and which were “losers” in the course of negoti-
ating sales based on such measures as the purchaser’s race, gender, 
ethnicity, and income. In the mid- nineteenth century, a new 
breed of merchants tried to encourage customers’ return visits—
what sellers typically meant by loyalty—in a populist way. They 
spread the word that a democratic era of shopping had arrived, 
but strong impulses toward discrimination remained. Despite 
their dominant egalitarian rhetoric, the largest, most populist 
sounding merchants accompanied these professed democratic 
ways with inequitable practices. Discrimination showed up in 
many elements of twentieth- century department store and 
grocery life: pricing, purchasing, packaging, branding, display, 
promotion, location, architecture, payment systems, and labor.
While major retailers were willing to slug it out over the 
lowest prices in the short term, they feared that perpetually guar-
anteeing the lowest possible prices was a recipe for insolvency. 
Instead, they tried to organize their operations in such a way that 
they could proﬁ tably offer beautiful surroundings, periodic 
discounts, and other populist incentives that would encourage 
loyalty among broad populations of shoppers. Ironically, though, 
attempts by the supermarket industry to reorganize during the 
painful economic conditions of the 1970s ultimately led it and, 
soon, all retailers to adopt a technology that could make their 
businesses more proﬁ table by returning to the explicit discrimina-
tory mindset of the peddler era. In the twenty- ﬁ rst century the 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 27
new approach would make surveillance of shoppers a habit, and 
data- driven personalization a must.
Christine Frederick was correct that bargaining was a fact 
of life not too many decades before her congressional hearing. 
In fact, this form of retailing in the early United States was centu-
ries old. Whether informal transactions or those conducted in 
more structured settings such as outdoor markets and small 
stores, buyers and sellers had seemingly always tussled over the 
price and quality of merchandise. As far back as biblical times 
buyers and sellers both inevitably took into account the charac-
teristics and cues of the other as each side tried to gain the upper 
hand in the bargaining. The nature and the cost of the merchan-
dise was therefore often tailored to the particular transaction. 
Historian Claire Holleran remarks that in ancient Rome haggling 
over price was an everyday activity. She also points out that how 
and where an individual negotiated exempliﬁ ed that person’s 
status: “The act and the space in which shopping took place were 
central to the construction of particular lifestyles and identities.” 
That was as true in early modern England and Renaissance Italy 
as it was in old Rome. In Renaissance Italy the wealthy tended 
not to negotiate for goods in public. While they might examine 
luxury items in public, they would retire to their home with the 
merchant to negotiate the price.2 But for most people the 
bargaining tended to be far less reﬁ ned, as they typically purchased 
goods from screaming hawkers and peddlers trudging through 
the street. If they were lucky they might manage a quiet conver-
sation about price and quality with a peddler moving from house 
to house in the village.

28 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
Bargaining is, of course, a two- way street. Just as the buyer 
cautiously had to pursue the best deal, the seller had to survive on 
his trading skills. As a reminder of the original prices they paid for 
the goods, as well as to recognize the goods if stolen, peddlers 
marked the back or bottom of their wares with unique symbols. 
They also followed a number of other strategies to maximize their 
returns on investment. Historian Laurence Fontaine, who studied 
the notebooks of peddlers in Europe from the seventeenth through 
the nineteenth centuries, found they covered a limited territory 
and so regularly returned to the same villages. Consequently, they 
developed ongoing relationships with individual customers and 
kept track of the deals made with them. They would also keep 
track of those customers’ friends and relatives, as they might learn 
of the deals and could expect to pay similar amounts for similar 
goods. In one notebook from mid- nineteenth- century France, a 
peddler noted the women who bought his goods but also linked 
them to the more important aspects of the town: the men to whom 
they were related (for example, “Roubi’s mother,” or “Mourau’s 
wife”). He recorded the occupations of those men and their family 
connections, as well as how they were addressed in the village and 
how they presented themselves during his conversation with them.
By researching the networks of their customers, notes 
Fontaine, peddlers slowly and “almost surreptitiously” became 
part of the village culture. Sellers and buyers negotiated prices 
“within the context of a personal relationship, and through the 
manoeuverings of trading and bargaining.”3 These bonds allowed 
the peddler to tamp down the inevitable tensions on both sides of 
the negotiation and to encourage customer loyalty built on 
protection: a reputation for honest representation of his goods’ 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 29
quality. The peddler could also build loyalty by implying to partic-
ular customers that he was giving them and their family espe-
cially low prices. Knowledge about the customers came in handy, 
too, when allowing sales on credit. Judging from Fontaine’s 
peddler account books, a large percentage of the buyers did not 
pay in full when making a purchase. By allowing personalized 
deferred payments, peddlers solidiﬁ ed their relationships with 
customers. Each return to the village was an opportunity to 
recover a small amount of money they were owed as well as to 
offer a few more goods on credit—a built- in way to encourage 
loyalty. The peddler’s challenge was to collect enough of the debt 
to enable him to repay his creditors while retaining enough to 
feed his family. This didn’t always happen; peddlers often had to 
borrow money in their own villages with the expectation of 
recouping the cash during their upcoming travels.4
The peddling business migrated to North America with the 
ﬂ ood of immigrants who poured in during the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries. Some peddlers who managed to amass a 
bit of cash settled in communities and established small dry goods 
emporia or grocery stores. Most of this group continued a version 
of the peddler tradition that was then called “personal service,” 
whereby sellers helped customers choose from goods that were 
behind a counter or in a storage area. Writing about Chicago 
grocery stores at the turn of the twentieth century, historian 
Tracey Deutsch notes that customers developed “more personal 
relationships with their grocers than they might have with tran-
sient peddlers or nonlocal market stall sellers.”5 In addition to 
selling groceries, these merchants offered a range of other services 
including food preparation advice, letter writing or translating 

30 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
for non- English- speaking customers, and offering information 
about neighborhood activities. Grocers also learned much about 
their patrons’ family situations, a topic that often came up when 
the customer asked for credit, as many did.
As with the peddlers, the relationship between shopkeeper 
and customer could be fraught for both sides. Deutsch points out 
that traditional approaches which led to “close personal relation-
ships” and reasons for loyalty “did not guarantee smooth interac-
tions in grocery stores, just as they did not in other retail formats.”6 
Along with Fontaine, she found that advancing credit was crucial 
in the sellers’ attempts to win customers, even as the sellers 
worried about bringing in enough money and the buyers worried 
about terms and their ability to pay. Pricing issues also caused 
angst. Customers typically assumed that store owners would give 
trusted clerks the code to the pricing symbols so they could 
bargain knowledgably. Despite efforts by the sellers to put 
customers at ease, shoppers worried whether they were paying 
more than other customers. Ethnic customers suspected that 
grocers who were of a different ethnic background overcharged 
them and sold them inferior products. African- Americans, who 
typically had little choice but to frequent stores owned by whites, 
were especially suspicious that the lack of transparency of price 
and quality caused them to receive poor treatment.7
During the mid and late nineteenth century, these strains 
opened the door for ambitious merchants to offer alternative tech-
niques to make customers feel more comfortable and thereby gain 
their loyalty. The key change was posted pricing, which started as 
a stand- alone selling idea but became a crucial part of the new 
U.S. retail institution. Through much of the 1800s dry goods store 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 31
owners had followed the peddlers’ routine of personalizing 
charges for individual customers. Although Christine Frederick 
and others credited John Wanamaker and Marshall Field with 
making the change, the idea actually long preceded them. As far 
back as the seventeenth century Quakers believed it was morally 
abhorrent to charge different prices for the same item, and Quaker 
merchants Potter Palmer (an early partner of Marshall Field), 
Roland Macy, and the founders of Strawbridge & Clothier followed 
this philosophy in the early nineteenth century.8 By the 1840s 
standardized pricing as a means to encourage customer trust was 
evident. An undated business card of A. T. Stewart and Company, 
possibly from as early as 1827 or as late as 1841, described the 
ﬁ rm’s prices as “regular and uniform.” Adam Gimbel, founder of 
the iconic department store, guaranteed ﬁ xed prices at his 
Vincennes, Indiana, trading post in 1840. Several New York stores 
were advertising one price as early as 1842.9
For the merchant, part of the attraction of ﬁ xed prices was 
that clerks didn’t have to be taught how to bargain. This model 
became increasingly important beginning in the 1860s, as U.S. 
cities saw the growth of multistory, multidepartment emporia 
employing many people. A famous precedent was Aristede 
Boucicaut’s Le Bon Marché in Paris. The store’s name means 
cheap, or a bargain. Boucicaut founded it in 1838 to sell piece 
goods in a poor neighborhood but branched out into various 
types of women’s clothing and beyond; by the early 1850s it had 
morphed into what we call today a department store. Le Bon 
Marché marked all of its goods with ﬁ xed prices and even offered 
a money- back guarantee. These policies inﬂ uenced American 
entrepreneurs, who moved from selling single stock products 

32 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
such as bolts of calico (the original “dry goods”) to a wide range of 
merchandise types in distinctively separate departments. The 
post–Civil War era was ripe for this retailing model. The growing 
urban population and an improving standard of living meant 
concentrated numbers of people with money to spend. The wide 
circulation of newspapers, handbills, and billboards in dense 
neighborhoods enabled the stores to advertise to large numbers of 
people. Mass transit in the form of horse- drawn trolleys could 
bring those residents to central shopping districts. At the same 
time, rabid competition among many small stores selling the same 
limited range of products yielded virtually no proﬁ ts. As retailing 
historian Robert Hendrickson notes, “Farsighted merchants cast 
about for new things to sell, realizing that if they wanted to grow, 
they would have to offer a fuller line of merchandise.”10
The model these forward- thinking store owners had insti-
tuted in the mid- nineteenth century, especially regarding their 
approaches to gaining steady customers, fed into an entirely new 
approach that would develop in the following decades. Historians 
of late nineteenth- century America agree the era was transfor-
mative when it came to selling goods to the American masses. 
William Leach describes what was happening as “the democrati-
zation of desire” and traces it to the 1880s. This was a time of 
rapid industrialization and the creation of a new form of market 
capitalism based around industries that focused on “the produc-
tion of more and more commodities.” By the late 1890s so much 
merchandise was ﬂ owing out of factories and into stores that 
businessmen feared overproduction, which might push prices so 
low they would drive manufacturers and retailers out of business. 
In addition, while real incomes of many Americans were growing, 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 33
wealth was lopsided; a small number of captains of industry 
controlled much of the nation’s assets. Advocates of the new 
market capitalism may have wanted to draw public attention 
away from criticism that the far- reaching resources of a relative 
few were hindering democracy by diminishing the political power 
of the many. To do that, they reimagined democracy as the right 
of each American to dream about achieving personal happiness 
by buying things. “This highly individualistic conception of 
democracy,” writes Leach, “emphasized self- pleasure and self- 
fulﬁ llment over community or civic well- being. . . . The concept 
had two sides. First, it stressed the diffusion of comfort and pros-
perity not merely as part of the American experience as hereto-
fore, but instead as its centerpiece. . . . Second, the new conception 
included the democratizing of desire, or, more precisely, equal 
rights to desire the same goods and to enter the same world of 
comfort and luxury.”11
The key, merchants learned, was to follow a strategy of low 
markup and rapid turnover that contemporaries attributed to 
Boucicaut. The idea was to be proactive about low- cost selling: 
purchase large quantities of goods for cash (thereby getting the 
supplier’s lowest price) and sell them quickly at low margins. The 
incoming proﬁ ts would ﬁ nance the purchase of yet more goods 
for cash that also would be unloaded quickly. The challenge was 
huge, however. Sellers realized that a store’s “turn” of its prod-
ucts was key. Success would come only if product turns could 
take place continually and on a large scale. These conditions 
pointed to a store with several departments and many different 
items.12 They also indicated the need for a continual ﬂ ow of large 
numbers of people. To achieve this merchants built on the trend 

34 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
of posted low prices, even though they recognized that competi-
tion primarily over price could lead to unsustainably low proﬁ t 
margins, even severe losses. The emerging department stores 
therefore went out of their way to cultivate loyalty through egal-
itarian versions of protection and privilege.
Protection came in the guise of the customer’s right to touch 
the goods as well as guaranteed satisfaction—the stores accepted 
returns without argument or penalty. Department stores offered a 
new, egalitarian form of privilege by creating a beautiful environ-
ment to which all shoppers would want to return and in which 
they could feel special. The no- haggle returns and the marvelous 
surroundings were geared particularly toward women, whom the 
new merchants saw as their primary customers. Historians point 
out that the nineteenth century in both the United States and 
Europe was marked by a Victorian sensibility regarding women in 
public places. “Disreputable women were associated with the 
immorality of public life in the city,” writes historian Mica Nava. 
“Respectable and virtuous women were connected to the home.”13 
Such concerns didn’t mean middle- class and wealthier women 
fully shunned urban streets without escorts. Chroniclers of the 
era have pointed to the large numbers of women who moved 
freely around the landscape to carry out philanthropic work.14 
Barbara Olsen argues that in some areas “American women by 
the mid- 1850s could now shop alone, make their own purchase 
decisions from expanding product categories, and spend their 
own money earned outside the home.”15 Moreover, Nava notes, 
the “Victorian ideal of separate spheres” unraveled rather quickly 
in the urban landscape around the turn of the twentieth century 
as women engaged in the public world of education and the 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 35
suffrage movement. These changes also tied into the loosening of 
Victorian sexual mores. Relatively mainstream notions around 
“choice of partner, courtship patterns, and independence of move-
ment” mixed with more radical ideas about “‘free love’ and sexual 
pleasure as an entitlement for women as well as men.” Women’s 
magazines and, later, movies spread these ideas to the distaff 
population at large. None of these changes came easily; literary 
and other depictions of the “proper female sphere” suggest the 
social tensions. But by the early twentieth century increasing 
numbers of American women were “making themselves at home 
in the maelstrom of public life . . . however contradictory, painful 
and uneven the process.”16 Department stores helped the process 
along by positioning themselves as oases of populist privilege—
and havens of safety—in a nonfeminine urban world.
From their inception the stores “provided a particularly 
welcoming space for women.”17 To elicit the sense of special 
comfort, they outdid one another with elegance and showmanship 
in order to attract crowds. Again, Bon Marché had pointed the 
way. A. T. Stewart’s 1848 Marble Drygoods Palace at Broadway 
and Chambers Street in Manhattan, though not yet a department 
store, demonstrated how to draw crowds in a U.S. urban center. 
The block- long ediﬁ ce became an instant tourist attraction. The 
canny Stewart lured visitors inside not just to ogle at the architec-
ture but to attend fashion shows, scan and purchase the high- 
quality European women’s merchandise, and scoop up the great 
deals he offered through “ﬁ re sales” of distressed and damaged 
goods. Competitors followed suit, ﬁ rst via the elegant Ladies Mile 
that grew on Broadway around Stewart’s and later uptown in 
fabulously appointed stores such as Macy’s, Siegel- Cooper, Gimbels, 

36 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
and Bergdorf Goodman. Among the other emporia that arose in 
this tradition were Abraham and Strauss in Brooklyn; John 
Wanamaker and Strawbridge & Clothier in Philadelphia; Marshall 
Field and Carson Pirie Scott in Chicago; L. S. Ayres in Indianapolis; 
Lazarus in Cincinnati; and Dayton’s in Minneapolis. Designers and 
architects appointed the ediﬁ ces with large display windows, 
carved wood, polished stone, imposing mirrors, fancy elevators, 
and streamlined escalators. The stores were among the ﬁ rst public 
spaces to use central heating and electric lighting both for illumina-
tion and to make artistic impressions. Department managers laid 
out goods in gorgeous displays, and the mundane administrative 
functions were situated in areas the public would not encounter.
The French author Emile Zola described these developments 
(also taking place in Europe) as agents for “democratizing luxury.” 
He also saw them as enticements for the broad middle class to 
spend large, often too large, amounts of money.18 The ediﬁ ces 
were typically situated on major thoroughfares easily accessible 
by mass transit. In New York City and Chicago, some of the stores 
even maneuvered to have subway or elevated line stops at their 
locations. While the lavishness drew tourists, the real intention 
behind all the glitter was to build a loyal clientele, which for 
merchants meant people who would continually return to buy 
items. Accounts of the period indicate that such customers would 
visit the same store frequently, even several times a week.19
With the inﬂ ux of crowds of shoppers, the new mass- 
marketing entrepreneurs understood they were no longer able to 
tailor prices to the individual.20 Although those shoppers who 
considered themselves winners in such give- and- take transac-
tions might balk, the retailers were counting on a much larger 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 37
population being happy with the new process. Store management 
spread the word that loyalty- generating practices were to be 
enacted in a populist, routinized manner. A. T. Stewart suppos-
edly boiled down the notion to a blunt statement to his clerks: 
“Never cheat a customer even if you can.” He also instructed them 
on the importance of gifts for customers who paid cash rather 
than wanting credit. “If she pays the full ﬁ gure [does not ask for 
credit], present her with a hair of dress braid, a card of buttons, a 
pair of shoestrings. You must make her happy so she will come 
back again.”21 John Wanamaker, who set the bar high for pursuing 
customer loyalty, laid the general precept out in a more philo-
sophical tone. “The chief proﬁ t a wise man makes on his sales,” he 
wrote in 1918 in a memorandum book, “is not in dollars and 
cents but in serving his customers.”22 Shoppers could rest assured 
that a posted price (Wanamaker himself supposedly invented the 
price tag) along with a satisfaction guarantee meant they were not 
being taken for a ride.
But Wanamaker and other department- store entrepreneurs 
also aimed to create a service atmosphere that would cause their 
targeted (women) customers to see the stores as multifaceted 
environments that surrounded them with a sense of feeling 
special. To that end, clerks and ﬂ oor workers were trained to be 
attentive to customer needs.23 Installment purchasing and free 
delivery were among the widely available services. Most dramati-
cally, the stores made actual shopping only one part of the retailing 
experience. Executives also attempted to cultivate loyalty by 
attracting people for reasons beyond shopping. For example, one 
could simply rendezvous with friends at a beautiful fountain or 
impressive sculpture in the center of the store. The stores presented 

38 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
concerts on- site; Wanamaker’s turn- of- the- century store had one 
of the largest pipe organs in the world. The merchants offered 
special toy exhibits for children, particularly around Christmas 
time. They offered dining by establishing restaurants in the stores. 
Or, instead of going anywhere near the store, customers could 
phone in an order from home. Wanamaker was a leader here, 
too: as early as 1900 the company employed hundreds of phone 
operators to take customer orders day and night.24
Like department stores, grocers developed an emphasis on 
loyalty through egalitarian access as well as populist protection 
and privilege, though in somewhat different ways and, when it 
came to architectural opulence, on a slower timeline. The early 
leader was the Great Atlantic and Paciﬁ c Tea Company. Founded 
in 1859 with a small number of New York tea and coffee stores, 
by 1880 it expanded to some one hundred branches. It also added 
sugar to its merchandise, a decision that began its march toward 
becoming the nation’s ﬁ rst grocery chain. Apart from ﬁ xed low 
prices, A&P units were not much different from the neighbor-
hood grocery stores with which they competed. They offered 
everyone discounts and gifts for continued patronage. They also 
advanced customer credit and allowed free delivery, activities 
that were expected in the grocery business at the turn of the 
twentieth century. But in the face of a national debate about 
high food prices during the 1912 presidential campaign, some of 
the company’s outlets abandoned those inducements. Instead, 
they attempted to gain loyalty by trumpeting efﬁ ciency- driven 
cost reductions. The idea was to keep grocery prices as low as 
possible. Implementation meant reducing the staff to a manager 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 39
and a clerk who retrieved the goods for customers. A&P’s popu-
list spin was that the no- frills style protected its customers from 
the scourge of high prices. The strategy proved highly successful, 
leading A&P and other grocery chains to expand the concept 
widely. It was a rather Spartan paradigm; an A&P store was no 
John Wanamaker.
The next couple of decades saw two additional iterations of 
the no- frills grocery store—the self- service market and the super-
market. The ﬁ rst innovation came from Clarence Saunders’ 
Memphis, Tennessee, Piggly Wiggly store in 1916. The place was 
rather small compared to most groceries of the day. His idea was 
to have the customers pick up the goods in the store themselves 
(instead of asking a clerk for assistance) and then pay at a central 
checkout area. Saunders knew this strategy would enable him to 
cut down on labor costs. He was also convinced customers would 
buy more if they could see and touch all the merchandise them-
selves. He therefore created aisles that facilitated customers’ 
handling of the goods, and he provided baskets in which shop-
pers could collect the items they wanted to buy.25 As with depart-
ment stores, the public spin on the setup was one of democratic 
privilege. As early as 1922, the Piggly Wiggly chain boasted that 
its self- service model “fosters the spirit of independence—the 
soul of democratic institutions, teaching men, women, and chil-
dren to do for themselves.”26
The idea caught on. Kroger, Grand Union, Acme, and the 
many other growing chains adopted this model, and eventually 
A&P followed suit as well. The low labor costs associated with the 
self- service model encouraged the expansion of grocery chains, 
and the larger ones regionalized. Another factor inﬂ uencing the 

40 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
chains’ growth was their continuing power struggle with their 
suppliers over issues that had brought Christine Frederick to 
Capitol Hill earlier in the century. The stakes were high. Many 
grocers preferred to choose the manufacturers whose products 
they put on their shelves, because they could bargain over whole-
sale prices and get good margins. Some manufacturers, however, 
tried to force grocers to carry their goods on their terms by going 
over the heads of grocers to their customers to position the manu-
facturers’ products as special “brands.” Packaged goods companies 
such as Sapolio Soap, Pepsodent, Kellogg, and Procter & Gamble 
launched an avalanche of advertising in popular newspapers and 
magazines to exhort people to buy items with unique names, 
trademarks, and package designs. The ﬁ rms assured shoppers they 
would protect them from the uncertain quality of counterparts in 
barrels and bins and even in packages with unfamiliar persona 
and provenance. A Toasted Corn Flakes ad in Munsey’s Magazine of 
the early 1900s noted that “the package of the genuine bears this 
signature [W. K. Kellogg].” It quoted an imperious young women 
telling a merchant who was offering her ﬂ akes from a different 
company, “Excuse me—I know what I want, and I want what I 
asked for—TOASTED CORN FLAKES—Good day.”27
Manufacturers were pushing the right loyalty button. This 
was an era when grocery shoppers were looking for protection, 
as newspapers in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century 
were rife with stories of unscrupulous sellers putting dirty, 
dangerous, and even lethal materials into foods. People likely 
also remembered the “swill milk” scandal that affected New York 
and Brooklyn in the 1850s and 1860s. Diseased cows that had 
been fed distillery refuse were then literally milked to death. 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 41
Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Weekly cover in 1858 featured a drawing 
of a dairy getting milk out of a sick cow on a hoist. (The liquid, 
the caption said, “made babies Tipsey and often sick.”)28 Ads that 
exhorted shoppers not to accept imitations played on these 
worries and effectively forced even large grocery chains to carry 
branded goods in the name of customer protection. Procter & 
Gamble warned grocers that they had better stock their new 
vegetable shortening Crisco—which, unlike the commonly used 
lard, would not spoil through bad refrigeration—because the 
advertising and public relations campaign the company was 
launching would be so extensive that their customers would 
come clamoring for it.
In addition to offering protection as a way to build customer 
loyalty, manufacturers also adopted campaigns and packaging that 
pointed shoppers to incentives included with the product inside 
the box or package. Manufacturers also offered discounts or gifts 
for collecting proofs of purchase from the product packaging.
The brand manufacturers’ growing clout had a critical impli-
cation for the grocery industry, which sometimes was forced to 
accept smaller margins (and proﬁ ts) on brand name products. 
But whether brand name item or not, the stores were committed 
to low prices because of competition and the need to encourage 
loyalty. Therefore, with such tight margins they had to sell very 
large numbers of goods to achieve acceptable proﬁ tability. During 
the 1920s many chains addressed the challenge by aggressively 
expanding their number of stores, which enabled them to 
purchase products from manufacturers at the lowest possible 
wholesale prices. They then implemented bouts of predatory 
retail pricing (undercutting the costs charged by competitors) on 

42 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
those lower- cost items, along with offering gifts with purchases, 
to encourage shopper loyalty and eliminate rivals in particular 
market areas, thereby gaining more leverage over suppliers. 
Once a store drove out competitors it could then increase prices 
a bit on the contested products.29 Chains that successfully 
followed this strategy raised their market share: in 1920 grocery 
chains accounted for less than 3 percent of grocery sales, but by 
1935 ﬁ ve chains captured about 25 percent.30
The chains’ growing power notwithstanding, the Great 
Depression of the 1930s saw the emergence of a second new 
model for the grocery store, the supermarket. Originally spelled 
as two words—“super market”—it was conceived by entrepre-
neurs from outside the grocery establishment who pushed the 
low- price, no- frills paradigm to a new extreme in those hard 
economic times. The formula consisted of a massive store (often 
located in an inexpensive abandoned warehouse or factory), 
local advertising and promotional ballyhoo about products to be 
sold below cost, and huge numbers of customers noisily and 
chaotically hunting for bargains. One of the ﬁ rst of these 
“cavernous, ungainly stores” (as Tracey Deutsch describes them) 
was started by former Kroger executive Michael Cullen.31 Called 
King Cullen, the store was located in an abandoned Long Island 
garage and used empty ginger ale cases for display tables.32 While 
Cullen controlled all the merchandising in its outlets, some 
versions of the Depression supermarket leased space to different 
types of grocery retailers under the umbrella of a single name. 
Yet another iteration saw butchers, bakery owners, and other 
specialized grocery retailers join together to share the costs under 
one moniker, such as Big Bear stores, which opened in New York 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 43
and New Jersey in the early 1930s.33 Although these early super-
markets did not serve nearly as many people as the major grocery 
companies did, they often caused quite a stir in the neighbor-
hoods they served. Twenty- thousand people entered the Family 
Market Basket on its opening day on Chicago’s North Side; this 
supermarket was 50 percent larger than most of the bigger chain 
store units. The owner of another Chicago supermarket boasted 
that his opening- day crowds were so large he had to call the 
police.34
Executives at the established chains observed the phenom-
enon warily. Kroger executives worried about the dangers of 
appealing to loyalty through low prices instead of other aspects of 
protection and privilege. “The early supermarkets were bare- 
bones bargaining houses that emphasized price,” Kroger company 
chroniclers noted, “while Kroger felt it owed its growth and 
strength to its insistence on quality”—presumably through its 
service and its company brands.35 Although they were used to 
competing on price, sometimes very intensely, chain executives 
nevertheless believed that the ongoing extreme low- price prom-
ises, enormous size, and chaotic nature of supermarkets made 
them unstable ventures. They insisted long- term value lay in 
linking low, but not lowest, prices with a populist stress on a stylish 
experience and decorum in their stores. “The super- store in its 
present form may prove to be a ‘depression baby,’” one industry 
person sniped.36
In fact, by the late 1930s supermarket owners began to 
modulate their emphasis on lowest price and shift to other forms 
of competition such as decoration with “a feminine touch,” 
wheeled shopping carts instead of baskets, high- quality meats, 

44 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
and a new emphasis on service.37 This new wave of classy treat-
ment, available to all, seemed to result in higher proﬁ ts in the 
face of the stores’ traditionally low margins. Kroger, A&P, Jewel, 
and other grocery chains began to construct expansive stores 
with large parking lots to encourage shoppers to ﬁ ll their trunks 
with groceries. The building rate and size accelerated after World 
War II, as many of the American middle class and upper- middle 
class began to relocate to the suburbs. Stores averaged nine thou-
sand square feet by the late 1940s (far larger than the chain 
outlets of a decade earlier) and twenty- two thousand square feet 
by 1957.38 They contained a vast range of advertised goods as 
well as store brands in an array of departments that sold fresh 
meats, salads, ﬁ sh, and baked goods, as well as health and beauty 
supplies. Many of these areas were self- service, in keeping with 
the overall mindset from decades earlier.
The structures themselves looked quite different from the 
A&Ps, Piggly Wigglys, and Big Bears of earlier in the century. In 
a 1951 article Collier’s, a popular weekly magazine, celebrated the 
change with language that evoked the air of privilege suffusing 
the great department stores of the era. “Low prices are no longer 
the supermarket’s only attraction,” the article noted. The trans-
formation was “the prodigious issue of a marriage between bril-
liant showmanship and the world’s most modern distribution 
techniques.” The result, it said, was a new world of efﬁ ciency 
linked to indulgence: “In a supermarket the housewife buys her 
groceries (and a growing variety of other things) faster, because 
of self- service, and cheaper, because volume sales enabled the 
stores to keep prices at a minimum.” The article went on to 
enthuse: “Nothing that could conceivably lure the housewife has 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 45
been left undone by the supermarket operators. Their grocery 
stores are the world’s most beautiful. They’ve gone into color 
therapy to rest the shopper’s eyes; installed benches to rest her 
feet; put up playgrounds and nurseries to care for her children; 
invented basket carts with ﬁ ngertip control; revolutionized a 
packaging industry to make her mouth water; put on grand 
openings worthy of Hollywood premieres. They’ve completely 
made over the nation’s greatest business—food—to attract more 
and more of her interest and her dollars.”39
Like the grocery chains, many department stores also relo-
cated to the suburbs. While the branches did not typically match 
the glory of the downtown ediﬁ ces (which sometimes suffered 
because of suburban mall competition), their executives continued 
to stress that the recipe for shopper loyalty had to involve alluring 
architecture, display, and service.40 Some chains, such as Sears 
and J.C. Penney, aimed for the mass market with low prices. 
Others—for example, Macy’s and Lord & Taylor—presented 
somewhat higher priced goods. Still other department stores, Saks 
Fifth Avenue and Neiman Marcus among them—presented a 
wealthy image with very expensive items. A 1974 overview of 
department stores marveled at the Woodﬁ eld, Illinois, shopping 
center, then the largest in the world. Along with Sears, Marshall 
Field’s, J.C. Penney, and Lord & Taylor, it had two hundred smaller 
stores, many of which were themselves part of chains. The authors 
of this write- up concluded that an attractive location was a good 
formula for nonprice competition: “It is a seven- day operation 
with shoppers driving many miles for the Sunday ‘champagne 
brunch’ served by [Marshall] Field’s Seven Arches restaurant, one 
of more than 30 eating places in the big development.”41

46 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
For two decades after World War II media reports referred to 
the purchase of food and everyday necessities in supermarkets as 
well as the purchase of clothes and home goods in great urban 
department stores as a wonderful sensory experience. Both 
retailing sectors understood the competitive usefulness of linking 
material desires with the very essence of American democracy. 
Both arenas ultimately aimed for shopper loyalty that was not 
primarily tied to price, and both echoed the rhetoric and the 
architecture of democratic access to privilege. They continued to 
promote self- service as a democratic, loyalty- inducing plus. They 
claimed that the very depersonalization of the new forms reduced 
the tension that had been at the core of merchant- shopper rela-
tions in the peddler model. Unlike the earlier model, in which 
the customer often felt scrutinized by the grocer—who might be 
judging purchases, offering substandard products from under the 
counter, or charging more because of ethnicity, race, or perceived 
low income—they promoted the idea that twentieth- century 
shopping furthered the democratic ideal of allowing (to quote 
William Leach) “everybody—children as well as adults, men and 
women, black and white—[to] have the same right as individuals 
to desire, long for, and wish for whatever they pleased.”42 During 
the 1950s and 1960s, government and retailing ofﬁ cials pushed 
this equality- through- self- service- and- materialism argument as 
part of the defense of capitalism against communism in the Cold 
War, claiming that “because supermarkets lowered food prices, 
celebrated freedom of choice, and made customers feel that they 
were being treated equally, they reduced the appeal of commu-
nism and showcased the real value of American capitalism and 
free enterprise.”43 When Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev came 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 47
to the United States in 1959, American ofﬁ cials made sure that 
he visited a supermarket so they could present it as a symbol of 
their nation’s superiority.44
The mid- twentieth- century buoyant rhetoric notwith-
standing, critics have noted impulses toward discrimination 
coursing through the new retailing model. While department 
stores “eagerly accepted all dollars,” in the words of historian 
Susan Porter Benson, they early on divided their clientele into 
two broad groups: the more afﬂ uent “carriage trade” and the 
poorer “mass,” or “shawl,” trade.45 Stores declared that class divi-
sions were simply the natural consequence of fundamentally 
different shopper desires. Articles in the retailing press contended 
that the shawl group saw fancy ﬁ xtures and other upscale 
appointments as indicators the establishment would charge them 
higher prices. In contrast to this group, noted a turn- of- the- 
twentieth- century commentator, “People of culture and reﬁ ne-
ment dislike crowds and crushes in stores [and want] to trade at 
a store where there is plenty of room and an abundance of air, 
with surroundings of an elegant, not to say aesthetic character.”46 
Department- store architects and designers claimed to be taking 
to heart the differences between the two groups with the creation 
of bargain- price departments which sold lower- quality goods, 
located usually in store basements. As Porter Benson notes, “The 
bargain- section strategy allowed department stores to pursue 
simultaneously their strategy of ‘trading up,’ or seeking an even 
wealthier clientele, and their goal of increasing sales volume.”47
This basic bias showed up on several levels, especially before 
World War II. Outdoor windows sometimes signaled the customer 

48 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
bifurcation: front windows might show prestige goods, while 
side windows might contain sale merchandise.48 Inside, store 
personnel were taught to reﬂ ect a desire for an elite version of 
personalization in the midst of populist extravaganzas. People 
who clearly had a lot of disposable income received special consid-
eration. Salespeople and doormen were encouraged to greet 
high- spending customers by name, for example, and even phone 
them when the store received new items that might be of interest. 
Preferential service could include free delivery. Well- off customers 
had their special requests dealt with more carefully and their 
returns accepted more graciously than those of other customers.
Another side to personalization involved matching clerks with 
customer type. Personnel directors used a range of stereotypes—
including age, race, and birth status—to assign salespeople (typi-
cally women) to different parts of the store based on the anticipated 
customers in each section. For example, older and native- born 
women were sent to higher- price departments, while younger 
and immigrant women worked in areas that sold less- expensive 
goods. Capping all of these prejudices was the allowance of a 
charge account to only the most select customers. During the ﬁ rst 
half of the twentieth century, charge accounts were the province 
of stores, not national credit ﬁ rms such as Visa and MasterCard. 
To lessen the risk of default, and because they understood that 
well- off charge customers spent far more than cash ones, depart-
ment stores made it clear this was a special privilege granted “only 
[to] wives of ‘substantial citizens’ and not those of you [from] 
working- class families.”49
The discriminatory aura pervaded supermarkets as well. As 
early as 1926, chain grocers worried that they were reaching only 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 49
working- class and lower- middle- class shoppers because they 
emphasized price over services such as helping customers retrieve 
items from around the store and stationing a clerk in the produce 
section to help customers choose, weigh, and wrap their fruits and 
vegetables. Christine Frederick, who didn’t hide her anti- immigrant 
and anti- Semitic sentiments, stoked these concerns by repri-
manding the chains as off- putting to busy women because of their 
abandonment of personal help and their long checkout lines. 
Industry observers warned that “low prices were not enough to 
keep customers because women—at least the sort of women so 
coveted by chains—wanted more.”50 Consequently, grocery chains 
began to move somewhat away from their vaunted standardiza-
tion and toward at least partially retrieving the service component. 
Sometimes this meant hiring multilingual clerks to work in stores 
in immigrant neighborhoods. More commonly, though, it meant 
ensuring that stores in more desirable neighborhoods had service 
components. Class distinctions in service became even starker 
during the Depression, when supermarkets in working- class neigh-
borhoods often offered lower grades of meat, cheaper brands of 
goods, and fewer services than they did in middle- class and upper- 
class neighborhoods. Chain store management also preferred to 
build new stores in wealthier neighborhoods, a practice that took 
on special vigor after World War II.
By the 1960s critics were citing studies that supermarkets in 
economically distressed (often African- American) neighborhoods 
were dirtier, limited in variety, and higher in price than in more 
well- off districts, and stocked substandard foods. The customers 
and clerks who shopped or worked at supermarkets in poor neigh-
borhoods were certainly aware of the discriminatory patterns, but 

50 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
these conditions were rarely publicized except in the wake of 
major events such as the rioting that occurred during the Depression 
and World War II, and following the assassination of Martin Luther 
King Jr. in 1968. The latter insurrection served as an ironic coun-
terpoint to the Cold War trumpeting of consumer democracy just 
a few years earlier. These angry outbursts led to short- term 
attempts by merchants and government ofﬁ cials to explore causes 
and offer solutions, but the policy suggestions tended to be rather 
bland. Tracey Deutsch notes that even reformers “treated the facts 
(that lower quality was being sold in poor neighborhoods in lesser 
quantities and at higher prices) as intransigent and inevitable.” She 
adds that an article appearing in New Republic arrived at similar 
conclusions about supermarket inequalities but didn’t think that 
government interventions could possibly be effective. The article 
did offer several ideas for addressing the problem, including the 
placement of home economists in local stores to provide advice, 
and busing shoppers to better stores in better neighborhoods.51
Supermarket operators’ response to the obvious inequalities 
was to acknowledge them not as consequences of their prejudicial 
discrimination—a practice they publically condemned—but as 
unfortunate results of larger economic problems or as evils of 
discrimination unrelated to retailing. In 1968 a Philadelphia 
woman who had heard the claim that chain supermarkets sold 
goods of lower quality in black neighborhoods confronted the 
president of the National Association of Food Chains. According to 
a Business Week article, the woman said that the ofﬁ cial “and his 
colleagues deny everything—and then they explain why it 
happens. Suburban stores, they say, are bigger than ghetto stores, 
with more parking space, roomier aisles, better displays, and 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 51
greater store trafﬁ c. The implication to experienced merchandisers 
is plain: fresher product, greater variety. . . . By contrast, land in 
ghetto areas is often costly, and parking space is in short supply. 
The result: fewer stores, cramped, crowded, and offering few 
products.”52 Yet as retailing indignities continued to simmer within 
disadvantaged communities, the public relations arms of retailing 
ﬁ rms continued their campaigns “to celebrate [the supermarkets’] 
hard work on behalf of women.”53
Rather than actively confronting socially corrosive prejudices, 
supermarket and department- store management throughout the 
twentieth century focused on a different form of discrimination 
in the midst of their populist pursuits: they needed to ﬁ nd ways 
to keep their most proﬁ table shoppers coming back. Posted 
pricing, low markups, and an impressive interior had rapidly 
become generic elements of the twentieth- century retailing envi-
ronment. Yet identifying this group had become extremely difﬁ -
cult. For one thing, the stores now had so many customers it was 
hard to identify the ones who kept coming back. For another, 
loyalty and proﬁ tability didn’t necessarily go hand in hand. A 
store could lose a lot of money enticing customers to be loyal; for 
example, earlier in the century department stores had lists of 
wealthy people who took advantage of their customer status by 
returning very expensive merchandise frequently, insisting on 
special deliveries, and piling up lots of credit. Just as frustrating, 
short of reviewing sales receipts, stores had difﬁ culty determining 
what even good customers expected. Learning and responding to 
customer desires was an impressionistic project in the early twen-
tieth century. Even in big stores, upper management and product 

52 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
buyers relied on department managers and salespeople for their 
opinions regarding what their desired customers wanted.
During this time many in the academic community and some 
businesspeople began proposing that retailers adopt a “scientiﬁ c” 
approach to the issue. By the 1920s, stores were collecting a wide 
range of information from customer surveys,54 and in 1933 
market research pioneer Arthur Nielsen made deals with a repre-
sentative sample of stores to audit the products they sold, and 
with the results of his study he launched his drug and retail store 
index; a year later he debuted an index of department store and 
food sales.55 Historian Sarah Igo has noted, though, that the 
quantitative projects tended to measure what individuals actu-
ally purchased, not “what they desired.”56 Some stores did give 
their customers surveys to ﬁ ll out about what they wanted from 
the store, and a few department stores recruited customers as 
advisers on issues concerning service and merchandise.57 But 
overall retailers found it frustrating to study customer desires 
using the tools of science. A Filene’s department- store executive 
sneered that retailers were “merchandis[ing] on opinions not on 
facts.”58 In her exploration of pre–World War II department- store 
management Susan Porter Benson concludes that “they had only 
the foggiest and most impressionistic sense of who their best 
customers were and what they wanted of the store.”59 And Bill 
Bishop, a longtime supermarket industry observer and founder 
of the Willard Bishop consulting ﬁ rm, reﬂ ected in a 2014 inter-
view that before 1990 supermarket managers strategized about 
their customers “more from gut feeling than anything.”60
Rather than focusing on a “scientiﬁ c” ﬁ x for ascertaining 
what customers want, executives turned to efﬁ ciency efforts in 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 53
logistical operations and dealings with suppliers. University of 
Wisconsin professor Paul Nystrom wrote approvingly in his 1916 
text on retail selling and store management that “business maga-
zines have teemed with articles upon efﬁ ciency and scientiﬁ c 
management.”61 Merchant Edward Filene led the way for depart-
ment stores, developing a much- copied “scientiﬁ c” model plan in 
the 1910s in which a store’s sales patterns were assessed to deter-
mine the range of items in the store and the amount of stock for 
each.62 Supermarkets, too, learned that making internal opera-
tions more efﬁ cient and putting price pressures on suppliers 
could widen margins more effectively than trying to build loyalty. 
They also discovered that proﬁ ts could be made by charging 
manufacturers for special displays of their products and for 
in- store advertisements. These efforts at maximizing revenue 
made ﬁ nancial results respectable despite razor- thin margins on 
many of the products sold.
Store employees tended to see such efﬁ ciency efforts in 
opposition to the goal of loyalty because they believed their 
attention was then shifted away from customers and toward 
paperwork and backroom operations.63 Management clearly felt 
a need for both. They insisted money saved through efﬁ ciency 
could yield money for loyalty- generating activities. And many 
executives believed that, like their efﬁ ciency programs, the best 
loyalty programs would be those that could be evaluated quanti-
tatively. But measuring loyalty proved extremely difﬁ cult. For 
example, it was virtually impossible to calculate the extent to 
which high- proﬁ le, expensive interior designs and architecture 
brought in customers; their utility was taken for granted as 
important. Likewise, another loyalty effort, the signal events 

54 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
department stores staged for their cities, such as the Thanksgiving 
Day parades put on in New York by Macy’s and in Philadelphia 
by Gimbel’s, seemed to make good business sense, yet by their 
very nature they could not be analyzed in terms of speciﬁ c sales 
and loyalty- building.
Consequently, throughout the twentieth century merchants 
focused on pursuing other methods whose results could be evalu-
ated at least to some extent by norms of “scientiﬁ c selling.” The 
most enduring of these was advertising, which in the ﬁ rst half of 
the century meant marketing to wide publics. Merchants saw two 
main beneﬁ ts: the possibility of building loyalty by circulating 
positive paid messages about the store in local newspapers; and 
the ability to check the effect on sales of an item featured in an 
advertisement. Although today it may be hard to understand how 
retailers could connect speciﬁ c sales to their newspaper adver-
tising expenditures, in the ﬁ rst part of the twentieth century 
retailers used a more direct- marketing approach. For example, 
when John Wanamaker advertised in Philadelphia papers that a 
special deal on umbrellas would take place the day after the ad 
appeared, he and his copywriter, John Powers, believed that 
umbrella receipts on the day of the sale would indicate the success 
of the ad. This view continued into the 1940s, as stores anticipated 
that once shoppers made the trip to the store to purchase the sale 
item, they might then purchase other things as well, and at full 
price.64 Comparing the number of umbrellas sold on the day of 
the sale with the number sold on a typical day would give the 
merchant a sense of the power of the ad and of the newspaper. 
Placing the ad in various other local newspapers might help distin-
guish the factor that exerted the greatest inﬂ uence on the sale, the 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 55
ad itself or the vehicle in which it ran. And an examination of the 
receipts from those who bought umbrellas could indicate whether 
the advertised sale also resulted in sales of undiscounted merchan-
dise. Still, the conclusions would hardly be deﬁ nitive because of 
the many variables that could lead shoppers to make purchases. 
And the anonymous receipts in this generally cash- only era 
wouldn’t signify whether ad- related purchases truly led to the 
best kind of loyalty—repeat purchases even when the customer 
encountered no discounted merchandise.
Grocery chains faced a similar dilemma. They also advertised 
special sales on particular products and could attribute at least 
some of any resulting revenue uptick to these circulars and 
newspaper announcements.65 Discount coupons that were incor-
porated in an ad or sent to people’s homes could be directly 
traced to the publication in which they had been printed if they 
carried a corresponding code. If they did, certain broad relation-
ships between the advertising and resulting sales were quantiﬁ -
able, such as determining the percentage of redeemed coupons 
for a particular product in a particular neighborhood. But there 
was much the numbers couldn’t tell, such as whether the 
coupons encouraged repeat shopping and therefore the loyalty 
that retailers prized so highly. Meanwhile, brand goods manufac-
turers such as Procter & Gamble broadly circulated their own 
money- off coupons to encourage loyalty not to any particular 
chain but to the products. Sometimes, in fact, manufacturers 
circulated the coupons to get shoppers to demand grocers carry 
items that they otherwise didn’t stock.66 This activity stoked the 
long- simmering tension between the makers and the sellers, as 
did the payment amounts manufacturers offered stores for their 

56 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
trouble of collecting and returning the coupons; stores perenni-
ally complained the reimbursement was inadequate.
The trading stamp program offered the one loyalty vehicle 
that merchants knew could help them quantify repeat shopping. 
Trading stamps were introduced as a way to encourage a customer 
to make repeated shopping trips to the same store. The customer 
would be awarded stamps based on the total amount spent—typi-
cally one stamp for every ten cents paid. After accumulating a 
certain number of stamps the customer would receive a gift. 
Originating in the nineteenth century, trading stamps were 
different from discount coupons because sellers distributed them 
upon purchase. The ﬁ rst stores to dole out the stamps—beginning 
in England possibly during the 1880s and in the United States 
during the 1890s—were small department stores for exclusive use 
in their establishments.67 They were different from small gifts that 
customers sometimes received with their purchase—say, a baker’s 
dozen or the small thread A. T. Stuart encouraged his clerks to 
distribute—because they were individually worthless. This was 
controlled loyalty; customers both received, and were rewarded 
for, their stamps from the same store, and so repeat visits were 
easy to monitor. Tracking the amount of time it took for a customer 
to earn a reward would enable the merchant to note the success 
of the loyalty program across its customer base. The establishment 
could also note the value of a particular customer.
But this store- speciﬁ c program didn’t last. The situation 
began to get muddled in 1896 when the Sperry and Hutchinson 
Company became a wholesaler of what it called Green Stamps. 
The idea was simple and had a populist spin that invited everyone 
into the game: Sperry and Hutchinson sold large numbers of 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 57
gummed stamps to retailers for a tiny fee per stamp. The retailer 
would then award customers with one stamp for every ten cents 
they spent. (Early on, to discourage credit sales, customers would 
receive stamps only if they paid promptly in cash.)68 The 
customers were to paste the stamps into a specially designed 
booklet, which, when ﬁ lled, they could redeem for various prod-
ucts (“premiums”) at an S&H center. S&H would offer exclusivity 
to a particular type of merchant—a grocer, a plumber, an electri-
cian—in designated localities. For example, a 1910 newspaper ad 
for Davidson’s Cash Store in Phoenix, Arizona Territory, extolled 
the ﬁ rm’s “price and quality” and noted that “they are the only 
people in Phoenix who give S. & H. Green stamps with hard-
ware.”69 S&H’s pitch to these merchants was that stamp- collecting 
customers would give priority to retailers who offered the stamps. 
That may be, but because the booklets were likely ﬁ lled with 
stamps awarded by any number of different vendors, tracking 
customer loyalty to a particular store via Green Stamps was 
impossible.
That didn’t matter to shoppers, of course, who liked accumu-
lating the same stamps from different establishments. The tiny 
revenue S&H made per stamp ballooned into a huge cash ﬂ ow, 
which translated into substantial proﬁ ts in two ways. First, S&H 
proﬁ ted from the difference between the price it paid for a 
premium and the amount in stamps a customer had to redeem 
for the item. Second, S&H earned considerable proﬁ ts in the 
form of interest from the large cash reserves it held in the fairly 
lengthy period between the time that stamps were sold to stores 
and when customers completed the process of collecting, saving, 
and redeeming them.70

58 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
S&H’s success encouraged other companies to enter the 
trading stamp business, mostly with a regional focus. One ﬁ erce 
competitor was Gold Bond stamps, known at the time for offering 
a mink coat as an item that could be redeemed for stamps. But 
while loads of consumers gathered stamps eagerly, others found 
the activity preposterous. Some economists scoffed that the 
stamps simply encouraged price inﬂ ation, arguing that stores 
raised their prices to pay for the stamps. Some state legislators 
screamed that the stamp companies were actually anti- democratic. 
They said the programs were taking advantage of naïve consumers, 
who didn’t realize that the value of gifts amounted to only about 
2 percent of what they had spent. One anti- stamper described 
such programs as “prostitutions at their best and economic insanity 
at their worst.” Dozens of states tried to ban trading stamps 
outright or impose taxes that would force them out of business.71 
Yet most of these initiatives failed, and the stamps endured—but 
not because retailing executives liked them. Retailers tended to 
see them as albatrosses and tried to ﬁ nd excuses that would be 
acceptable to their customers for getting rid of them. To them, 
store coupons or discounts were far more useful because the exec-
utives could control the timing, nature, and amount of the offers, 
and these tactics would provide them with at least some quantita-
tive measure of success. With stamp programs, all stores knew 
was the total number they gave out, though occasionally they 
could quantify the success of special promotions, such as offering 
double stamps for a short period.
Trading stamps experienced rapid growth up until 1915, with 
department stores, mail- order houses, and many other sellers 
including grocery chains joining in. With the start of World War 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 59
I the business slumped, and this downturn lasted well into the 
Great Depression. Department stores experienced cash ﬂ ow 
problems during the war and were among the ﬁ rst to stop using 
them, while grocery chains canceled their programs as they 
converted their units into economy outlets. Consequently, stamp 
programs between the two world wars became the preserve of 
small stores wanting as many loyalty arrows as possible in their 
competitive quivers. But the competition that accompanied the 
fast growth of supermarkets during the 1950s led many super-
market chains, which by then seemed interchangeable as well as 
impersonal, to offer trading stamps as a way to stand out from 
the others. One retail economist wrote that, in the 1950s, “the 
loss of individuality reinforced the supermarkets’ image of a 
formal business, carrying the same brands as the other super-
markets, offering the same conveniences, and charging just as 
much. In less than two decades the supermarket had become a 
comfortable and commonplace store to the shopper; an enmeshed 
and exposed ﬁ rm to the merchant.”72
Some supermarkets, including Kroger and A&P, held out for 
a time, concerned that offering stamps could reduce their margins 
and therefore limit their ﬂ exibility to time other premium and 
discounts programs. But most ultimately concluded that stamps 
were an unstoppable rage, as the president of Kroger reﬂ ected to 
the Wall Street Journal: “We fought them by cutting prices; we 
gave away hosiery, dishes, and dolls. We used every gimmick 
known—and still the stamps stores took sales away from us. We 
couldn’t ﬁ ght them, so we joined them.”73 A&P, whose president 
called stamps “a drag on civilization,” began dispersing them at 
some stores as well.74

60 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
The trading stamp craze continued through much of the 1960s. 
Berkshire Hathaway, the chief investment vehicle of Warren 
Buffett, began investing in Blue Chip Stamps in 1970 when the 
company had sales of $126 million, with sixty billion stamps licked. 
“When I was told that even certain brothels and mortuaries 
gave stamps to their patrons, I felt I ﬁ nally found a sure thing,” 
Buffett recalled in 2007. But Buffett was buying in at the end 
of a long ride. “From the day Charlie [his partner] and I stepped 
into the Blue Chip picture, the business went straight downhill,” 
he acknowledged.75 Discount stores and inﬂ ation were the main 
reasons that merchants began to jettison the sticky things. Big- box 
chains such as Shoppers’ City, Target, and Kmart sprang up on a 
large scale in the 1960s and started diverting the proﬁ ts from 
department stores and supermarkets. They challenged shopper 
loyalty to stamps by aiming price- cutting efforts at the most popular 
redemption center items and setting up grocery departments with 
lower prices than those offered by supermarkets.76 The discount 
model also undoubtedly beneﬁ ted from widespread concern 
regarding rapidly rising food prices. Various factors contributed to 
this dramatic increase, among them steadily increasing petroleum 
prices, a decrease in world grain production that caused feed 
grain and therefore meat prices to skyrocket, and a devaluation of 
the dollar. The impact was dramatic. The consumer price index 
rose 16 percent from 1967 through 1970, and 27 percent from 
1970 to 1974. Food prices rose even more—15 percent from 1967 
through 1970 and 41 percent from 1970 to 1974. Wholesale prices 
of farm products rose higher yet—an astonishing 69 percent from 
1970 to 1974.77 The United States had never before experienced 
such high rates of inﬂ ation during peacetime.78

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 61
In this tumultuous environment, the proﬁ ts of retail food 
chains as a percentage of return on sales plummeted from an 
average of 1.2 percent in 1963–70 to an average of .7 percent in 
1972–74.79 Struggling to keep their companies aﬂ oat, executives 
ceased giving out trading stamps. Even companies that ran their 
own programs, such as Grand Union, stopped them during the 
1970s.80 They instead decided to emphasize discounts and 
coupons the retailers could control closely, and in amounts that 
would encourage customer visits. In the early 1970s, though, the 
overriding concern for retailers was less loyalty than it was 
dismally low proﬁ tability. While discount coupons also allowed 
merchants to track results at least a bit more precisely than stamps 
did, this amounted to small consolation at a time of gravely bad 
earnings. In such an environment it’s hardly surprising that when 
supermarket executives were presented with an invention aimed 
at improving managerial efﬁ ciency—which also might poten-
tially quantify shopper loyalty as never before—they leaped at 
the chance.
The new technology was the Universal Product Code scan-
ning system: the small rectangle of black and white bars that gets 
swiped across a scanner connected to the checkout register—a 
feature that we take for granted on virtually every package we 
buy today. Incorporated into the bars is a unique code for the 
particular brand and type of item. The checkout scanner reads 
the product code—say on a sixteen- inch DiGiorno Rising Crust 
frozen pizza—and looks up the pizza’s current price from a data-
base in an on- site or central computer. Almost instantaneously, 
information regarding the sale and the store from which it was 

62 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
purchased is transmitted to the corporate ofﬁ ce. Corporate buyers 
can then determine when they need to replenish the stock for 
that speciﬁ c pizza in that speciﬁ c store. As a result of this devel-
opment, companies now had immediate, precise knowledge of 
what was (or wasn’t) selling and when, and in which stores.
Despite its evident beneﬁ ts, the UPC system was not instituted 
until the mid- 1970s even though the basic technology had existed 
for decades. In 1948 Bernard Silver, a graduate student at the 
Drexel Institute of Technology (now Drexel University), overheard 
a local supermarket executive imploring a dean to develop an efﬁ -
cient means for creating codes for product data. The dean demurred, 
but Silver took up the challenge with another graduate student, 
Norman Woodland, and later that same year they conceived and 
patented a version of the modern barcode. They used light from a 
very hot bulb to reﬂ ect off printed lines and create patterns that 
could be read by a special sound- on- ﬁ lm tube. As one writer notes, 
“It worked, but it was too big, it was too hard, computers were still 
enormous and expensive, and lasers hadn’t been invented yet.”81 A 
further stumbling block was the lack of an industry system to desig-
nate numbers or products. As two business economists note, “The 
UPC system would have been prohibitively expensive, perhaps 
technically impossible, to implement a decade earlier than it was.” 
They added, though, that it was the supermarket industry’s search 
for efﬁ ciency in the midst of an unprecedented ﬁ nancial challenge 
that pushed the project toward success. “The UPC was shaped as 
much by the challenging and volatile conditions of the food sector 
as it was by the forces of technology.”82
Between the 1940s and the 1970s some manufacturers and 
retailers tried to establish their own product coding systems, but 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 63
each was incompatible with any other system and so they were 
effectively useless. Amid grave concerns about rising inﬂ ation in 
the early 1970s, a group of grocery industry trade associations 
banded together to pursue a universal coding system, forming the 
Uniform Grocery Product Code Council, a committee of super-
market and packaged- goods executives aided by the consulting 
ﬁ rm McKinsey & Company. IBM was chosen to develop the tech-
nology, and National Cash Register developed the actual scanner. 
The ﬁ rst UPC- marked item scanned at a retail checkout took place 
at a Marsh supermarket in Troy, Ohio, on June 26, 1974, at 8:01 
a.m.: a ten- pack of Wrigley’s Juicy Fruit chewing gum.83
There were doubters, but the project moved ahead rather 
quickly. By 1976, 75 percent of the items in a typical supermarket 
carried a UPC symbol, while installation of scanners in supermar-
kets took place more slowly. The code was soon considered to be 
“ﬁ rmly established in the food industry.”84 At the same time, 
Kmart, Walmart, and other grocery- stocked big- box merchants 
joined the move to scanners. Moreover, nongrocery manufac-
turers were now approaching the Code Council for UPC symbols 
to place on their products. By 1982, food and beverage manufac-
turers no longer constituted most new UPC registrations.85
The Wrigley’s gum crossing the scanner signiﬁ ed the begin-
ning of a revolution throughout retailing. Stores adopted the 
device slowly at ﬁ rst (in 1976 Business Week published an article 
titled, “The Supermarket Scanner That Failed”), but through the 
1980s, and spurred by the big- box merchants, supermarkets 
made the scanners standard features at checkout. The executives 
who switched over to this system had efﬁ ciency in mind primarily, 
and over time they certainly achieved that goal. In addition to 

64 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
speeding the checkout process, the scanners enabled stores to 
order goods more efﬁ ciently because they could immediately 
identify which products sold poorly and which sold well. And 
stores no longer had to stamp or otherwise label each individual 
item with pricing information for a clerk to read and enter into a 
cash register at checkout; instead they could afﬁ x a single price 
label for an item to the adjacent shelf so that customers would 
know the cost. Finally, because they now could have virtually 
instantaneous knowledge of the goods in their stores and how 
they were selling, retailers could stock far more products than in 
the past and with fewer stock- keeping woes—and they did.
More important, perhaps, the scanning system upended the 
power relationship between retailers and manufacturers. For the 
ﬁ rst time in a century, chain retailers now had leverage over manu-
facturers when it came to information about the items they sold. 
Neither Nielsen nor IRI (another retail auditing company) could 
hope to provide anywhere near the level of competitive detail that 
retailers’ computers were now accumulating. With the new tech-
nology, store executives could know with unprecedented speed 
how a manufacturer’s new product was selling, or whether a 
brand’s advertising or couponing program seemed to be working—
and all this information could be further broken down by store, by 
the extent of the success of the item or program, and by speciﬁ c 
durations. These were important bits of information with which 
stores could bargain with manufacturers for product discounts, 
promotional funds, and “slotting fees”—payments for including a 
manufacturer’s product on the retailer’s shelves.
The scanner system also offered opportunities for efﬁ ciency 
to intersect with loyalty. Grocery executives recognized at the 

THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT 65
outset that the system could encourage shopper loyalty, reasoning 
that customers would appreciate getting through the checkout 
line more quickly. And although the idea wasn’t implemented at 
the time, the executives saw that the checkout registers could 
also be used to print recipes related to speciﬁ c purchases—
reﬂ ecting an interest in using personalization as a loyalty moti-
vator in ways that were previously impossible. From there it was 
no great leap to view the barcode scanner as a logical platform 
that retailers could use to track the purchases of all customers. 
Trading stamps seemed to offer that potential in the early twen-
tieth century, but ultimately they weren’t relevant to the mass- 
market, populist impulses of the period. In the late twentieth 
century the pressures on retailers pointed to a very different, 
nonpopulist mindset: a high- tech version of the discriminatory 
peddler era. As the 1970s drew to a close, the idea of tracking 
sales of individual shoppers by computer and proﬁ ling people 
based on what they bought had yet to take off. But the institu-
tional challenges of the next decade would certainly move 
retailers in that direction.

66
3  TOWARD THE DATA- 
POWERED AISLE
During the second week of December 2011, Amazon encour-
aged shoppers to install the company’s price- check app on their 
smartphones and then scan the UPC bars of items they were 
considering buying at local physical retailers. As an enticement, 
the company offered a 5 percent discount (up to $5) if the 
customer purchased the scanned item from Amazon (the deal 
applied only to certain products). Not only could the shopper 
beneﬁ t by paying less, but the app also provided the e- tailer with 
the location and the price of the product—critical information 
pertaining to its physical- store competitors throughout the 
country during the most popular shopping time of the year. With 
this information Amazon could then adjust its prices by geographic 
area to achieve optimal proﬁ t margins.1
To many merchants, the mix of barcode scanning, location 
checking, and a discount—on top of no sales tax—reinforced 
Amazon’s image as a destructive pirate. Of particular concern 
was Amazon’s encouragement of “showrooming,” which is the 
practice of inspecting merchandise at a physical store but then 
making the actual purchase online. The publishing industry 
has little doubt that this tactic caused the downfall of many 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 67
U.S. bookstores. The author Scott Turow, president of the Authors 
Guild, decried the “bare knuckles” approach to retailing that 
Amazon’s broader price- comparison project revealed.2 Other 
critics focused on the possible consequences for small businesses. 
The Sun newspaper in Lowell, Massachusetts, editorialized that 
“the online behemoth is trying to put small business owners on 
the street with a Christmas sales promotion that is—quite 
frankly—unfair and un- American.”3 The New York Times drew a 
parallel between Amazon’s activity and “when Walmarts open 
in small towns.”4 Similarly, a Canadian bookseller rejected 
the admiring portrayal of Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos, who trans-
formed the way many purchase books, “as Steve Jobs of the 
book world. For me, he’s the (Walmart founder) Sam Walton of 
the book world.”5
Large retail chains, including those with online components, 
were also angry that their major internet competitor was encour-
aging huge numbers of people to exploit the physical stores they 
frequented. “Amazon has been at the implicit war with local 
brick- and- mortar stores” since its inception, wrote New York 
Times columnist Robb Mandelbaum. “Last week, the implicit 
seemingly became explicit.”6 Target signaled its irritation in a 
letter to suppliers that promised “what we aren’t willing to do is 
let online- only retailers use our brick- and- mortar stores as a 
showroom for their products and undercut our prices.”7 The 
customer “has so many more available places to get products, 
and mobile technology and the Web have completely exposed 
pricing,” said Al Sambar, a retail strategist at the consulting ﬁ rm 
Kurt Salmon. “So the two best competitive levers retailers have 
are under attack.”8 Five months later Target stopped selling 

68 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
Amazon’s Kindle e- readers.9 The company certainly knew that 
Amazon’s app was not the only smartphone price- checking soft-
ware, but ofﬁ cials were especially angry that a giant online 
merchant was gleefully poaching customers systematically from 
inside a competitor’s physical store.
The year 2011 signiﬁ ed the beginning of a great transition in 
America’s retailing institution, as a broad swath of retailing execu-
tives expressed consternation over Amazon’s activities and their 
inability to combat them. Retailers ﬁ nally opened their eyes to the 
mountains of data that now could be accessed because of the 
Universal Product Code, the internet, and other new technologies, 
and they started to rethink their entire approach to customers, 
merchandise, pricing, and the selling process. As a result, we are 
entering a new retailing era with swiftly growing impulses toward 
customer discrimination and ever-quickening movement away 
from the democratic ideal. Ironically, those who are setting the 
pace are borrowing industrial approaches from the past to bring 
back aspects of personalized selling that marked the days of 
peddlers and small stores. Amazon’s price- check stunt proved to be 
the tipping point that moved physical retailers toward personaliza-
tion on an industrial scale. The pre-Christmas hijacking, limited 
though it was, forced brick-and-mortar merchants to recognize 
that the online and the ofﬂ ine worlds were coming together inside 
their physical stores. If they didn’t use their aisles themselves to 
target likely customers with messages driven by the detailed indi-
vidual shopper information that they had compiled, their competi-
tors would. Once again the UPC, or barcode, would play a major 
role, this time in the merger of physical and online retailer.
* * *

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 69
To understand how we arrived at this transition we need to 
take a closer look at retailing in the late twentieth century—and in 
particular one retailer that laid the groundwork for change before 
Amazon. The rise of Walmart is the starting point for exploring 
how competition, technology, and rhetoric about targeting the 
customer combined to set the stage for personalization-centered 
physical retailing. Walmart practically sneaked up as a power-
house on the American retail industry. “The plain fact is that the 
market has failed to realize the impact that Wal- mart has made,” 
said a retail analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Company 
in 1989. But, she quickly added, “What it has done has never 
been done before.”10 From 1977 to 1986 the discount chain 
increased its annual sales from $678 million to $12 billion, and its 
net income from $22 million to $450 million. And in 1988 its sales 
increased 34 percent, to $15.9 billion, and its net income soared 
39 percent, to $627.6 million. A New York Times columnist wrote 
that Walmart is “unarguably the most dramatically successful 
retail company of the last twenty years. It has leaped out of the 
South to become the nation’s third- largest retailer after Sears, 
Roebuck & Company and the K Mart Corporation and is now 
hurtling ahead with the possibility of overtaking each of them in 
sales in the next few years.”11
Some speculated that because Walmart had “leaped out of 
the South” it was not taken seriously despite its surging income. 
Launched in 1962 by Sam Walton and his brother Bud (the store 
signs read “Wal- mart” for many years to indicate its founders), 
the chain systematically radiated “in concentric circles” from its 
ﬁ rst store in Rogers, Arkansas.12 Even by 1988 the company 
operated stores in only twenty- four states, while the corporate 

70 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
base was in Bentonville, Arkansas, far from the traditional halls 
of retailing power in the Northeast and upper Midwest. Yet 
during that decade it was already expanding beyond its basic 
discount store format to include Sam’s Wholesale Clubs and, 
beginning 1987, adding a grocery section to many of its 
new, expanded stores, which the company called “Walmart 
Supercenters.”13 By 1987 Sam Walton, with a net worth that 
Forbes magazine pegged at $8.5 billion, led the Forbes list of richest 
Americans by a huge margin.14
Walton and David Glass, his president and chief operating 
ofﬁ cer, attributed Walmart’s success to its laser focus on the 
customer. “As for Wal- mart becoming a household word, we 
never think about things like that,” Glass told a reporter in 1989. 
“What we want is for customers in our territories to think of us 
fondly.”15 A Morgan Stanley report on the company that year 
agreed: “Management is insisting that every customer be treated 
as a guest. . . . This unique attitude is producing a strong response 
from consumers since service with a smile is often a forgotten 
commodity in retailing.”16 This approach democratically included 
stationing “greeters” by the entrance to the store to help all 
customers ﬁ nd what they need. The company also tried to draw 
in customers by emphasizing that the chain was the place where 
they could “Buy American.” These efforts notwithstanding, most 
observers agreed that what brought people to Walmart in the 
ﬁ rst place was its reputation for low prices.17
That reputation tended to be well deserved, and it created 
great fear among executives of competing stores. Individual 
merchants could not purchase items at the kind of scale that 
gave Walmart leverage to demand rock- bottom prices from 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 71
manufacturers. But beyond low prices, another reason for 
Walmart’s success was its absolute concentration on cost control 
throughout its supply chain. In part, this was simply a matter of 
survival, as in its early years Walmart could not get large whole-
salers to deliver to its rural Southern locations. According to an 
Associated Press account, the company therefore “had to create 
its own distribution system, with its own trucks, its own direct 
dealings with manufacturers, and its own technologies.”18
Sam Walton saw that technology could aid in making that 
process ultraefﬁ cient, and in the mid- 1960s he began using 
computers to track the delivery and sale of inventory in each of 
his stores. This predated the UPC system, so at ﬁ rst all the items 
coming in and going out still had to be counted individually. By 
the early 1980s most packaged goods were labeled with bar codes, 
and in 1983 Walmart outﬁ tted its warehouses and store delivery 
areas with the UPC system, including hand scanners so that 
employees could check in merchandise as it arrived.19 At the same 
time, the company replaced standalone cash registers with scan-
ning systems that relayed each individual sale to an on- site 
computer; the store then reported this information to Bentonville. 
In 1987 the company greatly speeded the process by setting up 
the largest corporate satellite system in the world, providing real- 
time data, voice, and video links to all Walmart stores. Individual 
sales information from every store was now delivered instantly to 
the company’s headquarters.20 Walmart made the process even 
more efﬁ cient when it announced that it would no longer buy 
from wholesalers, instead dealing directly with manufacturers, 
and in 1988 it proceeded to force these suppliers to link their 
computer systems with Walmart’s.21 As a result of this electronic 

72 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
data interchange (EDI) operation—probably the largest in the 
United States—paper and fax relationships virtually disappeared.22 
Instead, all invoices came directly into Walmart computers for 
quick processing, and Walmart computers instantaneously alerted 
suppliers’ computers when an item needed to be replenished.
Writing about Walmart in 1994, a Canadian reporter 
marveled at the speed and efﬁ ciency at which the retail giant was 
able to restock its shelves. “Wal- Mart’s check- out scanners feed 
information by satellite dish to the distribution centers, orders 
are made automatically and products are speeded to a loading 
dock by conveyors. In the United States, every Wal- Mart store is 
within a day’s drive of one of about 20 Astrodome- sized distribu-
tion centres. The centres are serviced by a ﬂ eet of 14,000 trucks, 
the largest private ﬂ eet in the United States.”23 The reporter 
described how, using information provided by the company’s 
computers, Walmart personnel at each distribution center imme-
diately transferred every manufacturer delivery onto the appro-
priate Walmart truck for carriage to speciﬁ c stores. No product 
had to be entered into warehouse inventory, and the speed of 
transfer “allow[ed] Wal- Mart to re- stock its stores at least twice a 
week and sometimes every day, compared to the industry norm 
of every two weeks.”24
These impressive feats, generally recognized as far more 
accomplished than what Walmart’s competitors could do, were 
just the tip of an iceberg of efﬁ ciency- centered activities Walmart 
used to wring costs out of products in its now 2,440 stores.25 One 
ongoing common tactic was to compel suppliers to lower the cost 
of their products by lowering expenses. Indeed, there were reports 
that David Glass, who remained CEO until 1993, would even 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 73
chastise manufacturers for using private jets to travel to Bentonville 
for meetings with Walmart ofﬁ cials, and for locating their corpo-
rate ofﬁ ces in expensive cities. “You don’t tell Wal- Mart your 
price; Wal- Mart tells you,” said an executive of the American 
Textile Manufacturing Institute in 1997.26 There were also leaked 
accounts of Walmart pressuring its vendors to submit to especially 
low wholesale prices on everything from dresses to kitchen uten-
sils to lawn mowers. Publicly executives were upbeat. “I went [to 
Bentonville] knowing we were going to get squeezed and wrung 
and twisted all in positive ways,” the CEO of Liz Claiborne said in 
2000 about the Russ clothing brand his ﬁ rm designed exclusively 
for Walmart.27 To keep costs extra low, Claiborne employed fewer 
people for the Walmart project than it would for its department- 
store accounts, located them outside of New York City to save on 
rent, and relied more heavily on technology to keep things “faster, 
quicker, and cheaper when optimized” at the scale of Walmart’s 
purchases. Even so, Walmart executives persisted in trying to 
lower the price: “They will ask if that zipper is right, or does that 
piece of lace trim add value.”28 While Claiborne kept in Walmart’s 
good graces, Rubbermaid didn’t, and was punished. In the 1990s, 
the ﬁ rm was the leading brand- name maker of items such as 
kitchen trashcans and laundry baskets. “But when the price for 
the main component in its products, resin, more than tripled 
between 1994 and 1996,” journalist Leslie Kaufman wrote, “Wal- 
mart balked at paying increased prices. When Rubbermaid 
insisted, Walmart relegated the manufacturer to undesirable shelf 
space and used its market power to promote . . . Sterilite, which 
made lower- priced nonresin products.”29 Rubbermaid’s proﬁ ts 
plummeted and the company was bought by another household 

74 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
goods giant, Newell.30 Newell managed to get Rubbermaid prod-
ucts back on Walmart’s good side.
In the public’s eye, Walmart’s Darwinian ﬁ xation on efﬁ -
ciency in the name of democratically low prices was most apparent 
in its labor practices. Walmart salaries were quite low, employees 
were nonunion, and huge numbers of their workers didn’t receive 
health beneﬁ ts. In regions with a high labor union population, 
union ofﬁ cials and some government agencies complained that 
the chain’s size and nonunion practices caused beneﬁ ts and wages 
in the area to suffer once Walmart moved in.31 By the late 1990s 
the retailer had abandoned its “Buy American” mantra and 
instead obtained most of its products from ﬁ rms that made them 
outside the United States at much lower cost. Labor advocates 
complained that these factories were routinely among those with 
the worst working conditions. Walmart’s CEO in 2000, Lee Scott, 
adamantly disputed those charges, pointing to a strict code of 
ethics for overseas suppliers and stating that the company cut off 
contractors who violated them. “If you are an admirer of capi-
talism, [Walmart is] the epitome of it,” said economist Carl 
Steidmann of the PricewaterhouseCoopers consulting ﬁ rm in 
2000. “They are the prime example of the good and bad.”32
Retailing consultants and Wall Street brokers tended to 
emphasize the good. By the early 1990s the chain’s efﬁ ciency 
practices reduced its sales costs to 2 to 3 percent below the industry 
average—savings that translated into billions of dollars in addi-
tional revenue for the company.33 In 1993 AT Kearney manage-
ment consultant Burt Flickinger noted that “Wal- Mart is the only 
car on the track with a jet engine under the hood. . . . [It] is so far 
ahead it’s going to be damn tough for anyone to catch up in this 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 75
decade.”34 A 1998 article stated that “Wal- Mart’s ability to use 
data to adjust quickly to market conditions and consumer demand 
has caught the attention of many top business leaders.”35
Competitor retailers, both large and small, were fearful. Local 
merchants in small towns where Walmart had pitched its huge 
tent complained that they could never get manufacturers to 
sell them goods at near the wholesale prices that Walmart, with 
its formidable buying leverage, paid. Even the huge Kmart, Sears, 
J. C. Penney, and Target chains, Walmart’s most direct national 
competitors in the broad discounting realm, struggled mightily to 
keep up with the market share it had gained at their expense.36 
Department stores were especially vulnerable to competition 
during the 1990s, when Walmart was spreading more broadly 
than ever across the United States, and many analysts saw the 
department- store form as inherently weak. The New York Times 
summarized the view held by many: “Once a growth industry 
that racked up proﬁ ts from a rising population tide,” it wrote, 
“retailing has matured into a business where one store’s gains 
now come only at the expense of another. The massive over-
building of shopping complexes during the 1970s has left America 
‘over- malled.’ Yet Americans’ appetite for these products has 
slackened. The baby boom generation that turned shopping into 
a leisure activity is aging, and becoming more interested in saving 
for the future.” Many also thought that traditional department 
stores, such as Macy’s, J. C. Penney, and Burdines, were caught 
between discounters such as Walmart and specialty stores such 
as Gap, Ann Taylor, and Crate and Barrel—and even between 
manufacturers such as Ralph Lauren, Wedgewood, and Burberry 

76 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
that sold their products in department stores. Additional niche 
competition came from twenty- four- hour ordering departments 
of catalog companies such as L.L. Bean and Sharper Image. 
“Department stores are at the end of their life cycle and have to 
be reinvented,” the head of an investment bank told the New 
York Times.37
A number of Wall Street takeover specialists exacerbated the 
situation in the 1980s. Conﬁ dent they could sell department 
stores’ real estate and unrelated businesses for a sizable proﬁ t, this 
group engineered a succession of department- store buyouts that 
caused the debt of the new owners to skyrocket, with retail 
margins that could barely support it. Those huge repayment 
requirements, noted Investor’s Business Daily, “hurt [the compa-
nies’] ability to upgrade stores and systems to better compete with 
discounters like Wal- Mart Stores, Inc.”38 The major economic 
recession in 1990 and 1991 made repayment especially onerous, 
and the fallout was devastating. From 1990 to 1995 a total of 316 
department stores failed, and two such companies, Federated 
Department Stores and Macy’s, entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
protection.39 A healthier Federated bought Macy’s once it emerged 
from Chapter 11 in 1994. Federated had under its umbrella some 
of America’s most famous regional store brands, from Bullock’s in 
the West to Lazarus in the Midwest to Abraham and Strauss and 
Bloomingdale’s in the East. Many hoped that Federated CEO 
Alan Questron, an efﬁ ciency fanatic, would set an example by 
steeling his merchants to face Walmart and other discounters.40
The supermarket business likewise found it difﬁ cult to keep 
pace with Walmart. A spate of acquisitions during the merger- 
happy 1980s–early 1990s brought many regional brands under a 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 77
few prominent names—Kroger, Albertson’s, Safeway—while 
some independent retailers—Harris Teeter, Publix, and Wegmans, 
for example—held their own as respected forces within the 
industry.41 But they all worried about Walmart as its Sam’s Club 
and Supercenters with grocery sections started to open across the 
United States. The discounter’s grocery prices were often set arti-
ﬁ cially low, as executives anticipated that the store would earn 
higher margins when grocery customers went on to also shop in 
the nongrocery aisles. Walmart didn’t follow supermarket- 
industry tradition whereby low margins were made up via a 
second revenue stream from manufacturers that paid for special 
placement and promotion of their goods. Grocers historically 
would charge manufacturers for the right to place certain goods 
on the shelves (“slotting allowances”);42 take some of the money 
manufacturers pay for promoting particular products and use it 
for other purposes (“diverting”);43 and take advantage of promo-
tional pricing by ordering a sale product at a reduced price, then 
holding it until the sale is over and making higher margins on 
the regular price (“forward buying”).44 Because manufacturers 
didn’t have to play these sorts of games with Walmart or Sam’s 
Club, they were happy to give Bentonville a better deal.45 A 
historical review appearing in 2012 in the trade magazine 
Progressive Grocer noted that the supermarket industry in the 
1990s “was put on abrupt notice by the ‘Bentonville Behemoth’ 
. . . [t]hat the rules of the game were in the process of being 
permanently upended by its efﬁ cient, and quite literal, march 
into the food business.” That food business, the magazine added, 
“found [Walmart] at once becoming the most feared, loathed, 
and respected of any retailer on the planet, before or since. 

78 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
Indeed, the weakest links in the industry—those that ignored or 
dismissed Walmart’s potential impact on their marketing turf or 
just refused to evolve to meet new standards—rapidly fell by the 
wayside in a spate of acquisitions, closures and sell- offs.”46
Department stores and supermarkets developed a variety of 
strategies to compete in a Walmart world. Some retailers supported 
community efforts in their towns to oppose the establishment 
of the “Bentonville Behemoth.” These ﬁ ghts often focused on 
academic studies and anecdotal evidence concluding that the 
arrival of a Walmart drove local merchants out of business and 
devastated downtown areas. Typically these battles pitted citizens 
who wanted to retain their traditional shopping districts against 
those who supported the potential economic beneﬁ ts, such as 
new construction jobs and the inﬂ ux of shoppers from outlying 
areas. Although traditional shopping did win at times, it was an 
uphill battle. Some local retailers pursued their own programs in 
the hope of matching Walmart’s vaunted efﬁ ciency levels: by the 
early 1990s, the use of barcodes, electronic data interchange, and 
the so- called just- in- time replenishment of stock was becoming 
common, especially in groceries.47 The department- store retailer 
Nordstrom, for example, touted its rollout in 1992 of an inventory 
system that used radio- enabled UPC scanning devices and touch- 
screen personal computers “to help merchandisers make smarter 
buying decisions and allow them to monitor the unexplained loss 
of goods.”48 Around the same time, Federated was forging ahead 
with software aimed at making planning and buying more efﬁ -
cient.49 These advances could help increase the rate of inventory 
turnover and reduce the need for markdowns and sales. “That’s 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 79
the area of greatest leverage,” agreed Stewart Neill, Saks Fifth 
Avenue’s vice president of management information systems. “If 
you can speed up turn[over]s . . . that will increase proﬁ t more 
than anything else you can do.”50
By the late 1990s, according to Investor’s Business Daily, depart-
ment stores were turning the corner in efﬁ ciency, noting in an 
article that through the decade they “had been building muscle by 
consolidating.” The article added that “to cut costs and better serve 
customers they’ve built clout with vendors in the same way.”51 
Nevertheless, when department stores and supermarkets competed 
toe to toe with Walmart for better margins, they lost. Even its giant 
competitors Kmart and Sears couldn’t match Walmart.52 These big 
chains poured millions of dollars into the kinds of satellite systems 
and back- end technologies Bentonville was using, and yet they 
still experienced smaller margins, decreasing customer counts, 
and lower proﬁ ts. And while Walmart was often ﬁ rst and foremost 
in the minds of many department- store and supermarket execu-
tives during the 1990s and early 2000s, this group also worried 
about direct and indirect competitors in their own industry. For 
department stores this meant big discounters and specialty stores, 
while supermarkets saw Kmart (which carried groceries), limited- 
inventory discount stores (such as Dollar Store), deep- discount 
drugstores (such as Drug Emporium), and convenience stores 
(such as 7–11) as stealing shopper time from their aisles.
In the face of both the efﬁ ciency treadmill and considerable 
competition, supermarket executives began to argue that, beyond 
the need for back- end productivity, the only way to become 
proﬁ table again was to ﬁ nd ways to differentiate themselves from 
the discounters. Advertising Age captured the challenge in a 1993 

80 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
article noting that “much of the supermarket industry seems 
stuck in the same retailing midway that’s creating troubles for 
old- line retailers like Sears, Roebuck and Co. and local depart-
ment stores.” It quoted an advertising executive who encouraged 
executives to shift from trying to ﬁ ll customer desires democrati-
cally to following the pragmatic need for discrimination. “No 
retailer can be all things to all people,” he argued. “If you don’t 
have a clearly deﬁ ned niche in the marketplace, and you don’t 
generate top- of- mind awareness at least among that segment of 
the market that you say you stand for, you are lost.”53
Sure enough, retailing discrimination started to catch on. Bill 
Bishop, founder of the Willard Bishop packaged- goods consul-
tancy, remembers urging skeptical CEO Danny Wegman of 
Wegmans Food Markets to adopt the barcode system for collecting 
information on his customers. “When we ﬁ rst started working 
in the ’80s on loyalty data, people like Danny Wegman didn’t 
want to treat people differently,” Bishop said. But, Bishop said, 
Wegman ultimately came around as he began to understand the 
value of identifying the 20 percent of shoppers who brought in 
80 percent of the revenue.54 The inevitability of discrimination 
was aided by an existing retail business truism stating that the 
declining rate of U.S. population growth meant competition for 
new customers would therefore become substantially more rabid 
and expensive than in the past. Many in the industry argued that 
efﬁ ciency meant retailers needed to place more emphasis on 
retaining good customers than on ﬁ nding new ones—and that 
the way to do that was to learn as much as possible about those 
good customers in order to know what persuasive levers would 
keep them returning.55

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 81
Most retailing experts also agreed that competing on price 
alone was not a winning strategy against Bentonville or other 
discounters. They believed that Walmart was succeeding also 
because in shoppers’ minds its stores were linked to solicitous 
service. True, pricing had to be low, the experts acknowledged, 
and to compete successfully certain high- proﬁ le items needed to 
be heavily discounted. But they also cautioned that relying on 
the lowest price to differentiate one store from its competitors 
would only encourage a deadly race to the bottom against another 
retailer that might be better able to sustain losses. Instead, 
according to a 2003 essay in Progressive Grocer, the key was ﬁ nding 
a large enough niche in the marketplace that eluded Walmart 
and that served speciﬁ c, carefully designated customers and their 
interests. “Being where Wal- Mart isn’t,” the article noted, “means 
targeting customers not served well by Wal- Mart, addressing the 
needs of that segment in a compelling value proposition, and 
then designing value innovations that are hard to copy or disad-
vantageous for Wal- Mart to duplicate. And, of course, the exciting 
outcome . . . is maximized sales, more loyal customers, and an 
impenetrable barrier to the encroaching mega- chain.”56
At its core, this idea wasn’t new. Traditionally department 
stores and supermarkets had attempted to present a particular 
image to draw certain types of shoppers to them over their compe-
tition. In the early 1990s, though, many worried that retailing 
personas were not sharp enough for the new competitive era. 
Department stores in particular were singled out: mergers clouded 
the original brand’s personality; store brands were downplayed in 
favor of nationally advertised merchandise (such as Polo, Etienne 
Aigner) carried by various merchants; baby boomers didn’t share 

82 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
their parents’ loyalty to department stores; and department stores 
tended to follow discounters in focusing on price- oriented rather 
than image advertising. The lack of a clear- cut image pushed 
many shoppers into the hands of Walmart, with its constant 
drumbeat of low prices and service. “Retailers need to prepare 
to ﬁ ght harder for their customers,” a retailing consultant told 
Advertising Age in 1988.57 A senior sales executive at Chicago’s 
Marshall Field’s department store agreed. “There was a time when 
we took our existing customers for granted and saw chasing other 
stores’ customers as the key to growth,” he said. “Now all that’s 
changed, and we see our future growth coming from our current 
customer base.”58
Supermarkets had done at least a little better in establishing 
individual images. In 1986 a stock analyst told Advertising Age 
that the Albertson’s supermarket chain’s “niche has been to offer 
attractive stores, specialty departments, nonfood merchandise, 
and a little more service at a slightly higher price.”59 With few 
exceptions, though, supermarket images were not immune to 
encroachment from Walmart, and stand- alone grocery busi-
nesses were losing ground to the discounters that also offered 
food aisles. This was a new world.
A refurbished loyalty program seemed an obvious solution. 
But instead of trading stamps, many stores took a cue from airline 
and credit card companies and offered reward programs, which 
for retailers meant awarding points based on purchases so that 
customers could redeem them in the form of discounts and 
rebates at checkout. “It’s hard to walk into a supermarket or 
department store these days without being asked to join their 
‘preferred customer’ club,” noted a 1993 Advertising Age article.60 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 83
Naysayers saw such activities as misguided. A director at the Bain 
& Company consultant ﬁ rm considered it a way of “bribing” 
customers to continue buying, a strategy that he said rarely pays 
off in the long run.61 Don Schultz of Northwestern University’s 
Integrated Marketing program agreed. “I see an awful lot of 
[marketers] who get into it, can’t ﬁ gure out how to make it work 
and get out pretty quickly,” he told Advertising Age. Walmart had 
no loyalty program.
Some urged that loyalty programs be transformed rather than 
discarded. The real utility in such programs, they insisted, was 
not in bribing customers but in the valuable insights they could 
glean about them.62 Walmart’s target audience consisted of shop-
pers from one socioeconomic background, so competitors that 
collected data via rewards programs could identify other types of 
customers and pursue those groups. Shoppers who saved money 
as a result of their membership in the program would be encour-
aged to continue buying from the same retailer, while at the same 
time the retailer would learn much about these repeat customers. 
Knowing the buying habits of the most frequent and highest 
spending customers could enable a store to develop its “best 
customer” proﬁ le and therefore its most effective market niche. 
The same technologies that enabled stores to collect this informa-
tion also enabled them to reach out to customers with individual-
ized rewards or discounts. And of course other stores wouldn’t 
even be aware of—and so couldn’t match—these speciﬁ c offers. 
An executive from the Epsilon database company referred to 
such offers as “a stealth weapon in frequency marketing.”63
Catalog companies likewise began adopting a targeted 
approach to reach speciﬁ c customers. By the late twentieth century 

84 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
these companies faced huge costs associated with producing and 
mailing their promotional materials. A data analyst for the catalog 
company Lands’ End noted that “we’d go bankrupt quickly” 
without sophisticated analysis to cull the most likely buyers of 
items in speciﬁ c catalogs from the twenty million names in his 
ﬁ rm’s database.64 The high cost of producing and mailing catalogs 
may explain why retailing experts have tended to exhort retailers 
to ﬁ nd ways to reward the “most valuable (and most proﬁ table)” 
customers in the store itself.65
Department stores were slow to adopt a personalized 
approach. In the early 1990s they were preoccupied with trying 
to make their behind- the- scenes operations more efﬁ cient as the 
best way of keeping their books balanced. For them the chal-
lenge was to be proﬁ table by offering their target clientele the 
right merchandise when they wanted it and in the right amounts 
and sizes, and at the right prices. Still, many department stores 
did attempt to take what data they had and made targeted mail-
ings based on gender, income, and lifestyle. Taking a page from 
their forebears, several built personal- shopper programs aimed 
primarily at corporate customers short on time or fashion sense.66 
Pursuing technologies for in- store personalized deals based on 
rewards program data didn’t gain traction for at least another 
decade.
In contrast, the idea did begin to take hold in the supermarket 
business, as those executives were recognizing that individual-
ized shopper attention could prevent defections to competitors. 
“The average shopper is spending $50, $60, $100 a week in a 
supermarket and yet the store is not in personal contact with 
that customer,” Progressive Grocer’s editor told the New York Times 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 85
in 1991.67 Not only did supermarket executives recognize that 
personalization could establish a level of connection with 
customers that would keep them from shopping elsewhere, they 
also believed that their suppliers would pay them to do it. A 
power shift had occurred in the grocery business, as manufac-
turers now depended more than ever on stores for reaching 
people with messages about their products. One reason for the 
change was the shopping environment; research conducted in 
the late 1980s and into the 1990s consistently showed that a 
large percentage—some argued as high as 80 percent—of shop-
pers made their decisions on speciﬁ c brand purchases in the 
supermarket aisles.68 Manufacturers saw this as an opportunity 
to use advertising, and especially coupons, more effectively.69 
Procter & Gamble (P&G) CEO A. G. Lafﬂ ey referred to it as “the 
ﬁ rst moment of truth,” the instance when all the money the 
company had invested to push its creations was tested.70
Traditionally, P&G and other manufacturers of branded prod-
ucts spent greatly on advertising their products in mass media. 
They also placed discount coupons in circulars that were distrib-
uted by mail, in stores, and in newspapers. Americans redeemed 
roughly 1.7 billion coupons in 1993.71 Considerable cost was 
involved to produce and redeem the coupons (each one had to 
be hand- counted), and the brand manufacturers tended to see 
them as an unfortunate cultural addiction that they wished they 
could eliminate.72 Unable to do away with them outright (though 
P&G did experiment with this),73 they tried other tactics to 
increase their effectiveness. One involved placing UPC codes on 
coupons for scanning as a way to reduce their processing costs.74 
Companies also began to focus more on increased in- store 

86 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
distribution, which they found could generate four or ﬁ ve times 
the response rate of newspaper inserts.
Although supermarket operators proﬁ ted by redeeming shop-
pers’ coupons, they realized they could earn more by allowing 
vendors to set up advertising or coupon- distribution technologies 
in their stores and then charging them for a portion of their earn-
ings—typically either a ﬂ at fee or a guaranteed percentage (some-
times as much as 25 percent). Advertising Age estimated that large 
chains such as Kroger, which operated 1,234 supermarkets in 
twenty- four states in 1990, could earn $1 million or more by 
allowing the dispensing of coupons alone. “This revenue- 
generating potential doesn’t go unnoticed in an industry that 
operates on a tight proﬁ t margin,” the trade magazine noted.75 A 
horde of technology companies then descended on supermarkets, 
with various mechanisms for in- store advertising and coupon 
circulation. Depending on the store and the region, shoppers 
might see electronic advertising signs, various video information 
displays, shopping calculators (with ads), ad- supported radio 
networks, and both shelf- based and checkout- based coupon 
dispensers. “It’s becoming a blur,” said an ad agency executive 
about the profusion of promotional options.76
Progressive Grocer estimated in 1991 that 12 percent of the 
seventeen thousand chain stores and 3 percent of independent 
grocers offered some sort of electronic coupon program at 
checkout. Many tried tailoring those coupons to the purchaser’s 
buying habits. Von’s supermarket chain of southern California, for 
example, replaced what Progressive Grocer called a “standard” 
loyalty program in 1990 with one that cross- indexed “by customer 
and product category” the purchases of the program’s three 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 87
million members. Based on this information, Von’s mailed speciﬁ c 
promotions to members, matching what they had previously 
bought with participating marketers’ coupons.77 King’s Super 
Markets sent targeted letters to its reward card holders. “It’s 
possible to do a mailing to kosher customers,” said an executive. 
“It’s possible to write to people who never buy pasta to try to win 
them over.” The store even mailed letters to customers who hadn’t 
used their cards in a while in an attempt to rekindle their interest.78
By today’s standards, these tailored actions seem a fairly 
simple targeting of customers by segments as opposed to the more 
current sorts of multivariate analysis that yield very speciﬁ c 
insights into shopping habits. Nevertheless, the scanners spewed 
out so many data points that the industry found itself over-
whelmed. The New York Times noted in 1991 that “the data is so 
hard to use because its volume is intimidating and using data of 
any kind in the supermarket industry is new. The very fact that 
stores can ﬁ nd out almost anything they wish from the data is 
bewildering to some managers. Should they pursue lost customers? 
Senior citizens? Young couples with more than one child? Once 
they do choose a group, what enticement should they offer?”79 
The manager of Ukrop’s Super Markets in Richmond, Virginia, 
agreed. “You have to be careful because there’s so much [scanner 
data] out there you can be run over by it.”80
Despite the immense analytical challenges, many supermarket 
executives believed that they couldn’t afford to ignore the person-
alizing possibilities of database marketing in view of the intense 
competition among stores. Yet even though the biggest suppliers 
had the cash and expertise to conduct these database explora-
tions, the grocers typically weren’t willing to share their data with 

88 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
them. An exception was a ﬁ rm called Catalina Marketing, which 
was enlisted by grocers to connect purchased items to customers 
only by their loyalty numbers, not by any personal information. 
Based on Catalina’s straightforward analysis of an individual shop-
per’s purchases over time, discount coupons would be printed at 
checkout using a small Catalina- installed system; manufacturers 
paid the ﬁ rm to generate the coupons.81 So, for example, a shopper 
who buys shaving cream every six weeks might, ﬁ ve weeks after 
his last purchase, be presented with a coupon from a shaving- 
cream brand he didn’t use—or from one he did use, depending on 
the brand that paid for the coupon.82 In 1994, Catalina was sharing 
its coupon revenues with seven thousand supermarkets.83
Many of the merchants that didn’t use Catalina were simply 
overwhelmed by the amount of data involved or were generally 
reluctant to adopt personalization. One such grocer, Von’s, found 
it so difﬁ cult to conduct sophisticated analysis of its database that 
the grocer fell back on distributing electronic coupons based just 
on the presentation of a frequent shopper card.84 A year later, 
however, Von’s was back again with a rewards program that tried 
to match shopper purchases with manufacturers’ coupons.85 
Because of the consistently low level of statistical capability 
among grocers, some in the industry believed that supermarkets 
would ultimately have to bring in sophisticated third parties—
even major high- tech ﬁ rms such as IBM and NCR—to cull 
purchase information and buy third- party data to encourage an 
actual “two- way dialogue between the retailer and the customer 
[in the form of] personalized communication.”86
By the mid- 1990s the level of personalized communication 
supermarkets conducted with their customers didn’t seem that 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 89
much different from department stores’ approaches to their clien-
tele via in- store frequent- shopper point accumulations and 
targeted mailings. The insulated nature of both industries, their 
lack of data- analysis capabilities, and the high monetary and 
competitive costs involved all had stood in the way. But despite 
the industries’ reluctance to embrace the new technologies, they 
soon concluded that database-driven personalization was a valu-
able activity that should become an integral part of retailers’ rela-
tionships with shoppers—if not immediately, then down the 
road. And as it turned out, developments in electronic commerce 
were making that road more navigable. Yet the department- store 
and supermarket industries still needed another ﬁ fteen years to 
make widespread in- store personalization a priority.
The stirrings of electronic commerce date back to the 1970s, 
and the 1980s saw the creation of a number of key endeavors, 
including France Telecom’s Minitel online ordering system (1982) 
and CompuServe’s Electronic Mall, the ﬁ rst comprehensive elec-
tronic commerce service in the United States and Canada (1984). 
The 1990s ushered in transformative changes that ignited 
e- commerce along the lines we see today—particularly at mid-
decade, when developments reinforced retailers’ growing interest 
in using technologies for personalizing their relationships with 
shoppers.87 A signal of things to come was a 1993 Adweek article 
urging the advertising industry to “take note” of the internet. The 
emerging technology has, the essay said, “the potential to become 
the next great mass/personal medium.”88 The U.S. government 
had recently begun to allow private activities on the internet, 
which had previously been a vehicle mostly for university and 

90 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
military researchers. The major internet- related breakthrough for 
advertising and commerce was Tim Berners- Lee’s 1989 invention 
of the World Wide Web system of hyperlinks. It led to the creation 
of graphical Web viewers (browsers), notably (in 1993) Mosaic 
and, a year later, Netscape, which were the ﬁ rst popular ones. 
Browsers allowed people to peruse photos and information 
regarding goods for sale on websites, and to make purchases of 
those goods directly on the sites.
Mosaic was an apt name for the browser, as websites are typi-
cally a mosaic resulting from “a two- way interaction between 
users and a company’s webserver (the computers that host 
internet content).”89 When a user types a Web address into a 
browser, that person’s computer is requesting to view the content 
of a speciﬁ c page. Although a website’s words and images seem 
to appear almost instantaneously, the conversation between a 
user’s computer and the website’s server covers several compli-
cated steps. In general, each item on a page is requested and 
issued individually. Although the website dynamically generates 
content, the page itself is “assembled” on the user’s computer, 
which downloads software code from the website and executes it 
on the user’s system in order to create the Web page.90
The origin of the content you see on the browser depends on 
the site that you requested. Sometimes most of the content comes 
directly from the website you chose—called “ﬁ rst party”—and 
whose URL appears at the top of the browser. But often at least 
part of the content is delivered from elsewhere—“third parties,” 
which deliver material to your chosen site typically with the 
permission of that site. Commercial messages are the most 
common third- party additions. Of particular interest to advertisers 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 91
is the Web’s ability to identify certain aspects of the person receiving 
that message even without the person realizing it. When you go to 
a website this interaction is recorded on the website’s server, along 
with various information regarding the interaction, such as your 
computer’s internet protocol (IP) address—a string of numbers 
associated with your computer. The IP address can reveal your 
computer’s geographic location within a few hundred feet. The 
website can also record the browser you are using, the language 
you are using to communicate, and the speed of your transmis-
sion. This information enables the website to tailor commercial 
content appropriate to your device (that is, the correct language 
and the right graphical layouts).
But this sort of information, helpful though it is, isn’t nearly 
enough for advertisers hungry for audience information. For one 
thing, IP addresses aren’t useful for identifying a speciﬁ c user 
indeﬁ nitely. Internet service providers might change home users’ 
addresses every few days, and when multiple computers share one 
IP address, as is the case with most standard home networks, it’s 
impossible to know whether one computer or several computers 
are being tracked. One way to be sure of a user’s identity was to 
ask individuals to log in to a website each time, though early on 
this was not considered a particularly good alternative. Another 
issue involved tracking purchases on a site. At ﬁ rst browsers were 
set up so that people wanting to buy more than one item had to 
buy each item separately; Mosaic had no way to store choices—the 
electronic shopping cart had yet to be instituted—and so a person 
could not purchase the items together.
A crucial step in the ability of advertisers to collect informa-
tion on individuals was the invention of the computer cookie in 

92 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
1993. Cookies are typically small text ﬁ les that are placed on a 
user’s hard drive by the website the individual is visiting, and 
only the person or organization placing the cookie can access it. 
Even after a user exits out of a website, the cookies placed by the 
website remain on the individual’s computer. Companies quickly 
realized that cookies could enable them to gather much informa-
tion about an individual, including the dates and times when the 
person visits their website. Moreover, if a website could get a 
shopper to log in or otherwise provide the person’s name, email 
address, or other personal information, this data could also be 
added to the cookie. The website could retain the information on 
its servers even if the user erased the cookie (as privacy activists 
increasingly advocated), enabling it to reconnect the information 
the next time the person logged in.
Advertising ﬁ rms also discovered that they could recognize 
people across sites by placing “third- party” cookies on the user’s 
computer, enabling the marketers to follow individuals from 
website to website—any site from which the marketers had 
permission to place cookies—and to record a person’s presence 
and activities on each site. An advertiser, a network of adver-
tisers, or a database company that had made cookie- placing 
agreements on thousands of websites (or more) could compile a 
substantial listing regarding websites an individual had visited—
and make inferences about the person’s lifestyle and interests and 
how those might affect the individual’s purchase patterns.
The cookie was the most crucial of a range of emerging devel-
opments that deepened the notion that the Web was a place for 
promoting products as well as collecting data on individuals and 
then using that information to entice them to make a purchase.91 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 93
But despite exhortations from trade journals, retailers approached 
tailored communication rather irregularly and experimentally, 
even as the Web quickly became a model for compiling data on 
consumers. “You don’t want your company to be left at the 
starting gate as more nimble competitors race toward the pot of 
gold in electronic commerce,” lectured a Computerworld colum-
nist.92 An article in Progressive Grocer predicted that “everything 
we currently imagine we know about the consumers will be 
redeﬁ ned in the next 10 to 15 years.” The article urged readers to 
“just think of the [small] differences between micromarketing to 
physical neighborhood and a cyber community. . . . Or consider 
what service means in a virtual shopping environment in which 
the retailer never physically meets the consumer, but where they 
know more about that shopper as an individual than any ‘place- 
based’ retailer who sees the consumer three times a week.”93
But exactly when this complete transformation was going to 
occur was open to question. The Computerworld article, titled “Old 
Rules Apply in the Marketplace of the Future,” cautioned that 
retailers must create an electronic marketplace “that supports the 
entire procurement process” and is not just caught up in the 
enthusiasm of selling as long as the transactions are secure.94 
(Visa, MasterCard, Microsoft, and Netscape were already hard at 
work on transaction security.) The Progressive Grocer envisioned a 
time frame far beyond the typical ﬁ ve- year business plan. An 
editorial by the retailing editor of Computerworld in 1996 under-
scored that Web commerce was a long- term wager. “Current 
betting is that Web- based shopping will be slow to catch on 
because it is only appropriate for certain types of purchases,” he 
wrote. He suggested that “anything that requires real- time, 

94 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
hands- on examination is probably safe—for now.” He predicted 
that new multimedia development tools, such as Sun’s Java, 
could eventually deliver “Jetsonesque” experiences such as 
online digital dressing rooms and digital agents to handle “time- 
consuming” personal shopping. But when these sorts of tech-
nologies do become reality, he noted, “like it or not, you’ll have 
to make sure your web presence is second to none.”95
The efforts of the trade press notwithstanding, many physical 
retailers were hardly persuaded that the Web deserved their 
attention, though some were experimenting with an online pres-
ence. In anticipation of the holiday shopping season in 1996 
some major retailers launched websites, including Sharper Image, 
Saks Fifth Avenue, F.A.O. Schwartz, Eddie Bauer, J.C. Penney, 
and Omaha Steaks. Private online services such as America 
Online and CompuServe also offered electronic stores from 
companies with physical counterparts, but, according to a New 
York Times article, the overall internet “has a far greater variety.” 
One way a retailer might achieve a Web presence at that time 
was to join a so- called cybermall, which presented various stores 
under the umbrella of one master site. In 1996 Saks, Eddie Bauer, 
and Omaha Steaks were part of a cybermall owned and operated 
by Time Warner Cable. Such approaches were more prevalent in 
the pre- Google world, when Web directories such as Yahoo! and 
search engines such as Infoseek and Excite had yet to optimize 
their navigation functions. “Finding what you are looking for can 
be both difﬁ cult and time consuming,” the Times article cautioned, 
“and many newcomers to the Web will tire of having to jump 
from site to site and item to item, an experience that has earned 
Net shopping the reputation of ‘Death by 1,000 clicks.’ Others 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 95
will enjoy the adventure and ﬁ nd it like window shopping, 
without the sore feet.”96 A year later, an article in the Washington 
Post also reﬂ ected online retailers’ desire to be seen as “growing 
and quickly becoming more mainstream.”97
With an increasing number of people using the internet for 
shopping, the case for physical stores establishing a Web presence 
seemed apparent. At this time direct- marketing advertisers were 
setting the pace online, serving ads to individuals based on increas-
ingly speciﬁ c data pertaining to their online habits as well as their 
ofﬂ ine habits. (Ofﬂ ine information was purchased from non- Web 
database ﬁ rms such as Acxiom.) Meanwhile, online- only retailers 
such as Amazon were using cookies to show returning shoppers 
items they might be interested in buying based on their previous 
activity on the site, as well as on the retailers’ data analysis of 
other people they deemed to have similar shopping inclinations. 
Some observers began to suspect that online retailers were also 
using their databases to tailor prices to individuals, though the 
merchants weren’t saying and direct evidence for this was slim. 
Data collection for commercial purposes increasingly ignited 
discussions in the press, academia, the federal government, and 
state governments about privacy and surveillance and their 
potential limits, and about whether any limits should be volun-
tary or mandated by law. Web enthusiasts played down any 
potential harm to consumers and instead touted the beneﬁ ts of 
offering ads and products of speciﬁ c relevance to an individual. 
They also argued that data- driven Web commerce was a great 
engine of American economic growth.
Physical retailers observed these developments and recog-
nized that data- driven targeting and personalization held great 

96 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
promise. They increasingly parsed their customer and loyalty data 
for targeted mailings of sales and catalogs. Yet they were reluctant 
to spend the tens of millions of dollars it would to take to mount 
“a web presence second to none,” concerned that the Web was 
actually geared toward catalog rather than brick- and- mortar 
sellers. Indeed, it was no coincidence that several of the stores 
featured in the 1996 New York Times article had strong mail- order 
businesses. Firms such as Eddie Bauer and Omaha Steaks were 
already well positioned for handling online ordering and fulﬁ ll-
ment; ﬁ rms that existed outside the mall, such as Lands’ End, 
were likewise good candidates for the Web. Walmart became 
involved in 1996 with the help of Microsoft and then revamped 
the site on its own several years later. Department stores, however, 
typically were not prepared to compete. Bloomingdale’s tried 
establishing a website, but by 1999 it no longer existed.98 As of 
2004 Lord & Taylor still didn’t have one at all. Macy’s offered a 
relatively thin site at ﬁ rst, but in 1999 its parent company, 
Federated Department Stores, expanded it and also purchased 
catalog retailer Fingerhut at a cost of $1.7 billion to hone its logis-
tical and fulﬁ llment expertise.99 A Federated executive noted at 
the time, “None of us knows how big e- commerce will be. But 
I’m convinced that the company that gets the most out of 
commerce will have to have database marketing and order fulﬁ ll-
ment capabilities—not just a fancy website.”100
Although mindful of the direct- marketing model, Macy’s exec-
utives and their counterparts at other department stores during the 
early 2000s typically viewed internet commerce as a business to be 
run parallel to, but separately from, their physical store aisles. The 
databases for each were typically unconnected. High- end retailer 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 97
Bloomingdale’s, for example, used a sophisticated system called 
Klondike to identify and cultivate its top customers who shopped 
either in the physical store or by calling its toll- free ordering 
number, but this system was not connected to activities on its 
website. As early as 1998 Walmart began to allow customers to 
pick up Web orders in a store near their home.101 But this policy 
did not result from enthusiasm for the new retailing form; rather it 
grew out of a speciﬁ c need—many customers did not have a credit 
card and so needed to pay in person with cash. Beginning in 1998 
Macy’s also allowed store pickup for online orders. In 1998 it 
brought its website under a new interactive division based in San 
Francisco. The division’s head said that the website had the poten-
tial for increasing store sales by attracting younger customers and 
encouraging purchases from home, especially in markets without 
Macy’s brick- and- mortar stores. Yet the chain’s leadership was 
keen for shoppers to see Macy’s.com as separate from the physical 
establishment so that the former wouldn’t be “eating away at its 
department store trade,” reported the Atlanta Journal and 
Constitution. “Macys.com is designed to attract customers who don’t 
like department stores.”102
In the grocery industry various attempts had been made to 
sell food online from almost the Web’s commercial beginnings. 
Services such as Webvan and Peapod received much attention for 
attempting to carve out a niche that involved quick delivery of 
perishables that had been ordered online. Most lost money (as did 
many Web ventures at ﬁ rst, including Amazon) and were minis-
cule in reach. Larger, mainstream grocers such as Kroger and 
Albertson’s experimented with Web- driven home distribution 
services in the 1990s and early 2000s, but they saw the internet’s 

98 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
utility mainly as an extension of their promotion business. In fact, 
supermarket executives saw the Web as even more distinct from 
their physical stores than department stores did. A 1998 Progressive 
Grocer article encouraged the personalization possibilities associ-
ated with promotional use of the internet. “In on- line shopping 
models,” the article noted, “on- line ads, coupons, new product 
announcements and a wide range of promotional events can be 
delivered precisely to speciﬁ c households with speciﬁ c demo-
graphics and buying histories.”103 Clearly the public was ready to 
take advantage of ways that the internet could beneﬁ t their 
grocery shopping. The New York Times noted that the number of 
shoppers who visited the coupon- dedicated site Supermarkets
.com every month grew from twenty thousand in early 1998 to 
three million just over a year later. Coupon sites took off when 
manufacturers realized that shoppers would not go to their corpo-
rate websites in search of coupons. They therefore made deals 
with many sites, including supermarket sites, to circulate the 
deals. Consumers could print coupons and redeem them at their 
grocery store. Although traditional newspaper inserts and postal 
circulars overwhelmingly remained the predominant means for 
receiving coupons, the Times noted that “on- line coupons offer a 
major advantage: customization. Instead of picking through a 
random selection of coupons that arrive in the mail or tucked into 
the daily newspaper, shoppers can ﬁ ll out on- line questionnaires 
specifying their interests, ZIP codes and shopping habits and then 
receive E- mail with relevant offers on a regular basis.” Industry 
analyst James McQuivey predicted that the targeting and person-
alization of the online coupon business would evolve rapidly. 
“This is just the ﬁ rst step in the evolution of on- line coupons 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 99
because there’s an enormous opportunity here,” he told the Times. 
“In the next two to three years, companies will ﬁ gure out how to 
get coupons more and more easily to consumers.”104
Electronic coupon delivery proved to be a growing part of 
the armamentarium that supermarket chains used to try and 
keep customers from straying to other grocery- only competitors 
or the food- and- everything- else stores of Walmart and other 
discounters. However, the grocers realized they needed to asso-
ciate coupon distribution with their own identities as opposed to 
using freestanding coupon sites. One way to do that would be to 
present their database- determined valued customers with 
targeted offers. A variety of emerging ﬁ rms were engaged to do 
heavy lifting. The Food Lion chain hired a company called Bigfoot 
Interactive to provide email communications solutions “for 
ongoing customer retention and coupon incentive efforts.”105 
Foodtown hired S&H Greenpoints, the twenty- ﬁ rst-century 
incarnation of the popular Sperry & Hutchinson Green Stamps, 
to help manage its rewards program for points “that can be 
earned online, ofﬂ ine or via credit card, and can be redeemed at 
both clicks- and- mortar and bricks- and- mortar stores.”106 And 
the Great Atlantic & Paciﬁ c Tea Co., still in business but far 
smaller than in its heyday before World War II, analyzed the A&P 
loyalty program’s database and created targeted coupon offers for 
frequent shoppers. The program, called One- to- One Direct, sent 
the offers via the U.S. Postal Service.107
Inside supermarkets themselves the grocers launched a new 
wave of targeted- coupon distribution. Prior to 2000, they typically 
distributed personalized in- store coupons to customers as they 
exited, most often via Catalina printers. The redemption rate of 

100 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
Catalina coupons was higher than that of newspaper coupons—
6–7 percent as opposed to 3 percent. Still, grocers and manufac-
turers complained that shoppers lost many of the checkout coupons 
before they returned to shop again. While not giving up on the 
Catalina printers some grocers, in response to the growth of general 
coupon websites, started to target shoppers in the early 2000s as 
they entered the store or moved through the aisles, mostly through 
newly installed kiosks. At the kiosks shoppers could swipe their 
rewards cards in machines that then generated coupons tailored to 
what the grocer and participating manufacturers believed would 
interest the customers as they moved through the store. A more 
sophisticated technology involved radio- connected carts or hand-
held devices that were linked wirelessly to a store computer and 
that offered shoppers various supermarket services (such as noti-
fying them when deli orders were ready) as well discounts based 
on database information; in 2004, both Albertson’s and Stop & 
Shop were experimenting with these systems.
Neither the kiosks nor the other high- tech gizmos caught on. 
Perhaps they were simply too expensive for stores to justify their 
use, and maybe customers simply found them too complicated to 
operate. And possibly grocers were growing a bit impatient with 
rewards programs overall, which too often were compromised by 
normal human behaviors. “Quite frankly, we’ve been hard- 
pressed to ﬁ nd retailers that are doing the customer loyalty 
program with speciﬁ c customer successes,” noted a retailing 
consultant in 2007. “Shoppers forget to bring their cards for every 
trip, and/or borrow someone else’s, and the integrity of the data is 
then compromised. Pretty soon all the intelligence that an expen-
sive loyalty program has gathered is useless.”108 Still, the logic 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 101
linking Web promotion to the physical store was clear: if Web 
marketers could track people’s activities and send them coupons 
online, perhaps grocers could apply the same process even more 
successfully as people moved through the stores. And for manu-
facturers anxious to identify likely and valuable customers and to 
learn as much about them as possible, the ability to personalize a 
deal as a person faced an actual “ﬁ rst moment of truth” could be 
an exciting development.
The mobile phone greatly simpliﬁ ed efforts to achieve this 
goal. For the ﬁ rst time the shopper, rather than the merchant, 
brought the connecting technology into the store—and that 
technology could be used to reliably identify the individual. An 
early approach, the Mobile Rewards system from Boston- based 
MobileLime, transformed a shopper’s cell phone number into a 
unique identiﬁ er. “Employing the cellular- based payment and 
loyalty capabilities, the single- store operator will offer shoppers 
instant, individualized rewards without the cost and inconve-
nience of standard in- store reward cards,” noted Progressive Grocer 
in 2005. Mobile Rewards enabled a supermarket “to tailor special 
promotions and send real- time offers to customers” as they 
moved through the store; shoppers were sent text messages and 
were invited to use their cell phone to call a dedicated toll- free 
number for bargains.109 In a follow- up piece two years later, the 
trade magazine concluded that the program was transforming 
the “lowly mobile phone into a marketing, loyalty, and payment 
device.”110 In the United States at this time, the plain ﬂ ip phone 
(or “feature phone”) was by far the most popular type of cell 
phone among the 77 percent of adults who owned a mobile 

102 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
phone.111 Smartphones—devices that connected to the internet 
as well as to cellular phone networks—represented just 4 percent 
of the mobile market.112 Those numbers would soon change 
radically with Apple’s release that same year of the iPhone, which 
reshaped Americans’ understanding of mobility and inﬂ uenced 
the creation of the open- source Android smartphone operating 
system that would ultimately dominate the market.
By 2009 only about 29 percent of Americans owned smart-
phones, but those who did tended to be upscale and were there-
fore desirable to marketers.113 Clearly if stores could use the ﬂ ip 
phone to identify shoppers and cultivate personalized relation-
ships with them, they could do the same thing with the smart-
phone, but with far more gusto: these phones could accept 
cookies from websites, and they could be tracked. At this time 
most of retailing wasn’t yet taking advantage of the smartphone’s 
capabilities, but industry analysts believed that the devices, espe-
cially Apple’s version, indicated a need to rethink how stores 
approached shoppers. “Few devices have revolutionized the way 
people communicate and live more quickly than the Apple 
iPhone,” marveled a Progressive Grocer columnist in late 2009. 
With the advent of home computers and now cell phones, many 
analysts believed that shoppers for the ﬁ rst time had supreme 
leverage over the retailer because they could access these tech-
nologies to obtain coupons, investigate product quality, compare 
prices, and make purchases. “The consumer is now in control—
think ‘Command Center,’ noted the Progressive Grocer.114 “The 
challenge for retailers,” the writer emphasized, “is to ﬁ gure out 
how to use the technology, and your relationships with shop-
pers, to the beneﬁ t of your [store’s] brand.”115

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 103
Supermarkets still considered Walmart to be their main 
nemesis, but their concern had moderated somewhat when the 
chain halted its rabid march across the United States in favor of 
overseas expansion. Some in the industry also pointed out that 
Bentonville wasn’t bulletproof even on a supermarket’s home 
turf. Because the discounter’s primary customers were from the 
lower economic end of the earnings spectrum—albeit a large and 
growing chunk of America—supermarket chains realized they 
could pursue more lucrative customers with broader, deeper—and 
higher margin—arrays of packaged goods. By contrast, they saw 
Amazon as a growing threat. The online behemoth was a major 
force in the growing grocery home delivery movement. Amazon 
Mom, a diaper subscription program launched in 2010, offered 30 
percent off diaper supplies, often with free two- day shipping.116 
Supermarket News noted that the deal undercut just about everyone, 
including Walmart. “Thirty percent is a huge incentive to steal a 
trip and loyalty [from the supermarket] and try to build the mom’s 
[Amazon shopping basket] up,” noted an industry consultant.117
And it wasn’t just diapers, as Amazon began to experiment 
with home delivery of all sorts of groceries in the area surrounding 
its Seattle base. Called AmazonFresh, the program offered free 
delivery for orders of $75 or more (and $5.99 for orders under 
$75). Further, customers who lived in certain ZIP codes and who 
shopped once a week and scheduled deliveries on a speciﬁ c day 
would receive free delivery with any purchase.118 The ﬁ rm had 
experimented with grocery delivery since 2006, enlarging the 
service steadily over the subsequent ﬁ ve years. In early 2011 an 
article in Supermarket News reported that the company was mulling 
expansion of the service beyond the Seattle area. The article quoted 

104 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
an analyst who noted that Amazon could expand its grocery 
delivery “as far as it wants as long as it has enough of a distribution 
system, because there’s a limit on how far it can go from just one 
hub.”119 Amazon had, in fact, begun rapidly expanding its ware-
houses across the country.
Also in 2011 Amazon introduced its price- check app, which 
grocers realized was a major threat to their control over their 
store environment. An app that enabled customers to seek lower 
prices from Amazon as they moved through the aisles of their 
local supermarket could well result in increased grocery purchases 
outside the physical store. The widespread concern that perme-
ated the retail department- store industry had now spread to the 
grocery industry. “Amazon is the biggest thing to hit retailing 
since Wal- Mart went national,” proclaimed the Journal of 
Commerce Online.120 Investor’s Business Daily viewed physical retail-
ing’s predicament quite ominously. “With e-commerce now a 
major share of core retail sales and growing rapidly, the writing 
is on the brick-and-mortar wall,” it said. “Adapt or die,” the peri-
odical added.121
Many believed that the large chains Circuit City electronics 
and Borders books folded principally because an increasing 
number of shoppers used these physical stores just to “show-
room”—they would go to a store to check prices before making 
their purchases online from Amazon or other e- tailers.122 The 
smartphone (used by about 42 percent of the U.S. population by 
2011)123 was a handy tool in helping consumers compare prices 
as they walked through the stores. Department- store executives 
recognized that they needed to make fundamental changes, 
reported Investor’s Business Daily. “To survive, traditional retailers 

TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE 105
such as Macy’s [and] Nordstrom . . . are adapting to a fast- 
changing landscape in which the old one- size- ﬁ ts- all model no 
longer works with today’s cross channel shoppers.”124 An imme-
diate response was to stop carrying products that shoppers could 
showroom. The trade press reported that stores began working 
with manufacturers to modify particular items slightly so that 
they would each be assigned a unique barcode. Department 
stores also reverted to their pre–World War II policy of carrying 
clothes with store labels. Macy’s, now the largest U.S. department- 
store operator, reported in 2012 that 43 percent of all the prod-
ucts in its aisles were either exclusive brands like Madonna 
Material Girl or in limited distribution and so hard to ﬁ nd else-
where.125 Many types of retailers, including supermarkets, could 
adopt this tactic, but it was not nearly enough; Amazon and 
other online sellers could come up with similar items that met or 
exceeded the quality of the physical retailers’ house brands, with 
quick tryout turnaround and at lower prices. Investor’s Business 
Daily reported that the house brand was just part of a more 
comprehensive strategy for competing with the Web and 
showrooming. Retailers, it noted, had “started to integrate the 
virtual and physical store worlds to give customers a similar 
experience.”126
In the following chapters I will show that this integration is 
bringing us into a new era of shopping, with the retailing institu-
tion tilted ﬁ rmly toward the ancient merchant impulse of discrim-
ination. The difference is that, in the new world of the universal 
product code and the internet—and the ballooning amount of 
personal information that these technologies can generate on 
virtually any customer—it will be accomplished much more 

106 TOWARD THE DATA-POWERED AISLE
intensely. It will involve an interlocking system of new and 
old organizations committed to accumulating ever- increasing 
amounts of data on individual shoppers along with furthering the 
technologies to track and persuade them. All this information, 
and all these resources, are changing the industries’ understanding 
of the shoppers who move through their stores, of their stores’ 
layouts, and of the deals they can make with particular customers. 
The new world of the physical store is linked to a multifaceted 
approach to buying and selling, and it is challenging shoppers’ 
understanding of the marketplace, themselves, and even the 
traditional association between shopping and democratic social 
life that has become such a strong part of American culture.

107
4  HUNTING THE MOBILE 
SHOPPER
“Bricks and mortar is dead; long live bricks and mortar!” This 
was the surprising theme that emerged from the sprawling 2014 
Internet Retailer Conference and Exhibition, reported Laura 
Heller, editor in chief of the online trade magazine FierceRetail.1 
Everybody in retail had previously been emphasizing only the 
tremendous advantage that digital retailers had over physical 
stores because of the vast amounts of customer information they 
could amass and exploit. True, brick- and- mortar stores also could 
size up customers by recording their purchase history and by 
purchasing additional information about them from data brokers. 
But digital sellers could do the same—and a whole lot more. 
They could follow customers around the internet and track them 
at any site where they had shopped, and they could also present 
them with ads on other sites for the same items the shoppers had 
viewed earlier on the merchants’ site. When those shoppers 
returned to the sellers’ website the merchant could offer up the 
products they had previously considered and possibly rejigger 
the deal—change the price, add other items, reconﬁ gure the 
warranty, and more—based on the shopper’s assessed value to 
the business, such as whether the person was a consistent 

108 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
customer yielding good margins for the store, a bargain hunter, 
or someone in between.
Given the seemingly insurmountable edge enjoyed by online 
retailers—beyond their extraordinary and ever- growing data-
base of information on individual shoppers, they also enjoyed 
virtually unlimited shelf space—some wondered whether 
physical retail real estate was dead weight, a hindrance to 
merchants attempting to compete with seemingly ever- ﬂ exible 
digital companies. But Heller noted that the zeitgeist was 
beginning to change. The attendees at the internet retailer 
conference, she said, were recognizing the physical store as 
“increasingly a critical part of an online or omnichannel strategy” 
(omnichannel is an industry buzzword that refers to the multi-
faceted means by which a physical retailer can proﬁ tably meld 
its online and mobile phone capabilities with its physical 
resources).
The largest department stores, supermarkets, and discounters 
were well aware that online- only stores were continuing to 
move in on their turf. The success of Amazon was probably the 
biggest factor behind physical merchants’ new focus on beating 
internet rivals at their own game. Succeeding at this gambit was 
not going to be easy, however. At the end of 2014, Amazon 
announced that more than ten times as many items were ordered 
with same- day delivery for Christmas than in the previous year. 
Moreover, the company reported that nearly 60 percent of its 
customers had purchased from Amazon using a mobile device 
and that the percentage of people using mobile shopping 
increased as Christmas drew closer. Total U.S. holiday sales from 
the Amazon app doubled in 2014.2

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 109
Major physical retailers understood that developing winning 
websites and apps was necessary to countering this challenge, but 
they saw it as just one part of a larger overall strategy. Believing 
that a material store in one form or another would always be a 
key to success, retailing executives wanted to encourage shoppers 
to buy items from their websites or apps and then pick them up 
from their brick- and- mortar stores. More important, they decided 
to copy what internet retailers had been doing: tracking shoppers 
to discern their lifestyles and the goods that appeal to them; distin-
guishing individual shopper value based on that information and 
the shopper’s prior purchases; and (depending on a shopper’s 
assessed value) offering targeted enticements, which could include 
altered pricing, to encourage both a relationship and a sale.
As late as 2013, many brick- and- mortar chains continued to 
back away from direct confrontation with internet- only compa-
nies. Executives, especially those overseeing major department- 
store and discount operations, instead tried to work around 
online sellers by offering merchandise that their shoppers would 
not be able to ﬁ nd anywhere else. For example, they increased 
their stock of exclusive brands or had their suppliers tweak the 
products they produced for them just enough so the items would 
be assigned new barcodes.
After 2013, these companies shifted their focus and began to 
build parts of the business they felt could beat or at least match 
online- only merchants. For one thing, they designated part of the 
physical store as a warehouse. The idea was not new; during the 
1990s and early 2000s Walmart, Sears, and Macy’s were among 
retailers that had instituted systems enabling shoppers to buy 

110 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
online and pick up at a nearby chain location. They called the 
practice “shop online and ship to store,” or “click and collect.” But 
many other merchants demurred. The chief executive of super-
market giant Kroger told investors as late as October 2013 that 
people went online for recipes and coupons and to check their 
loyalty reward points, but “not for e- commerce.” The interna-
tional retailer Ahold, whose U.S. chains include Stop & Shop and 
Giant- Landover, had a different view: it had already instituted its 
Peapod service, which enabled customers in select areas to order 
online and pick up the goods at one of its nearby supermarkets.3 
Nevertheless, as far as Kroger was concerned, “E- commerce 
makes up a tiny, tiny percentage of the food business.”4
By 2015, though, the online purchasing and in- store pickup 
system was becoming commonplace for most sellers with a 
national footprint. Even Kroger was now moving in that direction 
with an experiment in Houston.5 Department stores and large 
discount chains were also touting their ability to accept returns 
from internet purchases at the physical store. Astonishingly, in 
2013 customers returned an estimated third of all purchases they 
made on the internet,6 and this proved to be an opportunity for 
physical stores to shine: surveys indicated that customers liked 
the choice of returning goods to any branch, regardless of where 
they had made the purchase.7
With these new developments physical retailers started going 
head to head against their biggest internet- only competitors, who 
wanted to make brick- and- mortar stores look anachronistic. 
Amazon, eBay, and Google Express delivery service instituted a 
new arrangement by which they contracted space in shopping 
centers, stores, and bus stations for pickups and returns, but 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 111
the program did not initially catch on with shoppers.8 Instead, 
a number of online- only businesses—grocery delivery service 
Instacart, Google Express, and eBay, among others—focused on 
beating brick- and- mortar’s alleged location advantage by targeting 
delivery to home or ofﬁ ce.9 They aimed to make their services so 
convenient that shoppers would not even have to go to a physical 
store to purchase the most basic goods.
Amazon was at the forefront of such efforts. In 2013 the 
company announced a plan to use drone aircraft to deliver pack-
ages to customers’ porches, lawns, or roofs within thirty minutes 
of an order being placed. Although the U.S. Federal Aviation 
Administration initially balked at the notion of drones ﬂ ying 
around with parcels, it eventually allowed these and other 
unmanned initiatives in airspace below four hundred feet.10 In a 
more conventional move, the company began offering free two- 
day shipping in 2005 on over twenty million items via its Amazon 
Prime program (memberships cost $99 a year in 2015). In 2009 it 
began offering same- day delivery in Manhattan, Philadelphia, 
San Francisco, and a few other heavily populated areas. And for 
the 2014 Christmas holiday season the company offered free two- 
hour and $7.99 one- hour delivery service in Manhattan for one 
day between the hours of 6 a.m. and midnight. Twenty- ﬁ ve thou-
sand products were eligible for this service, including paper towels, 
shampoo, books, toys, batteries, USB cables, and Kindle Fire 
tablets. Bike messengers made many of the deliveries. Amazon 
planned to expand the offering to other large metropolitan areas.11 
By offering same- day delivery the company was hoping its 
customers would decide to “skip the trip to a retail store,” an exec-
utive at a mobile apps production ﬁ rm told Mobile Commerce Daily.12 

112 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
Dave Clark, Amazon’s senior vice president of worldwide opera-
tions, conﬁ rmed this goal: “There are times when you can’t make 
it to the store and other times when you simply don’t want to 
go. There are so many reasons to skip the trip and now Prime 
members in Manhattan can get the items they need delivered in 
an hour or less.”13
The brick- and- mortar side fought back. Walmart,14 Macy’s, 
hhgregg, and others moved to match the quick- delivery programs 
offered by Amazon (and others). Mall operators such as Simon 
and Westﬁ eld also stepped in to help their smaller tenants 
compete.15 The move to quick delivery involved the implemen-
tation of new processes and technologies on a local level, and it 
also meant that part of the store had to be turned into a kind of 
mini- warehouse. By 2015 stores were still mostly testing their 
programs in small patches of the country, but the two sides 
seemed to achieve a rough parity in the ability to, literally, deliver 
the goods. Analysts noted that while these efforts were expen-
sive and might not even distinguish any one retailer over another, 
same- day delivery by physical retailers was probably necessary. 
“Like other traditional brick- and- mortar retailers, Macy’s is 
adapting to a digital age in which people are growing accustomed 
to getting what they want when they want it,” reported CBS’s 
“MoneyWatch.” “The chain probably has little choice but to face 
this new reality and take a risk on same- day delivery.”16 An exec-
utive at the grocery consultancy Willard Bishop noted the same 
situation with supermarkets. “It’s messy, but it’s inevitable,” he 
said in 2016. “Stores that do it well are reporting incremental 
gains of up to 30 percent when shoppers use them for both phys-
ical and online shopping. But it’s still not proﬁ table.”17

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 113
As the battle continued to rage, both sides ignored a crucial 
terrain: the selling ﬂ oor. It was there, amid store aisles, that about 
90 percent of all retail goods continued to be bought and sold as 
of May 2015, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.18 And just as 
some brick- and- mortar retailers nervously turned part of their 
stores into warehouses for the internet world, they viewed their 
aisles equally apprehensively as domains that, they felt, would 
also have to function somehow like the internet. Although the 
notion that a store aisle could serve in such a capacity might seem 
odd, merchants had concluded that this would be the new role of 
the physical store in the digital shopping era. “Savvy retailers are 
using multimedia content to make the shopping experience more 
engaging,” wrote Justin Honaman, a partner in a company that 
provides customer analysis technologies, in January 2014. “They 
will offer in- store only events and services . . . aimed at bringing 
customers to stores and keeping them there.”19 He also predicted 
that personalization “lies at the center of omnichannel marketing 
strategies in 2014,” pointing out that retailers now had the means 
to “reach shoppers with what they want, when they want it and 
via the channel they prefer to shop. Retailers will also work to 
curate the right product information at the right time in the shop-
ping process.”20
To achieve these goals, he wrote, retailers will need to “connect 
the dots . . . and [create] a comprehensive customer proﬁ le.” 
According to Honaman, retailers with physical stores actually had 
a unique advantage over their internet- only competitors. While 
each group could compile mountains of data and build individual 
proﬁ les by tracking shopper behaviors and purchases online, and 
then target personalized ads and discounts, only physical retailers 

114 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
could exploit this gold mine of customer knowledge and engage-
ment when customers went from the virtual to the material world, 
as they so often do. He argued that brick- and- mortar emporia had 
to be seen as an integral part of a new retailing mandate to “reach 
shoppers with what they want, when they want it, and via the 
channel they prefer to shop.” For example, a physical retailer 
could offer an individual the most effective prices “both in- store 
and online,” and in a real- time, personalized manner.21
In Honaman’s view the key to success was the cellular phone. 
“Consumers are increasingly using mobile phones and tablets for 
product research and online purchase,” he wrote. “The combina-
tion of portability, connectivity and relative affordability gives the 
smartphone a privileged place in driving always- on commerce.”22 
Indeed, the smartphone was already becoming part of retailing 
strategy. “Mobile is the new ﬁ rst screen,” noted a MediaPost article 
at the end of 2014. “On average, people check their phones 150 
times per day. More than one third of customers are ‘mobile 
only.’ With stats like this coming out daily, we (should all) get it.” 
That meant, the writer said, developing mobile strategies for 
engaging with the shopper for “loyalty and revenue.”23
Retail establishments have long audited shopper movements in 
their stores. The turnstile was perhaps the most common mecha-
nism used to measure the activity at a store’s periphery during the 
twentieth century. The ﬁ rst use of turnstiles in contemporary shop-
ping has been traced to Clarence Saunders, who installed one at the 
entrance to his ﬁ rst Piggly Wiggly store in Memphis, Tennessee, in 
1916.24 Turnstiles ultimately fell out of favor in retail venues, and 
by the end of the century some merchants were using electronic 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 115
beams to tally the number of people who entered their establish-
ments. In addition some stores, especially supermarkets, worked 
with product manufacturers to use a light source to count the 
number of people passing through particular aisles, or areas within 
aisles. (In retailing the familiar term “foot trafﬁ c” has now morphed 
into the rather scientiﬁ c- sounding “shopper analytics.”)
Retailers accepted that this form of tracking wouldn’t include 
identiﬁ cation of individual customers. In addition, the ten largest 
companies that engaged in this form of tracking agreed in 2013 to 
a “Mobile Tracking Code of Conduct” that required stores to post 
conspicuous signs when using tracking technology, and to offer a 
website from which customers could opt out of being tracked. 
Plus, data collected could not be personal or “be used to adversely 
affect a shopper’s employment, healthcare or insurance.”25 But 
with ever- evolving tracking technologies and intense competition 
among these companies, the veil of anonymity began to fall away.
Consider the experiences of two such companies, ShopperTrak 
and Euclid. ShopperTrak, founded in Chicago in 1991, devised 
systems that solved two major problems: the inability to distin-
guish both things (such as baby carriages and shopping carts) 
from people, and individual shoppers entering a store side by 
side or en masse.26 By 2013 the company had developed a small 
video camera with microprocessors that not only could detect 
individuals entering side by side or in groups, but could also 
distinguish between children and adults. In interviews for this 
book ShopperTrak executives said they were careful to build 
anonymity into the technology—the system did not capture 
faces—because they believed their clients were wary about 
intruding on shoppers’ privacy.

116 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
Euclid Analytics, a 2009 Silicon Valley startup, came up with 
an entirely different approach. An early force in accessing shop-
pers’ smartphones, Euclid could follow individuals’ movements 
throughout a store using Wi- Fi, which at the time was in use by 
more than 90 percent of smartphones. (Wi- Fi allows a mobile 
device to connect to the internet via a wireless network access 
point—a “hot spot.”) Smartphone owners typically keep their 
phone’s Wi- Fi access turned on, often so they can use the free 
Wi- Fi available at many retail establishments. And indeed, retailers 
have offered this service at least partly because they know it 
makes the phones identiﬁ able. Smartphones constantly ping in 
search of Wi- Fi network access nodes, and these pings contain the 
smartphone’s MAC (media access control) address—a unique 
string of letters and numbers that identify the device. Euclid 
developed a system that could be installed in its clients’ stores to 
follow pings, enabling the company to note the presence as well 
as the location of every smartphone in the store. (The smartphone 
owner remained anonymous, however, because Euclid scrambled 
the MAC number.) The tracking also extended to exterior display 
windows so that retailers could attempt to monitor the effective-
ness of displays in attracting customers into the store. Euclid could 
also provide the total amount of time a customer spent inside the 
store—helpful information, as studies have found a direct correla-
tion between the amount of time shoppers spend in a store and 
the amount they spend. In addition, Euclid contended that its 
data could help ﬂ oor managers allocate personnel based on where 
and when the number of customers would be greatest.27
Bill Martin, one of ShopperTrak’s founders, didn’t believe 
that tracking the location of individuals as they moved through a 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 117
store would result in greater proﬁ ts for the merchant, given the 
cost of the technology. However, many of his clients nevertheless 
wanted ShopperTrak to extend its tracking beyond the store 
perimeter.28 In 2014 the company responded by buying RapidBlue 
Solutions, a Helsinki ﬁ rm whose technology was similar to 
Euclid’s. By combining their systems and adding new features, 
ShopperTrak hoped to generate a larger sample of individuals 
than Euclid was getting by Wi- Fi alone.
The company’s new approach involved identifying and 
following mobile devices via any of three signals smartphone 
owners might have activated on their handset—Wi- Fi, Bluetooth, 
or cell tower connections. Like Wi- Fi, Bluetooth is a wireless 
technology with a consistent ping, though it has a less powerful 
signal and so is typically used for exchanging data over shorter 
distances (say, between a cell phone and a nearby music speaker). 
Still, the company believed that Bluetooth could be useful for 
tracking devices near or in a store when Wi- Fi is not turned on. 
If neither signal was active, the company could still track shop-
pers using the phone signal, which bounces off the nearest 
cell tower, and which is also broadcast with the unique MAC 
number. At best a phone signal can establish location within 
150 feet, while Wi- Fi offers accuracy as precise as 10 feet, and 
Bluetooth within 10 feet. A ShopperTrak executive said the 
company could narrow down a cell signal enough to detect a 
phone in front of or near a speciﬁ c retail location.29 He acknowl-
edged, though, that cell- signal tracking would not work well 
inside a store.30
The company’s technologies faced various barriers set up 
by phone manufacturers. In the case of following phones via 

118 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
Bluetooth, the manufacturers often assign random and rotating 
false MAC addresses to disguise the device’s identity so it can’t be 
identiﬁ ed by a Bluetooth transmitter. Only when the phone’s 
owner, or an app the owner has loaded on the phone, reaches 
out to the transmitter does special software allow the devices to 
convert the random MAC addresses into the real one that allows 
the two devices to communicate.31 Tracking people via Wi- Fi also 
raised issues. Apple voiced concern that some marketers were 
violating iPhone owners’ privacy by pinging Wi- Fi signals of 
iPhones to get MAC addresses even though they had no apps to 
link up with those phones. Instead, Apple alleged, the marketers 
wanted to collect MAC addresses of phones and then ﬁ nd ways 
to link the phone IDs with personally identiﬁ able information—
names, email addresses, postal addresses, and the like—and use 
the data for directly targeting individuals.
Also around this time, many citizens were taking notice of—
and objecting to—this form of tracking. In 2013 customers and 
privacy advocates complained after Nordstrom posted signs at 
seventeen of its stores regarding tracking that Euclid was 
conducting at those locations. The retailer tried to reassure the 
public that the data gathering was benign, stating that “anony-
mous information” giving Nordstrom “a better sense of customer 
foot trafﬁ c” would ultimately lead to an enhanced shopping 
experience. Ultimately Nordstrom declared that it was ending its 
“test.”32 Euclid stated on its website that public concerns about its 
activities were unfounded. “Our sensors collect only basic device 
information that is broadcast by Wi- Fi enabled phones. This does 
not include any sensitive data such as who you are, whom you 
call, or the websites you visit.”33

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 119
Not everyone agreed. One critic noted that, even if those 
ﬁ rms were not intercepting individuals’ data, leaving a phone’s 
Wi- Fi turned on “can let your phone leak all sorts of useful things 
for malicious actors to intercept and act upon.”34 U.K. technology 
writer Julian Bhardwaj previously wrote that “it’s very likely 
that your [Wi- Fi enabled] smartphone is broadcasting the names 
(SSIDs) of your favourite networks for anyone to see. This alone 
might be enough for someone to glean information about you: 
where you work, where you live or your favourite coffee shop 
for instance.”35 Even worse, an attacker might use software to 
kick you off a legitimate Wi- Fi connection and then, when you 
try to reconnect, force your device onto a rogue network that, on 
the surface, seems very much like the legitimate one. The goal is 
a “man- in- the- middle” attack: intercepting data sent between 
you and a friend, or your bank, and “giving the impression you’re 
talking to each other over a private connection, when in fact the 
entire conversation is controlled by the attacker.” That situation 
could cause major damage, such as stealing your personal data 
(for example, bank account or credit card information) or 
installing malware on your cellphone. “Whilst we have all 
embraced the technological age none of us are really experts in 
the ﬁ eld and therefore we are extremely vulnerable to attack,” 
noted an expert on issues related to mobile environments linked 
to Wi- Fi networks.36 Bhardwaj noted that “there doesn’t appear 
to be an easy way to disable active wireless scanning on smart-
phones like Androids and iPhones.”37
Apple attempted to address this situation in September 2014 
as part of an update to iPhone’s operating system (iOS 8). The 
system now transmitted two MAC addresses during Wi- Fi 

120 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
pings—of which just one was correct. Apps on the phone 
searching for the Wi- Fi link would latch onto the correct code, 
but a company simply trying to exploit the phone for other 
purposes would be fooled.38 Critics complained that the presenta-
tion of false and true codes was too patterned, and that with some 
phone settings the “spooﬁ ng” didn’t even work. Nevertheless, the 
update threatened to derail ShopperTrak and, especially, Euclid. 
A Euclid representative downplayed the development, which she 
said involved just a subset of the iPhone universe. She also 
pointed out that Google’s popular Android smartphone operating 
system did not have that Wi- Fi restriction. Consequently, she 
said, Euclid had thus far not lost much valuable data about shop-
pers’ movements.39 A ShopperTrak executive similarly played 
down phone manufacturers’ attempts to stop ﬁ rms from tracking 
phones through Bluetooth. Not all phones had Bluetooth soft-
ware that used rotating MAC addresses, he said, so ShopperTrak 
could still follow that subset through the store.
Nevertheless, Apple’s potential destruction of marketing- 
tracking vehicles was a sober reminder to both Euclid and 
ShopperTrak that technologies in the digital space are ﬂ uid and 
dependent on the whims of those outside the trackers’ control. 
Some believed that Apple had made the change because it was 
irked that marketers were ﬁ nding ways to use its operating 
system without passing some of the revenue along to Apple.40 
Others believed that Apple wanted to move away from Wi- Fi and 
original Bluetooth and toward a different version of Bluetooth 
technology, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE). BLE uses considerably 
less power and cost than original Bluetooth, while maintaining a 
similar range. Companies can buy inexpensive BLE boxes, which 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 121
act as beacons, transmitting a signal with a device ID. If a phone 
app within that range is compatible with that ID, the signal alerts 
the app to send a message via cellular or Wi- Fi that the phone has 
made a connection with the BLE beacon in a particular location. 
With an array of its BLE beacons tuned to its app in a retail loca-
tion, the app owner can therefore ﬁ gure out the movement of 
the phone’s holder as she or he moves through the store.
BLE can function with many operating systems. Apple engi-
neered a version for apps that were available from its iPhone stores 
as well as one for the iPhone’s built- in Wallet app (originally called 
Passbook). The Wallet could hold discount coupons and other 
messages related to trade and travel from retailers and manufac-
turers. The marketer could attach a location tag to the message so 
that a reminder about the message would appear on the phone’s 
lock screen (that is, the screen that users ﬁ rst encounter each time 
they want to access their phone; they ﬁ rst have to swipe a ﬁ nger 
across the screen or engage in some other action in order to unlock 
it) when the phone entered into the range of the BLE installed in 
the store. Marketers especially liked the lock screen feature because 
Apple allowed the message to be displayed so long as the tagged 
message was in the Wallet—the device didn’t need to actually carry 
their app. They therefore saw their challenge as encouraging 
people to load coupons and other messages into Apple Wallet.
Both ShopperTrak and Euclid began to consider BLE as the 
best option for tracking foot trafﬁ c in and around stores, as neither 
Apple nor Google were likely to derail it. There was an obvious 
challenge, however: Apple had built the technology so that only 
the ﬁ rm controlling both the BLE transmitter and the app could 
identify the phone, and neither ShopperTrak nor Euclid would 

122 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
likely be able to persuade smartphone owners to install the app of 
a foot- trafﬁ c auditing ﬁ rm on their phones. To get around this 
issue, a high- level ShopperTrak executive said in 2015 his 
company was considering a plan to install its own Bluetooth 
beacons in stores while arranging to incorporate its location soft-
ware tool into the apps of unrelated companies’ phone apps. As 
the foot- trafﬁ c auditor of 55,000 retail establishments around the 
United States, the executive seemed conﬁ dent that both stores 
and app companies would be agreeable: when its app is pinged by 
a ShopperTrak beacon, the app owner will learn the exact loca-
tion of one of its shoppers, and the company can then deliver an 
ad on the spot to the smartphone as well as add new information 
about the phone owner’s shopping habits to its data ﬁ les. Privacy, 
the executive argued, was not an issue. People who download 
apps and turn on the Bluetooth function should assume they 
might broadcast their presence via apps on their phones, he 
reasoned. He emphasized that ShopperTrak itself would still not 
be collecting identifying data or retaining any of the data in ways 
that would link back to the device. Foot- trafﬁ c monitoring, he 
said, had to be above suspicion to people moving through stores.
The actual situation was not so straightforward. As with 
Wi- Fi, some experts worried Bluetooth technology could likewise 
make smartphones vulnerable to anonymous third parties with 
man- in- the- middle intentions. The fear was that a malicious app 
on a person’s phone could sniff out the unique ID of a retailer’s 
beacon and then act as if it was the correct app to connect the 
phone with the beacon. “The user will never know that there was 
an app that was looking at where they were, capturing analytics 
and pushing them very targeted advertisements based on what 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 123
they’ve seen,” worried the CEO of a company that has installed 
beacons in many retail establishments, airports, and hospitals.41 A 
number of Bluetooth providers say they have since solved this 
problem.42 Yet ShopperTrak’s plan included a different means for 
identifying and tracking an individual without the person’s 
knowledge—making this information available if not to 
ShopperTrak, then to the company whose app ShopperTrak was 
using. If, for example, ShopperTrak made a deal to incorporate its 
beacon software into the app of a social media ﬁ rm, that social 
network would then possess unprecedented real- time knowledge 
of members’ precise locations.
Not surprisingly, trafﬁ c- analytics ﬁ rms quickly recognized that 
tracking people for auditing could also mean tracking them for 
marketers. Raul Verano, chief technology ofﬁ cer for the analytics 
ﬁ rm Shopperception, said that his company had installed cameras 
with 3D sensors in stores to track shopper activity in proximity to 
goods made by the company’s clients. In deference to U.S. and 
European privacy concerns he said that the company did not 
analyze the images for age and gender. (The policy was different 
in Asia, where privacy concerns were low, he said.) He also 
emphasized that the company discarded the U.S. and European 
images at the end of each day. “You’re so anonymous with our 
system,” he said, “that when you go away from the detection area 
to another camera area, you can’t tell it’s the same person.”43 He 
said that the ﬁ rm had been experimenting with BLE, sending ads 
to shoppers on their phones based on data picked up by the camera 
sensors, and the company was planning to piggyback onto other 
companies’ apps to attract increasing numbers of clients. Like the 
ShopperTrak executive, he likewise contended that because 

124 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
shoppers had their Bluetooth function activated and were using 
their apps while out shopping, privacy was not an issue. Although 
the company could follow people and send ads to them without 
having particular data about them, he said that the trend was 
leading toward personalized messages. He predicted that business- 
as- usual for companies like his would ultimately include both an 
analytic component as well as personalized advertising.
While ShopperTrak, Euclid, and even Shopperception worried 
about capturing personal data via foot trafﬁ c, another company, 
shopkick, had no such qualms. It was one of a new group of 
technology- inspired ﬁ rms that dived zestfully into the new play-
ground of mobile customer proﬁ les. The tale of Cyriac Roeding’s 
founding of shopkick in 2008 underscores how quickly retailers 
embraced him for his new take on loyalty. A German- born student 
of engineering and business who had been impressed by mobile 
phones as “the next big thing” while in Japan during the mid- 
1990s, Roeding decided to look for “an idea that has the potential 
to become a really large company in mobile.” He ran CBS Mobile 
(CBS Corporation’s wireless business for its entertainment, sports, 
and news concerns) for a while in the 2000s, but shifted to the 
position of entrepreneur- in- residence in 2008 with Silicon Valley 
venture capital ﬁ rm Kleiner Perkins Cauﬁ eld & Byers. It was 
there, Roeding says, that he saw a gold mine in mobile tracking as 
the solution to the central problem of retailing. “The number- one 
challenge facing every retailer in America is getting people 
through the door,” he told Entrepreneur magazine in 2011, half a 
year after shopkick launched. The next critical step, he realized, is 
“conversion,” the industry term for a shopper turning into a buyer 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 125
while in the selling space. “Conversion rates in the physical world 
are so much better than online—between 0.5 percent to 3 percent 
in the virtual world and between 20 percent and 95 percent in the 
real world. So if foot trafﬁ c is so important, then why hasn’t 
anyone rewarded people for visiting stores? The answer is simple: 
It’s because nobody knows you came through the door.”44
Roeding’s comments gave no indication that he was aware of 
foot- trafﬁ c auditing—or perhaps he simply didn’t want to acknowl-
edge the earlier model and its adherence to anonymity. He repre-
sented himself as part of a new business and approached retailers, 
brand manufacturers, and investors with a four- pronged plan:
• Award points (“kickbucks”) to smartphone owners with 
a shopkick app for going into a store, for handling products 
in the store, and for buying those items;
• Use the shopkick app to notify the company every time 
a speciﬁ c smartphone crosses the threshold of the store;
• Reward a shopper with kickbucks for scanning products 
in the store and for purchasing products. Charge the store a 
small fee for each kickbuck a shopper earns from scanning. If 
the shopper makes a purchase after using the app (eventu-
ally, the shopper could make purchases through the app), 
charge the store a small percentage of that transaction;
• Gather as much data about app users as possible, sharing 
some of it with the retailers as an added incentive, but use 
the information mainly as a data pool to help shopkick 
present highly reﬁ ned proﬁ les of individuals to brands and 
retailers wanting to advertise to them in applicable shopping 
locations via the app.

126 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
The shopkick app that Roeding’s company created prompted 
users to register the items they handled in stores by scanning the 
items’ barcodes. The notiﬁ cation signal to be sent to shopkick by 
smartphones entering the store posed a technical challenge, 
because at the time Wi- Fi signals could invariably leak outside a 
store and be picked up by passersby. shopkick engineers solved 
the problem by developing a device that was mounted near the 
store entrance and emitted a signal undetectable to the human 
ear but was picked up by a smartphone’s internal microphone—
and recorded by the shopkick app. Because the signal was limited 
to the store’s perimeter, the store could be sure that the kick-
bucks earned for entering were legitimate. The third part of the 
plan—the fee shopkick charged the stores—brought the Green 
Stamps loyalty playbook into the twenty- ﬁ rst century: now 
merchants could trace these electronic stickers directly to an 
individual customer’s buying record. Retailing executives were 
drawn to shopkick because it both collected data about individual 
shoppers and distributed targeted advertising close to the 
product—proximity marketing, as it became known.45
shopkick launched in 2010, with Macy’s, Best Buy, American 
Eagle Outﬁ tters, and the large Simon mall company trying out 
the service in some of their locations. The actual dollar amount 
in terms of rewards that shoppers could receive was typically 
quite low—reports suggested that people on average gained $3 
for their assiduous work over many store visits—yet the app’s 
popularity quickly grew, surpassing eight million users by 2014.46 
During this time shopkick expanded its business model by adding 
BLE boxes to its tracking system so that it could present shoppers 
with offers that would be delivered via their smartphones as they 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 127
approached targeted products. In a test on shopper behavior at 
American Eagle Outﬁ tters, some shopkick users were notiﬁ ed 
upon entering the store that the merchant was offering “a small 
incentive” for visiting the ﬁ tting rooms. The company reported 
that more than twice as many shopkick users who received the 
message visited the ﬁ tting room area as those who didn’t.47
Merchants were especially drawn to shopkick because, unlike 
other apps relying on BLE, users didn’t have to open the app for 
it to operate. Newer features on iPhones and some Android 
devices enabled shopkick’s engineers to make their app “wake 
up” automatically when in the range of a BLE and get right to 
work sending personalized messages to the user.48 shopkick also 
encouraged its users to indicate their interest in speciﬁ c products 
while browsing all the items that can be viewed on the shopkick 
app, which would then remind them when they entered a store 
that sold one of those products.49 A surprise discount on the app 
could then catalyze a purchase.
Competitors that were determined to follow shopkick’s model 
and convince millions of people to download a marketing app 
found the challenge difﬁ cult. inMarket succeeded by instituting an 
aggressive but very different strategy. Unlike shopkick, it didn’t 
expect to reach shoppers just by building loyalty into its own app. 
Instead, it made deals with many retailers to place BLE boxes with 
the inMarket code throughout their stores. The deals also included 
the right to put inMarket code in those retailers’ apps so when 
shoppers placed the apps on their phones they could be pinged by 
the inMarket boxes as they moved through the stores. Extending 
its reach, inMarket also arranged for the owners of other popular 

128 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
apps—for example, the magazine publisher Conde Nast and the 
newspaper publisher Gannett—to include inMarket code in their 
apps. Their incentive for doing that was to share shopper data and 
money. Having BLE boxes with inMarket code in thousands of 
places that could connect to millions of phones with its code meant 
that inMarket could trace millions of people’s movements through 
stores and send advertising messages to them as they walked 
around the stores. Coca-Cola and Hillshire Brands were clients.50 
The retailers would get a slice of the advertising revenues if an ad 
appeared on a smartphone via their app or while a shopper was in 
their store. inMarket divvied up payments from advertisers to the 
ﬁ rm that owned the opened app with the ad, the company that 
sold the ad (typically, inMarket or the retailer on the retailer’s 
app), the retailer where the app opened, and inMarket. Retailers 
would be able to set the order of inMarket- linked apps to be woken 
by the beacon. So, for example, a person walking into Marsh 
supermarkets with Bluetooth on would trigger the Marsh app. If 
the phone did not have a Marsh app, the WebMD app might wake 
up, if it was Marsh’s second choice and it was installed on the 
phone. If Marsh’s retail advertising sales force had sold a Nyquil 
cold medicine ad for the beacon near the pharmacy, inMarket 
would send that ad to the phone via the shopper’s WebMD app.
Apart from advertising revenues, inMarket’s website prom-
ised to deliver to retailers “rich insights into shopper behavior”—
for example, age, gender, visits by hour and day of week, “and 
more.”51 There was a lot more, as the company collected a lode of 
data from shoppers in different ways.52 For example, if a Nyquil 
ad were served in one of inMarket’s own apps (FreeCoupons 
and ListEase, among others) inMarket would get full personal 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 129
information about the individual. It would also get the ability to 
add to the shopper’s data ﬁ le information such as when the person 
entered the store and the nature of the ad viewed. If, however, 
the person used the WebMD app, only WebMD could collect the 
personal information, as stated in its privacy policy. Although that 
person would be anonymous to inMarket and Marsh, the compa-
nies would still get potentially useful data. They would learn the 
app ID related to the device, which would allow them to record 
the presence of the device wherever the person was situated in 
store (in the case of Marsh) or (in inMarket’s case) wherever the 
ﬁ rm placed beacons. They would also know the person’s location 
in the store, and the ad the person saw. They could store that 
material, and create a proﬁ le based on the history of the person’s 
anonymous movement in the store. And if the person with the 
phone happened to ﬁ ll out a sweepstakes form on the phone’s 
WebMD, Conde Nast, or Gannet apps—which would, of course, 
include the individual’s name and address—that person’s 
anonymity would dissolve, thereby enabling inMarket to purchase 
personal information about the shopper from third parties.
By late 2014 inMarket claimed to have 31.5 million monthly 
users. In comparison, Walmart was reaching twenty million 
phones a month with its app, and Target, Walgreens, and Kroger 
each had approximately four million users of their respective 
apps.53 Substantially fewer people were loading other retailers’ 
apps, with the result that those stores could not take full advantage 
of the tracking and personalization technology. Lord & Taylor was 
one chain that decided to contract with a number of cross- retailer 
apps deemed ﬁ tting for the store’s image, rather than create a 
stand- alone app. Indeed, inMarket, SnipSnap, Swirl, and other 

130 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
beacon- oriented marketing ﬁ rms saw fertile terrain in small-  and 
medium- sized businesses lacking the scale to go it on their own.54
Giant retailers had an advantage, as they already had widely 
circulated apps before installing BLE beacons. They also had the 
means to compile an arsenal of data to proﬁ le their customers’ 
shopping habits, so much so that sometimes they could even infer 
how shoppers moved through the aisles. These retailers typically 
collected personal information based on loyalty card (or app) 
registration or via credit (or debit) card identiﬁ cation customers 
provided at checkout. They captured a record of the items an indi-
vidual purchased by linking the UPC codes of the purchased items 
to the purchaser. They then linked the online and mobile activi-
ties of every shopper—their purchases as well as what they viewed 
and/or commented on at the retailer’s website and possibly else-
where—to purchases they made in the physical store. Walgreens’ 
privacy policy acknowledged outright that the company was 
collecting personally identiﬁ able information by connecting 
purchases to app and loyalty- program registrations (including 
information obtained via customers’ Walgreens- purchased health 
devices that linked to the company’s app).55 Walmart imple-
mented cutting- edge customer analytics to understand how 
online behavior inﬂ uenced in- store behavior, and vice versa.56 
Target also used sophisticated analytics, collecting and purchasing 
personal information about individual shoppers from just about 
any available source—“including information you submit in a 
public forum (e.g., a blog, chat room or social network).” It also 
reserved the right to share the information “with other compa-
nies . . . to provide special offers and opportunities to you,” if a 
person didn’t opt out.57 A New York Times article suggested that 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 131
data Target had gathered on a young unattached woman based on 
her recent purchases enabled the retailer to infer correctly that 
she was pregnant, and proceeded to send her coupons related to 
her condition—which her father intercepted.58
The supermarket industry was moving forward with a range of 
apps and vigorous data collection even before beacons exploded in 
popularity. Retail executives widely praised Kroger, the nation’s 
second largest grocery company (behind Walmart), for its ability to 
compile information about its customers. To accomplish this it 
enlisted dunnhumbyUSA, a highly regarded analytics ﬁ rm it 
co- owned with the British company Tesco. (Kroger ultimately 
bought out the U.S. branch in 2015 and renamed it 84.51 Degrees 
to reﬂ ect both the quantitative nature of its business and the coor-
dinates of Kroger’s headquarters.) The subsidiary conducted 
sophisticated explorations of checkout data and other information 
the retailer had linked to shoppers’ loyalty cards, which were 
involved in nearly every transaction. The company likely also 
obtained personal information from outside ﬁ rms. Kroger’s 2015 
privacy policy stated only that it would not sell or trade its 
customers’ information; it did not mention gathering data from 
elsewhere.59 Personalization was of course the goal. “Working with 
Dunnhumby,” noted Forbes in 2013, “Kroger tracks each customer 
as an individual.” A dunnhumby executive said the company 
strives to isolate each individual’s behavior. “Do they have kids, do 
they skew toward healthy or fun, do they like organic or conve-
nience, and where are they price sensitive—across all products or 
only on some.” The ﬁ rm uses this information and other research 
to understand its customers’ movements through the store, and to 
tailor postal and internet mailings to individual shoppers.60

132 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
A number of grocery businesses, including Stop & Shop61 
and ShopRite, instituted a self- scanning- and- bagging program 
that enabled customers with the stores’ app to monitor their 
purchase total as they shopped and then proceed quickly through 
checkout.62 Supermarket and drugstore coupon dispenser 
Catalina Marketing built customized apps for this type of program 
to help its clients gather data on individual customers and offer 
personalized discounts. Now, instead of providing the coupons 
only through its checkout printers, Catalina could send customers 
messages as they scanned products while moving through the 
aisles. A brochure boasted that “Catalina Mobile targets more 
than 4.6 million personalized offers each month. Every offer is 
based on each customer’s individual historical purchases, brand 
preferences and loyalty, location in store/aisle, and what’s in 
their shopping cart. Catalina Mobile gives you the ability to target 
customers at the most critical step in the path to purchase.”63
The program represented a major change. For decades barcode 
scanning and its link to rewards cards had taken place at the cash 
register at checkout, and now companies were hard at work to 
come up with ever- easier ways for customers to scan goods as 
they strolled past them. The Sapient Nitro agency developed a 
prototype involving a computer chip in the customer’s shopping 
bag that would automatically identify the barcode of an item 
placed into it. The chip would then communicate with an app the 
shopper had downloaded to keep a running total of the transac-
tion. Critics worried that customers might be less inclined to return 
to the store if they had virtually no direct interaction with a store 
representative—that is, the cash register clerk. They also worried 
that customers bagging their items in the aisle would encourage 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 133
theft (the industry calls this “shrinkage”). Although Catalina ﬂ atly 
stated that this was a “misconception,” the company (along with 
others) nevertheless investigated approaches that would “mitigate 
the risks of bad behavior of a few customers, without alienating 
the majority of trustworthy, loyal customers.”64 One such tactic 
was a computer review of shopper scanning activity to look for an 
unusual number of voided transactions—an indication someone 
might have scanned an item and then pretended to return it to the 
shelf. Other potential red ﬂ ags could be an extended period 
between scans (the implication being that an individual could be 
adding items to his or her shopping cart without scanning them), 
spot- checking whether someone has a history of being caught 
leaving a store with “accidentally” unscanned items, and what 
Catalina called “shopper status”—likely a reference to whether a 
customer’s purchase history and loyalty status coincide with the 
items in his or her shopping bag.65
Beacon advocates asserted that their new technology would 
bring selling in the aisles to an even higher level of success. They 
said that BLE was superior to self- scanning- and- bagging programs 
because the shopper didn’t have to handle a product to get a 
message about it or its competitor. Beacons were also quite 
inexpensive (by 2015 the price was down to $5 per box) and 
easily installed. When chain retailers such as Walgreens, Walmart, 
and Target saw how beacons could help them collect new 
behavior- centered data and send messages to identiﬁ ed shoppers 
based on extensive proﬁ ling, they pounced on the technology. 
The Business Insider Intelligence research group listed beacons as 
one of the most important new mobile developments helping 
merchants win back revenue “thanks to their ability to target 

134 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
consumers with sales and loyalty offers.”66 Critics, however, 
noted that beacon boxes covered rather small store areas and 
could not reliably follow an individual’s complete movements 
through the store unless a large (and expensive) number of 
beacons were used. They also pointed out that smartphone users 
don’t necessarily keep their Bluetooth phone signal turned on. A 
Kroger executive suggested that the ﬁ rm didn’t consider them 
cost- efﬁ cient; indeed, the company wasn’t using beacons as of 
late 2015 and said it had no plans to do so.67
This chink in the Bluetooth box opened the door for alternative 
tracking solutions. IndoorAtlas, a Finnish company, uses a smart-
phone’s magnetometer along with other built- in sensors to locate 
its position based on the Earth’s “natural variations of geomagnetic 
ﬁ eld.”68 A retailer can then follow a phone that has its app ﬂ uidly 
through the store—with no need to invest in any boxes or lights.69 
General Electric is producing a system that incorporates beacon 
technology into a store’s lighting system, so its range encompasses 
virtually the entire store. The GE system emits a unique light 
pattern to a phone if the user clicks OK to location awareness when 
asked by the store’s app. The phone detects the Bluetooth signal 
speciﬁ c to that location, and the phone’s camera detects the light 
patterns from the ﬁ xture even if the Bluetooth in the phone is off. 
Noting one or the other signal (or both) allows the store to learn of 
the shopper’s position and direction with an accuracy of less than 
three feet. The location information allows the retailer to send the 
phone a personalized message based on that location. And because 
interaction with the app allows the retailer to learn the phone’s ID, 
the personalized message can be based on lots of other information 
about the individual in addition to location.70

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 135
Walmart was reported to have made a major purchase of GE’s 
system.71 Whether it or IndoorAtlas’ approach gains wide accep-
tance, they reﬂ ect merchants’ insistence on ﬁ nding efﬁ cient ways 
to identify and follow shoppers in the aisles, sending them person-
alized messages in the process. Matthew Kulig, co- founder of the 
store mapping company Aisle411, believes that retailers ultimately 
will exploit a combination of solutions toward this goal. His 
company has been working with retailers to address both tracking 
and simply helping shoppers ﬁ nd their way around a store. Founded 
in 2008, the company began with a toll- free number providing 
computer- generated answers to questions about the location of 
items in stores. It has since evolved to using other technologies, 
including cellular, Wi- Fi, and Bluetooth, depending on the client. 
Perhaps the most advanced version of its products to date is a three- 
dimensional map created in cooperation with Google. Tested in 
some Walgreens locations in 2015, the system is accessed using 
Google’s Tango augmented- reality tablet and provides product 
location information as well as customer tracking for presenting 
messages and coupons relevant to the shopper’s proﬁ le.
Given the exhaustive efforts to target people’s mobile devices 
inside brick- and- mortar establishments, it is not surprising 
that this technology began to extend outside the physical 
store. Facilitating this development was a GPS (global positioning 
system) chip that, by the 2010s, manufacturers were installing in 
every smartphone. The chip picks up the beaconlike signal of 
three geostationary satellites; software in the phone triangulates 
the data into map coordinates. The highest- quality commercial 
GPS receivers can pinpoint someone’s position to better than 

136 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
11.5 feet, and when combined with the location of Wi- Fi pings 
from stores and other places, the location can be even more 
precise.72 Consequently, if a smartphone owner allowed an email 
provider, an app, or a website to access the phone’s location, that 
information could be used to sell ads to merchants near that 
phone. The ﬁ rms monitoring a phone’s location could also—
without additional permission—peddle the data to other apps or 
mobile websites, and they could sell the ads.
Predictably, advertising giants such as Google, Facebook, and 
Yahoo! became deeply immersed in GPS tracking, but so did 
inMarket and other smaller companies. inMarket, which provides 
location- based ads outdoors in addition to inside stores, offers 
merchants and brand manufacturers the ability to know where 
individuals carrying apps with its code are located on a proprietary 
latitude and longitude (“lat- long”) grid containing a large number 
of retail locations. The ad- serving process works this way: If a 
person allows location detection on a smartphone, the phone’s 
operating system continually pings the phone to check its latitude 
and longitude. The device then sends these coordinates to apps for 
which the device owner has allowed location. The phone essen-
tially tells the app, “This is where I am. What should I now do with 
this information?” In the case of inMarket’s apps or apps on which 
it has code, the answer is to plot the phone (and so the individual 
linked to it) on the company’s grid. inMarket therefore knows 
where these people go from moment to moment. The company 
can also determine whether the phone holder is in an area where 
an advertiser wants to reach shoppers with a message. That space 
is called a “geofence”—that is, a deﬁ ned geographic area. A retail 
establishment might pay inMarket to surround it with a geofence 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 137
of a certain size so that when inMarket sees a mobile device enter, 
it will trigger a message about the store to be displayed through 
one of the apps with inMarket code. A geofenced area can be as 
large as a several- mile radius or as small as a single shop within a 
strip mall. In addition to targeting by location, inMarket can 
choose from among people in those geographically speciﬁ c areas 
based on the demographic and behavioral information it gathered 
when people signed up for the apps, when it tracked their phone’s 
movements in the outside world, and when it followed them in 
stores with inMarket beacons.
Another “geolocation” company, xAd, exploits this location 
technology somewhat differently. The company attempts to 
combine a smartphone’s position with its user’s actual reason for 
being at that location. xAd has access to both sorts of data because 
it provides a digital- advertising network for a raft of restaurant, 
tourism, and directory apps.73 The advantage for xAd of working 
with such apps is that they logically require their users to accept 
giving out their GPS location to learn about establishments and 
their directions. Through these relationships, xAd claims the ability 
to know what the people in particular locations were intending to 
do. Based on close mapping of retailers’ location coordinates, xAd 
could then serve ads within the apps that targeted “consumers as 
they are visiting key locations in real- time and showing their 
intent to browse and purchase in the physical world.”74
xAd also uses the IDs of the smartphones it accesses to record 
physical locations along with analysis of buying intent. Simply 
knowing the past twenty retailers where a particular anonymous 
person shopped can provide useful information for target adver-
tising. BIA/Kelsey senior analyst Michael Boland noted that 

138 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
“location always is thought of as geographic,” yet it is most valuable 
“as a means toward building user proﬁ les.”75 He said that many of 
the advertisers using these sorts of location targeting in 2014 were 
“the suppliers of consumer packaged goods products, including the 
Procter & Gambles of the world but also their retail afﬁ liates like 
Walgreens.” He noted that “they’re kind of working together in 
ways that engage users to ﬁ nd the closest store.”76 At the same time, 
Boland said, xAd and other mobile targeters were applying their 
real- time capabilities to persuade shoppers to choose a client store 
over a competitor. Under such “geo- conquesting,” as it is known, 
shoppers who are tracked near a competitor store are sent ads to 
persuade them to buy from the company’s client instead. “For 
instance,” wrote one mobile- marketing blogger, “a local coffee shop 
. . . might target users who are at big coffee chains like Starbucks 
and Dunkin’ Donuts with timely messages emphasizing local deals, 
short lines or unique menu items . . . like ‘Tired of waiting in line? 
Try our organic original roast today with no waiting!’”77
Thinknear is a company that also exploits location to target 
individuals, but in contrast with xAd it uses what’s known as 
mobile advertising exchanges to reach individuals rather than 
speciﬁ c sites or apps. A mobile advertising exchange is an elec-
tronic marketplace in which companies bid for the right to send 
advertisements to people from any of hundreds or thousands of 
sites or apps in near real time. Thinknear bids to serve ads for 
retailers and other clients based on what it learns through the 
exchanges about the mobile devices’ locations as well as the 
demographics of their owner. The company uses GPS as well as 
Wi- Fi, cell triangulation, internet protocol (IP) address, and user 
registration to determine the location of the devices.

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 139
The retailing and marketing industries are also examining 
other avenues for exchanging information between a location 
targeting company and merchants. One possibility is to send indi-
vidualized messages about a store to entice people when they are 
in proximity. If the person then enters the store, the targeting 
company would inform the merchant and share behavioral data. 
This activity could occur through such companies as LinkNYC, 
which began installing unrestricted Wi- Fi kiosks in public spaces 
throughout New York City in 2016. LinkNYC could collect data 
on the patterns of individuals who use the service as they pass the 
kiosks. The ﬁ rm could then sell advertisers the right to send 
messages to the pedestrians based on what the kiosks had learned 
about their locations and behaviors. Scott Varlard, a technology 
expert at IPG Media Lab think tank, noted that the tracking of 
individuals could continue into the store if LinkNYC and the 
retailer collaborated on ways to match people’s identities.78
As the capabilities to track and target individuals continue to 
extend their reach, it seems only a matter of time before the 
physical retailer can enter private homes. Of course, some versions 
of this type of interactivity already exist as people use their PC 
and laptop computers, tablets, and phones at home to make 
purchases or to gather coupons and compare prices in anticipa-
tion of physical shopping. Not too long from now, insisted David 
Skaff of the Science Project marketing agency, there will exist 
what he calls “omnichannel nirvana”: interactions of common 
appliances, including thermostats, lights, and refrigerators, with 
each other.79 The connected home, part of a larger development 
technologists call “the internet of things,” has been leading 
retailers and brand manufacturers to revel in the possibilities of 

140 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
getting in on the stream of habits, lifestyles, and even personali-
ties that the collection of household- use data would reveal. Leigh 
Christie, a technologist at the Isobar agency, predicts that people 
will “shop on” their family members and friends, meaning they’ll 
be able to use a device to scan their clothes to obtain information 
such as where the items were purchased. He says that food 
containers will be able to remind their owners verbally of their 
expiration dates, and where they can replenish them. He also 
believes that everyday products such as cosmetics will reach out 
to individuals with advice relevant to the season and the weather.
Such communications are feasible today for cosmetics, 
Christie notes (though with Android phones only; iPhones don’t 
as yet allow this sort of interconnection). A cosmetics manufac-
turer or retailer can place an inexpensive chip (known as a near-
ﬁ eld-communication, or NFC, chip) on an item—for example, 
on a cosmetics container. The chip will send its unique ID code to 
a smartphone’s NFC transmitter/receiver when the two are in 
very close proximity. Phones on which the cosmetic ﬁ rm’s or the 
retailer’s app has been installed will receive the ID code, which 
identiﬁ es the product. Alerted to the speciﬁ c cosmetic, the app 
can then instruct the phone to carry out a variety of tasks, such 
as looking up the weather and the time of year, and checking 
previously collected information about the phone’s owner in the 
cosmetic company’s computers. The app can then send a person-
alized message to the phone based on the information it has 
compiled—for example, “It’s a good day to wear blue,” “Your red 
lipstick would go great with this makeup this time of year,” or 
“Here’s a coupon for a new look!”80
* * *

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 141
Strong tensions shoot through this evolving world, as compe-
tition among companies continues to intensify and executives, 
consultants, investors, vendors, and advertisers try to assess what 
the role of mobile- tracking technology should be. A number of 
executives suggest that many of the so- called crucial develop-
ments in tracking technology are in fact anything but. Some 
even consider BLE beacons, the shopper- hunting stars of the 
mid- decade, to be merely an intermediate stage that will ulti-
mately be cast aside for something different and, hopefully, 
better. At the same time nearly all agreed that the basic impera-
tives of identifying and following shoppers to and through the 
physical store, collecting enormous amounts of information 
about them without their awareness, and personalizing messages 
to them along the way is, whether through one technology or 
another, a new requirement of retailing.
More pressing than the technology itself is the key coin of the 
realm: data. Who owns customer data when so many parties, 
often in collaboration, ping and poke at shoppers at home and 
outdoors, and in stores? inMarket executives voiced speciﬁ c 
concern over the lack of control their retailing clients feel they 
have over who should be allowed to reach shoppers within their 
walls, and by what means. inMarket contends some brand 
marketers have begun putting their own detection devices into 
store displays as a way to audit the number of passing shoppers 
and identify their app holders, and even to serve coupons to these 
shoppers. Marketers assert that these activities are always under-
taken with the permission of the retailers, but inMarket ofﬁ cials 
dispute this and note that they have undertaken measures to 
thwart unauthorized activity.81

142 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
Ivan Frank, the digital- marketing head of the upscale 
Taubman mall company, agreed that people shopping in one of 
the company’s malls should not be receiving advertising from 
outside ﬁ rms, potentially encouraging them to buy items 
online instead of at the mall. Although shoppers can’t be prohib-
ited from accessing Amazon- like apps or getting text messages 
from retailers as they browse, he said he was working to at 
least maintain control of beacon companies hired to install units 
in the malls—but this was proving difﬁ cult. For example, some 
of the beacon companies that Taubman was planning to hire to 
set up and run units in a new mall the ﬁ rm was opening 
in Sarasota, Florida, wanted to own the data their beacons 
collected on customers moving through the mall. “Why,” Frank 
asked rhetorically, “would we want a third party to own our 
data?” He objected that this information could be sold to retailers 
competing with Taubman’s tenants and mentioned Amazon in 
particular—“a company we’re at war with.” He lamented the 
lack of clear industry norms concerning beacon companies’ 
practices.
Frank’s concerns are shared by others in the industry. inMar-
ket’s carefully spelled- out hierarchy of data- sharing among its 
retail and app partners is being accepted by many. shopkick and 
Catalina typically send the names, addresses, and email addresses 
of all their shoppers to each of their “partners,” but they do not 
release other individual shopper information—for example, the 
items bought or returned, the amount spent—except to the 
retailer that made the sale. Of course, ﬁ rms such as shopkick and 
Catalina themselves have access to a range of data about indi-
vidual shoppers from many different merchants, and the 

HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER 143
merchants try to negotiate limits on the amount of information 
those ﬁ rms can store and on how they can use it.
As retailers, technology companies, and brand manufacturers 
negotiate new ways to glean information about people and imple-
ment marketing efforts based on that data, the one party who has 
no say in the matter is the shopper. Although privacy policies do 
allude to the often voluminous amounts of data retailers can 
ingest about people, studies repeatedly show that relatively few 
consumers read them. Those who do likely ﬁ nd the policies’ legal 
and industry language nearly impenetrable. And if they do 
manage to wade through the policies and object, the only option 
is not to use the website or the app—the rules typically constitute 
a “tough luck” contract, not open to negotiation. Shoppers who 
are determined not to give up their data can ﬁ nd ways to stop 
Web trackers and block ads, and although an increasing number 
of Americans are doing so, most remain readily identiﬁ able and 
trackable via various cookie- like tags and data- matching proce-
dures on the Web and on mobile apps. Physical retailers, though, 
have particular reason to worry whether shoppers will accept 
in- store tracking because, unlike digital retailing, crucial aspects 
of it cannot as yet be made as invisible. Their approach instead is 
to get shoppers to accept, and then take for granted, the 
omnichannel world of tracking and targeting, from their home to 
the brick- and- mortar store. To do so the merchants must seduce 
shoppers to switch on their Wi- Fi and/or Bluetooth, download 
the retailers’ app, and set up their loyalty program, thereby 
inviting the discounts and other blandishments offered up by the 
newly outﬁ tted physical store. This evolving strategy is ushering 
in a new battleﬁ eld for shopper loyalty.

144
5 LOYALTY AS BAIT
Airlines are an extreme example when it comes to discrimi-
nating among customers for proﬁ t. Over the years, frequent- ﬂ ier 
reward programs, which were launched to entice business trav-
elers to book all their ﬂ ights with the same airline, typically have 
become increasingly complex. Carriers created multiple tiers 
within their programs, offering their most frequent ﬂ iers the best 
perks such as preferred seating, more legroom, early boarding, 
and guaranteed overhead luggage space. Lower- tiered ﬂ iers and 
passengers who haven’t joined the frequent- ﬂ ier program aren’t 
treated nearly as well; for example, they typically receive less- 
comfortable seat assignments unless they choose to pay extra. 
The airlines give business travelers, who are their main targets, 
enough protection and privilege even at middle loyalty tiers to 
make them oblivious to the indignities experienced by infre-
quent ﬂ iers. Indeed, the New York Times noted that “the opposite 
of rewarding a good customer is penalizing a bad one.” In the 
case of Delta Air Lines, the paper wrote, “in order to toss 10 or 
11 [reward] miles at some travelers [its best customers] for every 
dollar they spend, Delta will have to do less for plenty of others 
on many of its routes.”1

LOYALTY AS BAIT 145
The airline loyalty programs have had enormous inﬂ uence 
on marketers’ overall efforts to use data to attract, learn about, 
and reward the best customers. Consultants have exhorted 
merchants outside the airline industry to discriminate between 
customers whose purchases indicate they will bring the ﬁ rm 
proﬁ ts over a number of years (a high lifetime value) and the 
others who just show up. Bain & Company loyalty consultant 
Fred Reichheld wrote in a letter to the editor in Harvard Business 
Review that “plenty of long- term customers—those who relent-
lessly cherry pick loss leader products, who treat front- line 
employees abusively . . . can’t be considered loyal.” He added, “If 
frontline workers are taught to distinguish proﬁ table from 
unproﬁ table customers, and if those employees are rewarded for 
focusing jointly on earning proﬁ ts today and treating proﬁ table 
customers in ways that make them want to return, companies 
will be pleasantly surprised by the resulting improvements in 
growth and proﬁ ts.”2
Several retail chain executives interviewed for this book 
suggested that the bluntness with which this sorting activity 
takes place in stores depends on the merchant’s target audience. 
Although luxury brands such as Louis Vuitton, Bergdorf 
Goodman, and Saks might well want the public to see them as 
exclusionary in order to cultivate elites, mid- tier merchants 
cannot be perceived as treating their lower- value customers the 
way that the airlines do. One department- store executive said 
he would rather try to persuade customers to move up the 
purchasing chain instead of making them uncomfortable or 
implying they should shop elsewhere. An executive with a major 
regional supermarket chain shares that view; rather than make 

146 LOYALTY AS BAIT
life difﬁ cult for less- proﬁ table shoppers, she said, her company 
tries to convert them to becoming increasingly loyal and, conse-
quently, more consequential customers for them. “Cherry pickers 
exist,” she said, “but we don’t ﬁ re them. They are customers. 
Groups of folks in the company deal with such things, worry 
about loyalty now and beyond. There are certainly different 
types of programs [to reward different levels of loyalty]. If you 
use your [basic supermarket loyalty card] you will get the base 
level of savings. But if you use other programs, like gas . . . that 
can bring the customer more beneﬁ ts.”3
The key to selling, executives agree, will increasingly be to 
know how to deal with individuals. Merchants need to know 
what messages to send to speciﬁ c customers, whether store asso-
ciates should interact with them (and, if so, for how long), and 
whether the store should offer speciﬁ c customers discounts and, 
if so, for which products and for how much. To do this the store 
must have appropriate information about each shopper each 
time that person enters a digital or physical version of the store. 
“Retailers know they need to upgrade their technology portfolio 
to understand consumers’ complex path to purchase,” said a 
retailing consultant in 2014 at the National Retail Federation 
conference. “It’s critical for them to reach customers in new 
ways, and that can only happen if retailers gather and analyze 
customer data.” Macy’s chief marketing ofﬁ cer put the matter 
more bluntly. “We don’t need more customers,” he noted in 
2012. “We need the customers to spend more time with us.”4
He meant that the merchant was attempting to engage shop-
pers in every way possible—the internet, any mobile device, and 
in the physical store, and he was particularly referring to the 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 147
value of shoppers who interacted with more than one of these 
channels, as they spend more than those who adhere to just one. 
In an article discussing Target, the FierceMobileIT5 trade journal 
noted that “the multi- channel shopper is the prize, as customers 
who shop both in stores and online generate three times the 
sales compared to shoppers who only frequent brick- and- mortar 
stores, according to the retailer.” Target, Macy’s, and other chains 
have recognized that identifying and pursuing such high- value 
targets require highly speciﬁ c data, and lots of it. “Analyzing data 
can help companies make precise decisions about everything, 
from crafting relevant offers for on- the- go consumers to 
displaying the right assortment of merchandise,” noted a retailing 
journalist who was covering the 2014 National Retail Federation 
conference, which was packed with merchants with strong phys-
ical footprints and digital sales platforms.6
The increasing focus on the individual was by no means 
unique to retailing. “Companies across the globe and from every 
industry are building teams to translate mountains of informa-
tion into better understanding of their customers,” stated a 2014 
Forrester report titled The Age of the Customer Requires a More 
Intelligent Enterprise. The title alluded to the potential knowledge 
and bargaining power shoppers could exercise in the age of the 
Web and mobile phones. “Your customers’ expectations are 
changing,” the report cautioned, “fueled by the constantly 
connected world and the mind- boggling speed of technology 
enablement,” and companies have to respond in kind. “Knowing 
your customers and quickly translating and applying that knowl-
edge across the entire enterprise is no longer a competitive 
advantage, it’s a competitive necessity if you are to win, engage, 

148 LOYALTY AS BAIT
and retain customers.” An “intelligent” business, it said, is one 
“in which customer knowledge is drawn from everywhere, 
created centrally, and shared across the entire enterprise, so 
all stakeholders can act upon it and measure the results.” Key 
to this approach is creating a unique identiﬁ er for each customer 
to “enable ﬁ rms from industries as diverse as telecom, ﬁ nancial 
services, media, retail, and high- tech to avoid the agony 
and inefﬁ ciency of manually tracking, trending, and tying 
together customer interactions from disparate databases.” All 
this information should tie into “an automated system built on 
rules- based algorithms that trigger actions such as personal 
communication, offer optimization, and cross departmental noti-
ﬁ cations.” Such automation would speed the time it took to 
translate executive insight into action so as to “meet customer 
expectations.”7
A central question remained: What are the best ways to 
get such information without alienating customers? Although 
marketers had come up with surreptitious ways to create 
shopper proﬁ les, not all of these would work in a selling situa-
tion. Consequently, many physical retailers began to use their 
loyalty programs to accomplish it. Traditionally stores used the 
programs to generate recurring purchases; now they also began 
to use them as bait to attract shoppers and encourage them to 
consider it perfectly normal and ordinary to give up information 
about themselves unselfconsciously. The shift has ramiﬁ cations 
far outside physical aisles.
Retailers in the early twenty- ﬁ rst century are adopting a new 
perspective in customer analysis that goes beyond traditional 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 149
classiﬁ cations of people based on a small set of categories such as 
demographic (gender, annual salary, etc.) or lifestyle (hunters, 
skiers, people who eat out a lot, etc.). Though these classiﬁ ca-
tions remain important, there is a new emphasis on gathering 
behavioral and attitudinal information in order to predict how 
speciﬁ c people will respond to various shopping situations. 
Indeed, practitioners in ﬁ elds such as advertising, health care, 
political analysis, and insurance have been increasingly accepting 
that learning as much as possible about individuals will lead to 
accurate predictions of their behaviors. Genetic research has 
contributed to this new mindset. When the Human Genome 
Project published the ﬁ rst human DNA blueprint in 2000, “scien-
tists promised that the age of personalized medicine had arrived.”8 
Although the technology has yet to deliver on this promise, hope 
remains that improved whole- genome sequencing techniques 
will ultimately usher in a new health care era. A Los Angeles Times 
article noted that “what they learn will enable doctors to warn 
their patients of their genetic vulnerabilities, allowing patients, 
in turn, to take steps to reduce their risk.”9 At the same time, 
ﬁ rms such as AncestryDNA (the genetics division of Ancestry
.com) reﬂ ected and encouraged public fascination with genetics 
in their marketing efforts. “This service combines advanced DNA 
science with the world’s largest online family history resource to 
predict your genetic ethnicity and help you ﬁ nd new family 
connections,” explained the AncestryDNA website.10
Retailers adopted geneticists’ ﬁ xation on the individual but 
focused on more realistic avenues for collecting data. They turned 
to the work of actuaries, statisticians, accountants, engineers, 
and computer scientists who were building disciplines aimed at 

150 LOYALTY AS BAIT
calculating the probability of knowing individuals’ actions based 
on social characteristics (such as age, ethnicity, gender, race, 
membership in an organization) and behaviors (such as driving 
habits, web- surﬁ ng habits, vacation destinations). A century 
ago the concept of probability “was relevant to practically only 
two types of people: to professional gamblers—and actuaries. 
Another profession which has integrated the concept of proba-
bility increasingly since the middle of this century is that of 
accountants.” But in recent years, “the concept of probability 
has become a universal way of thinking which is incorporated in 
all aspects of our life.”11 By 2010 computer- analytics specialists 
had attached that idea to tracking the minutiae of people’s 
everyday activities—“the little data breadcrumbs that you 
leave behind you as you move around in the world,” as MIT 
computer science professor Alex Pentland put it.12 Catalina 
Marketing used a different metaphor: “Like ﬁ ngerprints, every 
shopper’s proﬁ le is unique in the assortment of products they 
buy each year.”13 The work of zeroing in on patterns linked to 
the ﬁ ngerprint bread crumbs typically involved complex mathe-
matical tools with labels such as data mining, logistic regression, 
and cloud computing.14 It attracted many different types of 
companies. A 2011 study forecast their phenomenal growth, 
including the need for 1.5 million managers and data experts by 
2018.15
A 2013 report from the Gartner information technology 
consultants celebrated the rise of this analytical class. It predicted 
that within ﬁ ve years businesses would be able to identify and 
follow individuals through apps on mobile phones, home appli-
ances, cars, and wearable devices. Gartner identiﬁ ed four stages in 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 151
the evolution of these activities: “Sync Me,” “See Me,” “Know 
Me,” and “Be Me.” Sync Me and See Me “are well underway,” it 
said, referring to the increasing tendency of customers to connect 
several devices and the increasing ability of businesses to follow 
them across these technologies. Surveilling people across their 
digital and physical worlds would lead to such in-depth proﬁ ling 
that businesses would create intimate models of an individual’s 
behaviors and dispositions regarding their consumption patterns 
and preferences, and would ultimately enable ﬁ rms to anticipate 
customers’ needs and actions.16 The report added that when a 
shopper can be identiﬁ ed via the information gleaned through 
connected devices such as location, app- usage tracking, customer 
demographic data, and behavior history analysis, “it will be easier 
to target the right advertisement at the right moment, or send the 
precise redeemable coupon when people are at the right location, 
at the right time of day, generating a higher return on marketing 
campaigns than before.”17 The report seemed to echo Google 
chairman Eric Schmidt’s comment that the information Google 
has collected on individuals enables the company to know “roughly 
who you are, roughly what you care about, roughly who your 
friends are”—to the extent that it can give insightful suggestions 
about what individuals should do next in speciﬁ c locations.18
As to the challenge of collecting customer data, the internet 
set a precedent that physical retailing is now trying to imitate 
regarding the tracing of customer behavior. From the dawn of 
Web commerce in the mid- 1990s marketers learned a lot about 
shoppers, and mostly without their direct approval or knowl-
edge. The basic Web tracking mechanism, the cookie, was devel-
oped in 1994 solely to address the issue of identifying individual 

152 LOYALTY AS BAIT
shoppers so they could purchase more than one item in the same 
transaction. Marketers learned quickly that such a mechanism 
could do much more, and an entire industry has since grown up 
around the ability to tag people, follow their movements from 
website to website, sometimes connect them to personally iden-
tiﬁ able information (name, address, phone number), and build 
information proﬁ les about them based on their digital travels 
and, often, their ofﬂ ine lifestyles.19 People have willingly provided 
personal information about themselves by creating accounts at 
sites of interest, but most of the time they have scarcely consid-
ered the ramiﬁ cations of sharing such data. Surveys show that 
Americans have had little understanding of the speciﬁ c ways in 
which tracking takes place or of the general lack of government 
regulations overseeing such surveillance.20
Americans’ ignorance has been no different when it comes to 
the mobile phone. Especially after the iPhone’s 2007 release, 
advertising and retailing executives considered it a necessity to 
track people via their smartphones in addition to following them 
on their home computers—and to pursue them from one device 
to another. However, a cookie cannot follow someone across 
platforms; it can’t even follow someone using different browsers 
on the same platform. In addition, while a smartphone’s Web 
browser such as Safari or Chrome can accept cookies, apps 
cannot. Marketers were ﬂ ummoxed. “When companies lack a 
central notion of customer identity, each channel and the system 
creates a new identity,” noted a report from the Janrain marketing 
consultancy. “When identities are [isolated], companies all 
together lack the ability to plan, optimize, and measure the 
customer journey across devices, channels and systems.”21

LOYALTY AS BAIT 153
The best solution seemed to be what data scientists call the 
deterministic approach, meaning the shopper has to register 
separately for both the website and the app. Facebook and Target 
are businesses that operate this way. Say a Target customer logs 
into the company’s app and website every time he or she uses 
a device (or the software remembers the person). The tracking, 
the analytics, and the proﬁ ling can then take place in the back-
ground, out of the person’s awareness. Under this system, the 
company would recognize the individual no matter which of 
the person’s devices was used. Even if a shopper doesn’t sign 
in on every device, it might be possible to determine the person’s 
connection to all of them by encouraging the individual to 
offer personal information when visiting a website or using an 
app on a device not yet linked to that individual. As that personal 
disclosure takes place, the merchant can make a permanent 
connection between the shopper’s identity and the device ID. A 
common tactic for unmasking people, according to Janrain, is “to 
offer a discount code on a next purchase if an anonymous site 
visitor would provide an email address and opts in to future 
email marketing campaigns. Consumer brands frequently run 
sweepstakes and other contest promotions to the same end, and 
many product manufacturers incentivize otherwise anonymous 
buyers to provide contact and demographic information through 
warranty registrations.”22
But what if a retailer wants to learn about people who have 
never logged in to its app or website? Beginning in 2007, analytics 
ﬁ rms launched a cavalcade of new technologies to follow these 
and all other individuals across devices, often without their being 
aware of it. The approaches they use are called probabilistic (as 

154 LOYALTY AS BAIT
opposed to deterministic) identiﬁ cation because when ﬁ rms 
don’t have log- ins to work with, they have to use predictive 
methods to recognize when a person using one device is the 
same one who is using another. Tapad is a company that does 
that. It analyzes the IDs and IP addresses of millions of devices to 
identify their geographical locations and then looks for patterns: 
are a laptop, tablet, and a smartphone using the same internet 
connection? Are the web- browsing patterns similar? Do the 
devices “wake up” at the same time? Do they “sleep” at the same 
time? The greater the number of “yes” answers to these ques-
tions, the more likely that the devices connect to the same user. 
Although accurate analysis might seem improbable,23 indepen-
dent tests suggest a higher than 90 percent accuracy rate in 
predicting common owners.24
Tapad also matches its tracked phones, tablets, laptops, and 
desktops with devices that database ﬁ rms such as BlueKai and 
eXelate follow with cookies and other tags. Tapad purchases 
information from these companies and uses all the information it 
has gathered to create individual proﬁ les, which it then sells to 
marketers for targeting with personalized messages.25 Surprisingly, 
Tapad doesn’t try to match device owners with information that 
can identify them ofﬂ ine, such as name, home address, phone 
number. It also doesn’t permit clients to use its technology for 
tracking people’s activities within areas of less than one mile or 
to send people ads based on precise locations without their 
explicit consent. “Time to get precise (without getting personal),” 
the ﬁ rm tells potential clients on its home page.26
In contrast, plenty of cross- device tracking ﬁ rms do help 
retailers and other marketers connect behavioral data with 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 155
personal identities. Janrain does this through social network log- 
ins, in which people register and sign in to a website or app with 
their passwords from one of the social networks to which they 
belong. Janrain claims that “more than half of people” world-
wide use their social network log- ins for this purpose, with 81 
percent going through Facebook or Google+. This method is 
certainly convenient, as people don’t have to take the time to 
register on sites or apps requiring users to set up an account; the 
social network password enables them to bypass the process 
altogether. But in so doing, the social network logging them in 
can record this activity. Moreover, these “social log- in identity 
providers,” like Facebook and Google, enable the site or app 
owner to identify each person by name as well as “select speciﬁ c 
pieces of customer data that go beyond the basic name and 
veriﬁ ed email address to include elements like a customer’s 
birthday, Likes, relationship status, photos, and friends’ lists, to 
name a few.” And the social network updates the data every 
time a person logs in again. “Your customers simply select 
their preferred social identity from Facebook, Twitter, or other 
networks,” noted Janrain in its promotional literature, “and 
choose whether to share some of their information with you.” 
Logging in to the same retailer on various devices using the same 
social log- in presents a persistent identity that enables retailers to 
compile extensive amounts of information on individual shopper 
behavior.27
In recent years privacy advocates have convinced Facebook, 
Google+, and other social platforms to notify their users about 
the personal data they give away when they log in with their 
social accounts. In 2015 Facebook began to allow members to 

156 LOYALTY AS BAIT
specify data they don’t want to share when logging in to a site or 
app. A Janrain report noted that “some consumers are discour-
aged from using social log- in when the personal data requested 
seems excessive for or irrelevant to the intended transaction.” To 
allay such concerns, it said, the retailer should ask the social 
media site to transfer only the data that will allow the retailer to 
recognize the individual. But once that basic material pertaining 
to identity has crossed the threshold, the data ﬂ oodgates would 
be open. At that point, Janrain advised retailers, “build a supple-
mental strategy to collect everything else [about each person].”28 
The company listed a range of sources that merchants can consult 
to collect “everything else,” including email service providers; 
gaming, e- commerce, and online chat and commenting plat-
forms; “social signals/social listening” services such as Twitter, 
Facebook, and YouTube; rating and review platforms for those 
who offer opinions on products, services, or companies; and 
on- site behavioral analytics.29
Retailers who want still more information about their 
customers, including statistics that can potentially identify shop-
pers on their sites and apps on different devices, can buy it 
from data brokers such as Acxiom and Experian, which by the 
mid- 2010s had put together their own ways of tracking individ-
uals across digital devices. In 2013 Acxiom introduced a system 
that gathers information continually on approximately seven 
hundred million identiﬁ able individuals using three sources: 
Fortune 100 companies’ records of people who “purchased 
something or signed up for a mailing list or some kind of offer”; 
“every data attribute you could gather publicly about consumers 
from public records”; and its own cross- device cookie- like system 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 157
that can identify an individual across many digital properties and 
gives Acxiom “access to the last 30 days of behavior on more 
than one billion consumers.”30 Acxiom executive Phil Mui 
claimed that “for every consumer we have more than 5,000 
attributes of customer data.” Joe Mandese, editor in chief of the 
online industry publication MediaPost, asked Mui and Acxiom 
CEO and president Scott Howe about the seemingly “creepy” 
nature of the company’s aggressive quantiﬁ cation of individuals. 
He reported that the two executives viewed their work as “just a 
fact of modern consumer life, and all Acxiom is trying to do is 
make it more scientiﬁ c so that the data works the way it should, 
friction is taken out of the process for marketers and agencies, 
and consumers—at least—get the most relevant offers and 
messages targeted at them.” Indeed, Mui boasted that Axciom 
can actually predict individuals’ future shopping behaviors based 
on the demographic information and the off-  and online purchase 
data the company has compiled. “We know what your propen-
sity is to buy a handbag,” he said. “We know what your propen-
sity is to go on vacation or use a loyalty card.”31
Despite the enormous and still- growing capability of compa-
nies to gather data from various devices so they can identify 
and market to consumers, retailers remained concerned about 
accomplishing the same with shoppers strolling through the 
aisles of their physical stores. These shoppers have to be explic-
itly willing to be identiﬁ ed if a human sales associate or a 
computer- driven point- of- sale machine is to recognize them and 
follow their actions. There is also the matter of encouraging 
customers to make sure the location tracking (Bluetooth, Wi-Fi) 
functions are activated on their phone, as well as to download 

158 LOYALTY AS BAIT
the retailer’s app. High- proﬁ le privacy issues concerning National 
Security Agency surveillance and “creepy stalking” by marketers 
have prompted many Americans—approximately 35 percent, 
accordingly to a 2013 Pew Research report—to turn off their 
phone’s Bluetooth capability.32
Retailers argue people don’t have the antipathy toward 
tracking that critics claim they do. Some observers have declared 
the situation a “privacy paradox”33—meaning that, the New York 
Times noted, “normally sane people have inconsistent and contra-
dictory impulses and opinions when it comes to their safeguarding 
their own private information.”34 A March 2015 Accenture 
consulting ﬁ rm survey found that people felt strongly about 
controlling access to their personal information. Fully 90 percent 
of the survey participants said that, if given the option, they 
would limit access to certain types of personal data and would 
stop retailers from selling their information to third parties. In 
addition, 88 percent wanted to be able to approve how their data 
was used. But Accenture also found contradictions among the 
people in its sample: while nearly 60 percent of consumers 
wanted to receive promotions and discounts, just 20 percent 
approved of retailers knowing their current location so that the 
retailers could tailor those offers.35
An Accenture representative underscored the importance of 
gathering data about shoppers despite their reluctance. “Addressing 
the complex requirements of U.S. consumers is challenging 
because they are conﬂ icted on the issue,” he noted. Yet he went 
on to state that “personalization is a critical capability for retailers 
to master.” The solution, Accenture suggested, lies in persuading 
shoppers to see the situation in terms of trade- offs. “If retailers 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 159
approach and market personalization as a value exchange, and are 
transparent in how the data will be used, consumers will likely be 
more willing to engage and trade their personal data.”36 In reality, 
large retailers have yet to express such an interest in transparency 
and assume instead that their customers want personalization and 
will willingly exchange their data for relevant offers and good 
buys. Forrester marketing consultant company mirrored this view 
in a report that suggested ways to reach goals regarding shopper 
data but didn’t mention a need to let people in on how the infor-
mation about them would be used. Forrester offered its own prag-
matic formula: “Provide services that customers ﬁ nd useful and 
get back data on product use and customer afﬁ nities.”37
Physical retailers see cultivating loyalty as a way to encourage 
customers’ allegiance to services they consider useful. Retailers 
crave the kind of allegiance that will compel customers to iden-
tify themselves and to turn on their Bluetooth or Wi- Fi when 
they walk into a store because they think these actions can help 
them even if they are not sure exactly how. More generally 
retailers hope loyalty will trump wariness so that shoppers will 
suppress any data concerns and happily give out information 
about themselves—and will do so across multiple platforms, and 
will offer far more facts about themselves than they might even 
realize. Retailers especially hope they will be able to reinforce 
this relationship with the most desirable of those customers, 
encouraging them to implicitly accept and trust what the 
company does with all their personal data.
The intense competition accompanying the rise of online 
selling helped catalyze retailers to create “loyalty” programs that 

160 LOYALTY AS BAIT
offer incentives for customers to return. Whether the programs 
retailers set in motion to accomplish this goal truly constitute 
loyalty depends on one’s deﬁ nition of the term. Many have ques-
tioned whether this word accurately describes a customer’s 
repeated purchases at a store to accumulate points toward a gift. 
Bribery might be a better term, though the amount returned to 
the customer is typically quite small—often just 2 percent. In 
academic circles some have explained a person’s repeat visits to a 
store in response to loyalty points as a merchant’s attempt to 
imitate the behavioral psychologist B. F. Skinner, who conducted 
experiments with animals using food as a reward to encourage 
speciﬁ c behaviors. To apply this methodology to retail shopping, 
the customer learns the habit of returning “ﬁ rst through short- 
term ‘points pressure’ and then through long- term ‘rewarded 
behavior’ that results from the reinforcement of behavioral 
learning by gratiﬁ cation” from those loyalty points.38 Many 
agreed that a successful stimulus- response regime could 
encourage loyalty, but they did not think that the goal should 
merely be to get customers to return. After all, buying things 
might have little to do with adding value to a retailer’s bottom 
line; for example, customers who buy only deeply discounted 
sale items provide little beneﬁ t to a retailer.
Bain consultants Fred Reichheld and Phil Schefter believe 
that loyalty must involve focusing on “repeat purchases among a 
core of proﬁ table customers.”39 Retailers tend to accept this view, 
yet they typically consider emotional attachment to be a crucial 
aspect of customer loyalty. Emilie Kroner, who heads consumer 
markets organization engagement at dunnhumby, a retailing 
consultant, observed in 2013 that “emotional loyalty to a brand is 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 161
becoming more and more important” to merchants.40 Bond 
Brand Loyalty, a creator of loyalty programs, declared in 2014 
that “it’s time for brands to look beyond [customers accumulating 
rewards] points to establish deep, meaningful relationships, even 
bonds, with their customers in ways that are engaging, emotion-
ally rich, and brand aligned.”41 Such affective links are important, 
Bond Brand suggested, because they can help facilitate the collec-
tion of individual customer data: emotional loyalty results in 
higher trust and, consequently, a willingness on the part of 
program members to offer up personal information. Marketers 
then send out personalized messages built on this data, resulting 
in “likely . . . incremental business results.”42 Some believe that 
engaging shoppers in games as part of loyalty programs (what the 
industry calls “gamiﬁ cation”) is effective in encouraging emotional 
connections. Ayan Sen, senior manager for the marketing consul-
tant company Peppers & Rogers Group, suggested that shoppers 
value this aspect of rewards programs nearly as much as they do 
protection and prestige. “Gamifying the engagement platform 
helps customers enjoy the activities that earn them rewards,” Sen 
wrote. “With a typical tiered loyalty program, many consumers 
don’t get close enough to the top rewards, so they lose interest.”43 
The president of loyalty marketer Points agreed, noting that the 
aim of “modern gamiﬁ cation” is to create “a relationship of 
exchange where consumers are challenged and incentivized to 
share more of themselves: their time, their attention, their infor-
mation, and ultimately their loyalty.”44
Merchants with physical stores see emotionally driven loyalty 
programs as a way to address their need for in- store data 
collection in the face of widespread public opposition toward 

162 LOYALTY AS BAIT
surveillance, offering program members protection, privilege, 
and games in exchange for willingly providing the store with 
information about themselves. Retailers and their consultants 
believe that the data collected in this way allows them to create 
increasingly relevant messages. Wanting relevant messages, 
shoppers will accept location tracking and keep on Wi- Fi and/or 
Bluetooth and/or offer up their mobile phone numbers. Under 
this same relevance- through- personalization banner, the stores 
can make their customers complicit in their own data releases 
without describing the particulars of proﬁ ling and differential 
treatment lest the customers get annoyed or balk. It’s a classic 
technique of misdirection: hype the beneﬁ ts of a relevant brand 
experience using the traditional emotional carrots of privilege 
and protection. Garnish it every now and then with the fun of 
gaming that in- store technologies can offer. And quietly, even 
surreptitiously, gather, store, and analyze all the data that go 
along with these activities.
The Janrain consultancy suggested to retailers in a report 
that they offer loyalty members the privilege of “ﬁ rst- to- know” 
promotions and other members- only offers not only to encourage 
shoppers to identify themselves, but also to motivate them “to 
return again and again and offer up more ﬁ rst- party data or 
engage in behaviors that help brands identify them as advocates 
or inﬂ uencers.”45 Discrimination was an integral part of the 
process. “Not all customers are created equal—and not all 
segments are, either,” the company noted in a second report. 
“Segmentation should always be in support of maximizing 
customer value and response rate, and ultimately return. If your 
analysis of customer identity data reveals segments that are 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 163
disengaged, or have never demonstrated a target behavior or 
conversion, focus on creating compelling content for your other 
more high- value segments ﬁ rst.”46
Cosmetic chain Ulta Beauty exempliﬁ es the new approach to 
customer loyalty programs. Founded in 1990, the company 
currently operates nearly eight hundred stores nationally, selling 
both inexpensive and high- end brands. According to an analysis 
cited in Investor’s Business Daily, Ulta’s target customer in the mid- 
2010s is an upscale woman in her early thirties, with a house-
hold income of about $75,000. The company has grown steadily, 
by approximately 10 percent each year, and its success has been 
attributed to many factors.47 An article in Investor’s Business Daily 
suggested that customers are drawn to Ulta particularly because 
of its leisurely ambiance. “Salespeople aren’t on commission so 
they’re not breathing down your neck,” the article said. Another 
analyst attributed Ulta’s success to aggressive promoting of 
high- brand awareness, including its marketing efforts on Ellen 
DeGeneres’s television show. “A loyalty program, new products 
and the perception that it’s a ‘destination shop’ help pull 
customers to the store,” he asserted. “They know how to incu-
bate new brands through their merchandising program. That’s 
what women are looking for. They’re looking for ‘the new thing 
I can show off to my friends.’”48 Another pointed to Ulta’s one- 
stop shopping experience. Before Ulta, he noted, women had 
to travel around to beauty stores, department stores, and mass 
retailers to make all their makeup and fragrance purchases. He 
suggested that Ulta allows them to short- circuit that journey, 
even to the point of having salons at the back of its stores that 

164 LOYALTY AS BAIT
offer hair, skin, and brow services. He also contended that Ulta 
can hold its own against Amazon’s online “Beauty Bar” collec-
tion because “most women go online to see what’s hot but prefer 
going to brick- and- mortar stores. They want to see the makeup 
and smell the fragrance.” A Wells Fargo prognosticator remained 
unconvinced, however, that a niche physical store can be 
adequately protected from the two nemeses of retailing. “At the 
pace at which Amazon and Wal- Mart are innovating, if you’re 
great you’ve got to be supergreat tomorrow and unbelievably 
great a day later.”49
One way the chain attempts to remain competitive in the 
new shopping universe is to offer thousands of its products on its 
website, where shoppers can also engage in live, interactive chats 
with fashion experts, see photos of celebrities using Ulta prod-
ucts, and view photos as well as so- called haul videos of products 
customers have purchased.50 (Many of these features, especially 
the photos, are also available on Facebook, Pinterest, Twitter, and 
Instagram.) Although the company promotes these extras to add 
credibility, authority, and authenticity, its larger aim, noted Ulta’s 
chief marketing ofﬁ cer, centers on enticing high- value customers. 
Like many retailers, the chain has found that this group encom-
passes shoppers who cross the chain’s virtual and physical bound-
aries. “Our best guests,” the marketing chief said, “are the ones 
that are using our physical stores as well as our e- commerce 
business and then ultimately using our [salon] services—a trifecta 
that works well for us.”51
That “trifecta”—along with its associated marketing tools 
involving smartphones, guest services, direct mail, online and 
in- store activities, email, and social media—is the fundamental 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 165
source for the data that fuels Ulta’s “Ultamate Rewards” loyalty 
program. It encompasses a ﬁ fteen- million- member database that 
contains customers’ unique preferences so the company can 
“target the conversation” to individual shoppers. Individuals can 
become members through signing up directly for an account or 
logging in through Facebook or Google+; these social log- ins are 
a particular data boon for the retailer because Ulta might then be 
able to learn the names of the member’s friends. On its website 
Ulta emphasizes that membership in its reward program “has its 
privileges.” The program’s rules are a bit tricky, and they have 
changed more than once. Not surprisingly, they are set up to 
encourage customers to spend more when they make purchases. 
The description glosses over the rather small standard discount 
the program offers and instead encourages members to earn 
double and triple points on speciﬁ c products “or on your entire 
purchase during special bonus days.” If shoppers spend $400 
within a calendar year, their points don’t expire. Moreover, in 
mimicking airline loyalty programs, customers who reach this 
“platinum” status receive a higher reward ratio: 1.25 points 
(rather than 1 point) for every dollar spent. Consequently, this 
group can receive discounts more quickly than lower- spending 
members, and it aims to encourage high- value customers to 
spend to keep their special status.
The retailer’s additional goal of learning as much as it can 
about customers and reaching them across digital and physical 
domains may or may not be evident in the postal mailings, 
emails, app coupons, website offerings, Facebook blandishments, 
and other marketing materials program members encounter. 
Members are probably completely unaware of other aspects of 

166 LOYALTY AS BAIT
data gathering that are explained in the small print of the Ulta 
privacy policy. If they do take the time to wade through these 
notices they might be startled to learn that Ulta:
• claims the right to buy information about its members 
from third- party sources (often database ﬁ rms) to incorpo-
rate into its existing member proﬁ les;
• uses cookies and similar elements to follow members’ 
activities on its sites and in emails as well as to infer their 
interests by tracking members’ visits to non- Ulta sites;
• allows authorized advertising networks to collect data 
about its members while they’re visiting the Ulta site;
• tracks members’ locations via their mobile devices 
without requesting explicit permission (unless members turn 
off that feature on their devices);
• collects members’ comments and other input regarding 
“a product review, question, or other information” on the 
Ulta website; and
• allows “third- party social media widgets such as buttons 
or similar mechanisms” from Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, 
YouTube, and FourSquare to collect information about 
members as well as to place trackers on members’ devices.
Although Ulta collects much information about its shoppers 
online and via its app, Ulta’s marketing director emphasized in 
2015 that his company’s goal is for them to shop primarily in 
the store, and to have “a personal and fun experience” as they 
do it.52 To help facilitate this, the company has instituted what 
it calls a “clientelling” tool—an iPad that provides clerks with 
immediate access to every bit of information the store has 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 167
compiled on any individual customer. Once the employee has 
identiﬁ ed a customer, the clerk can “review her purchase history, 
understand what her beauty concerns are, and target the right 
product to address those concerns.” The associate can also enter 
the customer’s brand preferences. All that information can lead 
to personalized offers as well as “targeted invites” to in- store 
events.53
Sephora, an Ulta competitor, which likewise collects infor-
mation on its customers from their activities via the internet, 
mobile devices, and in- store, has a different focus. It installed 
beacons in all its locations in 2015, and smartphones that have 
downloaded the company’s app can capture the beacon trans-
missions, which send notiﬁ cations of promotions in speciﬁ c areas 
of the store. The app also outlines in- store services, and shoppers 
can also use it to review previous purchases as well as to check 
their current balance for the company’s rewards program. 
In- store shoppers who have checked their balance to ﬁ nd that 
they’re just a few dollars short of earning their next reward often 
shop accordingly and buy a bit more to make sure they’re eligible 
for their next reward once they complete that day’s transaction. 
Johnna Marcus, Sephora’s director of mobile and digital store 
marketing, said that the balance- checking function of the app is 
one of its most popular features.54
No matter the merchant, rewards programs have much in 
common with game playing—following rules, accumulating 
points, obtaining prizes. To be sure, industry reports suggest that 
such game- like activities can help keep customers interested in 
the merchant—“prime the loyalty pump,” says an executive at 
the marketing consultant Pepper and Rogers—by informing 

168 LOYALTY AS BAIT
them about products, stimulating their use of more services, and 
encouraging them to talk about the company with others through 
social media.55 For the retailers involved, the fun elements help 
sew together each customer’s purchase and preference data from 
the merchants’ digital online, mobile, and physical platforms. In 
2015 Sephora extended the game- like approach beyond its 
rewards program to an in- store “augmented reality image scan-
ning” activity. Customers who spot “Scan to Watch” signs in the 
store are urged to point their phones at the signs and “unlock 
content (such as exclusive videos).”56 The signs also encourage 
shoppers to use the company’s app as a tool as they shop—which 
also means that the store’s customer- tracking beacons will be 
capturing data on its customers as they shop.
While many, if not most, loyalty programs can offer real 
value to shoppers, their unstated aim is also to train people to 
give up personal data willingly. shopkick, which pioneered ultra-
sonic and Bluetooth technologies to follow customers through 
stores and encourage them to interact with the retailer and 
provide personal information, has made capturing all sorts of 
data with little transparency an integral part of its business model. 
In an uncharacteristically frank reﬂ ection, a Best Buy represen-
tative said her company signed up with shopkick to “ﬁ nd new 
ways to bring people into our stores through the use of mobile 
technology, but more importantly, [to] know when they [indi-
vidually identiﬁ ed shoppers] come into our store.”57 For shop-
pers shopkick emphasizes the rewards they can earn by scanning 
goods with the shopkick app and by purchasing products. 
According to the online magazine TechCrunch, an important part 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 169
of shopkick’s success came from introducing “a level of ‘gamiﬁ ca-
tion’ to the shopping experience.” But the company’s privacy 
policy makes clear that it reserves the right to store, analyze, and 
use for proﬁ ling and “tailored” targeting virtually all the infor-
mation it can gather on its users. The company also maintains 
the right to purchase information on shoppers from data brokers 
as well as to gather information that shoppers provide retailers 
“in the course of using their services.” shopkick further reserves 
the right to share any of this personal information with merchants 
so long as shoppers give shopkick their various merchant reward 
program account numbers (which many do out of convenience 
to simplify awards transactions), or identify themselves as a 
shopkick member (to earn points) when they make a purchase 
from a shopkick- related store. Only those customers who bother 
to wade through the privacy policy can learn of these conditions, 
as shopkick does not otherwise mention them. And although 
shopkick won’t share shopper information among its retailer 
clients—for example, it won’t tell Best Buy what a customer 
bought at Macy’s—it does compile all that data for itself and 
maintains the right to use it to analyze shopping behaviors and 
target shoppers with ads accordingly.
First Data Corporation, a major credit card payment processor, 
has blended its primary function with managing rewards 
programs for smaller businesses that otherwise aren’t set up to 
operate one.58 Using beacon technology, merchants are notiﬁ ed 
when rewards shoppers open the First Data’s Perka app upon 
entering a store; the notiﬁ cation includes the customer’s name, a 
photo, and most recent transaction at that business. Shoppers 
may appreciate a personalized greeting and offers that result 

170 LOYALTY AS BAIT
from their presence being announced, but they likely are 
unaware that all the personal information that the app gathers 
on them in the process is shared with many sources outside that 
particular store. Perka’s privacy policy is even broader than shop-
kick’s in terms of allowing outside ﬁ rms to purchase access to 
individual shopper data. Because customers use the app at any 
number of associated small-  and medium- size businesses, Perka 
can harvest enormous amounts of information about the shop-
pers who use the app and visit the websites of these merchants. 
Based on a customer’s initial registration when downloading the 
app, and on subsequent behavioral tracking as the customer uses 
the app, shopper proﬁ les are built around “personal data such as 
your name, birthday and email address, any transaction history, 
and could include a photograph.” First Data mines “geographic 
location details” both outdoors (via GPS and Wi- Fi) and inside 
stores (via Bluetooth) so shoppers can be sent “relevant and 
appropriate offers.”59 While it shares just transaction- speciﬁ c 
data with the merchant making the sale—and not the extensive 
personal information the company has compiled—First Data also 
sells access to third- party advertisers “to serve advertisements 
regarding goods and services” based on customers’ activities on 
Perka- associated websites as well as on other websites (which are 
monitored via cookie- like trackers).60
Merchants who use Perka are generally aware that they are 
not in full control of their customer relationships, and this concern 
at least partly explains why large retailers release their own apps 
even as they also work with outside loyalty trackers such as shop-
kick, and proximity ad networks such as inMarket. Several people 
interviewed for this book pointed out that the premier retailer 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 171
Macy’s, which employs shopkick’s perimeter- and- beacon app, 
also ﬁ elds its own app. The retailer values shopkick’s ability to 
help bring desirable customers into the store and assist Macy’s in 
identifying them, but at the same time it doesn’t want an outside 
technology ﬁ rm to have complete control over its customer data. 
Unlike shopkick’s app, the Macy’s app is not an explicit attempt to 
encourage shopper loyalty. Its dominant focus is on encouraging 
omnichannel shopping at Macy’s either remotely or inside a 
Macy’s store. The app invites product searches via text messages, 
product ID information obtained online, a smartphone- generated 
photo of the product, or the item’s barcode scan. Neither logging 
in to an existing account nor registering for a new account is 
necessary to access these or many other of the app’s functions, so 
any tracking that occurs under those conditions is anonymous. 
However, the app does encourage users to set up an account and 
create a personal proﬁ le. When shoppers do register the app, 
Macy’s can match the personal information they have provided, 
such as name, birth date, and physical address, with information 
obtained about them from shopkick and other sources.
Many apps often offer features such as ease, special offers, 
and game- like activities, which entice shoppers to accept smart-
phone settings that link their device with cellular, Wi- Fi, 
Bluetooth, and other technologies while enabling retailers to 
track individuals walking toward, through, or away from their 
physical locations and gather additional valuable information as 
they do so. A few examples:
• Old Navy and some other retailers use sweepstakes offers 
distributed in widely broadcast anonymous text messages as 

172 LOYALTY AS BAIT
a way to begin collecting personal data. Once a cell phone 
user opts in and provides the requested personal informa-
tion, a company can “start to develop the data set you need 
as a marketer to actually deliver personalization,” said an 
executive who was familiar with Old Navy’s digital- marketing 
agency and who requested anonymity to be interviewed for 
this book.61 “The consumer texts in, and there’s a prompt 
that responds. It says, ‘Are you sure you want to join? Reply 
yes.’ And some companies will say ‘Reply yes and include 
your birthday’ as the next validation. Once the consumer has 
opted in, now that mobile number is in your database, and 
you can link that number with your CRM [customer relation 
management] system.”
• Although Walmart doesn’t have a traditional loyalty 
program, it has nevertheless gathered personal data on its 
customers by asking them to register on its website and app 
and by using credit card information that customers provide 
during a purchase. In 2015 the giant retailer introduced a new 
vehicle by which it could identify individual customers: under 
its “Savings Catcher” program, shoppers submit the prices of 
goods they’ve bought by scanning a barcode on their purchase 
receipt using the Walmart app (they can also input the barcode 
number by hand on the company’s website). Walmart says it 
then compares the prices against those listed by its competitors 
in the past month and will issue a credit for any difference in 
the form of a Walmart gift card.62 To participate, customers 
need to identify themselves, whether they either already have 
an account or paid cash for the transaction. Walmart can then 
connect this information with other purchases a customer has 
made. The program also encourages customers to download 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 173
the Walmart app to simplify access, and those who do so can 
then also be tracked by beacons when they shop in the physical 
store.
• Target’s popular app helps shoppers aggregate discounts, 
compare Target coupons with those of other retailers (and 
possibly receive lower prices as a result), ﬁ nd products in the 
aisles via an interactive map, and check an item’s availability. 
But between the app and other ways customers interact with 
the retailer, according to the ﬁ rm’s privacy policy, Target and 
its “service providers” use “cookies, web beacons, and other 
technologies” to record just about every such action it can, 
and by every means—“online, in store, mobile, etc.”63 The 
phone app also connects to inMarket’s beacon technology 
for further data collection.64 Target’s privacy policy for its 
app states that the chain buys additional information from 
third parties and shares this data with its subsidiaries and 
afﬁ liates, as well as with other companies “for their marketing 
purposes.”65 Target’s main privacy policy adds that “if we are 
able to identify you as a Target guest, we may . . . link your 
activity on our website to your activity in a Target store. . . . 
This allows us to provide you with a personalized activity 
regardless of how you interact with us.”66
Target is one of the few companies that present a separate 
privacy policy for their app, as most use one policy to cover all 
aspects of their business. This variation notwithstanding, privacy 
policies in general often mask rather than reveal ﬁ rms’ handling 
of customers’ personal data. shopkick’s long, complex privacy 
policy is typical; it uses terms such as non- personally identiﬁ able 
information, afﬁ liated partners, API calls, and psychographic data 

174 LOYALTY AS BAIT
without deﬁ ning them or providing any explanation.67 Ulta’s 
privacy policy is likewise characteristic in that it doesn’t explain 
how it proﬁ les people based on the information it gathers or how 
the data translate into what it calls “special offers and personal-
ized content.”68 Privacy policies also often seem contradictory 
when they describe their data- sharing activities. For example, in 
one section the Safeway supermarket chain privacy policy states, 
“We do not sell, rent, lease, share or disclose personal informa-
tion to any non- related companies or third parties without your 
consent,” except for certain narrow business purposes like ﬁ lling 
orders. But in another section the policy notes that it allows 
“third parties to serve ads on our websites.” It also says that the 
company shares personal data from cookies with the third parties. 
Marketers are well aware that the information those third parties 
collect in this manner enables them to easily identify the 
names and other personal information pertaining to Safeway 
customers. And because the supermarket chain charges the 
marketers for serving the ads, indirectly at least Safeway does 
“sell . . . personal information.”69 Attorneys representing various 
marketing organizations acknowledge privately that these poli-
cies are not written for public consumption. Rather they are 
arcane documents that provide the retailer with legal protection, 
so they mention everything the merchant does to learn about its 
shoppers but without revealing speciﬁ cs that might enlighten 
competitors or stir up the general public.
Retailers continue to seek out new ways of combining data 
collection with beneﬁ ts so that shoppers ﬁ xate on the perks and 
don’t stop to consider the behind- the- scenes activities that 

LOYALTY AS BAIT 175
capture their personal information. Mobile wallets are among 
the newest such vehicles. A wallet is a default smartphone app 
that began as a means by which users could store and access 
items on their device such as retail coupons, airline boarding 
passes, and event tickets. It has since grown to include credit and 
debit cards, as well as retail rewards cards. Both Apple and Google 
offer a version of the app. But despite the availability of mobile 
payments from these and other entities as diverse as Amazon, 
PayPal, Alipay, and a consortium of retailers that includes 
Walmart, most Americans have yet to give up their plastic cards 
and paper currency and use their mobile phones instead to make 
their purchases. The competition for phone- payment supremacy 
among these companies is likely to be drawn out and messy.70
Battles among mobile payment providers aside, some 
marketing professionals believe that mobile wallets can serve as 
at least a partial replacement for individual retail apps. Although 
a retailer’s app can help the merchant by collecting customer 
information, encouraging their loyalty, tracking their locations, 
and sending them messages, many shoppers either never down-
load the app or, when they have downloaded it, never turn it on. 
Mark Tack, vice president of marketing at Vibes, a mobile tech-
nology marketing company, noted that smartphone users access 
just ﬁ ve of their downloaded apps 80 percent of the time, and so 
retailers should change their strategy and tap into the mobile 
wallet platform already on the phone. “When you have that 
[wallet] app that is offered by the operating system, it sits on your 
phone, it’s just there,” he said. A report from the marketing 
consultant agency Forrester Research agreed, noting, “Marketing 
leaders will beneﬁ t from mobile wallets if they tie together loyalty 

176 LOYALTY AS BAIT
programs, coupons, product discovery, gift cards, and promotions 
to create powerful and new brand experiences in the mobile 
moments of their customers.”71
Here is how the process can work, according to a Vibes exec-
utive who did not want to be named:72 a retailer can send emails 
or text messages with discount coupons to people who are 
customers or whose contact information the retailer bought from 
third parties. If the individuals open the messages on their smart-
phones and click on the coupons, they can deposit them into 
their phone’s mobile wallet for later use. These promotional 
items can incorporate a unique identiﬁ er, which, when combined 
with the geolocation functions of the smartphone, can result in 
the coupon or other offer automatically appearing on the phone’s 
lock screen as the shopper nears the store (or, with Wi- Fi or 
Bluetooth on, the location in the store) for which the offer is 
intended.73 Vibes performs these services for its retail clients, 
and, depending on the data analysis of the smartphone user, it 
also offers the option of altering the text—and even the discount 
amount—of the coupon once delivered, until the offer is 
redeemed or deleted. For example, Men’s Wearhouse (a Vibes 
client) can ﬁ rst send a coupon discounting the price of a pair of 
pants, then increase the discount or change the discount item to 
a sports jacket. The company can also increase the rewards points 
offered with the purchase, or present an offer to buy a gift card. 
(Interestingly, the hardware hasn’t quite caught up with the rest 
of the technology, as a smartphone’s barcode can’t always be 
read by a store’s scanner. Consequently, Vibes includes the 
numerical digits with the barcode so the clerk can key in the 
number by hand when this problem occurs.)74

LOYALTY AS BAIT 177
This ability to change the value of a discount based on a 
company’s knowledge of an individual across space and time 
raises coupon personalization to a new level. Making the activity 
a common promotional tactic requires retailers to make loading 
retailer messages into a mobile wallet part of shoppers’ regular 
routines. That will involve encouraging them with help, special 
treatment, and gamelike entertainment around the smartphone. 
Another Vibes executive listed incentives such as loyalty points, 
rewards redemptions, and contests as ways to present “more 
opportunities for . . . consumers to save content to their mobile 
devices.” He said that email, text messages, the internet, apps, 
direct mail, and QR (quick response) codes all can be used to 
transmit these incentives to targeted individuals.75 And behind 
the scenes Vibes can tell “who has saved or deleted mobile wallet 
content” as well as “which [geographic] locations consumers 
save to their mobile wallet offers and loyalty cards.”76
Whatever the tools that marketers and retailers use to gather 
information on consumers so that they can be sold to more effec-
tively, the main goal is to make the surveillance- and- selling 
scenario as smooth and as tension- free as possible. The compa-
nies discussed in this chapter—Ulta, Sephora, Old Navy, Men’s 
Wearhouse, Walmart, Target, and Safeway—each reﬂ ects the 
retail industry’s common practice of baiting consumers to gather 
data on them and then to obfuscate the process by presenting 
confounding privacy policies. Indeed, “frictionless” and “seam-
less” are current industry buzzwords for a process that doesn’t 
provoke people to stop and ask tough questions about the tech-
nologies inﬂ uencing them. “By investing in mobile applications 

178 LOYALTY AS BAIT
and frictionless digital payment tools that incorporate loyalty, 
coupons and rewards in- store,” said the global head of retail 
consultant Accenture, “retailers can provide a seamless bridge 
between customers’ online and ofﬂ ine experiences.”77 And a 
trade publication article on Target stressed that the retailer “plans 
to strengthen its data, analytics and technology capabilities to 
deliver more personalized digital experiences, loyalty programs 
and promotional offers.”78
Such a retailing environment raises some major questions: 
What does personalization really mean? What should personal-
ized messages express? In an era where personalized information 
can yield tailored prices as well as other offers, what should the 
balance be? And in what direction is retailing headed as a result 
of personalization?

179
Mark Tack, vice president of marketing for Vibes, a mobile 
technology marketing company, put his point bluntly: “For us 
personalization isn’t a nice- to- have in the mobile channel,” he said. 
“It is absolutely required.” Vibes’ clients include some of the biggest 
retailers in the business—Home Depot, Sears, Men’s Wearhouse, 
Gap, Old Navy, Pep Boys. In mid- 2015 he estimated that 90 percent 
or more of the work he does for those chains centers on the phys-
ical store. He said that personalization is “deﬁ nitely” a topic of 
discussion among his clients, and that the smartphone “has become 
arguably the most important marketing channel.” Consumers 
are “living on their phones,” he said, and experience a “panic 
attack” if they forget them at home. “Our phones actually become 
extensions of ourselves,” he continued, and that level of personal 
connection means that people expect everything on their phones 
to relate to them individually. “Consumers are much more likely to 
turn off marketers from their phones than they are other chan-
nels,” he said. “Consumers’ tolerance for nonpersonalized messages 
on their phones is extremely low.” In other words, he said, a retailer 
that wants to attract the attention of smartphone users must 
“personalize and tailor every mobile message to the individual.”
6  PERSONALIZING 
THE AISLES

180 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
Tack’s perceptions were closely echoed by each of the 
twenty- one executives I interviewed on this topic. Mark Miller, 
strategy director for the Catapult brand- marketing consultancy, 
said, “Locating individuals is a Holy Grail. Speaking one to one is 
a Holy Grail. . . . It’s all about one- to- one communication.” But, 
he asked, “Can we always get there?” He ﬂ atly answered his own 
question: “No.” Most of the other business leaders made the 
same point when describing their attempts to link technologies 
to data with the aim of tailoring messages that would get indi-
viduals to take certain actions near, around, or in physical stores. 
The words “experimental” and “testing” were mentioned often. 
“That stuff is really, really nascent; it’s highly experimental at this 
point,” said Gary Stokes of the Signal Digital consultancy when 
discussing his clients’ approaches to in- store tracking. Randy 
Jiusto of the Outsell strategic advisory ﬁ rm agreed, noting that 
retailers have been testing beacons in certain stores as they 
attempt to determine “the best combination of the right services 
to offer, and how it relates to their analytics.” Jason Goldberg, 
an executive at the Razorﬁ sh marketing communications agency, 
noted an “appetite on the part of retailers to say, ‘Let’s do some 
tests to try out some innovative self- service experiments using 
the customer’s phone.’” Bruce Biegel, managing partner of the 
Winterberry strategy consultancy, pointed to the broad uncer-
tainty standing in the way of the personalization grail. “They are 
testing,” he exclaimed, referring to physical retailers and their 
digital- marketing agencies. “They are testing everything.”
To Biegel, the advantage of retailers in the current competi-
tive environment would devolve to those who have “the most 
experience in CRM [customer relationship management] data 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 181
management, data aggregation, campaign management, and 
analytics” because they can use that experience to “deploy a new 
technology, develop testing criteria, and roll it out faster than 
those that don’t have the experience or the culture.” He saw 
Macy’s as a frontrunner. “I believe that Macy’s, because they 
have the analytics bench, because they’ve got the database and 
maturity in their organization, and because they have analytics 
talent, they are better positioned to continuously test. And any 
marketer that we’ve worked with who’s really, really good and 
really analytically driven, they will use anywhere from 15 to 
30 percent of budget for testing. They’re trying to beat that 
control all the time. And so a Macy’s should always be testing. 
The whole job is to beat the control.”
Razorﬁ sh’s Goldberg agreed that Macy’s has implemented 
lots of testing to encourage optimal customer in- store involve-
ment as well as to gather data toward understanding shopper 
patterns and personalization. He noted that the retailer was 
testing a number of loyalty programs, including Plenti, a trading 
stamp–like loyalty plan from American Express. He said that 
Macy’s was one of the ﬁ rst to enable customers to scan QR codes 
with their smartphones to obtain information about speciﬁ c 
products. It was also one of the ﬁ rst to invest in mobile visual 
search, which enables a shopper to submit a photograph of 
an item to the Macy’s mobile app to ﬁ nd out if that product 
or a similar one is available in the store. “They are doing the 
beacon stuff,” Goldberg said. “They are doing GPS [tracking]. 
They are . . . partnering with shopkick. They’re doing some 
in- store analytics . . . to understand what the customer ﬂ ow is, 
how frequently the same customers come back, and what the 

182 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
conversion rates are. They have a whole host of initiatives 
like that.”
But one executive, who asked for anonymity, was not nearly 
as enthusiastic. He gently scoffed at the image Macy’s promotes 
in the trade press and at retailing industry events. “Macy’s is a 
very good tech company,” he emphasized. “They are willing to try 
any ideas or concepts that come into vogue. But they are far less 
organic about it than they would have you believe.” He described 
the retailer’s activities as fragmented and noted that even though 
Macy’s hired “the ﬁ rst omnichannel ofﬁ cer in all of retail,” in 
actuality it’s “really an honorary position with no speciﬁ c responsi-
bilities and no real leverage within the company.” He said that the 
retailer assigns “a pizza box full of employees—you know, six 
employees”—to pursue disconnected company initiatives and 
“launch them all off and learn from each in their own little vacuum.”
This same assessment could be applied to many physical 
retailers in the mid- 2010s. Despite a generally agreed- upon 
understanding of personalization and its relation to segmenta-
tion, there currently exist quite different perspectives on how 
best to use customized messages to reach shoppers. Moreover, 
the industry is struggling with key questions about what should 
be conveyed to shoppers via the smartphone: should the messages 
be mostly tailored salutations welcoming them to the store 
they’ve just entered? Should the communications mostly focus 
on pointing out certain products that ﬁ t a targeted customer’s 
proﬁ le? Should they present price adjustments aimed at offering 
just the right discount that entices a particular shopper to buy? 
Should other subjects—for example, loyalty, personal hobbies, 
provocative food choices—be included in the messages?

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 183
One aspect seemed clear: the data customers gave up, either 
knowingly or unknowingly, contributed to a data fest of experi-
mentation. These trials created proﬁ les of individuals that, when 
wedded to new targeting technologies, pushed the impulse 
toward discrimination to high gear. Shoppers might not be able 
to quite understand the hidden curriculum that urged them to 
give up information through various forms of bait. But they 
would increasingly feel how it would affect their movement 
through the twenty- ﬁ rst- century marketplace.
Joe Stanhope of Signal Digital mirrored the comments of 
most of those interviewed when he deﬁ ned personalization as a 
“kind of data management where we collect data from lots of 
online and ofﬂ ine sources and then bring the data together for a 
single identity, and then make that data available to retailers 
many times.” For most of his clients, he added, personalization 
also involves creating a constant experience no matter the means 
a retailer uses. “So what I [as a customer] see in my laptop on my 
tablet and in my mobile, in the store, when I get mailings from 
the loyalty program there is some degree of continuity and consis-
tency.” While not disagreeing with Stanhope’s broad description 
of personalization, Jason Goldberg of Razorﬁ sh believes that the 
concept is too vague to dictate speciﬁ c activities that will solve 
speciﬁ c retailing problems. He said merchants using the term are 
instead just reﬂ ecting panic over a new environment rather than 
an actual common understanding of how to carry it out. “If you 
interview certain retail execs,” he said, “[personalization] always 
shows up as the number one or number two point on the road 
map—‘Oh my God, I need more personalization online and in 

184 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
the store.’” But, he argued, “what that aspiration is varies widely 
from retailer to retailer. So for one retailer personalization is 
automated product recommendations, and for another it equals a 
360- degree view of the customer with client- selling tools for their 
sales associates. And for another, personalization exclusively 
means customized pricing promotion. So you can look at the 
studies and say, ‘Oh my God, personalization is hot,’ but the word 
is so amorphous that it almost isn’t a useful data point to talk 
about personalization in the abstract. You can talk about indi-
vidual tactics, and some of them have a more demonstrable 
return on investment than others. But it’s difﬁ cult to just talk 
generically about personalization.”
These two descriptions reﬂ ect the complexity involved in 
attempting to deﬁ ne and then institute personalization as a tech-
nique for reaching customers persuasively. For one thing, the 
word has charismatic charm within the retail industry; if done 
well, many see it as a key to meeting retailing’s marketing chal-
lenges in the twenty- ﬁ rst century. For another, the word is kalei-
doscopic; the meanings retailing executives and industry 
consultants attach to it vary depending on their business needs. 
When it comes to enacting personalization, some executives 
focus on store aisles and checkout areas as the ideal locations for 
sending messages, while others emphasize means far broader 
than the physical store. Company reports, industry trade- paper 
discussions, and executives interviewed for this book go back 
and forth between these approaches, depending on the topic at 
hand. One aspect remains clear through it all: new norms are 
coming into being regarding the ways customers are viewed in 
the new shopping world.

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 185
The Neustar analytics consultancy tried to canonize some of 
those norms in a 2014 report titled An A–Z Glossary of Personalized 
Marketing. Noting that “many marketers are struggling” to accom-
plish “personalized digital marketing,” Neustar said the business 
“has grown so quickly that it’s developed its own vernacular.” It 
added, “This guide has been created to give you a better under-
standing of the components of scaled, personalized marketing, so 
that you can give your customers the one- to- one dialogue they’re 
waiting for.”1 Signiﬁ cantly, only four of the forty- three glossary 
entries mention physical retail in their descriptions. And the 
report has no entries for beacon, proximity (NFC) chip, lock 
screen, clientelling, geolocation, and a host of other terms crucial 
to understanding personalization in the physical retailing context. 
Still, Neustar made it clear it saw the physical store as a crucial 
part of the new personalization ecosystem.
The Janrain retailing consultancy took a similarly broad 
view of personalization. In 2014 and 2015 reports, the consul-
tancy nested its understanding of the term within a model of 
marketing continuity and identity- driven marketing. It described 
marketing continuity as “a framework for thinking about and 
planning for an increasingly fragmented marketing landscape.” 
Identity- driven marketing, in turn, involves creating a “compre-
hensive, centralized and universally- accessible customer identity 
that informs every marketing message or offer an individual 
receives.”2 This continually refreshed “identity management 
system should become the driver of segmented and personalized 
messages.”3 Janrain deﬁ ned segmentation as “a way to get 
a ‘compelling message’ in front of a smaller or more targeted 
group of customers who share similar characteristics.” It 

186 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
was, the consultancy said, a pragmatic waystation between the 
supposedly earlier “spray and pray method of marketing” and 
highly speciﬁ c messages based on detailed knowledge of an 
individual.4 Recall from Chapter 5 Janrain consultancy’s proposi-
tion “Not all customers are created equal, and not all segments 
are, either.” A report from the ﬁ rm advised marketers to divide 
target audiences into groups based on psychographic as well as 
demographic information. “Beliefs, values and attitudes are far 
superior predictors of response, afﬁ nity and loyalty [than] the 
typical age, gender and location data on which many marketers 
rely,” it asserted.5
As useful as discrimination through segmentation can be, 
Janrain said, it is actually a relatively weak form of personalization. 
The stronger type, “truly one- to- one marketing . . . goes deeper to 
enable customized experiences based on individual- level data, such 
as self- declared afﬁ nities and interests or past transaction history.”6 
True personalization is “perhaps the most difﬁ cult identity- driven 
marketing tactic to put into practice.”7 It requires “real- time respon-
siveness and relies on highly accurate and comprehensive customer 
data.” Because of the difﬁ culty of collecting the identity- linked 
information and setting up technology capable of analyzing and 
applying that information to messages in real time, “Most marketing 
organizations have really yet to implement systems and processes 
that enable true one- to- one marketing experiences.” Nevertheless, 
Janrain reported, “a majority of marketers believed [in a 2014 
survey] that personalization would become the most important 
capability for their teams in coming years.” The ones that do it 
early, it claimed, “will be far ahead of the competition in terms of 
differentiation and added value.”8

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 187
Joe Stanhope emphasized an additional continuity between 
pursuing narrow segments of customers and speciﬁ c individuals. 
“A segment,” he said, “is really any kind of rule that’s applied to 
the universe of customers.” It might be based on the day’s 
weather, or on whether the merchant had designated a shopper 
a gold or a platinum customer—or a lapsed one. An “awful lot” 
of his clients also “score” shoppers; they place them in categories 
that indicate their value to the store or the store’s loyalty program. 
The distance between segmentation and personalization can 
sometimes be quite slim. Asked, for example, whether “scoring” 
the value of segments typically affects the messages his clients 
send customers, Stanhope slid into a perspective that sounded 
very much like personalization. “It should affect them,” he began, 
and then added that “given what retailers know about their 
customers, if they have a way to authenticate a customer through 
a loyalty program or something like that, they should be able to 
get pretty granular because they know your purchase history, 
they know where you live, they know your interests, they’ve 
probably enhanced that data with third- party information 
already. They might’ve scored it to ﬁ gure out what you’re going 
to want next.”
Andy Chu of Sears elaborated on Stanhope’s points as he 
described his company’s classiﬁ cation of its shoppers for its Shop 
Your Way loyalty program. Sears divides customers into various 
segments, and then sends speciﬁ c customers within each segment 
individualized messages depending on the person’s proﬁ le and 
value score. The initial, broadest segments primarily reﬂ ect shop-
ping frequency and the “way they engage with us across chan-
nels.” Shopping frequency is determined according to “someone 

188 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
who shopped with us over a year ago, someone who shopped 
with us in the last six months [but not recently], the frequent 
shoppers.” Sears then further segments these “loyalty” cohorts 
based on the amount spent during each visit (their “average 
basket size”) and by demographic information—income levels, 
ethnicity, home address, and the number of people in the house-
hold, for example.
Gathering that kind of information about a family, he noted, 
requires a way to identify a particular household—which the 
loyalty program provides when it asks for names and addresses. 
Sears also buys additional information from a list of companies 
including data provider giants Acxiom and Experian. Then, “we 
really mash those [pieces of information] together, if you will, to 
get a sense of who the customers are.” As an example he pre -
sents “a Hispanic household that falls in the age group of thirty- 
ﬁ ve, has three kids, and income level of more than $75,000, they 
shop with us more than three times a year, and their basket size 
is XYZ dollars. So we have different attributes and then we look 
at different sources that those attributes potentially come from.” 
Of particular interest are “high- value customer” groups within 
the segments. Chu calls one such subsegment Four- Plus Trippers. 
“Those are customers who shop with us very frequently, and 
within those we look at how much money these people also 
spend with us.” Based on its statistical modeling, Sears places a 
certain value on one or another subsegment. Then, based on 
what it knows about the group’s purchasing habits in terms of 
products and the channels it uses for retail purchases (the Web, 
the phone, the store), the company will approach individual 
customers with particular messages and offers tuned to their 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 189
group. “If we determine you have an interest in the tools cate-
gory and the last time you bought tools is three or four months 
ago, and we also saw you looking online at lawn and garden 
stuff, we might push you a notiﬁ cation” to encourage a tools 
purchase. The communication could be a text message or an 
email, he said, depending on what statistically had worked best 
to lead people like “you” in the segment to purchase the item.
While such increasingly narrow segments come close to one- 
to- one personalization, Ryan Boniﬁ cino, the marketing head for 
the Alex and Ani jewelry business, asserted his company actually 
carries out the real thing. He said his ﬁ rm’s one- to- one involve-
ments are with those who already have bought from the chain in 
the physical store or online and whose identities the analytics 
team therefore often knows. The key to successful personaliza-
tion, he said, involves optimizing the use of the company’s data 
management platform. It contains information about all the 
ﬁ rm’s identiﬁ ed purchasers, including “every single digital touch 
point.” He added that the ﬁ rm has an average of six hundred 
strands of information on each person and “upwards of twenty- 
eight thousand data points so far on our oldest customers.” That 
includes bits about activities on desktop computers, laptops, and 
mobile devices.
Identifying high- value customers is an important part of the 
customer analysis for future tailored interactions based on those 
data. “We’ll look at a couple of different dimensions,” he noted. 
“One is obviously the length of time they have been connected 
to us as a consumer. That could be as simple as signing up for 
email or as particular as purchasing a product online versus 
in- store. Making a new account, or maybe phoning [a] call 

190 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
center. All those little time stamps when they start their relation-
ship with us. So that’s more of a lifetime- value play. Then we 
have highest spenders, most frequent spenders, and we actually 
do most inﬂ uential as well.” Inﬂ uential people are those whom 
the company has tagged as having not only many social contacts 
but also sway in relation to those connections. The company 
tracks shopper comments through a social listening product 
called Radian6, which traces millions of discussions about brands 
in the digital environment. Boniﬁ cino said Radian6’s parent 
company can often help his company’s email provider match 
email addresses with commenting individuals. This information 
enables Alex and Ani to link speciﬁ c opinions to individuals on 
the ﬁ rm’s customer list as well as to note the discussion topics 
and their frequency.
To assess the inﬂ uence of those customers on others, Alex 
and Ani turns to social sign- on data, which is obtained from 
people who log into various websites using their password from 
Facebook, Twitter, Google+, or other social media sites. The 
advantage is convenience, as the individuals can use the same 
username and password instead of having to create a sign- in for 
each site. However, they must typically accept (through a pop- up 
window) that the site will receive data about them and the 
“friends” they have on the social media site they use for logging 
in. Retailers often hire a technology ﬁ rm (such as Janrain and 
Gigya) to help implement the sign- on as well as to collect and 
analyze the data coming from the social media sites. What they 
learn can be well worth the effort. “It will be the email, the 
networks of friends, things that they ‘like’—and you can pull in 
a lot of other stuff,” said Boniﬁ cino. The more people in the 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 191
target person’s network, the more likely that person will be 
deemed inﬂ uential, especially regarding discussions captured by 
Radian6. All this information determines the inﬂ uence score 
Alex and Ani gives its target customers and, in turn, the treat-
ment they receive from the retailer.
Alex and Ani uses the data it can gather on an individual to 
tailor what the person sees on its website and app. When the ﬁ rm 
has enough information to form a proﬁ le—usually after about a 
month once an individual has begun visiting the site—said 
Boniﬁ cino, “we start developing some logic around who you are 
and what you want to see. What keeps you on the site longer? 
What makes you share more on social, that kind of stuff?” As the 
retailer’s proﬁ le of a customer grows, what the shopper sees 
online and on the app becomes increasingly personalized. For 
example, the ﬁ rm may show different people different photos of 
the same product, and it may present them with different product 
details. Personalization is not quite as focused in the case of 
advertising messages online or via mobile devices. “We don’t use 
all six hundred data points while personalizing” the ads, Boniﬁ cino 
said. In fact, he said, when pursuing customers for the jewelry 
charms it sells through partnerships with Disney, Team USA, or 
the National Football League, some of the personalization comes 
closer to segmentation. Many shoppers are unaware of these 
connections, and they may never even have shopped at Alex and 
Ani. The company has been attempting to identify people who 
are fans of Major League Baseball’s Philadelphia Phillies and who 
had purchased charms from the team or might buy them in the 
future. Boniﬁ cino said he has access to the Phillies’ records of 
charm purchases, and he also turns to data suppliers such as 

192 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
Datalogix, eXelate, BlueKai, and MasterCard Advisors to learn 
what Alex and Ani customers purchase from other merchants 
(both online and by other means) in order to identify shoppers 
who have a predisposition for Phillies- related items.
Industry consultants stress that the success of personalization 
is limited by the quality of the data. To them this means accuracy 
and relevance, and they argue shoppers want the same when 
they receive personalized offers—hence the widespread and 
continual collection of data about individuals from as many 
sources as can be identiﬁ ed. Consultants consider anything less 
than that unacceptable. A 2014 Janrain poll, for example, found 
that 71 percent of U.S. consumers and 61 percent of European 
Union consumers say they have received offers which “clearly 
show they [marketers] do not know who I am.” The poll also 
found that 51 percent of U.S. consumers and 36 percent of 
European Union consumers have received inconsistent informa-
tion among various channels—online, apps, mobile devices, 
in- store—from the same brand.9 “Less than perfectly accurate” 
data was the source of much of this problem, according to the 
company.
To avoid such issues, industry analysts advise retailers to 
focus on amassing just ﬁ rst-  and second- party data. First- party 
data comes from the retailer itself, while second- party data is 
obtained directly from other retailers or publishers (Facebook or 
Google social log- ins, for example). In one of its reports Janrain 
noted that third- party data (from ﬁ rms such as Datalogix and 
Acxiom) may not be current, as an individual’s life events typi-
cally unfold so fast that it’s impossible to keep pace with them.10 
Consultants suggest that regular triangulation of ﬁ rst-, second-, 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 193
and third- party data is optimum. They say that to ensure the 
most accurate and actionable customer proﬁ les, marketers should 
use multiple sources and compare “declared, ﬁ rst- party informa-
tion directly from the consumer or identity provider, against 
purchased customer data.” Along with other analytics ﬁ rms, 
Janrain recommends continually tracking individuals across as 
many platforms as possible. It suggests to retailers that they 
should engage shoppers when they visit the merchants’ websites 
or access their apps by posing questions, encourage shoppers to 
participate in a poll, and have their in- store cashiers ask customers 
for their email address and phone number. This “progressive 
proﬁ ling,” Janrain promised, would yield increasingly speciﬁ c 
information about individual customers over time.11
Janrain was among the analytic and consultancy ﬁ rms that 
wrote only in passing about brick- and- mortar venues as places 
for collecting and using data for message personalization. Despite 
their omnichannel rhetoric they had become comfortable with 
the idea of gleaning data for personalization from purely digital 
areas, especially websites. With the growth of mobile devices, 
though, an increasing number of consultants and agencies, along 
with retailers, emphasized the use of data for tailoring messages 
in the physical store. “Ofﬂ ine Personalization Matters Just as 
Much,” was the headline of an early 2015 marketing industry 
article. “There’s been plenty of talk about personalizing online 
communications,” the article noted. “But recent research suggests 
it’s equally important to tailor ofﬂ ine customer experiences as 
well.” A survey cited in the article found that “just 23% of client- 
side marketers worldwide personalized ofﬂ ine channels, compared 

194 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
with 88% who used email personalization and 44% who did so 
for websites. Agency professionals were even less likely to tailor 
ofﬂ ine efforts, at just 17%.”12 For eMarketer, the survey ﬁ ndings 
were “another reminder” of the need for retailers to provide a 
genuinely multifaceted experience. “Most ﬁ nal buying decisions 
still happen in- store,” it pointed out. “Retailers who can tie all the 
data collected on a customer [across all channels, while the 
customer is in the physical store] stand a better chance at closing 
the deal.”
Some interpreted the call for in- store personalization to 
mean bringing back the traditional one- to- one contact between 
merchant and customer. The publisher of online publication 
Furniture Today, for example, exhorted her readers not to “under-
estimate the power of connecting with customers within your 
very own four walls.” Arguing to “Let Amazon be Amazon,” she 
said local retailers should not overlook their biggest strength: the 
opportunity to connect with their shoppers and to remember 
that people are social by nature. Her suggestions: interpersonal 
conversations “that genuinely engage with customers about their 
day,” and to provide exceptional customer service and to inspire 
shoppers by creating a visual counterpart to social sites such as 
Pinterest—but adding smell and sound. “Making the shopping 
experience inspirational is a winning combination with shop-
pers; many prefer to have the touchy, feely experience. Again, 
local retail wins.”13
Others argued that by combining quality data with appro-
priate in- store technologies retailers could eventually accomplish 
the same goals—only more efﬁ ciently, at greater scale, and perhaps 
even more successfully. “Marketers Are Showing Customers 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 195
Love,” read an April 2015 headline from the trade magazine 
DM News. The article said the “love” emanated from accurate, 
customer- relevant data leading to personalization.14 While DM 
News wrote broadly about tracing “multi- touch customer jour-
neys” as a source for personalization, a Forrester Research report 
in 2014 heralded “new key metrics that retail store analytics will 
unleash” for “insights that will drive increased engagement with 
customers as well as greater efﬁ ciency in retail store operations.” 
The report went on to say that “retail stores have been living in 
the analytical ‘dark ages’ in comparison to digital channels,” and 
that recently “technologies such as Wi- Fi, Bluetooth, GPS, and 
video” have allowed retail store analytics to gain a foothold among 
digital retail businesses, although “the depth of these analytic tools 
is lacking and immature.”15
Forrester also noted that physical stores were beginning to 
view personalization in and around the physical sales arenas 
on par with that for the Web. Retailers’ experiences with this 
varied; not only were they targeting different audiences, but 
each consultancy and marketing agency had its own philosophy 
and so glommed onto different technologies to carry out the 
targeting goals. The mobile technology company Thinknear, 
which approaches shoppers between home and store, hyper-
bolizes on its website that its technology is “so accurate, it’s 
insane. . . . We’ve combined location technology, a deep knowl-
edge of consumer behavior, and ﬁ rst- party data from our parent 
company, Telenav, to give you the ability of a mind reader—or 
some crazy shaman—so that you ﬁ nd your audience and ﬁ nally 
deliver those mind- blowing ideas.” Telenav, a wireless location- 
based services company, offers an app featuring maps, navigation 

196 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
support, points of interest information, real- time commute times, 
and weather forecasts. The app is free; the company makes 
money capturing, storing, and analyzing information based on 
individuals’ use of the app so they can be targeted with commer-
cial messages. According to Daniel Mahl of Thinknear, a special 
beneﬁ t of the app for his ﬁ rm is that it continually updates lati-
tudes and longitudes of restaurants, stores, train stations, airports, 
and other points of interest. Thinknear uses those locations in 
two ways. It can target people who are in certain areas, and it can 
target people who have been in those places.
Say a client wants to reach travelers who are near its stores. 
Thinknear goes after those types of people in two stages. First, 
Thinknear computers link to mobile- advertising exchanges that 
auction individuals based on their mobile phones’ current lati-
tude and longitude. Thinknear bids on locations frequented by 
the types of people its clients might prefer—John F. Kennedy 
International Airport, for example, to reach “travelers.” If 
Thinknear wins the bid, it can serve its client’s ads to the partic-
ular phones at the airport. Just as important for Thinknear at this 
stage are the data that the company gleans from the phone 
receiving the ad. If the ad lands on a mobile browser, Thinknear 
includes what’s called a tracking pixel, which can record the Web 
page on which the client’s message was presented. Tracking 
pixels have less utility on phone apps, but in these instances the 
company can record the personal information people provided 
when they registered for the app—gender, age, and home 
address, for example. The most important value of this targeting 
stage to Thinknear is that it provides the company with the 
unique identiﬁ cation numbers of the devices it targets. Possessing 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 197
those numbers enables Thinknear to track the individuals via 
GPS, cellular triangulation, or Wi- Fi as they move across the 
landscape mapped by Telenav. The company then executes its 
second stage of reaching “travelers” via mobile devices. It goes 
back to the mobile exchanges and has them ﬁ nd the travelers’ 
phone IDs among the phones they put up for bids. Thinknear 
then bids to serve ads to those phones, either for the initial 
retailers who reached the travelers at the airport, or for other 
retailers who want to reach travelers wherever they may be.
Thinknear’s specialty is determining the devices’ real- time 
locations and targeting them for clients who want to reach people 
in those speciﬁ c areas. A typical geofence (meaning a deﬁ ned 
geographic area) around a retail establishment, Mahl notes, is 
about a quarter-  to a half- mile. Generally such a geofence is 
wider in the suburbs than in a city to account for cars being a 
more predominant mode of transportation in the former. The 
company uses the phones’ location to interact with people when 
they are in or near a competitor of its client in the hopes of 
steering the people toward Thinknear’s client instead. This can 
involve inducing the phone’s owners to click a button that will 
take them to a landing page that, in turn, might offer a simple 
click to call the advertiser as well as directions for the client’s 
store.
Mahl says this landing- page technique “works well,” though 
not necessarily better than simply sending ads for his clients. 
Although the company can target men or women separately as 
well as both sexes together, he preferred instead to discuss 
Thinknear’s focus on an individual’s location as the pivot around 
which all persuasive activities turn. The company’s software 

198 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
can continually remind the phone user how far the individual is 
from the advertised retailer. It also can change the message based 
on the weather, pollen count, or even UV index in the phone 
holder’s location. “I’m working on a campaign right now [for 
sunscreen] that we’re only serving ads to people when the UV 
index is 6- plus,” Mahl said. He went on to say that Thinknear is 
working with a location- analytics ﬁ rm called Placed to determine 
whether the app- directed mobile device display messages lead to 
sales even though his ﬁ rm is not involved in reaching shoppers in 
the store. He also said that Thinknear wants to be able to match 
behavior on the Web and other media to the owners of the phones 
they target, but the company has yet to fully achieve that goal. 
“It’s deﬁ nitely getting better,” he said. Thinknear’s ability to iden-
tify individuals they can pinpoint geographically has increased, as 
has the ﬁ rm’s ability to gather data about those individuals from 
various sources. Yet, he added, “it’s still a ways away from being 
the industry standard and even then it’s still tough to get it down 
to an exact science and prove that it’s completely correct.”
In contrast, the Vibes agency downplays the value of deliv-
ering ads on mobile browsers and apps. “When you think of 
mobile messaging and mobile marketing and communication on 
the mobile phone,” said vice president of marketing Tack, “we 
like to recommend [that] the three biggies are text messaging, 
‘push,’ and mobile wallet.” Text messaging needs no special tech-
nology, but federal law requires that marketers offer a user the 
choice to opt in to receive these messages. Consequently, Tack 
said, because the users choose to receive such messages, they 
likely pay more attention to them than they would to random 
email messages. Moreover, he continued, those who opt in to 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 199
receive texts likely are more loyal, and therefore more valuable, 
to the retailer. “Push” messages and the mobile wallet help 
ensure that these messages do not go unnoticed, Tack said. By 
push he was referring to messages that pop in front of the targeted 
person on the phone’s top screen—its lock screen—at a preset 
geographical location. The push notiﬁ cation is tied to the pres-
ence of the client’s app on the phone. Many of their customers 
download those apps but don’t use them. Push- notiﬁ cation tech-
nology exploits the app’s presence without relying on the shopper 
to do anything with it. It is activated by cellular technology, 
Wi- Fi, or store beacons based on the shopper’s location. If a 
shopper doesn’t have the retailer’s app (and many do not) there 
is another way to push a message to the person in a particular 
location: send a coupon as a text message and encourage the 
person to save it in the phone’s wallet. By placing location tags 
on the coupons, marketers can instruct the wallet to send 
reminders about them to the device’s lock screen when the 
person is in a particular place—a speciﬁ c aisle in a speciﬁ c store, 
for example.
Tack emphasized that these messages must be personalized if 
they are to be successful. “If you’re sending a text message to 
someone and you just do a spam one- size- ﬁ ts- all, you’re going to 
have a pretty low response rate,” he said. “What a lot of our 
more sophisticated clients do—like a Sears, a Home Depot, a Pep 
Boys, a Men’s Wearhouse, as a few examples—is they’ll integrate 
their mobile database with their CRM [customer relationship 
management] systems” and their loyalty information. The 
customers are then placed into segments and sent messages “that 
include the customer’s name, category of products that they 

200 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
prefer to buy or they have purchased in the past—offers that 
have proven to be effective for that particular customer.” He 
continued, “In the mobile marketing channel, for retailers to be 
effective in what they care about most, which is driving in- store 
foot trafﬁ c, increasing basket size, and improving loyalty, we 
have found that using a personalized approach just delivers 
signiﬁ cantly better results.”
Shoppers who come to Vibes’ clients via their smartphone’s 
Web browser rather than the app are assigned a lower priority, as 
the agency believes browser use means that shoppers are not yet 
sure what, and from whom, they want to buy. Tack said the 
company prefers to try to learn about people who are already 
“engaged with the retailer, with the app installed, texts requested, 
or coupons downloaded.” Such people merit personalization, he 
said, a task that’s feasible “because now you actually got the 
data.” His company advocates text messaging, push notiﬁ cation, 
and wallet-generated lock screen views as the preferred means 
by which to reach those shoppers.
inMarket has yet another take on the technologies retailers 
should use to pursue shoppers. The company is struggling to 
marry two businesses, outdoor geofencing and in- store beacon 
messaging. The separate operations frustrate inMarket executive 
Jeff Grifﬁ n. “I work with retailers, and retailers care about two 
things,” he said. “One is driving trips to their store. Geofencing 
does a really good job of driving trips to a store. . . . [But] it’s not 
very good for driving the second thing that retailers care about, 
which is conversion—making a sale. Because you can’t penetrate 
the building. Beacons are the thing that allow retailers and 
brands to do that. And when you’re in a store to buy something, 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 201
you can receive that message, whatever that motivational 
message might be.” He gave an example: “Hillshire Farm, which 
is a really good customer of ours, they would deliver messages to 
buy Hillshire Farm sausages within one mile, for instance, of 
every Walmart in the country. And that message, frankly, can’t 
penetrate the inside of a Walmart. You only get it when you’re in 
the parking lot.”
To link the two businesses and expand inMarket’s marketing 
possibilities, the company has been experimenting with targeting 
shoppers outdoors based on its successes with the beacons it has 
placed inside stores. For example, as a result of ads the company 
has delivered for Hillshire Farm within supermarkets that carry 
its beacons, the “interaction with the brand” within those stores, 
as well as the number of shoppers installing and using the 
Hillshire app, increased substantially.16 The next logical step, 
Grifﬁ n said, is to note via beacons where people linger in a store, 
infer the products [Hillshire’s or others] they might be looking at, 
and pursue them through geofencing with ads about the items 
after they’ve left. This practice, he contends, will give the phys-
ical retailer the same power as Web merchants to personalize ads 
to shoppers beyond the store’s borders.
He offered the example of a man pausing to look at a lawn 
mower in a store. The beacon would register that he lingered 
for a substantial time, indicating an interest in the product. 
Grifﬁ n said the retailer should be able to send a message to the 
person about lawn mowers when he leaves the store, much as a 
person who viewed a mower on a website might ﬁ nd himself 
encountering lawn mower ads while browsing elsewhere on 
the Web. inMarket’s location- speciﬁ c ad business could do just 

202 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
that, said Grifﬁ n: “Once that person leaves the establishment and 
gets out of the range of our beacons, the fact is we can at that 
moment begin to drive retargeted messages to that phone that 
have to do with [the product].” Yet he acknowledged in mid- 
2015 that “we don’t do that much yet.” Because inMarket is 
“only in a couple of thousand stores”—and on only a dozen 
apps—it has been challenged to gather sufﬁ cient information 
on what shoppers are doing inside stores to enable it to engage 
in large- scale retargeting outside stores. He also said that many 
of his retailing and advertising associates have yet to understand 
outdoor retargeting: “I sit down with retailers who’ve been 
in the business twenty, thirty years, and they say, ‘Get out—you 
can’t do that!’ And I say, ‘Yeah, absolutely you can. It’s not 
that hard.’”
The various challenges notwithstanding, inMarket has been 
able to connect at least some of its outdoor and instore activities. 
Using its beacon data to analyze the shopping cycles of the 
millions of shoppers who hold its app, the company concluded 
that it could determine when particular customers would be due 
for a return visit to a particular store and send ads to those 
people’s phones, especially when they are near the retailers, to 
entice them to stop in at the retailer. In late 2015 the company 
reported that sending such ads on behalf of an unnamed client 
resulted in an 8 percent increase in store visits and a 14 percent 
increase in the amount of money spent per visit over the period 
of a year. The online media and marketing publication MediaPost 
recognized the synergy: “While most consumers may never be 
aware of beacons,” it said, “they may ﬁ nd themselves receiving 
more ads that matter at the right time.”17

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 203
inMarket wasn’t alone in attempting to proﬁ t from sending 
personalized messages to shoppers as they move toward, through, 
and away from a physical store. By mid- 2016, Swirl, another 
location tracking company, was working with retailers including 
Lord & Taylor, Urban Outﬁ tters, and Alex and Ani to combine 
beacons with Wi- Fi and GPS tracking for anonymous indoor 
and outdoor tracking. Swirl could identify phones and follow 
them across different locations, drawing inferences about the 
users’ interests and sending them messages sponsored by one or 
another merchant. For example, reported MediaPost, “a retailer 
could send a message in a parking lot when within a certain 
number of feet of a store offering a deal at the store. When that 
shopper enters the store and signs on to Wi- Fi, another location 
point is captured. And when that shopper nears a beacon in 
a department, yet another data point is captured. All that data 
could be used to trigger an instant, target message or offer 
or simply ﬁ led away for later use.”18 “Later use” is a particularly 
attractive feature, MediaPost noted. Although Swirl’s basic 
tracking would be anonymous, it did tie the data to the phone 
ID. It would then hand the tracking information, along with 
linked IDs, to the retailers where the smartphone owners 
shopped. The retailers could match the phone IDs with personal 
data they had stored via loyalty programs and other means. 
Anonymity would dissolve, and a new trove of material to 
build ideas about whom to target, when, and why, would come 
into play.
Twitter was one of the companies investing in Swirl’s new 
enterprise. In 2015 the social media giant was itself working hard 
to show that tailored ads placed alongside its social messaging 

204 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
could be a boon to retailers as shoppers moved through various 
daily experiences. In earlier efforts to increase revenues, Twitter 
had integrated the ability to place commercial messages carrying 
photos, videos, and links to advertisers’ websites into the ﬂ ow of 
a subscriber’s feed. In 2014 it incorporated a Buy Now button to 
enable mobile users to purchase an item directly from the 
merchant whose product was being advertised, sometimes even 
using a credit card number they had stored with Twitter, without 
leaving the social media app. Twitter considered the develop-
ment so important that it designated staff to work directly with 
very large retailers, including Walmart, Macy’s, Best Buy, and 
Walgreens.
Twitter’s Patrick Moorhead was assigned to work with 
Walmart. Part of his job is to identify people on Twitter beyond 
the currently active Walmart followers on the social network. 
“I’m probably reaching twenty million consumers today on 
Twitter with messages about Walmart’s fresh groceries that have 
nothing to do with the six hundred thousand people who follow 
the Walmart account on Twitter,” Moorhead said. Twitter’s agree-
ment with Walmart incorporates a revenue sharing model that 
encourages Twitter to work toward achieving sales for the retailer 
online, via mobile devices, and in the store. Twitter does not 
charge the retailer directly for ads; rather, the social messaging 
site receives a portion of the sales revenue either when a person 
purchases a Twitter- advertised product using the Twitter purchase 
button on the Web or the mobile app, or when a shopper who 
received Twitter’s Walmart ad for a product subsequently 
purchases that product in- store (database coordination between 
the two operations identiﬁ es the link). Moorhead sees the 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 205
program mainly as a way to reach consumers outside the phys-
ical store rather than in it (or rather than those who might travel 
there because of the Twitter program). “It’s less about Twitter 
being present at the shelf at Walmart and more about creating 
the ability for Walmart to export the shelf to consumers wher-
ever they are,” he said. At the same time, he noted, “over 70 
percent of Twitter users use Twitter while they are shopping, 
looking for product information, often reading the conversation 
about products even if they don’t participate in the discussion.” 
Consequently, he acknowledged, the Walmart ads could spark 
purchases in the physical store, and he noted that Twitter has 
the ability to use location as a consideration when it targets 
individuals with ads.
Moorhead believes that Twitter is uniquely positioned to 
reach large numbers of individuals based on their stated interests 
and pursuits. “We have very robust data science organization 
within Twitter,” he said. “On Twitter, people tell us what they’re 
interested in and they tell us what they feel all the time when 
they tweet. So we have built technology behind the scenes 
to compile all that information and operationalize it as, ‘Hey, ﬁ nd 
me everyone that via their Twitter activity—you know, who they 
follow, what they read, and what they tweet about—[who] are 
highly likely to be interested in fresh, cheap groceries from 
Walmart, either for same- day delivery or in- store purchase.’” He 
said that Walmart and Twitter mesh well. “When we look at 
Walmart we know their strategic growth customer is the millen-
nial mom—younger mothers with kids in a household.” He 
explained that Twitter can analyze people’s tweets to unearth all 
kinds of information about them, such as whom they follow and 

206 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
what they read. Armed with all these data, the company can 
then zero in on speciﬁ c demographics according to personal 
interests. For example, he said, he can target those who indicate 
by their tweets that they are interested in looking for recipes, or 
those tweeting about healthy food for their kids.
Walmart, for its part, has a world- class customer tracking 
and analytics division it calls WMX. According to Moorhead, it 
knows which products huge numbers of speciﬁ c Americans 
and American households put into their shopping baskets, and 
in which combinations. Walmart tracks its individual customer 
purchasing habits by connecting them via their use of credit 
cards at the physical store’s register as well as their habits on 
Walmart.com and its related app. In their collaboration with 
WMX, Moorhead said, Twitter’s software experts built an infra-
structure to enable Walmart to ﬁ nd its customers in Twitter’s vast 
database of registered users. An outside matching service then 
takes the data from WMX and matches it to Twitter users based 
on email addresses and other user account information. Once 
these connections are made, Twitter can analyze speciﬁ c popula-
tions and separate them further based on its own data on the 
individuals and their interests before targeting them with person-
alized messages. For example, Walmart can identify Twitter users 
who are millennial moms who shop at Walmart for soy milk and 
gluten- free bread and who may be good prospects for a certain 
yogurt. Twitter takes this information and conducts further anal-
ysis on this group: Moorhead suggested hypothetically that “they 
all tweet about whatever product Oprah gives away each week, 
they all tend to be interested in yoga, they all tend to be over 
thirty, they all tend to be interested in fashion, and they all like 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 207
Taylor Swift.” Twitter uses all this information to target Walmart 
ads to Walmart customers as well as to non- Walmart customers 
with similar characteristics (for example, Twitter users who don’t 
shop at Walmart but who have proﬁ les that parallel those who 
buy soy milk and gluten- free bread).
Soon, Moorhead went on, the Twitter- Walmart connection 
would extend into an additional venue: commercial television. 
Many people tweet about the programs they are watching, and 
Morehead said that Twitter can monitor that activity and correlate 
it with Walmart commercials airing on television. Once Twitter 
identiﬁ es the person tweeting about a television program during 
which a Walmart ad airs, that individual would likewise receive a 
Walmart ad on Twitter. “With the buy- now functionality on 
Twitter,” Morehead said, “we would essentially have the ability to 
know that Joe [is] sitting in his living room with his phone in his 
lap watching CSI on CBS, and at 6:19 p.m. Joe saw a Walmart 
television commercial featuring Weber grill tools, and then at 6:23 
p.m. we would serve Joe a promoted tweet from Walmart 
[inviting] him to buy those tools on Twitter.” The seemingly 
personalized message could lead “Joe” to purchase the tools in a 
Walmart store—and the chain could track the transaction and pay 
Twitter for its involvement. “The whole scenario that I just painted 
for you . . . sounds like it’s an episode of [the surveillance- themed 
movie] Minority Report,” he exclaimed enthusiastically, “but that 
will be a reality by the end of November [2015].”
None of Walmart’s messages offers a discount. The merchant, 
Moorhead says, instead wants to underscore that it offers low 
prices as a matter of course. (“Rollbacks,” which may seem like 

208 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
discounts, are not the same thing: Walmart offers them when it 
persuades a supplier to provide a product at a lower wholesale 
price so the retailer can pass the reduced cost on to the shopper.) 
For many other retailers discounts are a part of life even though 
they’re not necessarily proﬁ table. Executives acknowledge that 
they have been feeding Americans’ virtual addiction to the 
appearance of a “sale” for decades through a variety of means—
especially coupons in the grocery, drug, and chain store arenas. 
Even brand manufacturers as powerful as Procter & Gamble 
haven’t been able to break the habit. The mobile phone hasn’t 
changed the situation, though it has introduced new challenges, 
such as the need to calibrate the number of messages, and the 
mix of different message types, that retailers and their consul-
tants send to shoppers’ phones inside and outside the physical 
store. In addition, when retailers choose to use price as an incen-
tive, they must decide whether it should be personalized or not—
and if so, how.
Jason Goldberg of Razorﬁ sh is among those who urge caution 
regarding discounts in the digital mobile world. “I am not a huge 
fan of the ever- increasing ways to deliver discounts and promo-
tions,” Goldberg said. “It’s mostly a race to the bottom; we’ve 
mostly taken all the margins out of the stores already. The only 
way that I can come up with a sustainable win is to develop 
unique shopping experiences that the customers value beyond 
price. And so I’m much more interested in ﬁ guring out ways to 
use this technology to ﬁ gure out a differentiated shopping expe-
rience that customers actually appreciate and will seek out than 
I am just using it as another delivery vehicle for promotion.” 
Mark Miller, an executive vice president at Catapult Marketing, 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 209
agreed. “I’d rather not lead with price,” he said, arguing instead 
for the traditional formula to convert shoppers to a brand: a great 
product, great service related to the product, and a competitive 
price that together ignite great word of mouth. Miller added that 
in the new digital retailing arena, helpful “content” or other 
“enriched” experiences connected to the product and its use is a 
stand- in for great service. One such example would be a clothing 
store’s app that offers ensemble suggestions from different 
departments based on the customer’s shopping history and an 
initial choice of items.
Abhi Dhar, Walgreen’s chief technology ofﬁ cer, noted that 
Walgreens does not guarantee the lowest prices, nor does it match 
prices offered by other stores. Instead, his company’s marketing 
efforts are aimed at getting customers to focus on the chain’s service 
message—convenience and a positive shopping experience—as 
opposed to prices. Personalized messages tailored to a person’s 
shopping interests and background can reinforce this objective, 
Dhar said. Miller says his company offers a more quantiﬁ ed way to 
take a shopper’s mind off price: an armamentarium of customer-
analysis tools that Catapult has assembled for such clients as Mars 
Incorporated, Frontier Airlines, and Diaggio, so that it can decide 
whom to target and which messages to target them with. In partic-
ular he pointed to Catapult’s access to corporate parent Epsilon’s 
“massive database” of people’s purchases—“100 percent house-
hold penetration of data with thousands of attributes”—that 
provides demographic and psychographic traits along with indi-
viduals’ shopping journeys to enable Catapult to infer “some of 
those micro needles in a haystack, insights that will drive consumer 
conversions toward a brand.”

210 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
For example, Miller said that to better understand different 
types of feline owners on behalf of Mars (which manufactures cat 
food in addition to candy and many other products), Catapult 
analyzes customers’ entire shopping basket when they are buying 
cat food. He also pointed to the ﬁ rm’s additional capabilities 
resulting from Epsilon’s purchase in 2014 of the digital-marketing 
agency Conversant, which continually buys data relating to the 
transactions of millions of individuals at more than four thousand 
retailers.19 The company contends these people are “anonymized” 
because it doesn’t record their names or addresses. Yet this 
anonymity may be irrelevant because Conversant has so much 
information about each person—“7000+ dimensions,” the 
company asserts—that by using statistical techniques the company 
claims 96 percent accuracy in identifying an individual’s presence 
“across display, video and mobile.” Conversant assigns every 
shopper a unique ID that is the basis for tracking “how they spend 
their time and money—online, in-store, or both.” The company 
claims that “nearly everyone in the US” has been assigned an ID, 
which remain in place for “a lifetime so your conversation with 
each consumer never misses a beat.”20 Catapult’s Miller noted 
that using Conversant to match his clients’ ofﬂ ine customers with 
their digital presence and follow them puts his work at the leading 
edge of “micro-targeting.” These state-of-the-art capabilities 
(presumably along with services from Epsilon’s Agility/Harmony 
email targeting company)21 enable him to answer the ultimate 
personalization question for his clients: “How do I deliver the 
right message to the right person across devices at the right time?”
Miller recognizes that retailers and brand manufacturers 
offer people coupons based on their characteristics and in- store 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 211
behavior. He sees his role, however, as helping his clients main-
tain their proﬁ t margins by working with them to craft messages 
that would be so persuasive at the individual level that discount 
coupons become unnecessary. He says he tells his clients they 
shouldn’t react to shoppers leaving their website without 
purchasing by automatically sending coupons to them in the 
hopes that they’ll change their minds and buy something. “That’s 
not good business,” he insists. His goal instead is to help clients 
“crack that [discount] addiction” by arming them with knowl-
edge regarding types of shoppers, and even individual shoppers, 
so that they can steer customers toward those “two top levers” 
that encourage purchasing: a great product and great customer 
service, “without diluting price.”
In contrast, Sears goes with the addiction ﬂ ow. Andy Chu, 
who oversees mobile management for the retailer, explained that 
the company carries out strong price- promotion efforts aimed at 
the company’s Shop Your Way loyalty program members, who 
constitute approximately three- quarters of all Sears shoppers. 
Price promotions are often designed so that a shopper’s overall 
purchases at Sears add up to an acceptable proﬁ t margin from 
that individual. Both virtual and physical transactions are factored 
into this calculation. A major concern for Chu is that some Sears 
customers targeted for discounts visit the store only to buy sale 
items—a practice that is destructive to proﬁ t margins. “As an 
industry, I would say we do not do a good enough job to identify 
who are the good and the bad customers,” he said.
In the meantime, Sears continues its general efforts to iden-
tify the good customers and incentivize them to be better ones. 
“On a regular basis we send email [and text messages] to our 

212 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
customer segments,” Chu stated. “We also send them loyalty 
points and rewards points. And all that information is based on 
our internal modeling. So we know that if you have afﬁ nity for 
the tools category and the last time you bought something is 
three or four months ago, and we also see that online you are 
looking at lawn and garden stuff—we might push you a notiﬁ ca-
tion [that states,] ‘Hey, here are some surprise points. . . . Come 
spend XYZ dollars.’” He added that the offer can be geared toward 
fairly speciﬁ c discounts, such as $5 off on apparel or items 
purchased in the lawn and garden department, or to more 
general ones, such as $10 off for spending $75 or more. “It really 
depends on the different modeling that we do,” he said.
Chu went on to say that loyalty members don’t get individual 
pricing, but they do receive discount offers via their mobile 
devices, adding that members may receive personalized rein-
forcement “at the points level. We might give a person additional 
points—effectively it’s a discount. You might get $5 and I might 
get $10.” As of 2015 these blandishments were showing up on 
the mobile browser and in the Sears app, but not in the physical 
store. Still, things are changing. For one, Chu said, prices in 
different Sears stores as well as online are adjusted constantly 
based on Sears’ price monitoring of its competition. For another, 
Sears has also been testing “e- ink” paper- like electronic shelf- 
price displays, which the retailer can change instantly depending 
on various competitive exigencies (Chu noted that Kroger and 
Whole Foods supermarkets have also been moving in this direc-
tion). Still another change is evident in salespeople’s interactions 
with shoppers in the physical aisles as a result of the retailer’s 
digital personalization efforts. “As an example,” he noted, “in the 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 213
appliance area our associates . . . have been carrying iPads for 
about two years now. And when you are interested in a refrig-
erator, they will walk you through, they will show you on the 
iPad all the different specs, they will help you compare refrigera-
tors. And you might say, ‘Hey, I’ve just been looking at Best 
Buy. . . . This product is similar, but I can get it for X price.’ And 
it’s up to the salesperson to say, ‘You know what, we can cut 
you a deal.’ If you identify yourself as a member, they can actu-
ally look at your level—how many points you have, all that 
information. . . . We have something called member pricing. And 
if you’re a member you get special discount.” Chu said that Sears 
isn’t yet able to arm its salespeople with loyalty member value- 
level information so they can offer individualized pricing but 
added that “we are starting to develop that capability.”
Chu acknowledged that price incentives could be wasteful if 
presented to customers who entered a store already having 
decided to purchase a particular item. The dilemma, he said, was 
determining shoppers’ exact situations so that Sears would know 
whether incentives were advisable and, if so, what those incen-
tives should be. “All retailers struggle with this, including Sears,” 
he noted. “Are you leaving money on the table if someone’s 
willing to buy at the [posted] price? You don’t [know]. That’s the 
biggest challenge right now.”
Chu’s approach notwithstanding, most of the executives inter-
viewed believe that merchants should focus on nonprice messages 
when communicating to shoppers by smartphone, at least for the 
near future. Mark Tack of Vibes stated that some of his customers, 
such as Saks Fifth Avenue, do not send out any mobile coupons. 
And yet, he said, as frequently as any of Vibes’ clients Saks engages 

214 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
in mobile messaging as well as notiﬁ cations through the mobile 
wallet. Instead of discounts, Saks sends its customers “exclusive, 
insider only information,” such as alerts about invitation-only 
events. Wintergreen consultant Bruce Biegel mirrored the 
prevailing view within the industry, stating that companies are 
trying to ﬁ nd their way with mobile messaging in the aisles, often 
without making discounts stand out. He was optimistic. “I think 
we’re going to do a better job of engagement, and engagement 
doesn’t just have to be price,” he said. “It could be product, it could 
be loyalty, it could be content, it could be an event, it could be 
sampling.” Sampling occurs when a store arranges with brand 
manufacturers to distribute free versions of their products, such as 
pizza slice samples in a supermarket, to attract customers. Biegel 
said that databases and in- store messaging technologies should be 
able to identify shoppers who might want to sample the item so 
that a phone message or a store clerk can invite them individually 
to do so. Further, he noted, merchants should position all person-
alized communication as a reward, an indication of privilege. That 
reward, he said, could be many things besides a discount. But 
whatever the perk, “the experience should be personalized. . . . 
You’ll come in and they will recognize you and they will say ‘Hey, 
based on [your] prior [purchases] this is what’s going on today. We 
are out of this but did you try that?’”
Biegel went on to say that in- store personalization efforts are 
constantly evolving. “There’s just all sorts of crazy stuff going 
on,” he said. Jason Goldberg of Razorﬁ sh pointed to Walgreens’ 
in- store partnership with Google to offer augmented- reality 
maps—video screens installed on shopping carts that present 
information about products as shoppers walk by them—for the 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 215
chain’s loyalty program members along with messages based on 
their loyalty program data. Although determining the best mix 
of discount and nondiscount communications might be part of 
the motivation for the initiative, he said, “I honestly think that at 
this point it’s more about testing the mapping and augmented- 
reality technologies than it is the actual offers that they deliver 
through those technologies.” By contrast, Mars Advertising’s 
Ethan Goodman said his clients were in fact trying to learn “the 
right level to which you can do personalization with some of 
these in- store location- based technologies” such as beacons. He 
wants to be able to help clients with products in the frozen food 
aisle to “conﬁ dently deliver a frozen food–speciﬁ c message” to 
shoppers going down that aisle. His company has yet to ﬁ nd the 
right content that will cement the sale. “Is it a telling of how the 
product works, is it testimonials, it is a video, is it [a discount] 
offer? That’s largely going to depend on the category; it’s going to 
depend on the shopper; it’s going to depend on the retailer. I 
don’t think anybody knows [more than that] yet.”
The executives also believe that shoppers need to get used to 
the new technologies and data- collection regimes associated 
with personalization. Jeff Grifﬁ n of inMarket takes a particularly 
conservative position in this regard, saying that his company 
recommends to retailers that they start by installing just one or 
two beacons. Of course, he said, merchants with large stores and 
those with more than one level, such as Macy’s, should place an 
additional number of units, but he disagreed with Macy’s deci-
sion to place beacons in multiple store departments. “We don’t 
believe shoppers are ready for that level of bombardment,” he 
said, noting that inMarket’s analysis concluded that people who 

216 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
receive only one message per store visit will use the app linked to 
the beacon more often and keep it longer than if they receive 
two or more messages per visit. That’s “a very bad thing,” he said, 
because retailers want shoppers to use their apps, though he 
quickly predicted that this low- messaging rule would not be 
permanent. “Long- term, we will be delivering, and frankly [will] 
recommend, [in- store messaging] as an incredibly powerful 
advertising tool” that retailers will use to deliver both personal-
ized discounts as well as tailored information about the store 
and brands in the aisles. “But early on,” he said, “we absolutely 
believe that the shopper has to be handled with care” in order to 
create acceptance for the new activity.
Andy Chu of Sears was likewise reluctant to proceed with 
a different endeavor: sending messages (including discounts) to 
shoppers that Sears identiﬁ es as having inspected a competitor’s 
product, in either the merchant’s physical store or on the Web or 
a mobile device. “In the mobile site we have the capability to 
geofence against competitors,” Chu said. “So if you go to Home 
Depot three times and then you come online [to Sears and] 
look at a bunch of refrigerators, we might say, ‘Hey, you might 
go to Home Depot. We should go and give you an offer.’” To help 
identify these connections, Sears can purchase data pertaining 
to what their Web visitors view on competitor sites. Sears may 
also analyze its own data on people’s activities in either a brick- 
and- mortar Sears or on the company’s website and make assump-
tions about what they might look at when they visit competitors’ 
physical locations. To identify when those visits are made, Sears 
can triangulate the location of a shopper’s smartphone when 
the person is determined to be near a competitor store. This 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 217
technique is not infallible, he acknowledged, but added that 
third- party marketing ﬁ rms such as xAd and Place IQ have the 
technology to pursue it.
Despite its potential, Chu said that reasons such as “the 
creepy factor” are holding back this kind of preemptive personal-
ization, as the ads might reveal to shoppers a level of tracking 
that they ﬁ nd distasteful. Moreover, some shoppers could 
conclude that to receive a discount offer from Sears all they have 
to do is shop at Home Depot, a way of thinking that Chu doesn’t 
want to encourage. He also was uncertain about the optimum 
moment for delivering such messages. “Where in the purchasing 
decision do you want to inject those types of trigger points? Do 
we just send it to everybody? How do we know that the customer 
will be receptive to these quote- unquote coupons versus other 
things we could give? It’s a slippery slope. A lot of retailers like 
us—I’m sure Home Depot and Walmart and everyone else—have 
been thinking about these notions.” Despite the uncertainties, he 
said, Sears was going to proceed with pilot studies.
Chu, along with virtually everyone else associated with retail 
marketing, believes that shoppers will ultimately move beyond 
the “creepy factor.” He noted that consumers who have been 
surveyed agree that “privacy is a big concern. In reality, what 
they do with their privacy setting in Facebook or in Google or 
everything else, I bet you a very small percentage of people go in 
and change the settings. So it’s just a matter of time. The younger 
demographics already know that everything they do online is 
tracked. So to them it’s just business as usual.”
The same overall attitude will eventually extend to personal-
ized prices, all those interviewed agreed, even if shoppers still 

218 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
don’t like the practice. Razorﬁ sh’s Goldberg pointed out that 
Safeway supermarket’s mobile Just for You app already does “a 
little bit of that. You earn discounts on speciﬁ c products based on 
your shopping behavior and so the pricing can seem completely 
unique to you.” The store encourages every loyalty program 
member to use their mobile device to aim the app screen at 
special store displays, whereupon the screen then displays an 
individual member’s pricing for particular products. He said the 
amounts are based on a shopper’s previous purchases, with more 
lucrative offers tendered to customers considered to have a 
higher lifetime value to the retailer. A mobile device is a particu-
larly valuable tool in carrying out such discrimination. Goldberg 
noted that tailored discounts appearing on mobile devices are 
less likely to cause shopper pushback than if they were displayed 
more publicly, such as on e- ink shelves or video screens. Ethan 
Goodman of Mars Advertising agreed that “doing one- to- one 
dynamic pricing is certainly possible.” For most retailers “it prob-
ably requires a little bit more sophistication than is available now. 
But I don’t doubt that it could happen.” One executive, who 
requested anonymity, said his ﬁ rm was already engaged in the 
practice and was offering customers whom its data suggested 
were in danger of abandoning the store higher discounts than 
those presented to reliably loyal customers.
In fact, some of those interviewed predicted that shoppers 
may enter certain businesses with the expectation that their 
phones will continually light up with discounts as they move 
through the store. To forestall unwanted bombardments, suggested 
Randy Jiusto of the Outsell strategic advisory ﬁ rm, people may 
choose to turn on and off apps depending on the stores and the 

PERSONALIZING THE AISLES 219
product brands they want to interact with while shopping. Such a 
situation may itself challenge retailers and brands to offer shop-
pers certain levels of privilege for simply keeping their apps turned 
on. In any event, stores will need to ﬁ nd ways to respond to desir-
able shoppers who, armed with product data, comparative prices, 
and a strong sense of their worth to certain brands, will demand 
certain prices as they stand in the aisles in front of products they 
want to buy. “I do think we’ll have more” in the way of personal-
ized discounts, said Signal Digital’s Joe Stanhope. He predicted a 
range of discounts: one day some people will receive 10 percent 
off while others get 20 percent off on a particular product in a 
particular store; on another day some will see $10 off, while others 
are offered a 10 percent discount. Decisions on individual discounts 
will involve direct knowledge about each shopper as well as infor-
mation obtained from look- alike modeling—arriving at conclu-
sions about individuals whose backgrounds and behaviors suggest 
similarities to customers who have already purchased an item at a 
particular price. Marketers will also show similar types of people 
different prices and then use various statistical procedures to deter-
mine the optimal discriminatory approach. The need to rethink 
discounts through the lens of personalization is crucial, said 
Stanhope. “So many brands have trained their customers to shop 
[for] sales. That may not be sustainable, so [marketers] will start 
trying to get smarter to get out of that hole. Retraining customers 
to look for certain kinds of promotions right then [in the aisle], 
and to ﬁ nd out which customers really need those promotions and 
which don’t. You don’t have to give someone a promotion if they 
don’t need it yet. If they are already a loyal customer, why would 
you charge them less?”

220 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
This approach—awarding less for loyalty—ﬂ ips the tradi-
tional understanding of loyalty on its head. Yet it does make 
sense in a shopping world where loyalty is a vehicle for data- 
driven, personalized discrimination. All the industry voices in 
this chapter strive to ﬁ nd the best ways to act on this realization 
in the hypercompetitive and multipronged retailing environ-
ment. At the same time, they acknowledge that what they are 
doing marks only the beginning; they see many more transfor-
mative changes to come.

221
“The Truth will be present in everything. You’ll know every-
thing about yourself and your loved ones if you opt in,” said Jeff 
Malmad, managing director of mobile devices at Mindshare 
media and marketing services agency, which is owned by 
the huge WPP international conglomerate.1 He believes that 
marketers should use this pitch to convince consumers of the 
beneﬁ ts they receive from “wearables”—clothing and accessories 
incorporating computer and advanced electronic technology.2 
The digital watch and the ﬁ tness bracelet stand out as the most 
common examples today, but analysts predict this list will expand 
as the public adopts chip- laden glasses, headgear, shirts, coats, 
rings, and more in the years to come.3
Some retailing experts are skeptical that wearables will 
make a major splash. They point out that Google stopped produc-
tion of its Google Glass spectacles after they were criticized for 
interfering with people’s daily activities and for uncivilly accessing 
real- time data about individuals. Fitness monitors, among the 
ﬁ rst entrants into wearables (around 2014), have been accused 
of not retaining the attention of their owners. The consultancy 
ﬁ rm Endeavor Partners estimated in 2015 that about a third of 
7 WHAT NOW?

222 WHAT NOW?
these trackers are abandoned after six months. Health care 
investment fund Rock Health noted that only half of nearly 
twenty million registered users of Fitbit, by far the biggest 
seller of ﬁ tness monitors, were still active as of the ﬁ rst quarter 
of 2015.4
Supporters of wearables believe that smart watches are a 
superior test of the success of wearables, noting that these 
watches can perform the functions of ﬁ tness monitors as well as 
other useful activities. The most prominent smart watch, the 
Apple Watch, was introduced in April 2015. After three months 
an estimated 1.9 million watches were sold. In June of that year 
conventional timepiece sales in the United States fell more than 
they had in seven years, indicating that Apple Inc.’s watch was 
eroding demand for traditional watches and clocks.5 Elmar Mock, 
one of the inventors of the Swatch watch, predicted a month 
before the Apple debut that its smart watch might cause an “ice 
age” for the four- century- old timepiece industry. To compete, 
Swatch itself released its own smart watch later in the year. “The 
Apple Watch is going to gain a signiﬁ cant amount of penetra-
tion,” was the more measured prediction of an executive from 
the NPD market- tracking ﬁ rm in August 2015.6
Marketing analysts have taken the long view of the nascent 
business. “Just as tablets faced skepticism in their early days, 
with consumers and critics questioning the need for new devices, 
so too does wearable technology,” wrote the international 
accounting ﬁ rm PwC (formerly known as Pricewaterhouse
Coopers) in a report heralding the growing importance of wear-
able devices.7 “Wearable technology is still in its infancy,” agreed 
the Certona consultancy in 2014.8 The company suggested the 

WHAT NOW? 223
devices will be data generators that can “improve personalization 
. . . by implementing predictive analytics tools.”9 For example, 
mileage data on a ﬁ tness tracker can alert a retailer that the 
customer is in need of new running shoes. But Certona also 
cautioned, “Google Glass, smartwatches, and ﬁ tness trackers are 
getting all the attention now, but brands should not discount 
other wearable technologies.”10
PwC went on to note that in 2014 20 percent of U.S. resi-
dents owned some form of wearable device, either a “primary” 
device (a central connector for all kinds of devices and informa-
tion) or a “secondary” device (one that captures speciﬁ c actions 
or measurements that are then funneled back to a primary 
device). Smart watches are presently considered secondary 
devices, but PwC predicted that they, along with smart glasses, 
“will emerge as key primary devices, acting as a central collection 
portal for different wearables.”11 The PwC report didn’t count the 
smartphone as a wearable, though one can argue it is a de facto 
primary wearable device, as it serves as a central hub for 
secondary accessories such as ﬁ tness trackers. If the report had 
included it, the percentage of Americans carrying technology 
close to their bodies in late 2014 would have exceeded 71 
percent—in other words, the proportion of smartphone- owning 
citizens.12
The company in fact found that many of the consumers 
interviewed for its report think of their smartphone as a wear-
able device. Why, then, would anyone advocate for any other 
wearable? For marketers, the answer has to do with physical 
intimacy. The closer the instrument is to the body, the less likely 
people will remove it, meaning it can provide marketers with 

224 WHAT NOW?
more information. A retailer app that has been installed on a 
person’s wearable device enables the merchant to pursue a 
continuous relationship with the person “at home, on the go, 
and in store.” This means an interaction with the entire multifac-
eted retailing ecosystem in the same way that the smartphone 
does, from website cookies to GPS location trackers to beacons, 
and much more. But because the devices are connected to the 
body more directly, they will have a more consistent presence 
than that of smartphones. Consequently, wearable devices will 
“usher in a new level of hyper- interconnected retail in which 
retailers ‘join the dots’ between an individual’s pre- store and 
in- store behaviors to deliver an enhanced customer shopping 
experience,” reported an article in Information Age.13 In other 
words, the retailer will not have to rely on the shopper to move 
smartphones, tablets, or PCs “from couch to the shelf,” noted 
PwC.14 Instead, the intimate, always- connected nature of the 
wearable device will virtually guarantee continuous tracking 
across time and space.
Champions of wearables believe that tracking via these 
always- on products will be far more advanced in comparison 
with current smartphones. They will inevitably be part of 
what has come to be known as “the internet of things”—an 
environment in which all such devices (for example, smart-
phones, clothing sensors, and smart watches) connect with 
each other to perform services for their owner as established 
by the retailer or marketer that created the service software. 
The information generated will travel instantly to a data cloud 
to be run in real time through complex predictive analytics, 
incorporating other already- stored information pertaining to 

WHAT NOW? 225
the individual. The retailer or marketer can then detect 
changes in the individual’s habits and behaviors as well as in 
the individual’s surroundings and target them accordingly. 
The PwC report notes that “this process will be made possible 
through passive listening elements [on the wearable] as well as 
active cues—what you listen to, what you ‘like’ and what you 
browse.”15 In this vision of the future, wearable devices will 
enable retailers to recognize individual shoppers immediately, so 
advertisements, offers, and loyalty programs will be individually 
tailored more precisely than ever. And wearables will have built-
 in payment systems and veriﬁ cations that make checkout a 
breeze.
In addition, many wearables advocates say, the sustained 
close proximity of the devices to the users will add new elements 
of data to shoppers’ proﬁ les exceeding the capabilities of smart-
phones. PwC notes, for example, that nearly 30 percent of cell 
phone users turn off their phone overnight. And many of those 
who do keep their phones on while they sleep place them near 
but not actually in bed. Primary wearable devices that remain on 
the body both day and night transmit torrents of information on 
everything from sleep patterns to sports activities. The Certona 
consultancy notes that “nanotechnology and biometric tech-
nology is [sic] paving the way for smart clothing and turning 
heads in the athletic apparel industry. The data available through 
‘smart’ fabrics is unbelievable—perspiration data, heart rate 
patterns, activity tracking and calorie monitoring. An innovative 
company can beneﬁ t from this data by pushing out inspiring 
messages to a smartwatch or Google Glass to keep users moti-
vated toward their goals.”16 Indeed, Google’s head of retail says 

226 WHAT NOW?
that wearables “give [merchants] niche data that allow [them] to 
speak to customers better than ever before.”17 PwC examines 
some of these possibilities: “Through wearable technology, 
brands could present relevant content to a shopper while they 
are considering a product—say, in a grocery store, recognizing 
items a consumer has placed in the grocery cart and serving up 
relevant recipes through augmented reality. Brands could even 
tap body cues to tailor messaging. Sensor revealing that you’re 
thirsty? Here’s a coupon for smart water. Low on vitamins? Flash 
this for $1 off your favorite vitamin- loaded juice product. 
Serotonin levels down? Grab yourself a free soda and open 
happiness.”18
Although the retailing establishment seems reasonably 
certain that people can be persuaded to allow retailers to identify 
them through certain wearable devices, it’s not nearly so conﬁ -
dent that shoppers will consent to participating in the other 
emerging retailing tracker, the facial recognition system. This 
technology involves taking complex measurements of facial 
images and converting them into a mathematic calculation called 
a “faceprint,” which is then compared against a faceprint data-
base of photographs and video still images. In 2014 the New York 
Times reported that “if security cameras record someone at, say, a 
store or a casino, the system can compare the faceprint of that 
live image to those in the database, taking only a few seconds to 
run through millions of faceprints and ﬁ nd a match.”19
The various companies working with facial recognition 
systems use different techniques, and there is a lot of competi-
tion among those trying to make money on their face- matching 

WHAT NOW? 227
strategies. Law enforcement agencies logically are major 
customers, as facial recognition can assist in matching video 
images taken of criminal suspects with mug shots. Some airports 
use the technology to speed security checks for employees and 
frequent ﬂ iers.20 On the internet, Facebook is among the ﬁ rms 
offering face- matching software to suggest the names of people 
in posted photographs.
Retailers, too, have begun adopting the technology. As early 
as 2009 an online digital news and information publisher 
commented that such systems represent “perhaps the most 
exciting innovation” in analyzing shoppers. It listed companies 
that were offering “sophisticated hardware and software suites 
that use inexpensive cameras mounted on screens to recognize 
human faces.” These systems “keep detailed logs on who looks at 
what, for how long and when.”21 Fast- forward to 2014, when a 
reporter interested in “the future of shopping” noted that video 
surveillance and analytics tools “were everywhere” at that year’s 
National Retail Federation trade conference.22 In addition to 
serving as a potential marketing tool, retailers are interested in 
this technology for security reasons—for example, identifying 
convicted shoplifters that enter their store and notifying security 
personnel.23
A logical step beyond using surveillance equipment to 
monitor shoplifting is for retailers to apply the facial recognition 
technology to marketing oriented questions about the kinds of 
people who enter a store. In fact, Face- Six has sold software that 
enables cameras at dozens of malls in the United States and 
around the world to count and categorize shoppers based on age, 
gender, and race. In addition to these mall demographics surveys, 

228 WHAT NOW?
Face-Six can display target advertising based on facial analyses, 
CEO Moshe Greenshpan noted.24 Similarly, food manufacturer 
Mondelez International was reported to be working on a system 
in late 2014 that combined facial recognition with digital 
shelf displays; a digital message board accompanying the display 
would tailor messages based on the demographic information 
obtained by the system.25 For example, at an Oreo cookie display 
a person whom the system identiﬁ es as a thirty- something 
female could see a message stating that one of the Oreo Thin 
cookies in the package she is holding has just thirty- ﬁ ve calories, 
while a teenage boy might see a discount voucher in the form of 
a barcode scan or QR code for his mobile device.
Because facial recognition is passive, it has an advantage over 
mobile phone trackers. Using beacons to determine a shopper’s 
age, gender, and race at the very least requires that a shopper 
possess a smartphone, with its Bluetooth turned on and the 
pertinent apps loaded. In the course of this exchange the phone 
owner’s identity will often be revealed, so beacons do bring a lot 
more information to the aisle than just basic demographics. But 
supporters of facial recognition systems say that anonymous 
demographics are only the beginning of what they can deliver 
on the retail level. For example, several companies say they 
can offer retailers the ability to detect the current emotions of 
the people walking through their aisles. One such company’s 
software “extracts at least 90,000 data points from each frame, 
everything from abstract patterns of light to tiny muscular 
movements, which are sorted by emotional categories, such as 
anger, disgust, joy, surprise or boredom,” reported the Wall Street 
Journal.26 The facial recognition company Affectiva told the 

WHAT NOW? 229
Journal that it has measured seven billion emotional reactions 
from nearly two and a half million faces in eighty countries. 
Many of the algorithms incorporate the seminal yet controversial 
work of psychologist Paul Ekman, a pioneer in the study of 
emotion awareness.
Another such company, Emotient, says that its software algo-
rithms are based on analyses of an ethnically diverse group of 
hundreds of thousands of people participating in research for its 
clients via video chat. These analyses look for miniscule move-
ments in the face. On its website in 2015 Emotient stated that 
“major retailers, brands, and retail providers can use Emotient’s 
technology to assess customer sentiment analysis at point of 
sale, point of entry, or in front of the shelf.”27 The company’s 
co- founder and chief scientist, Marian Bartlett, said that her 
company aims “to measure emotion and tell the store managers 
that someone is confused in aisle 12.” Emotient’s other co- founder, 
Javier Movellan, stressed anonymity. “We do not want to recog-
nize who is watching. All we care about is what they are watching 
and how they feel about it.” The ﬁ rm’s technology appealed to 
Apple, which purchased Emotient in 2016 with the aim, some 
suggested, of using it in a new version of its phone helper Siri to 
understand its smartphone owners better.28 Like Apple, retailers 
are beginning to see the utility of this form of data. The Wall Street 
Journal reported that one retailer “is starting to test software 
embedded in security cameras that can scan people’s faces and 
divine their emotions as they walk in and out of its stores.”29 The 
Hill noted that digital monitors in stores use small embedded 
cameras to detect age and gender; the ads that then appear on 
the monitors will be tailored to the camera’s analysis of the 

230 WHAT NOW?
shopper.30 “There is anecdotal evidence that the results can be 
quite extraordinary,” said Tony Stockil, chief executive of retail 
strategy consultancy Javelin Group.31
Of course, these systems mean that customers will be substan-
tially more visible than they are in traditional foot- trafﬁ c videos, 
in which faces often are blurred and images are destroyed 
promptly to protect customer anonymity. And although Emotient 
and ShopperTrak (discussed in Chapter 4) stress the anonymity 
of their subjects, increasing competition is fostering a movement 
toward identifying shopper faces. Two facial recognition compa-
nies, NEC and FaceFirst, have developed systems in which 
cameras scan shoppers entering a store and identify existing or 
potential customers deemed important to the business. NEC says 
its system, “VIP Identiﬁ cation,” is “ideally suited to hospitality 
environments or businesses where there is a need to identify the 
presence of important visitors, whether expected or unan-
nounced.” The facial matching software “can take less than a 
second” to identify a shopper and alert store personnel “so that 
the necessary action can be taken to greet or prepare for the 
arrival of the VIP.”32 The FaceFirst website says its system enables 
retailers not only to “spot and stop the bad guys,” but to “recog-
nize the good guys and treat them better.” At a cost as low as $15 
per month per store, the retailer loads “existing photos of . . . 
your best customers into [the FaceFirst database]. Instantly, 
when a person in [the database] steps into one of your stores, 
you are sent an email, text, or SMS alert that includes their 
picture and all biographical information of the known individual 
so you can take immediate and appropriate action.”33 FaceFirst 
CEO Joel Rosenkrantz told the BBC that “someone could 

WHAT NOW? 231
approach you and give you a cappuccino when you arrive, and 
then show you the things they think you will be interested in 
buying.”34 The FaceFirst website exhorts retailers to “build a 
database of good customers, recognize them when they come 
through the door, and make them feel more welcome.” To 
compile a database of customer photos, Rosenkrantz presented 
one possibility: “If a particular brand has 10,000 likes on 
Facebook, you could use the proﬁ le pictures of all the people 
who have liked it. . . . You can tell customers that if they agree to 
enroll [their face] with their camera, then they will be offered a 
discount coupon when they walk into the store, or get them to 
tick a box saying they agree that their picture can be used when 
they log on with Facebook.”35
Rosenkrantz’s suggestion to ask permission for shoppers’ 
facial proﬁ le data by bribing them with discounts or exploiting 
their Facebook loyalties is consistent with the ways merchants 
encourage shoppers to give them personally identiﬁ able data to 
be used in other tracking technologies—for example, Ulta Beauty’s 
loyalty program, which gathers information that store associates 
can use as, tablets in hand, they greet shoppers entering the store 
(see Chapter 5). When it comes to obtaining an individual’s 
permission—“opting in”—NEC’s website is rather evasive. It 
mentions “matching images against what is likely to be an opt- in 
database of individuals they deem as important.” In 2010 
the retailing trade association Point of Purchase Advertising 
International published its “Recommended Code of Conduct for 
Consumer Tracking Methods,” which suggested that consumers 
should be allowed to opt in before their personal data are collected. 
In ranking various consumer tracking methods, the code listed as 

232 WHAT NOW?
“high risk” activities “any camera based OTD [observed tracking 
data] system” as well as “any method used to personally or 
uniquely identify consumers, when combined with loyalty 
program data, or third- party marketing data.” It added, “While 
the federal government has recognized dangers in the realm of 
mobile marketing and healthcare and has subsequently passed 
laws to protect consumers, no such laws exist for data collection 
in retail settings.”36
As of 2016, laws in this area were still lacking despite the 
increasing use of facial recognition technology. In fact, there 
were no federal laws that expressly regulated facial recognition 
software. (Only two states, Illinois and Texas, had laws regulating 
the collection and use of biometric data. Illinois speciﬁ cally 
required ﬁ rms to get permission before collecting and retaining a 
“scan of . . . face geometry.”)37 In 2012 Mark Eichorn of the 
Federal Trade Commission’s Division of Privacy and Identity 
Protection stated that the FTC “would be very concerned about 
the use of cameras to identify previously anonymous people.”38 
A 2014 attempt to nail down norms for the facial recognition 
activities of U.S. businesses was unsuccessful. The initiative was 
part of a larger project, encouraged by the Obama administra-
tion, to address consumer privacy and brought together nine 
privacy groups, leading industry representatives (including from 
Facebook), and retailer associations to negotiate a voluntary 
code of conduct. Coordinated by the Commerce Department’s 
National Telecommunication and Information Administration 
(NTIA), the effort was doomed because the positions of those 
involved remained far apart. Chris Calabrase of the Center 
for Democracy and Technology was among those who argued 

WHAT NOW? 233
that those using facial recognition should seek the consent 
of people before scanning their faces. He told CBS News that 
“face recognition allows secret tracking so any time you’re in 
public whether you are attending a protest rally or visiting 
your doctor or entering a church or a bar it could allow you 
to be identiﬁ ed and your movements tracked.” He emphasized 
that “the individual must be able to choose. If they can’t, 
lots of entities, whether they are companies or governments 
relying on company databases, can use this technology to spy on 
people. They will never know, and they will never be able to 
control it.”39
On the other side, facial recognition supporters contended 
that the demand for consent made little sense when the software 
is used to track criminals. The privacy groups offered a “narrow 
exemption” for security uses, but the industry turned it down, 
Calabrese said. Carl Szabo of NetChoice, a digital commerce trade 
association, said he and his industry colleagues would approve 
self- regulation requiring a merchant to post signs when using 
facial recognition technology. “If it turns out consumers love it, 
they will embrace it. If they hate it, they will walk away and 
that store will stop doing it.” He acknowledged “the feeling that 
people might get that someone is spying on them and invading 
their privacy. But . . . we haven’t encountered any misuse or 
abuse of the data. Nobody is selling the data to third parties.” He 
added, “I don’t think we are there yet for any calls for regulation. 
Theoretical fears make for bad laws. We also don’t want to 
strangle this new technology.”40
After a year and a half of negotiations, the retailers remained 
staunchly against the idea of seeking consent to use facial 

234 WHAT NOW?
recognition.41 Frustrated, privacy advocates abandoned their 
efforts, even as NTIA representatives urged them to continue. 
About two months later the General Accountability Ofﬁ ce (GAO) 
released a troubling report on facial recognition technologies. It 
noted that it could ﬁ nd no data pertaining to how much these 
systems were being used by American businesses.42 And it sided 
with those who worried that the activities had the potential 
to cause lasting harm to Americans. “The privacy issues stake-
holders have raised about facial recognition and other biometric 
technologies serve as yet another example of the need to adapt 
federal privacy law to reﬂ ect new technologies,” the report 
stated.43 It was a remarkably straightforward call for regulation 
at a time when the industry was digging in against any effort 
to do so. In the hypercompetitive physical store environment, 
merchants wanted to create tracking systems as effective—or 
even more effective—as those on the internet.
Australia- based retailing futurist Chris Riddell took many of 
these developments to their logical extension in a 2015 blogpost 
titled “The Future of Retail—Emotional Analytics”:
Imagine for a moment that, by using a combination of 
Bluetooth proximity and FRS [facial recognition systems], 
you could ﬁ rst of all identify your customers when they 
entered your store. Then you had the opportunity to identify 
the emotions they felt as they walked through your store. Of 
course, some customers keep a “poker face” when they shop, 
but new software from Californian company, Emotient, can 
register “micro- expressions”—the tiny ﬂ ickers of emotion 
that show on people’s faces before they even know they have 

WHAT NOW? 235
registered an emotion or are able to control it. It can even tell 
you if they are smiling, but not with their eyes.
How useful could this information be when it comes to 
understanding your customer and creating a unique, person-
alised experience for them? This kind of granular data is 
priceless. You can already analyse a customer’s online journey 
through your company website—discovering where they 
have come from, what they look at, how long they stay on 
the site, what grabs their attention and what motivates them 
to action. What if you could apply those same principles to 
their real- time journey through your real- world store?44
Some future- oriented observers of retailing believe that facial 
recognition will greatly augment existing information- gathering 
technology at checkout in the not- too- distant future.45 A Russian 
technology ﬁ rm, Synqera, conducted facial recognition trials at 
checkout in late 2013 for a Russian retail chain. The retailer 
hoped the activity could supplement loyalty- card information 
for those customers who have a card, as well as stand in for 
a loyalty card for those who don’t. “If the customer has no 
loyalty card or doesn’t want to identify himself with a loyalty 
card, then the system recognizes his general mood [by the pres-
ence or absence of a smile], gender and age in order to use this 
data for targeting of the content,” said Ekaterina Savchenko, 
Synqera’s head of international marketing. “If the customer iden-
tiﬁ ed himself with a loyalty card, the system double checks the 
customer age and gender with data sourced through facial recog-
nition. If the Synqera system sees that the loyalty card data differs 
from the camera data, then it evaluates the correctness of the 

236 WHAT NOW?
camera data (probability deﬁ ned for the particular user’s gender 
and age) and, if it is high, gives it priority.”46
Although theft may be the reason when facial recognition 
software doesn’t match the loyalty card being presented, more 
likely the card has been loaned to a friend or other family 
member. In these situations the facial recognition system helps 
the retailer to parse its data about the name on the card. The 
checkout systems and the back- end analytics “will then learn 
that these few users are linked to one card and base the analysis 
and relevant content on the facial recognition data,” Savchenko 
said.47 Retail information technology writer Evan Schuman 
noted that “the biometrics help make sure that the message or 
promotion being displayed [on a video display at checkout] is the 
right one.”48 Savchenko said that her ﬁ rm’s software can eval-
uate whether these are successful for each person at checkout. 
“Users’ smiles are used for the evaluation of the content effec-
tiveness,” she said. And users who smile are rewarded, she added: 
“If the user smiles, he gets a virtual achievement badge or extra 
loyalty bonuses to his card.”49
Schuman said that facial recognition systems at checkout can 
be used either for identifying individual customers by name or, 
in maintaining anonymity, “merely capturing the facial data 
points and noting what purchases the person attached to that 
face makes. Then, when the cameras catch that same face again 
(say, perhaps four days later), [the system] will remember the 
prior purchases.” With either approach, Schuman said, “such 
activities need not end with the same channel where they began. 
Once a shopper is identiﬁ ed in- store and is matched with a 
CRM [customer relationship management] proﬁ le—or they are 

WHAT NOW? 237
identiﬁ ed anonymously in- store and a purchase proﬁ le of this 
unknown- person- with- this- speciﬁ c- face is slowly built—that 
information can theoretically be married to data from that 
person’s desktop- shopping E- Commerce efforts or their tablet/
smartphone’s M- Commerce efforts.”50
Finally, Schuman advanced the possibility that the facial 
recognition process might be installed outside the physical store 
as well as inside: “What if [a retail] chain pushes some attractive 
incentives to get lots of customers and prospects to download its 
free mobile app? And buried in the terms and conditions is the 
right for the app to monitor images?” All these recognition 
approaches would better enable merchants to identify customers 
entering their store and offer them customized service and deals 
based on their shopping histories and the retailer’s calculation of 
their long- term value to the business. And while accuracy 
remains a problem today, Schuman said, “look for this tech-
nology to get an order of magnitude more accurate over the next 
couple of years.” As the technology continues to develop, he 
noted, “the privacy—and associated shopper backlash—risks are 
obvious.” Nevertheless, he contended, “shoppers (especially 
younger shoppers) seem to have developed an almost inﬁ nite 
capacity for tolerating such efforts. Make the incentive strong 
enough—and use the data in subtle enough ways so that you’re 
not forcing the customer to know how far you’ve gone—and 
privacy will be a trivial concern. Not saying that it should be a 
trivial concern, but merely our belief that it will be.”51 Indeed, 
over ten years ago retail consultant Karl Bjornson observed that 
the success of facial recognition systems could well depend on 
whether the public could be convinced to accept recognition 

238 WHAT NOW?
technology as a way to secure their identity and enable them to 
receive special offers.52
Such predictions equally apply to wearable devices. 
By the mid- 2010s retailing consultants were crafting rhetoric 
to 
justify 
data 
ﬂ ows 
from 
body-hugging 
technologies. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers concluded, for example, that “done 
right, wearable advertising can promise more personal and 
relevant messaging to consumers—and bring in big business for 
the companies that leverage this strategically.”53 Similarly, an ad 
agency CEO proposed continual reinforcement in ways that ﬁ t 
the always- attached nature of the devices: “customizable shop-
ping paths for each person, while incentivizing them with real- 
time offers and deals along that path.”54 In fact, in an online 
survey PwC found that millennials more than any other age 
group would welcome cash, loyalty privileges, and gaming as 
rewards for adopting wearable devices. The survey found that 37 
percent of this age group would be “strongly motivated” to use a 
wearable device if it “has apps/features that reward those who 
frequently use it with loyalty points”; 52 percent would be 
“strongly motivated” if the device “has apps/features that reward 
those who frequently use it with monetary rewards”; and 64 
percent would be “motivated” (though not “strongly motivated”) 
if the device “had some type of gaming component to it.”55
But just as with the technologies discussed in previous 
chapters, shoppers who encounter facial recognition systems or 
who sport wearable devices as they offer up their personal 
data will likewise not be treated equally. The best customers in 
the best niches will continue to get the best deals, while, as 
Bjornson noted, “people not in the right segments will be left 

WHAT NOW? 239
behind. They will not have as rewarding an experience.”56 As I’ve 
stated throughout, if a primary lesson of the hidden curriculum is 
that people should get used to giving out their data, another 
lesson will be that in this great transformation some shoppers 
will be winners, some will be losers, some will be a bit of both, 
and many will worry where they stand and why. It is not hard to 
see that a marketplace centered on individuals’ private data and 
their personalized mobile devices will upend the understanding 
of shopping that has crystallized over the past century and a half.
Without a doubt, many of the new information technologies 
created to help people shop online and in physical stores have 
marvelous capabilities. The ability to carry a device around a 
store to check shelf prices against those of other stores gives 
shoppers enormous knowledge—and potential leverage in the 
purchases they ultimately make. Tailoring a discount coupon to 
shoppers because of where they happen to be standing in the 
store at that moment can be a smart way for a retailer to ingra-
tiate itself. Increasingly, though, the data that retailers collect on 
their own and that they purchase from marketers will be far 
more personal and will lead to increasingly individualized prod-
ucts, postings, and prices aimed at shoppers. While marketing 
and retailing executives worry that tailored prices might anger 
shoppers, they nevertheless agree that discriminatory pricing 
will become common over time—they consider it an efﬁ cient 
approach to selling in an era of enormous competition. Three of 
the executives I interviewed argued that offering personalized 
deals on mobile devices likely would not cause public indigna-
tion over undemocratic pricing. These individualized discount 

240 WHAT NOW?
coupons, along with tailored product presentations and messages, 
will be sent just to a shopper’s smartphone, tablet, or other 
privately owned device, so no one else will see them. Shoppers 
may compare notes about these deals in casual conversation with 
friends and co- workers, so they may be aware that prices seem to 
differ for each person, but they will have no clue as to the reasons 
for the variations, and stores won’t provide direct answers.
As I mentioned earlier, the airlines have clearly already paved 
the way for such discrimination. To begin with, the baroque rules 
of airline loyalty programs award those considered most loyal 
with the best seats, ﬁ rst crack at coveted carry- on space, and 
priority boarding, while others are offered less- desirable seats 
(though they can shell out more money for better ones), may 
have to scramble to ﬁ nd a place to stow their carry- on items, and 
may have to wait longer during the boarding process. There is also 
the matter of ticket cost, as passengers sitting next to one another 
on a ﬂ ight may be paying wildly different fares, and for reasons 
that are often opaque. There is no record of open rebellion by 
passengers as a result of discriminatory pricing, seating, storage 
space, or boarding, and this can be chalked up to the personalized 
nature of the process: no individual passenger knows what his or 
her fellow passengers paid for their ticket, or why they received a 
speciﬁ c seat or boarding priority. Passengers likely won’t discuss 
these issues among themselves as they sit at the gate waiting to 
board, partly because of shyness, partly because they don’t want 
to know whether they won or lost in the particular transaction, 
and partly because they may feel that, whatever the inequalities, 
those disparities are a legitimate part of the social system. The 
airlines repeat this message in virtually all communications with 

WHAT NOW? 241
their customers: the more you spend and the greater your loyalty, 
the more you’ll get back. In their discriminatory practices they 
make it clear that ﬂ iers who spend less for ﬂ ights or who ﬂ y infre-
quently aren’t as loyal as those who spend and ﬂ y more and 
therefore deserve to be treated less well. You may protest that you 
simply don’t ﬂ y frequently for business (a characteristic of the 
most “loyal” passengers), but to no avail. The airlines have carved 
out this world of air travel, and we have to live in it.
This type of discrimination- centered world is now evolving in 
retailing, and it has broader ramiﬁ cations. In this hypercompeti-
tive environment stores are doing their utmost to steer shoppers to 
accept that the data- based customer relationship is a natural 
activity, a process that is taken for granted and a useful part of 
contemporary life. By doing the right things and having the right 
purchasing patterns, you will be rewarded with the best product 
suggestions and the best prices online and in physical stores. Part 
of “doing the right things” means being a “loyal” customer of the 
retailers you visit—though being loyal may be more complicated 
than it sounds. Doing the right thing also means allowing the 
retailer to gather information about you—for example, by logging 
in when you visit the merchant’s website, downloading (or in 
some cases just streaming) the retailer’s app and allowing location 
tracking, and enabling Bluetooth so the store can send you coupons 
as you move through the aisles. It may often mean having the 
assets and lifestyle that will lead a retailer’s computers to conclude 
that you are a shopper with a high lifetime value to the company.57
We are only at the beginning of this retailing transformation. 
Many of the data collection and tracking technologies that will 
become standard likely have yet to be invented, and it will take 

242 WHAT NOW?
some time before every person experiences these activities on a 
daily basis. But the trajectory is evident: the technologies of 
personalization and the social discrimination issues linked 
to them will become ever central to the ways people shop for 
goods and services. And the shifting class structure in American 
society will play a major part, as the changing retail framework 
will take place against a backdrop of widening income inequality 
in American society. Beginning in the 1970s income growth 
for households in the lower and middle classes slowed sharply, 
while incomes at the top continued to grow strongly.58 An article 
sponsored by the University of Southern California’s Center on 
Economic Policy Research concluded that “Americans today live 
in a starkly unequal society. Inequality is greater now than it has 
been at any time in the last century, and the gaps in wages, 
income, and wealth are wider here than they are in any other 
democratic and developed economy.” The article singled out 
the growing share of recent income gains going to the very 
high earners (the 1 percent or .01 percent of the population), the 
emergence of lavishly compensated “supermanagers,” and a 
concentration of wealth that fell a little during the ﬁ rst half of the 
twentieth century but that has grown steadily since.59
One might wonder how many of today’s major retailers can 
survive if such large portions of the population have less real 
income than in the past. One major way is credit. U.S. middle 
and lower- middle classes have had to pursue the American 
dream by borrowing to the hilt. Though the Great Recession of 
2008 wrecked many of those ambitions and plunged many 
people into disastrous debt, there is little evidence borrowing for 
buying is going away; it simply has become a necessary part of 

WHAT NOW? 243
the U.S. economic system. Another way is to target the very 
wealthy. During the past couple of decades, in fact, retailers and 
brands have succeeded in the United States when they have 
pursued both the luxury and the low- price market; the middle is 
increasingly being hollowed out. There are, in fact, large numbers 
of people who can afford relatively expensive goods, even if they 
make up a small percentage of the population overall. This group 
also includes comparatively wealthy international shoppers, who 
have increasing access to U.S. merchants through the internet 
and via stores the retailers have opened abroad. In the process of 
adapting to these new economic realities merchants have become 
all the more resolute in their desire to use data and technologies 
to identify customers of value and pursue them across as many 
channels as possible. It is increasingly a matter of retailing life 
and death to ﬁ x on and cultivate the right customers while 
shucking off shoppers who offer little beneﬁ t.
The reshaping of retailing will likely add data- driven anxi-
eties to both buyers and sellers. Stores will become stress centers, 
as technologies aiding shoppers duel with those aiding retailers, 
resulting in often conﬂ icting conclusions about price and prefer-
ential treatment. Sellers will have to change prices constantly, 
introduce new products rapidly, and continually adopt new ways 
to deﬁ ne, identify, track, and reevaluate customers, as well 
as satisfy those they deﬁ ne as winners. Beyond the traditional 
tension of assessing product quality and cost, shoppers will have 
to deal with the uncertainty surrounding the personal informa-
tion that merchants have gathered about them and the scores 
they are assigned as a result, and the effect that these activities 
will have on their shopping experience.

244 WHAT NOW?
This new direction in retail may be healthy for some stores’ 
bottom lines, but it is toxic for people’s sense of democratic 
possibilities in society. The data- driven stratiﬁ cation of customers 
encourages abandonment of the historical ideal of egalitarian treat-
ment in the American marketplace. As these forms of discrimina-
tion accelerate, the retail system increasingly encourages shoppers 
to accept a coarsening of relations in their dealings with merchants. 
The old saw that every person’s dollar is worth the same increas-
ingly no longer holds sway. Instead, the value of one’s dollar 
depends on the person’s prior spending, demographics, lifestyle, 
and willingness to be an open book for the retailer from whom 
good treatment and good deals are desired. Certainly the tradi-
tional discriminatory categories of race, income, and age will enter 
these calculations, but proving prejudicial behaviors toward such 
groups as black, low- income, or older Americans will become far 
more difﬁ cult because they will be masked by complex algorithms. 
To protect themselves from accusations of bigotry, retailers will 
probably not even put race into the equation. But it will certainly 
be represented in a host of hidden factors such as neighborhood, 
income, education, and even health. And rest assured that shop-
pers will respond by doing all they can to foster and perpetuate a 
favorable proﬁ le, adjusting their behaviors to those they think will 
lead to the best treatment from their favorite retailers. Look, too, 
for whispered social discussions and possibly blogs that try to deci-
pher speciﬁ c stores’ criteria when they pick winners and losers at 
any given time for any given product.
Jeff Malmad’s aggressively utopian declaration that opened 
this chapter reﬂ ects the urgent need that businesses, including 

WHAT NOW? 245
retailers, have to gather more and more information on indi-
vidual consumers. The days when merchants and their adver-
tising agencies targeted broad population segments such as men 
or college students—or even entire cities—as potential customers 
are beginning to fade. We are moving rather quickly into an era 
in which retailers are focused on exploiting what they know 
about speciﬁ c individuals to encourage their loyalty and to 
sell them products. Retailers believe that the more information 
they secure, the more likely they can identify the hot buttons that 
computer formulas say will ignite an individual’s interest in a 
particular product. This involves compiling and sifting through 
huge amounts of data about individuals’ shopping habits along 
with other material (from third- party data ﬁ rms or from “listening” 
services) that at ﬁ rst glance doesn’t appear directly related to 
shopping, such as Twitter statements, Facebook comments, blog 
posts about various products, the names of social media friends, 
and hobbies. Many merchants agree with IBM that the key to 
long- term customer proﬁ tability is “the process of identifying all 
of the information for a customer (member data) throughout the 
enterprise, linking it together for a 360- degree view of a member 
and maintaining that view going forward.”60
Of particular concern to many is that much of the data- 
gathering activities described throughout this book are occurring 
under the hood. And Malmad’s statement that “you’ll know 
everything about yourself and your loved ones if you opt in” 
inverts what is actually happening: retailers and data providers 
are trying to learn everything about us and our loved ones 
whether we know it or not, and if we opt in, an act that is often 
encouraged by loyalty programs or other incentives, they will 

246 WHAT NOW?
learn far more about us than if we don’t. Yet Malmad’s comments 
do reﬂ ect an intriguing tension that lies at the core of how 
retailers generally are approaching their customers in the twenty- 
ﬁ rst century. Even as merchants herald this era as the age of 
customer power, a result of the hypercompetition brought on by 
internet trading, they push back against that power via an 
increasing number of technologies aimed at constraining and 
channeling the decisions of their customers in ways that beneﬁ t 
the marketers.
This book has charted approaches that the largest depart-
ment store, supermarket, and big- box chains have adopted to 
corral desirable customers while minimizing the negative inﬂ u-
ence of customers who bring them little, if any, proﬁ ts. Whether 
these techniques work for the retailers’ bottom lines is beside the 
point; what matters is the larger implications of the emerging 
retailing institution in which shoppers accept and possibly 
normalize surveillance and social discrimination. Throughout 
the book I’ve noted how emerging technologies and retail 
marketers’ discussions about them turn into taken- for- granted 
elements of people’s worlds. Academic and futurist visions 
about the ways retailers need to use the new digital technologies 
to survive on-  and ofﬂ ine are translated into practical advice 
via consultant- generated systems such as customer relationship 
management, digital intelligence, loyalty systems, and listening 
platforms. These frameworks, in turn, encourage a continual 
stream of technologies that put into everyday practice the surveil-
lance, predictive- analytic, and personalization techniques that 
translate the elite theory into everyday routines. While foes of 
surveillance and data aggregation in areas such as health, 

WHAT NOW? 247
employment, and loan discrimination continue their ﬁ ght before 
government agencies, the retailing establishment has built quite 
similar activities into its very fabric with few complaints. The 
reason: buying and selling everyday products doesn’t seem prob-
lematic even when the new tools are used.
And yet, as I’ve shown, the practice of social discrimination 
is very much at the core of the transformation of everyday 
retailing today. The norms of this new retailing era are taking 
hold: it is rather commonplace that, online and on mobile 
devices, cookies and their variants form the building blocks 
of a data- rich world that personalizes offers on the ﬂ y. And 
now online personalization is migrating to the seemingly old- 
fashioned world of physical retailing—the arena where shoppers 
still do most of their buying by far. Internet- like tracking 
and analytical abilities are coming to the aisles and to the check-
outs. Tying into the always- on smartphone carried by about 70 
percent of Americans, merchants, brand manufacturers, and 
their agents are exploiting cellular signals, Bluetooth, Wi- Fi, 
sound waves, light waves, and more to track customers and send 
them product messages before, during, and after their store visits. 
The opportunity to receive personally relevant offers is one lure 
that companies use to entice customers to join the data- collection 
bandwagon. Enjoying the rewards of protection, privilege, and 
games relating to loyalty are others.
As a result of the information that retailers gather about their 
shoppers in this way, the complex algorithms they use mean 
that they treat people increasingly differently. As they go about 
their day, including moving through particular stores, people 
are receiving different messages, even different prices, based on 

248 WHAT NOW?
proﬁ les retailers have created about them—proﬁ les that the indi-
viduals probably don’t know exist and, if they could read them, 
might not even agree with. While these sorts of discrimination 
currently take place to a greater degree online than in the phys-
ical retailing space, it’s clear that the brick- and- mortar establish-
ments are moving inexorably in that direction. Concerns about 
hypercompetition and notions of efﬁ ciency are behind the push, 
and these changes are overturning more than a century of demo-
cratic treatment and posted prices in department stores, groceries, 
and discount chains. Yet neither the public nor the government 
has sufﬁ ciently grasped the immensity of the changes to be able 
to ask what they will do to our society.
With these disturbing trends in mind, I hope to encourage a 
discussion about what can be done to soften, if not eliminate, 
downsides of this new environment. The data- gathering and 
data- exploitation activities I’ve described in this book raise 
weighty questions. Does the American public really want a 
society in which marketers are free to track, proﬁ le, and target 
them virtually anywhere they go, and to share information about 
them with other marketers in ways they do not understand? Are 
people comfortable with a society that reverts to the discrimina-
tory elements of the peddler era in which selling was based 
on proﬁ ling each customer? If not, how should this new America 
create room for information respect—the idea that people 
deserve to know about and manage the ways society’s institu-
tions use data about what they say and do?
Marketing, retailing, database, and technology executives 
typically ignore these questions. They acknowledge the discomfort 

WHAT NOW? 249
that some Americans feel regarding the data that ﬁ rms gather 
about them.61 But they claim Americans understand full well they 
are involved in a trade- off of their data for relevant messages 
and offers. Marketers depict an informed public that understands 
the opportunities and costs of giving up its data and makes the 
positive decision to do so. A 2014 Yahoo! report, for example, 
concluded that when Americans are online they “demonstrate a 
willingness to share information, as more consumers begin to 
recognize the value and self- beneﬁ t of allowing advertisers to use 
their data in the right way.”62 In its argument to policy makers and 
the media the industry uses this image of a powerful consumer 
as proof that Americans accept widespread tracking of their 
backgrounds, behaviors, and lifestyles across devices, even though 
surveys repeatedly show they object to these activities.
Recall the privacy paradox described earlier in the book, 
which noted that people have inconsistent and contradictory 
impulses and opinions when it comes to safeguarding their own 
private information.63 Many marketers have embraced this 
seeming contradiction as a way to argue in favor of wide- ranging 
data collection. The McCann Worldwide advertising network’s 
Truth Central project derived this conclusion from “a global 
research study surveying over 10,000 people in eleven countries,” 
including the United States. Neither breaking down the results by 
country nor detailing the survey method, McCann stated that 
while “71% worry about the amount online stores know about 
them, 65% are willing to share their data as long as they under-
stand the beneﬁ ts for them.”64 The editor for mCommerceDaily 
interpreted the ﬁ ndings to mean that “the tracking of consumers 
all comes down to the trade- off in value.”65 Along the same lines, 

250 WHAT NOW?
the president and chief strategy ofﬁ cer of Mobiquity, a mobile- 
device- strategy consultancy, wrote in 2012 that “the average 
person is more than willing to share their information with 
companies if these organizations see the overall gain for end- users 
as a goal, not just for themselves.”66 A May 2014 report by Yahoo! 
Advertising followed this logic in interpreting its survey of “6,000 
respondents ages 13–64, a representative sample of the U.S. online 
population.” It highlighted the ﬁ nding that “roughly two- thirds of 
consumers ﬁ nd it acceptable or are neutral to marketers using 
online behavior or information to craft better ads.” Digitally 
connected Americans, the study concluded, “demonstrate a will-
ingness to share information, as more consumers begin to recog-
nize the value and self- beneﬁ t of allowing advertisers to use their 
data in the right way.”67
Are marketers correct in their assertion that Americans 
believe in trade- offs and are willing to give up personal data 
about themselves in favor of discounts and other blandishments? 
This is a difﬁ cult question to answer conclusively. The speciﬁ c 
questions asked, and methods used, in these studies often are 
not included with the survey results, so it’s challenging to perform 
a careful evaluation of the results. Sometimes the respondents 
are volunteers and their views have no statistical relationship 
to the population as a whole. A major problem with the accuracy 
of this research is that the participants are typically recruited 
online, and it is quite possible that, as opposed to the population 
at large, volunteers willing to ﬁ ll out online surveys are comfort-
able with giving up personal data. And ﬁ nally, the survey results 
are inconsistent, and even marketing executives are sometimes 
loath to fully champion the trade- off view. An Accenture 

WHAT NOW? 251
executive interpreted his company’s survey to mean that “if 
retailers approach and market personalization as a value 
exchange, and are transparent in how the data will be used, 
consumers will likely be more willing to engage and trade their 
personal data.”68 The Bain consultancy was even more cautious 
about its results, saying that “customers’ trust cannot be bought 
by companies offering compensation in exchange for selling or 
sharing personal data.” So what do Americans believe? And if we 
can determine their views conclusively, what, if anything, should 
we do about it?
The Annenberg National Internet Surveys, conducted seven 
times between 1999 and 2015, suggest useful and somewhat 
provocative answers to these questions. I headed the team at 
the University of Pennsylvania’s Annenberg School for 
Communication that created each survey. Major polling ﬁ rms—
Roper, ICR, and Princeton Research Associates International—
asked the survey questions during twenty- minute interviews 
with random samples of (typically) ﬁ fteen hundred Americans, 
age eighteen and older. The survey ﬁ rms contacted prospective 
respondents by phone—landlines only in the early studies and a 
combination of cell phones and landlines in recent years to 
account for the rise of mobile- phone- only households. In our 
surveys we report the speciﬁ c questions along with the results 
(all the questions can be viewed online).69
The basic ﬁ ndings are clear and, in some cases, alarming.
1. Most people know they are being tracked but don’t under-
stand what happens behind the screen. They don’t understand 
data mining, that is, the way companies plumb data about 

252 WHAT NOW?
them from various sources and merge the information to 
arrive at broad conclusions about them. They also don’t 
understand the purpose of a privacy policy, which is supposed 
to outline these activities. In four of the surveys (conducted 
between 2005 and 2015), we asked the participants a slight 
variation of this question: “True or False: If a website has a 
privacy policy, it means the site won’t share information 
about you with other sites without your permission.” A clear 
majority of the respondents in all of the surveys believed that 
this was a true statement, and a substantial percentage 
beyond that simply said they didn’t know. In actuality, the 
answer is false.
2. Most people don’t know the rules of the new digital market-
place, and they think the government protects them more than it 
does. The surveys found that more than half of Americans:
• do not know that a pharmacy does not legally need 
an individual’s permission to sell information to other 
parties regarding the over- the- counter drugs that the 
person buys;
• do not know it is legal for an online store to charge 
different prices to different people buying the identical 
product at the same time of day;
• do not know it is legal for an ofﬂ ine or physical store 
to charge different prices to different people buying 
the identical product at the same time of day;
• do not know that price- comparison sites such as the 
travel websites Expedia or Orbitz are not legally 
required to include the lowest travel prices.

WHAT NOW? 253
3. Most people don’t think personalization by marketers or 
retailers is a good thing, especially once they know the techniques 
used for obtaining their personal data. The 2009 survey conclu-
sively found that, contrary to the claims of many marketers, 
most adult Americans (approximately 66 percent) do not 
want to receive tailored advertisements. In contrast, slightly 
less than half said they would welcome tailored discounts. 
However, once this group understood several common ways 
that data are mined to produce tailored discounts—tracking 
the website the person has just visited, tracking the person 
on other websites, and tracking the person in stores—much 
higher percentages said they do not want such messages.
4. Americans directly admit feeling vulnerable in a retail 
environment in which companies collect personal information. 
The 2005 survey found that more than 70 percent disagreed 
with the statement “What companies know about me won’t 
hurt me,” disagreed with the statement “Privacy policies 
are easy to understand,” and agreed with the statement 
“I am nervous about websites having information about me.” 
This vulnerable feeling hadn’t changed by 2015. We found 
that 72 percent of Americans rejected the idea that “what 
companies know about me from my behavior online cannot 
hurt me.”
5. Most people philosophically do not agree with the idea of 
trade- offs. In 2015 we described to a random cross- section of 
American adults some everyday circumstances whereby 
marketers collect people’s data, and posed this activity in 
relation to personalized discounts as trade- offs. We found 

254 WHAT NOW?
that far more than half felt those trade- offs were unfair, 
disagreeing with the statements
• “If companies give me a discount, it is a fair exchange 
for them to collect information about me without my 
knowing.”
• “It’s fair for an online or physical store to monitor 
what I’m doing online when I’m there, in exchange 
for letting me use the store’s wireless internet, or Wi- Fi, 
without charge.”
• “It’s okay if a store where I shop uses information it 
has about me to create a picture of me that improves 
the services they provide for me.”
But if people disagree with trade- offs on principle, why 
do they accept them? This apparent contradiction surfaced 
even in our survey. We presented the people interviewed 
with a real- life trade- off situation, asking whether they would 
take discounts in exchange for allowing their supermarket to 
collect information about their grocery purchases. We found 
a much higher percentage said yes to the trade- offs than 
agreed with the three statements above. In examining our 
ﬁ ndings carefully, we concluded that the reason for this 
contradiction is resignation, as explained in #6:
6. Contrary to the claim that a majority of Americans consent to 
discounts because the commercial beneﬁ ts are worth the costs, we 
found that Americans do so because they are resigned to the inevita-
bility of surveillance and the power of marketers to harvest their data. 
The meaning of resignation we represent here is, to quote 
a Google dictionary entry, “the acceptance of something as 

WHAT NOW? 255
undesirable but inevitable.”70 And, in fact, our study revealed 
that 58 percent of Americans agree with the statement “I 
want to have control over what marketers can learn about me 
online,” at the same time they agree with the statement “I’ve 
come to accept that I have little control over what marketers 
can learn about me online.” Rather than feeling able to make 
choices, Americans believe it is futile to try to manage what 
companies can learn about them.
Watching what shoppers do doesn’t reveal their attitude. 
We found that people who believe in trade-offs are quite likely 
to accept supermarket discounts, but we couldn’t predict 
whether people who are resigned to marketers’ data-gathering 
activities would accept or reject the discounts. Marketers want 
us to see all those who accept discounts as rational believers in 
trade-offs. But when we looked at those surveyed who agreed 
to give up their data for supermarket discounts, we found that 
well over half of those who took the deal did so out of resigna-
tion rather than because they believe in trade-offs.
Ironically, and contrary to many claims for why people 
give up their personal information, those who are most aware 
of these marketing practices are more likely to be resigned. 
Moreover, the more knowledge resigned individuals have of 
marketing practices, the more likely they are to accept super-
market discounts even when the supermarket collects increas-
ingly personal information. When it comes to protecting 
personal data, our survey found those with the knowledge to 
accurately calculate the costs and beneﬁ ts of maintaining 
privacy are likely to consider their efforts to do so futile. 

256 WHAT NOW?
Though neither age nor gender reﬂ ect any differences in the 
number of people who are so resigned, statistically signiﬁ cant 
differences do show up regarding education and race: we 
found a higher percentage of resignation among the white 
population compared with nonwhites, and among more 
educated people compared with respondents who have a high 
school education or less. At the same time, one- half or more 
of individuals in those categories of respondents are resigned 
overall to personal data- gathering by marketers and retailers.
7. Young adults generally aren’t much different than older 
Americans when it comes to privacy issues. Media reports teem 
with stories of young people posting salacious photos online, 
writing on social networking sites about alcohol- fueled 
misdeeds, and publicizing other ill- considered escapades that 
may haunt them in the future. Commentators interpret these 
anecdotes as representative of a generation- wide shift in atti-
tude toward information privacy. They claim that young 
people are less concerned than older people when it comes to 
maintaining privacy. But our research with the Berkeley 
School of Law found that expressed attitudes toward privacy 
by American young adults (age eighteen to twenty- four) are 
not very different from those of older adults. In fact, large 
percentages of young adults are in harmony with older 
Americans with respect to both personal privacy and privacy 
regulations. For example, a large majority of young adults:
• have refused to give information to a business in 
cases where they felt it was too personal or not 
necessary;

WHAT NOW? 257
• believe anyone who uploads a photo of them to the 
internet should get their permission ﬁ rst, even if taken 
in public;
• believe a law should be passed to give people the 
right to know all the information websites have 
compiled on them; and
• believe a law should be passed requiring websites to 
delete all stored information about an individual.
In view of these ﬁ ndings, why would so many young adults 
conduct themselves on social networks and elsewhere online in 
ways that would seem to forfeit very private information to all 
comers? One answer is that it’s the nature of young adults 
to approach cost- beneﬁ t analyses related to risk differently in 
comparison with individuals older than twenty- four. An impor-
tant part of the picture, though, must surely be our ﬁ nding that 
higher proportions of eighteen- to twenty- four- year- olds believe 
incorrectly that the law provides more privacy protection online 
and ofﬂ ine than it actually does. This lack of knowledge in a 
tempting environment, rather than a cavalier lack of concern 
regarding privacy, may be an important reason large numbers of 
them engage with the digital world seemingly unconcerned.
The Annenberg surveys consistently reﬂ ect an American 
population that is struggling to cope with a media and marketing 
world they don’t understand, one they worry can harm them. 
Shopping is and will continue to be central to this new world. As 
U.S. society moves further into the twenty- ﬁ rst century, person-
alized deals, prices, and other tailored offers will undoubtedly be 

258 WHAT NOW?
increasingly troubling to Americans who believe they are on the 
losing end of often- hidden consumer proﬁ les and targeting 
formulas. Americans will also surely sense that the changes are 
causing the democratized marketplace to disappear and will feel 
powerless to do anything about them.
The issues raised in this book are relevant far beyond the 
United States. Earlier I discussed a popular Australian marketing 
consultant who carries his data- personalization boosterism 
throughout Asia. I also noted Synqera’s work on facial recogni-
tion in Russian stores. And in 2013 the chief information ofﬁ cer 
of Tesco, one of the world’s largest retailers, linked the key 
strategic question of how to bring the internet into the stores 
to three broad forces that would guide his ﬁ rm’s information 
technology investments: cloud computing, personalization, and 
the “seamless, blended world of physical and digital.” These activ-
ities represent the tip of the iceberg of retailing developments 
involving data collection, tracking, and personalization in- store 
and via various digital channels that are proceeding at different 
places around the world.71 A 2015 Nielsen global report on 
“The Future of Grocery” begins by describing “a grocery store 
where you can receive personal recommendations and offers 
the moment you step in the store, where checkout takes seconds 
and you can pay for groceries without ever taking out your 
wallet.” Might it sound “far- fetched?” the report asks. Not at all, 
it answers: “It’s closer than you think.” The report acknowledges 
that “today, only a small percentage of consumers around the 
world is already using such features.” But, it adds, this new 
kind of store is spreading. Moreover, based on a global online 
survey the company concludes that “willingness to use them in 

WHAT NOW? 259
the future is high.” It contends that millennials especially are 
champing at the bit.72
The Nielsen report says nothing about surveillance or privacy. 
Marketing and retailing executives around the world typically 
have attempted to minimize concerns about their use of shopper 
data. Our U.S.- focused survey challenges marketers’ usual 
trade- off defense by showing quite clearly that most Americans 
do not accept the fairness of getting discounts in exchange for 
their personal data. Yet many in the U.S. marketing industry are 
making the case that privacy in most areas of shopping doesn’t 
merit concern. They point to controversies about data mining 
and predictive analytics swirling around the National Security 
Agency’s work as well as around businesses that ferret out targets 
for shady payday loans and those that dredge up online relation-
ships suggesting a job applicant shouldn’t be hired. These intru-
sions, they insist, are quite different from tracking individuals for 
the purpose of ordinary advertising and shopping. Consider the 
comments of Scott Howe, president and CEO of Acxiom:
Some believe that all data is of equal importance and there-
fore must be controlled in exactly the same way. This is just 
not the case. Data regarding personal information that 
pertains to employment or insurability decisions, or that 
relates to sensitive health- related issues or conﬁ dential 
matters, deserves much different treatment than data that 
would indicate that I am a sports fan. Too often, legislation 
and regulation seek to paint issues in broad strokes, often 
with unforeseen consequences to liberties and innovation, 
despite being born of the best intentions.73

260 WHAT NOW?
Apart from ignoring the issue of respecting private informa-
tion—Americans want to be able to manage their personal data 
in commerce—this view pushes aside the discriminatory inﬂ u-
ence that seemingly benign pieces of data can potentially have on 
an individual’s opportunities in the public sphere. Howe surely 
must have considered that, in the not- too- distant future, compa-
nies may well take such actions as merging the category “sports 
fan” with dozens of other characteristics about individuals—their 
eating habits (at the ballpark, for example), their income, the 
number and age of their children, the value of their house, their 
vacation habits, their geographic whereabouts, their clothes- 
shopping habits, and their media- use patterns—to create proﬁ les 
that dub them winners or losers regarding certain areas of shop-
ping and that determine the advertisements and discounts that 
are directed to them. For reasons they don’t understand, people 
may see patterns of discounts that suggest they are being placed 
into certain lifestyle segments and are consequently receiving 
treatment they consider inferior to that of their neighbors and 
co- workers. The individuals may vaguely understand that these 
proﬁ les are the cause, and they may try to change their behavior 
to get better deals, often without success, all the while wondering 
why “the system”—the opaque predictive analytics regimes that 
they know are tracking their lives but to which they have no 
access—is treating them that way.
Arguments that play down the profound discriminatory 
potential of this sort of data- driven consumer commerce have the 
same rhetorical aims as those that insist Americans want to 
exchange data for beneﬁ ts: they give policy makers false justiﬁ ca-
tions for enabling the collection and use of all kinds of consumer 

WHAT NOW? 261
data in ways that the public often ﬁ nds objectionable. Yet when 
three of every ﬁ ve Americans are resigned to feelings of power-
lessness regarding their data relationships with marketers, when 
two of every ﬁ ve are both resigned to relinquishing the control of 
their data to marketers and worried that the loss of control can 
hurt them, and when people who are well aware of these data- 
gathering activities are actually more rather than less likely to be 
resigned, we have a problem. In a central area of the public sphere 
there exist substantial tensions that cannot be swept away by 
executives’ assertions of consumer autonomy and rational choice.
In 2010 the international retail marketing trade association 
Point of Purchase Advertising International (POPAI) directly 
addressed this issue in its “Recommended Code of Conduct for 
Consumer Tracking Methods.” The code concluded that “the ability 
to record and track a customer’s every move through the store, 
identify customers facially and demographically, and pinpoint 
where and what customers are looking at, picking up, and putting 
into their shopping carts through Observed Tracking Data (OTD) 
raises privacy issues and sends shivers down the spine of even the 
boldest marketer.”74 By 2015, however, the code had disappeared 
from POPAI’s website, as the marketing and retailing industries 
had since closed ranks around the idea that these activities are 
perfectly ﬁ ne as long as shoppers give their consent by down-
loading apps and/or turning on Wi- Fi, Bluetooth, location tracking, 
or other features of their mobile devices that signal a shopper’s 
presence. As we have seen in earlier chapters, loyalty strategies 
encourage people to opt into tracking via apps. We have also seen 
that retailers create privacy policies that intentionally avoid shed-
ding any light on tracking activities. The policies not only are turgid 

262 WHAT NOW?
documents designed to be unreadable by nonexperts; they are 
tough-luck contracts draped in take-it-or-leave-it terms. Moreover, 
their opaque nature decreases the likelihood that shoppers will 
become upset over speciﬁ c details of the merchants’ use of their 
data. Between the policies’ true intent and our ﬁ nding that most 
Americans assume a “privacy policy” means that their data won’t 
be shared without their permission—and the fact that the FTC has 
made no attempt to implement any changes that would clear up 
this misconception—we have a brick-and-mortar retailing envi-
ronment that is a frontier for customer data exploitation.
The marketing and retailing establishments generally have 
been secure pursuing their activities without government intru-
sion. A notable exception is the Children’s Privacy Protection 
Act, a landmark law that makes it illegal for companies to gather 
data on, or track, children under the age of thirteen without 
explicit parental permission. This one law notwithstanding, 
Tony Hadley, CEO of Experian, which sells both online and 
ofﬂ ine information on hundreds of millions of Americans, stated 
conﬁ dently in 2014 that Congress would not pass a law regu-
lating the collection of marketing data in the foreseeable future, 
or maybe ever. “Should marketing data be regulated like credit, 
like employment, like lending data?” he pondered, referring to 
speciﬁ c laws that address ﬁ nancial and health data in the name 
of privacy. “I think the clear indication that we’re getting from 
Congress is no.”75
Beyond Congress, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has 
taken the lead at the national level in wading into the controver-
sies surrounding the activities that Experian and so many of the 
retailers and intermediaries are pursuing. A number of the 

WHAT NOW? 263
agency’s commissioners and staff members are sympathetic to 
complaints expressed by individuals and advocacy organizations 
regarding potential misuse of digital- marketing data. In an 
attempt to prevent deception, the FTC in 1998 adopted a set of 
“fair information practice principles” that require ﬁ rms to provide 
“notice” of their information practices; “choice” (giving individ-
uals options about how their personal identifying information is 
used beyond the initial purpose); “access” (giving individuals 
reasonable opportunity to review the information collected and 
to make corrections); and “security” (reasonable steps to protect 
the information). Over time, the FTC has added to these princi-
ples with categories such as “collection limitation,” “purpose 
speciﬁ cation,” and “privacy by design.” Yet privacy expert Robert 
Gellman has concluded that, “from 1998 through 2010, the 
Commission’s description of [fair information practice principles] 
has been consistently inconsistent.”76 More troubling, companies 
have learned how to conform to the letter of the FTC categories 
while running roughshod over their spirit—the incoherent 
privacy policies, a response to the FTC requirement that websites 
provide “notice” of their information practices, are a primary 
example. Marketers and retailers also play games with the 
“choice” and “access” principles; for example, the typical tough-
luck privacy policy is an illusion of choice.
Marketers have generally had free rein to track people and 
collect information about them, as the FTC has been hobbled by 
the narrow deﬁ nition of “harm” that it (and advocates peti-
tioning it) must follow before it can act: injury to a person 
resulting from the use of the person’s gender, race, or age in 
health care, ﬁ nancial, or employment decisions and ending in 

264 WHAT NOW?
monetary loss. For example, the FTC has shown an interest 
in whether certain loan companies collect personal data that, 
while seeming to have nothing to do with race, enables those 
companies to circumvent race discrimination laws. The commis-
sion has also been willing to penalize companies that have gath-
ered or have used data in a deceptive manner. Although these 
are important initiatives, the FTC’s deﬁ nition of harm prevents it 
from addressing fundamental concerns about the public’s right to 
know about the speciﬁ c ways companies compile personal data 
and how they use the data. Nor can it mandate limits on in-the-
aisle data gathering in the new retailing era. As the FTC itself 
noted in a 2010 report, approaches to protecting consumer 
privacy that employ a harm- based model tend to focus on 
enhancing physical security, limiting economic injury, and mini-
mizing unwanted intrusions into the daily lives of consumers.77 
The report goes on to note that such an approach tends to leave 
out reputational harm and the pervasive fear many Americans 
have of being watched—issues that certainly intersect with 
concerns we have found in the Annenberg surveys. Yet the issues 
our surveys have identiﬁ ed are both more speciﬁ c and at the 
same time broader: Americans want to have control over the 
data that marketers obtain about them. They believe that 
marketers currently have total control, and they worry (perhaps 
because of that lack of autonomy) that the commercial relation-
ships they have as a result of marketers possessing their personal 
information are fraught. And they feel resigned to being unable 
to do anything about it.
The retail transformation taking place challenges the useful-
ness of the fair information practices and other self- regulatory 

WHAT NOW? 265
regimes set up to protect America’s right to privacy in the 
commercial realm. Philosopher and New York University 
professor Helen Nissenbaum notes that privacy involves the 
contextually appropriate ﬂ ow of personal information,78 meaning 
that this ﬂ ow should be consistent with the expectations of those 
whose data is being used. A website’s “notice” of its information 
practices helps individuals to determine whether the ﬂ ow meets 
their expectations. Yet the evolving cross- platform surveillance 
activities of the new retailing world make it difﬁ cult, if not impos-
sible, for an individual to understand and act on even this one 
aspect of the fair information practice principles; the person 
would continually have to review and attempt to comprehend 
several sets of frequently changing privacy practices of merchants 
online, on apps, and in the physical stores. They would also have 
to be familiar with the evolving privacy practices of third- party 
app companies such as shopkick and inMarket. Even in a perfect 
world, carrying out such due diligence successfully would be a 
huge task.
Companies such as Google and Acxiom say they offer indi-
viduals the opportunity to view and correct or update their 
personal information stored in the businesses’ database. However, 
these ﬁ rms join with other companies to meld their respective 
sets of data in targeting potential customers, resulting in individ-
ualized messages that often incorporate far more personal infor-
mation than the characteristics individuals see. Further, in 2013 
the New York Times reported that the website Acxiom had created 
to make this information available, aboutthedata.com, wasn’t 
releasing all the personal information it had collected.79 Jeff 
Chester of the consumer group Center for Digital Democracy told 

266 WHAT NOW?
the newspaper that the website’s language “is so innocuous that 
the average consumer would think there’s no privacy concern.”80 
A comparison between the information Acxiom was making 
available to individuals on aboutthedata.com and the descrip-
tions of what it was selling in its 2013 Consumer Data Products 
Catalog indicates that as of late 2015 the company was still making 
available only a small percentage of the personal data. For 
example, the website did not allude to the company’s tracking of 
people on social media, yet the catalog offers a panoply of prod-
ucts that provide such information as the number of an individ-
ual’s social network friends and the names of the people an 
individual is following—and is followed by—on Twitter.81 Health 
data is another example, as the website did not mention that 
Acxiom collects this type of personal data yet the product catalog 
sells information focusing on such areas as an individual’s choles-
terol level, diabetes, or senior needs. Nor did the website make 
any mention of the sixty- seven proﬁ ling tags the catalog assigned 
to people based on household socioeconomic status, such as 
“Summit Estates,” “Humble Homes,” and “Resilient Renters.”
Acxiom’s actions suggest a misleading approach that would 
keep even the most assiduous people from understanding the 
activities surrounding their personal information, as do those of 
Google and other ﬁ rms. Although the Federal Trade Commission 
is mandated to monitor and punish deception in the market-
place, one has to wonder whether the fair information practice 
principles themselves actually aid deception or misleading infer-
ences by pretending that notice, choice, and access can actually 
be carried out in the emerging complex, multilayered world.
* * *

WHAT NOW? 267
What is taking place is clearly not business as usual. It’s 
not even the business that existed when the fair information 
practice principles were written. We cannot rely on self- regulation 
by marketers and the monitoring abilities of individual shoppers 
to resolve the complex ethical, social, and legal problems created 
by the new regimes of commercial surveillance. Our Annenberg 
surveys consistently indicate that even when people consent for 
whatever reason to being tracked, or to allow retailers to use 
their personal information, they don’t truly understand what’s 
taking place behind the screen. At the heart of the situation is 
an asymmetry of power: on the one hand, retailers have vast 
amounts of personal information on people and can identify 
them using a range of means, and on the other, the public has 
little recourse in educating itself and acting on those activities.
Regulation is a crucial means for addressing this situation, as 
it can immediately slow the pace of marketing surveillance. 
Some public- interest advocates frustrated with the FTC hold out 
hope that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) will 
step up with stricter regulations that encourage transparency of 
data use by marketers and discourage tracking in the commercial 
sphere without permission. Unlike the FTC’s mandate to counter 
business harms, the FCC has the broader government mandate 
to regulate “in the public interest, convenience and necessity,” to 
quote the 1936 Federal Communications Act. In recent years, 
the FCC has reclaimed the right to regulate internet service 
providers (ISPs) as common carriers, similar to phone services. 
In 2016 FCC chairman Tom Wheeler suggested an FCC edict that 
those providers (typically cable ﬁ rms and large telecommunica-
tions ﬁ rms such as AT&T and Verizon) should be prohibited from 

268 WHAT NOW?
sharing customer data without active (“opt- in”) permission by 
those individuals. Wheeler reasoned that because they monitor 
all the broadband trafﬁ c to every location and device, ISPs have 
the capability of learning enormous amounts about where their 
customers go and what they look at online and on apps. Public 
interest activists cheered the idea, but the ISPs reacted angrily. 
They argued the FCC shouldn’t be regulating them with draco-
nian rules while, they contended, the FTC was allowing Google, 
Facebook, and other commercial giants to scarf up at least as 
much data about individuals. The ISPs gathered the support of 
important lawmakers, who announced the FCC was over-
reaching its regulatory authority. As of late 2016 Wheeler 
remained intent on pushing his plan through the FCC, and his 
opponents remained equally intent on making sure such opt- in 
rules never get implemented.
Rather than pursuing the ISP argument against opting in, the 
correct approach is actually to argue for the opposite: require a 
comprehensive opt- in policy for every company that wants to 
use an individual’s data, whether it be Google, inMarket, or 
Macy’s. Retailers will object, stating that people already opt in to 
being tracked when they install apps on their mobile devices, but 
this is a disingenuous argument requiring one to seriously believe 
that individuals stop to read the legalese of privacy policies on 
their smartphones’ small screens at the moment of download. 
One way such an opt- in could be implemented for apps is to 
prohibit the company offering the app from tracking individuals 
immediately after download. Instead, the ﬁ rms should send 
downloaders a straightforward accounting of data use through 
email (under the condition that the ﬁ rms discard the email 

WHAT NOW? 269
addresses afterward). Only after the downloader responds afﬁ r-
matively to the email, or uses the app at least a day after receiving 
the email, should the app owner be allowed to husband data.
These opt- in requirements clearly will not address the many 
issues regarding commercial surveillance in the imminent 
omnichannel environment. But they can slow the growth of 
surveillance in the aisles so that society can then have the neces-
sary time to chart a retailing future that satisﬁ es marketers but 
protects people from being overrun by surveillance and mini-
mizes discrimination. Despite the insistence of retailers’ lobbyists, 
we can’t put the burden on shoppers, who have a life and don’t 
have time to learn the ins and outs of new technologies that 
are often sugarcoated by companies that have a vested interest 
in deceiving them. The term transparency is used a lot in the 
marketing trade press to signify advertisers’ insistence that they 
must be able to look into the speciﬁ cs of their programmatic- 
advertising activities so that they can calculate their return on 
investment and not get harmed monetarily. Yet when it comes 
to transparency in advertisers’ relationships with the public, the 
term is far less popular—and the activities related to implementing 
openness far less diligent. We need initiatives that give the public 
the right and ability to learn what companies know about them 
and how they proﬁ le them, and what forms of data lead to what 
kinds of personalized offers. We also need to get people excited 
about using that right and ability. Here are a few suggestions:
• Encourage more corporate openness about the commercial use 
of people’s data by naming, praising, and shaming. Public interest 
organizations as well as government agencies should develop 

270 WHAT NOW?
clear deﬁ nitions of transparency that reﬂ ect concerns identi-
ﬁ ed in the Annenberg surveys and elsewhere. They should 
then systematically identify companies accordingly. When 
activists, journalists, and government ofﬁ cials name and 
shame ﬁ rms that don’t abide by the transparency norms, 
they can alert the public to stay away from bad actors, 
possibly force those actors to change their behaviors, and 
encourage some ﬁ rms to see privacy as a selling point.
• Create an initiative that dissects and reports on the implications 
of privacy policies. Activists, journalists, and government ofﬁ -
cials—perhaps aided by crowd- sourcing initiatives—should 
take on the role of interpreting these legally binding docu-
ments for the public. Rather than focusing on whether 
websites abide by their privacy policies, privacy policy inter-
preters can be most helpful by uncovering how companies 
say they collect and use their data, and what the implications 
might be for the individual and for society. They should also 
advocate for a consumer right to agree with selective parts of 
privacy policies by underscoring policies that do allow this. 
When this information is available in a digestible form, it 
may spur informed naming, praising, and shaming. It may 
well also lead ﬁ rms to alter objectionable behaviors.
• Give individuals the right to know the speciﬁ c data and proﬁ le 
on which a retailer bases any of its targeted messages, coupons, 
or other interactions. As long as the algorithms companies 
implement to analyze and predict the future behaviors of 
shoppers are hidden from public view, the potential for 
unwanted marketer exploitation of individuals’ data remains 
high. We therefore ought to consider it an individual’s right 
to access the proﬁ les and scores companies use to create 

WHAT NOW? 271
every personalized message and discount that the person 
receives. Although companies will argue that giving out this 
information exposes trade secrets, we contend that this can 
be done without exposing companies to such damage.
• Educate the public about digital media and marketing, begin-
ning in middle school. To have a truly informed discussion, 
people need to be able to communicate in the language of 
the future. They have to learn the vocabulary of digital media 
and marketing and be familiar with the primary individuals 
behind it. This area should be considered a part of the liberal 
arts because a solid understanding of it is necessary for a 
thriving citizenry.
Activists, journalists, and schoolteachers all need to be educa-
tors when it comes to the changing retailing institution and its 
hidden curriculum. They can push against the asymmetry of 
power in retailing by casting light on the often non- privacy- 
oriented nature of merchants’ privacy policies, focusing on how 
companies say they collect and use their data, and on what the 
implications might be for the individual and society. When these 
practices are available in digestible form—and people realize how 
different the retailers’ norms are from their own—the knowl-
edge may incite the praising or shaming of retailers and result in 
chastened merchants that change the behaviors their shoppers 
ﬁ nd disagreeable. These public activities, in turn, may spur the 
FTC, the FCC, Congress, state regulators, and the courts to work 
toward as even and as open a shopping playing ﬁ eld as possible. 
Also helping to push in this direction, and to puzzle out some 
of the legal conandrums the new environment is creating, are 
the platoons of privacy and surveillance scholars the nation is 

272 WHAT NOW?
fortunate to have.82 They offer important ideas about regulation, 
corporate behavior, and cultural values that might well help 
regulators confront the evolving retail challenges highlighted in 
this book.
The stakes are high. Our society should not rush headlong 
into a new retailing world, but instead should question whether 
it is the one we want. Should payment for products include 
a part of yourself? Do you want the next generation strolling 
down store aisles and thinking it normal that the merchants 
have proﬁ led and scored them, often in prejudicial ways, and 
that they don’t know how they were labeled, what consequences 
the labeling will have on their shopping experience, and whether 
they have any say in the matter? Merchants, left to their own 
interests and in response to hypercompetition, are creating this 
world. And they continue to work with the digital industry, 
which has grown around them, to ensure that future generations 
accept an environment of surveillance and tracking. If the 
retail industry prevails, a future societal mantra might well be, 
“Shoppers want to be tracked.” Our descendants might well 
remember when we failed to make a choice—if they recall there 
was a choice at all.

273
This book explores a new retailing industry in the making, and 
its effect on how we see ourselves and our world. I owe a lot to 
the many marketing executives, agency practitioners, journalist- 
experts, and public interest advocates who answered my questions 
about the complex technologies, business processes, and govern-
ment policies that are guiding the transformation. Several of these 
generous individuals wished to remain anonymous. I am thankful 
for the opportunity to acknowledge the others together with the 
ﬁ rms where they were employed when we talked: Bruce Biegel 
(Winterberry), Bill Bishop (Willard Bishop), Michael Boland (BIA/
Kelsey), Ryan Boniﬁ cina (Alex and Ani), Jeff Chester (Center 
for Digital Democracy), Andy Chu (Sears), Ryan Craver (Hudson’s 
Bay), Abhi Dhar (Walgreens), Pam Dixon (World Privacy Forum), 
Ivan Frank (Taubman), Jason Goldberg (Razorﬁ sh), Ethan Goodman 
(The Mars Agency), Moshe Greenshpan (Face- Six), Jeff Grifﬁ n 
(inMarket), Zach Grossman (Perka), Michael Healander (GiSi), 
Laura Heller (Fierce Retail), Kevin Hunter (industry consultant), 
Jeff Jensen (inMarket), Randy Jiusto (Outsell), Matthew Kulig 
(Aisle411), Daniel Mahl (Thinknear), Bill Martin (ShopperTrak), 
Charles Martin (Umbel), Michael Miller (Catapult), Patrick 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

274 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Moorhead (Twitter/Catalina), Brett Reisman (Spreo), Suzi Robinson 
(Stop & Shop), Joe Stanhope (Signal Digital), Mark Tack (Vibes), 
Paul Verano (Shopperception), Tyler Watson (inMarket).
In many cases I contacted sources because they either were 
mentioned in or wrote trade magazine articles I found helpful, or 
because they appeared on panels at industry meetings I attended. 
Particularly useful sources for tracking contemporary develop-
ments were MediaPost’s Email Marketing Daily, Mobile Marketing 
Daily, Search Marketing Daily, Social Media and Marketing Daily, Real 
Time Daily, and Media Daily News; Fiercemarket’s Fierceretail, 
FierceMobileMarketer, FierceMobileRetail, and FierceBigdata; Mobile 
Commerce Daily, Progressive Grocer, Advertising Age, AdWeek, and 
Adexchanger. The industry meetings were useful for conﬁ rming, 
extending, or refuting what I had learned in the trades. 
Steve Smith, Joe Mandese, and Wendy Davis at MediaPost 
Communications were particularly generous in allowing, even 
inviting, me to attend a number of their conferences and making 
me feel welcome. I beneﬁ ted from reports from retailing and 
marketing consulting and research ﬁ rms such as Forrester 
Research, eMarketer, Winterberry, Accenture, IBM, and Jainrain.
Colleagues from various academic disciplines have been 
crucial to teaching me, critiquing me, and offering me sage advice 
about various aspects of marketing, retailing, the digital environ-
ment, surveillance, and privacy. Warm thanks are due Danielle 
Citron, Brooke Duffy, Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Kathy Montgomery, 
Monroe Price, Ira Rubinstein, Christopher Yoo, and the always 
enlightening speakers and papers at the annual Privacy Law 
Scholars conference staged on alternate years by Chris Hoofnagle 
and Dan Solove at Berkeley Law School and George Washington 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 275
University Law School. My thinking on topics in this book has 
also beneﬁ ted from research help by Annenberg doctoral students 
Ope Akanbi, Nora Draper, Emily Hund, Elena Maris, Lee 
McGuigan, Paul Popiel, John Remensperger, and Steven Schrag.
I am fortunate to work in an environment that provides the 
time and encouragement to carry out this sort of research. 
Michael Delli Carpini, dean of University of Pennsylvania’s 
Annenberg School, has had a large role in creating and perpetu-
ating that atmosphere, and I thank him for it. Thanks also go to 
Joe Calamia, my editor at Yale University Press. Joe’s enthusiasm 
for this project and sensitive editorial suggestions have made the 
process of getting this book out as smooth as it could possibly be. 
The work also beneﬁ ted from the talents of Jeff Schier. A master 
copyeditor, Jeff worked hard to bring out the best in every 
paragraph.

This page intentionally left blank 

277
1 A FROG SLOWLY BOILED
 1. Conservative estimate of Kevin Hunter, an industry consultant who 
until July 2016 was president of the inMarket beacon network.
 2. See Brandon Fischer, “Bright and Shiny Objects”, http://www
.slideshare.net/mediapostlive/brandon-ﬁ scher, accessed September 25, 
2015.
 3. http://www.fmediapostlive/brandon- ﬁ scher, published August 7, 
2015, slide 12i.org/research- resources/supermarket- facts; http://www.
fmi.org/research- resources/supermarket- facts/weekly- household- grocery- 
expenses- 2014.
 4. http://www.nacsonline.com/Research/FactSheets/ScopeofIndustry/
Pages/Convenience.aspx; Cushman and Wakeﬁ eld Research, “Reality 
Check: Evaluating 7 Industrial Real Estate Predictions,” October 2014, 
http://global.cushmanwakeﬁ eld.com/en/research- and- insight/2014/
reality- check- industrial- re- predictions- 2014/ (page 4).
 5. Shelley Banjo and Drew Fitzgerald, “Stores iConfront New World of 
Reduced Shopper Trafﬁ c,” Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2014, http://
online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB1000142405270230441910457932510
0372435802, accessed August 22, 2014; Cushman and Wakeﬁ eld 
Research, “Reality Check: Evaluating 7 Industrial Real Estate 
Predictions,” October 2014, http://global.cushmanwakeﬁ eld.com/en/
research- and- insight/2014/reality- check- industrial- re- predictions- 2014/ 
(page 4).
 6. Ibid.
 7. Marco Kesteloo and Nick Hodson, “2015 Retail Trends,” January 13, 
2015, http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/reports/2015- retail- trends; 
NOTES

278 NOTES TO PAGES 10–20
“On Solid Ground: Brick- and- Mortar Is the Foundation of 
Omnichannel Retailing,” ATKearney, 2014, https://www.atkearney.
com/documents/10192/4683364/On+Solid+Ground.pdf/f96d82ce- 
e40c- 450d- 97bb- 884b017f4cd7, accessed February 21, 2016.
 8. Elizabeth A. Harris, “GE Capital to Help Set Up Loyalty Programs for 
Retailers,” New York Times, January 13, 2014, http://www.nytimes.
com/2014/01/13/business/ge- capital- to- help- set- up- loyalty- programs- 
for- retailers.html?_r=0, accessed March 17, 2014.
 9. Laura Heller, “Consumers Love Loyalty; Will They Stay Loyal to 
Starbucks?,” Fierce Retail, March 2, 2016, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.
com/story/consumers- love- loyalty- will- they- stay- loyal- to- 
starbucks/2016- 03- 02, accessed March 2, 2016.
 10. Charles Duhigg, “How Companies Learn Your Secrets,” New York Times 
Magazine, February 16, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/19/
magazine/shopping- habits.html?pagewanted=all&action=click&modul
e=Search&region=searchResults%230&version=&url=http%3A%2F%
2Fquery.nytimes.com%2Fsearch%2Fsitesearch%2F%3Faction%3Dcli
ck%26contentCollection%3DBusiness%2520Day%26region%3DTop
Bar%26module%3DSearchSubmit%26pgtype%3Darticle%23%2Ftar
get+pregnant, accessed March 17, 2014.
11. Jane Martin, “What Should We Do with a Hidden Curriculum When 
We Find One?” Curriculum Inquiry 6:2 (1976): 135–51.
12. Emile Durkheim, quoted in Eric Margolis et al., “Hiding and Outing 
the Curriculum,” in The Hidden Curriculum in Higher Education, ed. Eric 
Margolis (New York and London: Routledge, 2001), 1–20.
13. Roland Meighan, A Sociology of Educating (New York: Holt, Rinehart, 
and Winston, 1981), 52.
14. Jean Anyon, “Social Class and the Hidden Curriculum of Work,” 
Journal of Education 162:1 (Winter, 1980): 67–92.
15. Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis, Schooling in Capitalist America 
(New York: Basic Books, 1976), 42; see also 163.
16. Paul Willis, Learning to Labor (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1997).
17. Thomas Berger and Peter Luckman, The Social Construction of Reality 
(New York: Anchor Books, 1966), 55.
18. Ibid., 42, 62–63; see also 24.

NOTES TO PAGES 22–34 279
19. Interview with retail executive, September 21, 2014.
20. The term social imaginary is borrowed from social philosopher Charles 
Taylor. See Charles Taylor, The Secular Age (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2007), 1.
21. Brian Kilcourse, RSR research, quoted in Leonie Barrie, “NRF 
2014: Tailoring Technology for All the Omnichannel Success,” 
just- style, January 21, 2014, http://www.just- style.com/analysis/
tailoring- technology- for- omnichannel- success_id120413.aspx, via 
LexisNexis.
22. Berger and Luckman, The Social Construction of Reality, 55.
2 THE DISCRIMINATING MERCHANT
 1. “Trust Legislation: Hearings Before the Committee on the Judiciary 
House of Representatives, 63rd Congress, On Trust Legislation, Serial 
Seven—Parts 1 To 10 Inclusive, Volume 2,” Washington: Government 
Printing Ofﬁ ce 1914, 731.
 2. Claire Holleran, Shopping in Ancient Rome (Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press, 2012), 240.
 3. Laurence Fontaine, History of Pedlars in Europe (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 1996), 91.
 4. Ibid.
 5. Tracey Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise: Gender, Politics, and 
American Grocery Stores in the 20th Century (Chapel Hill, NC: University 
of North Carolina Press, 2010), 33.
 6. Ibid.
 7. Ibid., 33–40.
 8. Robert Hendrickson, The Great Emporiums (New York: Stein and Day, 
1979), 28.
 9. Ibid., 29.
10. Ibid., 31.
11. William Leach, Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New 
American Culture (New York: Vintage, 1993), 6.
12. Hendrickson, Great Emporiums, 31.
13. Mica Nava, “Modernity’s Disavowal: Women, the City, and the 
Department Store,” in The Shopping Experience, ed. Pasi Falk and Colin 
Campbell (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1997), 60.

280 NOTES TO PAGES 34–45
14. Ibid.
15. Barbara Olsen, “Rethinking Marketing’s Evolutionary Paradigm,” in 
Explorations in Consumer Culture Theory, ed. John F. Sherry and Eileen 
Fischer (New York: Routledge, 2008), 65.
16. Nava, “Modernity’s Disavowal,” 64.
17. Ibid., 66.
18. Emile Zola, The Ladies’ Delight, trans. Robin Buss (London: Penguin 
Classics, 2006), 75.
19. Nava, “Modernity’s Disavowal,” 66.
20. Harold W. Fox, The Economics of Trading Stamps (Washington DC: Public 
Affairs Press, 1968), 32.
21. Hendrickson, Great Emporiums, 36.
22. Quoted in Leach, Land of Desire, 112.
23. Leach, Land of Desire, 133.
24. Ibid., 133.
25. Susan Strasser, Satisfaction Guaranteed: The Making of the American Mass 
Market (New York: Pantheon, 1989), 248.
26. Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 57.
27. Daniel Delis Hill, Advertising to the American Woman, 1900–1999 
(Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press, 2002), 3–5.
28. From the Illustrated Weekly caption, as reproduced in Montrose Morris, 
“Walkabout: The Great Milk Wars, Part 1,” The Brownstoner, 
November 8, 2011, http://www.brownstoner.com/history/walkabout- 
the- great- milk- wars- part- 1/, accessed September 25, 2015.
29. Fox, Economics of Trading Stamps, 34.
30. Ibid.
31. Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 144.
32. Fox, Economics of Trading Stamps, 34.
33. Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 144–45.
34. Ibid., 145.
35. Quoted in Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 146.
36. Ibid.
37. Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 147–48.
38. Ibid., 187.
39. John Conner, “Supermarkets: There’ll Be Another One Along Any 
Minute,” Collier’s, May 1951, 64.

NOTES TO PAGES 45–53 281
40. Tom Mahoney and Leonard Sloan, The Great Merchants: America’s 
Foremost Retail Institutions and the People Who Made Them Great (New 
York: Harper and Row, 1974), 17.
41. Ibid.
42. Leach, Land of Desire, 6.
43. Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 192.
44. “Supermarkets as Symbols,” National Museum of American History, 
http://americanhistory.si.edu/food/new- and- improved/supermarkets- 
symbols, accessed September 21, 2015.
45. Susan Porter Benson, Counter Cultures: Saleswomen, Managers, and 
Customers in American Department Stores, 1890–1940 (Urbana, IL: 
University of Illinois Press, 1986), 91.
46. Ibid., 89–90.
47. Ibid., 90.
48. Ibid., 102.
49. Leach, Land of Desire, 133.
50. Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 68.
51. Ibid., 213.
52. “Supermarkets’ Newest Special: Self Defense,” Business Week, 
September 7, 1968, 34.
53. Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 216.
54. Benson, Counter Cultures, 114.
55. Nielsen Company, “Celebrating 90 Years of Innovation,” http://sites.
nielsen.com/90years/.
56. Sarah E. Igo, The Averaged American: Surveys, Citizens, and the Making 
of a Mass Public (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press 2007), 
212.
57. Benson, Counter Cultures, 114.
58. Ibid., 113.
59. Ibid.
60. Interview with William Bishop, September 2014.
61. Paul H. Nystrom, Retail Selling and Store Management (New York and 
London: D. Appleton, 1916), 35.
62. Edward A. Filene, The Model Stock Plan (New York: McGraw- Hill, 
1930).
63. Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise, 67.

282 NOTES TO PAGES 54–63
64. Paul H. Young, “Opportunities for the Use of Research in the 
Management of a Retail Department Store” (Thesis in Marketing: The 
Wharton School of the University Of Pennsylvania, 1946), 46.
65. Faye Gold, Alfred E. Berkowitz, Milton M. Kushins, and Edward A. 
Brand, Modern Supermarket Operations, 3d ed. (New York: Fairchild, 
1981), 112.
66. Ibid.
67. Fox, Economics of Trading Stamps, 1.
68. Ibid.
69. “Ask for S. & H. Green Trading Stamps at Davidson’s Cash Store,” 
advertisement in Arizona Republican, April 26, 1910, 7.
70. Fox, Economics of Trading Stamps, 94.
71. Jeff R. Lonto, “The Trading Stamp Story,” Studio Z.7 Publishing, 
http://www.studioz7.com/stamps.html, accessed November 1, 
2014.
72. Fox, Economics of Trading Stamps, 36.
73. George Church, “Give- Away Selling Tool Draw New Grocer Ire,” Wall 
Street Journal, April 13, 1956, 8.
74. Lonto, “Trading Stamp Story.”
75. Warren Buffett, “To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.,” 
Berkshire Hathaway, February 28, 2007, http://www.berkshire
hathaway.com/letters/2006ltr.pdf, accessed September 18, 2015.
76. Lonto, “Trading Stamp Story.”
77. John T. Dunlop and Jan W. Rivkin, Introduction to Stephen A. Brown, 
Revolution at the Checkout Counter (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1997), 23.
78. Ibid.
79. Ibid., 24.
80. Lonto, “Trading Stamp Story.”
81. Randy Alfred, “June 1974: By Gum! There Is a New Way to Buy Gum,” 
Wired, June 26, 2008, http://archive.wired.com/science/discoveries/
news/2008/06/dayintech_0626?currentPage=all, accessed on 
November 1, 2014.
82. Dunlop and Rivkin, Introduction, 22–23.
83. Alfred, “June 1974.”

NOTES TO PAGES 63–70 283
84. Dunlop and Rivkin, Introduction, 6.
85. Ibid., 5.
3 TOWARD THE DATA- POWERED AISLE
 1. Robb Mandelbaum, “Small Businesses and Amazon,” New York Times, 
December 15, 2011, B5.
 2. Richard Russo, “Amazon’s Jungle Logic,” New York Times, December 
13, 2011, A35.
 3. “Amazon.com’s Stunt,” Lowell Sun, December 9, 2011, editorial page.
 4. Stephanie Clifford and Claire Cain Miller, “Rooting for the Little Guy,” 
New York Times, January 6, 2012, B1.
 5. Bruce Dadey, quoted in John Barber, “Amazon’s Showrooming Tactic 
Enrages Booksellers,” Globe and Mail, December 24, 2011, R12.
 6. Mandelbaum, “Small Businesses and Amazon.”
 7. Stephanie Clifford and Julie Bosman, “Target, Unhappy with Being an 
Amazon Showroom, Will Stop Selling Kindles,” New York Times, May 
3, 2012, B3.
 8. Marilyn Much, “Brick- and- Mortar Chains Like Macy’s Battle vs. 
Amazon,” Investor’s Business Daily, May 15, 2012, A1.
 9. Clifford and Bosman, “Target, Unhappy with Being an Amazon 
Showroom, Will Stop Selling Kindles.”
10. Isadore Barmash, “Marketplace; Investors Ignore Wal- Mart Gains,” 
New York Times, June 20, 1988, D6.
11. Ibid.
12. Eben Shapiro, “3 Discounters on a Collision Course,” New York Times, 
September 23, 1991, D1.
13. Thomas C. Hayes, “Behind Wal- mart’s Surge, a Web of Suppliers,” 
New York Times, July 1, 1991, D1; Leslie Kaufman, “Wal- Mart: Retail 
Showcase Some Hate,” Contra Costa Times, October 29, 2000, D1.
14. Associated Press, “The 400 Richest People,” Los Angeles Times, October 
13, 1987, http://articles.latimes.com/1987- 10- 13/business/
ﬁ - 13869_1_real- estate, accessed December 12, 2014; New York Times, 
October 14, 1986, D6.
15. Marybeth Nibley, “Wal- Mart Plans Business Smarts, Small- Town 
Charms,” Palm Beach Post, March 26, 1989.

284 NOTES TO PAGES 70–75
16. Ibid.
17. Ibid.
18. Christopher Sullivan, “Wal- Mart Is High- Tech on Low Retail,” 
Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada), September 23, 1993, F7.
19. Ellis Booker, “IS Trailblazing Puts Retailer on Top,” Computerworld, 
February 12, 1990, 69; Amy Helen Johnson, “A New Supply Chain 
Forged,” Computerworld, September 30, 2002, 38.
20. Booker, “IS Trailblazing Puts Retailer on Top”; Johnson, “A New 
Supply Chain Forged.”
21. Tony Seidman, “Toy Industry Takes Big Steps in Automation,” Journal 
of Commerce, February 13, 1989, 4B.
22. Booker, “IS Trailblazing Puts Retailer on Top.”
23. Charles Russnell, “They Know How Shoppers Think,” Ottawa Citizen, 
April 26, 1994, D3.
24. Ibid.
25. Robin Bulman, “Logistics System Propelled Wal- Mart to Leading 
Role in Retail Industry,” Journal of Commerce, April 19, 1994, 
11C.
26. Tim Shorrock, “Retailers Push Down Prices, Alter Sourcing in Apparel 
Sector, Forum Told,” Journal of Commerce, May 21, 1997, 3A.
27. Kaufman, “Wal- Mart: Retail Showcase Some Hate.”
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid.
33. Russnell, “They Know How Shoppers Think.”
34. Bulman, “Logistics System Propelled Wal- Mart to Leading Role in 
Retail Industry.”
35. Lorrie Grant, “An Unstoppable Marketing Force Wal- Mart Aims for 
Domination of the Retail Industry—Worldwide” USA Today, November 
6, 1998, 1B.
36. Julia King, “Can America Win the Wardrobe Wars?” Computerworld, 
January 24, 1994, 67; Kaufman, “Wal- Mart: Retail Showcase Some 
Hate.”

NOTES TO PAGES 76–80 285
37. Leslie Wayne, “Rewriting the Rules of Retailing,” New York Times, 
October 15, 1989, 3/1.
38. “Industry Snapshot,” Investor’s Business Daily, September 14, 1998, A33.
39. Ibid.
40. Ellen Neuborne, “A Retail Giant in Store: Federated to Acquire Rival 
Macy,” USA Today, July 15, 1994, IB.
41. Jenny McTaggart, “The New World Order,” Progressive Grocer, August 
2012.
42. Jennifer Lawrence, “Cola Wars Move In- Store,” Advertising Age, 
November 9, 1987.
43. Julie Liesse, “EDLP Leaves Trade in Big Flux; Harsh New Reality for 
Retailers,” Advertising Age, May 10, 1993, 4.
44. Judann Dagnoli, “P&G Plays Pied Piper on Pricing,” Advertising Age, 
March 9, 1992.
45. Julie Liesse, “EDLP Leaves Trade in Big Flux; Harsh New Reality for 
Retailers.”
46. McTaggart, “The New World Order.”
47. Alan J. Ryan, “Retailers Seek Systems Edge,” Computerworld, October 
23, 1989, 23.
48. Lucie Juneau, “Luring Consumers with Conspicuous Efﬁ ciency,” 
Computerworld, September 14, 1992, 37.
49. Neuborne, “A Retail Giant in  Store; Federated to Acquire Rival 
Macy.”
50. Lena H. Sun, “Retailing’s High- Tech Revolution,” Washington Post, 
February 12, 1989, H1.
51. “Industry Snapshot.”
52. Joseph Maglitta, “Centralized, Revitalized IS Brings Sears into the 
‘90s,” Computerworld, October 8, 1990, 47; Kara Swisher, “The 
(Lowest) Price Is Right,” Washington Post, December 21, 1992, F1.
53. Bradley Johnson, “Supermarkets Take ‘Position,’” Advertising Age, May 
10, 1993, S1.
54. Interview with Willard “Bill” Bishop, September 8, 2014.
55. Gary Levin, “Marketers Flock to Loyalty Offers; Programs 
Acknowledging the Value of Keeping Your Best Customers,” 
Advertising Age, May 24, 1993, 13.

286 NOTES TO PAGES 81–85
56. Art Turock, [no title], Progressive Grocer, May 1, 2003, via LexisNexis.
57. Scott Sandberg, quoted in Judith Graham, “Stores See Loyal 
Customers Slip Away,” Advertising Age, July 11, 1988, 12.
58. Bob Cappelli, quoted in Graham, “Stores See Loyal Customers Slip 
Away.”
59. Janet Simons, “Albertsons’ Discount Strategy Shakes Up Market,” 
Advertising Age, April 28, 1986, S30.
60. Levin, “Marketers Flock to Loyalty Offers.”
61. Frederick Reichheld, quoted in ibid.
62. Thomas Hoffman and Mitch Wagner, “Visions of Holiday $ugar-
plums,” Computerworld, December 4, 1995, 1.
63. John Groman, quoted in Levin, “Marketers Flock to Loyalty 
Offers.”
64. Hoffman and Wagner, “Visions of Holiday $ugarplums.”
65. Associated Press, “Retail Federation Posts Guidelines to Ensure 
Privacy,” Portland Press Herald, April 15, 1998, 6C, via LexisNexis.
66. Amy Meyers Jaffe, “Retailing’s New Strategy: I Can Get It for You 
Personal,” New York Times, 3/8.
67. N. R. Kleinfeld, “Targeting the Grocery Shopper,” New York Times, May 
26, 1991, http://www.nytimes.com/1991/05/26/business/targeting- 
the- grocery- shopper.html?src=pm&pagewanted=3&pagewanted=all, 
accessed January 5, 2014.
68. See, for example, Riccardo Davis, “Shoppers, See the Special on Aisle 
11’s Floor,” Advertising Age, January 25, 1993, 8; Robert Viney, 
“Solving the Agency- Client- Mismatch,” Advertising Age, May 31, 1993, 
20. In the mid- 2000s, 70 percent was the number suggested. See Rob 
Holston, “Avoid the Shopper- Marketing Pitfalls,” Advertising Age, 
March 31, 2008, 20.
69. Jack Neff, “Dina Howell; Director- First Moment of Truth Center for 
Expertise, Procter & Gamble Co.,” Advertising Age, June 7, 2004, S12.
70. Ibid.
71. Emily DeNitto, “Catalina Effort Streams Coupon Process,” Advertising 
Age, December 13, 1993, 25.
72. Kate Fitzgerald, “P&G Zero- Coupon Move Sparks Related Cutbacks by 
Competitors,” Advertising Age, March 18, 1996, 3.

NOTES TO PAGES 85–90 287
73. “Smaller Role for Coupons?” Advertising Age, January 22, 1996, 16.
74. DeNitto, “Catalina Effort Streams Coupon Process.”
75. Alison Fahey, “For Grocery Stores, ‘Keep It Simple,’” Advertising Age, 
August 27, 1990, S8.
76. Alison Fahey, “Advertising Media Crowd into Aisles,” Advertising Age, 
June 18, 1990, via LexisNexis.
77. Laurie Freeman, “Supermarkets Sift Through Data; Work Needed to 
Take These Card Programs to the Next Level,” Advertising Age, October 
10, 1994, S16.
78. Kleinﬁ eld, “Targeting the Grocery Shopper.”
79. Ibid.
80. Bradley Johnson, “Grocers Learn to Nibble, Not Gulp,” Advertising Age 
(Special Report on Database Marketing,) January 13, 1992, 28.
81. Amanda Beeler, “Online Coupon Site Links with Fun and Games,” 
Advertising Age, October 25, 1999, 48; Tommy Greer, “In- Store 
Incentives Work for All,” Advertising Age, February 7, 1994, 30.
82. Beeler, “Online Coupon Site Links with Fun and Games.”
83. Greer, “In- Store Incentives Work for All.”
84. Bradley Johnson, “Grocers Learn to Nibble, Not Gulp,” Advertising Age, 
January 13, 1992, 28.
85. Freeman, “Supermarkets Sift Through Data; Work Needed to Take 
These Card Programs to the Next Level.”
86. Rick Barlow, president of Frequency Marketing, quoted in Freeman, 
“Supermarkets Sift Through Data; Work Needed to Take These Card 
Programs to the Next Level.”
87. See Turow, Niche Envy: Marketing Discrimination and the New Media 
World.
88. Michael Schrage, “Out There: The Ultimate Network,” Adweek, May 
17, 1993, http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising/out- there- 
ultimate- network- bby- michael- schragbbr- clearnonebr- 
clearnonelooking- next- , accessed July 19, 2013.
89. From Joseph Turow and Ashkan Soltani, “Marketing and Selling in 
the Digital Age,” unpublished paper for the Ohio State Attorney 
General, August 1, 2013, 11. The quote is from Soltani’s contribution 
to this paper.

288 NOTES TO PAGES 90–101
90. Ibid.
91. See Joseph Turow, The Daily You: How the New Advertising Industry Is 
Deﬁ ning Your Identity and Your Worth (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2011), 34–64.
92. Patricia B. Seybold, “Old Rules Apply in the Marketplace of the 
Future,” Computerworld, December 5, 1994, 35.
93. “A Globe of Villages,” Progressive Grocer, February 1, 1997.
94. Seybold, “Old Rules Apply in the Marketplace of the Future.”
95. Alan Alper, “Caught Up in the Web,” Computerworld, June 1, 1996, R5.
96. Lauren J. Flynn, “Malls and Stores Find New Outlets in Cyberspace,” 
New York Times, December 5, 1996, C2.
97. Rajiv Chandrasekaran, “More Shoppers Are Buying Online,” 
December 24, 1997, C1, via LexisNexis.
98. Sharon Machlis, “Macy’s to Grow Online,” Computerworld, July 28, 
1998; Karen Padley, “Fingerhut Is Sold for $1.7 Billion,” St. Paul 
Pioneer Press, February 12, 1999, 1E.
99. Peter Grant, “A New Line for Retailer,” New York Daily News, February 
12, 1999, 53.
100. Karen Padley, “Fingerhut Is Sold for $1.7 Billion,” St. Paul Pioneer 
Press, February 12 1999, 1E.
101. Michael J. Pachuta, “Wal- Mart Ready to Hit Start with Its New E- Tail 
Strategy,” Investor’s Business Daily, October 22, 1999, A16.
102. Frances Katz, “Federated Launches Interactive Division,” Atlanta 
Journal and Constitution, June 27, 1998, 1E, via LexisNexis.
103. “Voting with Their Pocketbooks,” Progressive Grocer, February 1, 1998.
104. Michelle Slattala, “Turning Coupon Users from Clippers into Clickers,” 
New York Times, April 1, 1999, G13.
105. “Food Lion Selects Bigfoot Interactive for E- mail CRM Solutions,” 
Progressive Grocer, July 7, 2004.
106. “Inside Line,” Advertising Age, June 5, 2000, 35.
107. Ibid.
108. Joseph Tarnowski, “Groundbreakers,” Progressive Grocer, April 2007.
109. “Broadway Marketplace to Roll Out Enabled Loyalty Program,” 
Progressive Grocer, September 20, 2009.
110. Tarnowski, “Groundbreakers.”

NOTES TO PAGES 102–107 289
111. Amanda Lenhart, “Teens and Mobile Phones over the Past Five 
Years,” Pew Research Center, August 19, 2009, http://www
.pewinternet.org/2009/08/19/teens- and- mobile- phones- over- the
- past- ﬁ ve- years- pew- internet- looks- back, accessed March 22, 2016.
112. Sarah Radwanick, “5 Years Later: A Look Back at the Rise of the 
iPhone,” June 29, 2012, https://www.comscore.com/ita/Insights/
Blog/5- Years- Later- A- Look- Back- at- the- Rise- of- the- iPhone, accessed 
March 22, 2016.
113. Ibid.
114. Phil Lembert, “Send in the Clones—or Not,” Progressive Grocer, August 
1, 2005.
115. Ibid.
116. Christina Veiders, “E- Baby,” Supermarket News, May 2, 2011.
117. Ibid.
118. Elliot Zwiebach, “Amazon Mulls Grocery Expansion,” Supermarket 
News, January 31, 2011, 4.
119. Ibid.
120. Joseph Bonney, “Amazon’s Supply Chain,” Journal of Commerce Online, 
January 20, 2012, via LexisNexis.
121. Much, “Brick- and- Mortar Chains Like Macy’s Battle vs. Amazon.”
122. Ibid.
123. Donald Melanson, “ComScore Report Finds 42 percent of US Mobile 
Users Have Smartphones, Android at Nearly 50 Percent,” Engadget, 
February 23, 2012, http://www.engadget.com/2012/02/23/comscore- 
report- ﬁ nds- 42- percent- of- us- mobile- users- have- smartph/, accessed 
January 5, 2014.
124. Much, “Brick- and- Mortar Chains Like Macy’s Battle vs. Amazon.”
125. Ibid.
126. Ibid.
4 HUNTING THE MOBILE SHOPPER
 1. Laura Heller, “Will Ship from Store the Retailers’ Last Mile Solution,” 
FierceRetail, June 13, 2014, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.com/story/will- 
ship- store- be- retailers- last- mile- solution/2014- 06- 13, accessed 
February 21, 2015.

290 NOTES TO PAGES 108–111
 2. Laura Heller, “Amazon Prime Adds 10 Million Members, Breaks 
Records,” Fierce Retail, December 26, 2014, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.
com/story/amazon- prime- adds- 10- million- members- breaks- 
records/2014- 12- 26, accessed February 15, 2015.
 3. “Our Company” and “The History of Peapod,” http://www.peapod.
com/site/companyPages/our- company- overview.jsp, accessed 
February 27, 2015.
 4. Annie Gasparro, “Kroger Isn’t Afraid of Online Grocery Shopping,” 
Wall Street Journal, October 30, 2013, http://blogs.wsj.com/corporate- 
intelligence/2013/10/30/kroger- isnt- afraid- of- online- grocery- 
shopping/, accessed February 27, 2015.
 5. Annie Gasparro, “Kroger Agrees to Buy Online Vitamin Seller 
Vitacoast,” Wall Street Journal, July 2, 2014, http://www.wsj.com
/articles/kroger- plans- to- buy- online- vitamin- seller- vitacost
 - 1404300842, accessed February 27, 2015; Sarah Mahoney, “Walmart 
Adds Uber,” Marketing Daily, June 3, 2016, http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/article/277271/walmart- adds- uber- target- leaves- curbside
.html, accessed June 3, 2016.
 6. Shelly Banjo, “Rampant Returns Plague E- Retailers,” Wall Street Journal, 
December 22, 2013, http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702
304773104579270260683155216, accessed February 21, 2015.
 7. “Despite Potential for Heavy Trafﬁ c and Long Checkout Lines, 
Shoppers Will Spend More of Their Holiday Budget In- Store Than 
Online,” Deloitte, November 10, 2014, http://www2.deloitte.com/us/
en/pages/about- deloitte/articles/press- releases/potential- for- heavy- 
trafﬁ c- and- long- checkout- lines- shoppers- spend- more- holiday- 
budget- in- store- than- online.html, accessed February 21, 2015.
 8. “Amazon Locker,” http://www.amazon.com/b/?_encoding=UTF8&no
de=6442600011#f6f8f9?ref_=acs_ux_hsb_3s_1_s_slideshowtes& ref=s
pkl_3_0_1976108042&ie=UTF8&pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_
s=desktop- auto- sparkle&pf_rd_r=0ZDH4MS841YTWQXHY7AS&pf_
rd_p=1976108042&pf_rd_t=301&pf_rd_i=amazon%20lock er%20
location&qid=1424876566, accessed February 25, 2015. Walmart 
seems to have had somewhat more success in Toronto, Canada, with 
the locker idea, which encompassed forty- three stores in late 2014, 

NOTES TO PAGES 111–112 291
while Amazon had not placed lockers in Canada at all. See Hollie 
Shaw, “Walmart looks to ‘Grab’ Online Sales,” Windsor Star, November 
28, 2014, B5.
 9. “Instacart Frequently Asked Questions,” https://www.instacart.com/
faq, accessed February 27, 2015; “About Google Express,” https://
support.google.com/shoppingexpress/answer/4561693?hl=en, 
accessed February 27, 2015; Sarah Perez, “eBay Expands Local Pilot 
Program Offering Same- Day Delivery, In- Store Pickup in Brooklyn,” 
http://techcrunch.com/2014/12/16/ebay- expands- local- pilot- 
program- offering- same- day- delivery- in- store- pickup- in- brooklyn/, 
accessed February 27, 2015.
10. Chase Martin, “Connected in the Air,” IOT Daily, August 21, 2016, 
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/282917/connected-
in-the-air-drones-take-ﬂ ight-forcnn-v.html, accessed September 1, 
2016.
11. Caitlyn Bohannon, “Amazon Prime Now Raises Bar with One- Hour 
Delivery,” mobile commerce daily, December 19, 2014, http://www.
mobilecommercedaily.com/amazon- prime- now- raises- bar- with- 
prime- now- one- hour- shipping, accessed February 23, 2015; Eric Sass, 
“Amazon Offers One- Hour Delivery with Prime- Now App,” MediaPost, 
December 18, 2014, http://www.mediapost.com/publications/
article/240426/amazon- offers- one- hour- delivery- with- prime- 
now- app.html, accessed February 23, 2014.
12. Bohannon, “Amazon Prime Now Raises Bar with One- Hour 
Delivery.”
13. Dave Clark, quoted in Sass, “Amazon Offers One- Hour Delivery with 
Prime- Now App.”
14. Heather Somerville, “Walmart Expands Delivery,” San Jose Mercury 
News, October 17, 2013; “Walmart Uses Test- and- Learn Approach to 
New Products,” Telegraph- Journal (New Brunswick, Canada), April 18, 
2014, B2.
15. Alexia Elejade- Ruiz, “Macy’s, Bloomingdale’s Adding Same- Day 
Delivery,” Chicago Tribune, September 15, 2014, http://www.chicago-
tribune.com/business/breaking/chi- macys- bloomingdales- same- day- 
delivery- 20140915- story.html, accessed February 25, 2015.

292 NOTES TO PAGES 112–116
16. Jonathan Berr, “Macy’s: Can Same- Day Delivery Deliver Results?” 
CBS News.com, February 24, 2015, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/
macys- expands- successful- same- day- delivery- test/, accessed February 
25, 2015.
17. Paul Weitzel, quoted in Sarah Mahoney, “Walmart Adds Uber,” 
Marketing Daily, June 3, 2016, http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/article/277271/walmart- adds- uber- target- leaves 
- curbside.html, accessed June 3, 2016.
18. Mary Meeker, “Internet Trends 2016,” KPCB, June 1, 2016, http://
www.kpcb.com/internet- trends, accessed June 11, 2016.
19. Justin Honaman, “Top 6 Retail Trends to Watch in 2014,” RIS- Retail 
Info Systems News, http://risnews.edgl.com/retail- news/Top- 6- Retail- 
Trends- to- Watch- in- 201490590, January 10, 2014.
20. Ibid.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid.
23. Puneet Mehta, “The Biggest Opportunity for CPG Brands on Mobile: 
A Killer Loyalty Program,” MediaPost, December 29, 2014, http://
www.mediapost.com/publications/article/240820/the- biggest- 
opportunity- for- cpg- brands- on- mobile.html, accessed February 15, 
2015.
24. “Turnstile,” Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turnstile, 
accessed March 9, 2015.
25. Christine Blank, “Retailers Face New Mobile Tracking Code of 
Conduct,” FierceRetail, October 22, 2013, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.
com/mobileretail/story/retailers- face- new- mobile- tracking- code- 
conduct/2013- 10- 22, accessed March 28, 2015.
26. Brigid Sweeney, “Attention, Shoppers: This Man Is Tracking You,” 
Crain’s Chicago Business, June 22, 2013, http://www.chicagobusiness.
com/article/20130622/ISSUE01/306229976/attention- shoppers- this- 
man- is- tracking- you, accessed March 4, 2015.
27. “How Euclid Location Analytics Works,” Euclid Analytics, http://eu
clidanalytics.com/products/technology/, accessed September 30, 2015. 
Also, “Retail Insights as Specialized as You,” Euclid Analytics, http://
euclidanalytics.com/solutions/retail/, accessed September 30, 2015.

NOTES TO PAGES 117–119 293
28. Interview with Bill Martin, March 4, 2015.
29. Interview with anonymous ShopperTrak executive, March 4, 2015.
30. See also “Interior Location Analytics,” ShopperTrak, https://vimeo.
com/70339461?mkt_tok=3RkMMJWWfF9wsRonu6%2FMZKXonjHpf
sX56u4tXKCwlMI%2F0ER3f OvrPUfGjI4ATMZrI%2BSLDwEYGJlv6S
gFT7PDMbR00LgMWhM%3D, accessed March 9, 2015.
31. Martin Wooley, “Bluetooth Technology: Protecting Your Privacy,” 
Bluetooth Special Interest Group, April 2, 2015, http://blog.bluetooth.
com/bluetooth- technology- protecting- your- privacy/, accessed August 
25, 2015; “Our History,” Bluetooth Special Interest Group, http://
www.bluetooth.com/Pages/History- of- Bluetooth.aspx, accessed 
August 25, 2015.
32. Peter Cohan, “How Nordstrom Uses Wiﬁ  to Spy on Shoppers,” Forbes, 
May 9, 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/petercohan/2013/05/09/
how- nordstrom- and- home- depot- use- wiﬁ - to- spy- on- shoppers/, 
accessed March 7, 2015. See also Quentin Hardy, “Technology Turns 
to Tracking People Off- Line,” New York Times, March 7, 2013, http://
bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/03/07/technology- turns- to- tracking- 
people- ofﬂ ine/?_r=0, accessed March 7, 2015.
33. “Privacy Matters,” Euclid, http://euclidanalytics.com/about/privacy/, 
accessed March 7, 2015.
34. Lisa Vaas, “Nordstrom Tracking Customer Movement via Smart 
Phones’ Wi- Fi snifﬁ ng,” nakedsecurity, May 9, 2013, https://naked
security.sophos.com/2013/05/09/nordstrom- tracking- customer- 
smartphones- wiﬁ - snifﬁ ng/, accessed March 8, 2015.
35. Kerry Wright, “Apple Randomize MAC Addresses with iOS 8 . . . Or 
Did They?,” Purple Wi- Fi, October 7, 2014, http://www.purplewiﬁ .
net/apple- randomise- mac- addresses- ios- 8/, accessed March 8, 2015.
36. Graham Smith, “Man in the Middle,” LinkedIn, July 19, 2015, https://
www.linkedin.com/pulse/man- middle- attacks- graham- smith- phd, 
accessed August 24, 2015.
37. Julian Bhardwaj, “What Is Your Phone Saying Behind Your Back,” 
nakedsecurity, October 2, 2012, https://nakedsecurity.sophos.
com/2012/10/02/what- is- your- phone- saying- behind- your- back/, 
accessed March 8, 2015.

294 NOTES TO PAGES 120–128
38. Wright, “Apple Randomize MAC Addresses with iOS 8.”
39. Interview with anonymous source, June 25, 2015.
40. Wright, “Apple Randomize MAC Addresses with iOS 8.”
41. Jimmy Buchheim (CEO of StickNFind), in Clint Boulton, “Beacon 
Technology Could Pose Security Challenges, Vendor Says,” Wall Street 
Journal, http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2014/07/22/beacon- technology- 
could- pose- security- challenges- vendor- says/, accessed March 9, 
2015.
42. Vincent Gao, “Everything You Always Wanted to Know About 
Bluetooth—Security in Bluetooth 4.2,” Bluetooth Special Interest 
Group, http://blog.bluetooth.com/everything- you- always- wanted- to- 
know- about- bluetooth- security- in- bluetooth- 4- 2/?_ga=1.164912767.
1332021922.1459354939, accessed August 24, 2015.
43. Interview with Raul Verano of Shopperception, March 27, 2015.
44. Jason Ankeny, “Innovator: shopkick’s Cyriac Roeding Reinvents 
Retail,” Entrepreneur, February 22, 2011, https://www.entrepreneur.
com/article/218157, accessed May 3, 2016.
45. “Proximity Marketing.”
46. “Germany’s Largest Retailers Launch Nationwide Programs on Day 
One,” PR Newswire, October 23, 2014.
47. “Shopkick Surpasses $1 Billion Generated for Partners,” PR Newswire, 
October 15, 2014, http://www.prnewswire.com/news- releases/
shopkick- expands- into- ﬁ rst- international- market- ﬁ ve- of- germanys- 
largest- retailers- launch- nationwide- programs- on- day- 
one- 707143761.html, accessed March 12, 2015.
48. Christine Blank, “Macy’s shopkick Test Conﬁ rms Value of iBeacon,” 
FierceRetail, November 20, 2013, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.com/story/
macy%E2%80%99s- shopkick- test- conﬁ rms- value- of- ibeaon; “shop-
kick Privacy Policy,” https://www.shopkick.com/privacy- policy, 
accessed March 10, 2015.
49. “Shopkick Debuts shopBeacon,” PR Newswire, November 20, 2013, 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news- releases/shopkick- debuts- 
shopbeacon- 232652521.html, accessed June 30, 2016.
50. Lauren Johnson, “Hillshire Brands Sees 20% Jump in Purchase Intent 
with Beacons,” Adweek, July 22, 2014, http://www.adweek.com/

NOTES TO PAGES 128–131 295
news/technology/hillshire- brands- sees- 20- jump- purchase- intent- 
beacons- 159042, accessed April 30, 2016.
51. “Get Rich Insights into Shopper Behavior,” inMarket, http://www.
inmarket.com/retail.html#timingmatters, accessed March 26, 2015.
52. “Privacy Policy,” inMarket, January 4, 2014 (effective date), https://
www.inmarket.com/privacy_policy.html, accessed September 24, 
2015.
53. Jordan Kahn, “Here’s Why Beacon Networks Are the Way to Go for 
Retailers and App Developers Supporting iBeacon,” 9TO5Mac, 
http://9to5mac.com/2014/11/19/comscore- ibeacon- app- usage/, 
accessed March 29, 2015.
54. Interview with Jeff Grifﬁ n.
55. In somewhat torturous language, the policy described collecting infor-
mation “you choose to provide through the linking of devices where 
you are actively choosing to share personal information, including 
health information, to interact with an application or program we 
host on our site.” “Online Privacy & Security Policy,” Walgreens, 
http://www.walgreens.com/topic/generalhelp/privacyandsecurity.jsp, 
accessed March 30, 2015. See also Margi Murphy, “Walgreens: Apple 
May Have a New Watch—but Collecting Data from Wearables Is 
Already in Motion,” Computerworld UK, September 11, 2014, http://
www.computerworlduk.com/in- depth/it- business/3571685/
walgreens- apple- may- have- new- watch—but- collecting- data- from- 
wearables- is- already- in- motion/?intcmp=in_article, accessed March 
30, 2015.
56. “Four Ways Walmart Uses Analytics,” SAS: The Power to Know, 
http://www.sas.com/en_us/insights/articles/analytics/four- ways- 
walmart- uses- analytics.html, accessed March 30, 2015.
57. “Target Privacy Policy,” Target Stores, http://www.target.com/spot/
privacy- policy#InfoCollected, and http://m.target.com/spot/terms/
privacy- policy#InformationShared, accessed March 29, 2015.
58. Gregory Piatetsky, “Did Target Really Predict a Teen’s Pregnancy? The 
Inside Story,” KDnuggets, May 7, 2014, http://www.kdnuggets.
com/2014/05/target- predict- teen- pregnancy- inside- story.html, 
accessed March 29, 2015.

296 NOTES TO PAGES 131–134
59. “Privacy Policy,” Kroger, https://www.kroger.com/topic/privacy- 
policy, accessed March 29, 2015.
60. Tom Groenfelt, “Kroger Knows Your Shopping Patterns Better Than 
You Do,” Forbes, http://www.forbes.com/sites/tomgroenfeldt
/2013/10/28/kroger- knows- your- shopping- patterns- better- than- 
you- do/, accessed March 29, 2015.
61. “SCAN IT! & SCAN IT! mobile,” Stop & Shop, http://stopandshop.
com/shopping/shopping- tools/scanit/, accessed March 30, 2015.
62. Laura Heller, “ShopRite Pilots Mobile Scan,” FierceMobileRetail, 
February 4, 2014, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.com/story/shoprite- pilots- 
mobile- scan- app/2014- 02- 04; Chantal Tode, “Walmart Boosts Scan & 
Go Self- Checkout with Mobile Coupons,” Mobile Commerce Daily, August 
2, 2013, http://www.mobilecommercedaily.com/walmart- boosts- scan- 
go- self- checkout- with- mobile- coupons, accessed June 12, 2016.
63. “Catalina Mobile,” Catalina Marketing, http://www.catalinamarketing
.com/wp- content/uploads/2014/02/Catalina_Mobile_PS1.pdf, accessed 
March 30, 2015.
64. “Six Things Every Retailer Must Do to Win in Mobile Commerce,” 
Catalina Marketing, 2013, 8, http://www.catalinamarketing.com/
wp- content/uploads/2014/01/Six_Things_Study.pdf, accessed 
September 23, 2015.
65. Ibid.
66. Brian Feldt, “Beacon Technology- Related Retail Sales to Grow Tenfold 
by 2017,” St. Louis Business Journal, June 16, 2015, http://www.
bizjournals.com/stlouis/blog/biznext/2015/06/beacon- technology- 
related- retail- sales- to- grow.html, accessed August 10, 2015.
67. Comments by Lung Huang, head of Strategic Partnerships, 84.51 
Degrees, at MediaPost’s IoT: Shopping conference, New York, August 6, 
2015.
68. “Why You’ll Love IndoorAtlas,” IndoorAtlas, https://www.indooratlas.
com/, accessed August 10, 2015.
69. Ibid.
70. “Indoor Positioning System,” GE Lighting, http://www.gelighting.
com/LightingWeb/na/solutions/control- systems/indoor- positioning- 
system.jsp, accessed April 30, 2016.

NOTES TO PAGES 135–139 297
71. Jordan Kahn, “GE Integrates iBeacons in New LED Lighting Fixtures 
Rolling Out in Walmart & Other Retailers,” 9TO5Mac, May 29, 2014, 
http://9to5mac.com/2014/05/29/ge- integrates- ibeacons- in- new- led- 
lighting- ﬁ xtures- rolling- out- in- walmart- other- retailers/, accessed 
March 30, 2015. The GE ﬁ xtures also incorporated a new form of 
tracking called VLC (visual light communication). Instead of the radio 
waves that characterize Wi- Fi and Bluetooth, it uses pulses of light 
sent to a smartphone camera to alert, and an app program to accept 
format. See Martin LaMonica, “Philips Creates Shopping Assistant 
with LEDs and Smart Phone,” IEEE Spectrum, February 2014, http://
spectrum.ieee.org/tech- talk/computing/networks/philips- creates- 
store- shopping- assistant- with- leds- and- smart- phone, accessed March 
30, 2015.
72. “GPS Accuracy,” GPS.gov, http://www.gps.gov/systems/gps
/performance/accuracy/, accessed September 23, 2015.
73. “Who Is xAd,” xAd, November 2014, http://www.xad.com/
wp- content/uploads/xAd- Fact- Sheet_November- 2014.pdf, accessed 
September 23, 2015.
74. “Search,” xAd, http://www.xad.com/technology/#products, accessed 
March 14, 2015.
75. Discussion with Mike Boland, March 13, 2015.
76. Mike Boland, quoted in David Kaplan, “More Than Half of Mobile Ad 
Dollars Will Be Location- Based by 2018,” Geomarketing, May 29, 
2014, http://www.geomarketing.com/more- than- half- of- mobile- ad- 
dollars- will- be- location- based- by- 2018, accessed March 12, 2015.
77. Love Hudson- Maggio, “What Is Geo- Conquesting, and How Can It 
Drive Campaign Results?,” localsolutions, August 13, 2014, http://
blog.cmglocalsolutions.com/what- is- geo- conquesting- and- how- can- 
it- drive- campaign- results, accessed April 8, 2015.
78. Presentation by Scott Varlard, technology expert from the IPG Media 
Lab, at MediaPost’s IoT Shopping conference, New York, August 6, 
2015.
79. Presentation by David Skaff, co- founder and head of creative, The 
Science Project, at MediaPost’s IoT Shopping conference, New York, 
August 6, 2015.

298 NOTES TO PAGES 140–149
80. Presentation by Leigh Christie, manager, IsobarNow Lab Americas, at 
MediaPost’s IoT Shopping conference, New York, August 6, 2015.
81. Interview with Jeff Grifﬁ n, executive vice president, inMarket, June 
9, 2015.
5 LOYALTY AS BAIT
 1. Ron Lieber, “Now May Be a Good Time to Bail Out of Frequent- Flyer 
Programs,” New York Times, February 28, 2014, http://www.nytimes.
com/2014/03/01/your- money/credit- and- debit- cards/now- may- be- a- 
good- time- to- bail- out- of- frequent- ﬂ ier- programs.html?_r=0, accessed 
April 30, 2015.
 2. Fred Reichheld, “Letter to the Editor,” Harvard Business Review, 
November 2002, 126.
 3. Interview with anonymous source, August 21, 2014.
 4. Peter Sachse, quoted in Allison Schiff, “Macy’s CMO Shares Loyalty 
Insights at NRF Show,” Direct Marketing, January 16, 2012, http://
www.dmnews.com/multichannel- marketing/macys- cmo- shares- 
loyalty- insights- at- nrf- big- show/article/223344/, accessed September 
26, 2015.
 5. Laura Heller, “Target’s Transformation Roadmap Makes Mobile the 
Front Door,” FierceMobileIT, April 9, 2015, http://www.ﬁ ercemobileit.
com/story/targets- transformation- roadmap- makes- mobile- front- 
door/2015- 04- 09, accessed May 16, 2016.
 6. Leonie Barrie, “NRF 2014: Tailoring Technology for Omnichannel 
Success,” just- style.com, January 21, 2014, http://www.just- style.
com/analysis/tailoring- technology- for- omnichannel- success_
id120413.aspx.
 7. Jody Sarno, with Carlton A. Doty and Collin Colburn, “The Age of the 
Customer Requires a More Intelligent Enterprise,” Forrester Research, 
January 22, 2014, 1, https://www.forrester.com/The+Age+Of+The+C
ustomer+Requires+A+More+Intelligent+Enterprise/fulltext/- /
E- RES112082, accessed April 27, 2015.
 8. Melissa Healy, “DNA Sequencer Raises Doctors’ Hopes for 
Personalized Medicine,” Los Angeles Times, January 3, 2014, http://
articles.latimes.com/2014/jan/03/science/la- sci- personalized- 
medicine- 20140104, accessed September 1, 2015.

NOTES TO PAGES 149–152 299
 9. Ibid.
10. “Frequently Asked Questions,” ancestry.com, http://dna.ancestry.
com/legal/faq, accessed September 1, 2015.
11. Hans Buhlmann, “The Actuary: The Role and Limitation of the 
Profession Since the Mid- 19th Century,” ASTIN Bulletin 27:2 
(November 1997): 165–71.
12. Quoted in “Reinventing Society in the Wake of Big Data: A 
Conversation with Alex (Sandy) Pentland,” Edge.org, https://edge.
org/conversation/reinventing- society- in- the- wake- of- big- data, 
accessed September 26, 2015.
13. “Engaging the Selective Shopper,” Catalina Marketing, 2013, 11, 
http://info.catalinamarketing.com/ﬁ les/133/Engaging- the- Selective- 
Shopper- 12- 6- 13.pdf, accessed April 30, 2015.
14. Lisa Tourville et al., “Actuaries in Advanced Business Analytics,” 
Society of Actuaries, 9, https://www.soa.org/Files/Soa/act- adv- bus- 
analytics- paper.pdf, accessed April 27, 2015.
15. Ibid.
16. Stephanie Baghdassarian et al., “Predicts 2014: Apps, Personal Cloud 
and Data Analytics Will Drive New Customer Interactions,” Gartner, 
Inc., November 22, 2013, 2, http://www.gartner.com/document/2628
016?ref=solrResearch&refval=170082897&qid=96c3e252d55b6b8814
dcb2f266e8a7e9, accessed June 30, 2016.
17. Ibid., 9.
18. Holman W. Jenkins, Jr., “Google and the Search for the Future,” Wall 
Street Journal, August 14, 2010, http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001
424052748704901104575423294099527212.
19. See Joseph Turow, The Daily You: How the New Advertising Industry Is 
Deﬁ ning Your Identity and Your Worth (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2011), 65–87.
20. See, for example, Joseph Turow et al., Americans, Marketers, and the 
Internet, 1999–2012 (Philadelphia: Annenberg School for 
Communication, 2015), http://repository.upenn.edu/asc_papers/348/.
21. “Identity- Driven Marketing: Best Practices for Marketing Continuity,” 
Janrain, 2015, 9, http://janrain.com/resources/white- papers/identity- 
driven- marketing- best- practices- for- marketing- continuity/, accessed 
September 26, 2015.

300 NOTES TO PAGES 153–158
22. Janrain, “Marketing Continuity: A Strategic Framework for Creating 
Connected Customer Experiences,” http://www1.janrain.com/rs/
janrain/images/White- Paper- Marketing- Continuity- Strategic- 
Framework- Creating- Connected- Customer- Experiences.pdf, 16, 
accessed September 26, 2015.
23. See Tapad website, http://www.tapad.com/product/#advertiser- 
solution, accessed September 26, 2015.
24. “Nielsen Conﬁ rms Tapad Cross Device Accuracy at 91.2%,” Tapad 
Blog, December 2, 2014, http://www.tapad.com/nielsen- study- ﬁ nds- 
tapads- device- connections- 91- 2- percent- accurate/, accessed 
September 26, 2015.
25. “Privacy Policy,” Tapad.com, July 30, 2015, http://www.tapad.com/
privacy- policy/, accessed September 2, 2015.
26. “Pinpoint advertising,” Tapad.com, http://www.tapad.com/lifestyle/
advertising/, accessed September 3, 2015.
27. “Identity- Driven Marketing: Best Practices for Marketing Continuity,” 6.
28. Janrain, “Marketing Continuity,” 15.
29. “Identity- Driven Marketing: Best Practices for Marketing Continuity,” 6.
30. “Acxiom Disrupts Conventional Marketing Models with New 
Audience Operating System (AOS),” http://www.acxiom.com/
acxiom- disrupts- conventional- marketing- models- with- new- audience- 
operating- system- aos/, accessed August 28, 2015.
31. Joe Mandese, “Supplier of the Year: Acxiom,” MediaPost, January 8, 
2014, http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/216930/
supplier- of- the- year- acxiom- whos- on- ﬁ rst- wha.html, accessed August 
28, 2015.
32. Kathryn Zickuhr, “Location- Based Services,” Pew Research Center, 
September 12, 2013, http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/09/12/
location- based- services/, accessed September 26, 2015.
33. See, for example, Sonja Utz and Nicole Kramer, “The Privacy Paradox 
on Social Network Sites Revisited,” Cyberpsychology 3, no. 2 (2009), 
http://cyberpsychology.eu/view.php?cisloclanku=2009111001%26art
icle=1, accessed April 26, 2015; Susan B. Barnes, “A Privacy Paradox: 
Social Networking in the United States,” First Monday, 11, http://ﬁ rst-
monday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs . . ., accessed August 8, 2008.

NOTES TO PAGES 158–161 301
34. Brad Stone, “Our Paradoxical Attitudes Toward Privacy,” New York 
Times, July 2, 2008, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/07/02/our- 
paradoxical- attitudes- towards- privacy/, accessed April 26, 2015.
35. See “US Consumers Want More Personalized Retail Experience and 
Control over Personal Information, Accenture Survey Shows,” 
Accenture, March 9, 2015, http://newsroom.accenture.com/news/
us- consumers- want- more- personalized- retail- experience- and- 
control- over- personal- information- accenture- survey- shows.htm, 
accessed April 26, 2015; “Shoppers Conﬂ icted on How Personal to 
Get,” Accenture, March 2015, http://www.accenture.com/
SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/Accenture- Retail- Personalization- 
Survey- Infographic- March- 2015.pdf, accessed April 26, 2015.
36. “US Consumers Want More Personalized Retail Experience and 
Control over Personal Information, Accenture Survey Shows.”
37. Carlton A. Doty, “The Power Customer Context,” Forrester Research, 
March 21, 2016 (updated from April 14, 2014), https://www.forrester.
com/report/The+Power+Of+Customer+Context/- /E- RES114961, 
accessed June 30, 2016.
38. Lars Meyer- Waarden and Christophe Benavent, “Grocery Retail and 
Loyalty Program Effects: Self- Selection or Retail Purchase Behavior 
Change?” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Sciences (2009) 37: 
345–58.
39. Frederick F. Reichheld and Phil Schefter, “Your Secret Weapon on the 
Web,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 2000, 113.
40. Jim Tierney, “Emotional Loyalty Emerges Among Many Brands, 
Customers,” loyalty 360.org, October 2, 2013, http://loyalty360.org/
Content- Gallery/Daily- News/Emotional- Loyalty- Emerges - Among
- Many- Brands,- Custo.
41. “The Loyalty Report 2014 from Bond Brand Loyalty,” Bond Brand 
Loyalty, 2014, http://cdn2.hubspot.net/hub/352767/ﬁ le- 
942578460- pdf/Whitepapers/Bond_Brand_Loyalty_2014_Loyalty_
Report_US.pdf?t=1430494118043, 2, accessed May 1, 2015.
42. Ibid.
43. Ayan Sen, “Gamifying Customer Engagement to Drive Growth,” 
TeleTech, April 2015, http://www.teletech.com/thought- leadership/

302 NOTES TO PAGES 161–168
articles/gamifying- customer- engagement- drive- growth#.
VZ70qPlVhBc, accessed July 9, 2015.
44. Kristina Knight, “How to Use Big Data, Gamiﬁ cation for Better 
Rewards Programs,” Bizreport, April 14, 2014, http://www.bizreport.
com/2014/04/how- to- use- big- data- gamiﬁ cation- for- better- rewards- 
programs.html, accessed September 2, 2015.
45. Janrain, “Marketing Continuity,” 16, accessed August 17, 2015.
46. “Identity- Driven Marketing,” 8, accessed August 17, 2015.
47. Daniel Hofkin of William Blair, quoted in Gary M. Stern, “Making a 
Beauty Chain Pop Against All Rivals,” Investor’s Business Daily, 
September 24, 2012, A8.
48. Jason Gere, quoted by Ciaran McEvoy, “How to Pin Down a Proﬁ table 
Niche Specialty,” Investors Business Daily, December 15, 2014, A8.
49. “Specialty Chains Earnings Spotlight Holiday Trends,” Investor’s 
Business Daily, November 11, 2012, http://www.investors.com/news/
ulta- movado- and- tiffany- report- earnings- this- week/, accessed May 
19, 2016; and Helen Martin, “How Ulta Is Remaking the Customer 
Experience,” FierceRetail, March 31, 2015, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.
com/story/how- ulta- remaking- customer- experience/2015- 03- 31, 
accessed May 19, 2016.
50. See “Watch and Shop,” UltaHaul Videos, http://www.ulta.com
/getInspiredLanding.html?bd=true, accessed September 27, 2015.
51. Heather Martin, “How Ulta Is Remaking the Customer Experience,” 
FierceRetail, March 31, 2015, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.com/story/how- 
ulta- remaking- customer- experience/2015- 03- 31, accessed May 7, 2015.
52. Heather Martin, “How Ulta Is Using Technology to Deliver a 
Distinctive Experience,” FierceRetail, March 31, 2015, http://www.
ﬁ erceretail.com/story/how- ulta- using- technology- deliver- distinctive- 
experience/2015- 03- 31, accessed May 19, 2016.
53. Ibid.
54. Nicole Marie Melton, “Sephora: We Want Customers ‘Showrooming’ 
in Our Stores,” FierceRetail, January 13, 2014, http://www
.ﬁ erceretail.com/story/sephora- we- want- customers- showrooming- 
our- stores/2014- 01- 13, accessed May 20, 2015.
55. Sen, “Gamifying Customer Engagement to Drive Growth.”

NOTES TO PAGES 168–174 303
56. “Sephora to Go,” Mixrank, https://mixrank.com/appstore/
apps/393328150/versions, accessed May 20, 2016.
57. Jefferson Graham, “Shopkick App Can Lead You to Discounts and 
Sales,” USA Today, August 11, 2010, http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/
tech/products/2010- 08- 12- shopkick12_ST_N.htm, accessed May 20, 
2016.
58. “Move Your Business Forward by Streamlining Back- Ofﬁ ce 
Operations,” Sam’s Club Member Services, https://www.samsclubms.
com/cloveroffer/?utm_campaign=sams- club- clover- branded&utm_
source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_term=%2Bperka&utm_
content=perka&trkid=V1ADW271 094- 20148910940- k- %2Bperka- 64
058616860- b- s, accessed March 29, 2015.
59. “The Perka Privacy Statement, Last Updated August 20, 2014,” http://
perka.com/privacy/, accessed March 29, 2015.
60. Ibid.
61. Interview with anonymous source, June 25, 2015.
62. Laura Heller, “Savings Catcher Boosts Walmart App to Number One,” 
FierceMobileRetail, August 7, 2014, http://www.ﬁ erceretail.com/
mobileretail/story/savings- catcher- boosts- walmart- app- no- 1/2014- 
08- 07, accessed May 21, 2015.
63. “Target Privacy Policy,” http://cartwheel.target.com/privacy- policy, 
accessed May 24, 2015.
64. Jillian Buttecali, “The Top 4 Omni- Channel Retailers,” ID.me, January 
15, 2015, https://blog.id.me/top- 10- retail- onmi- channel- success- 
stories/, accessed May 20, 2015.
65. “Target Mobile App Privacy Policy,” http://m.target.com/spot/terms/
privacy- policy- app, accessed May 24, 2015.
66. “Target Privacy Policy.”
67. “Shopkick Privacy Policy,” https://www.shopkick.com/privacy- 
policy?utm_expid=31844936- 2.DCxBLb4gTsm0wwWEELtEdA
.0&utm_referrer=https:%2F%2Fwww.google.com%2F, accessed 
September 4, 2015.
68. “ULTA.com Privacy Policy, Updated July 31, 2015,” https://www.
ulta.com/ulta/common/privacyPolicy.jsp, accessed September 4, 
2015.

304 NOTES TO PAGES 174–178
69. “Safeway Privacy Policy (United States),” http://www.safeway.com/
ShopStores/Privacy- Policy.page, accessed September 4, 2015.
70. See, for example, Thomas Husson, The Future of Mobile Wallets Lies 
Beyond Payments, Forrest Research, February 9, 2015, 11–15.
71. Ibid.
72. Interview with anonymous Vibes executive, June 27, 2015.
73. “About Passbook,” Apple’s iOS Developer Library, https://developer.
apple.com/library/ios/documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/
PassKit_PG/Chapters/Introducti on.html, accessed September 1, 
2015.
74. Interview with Vibes executive, August 31, 2015. Department store 
and supermarket chains got around the problem by asking customers 
to use the supermarkets’ own sites or apps to save the coupons to 
their app or loyalty account. However, the shopper might not 
remember to buy the product linked to the discount coupon, so the 
store might still ﬁ nd the wallet useful as a location for a message that 
would become a location- appropriate lock screen reminder to 
purchase the product. Shoppers ﬁ nding coupons online (from 
Coupons.com), for example, had to print them out and bring them to 
the score to be scanned—or input manually by the store clerk.
75. Michelle Saettler, “How Merchants Tie Loyalty to Mobile Wallets and 
Drive Results,” Mobile Commerce Data, July 16, 2014, http://www.
mobilecommercedaily.com/how- merchants- tie- loyalty- to- mobile- 
wallets- and- drive- results, accessed August 18, 2015.
76. Ibid.
77. Dave Richards, quoted in “U.S. Retailers Struggling to Meet Consumer 
Expectations Around Mobile and In- Store Experience, Accenture 
Study Finds,” Accenture, March 25, 2015, https://newsroom
.accenture.com/industries/retail/us- retailers- struggling- to- meet- 
consumer- expectations- around- mobile- and- in- store- experience- 
accenture- study- ﬁ nds.htm.
78. Laura Heller, “Target’s Transformation Roadmap Makes Mobile the 
Front Door,” April 9, 2015, http://www.ﬁ ercemobileit.com/story/
targets- transformation- roadmap- makes- mobile- front- door/2015- 
04- 09, accessed September 28.

NOTES TO PAGES 185–202 305
6 PERSONALIZING THE AISLES
 1. An A–Z Glossary of Personalized Marketing, Neustar, 2014, 2, https://
www.neustar.biz/resources/whitepapers/personalized- marketing- 
glossary, accessed June 30, 2016.
 2. “Marketing Continuity: A Strategic Framework for Creating Connected 
Customer Experiences,” 2014, http://www.janrain.com/resources/
white- papers/marketing- continuity- strategic- framework- creating- 
connected- customer- experiences/ (page 5), accessed June 6, 2016.
 3. Ibid. (page 19).
 4. “Identity- Driven Marketing: Best Practices for Marketing Continuity,” 
Janrain, 2015, http://www.janrain.com/resources/white- papers/
identity- driven- marketing- best- practices- for- marketing- continuity/ 
(page 5), accessed June 6, 2016.
 5. Ibid. (page 8).
 6. Ibid. (page 14).
 7. Ibid.
 8. Ibid.
 9. “Marketing Continuity” (page 14).
10. Ibid. (page 16).
11. Ibid.
12. “Ofﬂ ine Personalization Matters Just as Much,” eMarketer, January 
14, 2015, http://www.emarketer.com/Article/
Ofﬂ ine- Personalization- Matters- Just- Much/1011815.
13. Kristen Sprague, “Keeping the E- Wolf at Bay,” Furniture Today, 
November 4, 2014, http://www.furnituretoday.com/blogpost/13245- 
keeping- e- wolf- bay, accessed July 13, 2015.
14. Andrew Corselli, “Marketers Are Showing Customers Love,” DM 
News, April 2015.
15. Adam Silverman, “Analyze This: Web Style Analytics Enters the Retail 
Store,” Forrester Research, April 16, 2014, 1–2.
16. Mark Walsh, “Can Beacons Bring Home the Bacon?” MediaPost, August 
19, 2014, http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/232410/
can- beacons- bring- home- the- bacon.html, accessed July 16, 2015.
17. Chuck Martin, “Beacon Data Tells When a Consumer Is Due to 
Shop,” IOT Daily, November 10, 2015, http://www.mediapost.com/

306 NOTES TO PAGES 203–222
publications/article/262237/beacon- data- tells- when- a- consumer- is- 
due- to- shop.html, accessed November 20, 2015.
18. Chuck Martin, “Beacons, GPS, Wi- Fi Combo: The New Mobile 
Presence,” MediaPost, June 5, 2016, http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/article/277300/beacons- gps- wi- ﬁ - combo- the- new- 
mobile- presence.html, accessed June 5, 2016.
19. Ryan Joe, “Alliance Data Buys Epsilon a $2.3B Present: Conversant,” 
Adexchanger, September 11, 2014, http://adexchanger.com
/platforms/alliance- data- buys- epislon- a- 2- 3b- present- conversant/, 
accessed July 19, 2015.
20. “Our Approach,” Conversant, http://www.conversantmedia.com/our- 
approach#identiﬁ cation_delivery, accessed July 19, 2015.
21. “Services,” Agility/Harmony, http://www.agilityharmony.com/
services, accessed July 19, 2015.
7 WHAT NOW?
 1. “The Wearable Future,” PricewaterhouseCoopers, http://www.pwc.
com/us/en/technology/publications/wearable- technology.html, 42.
 2. PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Wearable Technology Future Is Ripe for 
Growth—Most Notably Among Millennials, Says PwC US,” October 
21, 2014, http://www.pwc.com/us/en/press- releases/2014/wearable- 
technology- future.html, accessed October 8, 2015.
 3. Broede Carmody, “iRing: Could Apple Soon Release a Smartring?,” 
smartcompany, October 7, 2015, http://www.smartcompany.com.au/
technology/48648- iring- could- apple- soon- release- a- smartring.html, 
accessed October 11, 2015.
 4. Anick Jesdanun, “Fitness Tracker Sales Are High, But So Are 
Abandonment Rates,” July 9, 2015, http://www.hufﬁ ngtonpost.com/
entry/ﬁ tness- tracker- sales- are- high- but- so- are- abandonment- 
rates_559e9cece4b05b1d028fd99b, accessed October 10, 2015.
 5. Thomas Mulier, “Apple Helps Push U.S. Watch Sales to Biggest Drop in 
Seven Years,” Bloomberg Business, August 7, 2015, http://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015- 08- 07/apple- helps- push- u- s- 
watch- sales- to- biggest- drop- in- seven- years, accessed October 10, 
2015.

NOTES TO PAGES 222–227 307
 6. Corinne Gretler, “Swatch Co- Inventor: Apple Will Succeed and an Ice 
Age Is Coming for Swiss Watches,” Bloomberg Business, March 10, 
2015, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015- 03- 10/swatch- 
co- inventor- sees- apple- causing- ice- age- for- swiss- watches, accessed 
October 10, 2015.
 7. “The Wearable Future.” 11.
 8. “A Look Ahead: How Wearable Technology Will Impact Retail,” 
Certona, http://www.certona.com/a- look- ahead- how- wearable
- technology- will- impact- retail/.
 9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. “The Wearable Future,” 35, accessed October 10, 2015.
12. Nielsen, “Mobile Millennials: Over 85% of Generation Y Owns 
Smartphones,” Snewswire, September 9, 2014, http://www.nielsen.
com/us/en/insights/news/2014/mobile- millennials- over- 85- percent- 
of- generation- y- owns- smartphones.html, accessed June 23, 
2016.
13. Chloe Green, “The Next Customer Frontier: How Wearables Are 
Going Mainstream in Retail,” Information Age, June 4, 2015, http://
www.information- age.com/it- management/strategy- and- 
innovation/123459594/next- customer- frontier- how- wearables- are- 
going- mainstream- retail, accessed June 24, 2016.
14. The Wearable Future,” 35, accessed October 10, 2015.
15. The Wearable Future,” 5, accessed October 11, 2015.
16. “A Look Ahead: How Wearable Technology Will Impact Retail.”
17. John Gillan, quoted in Allan Blair, “Is Now the Time for Retailers to 
Invest in Wearable Tech?,” Guardian, April 1, 2015, http://www.
theguardian.com/media- network/2015/apr/01/retailers- invest- 
wearable- tech, accessed October 10, 2015.
18. “The Wearable Future,” 22.
19. Natasha Singer, “When No One Is Just a Face in a Crowd,” New York 
Times, February 1, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/02
/technology/when- no- one- is- just- a- face- in- the- crowd.html?_r=0, 
accessed October 14, 2015.
20. Ibid.

308 NOTES TO PAGES 227–229
21. “Measurement and Analysis for Digital Signage,” Retail Customer 
Experience/Networld Alliance, 2009, 6, http://www
.retailcustomerexperience.com/static_media/ﬁ ler_public/4c/24
/4c24453f- 6df5- 486a- bd73- 48a69f8aaa0b/ns_g_measurement- and- 
analysis.pdf, accessed October 14, 2015.
22. Larry Dignan, “The Future of Shopping: Where Psychology and 
Emotion Meet Analytics,” ZDNet, January 15, 2014, http://www.
zdnet.com/article/the- future- of- shopping- when- psychology- and- 
emotion- meet- analytics/, accessed October 12, 2015.
23. Paul Rubens, “Facial Recognition: Shop Where Everybody Knows 
Your Name,” BBC online, December 9, 2014, http://www.bbc.com/
news/business- 30219820, accessed October 12, 2015.
24. Michael Casey, “Facial Recognition Software Is Scanning You Where 
You Least Expect It,” CBS online, June 25, 2015, http://www.
cbsnews.com/news/facial- recognition- software- is- scanning- you- 
where- you- least- expect- it/, October 12, 2015.
25. Rubens, “Facial Recognition.”
26. Elizabeth Dwoskin and Evelyn M. Rusli, “The Technology That 
Unmasks Your Hidden Emotions,” Wall Street Journal, January 28, 
2015, http://www.wsj.com/articles/startups- see- your- face- unmask- 
your- emotions- 1422472398, accessed October 12, 2015.
27. “Retail: Does Your In- Store Experience Bring Joy or Pain,” Emotient, 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/startups- see- your- face- unmask- your- 
emotions- 1422472398, accessed October 12, 2015. When Apple 
purchased Emotient, the ﬁ rm “removed details [from its website] 
about the services it had been selling.” See Rolf Winkler et al., “Apple 
Buys Artiﬁ cial Intelligence Startup Emotient,” January 7, 2016, http://
www.wsj.com/articles/apple- buys- artiﬁ cial- intelligence- startup- 
emotient- 1452188715, accessed June 24, 2016. The original language 
quoted here is reproduced in Brian Rommele, “Apple’s New AI Will 
Decode the 43 Muscles in Your Face and Help Siri2 Understand You 
Better,” Medium.com, https://medium.com/@brianroemmele/apples- 
ai- secret- how- the- 43- muscles- in- your- face- will- play- a- big- part- of- 
apple- s- new- ai- and- siri2- de8d4f54894#.o3vvwdrrd, accessed June 25, 
2016.

NOTES TO PAGES 229–234 309
28. Rommele, “Apple’s New AI Will Decode the 43 Muscles in Your Face 
and Help Siri2 Understand You Better.”
29. Dwoskin and Rusli, “The Technology That Unmasks Your Hidden 
Emotions.”
30. Mario Trujillo, “Facial Recognition Quietly Taking Hold,” The Hill, 
August 1, 2015, http://thehill.com/policy/technology/249958- facial- 
recognition- quietly- taking- hold, accessed October 12, 2015.
31. Rubens, “Facial Recognition: Shop Where Everybody Knows Your 
Name.”
32. “VIP Identiﬁ cation,” NEC, http://nl.nec.com/nl_NL/emea/solutions_
services/it_solutions/security/vip.html, accessed October 14, 2015.
33. “Retail,” FaceFirst, http://www.faceﬁ rst.com/services/retail, accessed 
October 14, 2015.
34. Rubens, “Facial Recognition: Shop Where Everybody Knows Your 
Name.”
35. Ibid.
36. Pam Dixon, “The One- Way Mirror Society,” World Privacy Forum, 
January 27, 2010, 35 and 37, http://www.worldprivacyforum.org/
wp- content/uploads/2013/01/onewaymirrorsocietyfs.pdf, accessed 
October 14, 2015.
37. Casey, “Facial Recognition Software Is Scanning You Where You Least 
Expect It.” See also Wendy Davis, “Illinois Privacy Law Tested by 
‘Faceprint’ Cases,” Daily Online Examiner, August 6, 2015, http://www.
mediapost.com/publications/article/255620/illinois- privacy- law- 
tested- by- faceprint- cases.html, accessed June 26, 2016.
38. Christopher Matthews, “Private Eyes: Are Retailers Watching Our 
Every Move?” Time, September 18, 2012, http://business.time.
com/2012/09/18/private- eyes- are- retailers- watching- our- every- 
move/, accessed September 18, 2012.
39. Casey, “Facial Recognition Software Is Scanning You Where You Least 
Expect It.”
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid.
42. Trujillo, “Facial Recognition Quietly Taking Hold.”
43. Ibid.

310 NOTES TO PAGES 235–241
44. Chris Riddell, “The Future of Retail- Emotional Analytics,” June 3, 
2015, http://chrisriddell.com/the- future- of- retail- emotional- 
analytics/, accessed October 12, 2015.
45. Laurie Sullivan, “Zoomkube Introduces Facial Recognition in 
Retail Stores,” Online Media Daily, August 23, 2013, http://www.
mediapost.com/publications/article/207520/zoomkube- introduces- 
facial- recognition- in- retail- s.html, accessed May 16, 2014; Evan 
Schuman, “As Chain Trials Facial Recognition, Channel Assumptions 
Flip,” StoreFrontBackTalk, July 1, 2013, http://archives.thecontent-
ﬁ rm.com/securityfraud/as- russian- convenience- store- chain- trials- 
facial- recognition- channel- assumptions- ﬂ ip/, accessed April 18, 2014.
46. Schuman, “As Chain Trials Facial Recognition, Channel Assumptions 
Flip.”
47. Ibid.
48. Ibid.
49. Ibid.
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid.
52. Quoted in Joseph Turow, Niche Envy: Marketing Discrimination in the 
New Media World (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006), 145.
53. “The Wearable Future,” 22.
54. Alex Romanov, quoted in Alicia Fiorletta, “Will Wearable Technology 
Shake Up the Retail Landscape?,” http://www.retailtouchpoints.com/
features/trend- watch/will- wearable- technology- shake- up- the- retail- 
landscape, accessed October 11, 2015.
55. “The Wearable Future,” 46.
56. Quoted in Turow, Niche Envy: Marketing Discrimination in the New Media 
World, 145.
57. In late 2015 Google was testing its ability to stream apps that people 
ﬁ nd through its search engine. It was part of an initiative Google 
called “app- ﬁ rst content,” where search query results return some 
details from within apps served on the Google engine. See Laurie 
Sullivan, “Google Streams Apps Without Downloading, Serves 
Content in Search Results,” SearchMarketingDaily, November 19, 
2015, http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/263020/

NOTES TO PAGES 242–249 311
google- streams- apps- without- downloading- serves- co.html, accessed 
November 29, 2015.
58. See, for example, Chad Stone et al., “A Guide to Statistics on 
Historical Trends in Income Inequality,” Center on Budget and Policy 
Priorities,” http://www.cbpp.org/topics/inequality- trends, accessed 
October 19, 2015; Paul Krugman, “Why We’re in a New Gilded Age,” 
New York Review of Books, May 8, 2014, http://www.nybooks.com
/articles/archives/2014/may/08/thomas- piketty- new- gilded- age/, 
accessed October 19, 2015.
59. Colin Gordon, “Growing Apart: A Political History of American 
Inequality,” Center for Economic and Policy Research, August 26, 
2013, http://scalar.usc.edu/works/growing- apart- a- political- history- 
of- american- inequality/index, accessed October 19, 2015.
60. http://pic.dhe.ibm.com/infocenter/initiate/v9r7/index.
jsp?topic=%2Fcom.ibm.initiateglossary.doc%2Ftopics%2Fr_glossary_
enterprise_customer_identity_management.html accessed April 7, 
2014.
61. Pam Baker, “Shoppers OK with Online Tracking, Not So Much with 
In- Store Tracking,” FierceRetailIT, July 15, 2013, http://www
.ﬁ ercebigdata.com/story/shoppers- ok- online- tracking- not- so- much- 
store- tracking/2013- 07- 15, accessed October 20, 2015.
62. Yahoo! Advertising, The Balancing Act: Getting Personalization Right, May 
2014, 11, https://advertising.yahoo.com/Insights/BALANCING- ACT.
html, accessed May 8, 2015.
63. Brad Stone, “Our Paradoxical Attitudes Toward Privacy,” New 
York Times, July 2, 2008, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/07/02/
our- paradoxical- attitudes- towards- privacy/, accessed April 26, 
2015.
64. “The Truth About Shopping,” McCann Truth Central, August 20, 
2014, http://truthcentral.mccann.com/wp- content/uploads/2014/09/
McCann_Truth_About_Shopping_Guide.pdf, accessed May 8, 2015.
65. Chuck Martin, “What the Shopper Gets Out of Being Tracked,” mCom-
merceDaily, May 28, 2014, http://www.mediapost.com/publications/
article/226734/what- the- shopper- gets- out- of- being- traked.html, 
accessed May 8, 2015.

312 NOTES TO PAGES 250–262
66. Scott Snyder, “Mobile Devices: Facing the ‘Privacy vs. Beneﬁ t’ 
Trade- Off,” Forbes.com, August 3, 2012, http://www.forbes.com/sites/
ciocentral/2012/08/03/mobile- devices- facing- the- privacy- vs- beneﬁ t- 
trade- off/, accessed May 8, 2015.
67. Yahoo! Advertising, The Balancing Act: Getting Personalization Right.
68. “US Consumers Want More Personalized Retail Experience and 
Control over Personal Information, Accenture Survey Shows,” 
Accenture, March 9, 2015, http://newsroom.accenture.com/news/
us- consumers- want- more- personalized- retail- experience- and- 
control- over- personal- information- accenture- survey- shows.htm, 
accessed April 26, 2015.
69. See Joseph Turow et al., Americans, Marketers, and the Internet, 1999–
2012 (Philadelphia: Annenberg School for Communication, 2014), 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2423753, 
accessed November 29, 2015. Chris Hoofnagle and Jennifer King of 
the Berkeley School of Law helped create the 2009 survey.
70. Google deﬁ nition of resignation, https://www.google.com/?gws_
rd=ssl#q=resignation, accessed May 18, 2015.
71. Chris Smith, “Tesco CIOL Personalisation Is the Next Big Thing for 
Retail Technology,” Guardian, November 7, 2012, http://www.
theguardian.com/media- network/2012/nov/07/tesco- retail- 
personalisation- technology, accessed November 29, 2015.
72. “The Future of Grocery,” Nielsen, April 2015, 4, http://www.nielsen.
com/content/dam/nielsenglobal/vn/docs/Reports/2015/Nielsen%20
Global%20E- Commerce%20and%20The%20New%20Retail%20
Report%20APRIL%202015%20(Digital).pdf, accessed November 29, 
2015.
73. Scott Howe, “A Price Call- to- Action for the Data Industry,” Advertising 
Age, April 8, 2014, http://adage.com/article/privacy- and- regulation/
a- privacy- call- action- data- industry/292464/, accessed May 18, 2015.
74. Dixon, “The One- Way Mirror Society,” 34.
75. Pam Baker, “Big Data Lobbyist Says Congress Won’t Pass a Law to 
Protect Consumer Privacy,” FierceBigData, August 20, 2014, http://www.
ﬁ ercebigdata.com/story/big- data- lobbyist- says- congress- wont- pass- law- 
protect- consumer- privacy/2014- 08- 20, accessed October 19, 2015.

NOTES TO PAGES 263–272 313
76. Robert Gellman, “Fair Information Practices: A Basic History, Version 
2.13,” February 11, 2015, http://bobgellman.com/rg- docs/
rg- FIPShistory.pdf, accessed October 21, 2015.
77. Federal Trade Commission, Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of 
Rapid Change, December 2010, https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/ﬁ les/
documents/reports/federal- trade- commission- bureau- consumer- 
protection- preliminary- ftc- staff- report- protecting- 
consumer/101201privacyreport.pdf, accessed May 16, 2015.
78. Helen Nissenbaum, “Respecting Context to Protect Privacy: Why 
Meaning Matters,” Sci. Eng. Ethics, July 12, 2015.
79. Quoted in Natasha Singer, “Acxiom Lets Consumers See Details It 
Collects,” New York Times, September 4, 2013, http://www.nytimes.
com/2013/09/05/technology/acxiom- lets- consumers- see- data- it- 
collects.html, accessed November 30, 2015.
80. Singer, “Acxiom Lets Consumers See Details It Collects.”
81. “Consumer Data Products Catalog,” Acxiom, May 2013, 3, http://
www.scribd.com/doc/187222488/Acxiom- Consumer- Data- Products- 
Catalog#scribd, accessed November 30, 2015.
82. See, for example, Anita Allen, Unpopular Privacy (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1011); Kenneth Bamberger and Dierdre Mulligan, 
Privacy on the Ground (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015); Danielle 
Citron, Hate Crimes in Cyberspace (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2016); Danielle Citron and Frank Pasquale, “The Scored 
Society,” Washington Law Review 80:1 (2014); Julie Cohen, Conﬁ guring 
the Networked Self (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013); 
Woodrow Hartzog and Frederic Stutzman, “The Case for Online 
Obscurity,” California Law Review 101:1 (2013): 1; Chris Jay 
Hoofnagle, Federal Trade Commission Privacy Law and Policy 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016); Helen Nissenbaum, 
Privacy in Context (Stanford, CA: Stanford Law Books, 2009); 
Paul Ohm, “The Rise and Fall of Invasive Surveillance,” University of 
Illinois Law Review 57 (2008): 1703–76; Frank Pasquale, The Black Box 
Society (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015); Joel 
Reidenberg, “Privacy in Public,” University of Miami Law Review 69:141 
(2014); Neil Richards, Intellectual Privacy (Oxford: Oxford University 

314 NOTES TO PAGE 272
Press, 2015); Marc Rotenberg, Jeramie Scott, and Julia Horwitz, eds., 
Privacy in the Modern Age (New York: New Press, 2015); Ira Rubinstein 
and Nathan Good, “Privacy by Design: A Counterfactual Analysis of 
Google and Facebook Privacy Incidents,” Berkeley Technology Law 
Journal 28: 1333–1583; James Rule, Privacy in Peril (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2009); Bruce Schneier, David and Goliath (New York: 
W.W. Norton. 2015); Daniel Solove, Understanding Privacy (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2015); Peter Swire and Kenesa Ahmad, 
U.S. Private Sector Privacy (International Association of Privacy 
Professionals, 2012); Omer Tene and Jules Polonetsky, “A Theory of 
Creepy,” Yale Journal of Law and Technology 59 (2013): 59–100; Tal 
Zarsky, “Transparent Predictions,” University of Illinois Law Review 4 
(2013): 1503–70.

315
INDEX
A&P (Great Atlantic and Paciﬁ c 
Tea Company), 38–39, 44, 59, 9
aboutthedata.com, 266–67
Abraham and Strauss, 36, 76
Accenture, 158–59, 250
Acme, 39
Acxiom, 95, 156–57, 188, 192, 266
ad- serving, process for, with GPS 
tracking, 136–37
advertising, 54–56, 81–82, 228, 
229–30
Advertising Age, 79, 86
Adweek, 89
Affectiva, 228–29
Age of the Customer Requires a More 
Intelligent Enterprise (Forrester), 
147–48
Ahold, 110
airlines, 144–45, 240–41
Aisle 411, 135
Albertson’s, 77, 82, 97, 100
Alex and Ani, 189–92, 203
Alipay, 175
Amazon, 66–68, 97, 104, 110–11, 
175; cosmetics and, 164; data 
analysis by, 95; delivery 
programs of, 111–12; drone 
testing by, 111; effect of, on 
retailing, 108; grocery delivery 
and, 103–4; price- check app, 
104; showrooming and, 66–68, 
104
AmazonFresh, 103
Amazon Mom, 103
Amazon Prime, 111–12
American Eagle Outﬁ tters, 126, 
127
American Express, 181
America Online, 94
analytics, growth in, 150–51. See 
also predictive analytics
AncestryDNA, 149
Android, 102, 119, 120
Annenberg National Internet 
Surveys, 251–58, 264, 267
Ann Taylor, 75
anxiety, retail and, 243–44
Anyon, Jean, 14

316 INDEX
Apple, 102, 118, 175; customer 
tracking and, 118–22; 
purchasing Emotient, 229. See 
also iPhone
Apple Watch, 222
apps, 4–6; cookies and, 152; opt- 
ins for, 268–69; personalization 
of, 191; registration with, 153
A. T. Stewart and Company, 31. 
See also Stewart, A. T.
AT&T, 267
attractiveness scores, 7–8
augmented reality, 135, 168, 
214–15, 226
A–Z Glossary of Personalized 
Marketing, An (Neustar), 185–86
Bain, 251
barcodes, 62, 78; customizing for 
each item, 105; effect of, on 
physical retailers, 68–69; 
rewards cards and, 132
bargaining, 24, 27–28, 30
bargain- price departments, 47
Bartlett, Marian, 229
beacon messaging, outdoor 
geofencing and, 200–203
beacon surveillance, 1–2, 121–23, 
128–30, 141, 167, 169, 173; cost 
of, 133–34; incorporated into 
store’s lighting system, 134–35; 
starting with, 215–16. See also 
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
behavior: prediction of, 149–51, 
157; tracing of, 151–52
Bergdorf Goodman, 36, 145
Berger, Thomas, 20, 23
Berkshire Hathaway, 60
Berners- Lee, Tim, 90
Best Buy, 126, 168, 204
Bezos, Jeff, 67
Bhardwaj, Julian, 119
Biegel, Bruce, 180, 214
Big Bear, 42–43
Bigfoot Interactive, 99
biometric technology, 2, 232, 234
Bishop, Bill, 52, 80
Bjornson, Karl, 237
BLE. See Bluetooth Low Energy 
(BLE)
Bloomingdale’s, 76, 96
Blue Chip Stamps, 60
BlueKai, 154, 192
Bluetooth, 118, 120, 122–23, 158, 
170
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), 
120–22, 123, 126–28, 133, 
141
Boland, Michael, 137–38
Bond Brand Loyalty, 161
Boniﬁ cino, Ryan, 189–92
Borders, 104
Boucicaut, Aristede, 31, 33
Bourdieu, Pierre, 14
Bowles, Samuel, 14
branding, 40–41
brands, emotional loyalty to, 
160–61
brick- and- mortar stores: analytics 
for, 195; buying decisions made 

INDEX 317
in, 194; consumers’ trust of data 
usage by, 159; data gathering in, 
157–58; as element of success, 
109; foot trafﬁ c in, 8–9; in- store 
pickup at, 109–10; integrated 
with virtual stores, 105, 109, 
114; loyalty programs for, 86–87, 
159; personalization in, 195; 
personalizing ads beyond, 201–3; 
portrayal of, 110; prices adjusted 
in, 212; quick delivery programs 
for, 112; returns at, 110; sepa-
rate from e- commerce, 96; 
showrooming and, 67; strength 
of, 194; tailoring messages for, 
193–94; tracking shoppers, 109 
(see also tracking); working 
around online sellers, 109
browsers, 90
Buffett, Warren, 60
Bullock’s, 76
Burberry, 75
Burdines, 75
Business Insider Intelligence, 133
Business Week, 63
buying intent, geolocation and, 
137–38
Calabrase, Chris, 232–33
capitalism, 46, 74
carriage trade, 47
cars, data from, 150
Carson Pirie Scott, 36
Catalina Marketing, 88, 99–100, 
132–33, 142–43, 150
catalog companies, 83–84, 
96
Catapult Marketing, 209–10
cell phones: attacks on, 119; 
customer identiﬁ cation and, 
101–2; inﬂ uence of, on retail, 
114. See also smartphones
Certona, 222–23, 225
charge accounts, 48
checkout, facial recognition 
systems and, 235–36
Chester, Jeff, 265–66
Children’s Privacy Protection Law, 
262
Christie, Leigh, 140
Chu, Andy, 187–88, 211–12, 
216–17
Circuit City, 104
Clark, Dave, 112
clientelling, 166–67
cloud computing, 150, 258
Coca- Cola, 128
Collier’s, 44
commerce, data- driven, 260
Commerce Lumascape, 19
commercial television, 207
CompuServe, 89, 94
Computerworld, 93
Conde Nast, 128
convenience stores, 79
Conversant, 210
conversion, 125, 200–201
cookies, 91–92, 95, 151–52
cosmetics, 140, 163–65. See also 
Sephora; Ulta Beauty

318 INDEX
coupons, 55–56, 61, 85–86; in the 
aisles, 100, 132; distribution of, 
86–87; electronic, 86; generation 
of, 88; online, 98–99; personal-
ization of, 86–87, 99–100, 151; 
reward programs and, 88–89
Crate and Barrel, 75
credit, 29, 30, 38, 242
Cullen, Michael, 42
culture power, 16
curriculum, hidden. See hidden 
curriculum
customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM), 172, 180–81, 199, 
236–37
customers: analysis of, new 
perspective on, 148–49; behav-
ioral and attitudinal information 
on, 149–51; biases against, 
11–12; data collected on, 19, 
128–31; giving personal infor-
mation to retailers, 148 (see also 
surveillance); high- value (proﬁ t-
able), 51, 144–146, 160, 164, 
188–90, 245; identiﬁ cation of, 
153–54; in- store movements of, 
monitored, 114–17; lifetime 
value of, 10–11; networks of, 28; 
personalizing messages for, 134, 
135 (see also personalization); 
proﬁ ling of, 18, 22, 113–14, 151, 
170; relationships with, 10–12, 
25, 30; scanning goods in the 
aisles, 125, 126, 132–33; 
segmentation of, 162–63, 187; 
stereotyping of, 48; studies of, 
52; tracking of, 27, 69, 107, 117; 
unique data proﬁ les of, 150; 
unmasking, 129, 153–55
cybermall, 94–95
data: accuracy of, 192; amount of, 
87–89; collection of, 91–92, 
161–62; for customer relation-
ship management, 180–81; 
differences in, 259–60; industry 
for, 19; interception of, 119; 
loyalty and collection of, 11, 
101, 161–62; ownership of, 
141–43; for pursuing high- value 
consumers, 147; questions 
about, 248–49; relevance of, 
192; rights regarding, 269–70; 
sharing of, 7–8, 87–88, 125–26, 
128, 130–31, 139, 142, 152, 
169–70, 173, 174, 177, 266; 
sources of, 68, 140, 156–57, 
171–73, 192–93, 225 (see also 
cookies)
database marketing, 87
data brokers, 156
Datalogix, 192
data mining, 12–13, 150, 170, 259
Dayton’s, 36
deep- discount drugstores, 79
DeGeneres, Ellen, 163
delivery, free, 37, 38
democracy, 33, 46
department stores, 25–26, 31; 
advertising by, 54–55; attracting 

INDEX 319
customers, 37–38; buyouts of, 
76; databases for, 96–97; design 
of, 35–36, 45–48; discrimination 
and, 26, 47–48, 51; e- commerce 
and, 95–96; efﬁ ciency efforts at, 
52–53; egalitarianism of, 34–35; 
emergence of, 30–34; failure of, 
76; loyalty and, 37; moving to 
suburbs, 45; organization of, 26; 
personalization in, 48, 84, 89; 
personas of, 81–82; pricing in, 
36–37; responding to smart-
phones, 104–5; trading stamps 
and, 59; Walmart and, 75–76; 
welcoming women, 34–35, 
37–38; window displays of, 17, 
36, 47–48
desire, democratization of, 32–33
deterministic identiﬁ cation, 153
Deutsch, Tracey, 29–30, 42, 50
Dhar, Abhi, 209
Diaggio, 209
digital retailing, pricing in, 208–13
direct marketing, online, 95
discounts, 4–7, 38, 41, 61, 207–8; 
changing value of, 176–77; 
customers changing behavior 
and, 160, 225, 261; personal-
ized, 217–19, 239–40; trade- offs 
for, 254–56
discount stores, 60, 79
discrimination, 10, 244; economic, 
49–50, 51, 144–46, 164; ethnic, 
49–51; retailing and, 26, 47, 80; 
social, 247; technology for, 68
Disney, 191
displays, effectiveness of, 
116
dollar, value of, 244
drones, 111
dry goods, 32
dry goods stores, 29, 30–31
dunnhumbyUSA, 131–32
Durkheim, Emile, 13–14
eBay, 110–11
e- commerce (electronic 
commerce), 89–90; emergence 
of, 94–99; security of, 93; 
unproﬁ tability of, 97–98
Eddie Bauer, 94, 96
efﬁ ciency, 52–53, 61–62, 78–79; 
loyalty and, 64–65; and 
retaining good customers, 80; 
scanners and, 63–65; at 
Walmart, 70–75
Eichorn, Mark, 232
e- ink price displays, 212
Ekman, Paul, 229
electronic data interchange (EDI), 
71–72, 78
Electronic Mall, 89
electronic monitors, 3–4
eMarketer, 194
Emotient, 229, 234
emotions, facial recognition 
systems and, 228–29
Endeavor Partners, 221–22
Epsilon, 209, 210
ethnic discrimination, 30, 51

320 INDEX
Euclid Analytics, 115–17, 118, 
120–22, 124
Excite, 94
eXelate, 154, 192
Experian, 156, 188, 262
Facebook, 136, 165, 190, 268; data 
sharing and, 155–56; determin-
istic approach of, 153; face- 
matching software and, 227
FaceFirst, 230–31
faceprints, 226
Face- Six, 227, 228
facial recognition systems, 7, 
226–38
fair information practice principles, 
263–67
Family Market Basket, 43
F.A.O. Schwarz, 94
Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), 268
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 
232, 262–65, 266, 267
Federated Department Stores, 76, 
78, 96
Field, Marshall, 24, 31, 36
Filene, Edward, 53
Filene’s, 52
Fingerhut, 96
ﬁ re sales, 35
First Data Corporation, 169–70
ﬁ rst- party data, 192–93
Fischer, Brandon, 2
Fitbit, 3, 222
ﬁ tness monitors, 221–22
Fletcher, George, 20
Flickinger, Burt, 74
ﬂ ip phones, 102
folklore studies, 15–16
Fontaine, Laurence, 28–29, 30
Food Lion, 99
Food Marketing Institute, 8
Foodtown, 99
foot trafﬁ c, 115; importance of, 
125; tracking of, 121–22
Forrester Research, 147, 159, 
195
France Telecom, 89
Frank, Ivan, 142
Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Weekly, 41
Frederick, Christine, 24, 25, 27, 
31, 40, 49
FreeCoupons, 128
frequency marketing, 83
frequent- ﬂ yer programs, 144–45
Frontier Airlines, 209
Furniture Today, 194
“Future of Grocery, The” (Nielsen), 
258
gamiﬁ cation, 161, 167–69, 177
Gannett, 128
Gap, 75, 179
Gartner, 150–51
Gellman, Robert, 263
General Accountability Ofﬁ ce 
(GAO), 233
General Electric, 134–35
genetics, 149–50
geo- conquesting, 138

INDEX 321
geofence, 136, 197
geolocation, 137
Gerbner, George, 15, 16, 18
Giant- Landover, 110
gifts, 41–42
Gigya, 190
Gimbel, Adam, 31
Gimbels, 35, 54
Gintis, Herbert, 14
Glass, David, 70, 72–73
Goldberg, Jason, 180, 181, 183, 
208, 214–15, 218
Gold Bond stamps, 58
Goodman, Ethan, 215, 218
Google, 135, 136, 175, 214–15, 
265, 268
Google Express, 110–11
Google Glass, 221
Google+, 155, 165, 190
GPS (global positioning system) 
tracking, 135–36, 170
Grand Union, 39, 61
Greenshpan, Moshe, 228
Green Stamps, 56–58, 99
Grifﬁ n, Jeff, 200–202, 215
grocery industry: future of, 258; 
national home delivery and, 
103; power shift in, 85; selling 
food online, 97–98
grocery stores, 29–30; advertising 
by, 55; design of, 38–39; egali-
tarianism of, 38–39; growth of, 
39–42; loyalty and, 38–42; 
no- frills, 39; privilege and, 38; 
protection and, 38, 40–41; 
service at, 49; trading stamps 
and, 59. See also supermarkets
Hadley, Tony, 262
Harris Teeter, 77
Heller, Laura, 107, 108
Hendrickson, Robert, 32
hhgregg, 112
hidden curriculum, 13–17, 183, 
238–39, 271; creation of, 18; 
loyalty and, 21; purpose of, 18; 
transformation of, into everyday 
life, 20
Hillshire Brands, 128, 201
Holleran, Claire, 27
Home Depot, 179, 199
homes, data from, 139, 150
Honaman, Justin, 113–14
house brands, 105–6
Howe, Scott, 157, 260
human conduct, institutions’ 
control of, 20
Human Genome Project, 149
IBM, 63, 88, 245
ICR, 251
identity- driven marketing, 185
Igo, Sarah, 52
image advertising, 81–82
income inequality, retail and, 
242–43
individuals, increased focus on, 
147
IndoorAtlas, 134, 135
industry sales, tracking of, 52

322 INDEX
inﬂ ation, 60–61, 63
information practices, Americans’ 
response to, 252–57
Infoseek, 94
inMarket, 127–29, 136–37, 
141–42, 170, 173, 200–203, 
215–16
Instacart, 111
installment purchasing, 37
institutions, controlling human 
conduct, 20
internet, as emerging advertising 
technology, 89–90
internet of things, 139–40, 224–25
Internet Retailer Conference and 
Exhibition (2014), 107
internet service providers, 91, 268
Investor’s Business Daily, 76, 79
IP addresses, 91
iPhone, 102, 118–21, 152
IRI, 64
Jackson, Philip, 13, 14
Janrain, 152, 153, 155, 156, 162, 
185, 186, 190, 192, 193
Java, 94
JCPenney, 45, 75, 94
Jewel, 44
Jiusto, Randy, 180, 218
John Wanamaker, 24, 31, 36, 
38, 54
Kaufman, Leslie, 73
Kawaja, Terry, 19
Kellogg, 40
Khrushchev, Nikita, 46–47
Kindle, 67–68
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 50
King Cullen, 42
King’s Super Markets, 87
Klondike, 97
Kmart, 60, 63, 69, 75, 79
Kroger, 39, 43, 44, 59, 77, 86, 97, 
110, 129, 134; competitive 
pricing in, 212; customer data 
collection by, 131–32
Kroner, Emilie, 160–61
Kulig, Matthew, 135
Ladies Mile (NYC), 35–36
Lafﬂ ey, A. G., 85
landing- page technique, 197
Lands’ End, 84, 96
Lazarus, 36, 76
Leach, William, 32–33, 46
Le Bon Marché, 31–32, 35
Life in Classrooms (Jackson), 13, 14
lifetime value, 10–11
LinkNYC, 139
ListEase, 128
Liz Claiborne, 73
L.L. Bean, 76
location targeting, 138–39
location tracking, 157
lock screen messaging, 121, 176. 
See also push messages
logistic regression, 150
Lord & Taylor, 3, 45, 96, 129–30, 
203
Louis Vuitton, 17, 145

INDEX 323
low- cost selling, 33–34
loyalty: bargaining and, 28; data 
collection linked to, 21–22, 65, 
80, 84, 161–62; department 
stores and, 36–37; efﬁ ciency 
and, 64–65; emotional, 160–61; 
hidden curriculum and, 21; 
measuring, 53–56; mobile strate-
gies for, 114; personalization of, 
65; populist approach to, 26; 
privilege and, 34; proﬁ tability 
and, 51; protection and, 28–29, 
34; punishment for, 22; relation-
ships and, 20–21; repeat 
purchases and, 55; retailers’ 
reward for, 21–22; social control 
and, 20; stimulus- response and, 
160
loyalty programs, 3, 6, 83, 165; 
airlines, 144–45; attracting shop-
pers through, 148; beneﬁ ts 
downgraded in, 11; cross- 
indexing of, 86–87; gamiﬁ cation 
of, 161; for physical retailers, 
159
loyalty trackers, 170
L. S. Ayres, 36
Luckman, Peter, 20, 23
MAC (media access control) 
numbers, 116–20
Macy, Roland, 31
Macy’s, 3, 35, 45, 54, 76, 96, 97, 
105, 109–10, 126, 146, 147, 171, 
204; analytical maturity of, 
181–82; beacons in, 171, 215; 
quick- delivery programs for, 
112; Web orders, store pickup 
for, 97
Mahl, Daniel, 196, 197–98
mail- order business, 96
malls, design of, 17–18
Malmad, Jeff, 221, 244, 245–46
Mandelbaum, Robb, 67
Mandese, Joe, 157
man- in- the- middle attack, 119, 
122
Marble Drygoods Palace, 35
Marcus, Johnna, 167
market capitalism, 32–33
marketing continuity, 185–87
marketing data, regulation of, 
262
marketplace, democratized, 23, 
258
Mars Advertising, 215
Marshall Field, 24, 31, 36
Marshall Field’s, 45, 82
Mars Incorporated, 209, 210
Martin, Bill, 116–17
Marx, Karl, 15
mass trade, 47
MasterCard, 48, 93
MasterCard Advisors, 192
McCann Worldwide, 249
McKinsey & Company, 63
McQuivey, James, 98
media depictions: as industrial 
products, 15–16; social values 
related to, 16–17

324 INDEX
Men’s Wearhouse, 176, 177, 179, 
199
merchandise, touching of, 34, 39
messages, unstated, 19–20
Microsoft, 93, 96
Miller, Mark, 180, 208–11
Minitel, 89
mobile advertising exchanges, 
138–39
MobileLime, 101
Mobile Rewards, 101
mobile shopping, 108
Mobile Tracking Code of Conduct, 
115
mobile visual search, 181
mobile wallets, 175–77, 198, 
199
Mock, Elmar, 222
Mondelez International, 228
Moorhead, Patrick, 204–8
Moral Education (Durkheim), 
13–14
Morgan Stanley, 70
Mosaic, 90, 91
Movellan, Javier, 229
Mui, Phil, 157
multichannel shoppers, as retail 
prize, 147
multivariate analysis, 87
Munger, Charlie, 60
National Association of 
Convenience Stores (NACS), 8
National Association of Food 
Chains, 50–51
National Cash Register, 63
National Football League, 191
National Retail Federation, 
227
National Security Agency, 259
National Telecommunication and 
Information Administration 
(NTIA), 232, 234
Nava, Mica, 34–35
NCR, 88
NEC, 230, 231
Neill, Stewart, 78–79
Neiman Marcus, 45
NetChoice, 233
Netscape, 90, 93
Neustar analytics consultancy, 
185–86
Newell, 74
New Republic, 50
New York Times, 67, 75, 87
Nielsen, 64, 258
Nielsen, Arthur, 52
Nissenbaum, Helen, 265
nonprice competition, 45–46
Nordstrom, 78, 105, 118
Nystrom, Paul, 53
Obama administration, 232
ofﬂ ine channels, personalization 
of, 193–94
Old Navy, 171–72, 177, 179
Olsen, Barbara, 34
Omaha Steaks, 94, 96
omnichannel marketing, 108, 
113–14, 139–40, 143, 194

INDEX 325
One- to- One Direct, 99
online practices, Americans’ 
knowledge of, 252
online retailers: data advantage of, 
107–8; targeting home and 
ofﬁ ce delivery, 111. See also 
Amazon
opt- in policies, 268
outdoor retargeting, 201–3
Palmer, Potter, 31
PayPal, 175
Peapod, 97, 110
peddlers, 25–29, 46
Pentland, Alex, 150
Pep Boys, 179, 199
Pepsodent, 40
Perka, 169–70
personal information, updating of, 
265
personalization, 131–32, 258; 
consumers’ perception of, 
158–59, 253; data- driven, 96; 
deﬁ ning, 183–86; difﬁ culty of, 
186; emotions and, 235; evolu-
tion of, 214–17; glossary for, 
185; increased focus on, 147; 
in- store, 88–89; limits on, 192; 
migrating to old- fashioned phys-
ical retailing, 247; of ofﬂ ine 
channels, 193–94; omnichannel 
marketing and, 113–14; one- 
to- one contact and, 180, 185, 
186, 189, 194; physical condi-
tions and, 198; in physical 
stores, 195; preemptive, 217; 
pricing and, 217–19; questions 
about, 178, 182, 210, 217; 
salespeople and, 25, 212–13; 
sampling and, 214; segmenta-
tion and, 185–89, 191, 199–200; 
uncertainty about, 180–81; of 
websites and apps, 191
personalized medicine, 149
personalized selling, on industrial 
scale, 68
personal service, 29–30
Philadelphia Phillies, 191–92
phone signals, 117
physical retailing, transformation 
of, 19
physical stores. See brick- and- 
mortar stores
Piggly Wiggly, 39, 114
Placed, 198
Place IQ, 217
Plenti, 181
Point of Purchase Advertising 
International (POPAI), 231–32, 
261
popular culture, hidden curric-
ulum in, 15
Porter Benson, Susan, 47, 52
posted pricing, 30–31, 34
Powers, John, 54
predictive analytics, 260
prejudice, selling and, 26
prejudicial discrimination, 10
prestige, loyalty and, 20–21
price- check app, 104

326 INDEX
pricing: competing on, 81; discrim-
inatory, 239–41; ﬁ xed, 30–31, 
34; geographic, 66; negotiating 
for, 24; personalized, 217–19; 
plans for, 24; predatory, 41–42; 
symbols for, 28, 30
Princeton Research Associates 
International, 251
privacy, 115, 122; Americans’ atti-
tude toward, 255–57; concerns 
about, 155–56, 158, 217, 
246–47, 259; customer images 
and, 123; customers’ forgoing 
of, 122, 124; facial recognition 
technology and, 232–33, 237; 
retailers and, 8
privacy paradox, 158–69, 249–50
privacy policies, 130, 131, 143, 
169–70, 173–74, 252, 263, 270
privilege, 34, 38, 162
probabilistic identiﬁ cation, 
153–54
probability, interest in, 150
Procter & Gamble, 40, 41, 55–56, 
85, 208
product packaging, 41
products, coding of, 62–65
proﬁ tability, loyalty and, 51
Progressive Grocer, 86, 93, 98
progressive proﬁ ling, 193
proofs of purchase, 41
protection, 162; grocery stores 
and, 38, 40–41; loyalty and, 
20–21, 28–29, 34
proximity ad networks, 170
proximity marketing, 126
publishing industry, 66–67
Publix, 77
push messages, 198, 199. See also 
lock- screen messaging
PwC, 222–26, 238
QR codes, 177, 181
Quakers, 31
Questron, Alan, 76
Radian6, 190–91
Ralph Lauren, 75
RapidBlue Solutions, 117
“Recommended Code of Conduct 
for Consumer Tracking 
Methods,” 231–32, 261
Reichheld, Fred, 145, 160
relationships, bargaining and, 28
resignation, 254–56, 261
retailers: Amazon’s effect on, 104; 
carrying exclusive brands, 105; 
cell phones’ inﬂ uence on, 114; 
customer privileges and, 21; 
customer protection and, 21; 
data- powered, for physical loca-
tions, 69–70; discrimination and, 
10–11; facial recognition and, 
227, 229; income inequality 
and, 242–43; manipulation by, 
19–20; physical, moving to the 
Web, 93–95; restructuring of 
industry, 9–10; selling and 
trading information, 7–8; 
tracking consumers, 107

INDEX 327
retailing: anxiety and, 12, 243–44; 
central problem of, 124; compe-
tition in, 2–3, 9; data- driven, 
21–22; hidden curriculum of, 
13–17, 18; maturing of, 75; 
social discrimination in, 247; 
transformation of, 241–44; tran-
sition in, and Amazon, 68; 
Walmart’s effect on (see 
Walmart)
retail monitoring, 10–11
retail personas, 82
rewards programs, 83–84; barcode 
scanning and, 132; coupons and, 
88; game playing and, 167–69
Riddell, Chris, 234–35
Rock Health, 222
Roeding, Cyriac, 124–27
Roper, 251
Rosenkrantz, Joel, 230–31
Rubbermaid, 73–74
Safeway, 3, 77, 174, 177, 218
Saks Fifth Avenue, 45, 94, 145, 
213–14
sales, appearances of, 208
Sambar, Al, 67
sampling, 214
Sam’s Wholesale Clubs, 70, 77
S&H, 56–58
S&H Greenpoints, 99
Sapient Nitro, 132–33
Sapolio Soap, 40
satisfaction guaranteed, 34
Saunders, Clarence, 39, 114
Savchenko, Ekaterina, 235–36
scanners, 61–65
Schefter, Phil, 160
Schmidt, Eric, 151
Schultz, Don, 83
Schuman, Evan, 236–37
scientiﬁ c selling, 54
Scott, Lee, 74
Sears, 45, 69, 75, 79, 80, 109–10, 
179, 199; geofencing and, 
216–17; individualized pricing 
and, 213; loyalty program at, 
187–88, 211–12; member 
pricing and, 213; pricing at, 211; 
salespeople at, and digital 
personalization, 212–13; 
segmentation at, 187–88, 
211–12
second- party data, 192
segmentation, 162–63, 185–89, 
199–200
self- scanning- and- bagging, 132–33
self- service model, 39, 46
selling, new types of, 25–26
selling ﬂ oor, amount of good 
bought at, 113
Sen, Ayan, 161
Sephora, 167, 168, 177
Sharper Image, 75, 94
shawl trade, 47
shopkick, 124–27, 142–43, 168–71
shopper analytics, 115
Shopperception, 123, 124
shoppers. See customers
Shoppers’ City, 60

328 INDEX
ShopperTrak, 8–9, 115, 117–18, 
120–24, 230
shopping, personalization of, 27
shopping centers, 45
shopping frequency, 187–88
ShopRite, 132
showrooming, 66–67, 105
shrinkage, 132–33
Siegel- Cooper, 35
Silver, Bernard, 62
Simon and Westﬁ eld, 112, 126
Skaff, David, 139
Skinner, B. F., 160
slotting allowances, 77
slotting fees, 64
smart fabrics, 225
smartphones, 23; comparing prices 
with, 104–5; cookies and, 152; 
GPS tracking and, 136; inﬂ uence 
of, on retail, 114; location detec-
tion and, 135–36; as most 
important marketing channel, 
179; nonpersonalized messages 
on, 179; paying with, 175; 
personalized advertising for, 
124; pinging of, 116–18; super-
markets and, 102–3; vulnera-
bility of, 119, 122; as wearables, 
223–24
smart watches, 221, 222–23
SnipSnap, 129
Social Construction of Reality, The 
(Berger and Luckman), 
20, 23
social listening services, 156
social networks (media), 5; log- ins 
from, 190–91, 192; participation 
in, 257; registration for, 155
social structure, re- creation of, 
14–15
Solomon, Yoni, 177
Sperry and Hutchinson. See S&H
Stanhope, Joe, 183, 187, 219
Steidmann, Carl, 74
Sterilite, 73
Stewart, A. T., 35, 37
Stockil, Tony, 230
Stokes, Gary, 180
Stop & Shop, 3, 100, 110, 132
store aisles, multimedia content 
and, 113
stores, design of, 17–18
Strawbridge & Clothier, 31, 36
Stuart, A. T., 56
Sun Microsystems, 94
supermarkets, 25–26, 39; Amazon 
and, 103–4; anticommunism and, 
46–47; coupons and, 85–87, 
99–101; database marketing and, 
87–88; data collection by, 131; 
data use in, 87–88; design of, 
43–46, 47; differentiating among 
clientele, 48–50, 52; differentia-
tion among, 79–80; discrimina-
tion and, 26, 49–51; efﬁ ciency 
efforts at, 53–55, 61; introduction 
of, 42–43; loyalty programs and, 
83; organization of, 26; personal-
ized communication with 
customers, 85, 88–89; personas 

INDEX 329
of, 82–83; proﬁ tability of, 61; 
promoting via customers’ cell 
phones, 102; promotional options 
of, 86–87; revenue streams for, 
77–78; rewards programs and, 
100; scanners at, 63–65; service 
components of, 44–45; trading 
stamps and, 59; Walmart and, 
76–78, 83, 103; women and, 
44–45, 49. See also grocery stores
Supermarkets.com, 98
surveillance, 27; Americans 
resigned to, 254–56, 261; 
Americans’ response to, 267; 
cross- platform, 265; frictionless, 
177–78; normalization of, 246, 
248; regulation of, 152, 267; 
slowing growth of, 269
surveys, online, 250–51
Swatch, 222
sweepstakes, 171–72
swill milk scandal, 40–41
Swirl, 129, 203–4
symbol systems, 17–18
Synqera, 235, 258
Szabo, Carl, 233
Tack, Mark, 175, 179–80, 198–99, 
200
Tango, 135
Tapad, 154
Target, 3, 10, 17, 60, 67–68, 75, 
129, 133–34, 147, 177, 178; 
customer analytics of, 130, 131; 
deterministic approach of, 153; 
methods of, for capturing 
customer data, 173
Taubman, 142
Team USA, 191
technology, ﬂ uidity of, 120
Telenav, 195–97
telephone ordering, 38
Tesco, 131, 258
text messaging, 198–99
Thinknear, 138–39, 195–98
third- party cookies, 92
third- party data, 193, 262
Tiffany, 17
Time Warner Cable, 94
tough- luck contracts, 143, 262
tracking: alternative solutions for, 
134; Americans’ response to, 
249–52; cross- device, 154–57; 
in- store, 114–17; for marketing 
purposes, 123; methods of, 
114–34; objections to, 118; 
outside stores, 117–18; solving 
central retailing problem, 
124–25; wearables and, 224–25
tracking pixels, 196–97
trading stamps, 56–61
trafﬁ c analytics, 123
transparency, 269–71
Truth Central project, 249
turnover, 33–34
turnstiles, 114
Twitter, 156, 190, 203–7
Ulta Beauty, 163–67, 174, 177, 
231

330 INDEX
Uniform Grocery Product Code 
Council, 63
United States: egalitarianism in, 
244; income inequality in, 
242–43
Universal Product Codes, 61, 63, 
68–69, 71, 85. See also barcodes; 
scanners
Urban Outﬁ tters, 203
Varlard, Scott, 139
Verano, Raul, 123–24
Verizon, 267
Vibes, 176–77, 179, 198–99, 200, 
213–14
VIP identiﬁ cation, 230–31
virtual shopping, environment for, 
93–94
virtual stores, integrated with 
physical stores, 105, 109, 
114
Visa, 93
Von’s, 86–87, 88
Walgreens, 129, 130, 133–34, 135, 
204, 209, 214–15
Wallet app, 121
Walmart, 3, 17, 63, 67, 109–10, 
129, 133–34, 135, 177, 201; 
audience tracking and analysis 
by, 18, 130; competition for, 
75–76, 78, 79, 103; cost control 
at, 70–75; customer data gath-
ered by, 172–73; data- powered 
physical retailing and, 69; 
efﬁ ciency at, 70–75; fear of, 75, 
76–78; labor practices at, 74; Liz 
Claiborne and, 73; local effects 
of, 75, 78; pricing at, 207–8; 
quick- delivery programs for, 
112; reputation of, 70–71; 
retailers distinguishing them-
selves from, 81–82; Rubbermaid 
and, 73–74; success of, 69–71, 
79, 81; Supercenters, 70, 77; 
supermarkets and, 76–78, 83; 
target audience for, 83; tracking 
and analytics division of, 206–7; 
Twitter and 204–7; UPC system 
at, 71–72; Web orders, store 
pickup for, 96; website of, 96
Walton, Bud, 69
Walton, Sam, 67, 69, 70, 71
Wanamaker, John, 37, 54
warranty registrations, 153
wearables, 150, 221–26, 238
Web, the. See World Wide Web
websites: content on, sources of, 
90–92; personalization of, 191; 
registration with, 153; tracking 
purchases on, 91
Webvan, 97
Wedgewood, 75
Wegman, Danny, 80
Wegmans, 77, 80
Wheeler, Tom, 267–68
Whole Foods, competitive pricing 
in, 212
Wi- Fi, 116–20, 126, 170
Willis, Paul, 14

INDEX 331
wireless scanning, disabling, 
119–20
WMX, 206–7
women: department stores and, 
34–35, 37–38; spheres for, 
34–35; supermarkets and, 
44–45, 49; women, Victorian 
ideals and, 34–35
Woodland, Norman, 62
World Wide Web, 90–91, 93, 94
xAd, 137–38, 217
Yahoo!, 94, 136, 249
Yahoo! Advertising, 250
YouTube, 156
Zola, Emile, 36

