www.ebook3000.com

THE PRIMITIVIST THEORY OF TRUTH
Jamin Asay’s book offers a fresh and daring perspective on the age-
old question ‘What is truth?’ with a comprehensive articulation and
defense of primitivism, the view that truth is a fundamental and
indeﬁnable concept. Often associated with Frege and the early
Russell and Moore, primitivism has been largely absent from the
larger conversation surrounding the nature of truth. Asay defends
primitivism by drawing on a range of arguments from metaphysics,
philosophy of language, and philosophy of logic, and navigates
between correspondence theory and deﬂationism by reviving ana-
lytic philosophy’s ﬁrst theory of truth. In its exploration of the role
that truth plays in our cognitive and linguistic lives, The Primitivist
Theory of Truth offers an account of not just the nature of truth, but
also the foundational role that truth plays in our conceptual scheme.
It will be valuable for students and scholars of philosophy of lan-
guage and of metaphysics.
jamin asay is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Lingnan
University, Hong Kong. He has published articles in journals includ-
ing Philosophy of Science, Philosophia Mathematica, Philosophical
Studies, Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, and International Studies in
the Philosophy of Science.

CAMBRIDGE STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY
General Editors
jonathan lowe (University of Durham)
noah lemos (College of William and Mary)
Advisory Editors
jonathan dancy (University of Reading)
john haldane (University of St. Andrews)
gilbert harman (Princeton University)
frank jackson (Australian National University)
william g. lycan (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
sydney shoemaker (Cornell University)
judith j. thomson (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)
Recent Titles
david lewis Papers on Ethics and Social Philosophy
fred dretske Perception, Knowledge, and Belief
lynne rudder baker Persons and Bodies
rosanna keefe Theories of Vagueness
john greco Putting Skeptics in Their Place
ruth garrett millikan On Clear and Confused Ideas
derk pereboom Living Without Free Will
brian ellis Scientiﬁc Essentialism
alan h. goldman Practical Rules
christopher hill Thought and World
andrew newman The Correspondence Theory of Truth
ishtiyaque haji Deontic Morality and Control
wayne a. davis Meaning, Expression and Thought
peter railton Facts, Values, and Norms
jane heal Mind, Reason and Imagination
jonathan kvanvig The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit
of Understanding
andrew melnyk A Physicalist Manifesto
william s. robinson Understanding Phenomenal Consciousness
d. m. armstrong Truth and Truthmakers
keith frankish Mind and Supermind
michael smith Ethics and the A Priori
noah lemos Common Sense
www.ebook3000.com

joshua gert Brute Rationality
alexander r. pruss The Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason
folke tersman Moral Disagreement
joseph mendola Goodness and Justice
david copp Morality in a Natural World
lynne rudder baker The Metaphysics of Everyday Life
michael j. zimmermann Living with Uncertainty
sanford goldberg Anti-Individualism
crawford l. elder Familiar Objects and their Shadows

www.ebook3000.com

The Primitivist Theory
of Truth
Jamin Asay
Lingnan University

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press,
New York
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107038974
© Jamin Asay 2013
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2013
Printed in the United Kingdom by Clays, St Ives plc
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data
Asay, Jamin, 1980–
The primitivist theory of truth / Jamin Asay, Lingnan University.
pages
cm. – (Cambridge studies in philosophy)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-107-03897-4
1. Truth.
2. Primitivism.
I. Title.
BD171.A83
2013
121–dc23
2012051081
ISBN 978-1-107-03897-4 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or
accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to
in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such
websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
www.ebook3000.com

For Emily

www.ebook3000.com

Contents
Preface
page xi
Introduction
1
part i
identifying primitivism
9
1
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
11
1.1
What is the theory of truth?
12
1.2
What is a primitivist theory?
28
2
The golden age of primitivism
40
2.1
Frege
43
2.2
Moore
51
2.3
Russell
65
2.4
After the golden age
75
3
A two-pronged theory of truth
78
3.1
Metaphysical deﬂationism
78
3.2
Conceptual primitivism
81
3.3
A preliminary objection
83
3.4
Nearby views
88
part ii
defending primitivism
101
4
Metaphysical deﬂationism
103
4.1
What is it for a property to be “metaphysically
substantive”?
104
4.2
The point and purpose of properties
108
4.3
Taking truth to absurdity
121
4.4
Some objections and replies
125
4.5
The metaphysics of truth and correspondence
129
ix

5
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
138
5.1
Frege’s treadmill
138
5.2
The argument from omnipresence
148
6
Conceptual primitivism: open questions, foundations, and
logical apparatus
173
6.1
The open question
173
6.2
The foundationalist argument
188
6.3
The argument from logical apparatus
197
6.4
Conclusion
211
7
Tarski and primitivism
213
7.1
Tarski’s theory of truth
214
7.2
Primitivism and the semantic conception
219
7.3
Tarski, Davidson, and primitivism
237
7.4
Convention T
243
7.5
Conclusion
254
8
Primitive truth at work
259
8.1
Problems for deﬂationism
259
8.2
Assertion
265
8.3
Declaratives and truth aptness
275
8.4
Meaning
283
8.5
Epistemic justiﬁcation
288
8.6
Falsity
293
8.7
Scientiﬁc theories
300
8.8
Conclusion
306
9
Primitivism and the liar
308
9.1
Perspectives on paradox
309
9.2
Three attitudes concerning paradox and truth
312
9.3
Paradox and primitivism: neutrality
318
9.4
Paradox and primitivism: inexpressibility
322
Conclusion
329
References
331
Index
348
Contents
x
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
My interest in the theory of truth began with my very ﬁrst
graduate seminar at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, in a course co-taught by Keith Simmons and
Thomas Hofweber. I was hooked. Ever since, I have wondered
if there was a better option in the theory of truth, one that
avoided the Scylla and Charybdis of correspondence theory
and deﬂationism. My goal in writing this book was to defend
one such option.
I do not recall when I ﬁrst became attracted to primitivism
about truth. I have long suspected that deﬂationary accounts
cannot tell the whole story about truth, but my interest in the
theory of truthmaking has led me to believe that the metaphys-
ical pull behind correspondence theory is best captured not by
any particular account of the nature of truth, but rather by an
explicitly metaphysical theory such as truthmaking. Anyone
who doubts that progress can be made in philosophy should
make a study of theories of truth in the twentieth century. The
debates that were live at the dawn of analytic philosophy
between correspondence theorists, coherentists, and pragma-
tists were inextricable from the corresponding metaphysical
debates between realism, idealism, and quietism. The lesson
we can glean, ﬁrst from Tarski, and later from the deﬂationists,
is that issues surrounding the nature of truth can be separated
from questions about realism and anti-realism. As a result, the
questions we can ask about the nature of truth have been
thrown into relief. Are we interested in asking primarily
xi

metaphysical questions about the nature of the property of
truth, or about what it is that makes things true or false? Or
are we interested in asking conceptual questions about our
concept of truth, and what it is to possess such a notion? My
project offers a primitivist account of our concept of truth that
perfectly harmonizes with a fully deﬂationary account of the
property of truth. As for the distinctly metaphysical question of
what makes our judgments true, I believe that it is best explored
independently, from the perspective of truthmaker theory.
I owe a huge debt of gratitude to a number of friends
and colleagues who have supported me throughout the process
of writing this book. My greatest intellectual debt is to Keith
Simmons, who has supported me at every stage of my career.
Keith has taught me a tremendous amount about the philo-
sophical problems that surround truth; but more importantly,
he has been a perfect model of an advisor, teacher, and
philosopher.
Special mention also goes to Jody Azzouni and Nic
Damnjanovic, who provided me with thoroughgoing com-
ments for the bulk of the manuscript. I am grateful to the
many others who have given their time reading, commenting
on, and talking with me about this project. This list includes
Bob Adams, Dorit Bar-On, Sam Baron, Jake Beck, Simon
Blackburn, Katie Elliott, Drew Johnson, Marc Lange, Bill
Lycan, Ram Neta, Pete Nichols, David Oderberg, Geoff
Sayre-McCord, and surely others I have failed to mention.
Various portions of the book have been presented to a
number of audiences, including one at the 2012 meeting of
the North and South Carolina Philosophical Societies, and at
the philosophy departments at Texas Tech University, the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the University
of Reading, and the University of Sydney. My thanks go to all
those in attendance for their constructive comments and
questions.
Preface
xii
www.ebook3000.com

Some of the material from Chapter 4 has been previously
published in my ‘‘Against Truth,’’ forthcoming in Erkenntnis. I
thank Springer for permission to reproduce it here. Material
from Chapter 7 has been previously published in my ‘‘Tarski
and Primitivism about Truth,’’ forthcoming in Philosophers’
Imprint.
It is only ﬁtting that this book should come out with
Cambridge University Press. The early defenders of primitivism –
Moore and Russell – formulated, defended, and later retracted
their brand of primitivism while at Cambridge. Frege, that era’s
other important primitivist, came to be known to the English-
speaking world through the efforts of the Cantabrigians. So
I am delighted that the book is being released by Cambridge,
and I am grateful to Hilary Gaskin for her efforts and support of
the project throughout its various stages.
Let me also take this opportunity to express my appreciation
to all the various philosophy departments that have supported
me along the way. My teachers at Whitman College recruited
me to philosophy, and I shall be forever grateful. My teachers
at Northern Illinois University set me on the course I continue
today, and I cannot overestimate the inﬂuence that the faculty
at the University of North Carolina have had on my philo-
sophical development. I also appreciate the warm welcome
I have received from all my new colleagues at Lingnan
University; I cannot imagine a better place to have started my
professional career.
Finally, let me express my deepest gratitude to my partner
Emily Matchar for all she has done to help make this book
become a reality. Emily has seen this project progress from
beginning to end; we were together in Sydney when the idea
for the book ﬁrst occurred to me, in Chapel Hill for the bulk
of its writing, and now in Hong Kong seeing it through to the
end. I can only hope that some day I shall be half the writer
that she is.
Preface
xiii

www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
Gottlob Frege begins his canonical paper “On sense and
reference” with an intriguing puzzle (1952). Consider a sim-
ple sentence of the form ‘A is identical to B.’ It is rather trivial
that everything is what it is, and not something else. So all
identity sentences, in a sense, are trivial. If A is identical to B,
then A just is B, and so ‘A is identical to B’ really amounts to
no more than just ‘A is identical to A.’ And yet identity
sentences can be incredibly informative, something it takes
ages to discover. (The classic example being that Hesperus,
the evening star, is identical to Phosphorus, the morning
star.) How is this possible? How can identity be both trivial
and informative?
Frege solves his puzzle by distinguishing between the sense
of a term and its referent. The senses associated with the names
‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ are different, though their refer-
ent (Venus) is the same. The difference in sense between
‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ accounts for the informativeness
of the sentence ‘Hesperus is identical to Phosphorus,’ as this
truth differs in its sense from the trivial sentences ‘Hesperus is
identical to Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus is identical to
Phosphorus.’
This book begins with a different puzzle – one which also
caught Frege’s attention – and which is importantly similar in
structure to the puzzle over identity. In “The thought,” Frege
considers the equivalence that holds between a sentence ‘p’ and
the sentence ‘It is true that p’:
1

It is also worthy of notice that the sentence “I smell the scent
of violets” has just the same content as the sentence “it is true that
I smell the scent of violets.” So it seems, then, that nothing is added
to the thought by my ascribing to it the property of truth. And yet
is it not a great result when the scientist after much hesitation and
careful inquiry, can ﬁnally say “what I supposed is true”?
(Frege 1956: 293)
On the one hand, Frege points out, the appearance of truth
here is utterly dispensable. It adds nothing. To discover that it
is true that there are subatomic particles is no more than to
discover that there are subatomic particles. But was this not a
remarkable discovery? Did it not mark a great scientiﬁc
advance? Scientiﬁc inquiry aims for the truth, yet adding
truth to our thoughts seems to be no addition at all. How is
this possible? How can truth be so dispensable, and yet so
important?1
This book is an exploration into the nature of truth. My aim
is to offer an account of truth that respects the two features to
which Frege calls our attention. On the one hand, we need to
countenance the equivalence, whatever its nature, between
the thought that p and the thought that it is true that p. But
coming to accept this feature of truth – whether it is called its
“redundancy,” “transparency,” or ability to “disappear” –
should not lead us to think that truth is an unimportant,
impotent, or dispensable notion. Truth, I shall argue, belongs
amongst our most basic and fundamental notions. But this
perspective on truth is fully compatible with taking truth not
to be an ordinary property, such that predicating truth of
something does not really “add” anything to it.
The theory of truth that I shall be advancing is best described
as being metaphysically deﬂationary while conceptually sub-
stantive. I argue that there is no property of truth, in any sense
1 Cf. Greimann (2004).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
2
www.ebook3000.com

of ‘property’ that bears any metaphysical weight. This take on
the property of truth helps us explain the equivalence between
‘p’ and ‘It is true that p.’ But I am no deﬂationist about the
concept of truth. To the contrary, I argue that truth is one of
our most important concepts. It is a fundamental or primitive
concept, one which we cannot analyze, deﬁne, or reduce into
further, more basic concepts. We understand much else in
terms of truth, but truth itself is bedrock.
My goal for this book is to articulate and defend a novel
theory of truth. The genus to which my account belongs has
not received much philosophical attention, though it enjoys a
noble heritage. By defending a primitivist theory of truth, I join
a club that includes Frege, Donald Davidson, and certain early
stages of both G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell. But although
all of these thinkers belong in the primitivist camp, there are
crucial differences between their views, and none of them
adopts (or even recognizes) the particular combination of
metaphysical deﬂationism and conceptual primitivism that
I advocate. Aside from these famous proponents of primitiv-
ism, a number of contemporary philosophers have expressed
sympathy with the view, though they have not argued in favor
of it.2 My goal is to offer the sustained articulation and defense
that primitivism deserves.
Primitivism typically receives very little attention in philo-
sophical discussions of truth. In his quite comprehensive
survey of the theory of truth, Richard Kirkham mentions
primitivism only by way of noting that Davidson holds it
(1992: 248). In their survey of the theory of truth, Alexis
Burgess and John Burgess mention primitivism only in passing,
also by noting that the view belongs to Davidson (2011: 86–9).
Wolfgang Künne’s magisterial tome on truth acknowledges
2 See Wiggins (2002: 316), Armstrong (2004: 17), Lowe (2007: 259; 2009: 215), and
Schaffer (2008: 309).
Introduction
3

up front that it will engage primitivism “only indirectly”
(2003: 13, 18). Frederick Schmitt’s anthology on the theory
of truth includes no coverage of primitivism (2004).3
Despite not receiving much overall attention from theorists
of truth, primitivism has attracted an uncommon amount of
scorn. Reporting on this fact, Stewart Candlish notes that
“primitivism has generally been thought so implausible that
almost no one else has ever been able to take it seriously, and
even Russell himself, despite what Peter Hylton has called his
‘White Queen-like talent for believing the impossible,’ could
not manage to hold it for long” (2007: 101).4 Barnett Savery
describes primitivism as being the result of a “youthful aberra-
tion” on the part of Russell and Moore, and states that he will
“dispose of this view with abruptness” (1955: 515). Paul
Horwich also abruptly dismisses primitivism as “the least
attractive conclusion” in the theory of truth, treating it as a
theory of last resort (1990: 10).
The inattention and bad publicity given to primitivism is
unfortunate, though perhaps understandable. It might be
thought that taking truth as a primitive entails not being able
to say anything informative about truth. If truth is primitive,
then there is nothing to say about it, let alone an entire book.
But this view is mistaken. To say that truth cannot be analyzed
into more fundamental notions is not to say that we cannot say
anything informative about the concept of truth. Because truth
is primitive, it can be used to elucidate other notions. We
appreciate the nature of truth by seeing how it ﬁts together
with other notions such as knowledge, justiﬁcation, assertion,
meaning, and others.
3 But note that the truth anthology by Blackburn and Simmons (1999) includes
Davidson’s locus classicus on primitivism (Davidson 1996), as does Lynch (2001),
which also includes Ernest Sosa’s defense of primitivism (Sosa 2001).
4 See Hylton (1984: 385), where Hylton himself calls the view “absurd.”
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
4
www.ebook3000.com

One way of arguing for primitivism is by way of elimination:
show how all the other theories of truth face insuperable
difﬁculties, and conclude that primitivism is the best of a bad
lot.5 I think we can do better by arguing for primitivism
directly. There are plenty of well-known criticisms of the
various non-primitivist accounts of truth, and it is not my
ambition to rehearse them again.6 My focus instead will be
on giving arguments that take primitivism as their conclusion,
and then showing the various theoretical virtues that accom-
pany primitivism about truth. Nevertheless, along the way
I shall be arguing directly against other theories of truth here
and there, though my main goal is to stand up for primitivism.
The book is divided into two main parts, and proceeds as
follows. The aim of Part I is to identify and articulate the
speciﬁc theory of truth that I advance. In Chapter 1, I outline
my favored approach to the theory of truth. Crucial to this
approach is the tripartite distinction between the property
of truth, the concept of truth, and the word ‘truth.’ Each of
these dimensions in turn admits of a substantive/deﬂationary
distinction. These two distinctions are crucial for articulating
my own view, which is substantive about the concept of truth
and deﬂationary about the property of truth. Chapter 2 delves
into the history of primitivism, focusing mainly on the “golden
age” of primitivism of the early twentieth century when Frege,
Moore, and Russell courted the view (though only Frege would
hold onto the theory throughout his life). Chapter 3 then
presents the ofﬁcial statement of my two-pronged theory of
truth, clears up a preliminary objection, and contrasts my view
with some contemporary primitivists (Ernest Sosa, Colin
McGinn, and Trenton Merricks).
5 Cf. Patterson (2010).
6 Kirkham (1992) and Künne (2003) are excellent sources of such objections.
Introduction
5

Part II presents the argumentative portion of the book.
Chapter 4 commences the defense of my positive view by
articulating the nature of and then arguing for the truth of
metaphysical deﬂationism. The argument draws on considera-
tions involving recombination and truthmaking, and concludes
that there is no property of truth in any metaphysically robust
sense. (Importantly, we shall see just what it is for a property to
be “metaphysically robust.”) This chapter also argues against
correspondence theories by showing how metaphysical deﬂa-
tionists can undercut the motivation for such theories by appeal-
ing to truthmaker theory. Chapter 5 turns to the defense of
conceptual primitivism, and begins with Frege’s own argument
for primitivism, the “treadmill.” Though the treadmill is ulti-
mately broken, I show how we can revive the argument by way
of Frege’s doctrine of “omnipresence.” Chapter 6 then presents
a battery of arguments that also seek to establish primitivism
directly. In Chapter 7 I show how primitivists can take advant-
age of Tarski’s pioneering work on truth in support of their
position. Chapter 8 offers a sustained indirect argument for
primitivism by demonstrating the various theoretical virtues
that primitivism enjoys over its rivals, particularly deﬂationary
theories of the concept of truth. Hence, this chapter includes the
book’s most direct criticisms of deﬂationism. I conclude in
Chapter 9 by taking up the liar paradox, and showing how
primitivists enjoy a wide variety of theoretical resources in
handling it.
A wider objective of the book is to shift the dialectic in the
theory of truth. Nowadays, most of the attention in the theory
of truth is split between deﬂationary theories and correspond-
ence theories. When we view the dialectic in these terms,
problems with one view can be taken as support for the
other. For example, the explanatory impotence of deﬂationary
views leads some toward a more substantive correspondence
theory. But the metaphysical baggage and obscurity of the
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
6
www.ebook3000.com

correspondence theory’s key theoretical notions leads others
to the theoretically clear and simple deﬂationary platform.
Everything changes once primitivism arrives on the scene.
The brand of primitivism that I offer avoids both of these
worries. It offers a substantive, explanatory account of the
nature of truth without taking on any problematic metaphys-
ical consequences. As a result, we need to rethink the over-
arching dialectic in the theory of truth. Hence, even if
primitivism is not, at the end of the day, the best account of
the nature of truth, its very availability as a contender reshapes
the way that we ought to think and argue about truth. If
the pages that follow do not convince you that primitivism is
true, at the least they should make you rethink how to think
about truth.
Introduction
7

www.ebook3000.com

part i
Identifying primitivism

www.ebook3000.com

1
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
Philosophical
theories of
truth
have taken
on many
forms over the years. Not every theory of truth addresses
the same set of questions, and not every theory approaches
the nature of truth in the same way. As a result, our
ﬁrst task is to isolate the framework with which we
shall be approaching the theory of truth. The main goals
of this chapter, accordingly, are two-fold. First, we need to
understand just what is at stake in the theory of truth.
What is a theory of truth out to accomplish? To answer
this question, we must begin by drawing two crucial
distinctions. The ﬁrst is that between the property of
truth, the concept of truth, and the word ‘truth’ (and its
cognates). The second distinction is between substantive
and
deﬂationary
approaches
to
the
theory
of
truth.
Equipped with both distinctions, we can appreciate that
whether a substantive or deﬂationary approach is called
for depends upon whether we are concerned with the
property, concept, or word.
Having drawn these paramount distinctions, the second
goal is to understand what, in general, a primitivist theory
is. Primitivist theories have arisen in various corners of
philosophy (such as ethics, epistemology, and the philoso-
phy of science). These fellow travelers demonstrate that
primitivist views are not theories of last resort: quite
to the contrary, they are independently plausible and
defensible.
11

1.1
What is the theory of truth?
A theory of truth will not tell you what is true. To ﬁnd out what
is true, we have to turn to empirical and rational investigation.
The sciences and mathematics provide us with lots of truths
about the world. They tell us what is true. But they do not tell
us what truth is, which is the main objective of a theory of
truth. Theories of truth set out to capture the nature and
essence of truth, assuming it even has one. Physics teaches us
that the sentence ‘All motion is relative to frames of reference’
is true. The theory of truth tells us what it is in which the truth
of that sentence consists. A theory of the nature of, say, water
will offer an account of what it is that is shared by all samples
of water, in virtue of which they are samples of water.
Similarly, a theory of the nature of truth will offer an account
of what it is, if anything, that is shared by all truths, in virtue of
which they are true.
Examples of theories of truth are far easier to ﬁnd than
adequate statements of what the theory of truth is. Perhaps
most commonly, there are correspondence theories of truth.1
These theories maintain that truth is deﬁned in terms of corre-
spondence with fact, or reality: something is true just in case it
corresponds to some fact. Next, there are coherence theories
of truth.2 Here truths are true in virtue of their cohering
together in some further speciﬁed way. There are also prag-
matic theories of truth3 and epistemic theories of truth.4 These
theories make something’s being true depend, respectively,
upon its usefulness to us in believing it, or on certain facts
1 Classic (but importantly distinct) examples include Chapter 12 of Russell (1912) and
Austin (1950). Contemporary correspondence theories are found in Fumerton
(2002), Newman (2002), David (2004), and Vision (2004).
2 See, e.g., Joachim (1906) and Young (2001).
3 See, e.g., Dewey (1941) and James (1981).
4 See, e.g., Dummett (1958–9) and Putnam (1981).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
12
www.ebook3000.com

about our evidence-gathering capabilities. There are deﬂation-
ary (or “minimalist”) theories of truth, which hold that truth
has no uniﬁed nature, that there is no substantive or genuine
property shared by all and only truths.5 Finally, there are
pluralist (or “functionalist”) theories of truth that maintain
that the nature of truth may vary from domain to domain.6
According to such theories, what it is for, say, an ethical claim
to be true may be different from what it is for a claim of physics
to be true.7
Each of these families of theories offers different answers
to the questions ‘What is the nature of truth?’ and ‘What, if
anything, do all truths share in common?’ The primitivist
theory I shall be defending rejects all of these views. My version
of primitivism is monistic, as it rejects the pluralists’ claim
to truth having multiple natures. It is fundamentalist, in that
it cannot be deﬁned in terms of more basic notions like corre-
spondence, coherence, utility, or warrant. Finally, it is some-
times deﬂationary and sometimes substantive. To appreciate
primitivism’s complex relationship to deﬂationary theories, we
need to turn to a pair of key distinctions.
1.1.1
Property, concept, word
Theories of truth do indeed investigate the nature of truth, but
our topic still needs further disambiguation. When discussing
5 See, e.g., Ramsey (1927), Ayer (1952), Quine (1970), Grover, Camp, and Belnap
(1975), Leeds (1978), Horwich (1990; 1998b), and Field (1994a).
6 See, e.g., Wright (1992) and Lynch (2009).
7 Complicating matters further is, following Beall and Glanzberg (2008), the distinc-
tion between theories concerned with the nature of truth (as in all the views just
mentioned) and theories concerned with the logic of truth (e.g., Kripke 1975; Gupta
and Belnap 1993). The latter theories are motivated directly by the liar paradox,
which tends not to be the focus of the nature-based views. The views I shall be
engaging most are focused on questions involving the nature of truth, but I do
discuss the liar paradox below in Chapter 9.
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
13

truth, we may be interested in the property of truth, that
feature (if it exists) that all truths share and all falsities lack.
We might be interested in the concept of truth, our mental
understanding of that notion that we use the word ‘truth’ to
pick out. Or we might be interested in the word ‘truth’ as well
as ‘true’ and its associated predicates (‘is true’) and operators
(‘it is true that’). Keeping this threefold distinction in mind is
absolutely vital. Views that may be attractive for one of the
dimensions of truth may not be so attractive for the others.8
The topic of the property of truth involves the metaphysics
of truth. What sort of property is truth? Is truth a natural kind?
A naturalistic property? A merely logical property? Is it even a
property at all? If so, is it a fundamental or a derivative prop-
erty? Is it monadic or relational? Simple or complex? We shall
take up these sorts of questions in Chapter 4, when we delve
into the various metaphysical approaches that are taken with
respect to properties.
The topic of the concept of truth often involves truth’s
connection to other concepts. Is truth an explanatorily inter-
esting concept? Does truth play a role in our thought that
extends beyond its linguistic role in forming generalizations
and anaphora? Can it be used to analyze other concepts? Can it
be itself analyzed into further concepts? Or does it admit of no
non-circular analysis, or perhaps no analysis at all? Questions
concerning the concept of truth also involve what mental
agents have to have in order to deploy the concept of truth.
What other concepts or mental abilities does one have to have
in order to have the concept of truth? Is there anything more to
having a concept of truth than being disposed to infer ‘p’ from
‘It is true that p’ and vice versa? These sorts of questions take
8 This section (and the general approach to truth that it advocates) owes much to
Dorit Bar-On and Keith Simmons, and their thinking about truth (particularly
2007). I thank them for turning me on to it.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
14
www.ebook3000.com

center stage in Chapters 5 through 8, where I launch the
defense of conceptual primitivism.
The topic of the words ‘truth,’ ‘is true,’ ‘it is true that,’
and others involves the various sorts of roles that these
expressions play in our language. Are they used to ascribe a
property to objects? Or are they words exclusively for serv-
ing logical and expressive roles like disquotation, forming
anaphora, and building generalizations? Some approaches
to truth posit a very tight connection between these linguistic
items and our concept of truth. The view I defend ﬁnds
much more space between them. In fact, as we shall see in
Chapter 5, I argue that we can have a concept of truth
even if we speak a language without any words like ‘truth’
or ‘true.’
I hope that these sets of questions illustrate the difference
between the property of truth (henceforth ‘truth’), the concept
of truth (henceforth ‘truth’), and the word ‘truth.’ In what
follows, I shall not be too concerned with exactly what a
property is, or exactly what a concept is. These are contentious
issues, and my particular view about truth does not depend on
taking on a speciﬁc stance on the nature of concepts and
properties. What is crucial is that we recognize that there is a
distinction to be drawn between properties, concepts, and
words. Consider how this distinction plays out with another
example, the tried and true case of water. On the one hand we
have the word ‘water’ (along with ‘agua,’ ‘aqua,’ ‘eau,’ ‘vand,’
etc.). What these words serve to pick out is that watery sub-
stance composed of H2O molecules. We can then distinguish
between the property of being water (understood in terms of
H2O) and the concept of water that is not understood in terms
of H2O, but in terms of its liquidity, its ability to quench thirst,
etc. It is no conceptual truth – so says the philosophical status
quo – that water is composed of H2O molecules. Our under-
standing of the full nature of the property of being water
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
15

came from much empirical investigation, investigation that
took place long after our concept water was ﬁrmly
entrenched.9 The property of being composed of water is the
property of being composed of H2O molecules, but our con-
cept does not tell us that.
Equipped with the concept/property distinction, one might
go on to say something about truth in line with what we have
just said about water. Our concept truth is one thing; the
property truth is another. If truth is like water, then there may
be more to the property than is revealed by the concept.
William Alston entertains just this possibility. He writes:
it may be that the property of truth really is what is speciﬁed in
one or another version of the correspondence theory, even
though, on my view and other “minimalist” views, the concept
we wield in ordinary thought and talk when saying of a proposi-
tion, statement, or belief that it is true does not specify any mode
of “correspondence” with a fact, a truth maker.
(Alston 2002: 11)
The suggestion is that one might take a deﬂationary or
“minimalist” approach to truth while taking a substantive,
correspondence approach to truth. (We shall cover the substan-
tivist/deﬂationist distinction in the subsequent section.) There
might be important features to truth that are not enshrined in
our concept. Hence, even if deﬂationism is correct for truth, it
does not follow that there can be no substantive philosophical
inquiry regarding the nature of truth.10 Similarly, Ernest
Sosa considers the possibility that we might pair a primitivist
conception of truth with “a metaphysical theory of truth as
correspondence with reality” (1993a: 15). The view I shall be
defending is something of the inverse of the view Alston consid-
ers. I reject deﬂationary accounts of the concept of truth, but
9 See Putnam (1975) for the locus classicus discussion of this example.
10 Cf. Wright (2001).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
16
www.ebook3000.com

adopt a fully deﬂationary account of the property of truth.
In short, I am a primitivist about truth, but take truth to be a
fully deﬂated property.
1.1.2
Substantivism and deﬂationism
The distinction between truth, truth, and ‘truth’ will be
of central importance as we proceed. The other crucial
distinction to which we shall often return is that between
substantivism and deﬂationism.11 Substantive views of truth
take truth to be a robust notion, one that admits of fruitful
philosophical theorizing.12 The traditional theories of truth
are all substantive accounts. They understand the nature of
truth in terms of correspondence with reality, coherence in
an ideal system, pragmatic utility, or the ability to be veriﬁed
by empirical science. They all take truth to have a common
nature. That nature is analyzable for the non-primitivists,
and fundamental for the primitivists. Pluralists are multiply
substantivist: they take truth to have a different, substantive
nature in different domains (though they could think that
truth was deﬂationary in some but not all domains).
Deﬂationists, by contrast, take the traditional debate over
the nature of truth to rest on a mistake. There is no common
core to truth, no shared genuine property enjoyed by all
and only truths. For deﬂationists, there is no more to a
philosophical account of truth than an account of its logical
and linguistic features.
11 Cf. Boghossian: “Whether truth is robust or deﬂationary constitutes the biggest
decision a theorist of truth must make” (1990: 165, footnote 17).
12 I sometimes use ‘notion’ where the concept/property distinction is not particularly
relevant, my remarks apply to both, or when discussing other views that elide the
distinction. Usually, if I am speaking of the notion of truth, I am referring to
something more general and/or pre-theoretical than the concept or property.
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
17

Deﬂationism gets much of its appeal by noticing the equiv-
alence (in some sense) between sentences like the following:
(1)
There is one even prime number.
(2)
It is true that there is one even prime number.
(3)
‘There is one even prime number’ is true.
At the very least, these three are materially equivalent. If one is
true, the others are as well. Further, from each of them we may
infer each of the others. Given these facts about ‘is true’ and ‘it
is true that,’ it is tempting to say, as Frege did, that “adding”
truth to our original thought adds nothing to it at all (1956:
293). When we assert that it is true that p, we do no more (and
no less) than assert that p. This feature of truth goes by many
names. Some say that truth is “redundant” (Johnson 1921–4),
“logically superﬂuous” (Austin 1950),13 or “transparent”
(Blackburn 1984). Some say that this property of truth allows
it to “disappear” (Sellars, according to Quine 1970: 11). The
equivalencies we are exploring here have been codiﬁed in the
form of the various “truth schemas,” such as:
(T1)
It is true that p if and only if p.
(T2)
‘p’ is true if and only if p.
(T3)
The proposition that p is true if and only if p.
Deﬂationists commonly draw our attention to the truth
schemas, and argue that they exhaust just about all there is to
say about truth (e.g., Horwich 1990; 1998b). Substantivists,
while granting the legitimacy of the schemas, reject this
exhaustiveness claim.
The substantivism/deﬂationism distinction can be applied
to each of our three dimensions of truth: metaphysical, con-
ceptual, and linguistic. Commitment to one side of the debate
for one of those dimensions need not commit one to that same
13 Austin does not endorse the view.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
18
www.ebook3000.com

side for one of the other dimensions. First consider the meta-
physical topic concerning the property of truth. Everyone can
admit that in some sense truth is a property.14 Some things
(such as the sentence ‘2 is a prime number’) are true, and so
there is a property of being true. That is the same thin sense of
what it is to be a property according to which existence is also
clearly a property.15 When philosophers deny that existence is
a property, they do not mean to deny that some things exist, or
that ‘exist’ can take predicate position in sentences. Similarly,
when deﬂationists deny that truth is a property, they need not
be denying that some things are true, or that ‘is true’ is a
perfectly good predicate.16 What deﬂationists deny is that
truth is a “metaphysically robust” or “genuine” property.17
More often than not, what it is for a property to be “robust”
is left quite vague. On my view, we can put some ﬂesh on the
notion of robust properties by turning to the metaphysical
literature on the nature of properties. There, a distinction is
typically drawn between sparse and abundant properties.
Sparse properties, depending on your view, are those that
have causal powers, correspond to universals or tropes, are
natural, or “carve nature at the joints.” The merely abundant
properties do none of these things. For example, one might
take green and blue to be sparse properties, and grue and bleen
to be merely abundant properties, and use this distinction to
help explain why the former properties, but not the latter, are
14 But note that deﬂationism about truth is often deﬁned – more often than not,
notably, by its opponents – as the thesis that there is no property of truth.
See, e.g., Boghossian (1990: 161), Kirkham (1992: 307), Alston (1996: 41),
Lynch (1998: 112), Merricks (2007: 187), and Young (2009: 564).
15 According to Shoemaker, “There is a broad sense of the word ‘property’ in which
there is a property corresponding to any grammatical predicate” (1979: 331).
16 But see prosententialism, which does deny that ‘is true’ is a predicate. See,
e.g., Grover, Camp, and Belnap (1975), Grover (1992), and Brandom (1994).
17 See, e.g., Putnam (1991: 2), Wright (1992: 13), Blackburn (1998: 75), Engel (2002:
41), and Lynch (2006: 68).
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
19

useful in drawing inductive inferences.18 Regardless of one’s
view regarding what sparse properties are, metaphysical
substantivism about truth can be understood as the view that
truth is a sparse property. Even deﬂationists can admit that
truth is an abundant property. David Lewis, for example, takes
abundant properties to be no more than classes of objects
(1983). For example, the abundant property being yellow or
in Kansas is just the class of things that are either yellow or in
Kansas. Similarly, one might think that the property truth is
just the class of things that are true. In Chapter 4 I shall draw
the distinction between metaphysical substantivism and deﬂa-
tionism in terms of this sparse/abundant distinction, and argue
that truth must be understood as a merely abundant property.
Hence, I advocate metaphysical deﬂationism.
Next we come to the debate between substantivists and
deﬂationists over the word ‘truth’ and its fellows. Linguistic
substantivists about truth think, for example, that the predi-
cate ‘is true’ is used to predicate a substantive property of
truth-bearers. Linguistic deﬂationists, however, think that ‘is
true’ does no such thing, for there is no such property to be
predicated. Linguistic deﬂationists go on to say what ‘truth’
and ‘true’ are for, since their function is not to ascribe robust
properties to truth-bearing objects.
What do deﬂationists think ‘true’ is for? A variety of things:
disquotation, denominalization, forming generalizations, and
generating anaphoric expressions. Truth is disquotational.
That is, when we are willing to apply ‘is true’ to something
quoted, we are entitled to “disquote” and just assert what is
found within the quotation marks. For example, if I am happy
to assert that ‘There are no Arctic penguins’ is true, I should be
just as happy to assert that there are no Arctic penguins. This is
18 See Goodman (1954) for the introduction of grue and bleen to the philosophical
consciousness.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
20
www.ebook3000.com

a unique feature belonging only to ‘is true.’19 The predicate ‘is
ﬁve words long,’ for example, does not enable disquotation.
From “‘There are no Arctic penguins’ is ﬁve words long” we
cannot infer that there are no Arctic penguins. Only truth lets
us “semantically descend” from talk of sentences to talk about
the world (see Quine 1970).20
Truth also enables us to build generalizations that would
otherwise be impossible to express ﬁnitely. Every sentence of the
form ‘p only if p’ is true. By using ‘is true’ here, I can very quickly
express what would otherwise be an inﬁnitely long conjunction:
There is one even prime number only if there is one even prime
number, and water is composed of H2O only if water is composed
of H2O, and so on. Truth’s generalizing features also enable us to
say things like ‘Everything Kant says is true’ and ‘Something
Hume says is true.’ The former is short for an inﬁnitely large
conjunction of conditionals: If Kant said that Hume was right,
then Hume was right, and if Kant said that Leibniz was dogmatic,
then Leibniz was dogmatic, and so on. The latter is short for an
inﬁnitely large disjunction of conjunctions: Either Hume said that
morals are sentimental, and morals are sentimental, or Hume said
that everything is either an idea or an impression, and everything
is either an idea or an impression, and so forth.
Truth also generates anaphora. Suppose I remember agree-
ing with you yesterday about something, but cannot remember
what it was. I can say ‘What you said yesterday is true.’ ‘True’
enables me, in effect, to reassert what had been asserted before,
without even realizing what it is that I am asserting. Similarly,
19 Colin McGinn (2000; 2002) makes much of this fact. But it is not quite true. Other
factive predicates like ‘is known’ are also disquotational. From ‘“p” is known’ we
may disquote and just infer ‘p.’ Of course, these other predicates are disquotational
in virtue of their presupposing truth.
20 Disquotation applies to sentences. Denominalization applies to propositions. From
‘The proposition that there is one even prime number is true’ we can infer ‘There is
one even prime number.’ See Horwich (1990).
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
21

if you say that kids these days have it easy, I can agree with you
by simply saying ‘That’s true’ rather than saying, all over
again, that kids these days have it easy.
Deﬂationists home in on this list of expressive functions that
‘is true’ performs, and then claim that these exhaust what there is
to say about ‘true.’ Linguistic substantivists, however, disagree.
They may well accept all of the features of ‘true’ that deﬂationists
identify. What they disagree with is the deﬂationists’ claim that
these features exhaust everything there is to say about ‘true’ and
truth. They might say, as above, that ‘is true’ also serves to
predicate a substantive property of truth-bearers. They might
also point out the existence of other uses of ‘true’ or ‘truth’ that
are not easily assimilable under the above functions of truth.
For example, substantivists might draw a distinction between
ﬁrst-order and second-order uses of truth (Simmons 2006). First-
order uses of truth apply ‘true’ directly to truth-bearers, or in
conjunction with expressions that quantify over truth-bearers.
The examples of the previous paragraphs are all of this form. But
there are other uses of ‘true’ where the truth of individual or sets
of truth-bearers is not in question. For example, there is the
Fregean idea that to assert is to present as true (1979). There
are many ways to present a thought. To conjecture that humans
will someday set foot on Mars is not the same as asserting that
humans will someday set foot on Mars. There are a variety of
modes of presentation, and assertion is the mode intimately
connected to truth. To assert that humans will someday set
foot on Mars is to present that thought as being true. We cannot
simply drop the reference to truth here, as we can in ordinary
disquotational ﬁrst-order uses of truth. To assert that p is to
present p as being true. But asserting that p involves more than
just presenting p.21 Regardless of whether this account of
21 See Bar-On and Simmons (2007) for more on this argument, which we take up in
full in Section 8.2.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
22
www.ebook3000.com

assertion is correct, the Fregean thesis here is fully intelligible,
and looks to be a counterexample to the deﬂationists’ claim
that all uses of ‘true’ and ‘truth’ can be brought under their
disquotational umbrella.
I will not have much to say about the linguistic dimensions
of truth in the pages that follow. I am happy to admit that truth
is a device for disquotation and denominalization, and a tool
for forming generalizations and anaphora. I do not think that it
predicates a substantive property of truth, for I do not believe
that there is any such property. But I do think ‘true’ expresses a
deep, important, and foundational concept. I am also for the
most part convinced that certain appearances of ‘true’ cannot
be disquoted away in standard deﬂationist fashion, as in the
example of second-order uses of truth from the previous para-
graph. So while I am happy to endorse linguistic substantivism,
this is mostly due to my embrace of conceptual substantivism,
and attention to certain facts about where and how truth
shows up in our language.
Finally we come to substantivism and deﬂationism about
the concept truth. A helpful way of approaching the dialectic
between substantivists and deﬂationists about truth is in
terms of explanatory power. Is truth an explanatorily potent
concept? Substantivists think that it is; deﬂationists disagree.
If truth is an explanatorily powerful concept, then it can be
used to explain and illuminate other notions. But it must do this
in a way that goes beyond truth’s mere logical and linguistic
functions. For deﬂationists agree that truth is importantly
related to our other concepts; they just think that those
connections can be fully elucidated by relying on truth’s ability
to disquote, form generalizations, etc. Here is Michael Williams:
“the function of truth talk is wholly expressive, thus never
explanatory . . . What makes deﬂationary views deﬂationary is
their insistence that the importance of truth talk is exhausted by
its expressive function” (1999: 547; see also Chapter 3 of
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
23

Horwich 1990 and Williams 2002). Deﬂationists do not take
truth to be of any explanatory value in analyzing other
concepts,
beyond
its
logical
and
expressive
functions.
Similarly, deﬂationists hold that truth can be accounted for
fully in terms of those functions. Truth plays no role in our
conceptual scheme other than as an expressive device for
disquotation and the like. We need not bring in any other
notions to understand the nature of truth. Truth holds up no
other concepts, and itself is held up by none. Truth is concep-
tually isolated and conceptually thin.
To get a better sense of the deﬂationary thesis that truth is
conceptually thin, consider two contrasting cases. One is
handled easily by the deﬂationist; the other poses more
substantive difﬁculties. Regardless of whether knowledge can
be analyzed without loss or remainder into further concepts, it
is a conceptual truth that knowledge requires truth. S knows
that p only if ‘p’ is true. Here we have a condition on knowl-
edge that explicitly appeals to truth. Still, the appearance
of truth here is easily handled by the deﬂationist. Indeed,
S knows that p only if ‘p’ is true. But the deﬂationist (and
non-deﬂationists, too, for that matter) may claim that ‘true’ is
used in the condition merely as a useful shortcut. For S knows
that p only if p is ‘snow is white’ and snow is white, or if p is
‘grass is green’ and grass is green, and so forth. The conceptual
connection between knowledge and truth poses no problem
for conceptual deﬂationism. ‘True’ shows up in the condition
because it is needed to express an otherwise inﬁnite statement
involving what it takes to know something.
Contrast the knowledge case with that of assertion. Here
again we can make use of the Fregean idea that to assert is to
present as true. Dorit Bar-On and Keith Simmons (2007) argue
against conceptual deﬂationism by saying that an adequate
account of assertion requires a conceptual connection to
truth that the deﬂationist cannot allow. Following Frege, they
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
24
www.ebook3000.com

argue that we do not succeed in making an assertion merely by
predicating ‘is true’ of some thought. The actor on the stage no
more asserts that there is one even prime number by saying
‘“There is one even prime number” is true’ than by saying
‘There is one even prime number.’ As Frege writes, “In order
to put something forward as true, we do not need a special
predicate: we only need the assertoric force with which the
sentence is uttered” (1979: 233). To understand what asser-
toric force is, one must rely on a prior understanding of truth.
But that reliance on truth goes beyond its role in disquotation
and denominalization. For if what it is to assert p is to put
forward p as true, we cannot simply drop the use of ‘true’ here
in typical deﬂationist fashion. To assert p is not simply to put
forward p. We can conjecture that p, we can deny that p, we
can wonder whether p. All are modes of putting forward p. To
capture what is distinctive about assertion, we must rely on a
prior conception of truth, one that goes beyond truth’s role as
an expressive device. Hence, Bar-On and Simmons argue
against conceptual deﬂationism on the grounds that we have
an important conceptual connection between truth and asser-
tion that is left unaccounted for by the various linguistic and
logical properties of the truth predicate.
In Chapters 5 through 8, I shall be arguing in favor of
conceptual primitivism, and so against conceptual deﬂation-
ism. Primitivism about the concept of truth admits that it is of
explanatory importance. There is more to our concept of truth
than its role in disquoting and forming generalizations.
Though truth is a valuable building block in analyzing other
concepts, the primitivist does not think that it can be analyzed
any further. Truth is a fundamental concept, an analyzer that
cannot be analyzed. Hence, primitivism about truth is not a
deﬂationary view; it is a form of substantivism. Nevertheless,
primitivist views have several important afﬁnities with deﬂa-
tionary views. For example, both views reject the claim that
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
25

truth admits of a substantive analysis, and so both reject all
of the traditional non-deﬂationary theories of truth. Hence,
as Sosa points out, it can sometimes be difﬁcult to distinguish
the conceptual deﬂationist from the conceptual primitivist
(1993a: 10).22 Nevertheless, staking out a primitivist view of
truth is to take a stand against deﬂationism, however strong
the afﬁnities between the views.
1.1.3
Truth and truth-bearers
When we talk about something being true, just what sort
of thing are we talking about? We apply truth to all sorts of
things: sentences, statements, beliefs, judgments, thoughts,
propositions. In some of the cases, such as sentences and
beliefs, we can distinguish between types and tokens. My belief
that snow is white and your belief that snow is white are two
separate existences; one could exist without the other. But
since they share the same content, they are two different tokens
of the same belief type.
Sentences are perhaps one of the most natural candidates
for being truth-bearers, but also one of the most problematic.
The sentence ‘I am bored’ might be true in my mouth, but
false in yours. What truth value should we assign to the
sentence? Or take the sentence ‘Phil has one billion dollars.’
If Phil has exactly $1,000,000,000, then the sentence is true
when uttered by Andy American, but false when uttered by
Betsy British. So perhaps we should not assign sentences any
truth values, and say instead that only sentences paired with
an interpretation (or, perhaps, paired with a context) have
truth values.
22 Cf. Candlish (2007: 102) and Candlish and Damnjanovic (2007: 310–11). John
Collins argues that Davidsonian primitivism is at risk of collapsing into deﬂation-
ism (2002: 518–19).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
26
www.ebook3000.com

The existence of some sorts of purported truth-bearers
is hard to deny. Surely (at least setting aside eliminativism
about the mental and eliminativism about compound
objects) there are sentence tokens, statements, judgments,
thoughts, and belief tokens. Propositions, belief types, and
sentence types are more ontologically controversial, given
that they are often understood as being ersatz or Platonic
(or, as some prefer, “abstract”) objects. It is common in the
theory of truth for theorists to take a stand on which sort of
truth-bearer is primary, and then deﬁne the truth of the
other sorts of truth-bearers in terms of the truth of primary
truth-bearers. For example, many take propositional truth
to be fundamental, and deﬁne sentential truth in terms of it:
a sentence is true just in case it expresses a true proposition.
Russell, by contrast, takes beliefs to be the primary bearers
of truth, and deﬁnes the truth of statements in terms of the
truth of beliefs (1910a: 172). I prefer to be more promiscu-
ous and pluralist. I shall freely make use of a variety of
truth-bearers; I am ofﬁcially neutral on the existence or
nature of propositions, so I shall avoid making any arguments
that indispensably presuppose their existence. Propositions,
in my view, are highly useful theoretical posits. Something
like them seems to be presupposed by ordinary thought,
which happily makes use of the idea that a variety of things
can all mean the same thing, as with different translations
of the same thought in various languages. What it is for two
distinct sentences to mean the same thing is for them to
express one single thing, a proposition. Ordinary thought
also allows us to think that there could be all sorts of truths,
even if there were no one around to think about them.
That possibility is of a scenario in which no mental agents
exist, and so nothing meaningful like a sentence, statement,
judgment, or belief exists. But that is no prohibition on
there being truth at all. In fact, according to that possibility,
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
27

it is true that there are no mental agents! But what is it that is
true in such a counterfactual scenario? Propositions, under-
stood as necessarily existing ersatz entities, can provide the
answer.
I could simplify the pages that follow by taking the existence
of propositions for granted, and proceeding as if they are the
primary sort of truth-bearer. I resist that approach for two
reasons. First, I have no desire to beg the question from the
outset against all those who are skeptical about the existence of
propositions. I myself have doubts, and hope to give an
account of truth that need not make use of propositions.
Second, I am somewhat skeptical of the very idea of there
being a privileged kind of truth-bearer that is deserving of
being called primary. I do not foresee that anything worth
worrying about turns on my being liberal with truth-bearers,
and egalitarian about their status.23
1.2
What is a primitivist theory?
Having now discussed what the theory of truth is about,
reviewed the major players, explored the two basic distinctions
that inform my approach, and brieﬂy considered what the
bearers of truth are, it is time to dig into primitivist philosoph-
ical views. Let us ﬁrst explore the nature of primitivist theories,
and then examine some fellow primitivist travelers, albeit
about topics other than truth.
23 Künne (2003) does make a point of distinguishing those primitivists who
embrace propositions (Frege, Moore, Russell, Sosa) from those who embrace
sentences (Davidson), though I think the more crucial distinction (and more
natural way of dividing up the landscape) is between those who are primitiv-
ists about the concept of truth and those who are primitivists about the
property of truth. After all, as we shall see in Chapter 2, Moore/Russell
propositions have no more in common with Fregean propositions than they
do with sentences.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
28
www.ebook3000.com

1.2.1
Theoretical and metaphysical primitives
To give an account is not necessarily to give an analysis.
Those are the wise words of David Lewis, who holds that
any systematic treatment of a set of purported facts may
either (a) deny them, (b) analyze them, or (c) take them as
primitive (1983: 352). The same can be said for accounts of
properties or concepts. We can deny that those properties or
concepts exist, analyze them into their constituents, or take
them as basic primitives that exist but admit of no such
analysis. Lewis himself goes on to take the notion of natural-
ness as a primitive. Some properties are more natural than
others, but there is nothing more to be said about what
naturalness is. We can show how naturalness relates to
other notions, or how other notions are built up from it;
what we cannot do is analyze naturalness into more funda-
mental notions.
One important distinction to draw is that between
theoretical and metaphysical primitives. Something is a
theoretical primitive relative to some theory just in case it is
not analyzed by that theory. For example, suppose I were
writing a book on epistemology where I offer accounts of
the nature of knowledge and justiﬁcation. As part of my
account of knowledge, I argue that S knows that p only if
S is justiﬁed in believing that p, S believes that p, and it is
true that p. The book is on epistemology, and so offers
accounts of knowledge and justiﬁcation. What it does not
do is offer accounts of truth and belief – it simply takes
those notions for granted. From the perspective of my
theory of knowledge, the notions of truth and belief are
theoretical primitives. Knowledge and justiﬁcation are not
taken as primitives, for I go on to give accounts of them.
But because the account makes use of truth and belief, but
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
29

does not say what they are, the theory takes them to be
theoretical primitives. By taking truth and belief on as theo-
retical primitives for the purposes of my epistemology, I do
not thereby take them on as metaphysical primitives, as in
fact having no analyses; I just set those analyses aside for
others to investigate.
The notion of being a theoretical primitive is a relative one:
something is a theoretical primitive relative to those theories
that use it but leave its analysis for another day. The notion of a
metaphysical primitive is absolute: even if one wanted to offer
an analysis of a metaphysical primitive, one would fail.
Metaphysical primitives admit of no further analysis. They
are rock bottom.
Now, one might take the position that there are no meta-
physical primitives, so deﬁned. According to this perspective,
there is no fact of the matter as to whether a particular concept is
fundamental; it is fundamental only relative to some systems,
but not others. In what follows, I shall be assuming the more
“realist” position that takes there to be a fact of the matter as to
whether a concept is fundamental in the absolute sense, and
arguing that truth is such a concept. But my arguments will
appeal even to those who do not share this realist perspective, as
they can also be used to recommend conceptual schemes that
take truth to be fundamental. A common theme in the chapters
to follow is that taking truth to be conceptually fundamental is
theoretically advantageous (even if there is no further metaphys-
ical fact of the matter as to whether it is really fundamental).
1.2.2
Primitive properties and primitive concepts
Given the distinction between properties and concepts, we
also need to attend to the distinction between primitivism
about a particular property and primitivism about a partic-
ular concept. The idea of a primitive property is complicated
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
30
www.ebook3000.com

by the metaphysical debate over the nature of properties.
In Chapter 4, when we take up the topic of the property of
truth, we shall explore some of the various ways that philos-
ophers have traditionally understood properties (or, more
speciﬁcally, the sparse properties): as universals, tropes, or
natural classes of objects. For those who embrace a theory of
universals, the idea of a primitive property may amount to no
more than the idea of a universal. Suppose that one such
universalist thought that there were two sparse properties,
green and blue, that correspond to universals. The properties
grue and bleen, by contrast, are abundant properties that
correspond to no universals. This universalist would not
take grue and bleen as primitive (nor, for that matter, the
properties green and blue or green or blue): they are not
basic, for they reduce down to green and blue, which are
basic. For those who understand sparse properties in terms of
fundamental entities like universals or tropes, a primitive
property may be no more and no less than a sparse property.
In any event, primitive properties are going to be simple and
unanalyzable.
It is much easier to get traction on the notion of a prim-
itive concept. For the purposes of this work, I do not
stake out a particular view on what concepts are. Perhaps
they are mental schemas, or sets of inferential rules. Perhaps
they are kinds of functions, in a Fregean sense (1951).
Whatever they are, concepts are the building blocks for
thoughts. Primitive concepts are the most fundamental of
those building blocks; from a stock of primitive concepts
we can build less fundamental, derivative concepts. Our
concept bachelor, roughly, is composed of the concepts
male and unmarried. The fact that bachelor admits of
such an analysis demonstrates that it is not a primitive
concept. Its component concepts, in turn, can themselves
admit of further analysis, or be primitive.
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
31

1.2.3
Foundations and networks
Another important distinction when it comes to primitive and
derivative concepts is that between foundations and networks.
The foundationalist and the networker approach the topic of
conceptual analysis from very different perspectives. According
to the foundationalist approach, there is a basic set of concepts
that provides the foundations of our conceptual scheme. All of
our other concepts are constructed from this basic set of concepts.
All non-fundamental, derivative concepts can be fully under-
stood in terms of the basic stock of primitives. Importantly, for
the foundationalist, each primitive is independent of the others.
Like the elements in the periodic table, each primitive concept is a
distinct existence, separate from the others. They may come
together to forge new concepts, as different elements combine
to form compounds, but no primitive concept depends on any
other for its own existence or intelligibility. Primitive concepts,
for the foundationalist, are rugged individualists.
Peter Strawson offers an elegant account of the foundation-
alist view and its commitment to simple, fundamental concepts
(though he does not endorse it):
any philosopher who believes in the atomic or simple elements of
reductive analysis, however he conceives them, will obviously view
these simple elements in a special light. He will view them as basic to
our whole conceptual structure, to our entire conception of the
world; for everything else is to be explained in terms of them,
while they are not to be explained in terms of anything else. They
will be conceptually ultimate or enjoy absolute conceptual priority.
They will be absolutely fundamental in our scheme of things. Now
these notions – of the ultimate, the basic, of that which enjoys
absolute priority or is absolutely fundamental in our scheme, or
schemes, of things – these are obviously appealing. They are among
the notions which initially attract us to philosophy.
(Strawson 1992: 20)
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
32
www.ebook3000.com

Among the concepts that Strawson has in mind are time,
change, identity, knowledge, and, of special interest to
us, truth (1992: 24).
The network approach sees matters differently. Strawson
describes this non-foundationalist approach in terms of what
he calls not conceptual analysis, but elucidation:
Let us abandon the notion of perfect simplicity in concepts; let us
abandon even the notion that analysis must always be in the
direction of greater simplicity. Let us imagine, instead, the model
of an elaborate network, a system, of connected items, concepts,
such that the function of each item, each concept, could, from the
philosophical point of view, be properly understood only by
grasping its connections with the others, its place in the system –
perhaps better still, the picture of a set of interlocking systems of
such a kind. If this becomes our model, then there will be no
reason to be worried if, in the process of tracing connections
from one point to another of the network, we ﬁnd ourselves
returning to, or passing through, our starting-point.
(Strawson 1992: 19; cf. 1959: 11)
The networker, such as Strawson himself, rejects the tradi-
tional project of conceptual analysis, understood as the process
of analyzing our more complex concepts into the simple,
foundational ones. The networker looks instead for intercon-
nections between concepts. Foundationalists, too, care about
the interconnections between our concepts, even our most
fundamental ones. The disagreement between networkers
and foundationalists involves whether or not the concepts in
question are constituted by those connections.
To explore the distinction between foundationalists and net-
workers, suppose that among our fundamental concepts are
truth and identity. Foundationalists think that these notions
cannot be deﬁned or analyzed, not even in terms of each other.
There still may be connections that may be drawn between them.
For example, if A and B are identical, then the sentence ‘A = B’ is
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
33

true. Here we have a connection in some sense between truth
and identity. Foundationalists may admit this claim to be a
conceptual truth, but they need not think that it is somehow
deﬁnitional of either truth or identity. It is also a conceptual truth
that something is true just in case it would be believed by an
omniscient being, but it does not follow that what it is to be true
is to be believed by an omniscient being. (There may be no such
being.) So whatever connections between primitive concepts
that foundationalists allow, they may not in any way be constitu-
tional. Networkers, by contrast, may allow that there are
conceptual truths that connect fundamental concepts like
truth and identity, and that these connections are constitutive.
On such a view, what it is to be A can be spelled out in terms of B,
even if what it is to be B is ultimately spelled out in terms of A.
Two points about the foundations/networks distinction
are worth mentioning. First, even though networkers deny
the existence of a privileged set of fundamental, primitive
concepts, they need not think that all concepts are equally
fundamental. It is open to the networker to think that there is
still a privileged set of equally fundamental concepts; those
concepts do not stand on their own – they are still understood
in terms of their fellow fundamentals – but do not fail to be
fundamental simply in virtue of their interconnected natures.
Of course, the networker must supply (as Strawson does) an
alternative way of drawing the fundamental/derivative distinc-
tion, since it cannot be identiﬁed with the simple/complex
distinction. Once that distinction is drawn, the following
theoretical possibility becomes open. The foundationalist
may offer a set of primitive, fundamental concepts, from
which all other concepts are constructed. The networker may
offer that exact same set as the set of fundamental concepts.
The difference between the foundationalist and the networker
here solely involves the relationship between the fundamentals,
not what the fundamentals are. What this possibility reveals is
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
34
www.ebook3000.com

that taking truth to be conceptually fundamental need not
presuppose one or the other of the two methodological
approaches to conceptual analysis/elucidation. The founda-
tionalist and the networker can be in complete agreement
that truth is primitive and fundamental in the sense that truth
cannot be analyzed or deﬁned in terms of other concepts that
are still more fundamental.
For what it is worth, I am not as pessimistic as is Strawson
about the prospects for the foundationalist approach, but this
ﬁght is one I shall set aside for another day. I shall proceed by
assuming the foundationalist approach, but networkers may
rest assured that everything I go on to say in favor of concep-
tual primitivism can be equally accounted for from their own
methodological perspective.
Second, as Strawson points out, the networker is not immedi-
ately worried by the existence of circularity in some account of a
concept. Circles are demanded by the networker, who argues
that even our most fundamental concepts cannot be fully under-
stood in isolation from one another. But to be happy with some
circles is not to be happy with all circles. Strawson writes: “Some
circles are too small and we move in them unawares, thinking we
have established a revealing connection when we have not. But it
would be a matter for judgement to say when the charge was
damaging and when it was not” (1992: 20). For example, sup-
pose one thought, alongside correspondence theories, that truth
is understood in terms of the further notions correspondence
and fact. What is a fact? If a fact is simply something that is true,
then we have moved in a very small circle indeed. It is up to
networkers to justify their choices as to when circles are large
enough to be sufﬁciently elucidatory.24
24 The networker’s congeniality toward circularity reveals why the foundationalist/
networker distinction is relevant only to the discussion of concepts, and not proper-
ties. Even if concepts can be analyzed circularly, properties, understood as basic
entities in reality, cannot. If properties are complex, then they are constituted by
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
35

The traditional debate over the nature of truth has, like
traditional conceptual analysis, proceeded in foundationalist
terms. Truth is analyzed in terms of correspondence and
fact, or coherence, or utility, and – crucially – it is taken
for granted that those notions must themselves be taken as basic,
or analyzable in terms of concepts other than truth. But there is
no reason why the debate over the nature of truth cannot
proceed in networking terms. In any event, the philosophical
differences between the
foundationalist primitivist
about
truth and the networking primitivist who takes truth to be
fundamental, but ultimately circularly analyzed at best, need
not involve anything in particular to do with truth. The differ-
ence between these two views involves a prior commitment to
alternative philosophical methodologies. In what follows, I shall
be speaking the language of the foundationalist, but will not
raise any principled objections for networkers, as I take them to
be congenial to everything I have to say here about truth.
1.2.4
Fellow travelers
Primitivist views can be found all across philosophy. They have
been ably motivated and defended, which is a testament to the
fact that primitivism need not be understood as a move of last
resort, or a kind of fallback position after all attempts at
theorizing have failed. Famously, G. E. Moore advocated
primitivism about goodness (and, along the way, the color
yellow). He writes:
their parts. Imagine there were three fundamental properties that were “circularly
composed”: The ﬁrst, A, is composed of the properties B and C. B is composed of
the properties A and C. And C is composed of the properties A and B. It follows that
C in turn is composed of C, because it is composed of A, which is itself composed of
C. I ﬁnd this setup unintelligible. Circular concepts are one thing; circular properties
are something else entirely – something non-existent, in fact, even if networkers are
right about concepts.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
36
www.ebook3000.com

If I am asked ‘What is good?’ my answer is that good is good, and
that is the end of the matter. Or if I am asked ‘How is good to be
deﬁned?’ my answer is that it cannot be deﬁned, and that is all I
have to say about it . . . My point is that ‘good’ is a simple notion,
just as ‘yellow’ is a simple notion; that, just as you cannot, by any
manner of means, explain to any one who does not already know
it, what yellow is, so you cannot explain what good is. Deﬁnitions
of the kind that I was asking for, deﬁnitions which describe the
real nature of the object or notion denoted by a word, and which
do not merely tell us what the word is used to mean, are only
possible when the object or notion in question is something
complex . . . But yellow and good, we say, are not complex: they
are notions of that simple kind, out of which deﬁnitions are
composed and with which the power of further deﬁning ceases.
(Moore 1903: 6–8)
Any attempt to deﬁne goodness, Moore argues, falls foul of the
naturalistic fallacy, and leaves one susceptible to the open-
question argument. If a philosopher deﬁnes goodness as X, it is
always open to an opponent to ask ‘But is X good?’ Moore takes
the existence of such open questions to refute the various
attempts at analyzing goodness, and so takes goodness to be a
primitive. (Whether Moore is targeting concepts or properties
(or both) is up for interpretation. In the quotation above he
speaks of the object or notion denoted by a word, which suggests
that he is interested in both properties and concepts, but not mere
words. See Section 2.2.) Around the same time as publishing the
Principia, as we shall see below, Moore was also entertaining a
primitivist theory of truth, though he soon rejected it.
More recently, Colin McGinn has advocated a primitivist
view of several fundamental philosophical notions: identity,
existence, predication, necessity, and truth. “These concepts,”
McGinn writes, “form a conceptual bedrock; they stand, as it
were, underneath all our other concepts. They have no analysis”
(2000: 104–5). McGinn argues that these notions are irreducible
to anything else, and he thereby takes himself to be a kind of
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
37

non-naturalistic realist about them. They are fully real, legitimate
notions, but not amenable to any sort of naturalistic reduction.
“Logical properties are what they are and not some other thing,”
McGinn writes (2000: vi), invoking Bishop Butler, just as Moore
does in the epigraph to Principia Ethica.25
Timothy Williamson, against the tide of all those offering
analyses of knowledge, opts out of the project and decides
instead to adopt the slogan “knowledge ﬁrst” (2000: v).
By this he means that knowledge is to be taken as the funda-
mental epistemological notion, and that other notions are to be
understood in terms of it, and not the other way round. The
orthodox view in epistemology, according to Williamson, is
that “belief is conceptually prior to knowledge” (2000: 2).
Whatever knowledge is, it is to be understood in terms of the
prior concepts truth, belief, justification, and whatever
else is needed to dodge the Gettier problem (see Gettier 1963).
Williamson turns this orthodoxy on its head. Knowledge
is taken instead to be unanalyzable, and conceptually prior
to belief. It does not follow from Williamson’s rejection of
orthodoxy that it is false that S knows that p only if S believes
that p. Knowledge may still require belief, even if belief is not
conceptually prior to knowledge. Such conditionals remain
true, even though their consequents are not interpreted as
partial analyses of their antecedents.
Finally, consider Tim Maudlin’s view of the laws of nature
(2007). On Maudlin’s view, “the notion of a law cannot be
reduced to other more primitive notions” (2007: 18). Maudlin
accepts the interconnectedness of many of the central concepts
in the philosophy of science: laws, counterfactuals, possibility,
explanation, and others. His strategy is to take the laws of
nature as basic. (His primitivism is both conceptual and onto-
logical; the concept of a law cannot be further analyzed, and
25 The quote can be found at Butler (2006: 44).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
38
www.ebook3000.com

laws themselves are fundamental entities.) Doing so, Maudlin
thinks, is already somewhat plausible. All philosophers have
their primitives when it comes to understanding this family of
notions. David Lewis has his possible worlds (1986) and his
notion of naturalness (1983). David Armstrong has his neces-
sitation relation between universals (1983). Marc Lange has his
brute counterfactual truths (2009). There are many possible
bumps in the rug that one may take for one’s primitive.
Maudlin’s contention is that taking the laws themselves to be
the fundamental bump is more initially plausible than the other
options in the neighborhood. The next step in the argument is
simply to produce the goods: “The only hope of justifying this
approach is to show that having accepted laws as building
blocks we can explain how our beliefs about laws determine
our beliefs in other domains” (2007: 18). Our strategy will be
similar. Taking truth as a fundamental concept is a far more
plausible starting point than other notions like correspondence
or coherence (or assertion or warrant for that matter);
I argue for this particular claim in Section 6.2. Then we can
make the positive case (in Chapters 8 and 9) for primitivism by
showing all the useful philosophical work to which it can be put.
(I do believe, in addition, that we can argue for primitivism
directly. That is the task of Chapters 5 through 7.)
Primitivist views in philosophy are starting to gain more
traction. I hope, in the following pages, to motivate another
form of primitivism −primitivism about our concept of truth.
This view has not received too much attention over the years,
but it has been of historical importance. That history, as well as
my departure from it, is the focus of the next chapter.
Truth, truth, and ‘truth’
39

2
The golden age of primitivism
Primitivism about truth has a very modest history, but one that
is marked by the endorsement of some of the greatest philos-
ophers of all time. Descartes, for one, seems to endorse some-
thing like primitivism, and employs an argument analogous to
one that Frege develops centuries later. But primitivism’s
golden age was at the dawn of analytic philosophy, when it
received attention from Frege, Moore, and Russell. Their views
are the focus of this chapter.
Let us begin, however, with a highly suggestive passage from
Descartes. In a letter to the French theologian, philosopher,
and mathematician Marin Mersenne, Descartes offers what
appears to be one of the ﬁrst articulations of a primitivist
conception of truth:
I have never had any doubts about truth, because it seems a notion
so transcendentally clear that nobody can be ignorant of it. There
are many ways of examining a balance before using it, but there is
no way to learn what truth is, if one does not know it by nature.
What reason would we have for accepting anything which could
teach us the nature of truth if we did not know that it was true,
that is to say, if we did not know truth? Of course it is possible to
explain the meaning of the word to someone who does not know
the language, and tell him that the word ‘truth,’ in the strict sense,
denotes the conformity of thought with its object, but that when it
is attributed to things outside thought, it means only that they can
be the objects of true thoughts, either ours or God’s. But no logical
deﬁnition can be given which will help anyone to discover its
nature. I think the same of many other things which are very
40
www.ebook3000.com

simple and are known naturally, such as shape, size, motion,
place, time, and so on: if you try to deﬁne these things you obscure
them and cause confusion.
(Descartes 1991: 139; AT II 597)
Descartes makes a number of tantalizing claims about truth
in this passage: (1) truth is a transcendentally clear notion;
(2) there is no way to learn what truth is save from knowing it
innately through nature; (3) we can offer a “verbal deﬁni-
tion” of the word ‘truth’; (4) no “logical deﬁnition” can be
given of it that will be of any help in revealing its nature;
(5) truth is so simple a notion that it is futile to try to deﬁne it.
Given Descartes’s overarching nominalism about properties,
and his use of the term ‘notion’ (he uses the French ‘notion’)
in the passage, I would venture to say that Descartes’s view
here is best understood as something akin to what we
are calling conceptual primitivism −primitivism about the
concept truth.
It is important to keep distinct the epistemic points that
Descartes makes (that we can never learn the nature of truth
by any attempt at a logical deﬁnition) from the metaphysical
points (that truth is a simple notion). Also lurking in this
passage, found within Descartes’s rhetorical question, is one
of the key arguments that has been used to defend primitivism:
that any attempt at a deﬁnition will involve some sort of
circularity or regress. We shall encounter this style of argument
again in our historical survey, and later when we turn to the
arguments in favor of primitivism.
Traces of primitivism surface here and there between
the age of Descartes and the golden age that took place around
the turn of the twentieth century. Hans Sluga (1980: 114)
claims to detect primitivism in certain passages of Kant (e.g.,
1998: 197; A58–9/B83; cf. 1992: 557–9). The eighteenth-
century Swiss-German philosopher Johann Heinrich Lambert
espoused a primitivist view (that is also sympathetic toward
The golden age of primitivism
41

the networking view): “Truth is a simple concept which, as it
does not have several internal marks, can at best be deﬁned
or elucidated only through its relation to other concepts”
(quoted in Künne 2003: 13). Alexander Nehamas claims that
Nietzsche is a primitivist about truth (1998: 145–7 and 243,
endnote 57).1 Primitivism is also arguably present in Alexius
Meinong, who takes “factuality” to be an indeﬁnable property
of his truth-bearing “objectives”: “An objective must bear
factuality in itself; and as far as I can see, its factuality is a
basic property for which there is no deﬁnition and, at least for
the time being, also no description” (1983: 56).
Primitivism about truth really took off during the
nascent years of analytic philosophy in Europe. It emerged –
independently, it seems – both on the continent and in Great
Britain. Primitivism appears in Frege’s writings as early as
1880 (according to Künne 2003: 16), and endures into his
later work, where it takes center stage in his 1918 essay “Der
Gedanke” (later translated and published as “The thought,”
Frege 1956 and 1984). Meanwhile, Moore was defending
primitivism in his doctoral dissertation and then in his 1899
essay “The nature of judgment”; Russell followed suit in a
number of works published between 1903 and 1907. The
genesis of the view in the Cantabrigians’ oeuvre is due more
to their critical response to the work on truth and reality found
in British idealism, notably F. H. Bradley, than to anything
happening on the continent (though Meinong’s work did loom
large at the time). Unlike Frege, Moore and Russell quickly
abandoned the view (though not their rejection of idealism)
and took up correspondence theories. Let us now examine
the role that truth played in the thought of these three early
primitivists.
1 I ﬁnd this claim somewhat dubious. See Clark (1990) for a detailed examination of
Nietzsche on truth.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
42
www.ebook3000.com

2.1
Frege
Frege has much to say on the topic of truth.2 In his famous
1892 essay “Sinn und Bedeutung,” Frege argues for the
infamous thesis that “Every declarative sentence concerned
with the reference of its words is therefore to be regarded as a
proper name, and its reference, if it has one, is either the True or
the False. These two objects are recognized, if only implicitly, by
everybody who judges something to be true” (1952: 63). Frege,
so far as I know, is alone among the great philosophers
in adopting the view that all truths refer to a reiﬁed truth value
‘the True,’ and that all falsities refer to a reiﬁed truth value
‘the False.’
Far less parochial is Frege’s recognition of truth’s transpar-
ency. In the same article in which he defends the existence of the
True and the False, Frege writes that ‘p’ expresses the same
thought as ‘the thought that p is true’: “‘The thought that 5 is a
prime number is true’ contains only a thought, and indeed the
same thought as the simple ‘5 is a prime number’” (1952: 64). By
the time Frege published “Der Gedanke” in 1918, he still held
this view: “It is also worthy of notice that the sentence ‘I smell the
scent of violets’ has just the same content as the sentence ‘it is true
that I smell the scent of violets.’ So it seems, then, that nothing is
added to the thought by my ascribing to it the property of truth”
(1956: 293).3 Frege thus thinks that “the word ‘true’ has a sense
that contributes nothing to the sense of the whole sentence in
which it occurs as a predicate” (1979: 252).
Notice how strong Frege’s view is here. He is not simply
upholding the material equivalency of the truth schema:
(T1)
It is true that p if and only if p.
2 Sluga (2002) offers a helpful historical and biographical context for Frege’s various
views about truth.
3 See also Frege (1979: 141, 194, 251; 1980: 163).
The golden age of primitivism
43

Rather, he is defending the view that both sides of the bicondi-
tional express one and the same proposition – or ‘thought’
(Gedanke), to employ Frege’s own terminology. One might
well reject this claim about the identity of sense between ‘It is
true that p’ and ‘p’ without rejecting the truth of the instances
of T1 (see Künne 2008: 14–21). Frege’s view about just
how transparent truth is suggests that he has much in common
with contemporary deﬂationists. “May we not,” Frege asks,
“be dealing here with something which cannot, in the ordinary
sense, be called a quality at all?” (1956: 293).4 When a thought
is true, we “don’t have the relation of an object to a property,
but that of the sense of a sign to its meaning” (1979: 194).
Though contemporary deﬂationists would take issue with the
latter half of Frege’s claim and its ontological commitment to
the True (such that the referent or “meaning” of every true
sentence is the True), they do seem to be in harmony with Frege
on the ﬁrst issue of whether truth is a genuine property belong-
ing to thoughts: it is not.
But Frege is no deﬂationist. Even setting aside his commit-
ment to the True, Frege advocates a distinctly non-deﬂationary
account of truth. As just noted, he may well be sympathetic to a
deﬂationary treatment of the property truth, and perhaps for
the word ‘true’ as well (at least for ﬁrst-order attributions of
truth). But when it comes to the concept truth, Frege is best
understood as a primitivist.5 For Frege claims that “What true
is, I hold to be indeﬁnable [nicht erklärbar]” (1979: 174).6
4 Where the Quintons translate Eigenschaft as ‘quality,’ Geach and Stoothoff (Frege
1984: 354) and Künne (2008: 25) opt for ‘property.’
5 Anthony Kenny writes: “The indeﬁnability of truth is a theme common to Frege’s
writing, early and late” (1995: 180). Kenny goes on to claim that in Frege’s middle
period, he focuses more on ‘the True’ and less on truth’s indeﬁnability.
6 Baldwin (1997: 1) renders nicht erklärbar instead as ‘inexplicable,’ and points out that
Frege also describes truth elsewhere as “indeﬁnable” (undeﬁnierbar) (1956: 291).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
44
www.ebook3000.com

He also describes truth as being primitive (ursprünglich), simple
(einfach), and unique or sui generis (einzigartig).7
Frege supports the indeﬁnability thesis with the best-known
argument in favor of primitivism. This argument has been
dubbed a “regress” argument (Dummett 1973: 443; Carruthers
1981–2), but others claim that Frege intends it to be a circularity
argument (Künne 2003; 2008). Some see it both ways (Soames
1999: 25). The argument appears both in Frege’s unpublished
notebooks and in “The thought” (1956: 291).8 I shall refer to it
as ‘the treadmill argument,’ in reference to Frege’s own colorful
imagery:
if we wanted to know whether a thought was true, we should have
to ask whether the relation in question obtained and thus whether
the thought that this relation obtained was true. And so we should
be in the position of a man on a treadmill who makes a step
forwards and upwards, but the step he treads on keeps giving
way and he falls back to where he was before.
(Frege 1979: 134; see also 128–9)
We shall examine the (dubious) credibility of this argument in
Section 5.1. But the argument, at least in outline, is fairly
straightforward. If truth can be deﬁned in some further terms
X, then the way to discover whether something is true is to
discover whether it is X. But to discover whether something is
X, one has to discover whether it is true that it is X. And here
7 See Frege (1979: 129) for the translation of ursprünglich and einfach as ‘primitive’
and ‘simple,’ respectively. See Frege (1956: 291) for the translation of einzigartig as
‘unique’, and Frege (1984: 353) and Künne (2008: 13) for the translation of
einzigartig as sui generis.
8 Though the treadmill is most often associated with Frege, it is worth noticing its
similarities to Descartes’s argument presented earlier (1991: 139; AT II 597), and
Moore’s (1899) and Russell’s (1994) arguments to be presented later in this chapter.
I offer my own descendant of the argument in Section 5.2. Candlish notes that
Bradley also makes use of this style of argument (2007: 90). Sluga (1980: 114)
claims that Frege borrowed the treadmill from the German philosopher Hermann
Lotze (see Lotze 1980). Dummett disputes the attribution (1981: 394, 526).
The golden age of primitivism
45

we continue on in a circle, start over on the treadmill, or launch
an inﬁnite regress, depending on your preference.9
The last feature of Frege’s account of truth that is important
for our project involves its connection to assertion. When one
asserts a claim, one puts it forward as being true. By contrast,
when one denies a claim, one puts it forward as being false.
We can also question a claim, hypothesize it, or simply contem-
plate it. We can treat a thought in any of those modes, and the
way that we initiate them is not by attaching predicates to the
thought. Take the thought that God exists. There is a difference
between asserting the thought – as I might do from the pulpit –
and denying it or mocking it, which I might do by uttering
exactly the same words, but accompanied with laughter, or a
sardonic tone. Merely communicating the thought expressed by
the words ‘God exists’ does not settle what sort of communica-
tive act has occurred. Was it a wondering, a denial, a mockery,
9 Sluga speculates that Frege had other reasons for being a primitivist that he never
articulates (1999: 37–8). Those reasons stem from Frege’s view about the “catego-
rial” differences between concepts and objects. Frege infamously claims that “the
concept horse is not a concept, whereas, e.g., the city of Berlin is a city and the
volcano Vesuvius is a volcano” (1951: 172). Though we have an intuitive sense of
the difference between concepts and objects, no logical notion can give an account of
that difference. So the supposed concepts being a concept and being an
object are, in Sluga’s terms, “categorially illicit,” as are expressions like ‘x means
y’ and ‘x refers to y,’ if ‘y’ is taken to range over both objects and concepts. The
argument for the indeﬁnability of truth now follows:
In the simplest case, a sentence will have to contain for [Frege] a name standing
for an object and a predicate standing for a concept. It follows from this
immediately that any deﬁnition of the concept of the truth of a sentence in
terms of the meanings of its components is categorially defective. Any deﬁnition
of the concept of truth, any attempt to determine its content, presupposes
predicates which are categorially illicit. The concept of truth is thus indeﬁnable
and, as Frege recognizes, logically speaking empty.
(Sluga 1999: 38)
Sluga speculates that Frege never made this argument formally because to do so he
would have to employ per impossible a predicate that straddled two categorially
distinct realms.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
46
www.ebook3000.com

an assertion? The thought itself can be presented in a variety of
modes; the force with which it is presented is not settled by the
thought itself and its components.
To assert, Frege thinks, is to present a thought as being true.
But to assert something is decidedly not simply to add ‘true’ to
my utterances. I can still fail to assert God’s existence when
uttering ‘It is true that God exists,’ provided that I do so in a
way that betrays my failure to assert. I might utter the words in
an inquisitive voice, making clear that I am wondering about the
claim rather than asserting it. Or I might utter the words in a
mocking voice, communicating my denial of it. An actress on the
stage might utter ‘It is true that God exists,’ but that would not
commit her to theism. So tagging ‘true’ onto an utterance does
not thereby help at all to guarantee that in expressing a thought
one will be asserting it. Furthermore, one can assert a claim
without employing ‘true’ at all. I don’t need to say ‘It is true
that God exists’ to assert that God exists. I can simply say that
God exists, making sure to accompany the utterance with the
relevant force. As Frege says, “In order to put something forward
as true, we do not need a special predicate: we need only the
assertoric force with which the sentence is uttered” (1979: 233).
Hence, Frege conceives of assertion as employing a kind of
force, a mode of presentation. Frege writes: “it is really by using
the form of an assertoric sentence that we assert truth, and to do
this we do not need the word ‘true’” (1979: 129). Frege’s overall
point is that assertoric force (behauptende Kraft) must be under-
stood in terms of truth, in spite of its not being communicated by
the use of the word ‘true.’10 Assertion is a mode of presentation
that is deeply connected to truth. Here we have a robust
10 Interestingly, Frege writes that the word ‘true’ “only makes an abortive attempt to
indicate the essence of logic, since what logic is really concerned with is not
contained in the word ‘true’ at all but in the assertoric force with which a sentence
is uttered” (1979: 252). Logic is concerned with assertoric force, with presenting
thoughts as true, and the existence of the word ‘true’ is a failed attempt to “make the
The golden age of primitivism
47

conceptual connection between the notion of assertion and the
notion of truth. When I assert that p, I communicate to my
interlocutor that I take the thought I have expressed to be true.
Similarly, what it is for me to judge that p is to take it on myself as
being true (Frege 1979: 185). When I judge that p, I take a
thought I may have previously merely entertained, and now
take a stand on its truth. The shift from wondering whether p
to judging that p is a shift in one’s attitude about and commit-
ment to the truth of p.
Dummett suggests that Frege puts the concept of truth to
work in distinguishing thoughts from the rest of the objects the
mind contemplates:
What, then, distinguishes thoughts from other constituents of our
mental life, from mental images, ideas, feelings, desires, impulses,
and the rest? That was the question Frege asked, and was the ﬁrst
to strive to answer: and his ﬁrst step towards an answer was to say
that thoughts, and only they, are apt for being characterized as
being true or as being false. An image or a conception of some-
thing may be more or less faithful to that of which it is an image or
a conception, but it cannot, itself, be meaningfully said to be true
or false: what is true or false is the thought that it is, in this or that
respect, faithful to its object. It always makes sense, of itself, to say
of a thought that it is true or that it is false; and whatever it makes
sense to describe as true or as false is a thought.
(Dummett 1993: 154)
Here we have a conceptual connection between truth and the
set of entities that Frege identiﬁes as thoughts. To understand
what a thought is, we employ the prior notion of truth.11 Frege,
impossible possible: it allows what corresponds to the assertoric force to assume the
form of a contribution to the thought” (1979: 252).
11 Dummett’s claim that Frege was the ﬁrst to strive to answer the question of what
separates thoughts from images, ideas, and the like is highly dubious. In Descartes’s
third meditation we ﬁnd him classifying his “thoughts into deﬁnite kinds, and
[asking] which of them can properly be said to be the bearers of truth and falsity”
(1984: 25; AT VII 36–7).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
48
www.ebook3000.com

then, deploys the concept of truth in a number of other con-
ceptual projects, using it to understand and explicate other
things like assertions, judgments, and thoughts. Since Frege is
a conceptual primitivist, he is entitled to take truth as founda-
tional, and then use it to give accounts of these other notions.
Accordingly, Frege should not be read as a deﬂationist
(or at least as a full-bore deﬂationist).12 Sometimes Frege is
so classiﬁed, presumably because he accepts the identity
between the thought that p and the thought that it is true
that p (e.g., Horwich 1990: 39; Kalderon 1997; Schantz
1998: 158; Stoljar and Damnjanovic 2010). Frege does indeed
deny that predicating ‘true’ of a thought “adds” anything to it,
and suggests that thinking of truth as a kind of property of
thoughts might well be misguided; but at most this shows that
Frege held a deﬂationary attitude toward the word ‘true’ and
the property truth. As we shall see in Section 5.2, primitivists
about the concept of truth may also accept the identity between
the thought that p and the thought that it is true that p, and use
it to argue in favor of primitivism over deﬂationism. Frege is
best understood as adopting a view about truth much like my
own (though we disagree on the metaphysics of truth, partic-
ularly with respect to the True and the False): though adding
the word ‘true’ to our utterances typically does not do anything
to change what thought is being expressed, the concept of truth
remains an important, explanatorily potent concept that is
foundational in our conceptual scheme.
Of all the golden age primitivists, Frege holds the position
closest to what I defend. As we shall see in the following
sections, the primitivism found in Moore and Russell is direc-
ted more at the property of truth, rather than our concept of
truth; Frege’s primitivism, like my own, is ﬁrst and foremost a
conceptual claim, not a metaphysical one about the property of
12 Cf. Baldwin (1997: 9).
The golden age of primitivism
49

truth.13 Frege also pays close attention to truth’s important
relationship to cognitive and speech acts like belief, judgment,
and assertion. These connections will surface repeatedly in the
chapters to follow.
Despite the similarities between Frege’s view and my own,
there are a few points of dispute. As already mentioned, I do
not follow Frege in being committed to the existence of the
True and the False. Nor do I accept his own argument for the
indeﬁnability of truth. Finally, I believe that it is absolutely
crucial to be cautious – more cautious than Frege appears to
be – about how we draw the identity between thoughts that
do and do not involve truth. In “Sense and reference” Frege
ﬁrst draws an identity between the thoughts expressed by ‘p’
and ‘The thought that p is true’ (1952: 64). In “The thought”
Frege draws the identity instead between the thoughts
expressed by ‘p’ and ‘It is true that p’ (1956: 293). I only
endorse the second identity. Committing to the truth of ‘The
thought that p is true’ appears to ontologically commit one to
the existence of entities called ‘thoughts,’ just as commitment
to the truth of ‘The proposition that p is true’ appears to
ontologically commit one to the existence of propositions.
But committing to the truth of ‘p’ does not itself involve a
commitment to thoughts or propositions, and so the thought
it expresses cannot be identical to the thought expressed by
‘The thought that p is true.’ We shall return to this identity in
Section 5.2.2, when we explore how to ﬁx Frege’s broken
treadmill.
13 Hence I disagree with Greimann’s analysis that “Frege accepts the deﬂationary
thesis that truth is a property sui generis that cannot be reduced to any other
properties or relations” (2000: 141). Frege is somewhat skeptical that there is a
property of truth at all, and his primitivist views are better directed at our concept of
truth. Plus, the thesis Greimann identiﬁes is not deﬂationary at all: taking the
property of truth to be irreducible and sui generis is the quite non-deﬂationary
metaphysically primitivist view of Moore and Russell.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
50
www.ebook3000.com

2.2
Moore
The ﬁrst trace of primitivism about truth in the English-
speaking world appears in G. E. Moore’s 1899 essay “The
nature of judgment.”14 There, Moore concludes that “truth is
itself a simple concept” (1899: 182). The truth or falsity of a
judgment, Moore writes, “must be immediate properties of its
own, not dependent upon any relation it may have to some-
thing else” (1899: 192). Since judgments cannot be true in
virtue of their relation to anything outside themselves, we
must reject the accounts of truth offered by correspondence,
coherence, and pragmatic theorists. Each of these views
accounts for the truth of judgments by way of their relation
to things standing outside the judgments: facts, other
judgments, ourselves. For Moore, the truth (or falsity) of a
judgment is a simple property that it has, regardless of what
is going on outside of it.
The topic of Moore’s early essay is the nature of judgment,
and it serves as a critique of the British idealist F. H. Bradley,
in particular his view that “truth and falsehood depend on
the relation of our ideas to reality” (1912: 2). Moore aims to
show that, to the contrary, truth and falsehood cannot depend
on any such external relation. Moore holds that judgments
(or, in less psychologistic terms, “propositions”) are composed
of concepts, which are distinct from words and thoughts.
Concepts are “possible objects of thought,” but are not them-
selves thoughts (1899: 179). They exist regardless of whether
anyone has thought of them. There are indeﬁnitely many
concepts, and propositions are syntheses of those concepts,
14 Actually, primitivism ﬁrst appears in Moore’s 1898 dissertation, The Metaphysical
Basis of Ethics (included in Moore 2011), from which “The nature of judgment”
was extracted. Gilbert Ryle refers to the essay as “the De Interpretatione of early
twentieth-century Cambridge logic” (1970: 90).
The golden age of primitivism
51

concepts brought under a relation. For example, the proposi-
tion that Socrates is wise is a fusion of the concepts socrates
and wise taken together with the relation of predication.
Moore points out that while propositions can be true or
false, concepts cannot, even though propositions are com-
posed of concepts. Moore then argues that the truth of a
proposition cannot depend on its relation to reality, because
then concepts would also be true or false according to their
own relation to reality, namely, whether or not anything sat-
isﬁes them. (human would be a true concept, unicorn a false
one.) Furthermore, since some true propositions are not related
to reality – here Moore cites mathematical truths – truth can-
not in general consist in some sort of dependence on reality.
Moore concludes: “What kind of relation makes a proposition
true, what false, cannot be further deﬁned, but must be imme-
diately recognised” (1899: 180).
To put the ﬁnal nail in the cofﬁn of Bradley’s view, Moore
propounds what looks to be a close relative to Frege’s treadmill
argument against the view that the truth of a proposition
depends upon its relation to reality, or, moreover, anything
outside itself. (However, note that Moore’s argument is dis-
tinctly metaphysical in a way that Frege’s is not.) Suppose some
proposition p is true, and that, as Bradley says, p depends for
its truth upon some bit of reality R. On this view, we must
suppose that both p and R exist. So the truth of p depends upon
the truth of the proposition that R exists. (After all, if that
proposition were not true, it would be of no use in deﬁning the
truth of p.) We now face a choice, since our account of truth
has come to rely on truth itself. First, we can take the truth of
this second proposition, unlike the ﬁrst, to be “independent,”
not depending on any further existing thing. But on this horn
of the dilemma, “we have removed all reason for the supposi-
tion that the truth and falsehood of other judgments are not
equally independent” (1899: 192). In effect, if we let that
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
52
www.ebook3000.com

R exists be true simply in virtue of its having some internal,
primitive property of truth, then we might as well allow that
p is true simply in virtue of its having some internal, primitive
property of truth. The second option is to take the truth of the
proposition that R exists to depend upon something for its
truth. The problem with the second horn is that this second
proposition “must itself be true, and the truth of this can
certainly not be established, without a vicious circle, by exhib-
iting its dependence on an existent” (1899: 181). If there is to
be a vicious circle, it must be as follows. Suppose the truth of
the proposition that R exists depends upon the existence of
something outside itself, namely, R. To hold this view, one
must, as above, take R to exist, and so the truth of the prop-
osition that R exists depends upon the truth of the proposition
that R exists. That is a very small circle, indeed. In explaining
the truth of that R exists, we end up having to presuppose the
very thing that we are trying to explain. To avoid the circle, we
could say that the truth of that R exists depends not on R, but
some further thing S. But this move just recycles the original
dilemma. Is the truth of that S exists an independent feature of
that proposition, or does it depend (circularly) on S, or – and
here we launch an inﬁnite regress – on some further thing T?
On the basis of his argument, Moore concludes that the truth
or falsity of a proposition cannot depend on anything external
to it.15 Hence, the truth or falsity of a judgment must be a
completely internal affair: a proposition is true or false accord-
ing to whether it possesses the primitive property of truth or the
primitive property of falsity, and nothing else. The overall view
of truth that emerges from “The nature of judgment” is one that
takes truth to be indeﬁnable, immediately recognizable, highly
valuable, immediately known, simple, immediate, independent,
and “logically prior to any proposition” (1899: 182).
15 Cf. Ayer (1971: 189–90).
The golden age of primitivism
53

Moore returns to the primitivist view in 1911 in a lecture
entitled “Beliefs and propositions,” but by then he had already
abandoned it. He there describes the view as follows: “‘Truth,’
therefore, would, on this view, be a simple unanalysable prop-
erty which is possessed by some propositions and not by others.
The propositions which don’t possess it, and which therefore we
call false, are or ‘have being’ – just as much as those which do;
only they just have not got this additional property of being
‘true’” (1953: 261).16 Crucial to this view are propositions,
some of which are true, and some of which are false. When a
proposition has the simple property truth, then there is a further
thing, namely, a fact that consists of that proposition’s possess-
ing that property. To use Moore’s own example, my true belief
that lions exist refers both to the proposition that lions exist
(which would still have existed had the belief been false) and to
the fact that lions exist (which would not have). If I were to
believe falsely that there are dodos, then this belief would refer to
the proposition that dodos exist, but not to the fact that dodos
exist, for this does not exist.
Moore ﬁnds his old theory to be “a very simple and a very
natural one; and I must confess I can’t ﬁnd any conclusive
16 On the basis of this passage, Richard Cartwright claims that Moore (unlike Russell)
is committed to a primitive property of truth only, and deﬁnes falsity in terms of
that property (1987: 92, endnote 8; see also Cartwright 2003: 112). While this
passage suggests that Moore need not have committed to a primitive property of
falsity, he clearly does so in his earlier essay where he endorses primitivism. As
already noted, Moore writes: “What kind of relation makes a proposition true,
what false, cannot be further deﬁned, but must be immediately recognised” (1899:
180). Then he writes: “we regard truth and falsehood as properties of certain
concepts” (1899: 181). Deﬁning falsity in terms of truth is out of the spirit of
“The nature of judgment” anyway, as the essay is an attempt to show how the truth
or falsity of a proposition cannot depend upon anything external to it. Hence, the
falsity of a judgment cannot in turn depend upon the truth of some other judgment.
In general, we should be cautious about any interpretation that ﬁnds a substantial
difference between Moore’s and Russell’s primitivism, given how much in sync they
were on the view.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
54
www.ebook3000.com

arguments against it” (1953: 262). Moore does, however,
present two objections to his view, which are sufﬁcient to
motivate him to move away from primitivism. First, Moore
admits that the view just does not feel right:
the fact to which a true belief refers – the fact, which is, only if the
belief be true, and simply has no being at all, if it be false – does not,
if you think of it, seem to consist merely in the possession of some
simple property by a proposition – that is to say, by something
which has being equally whether the belief be true or false.
(Moore 1953: 262–3)
Consider again the proposition that lions exist. Whatever this
thing is, it would exist regardless of whether it is true or false.
Now consider the fact that lions exist, that is to say, the very
existence of lions. What is the relationship between these two
things? For the Moorean primitivist (at least circa 1911), it is
just that the former is a component of the latter. The proposi-
tion is one thing, and when it bears the primitive property truth
we have the fact, the existence of lions. This answer strikes
Moore as insufﬁcient: “The relation of the proposition to the
fact doesn’t seem to consist simply in the fact that the propo-
sition is a constituent of the fact” (1953: 263).
We can press Moore’s skepticism about his account further
by considering the difference between true and false proposi-
tions. The proposition that lions exist and the proposition that
unicorns exist both exist, according to Moore’s old view.
The two propositions are on an ontological par, so to speak.
But now consider how great the metaphysical gulf is between
the existence and the non-existence of lions, and between the
existence and non-existence of unicorns. According to Moore’s
early theory, the only difference between the existence of lions
and the non-existence of lions is a proposition’s possession or
lack thereof of a simple property, the simple property of truth.
Our world’s containing lions, and not containing unicorns,
The golden age of primitivism
55

comes down to some simple properties belonging to two
propositions. One might think that metaphysically heavy-
weight matters such as what sorts of animals the world does
and does not include cannot be accounted for simply by a
proposition’s possessing a property. In short, there’s more to
facts than just propositions being true. If this kind of worry is
what Moore has in mind about his former view, then it is
unsurprising that he thinks that something does not seem
right about it.
Now, the Moore of 1899 would not have had this concern.
In “The nature of judgment” Moore advances the striking view
that the world is “formed of concepts” (1899: 182), and so the
world can be conceived as a world of true propositions, since
propositions are themselves formed of concepts (cf. Baldwin
1990: 41). Turn-of-the-century Moore saw no genuine distinc-
tion between true propositions and reality, and so he would be
happy to identify the very existence of lions with the truth of
the proposition that lions exist.17 But Moore must have
changed his mind about something in his younger view,
which he ultimately rejects. It is plausible that, a dozen years
down the road, Moore had softened this early metaphysical
view of his, and now saw the truth/reality identiﬁcation as a
problematic consequence of or accompaniment to the primi-
tivist view. After all, Moore eventually turns to the corre-
spondence theory of truth and its commitment to the very
thesis he argues against in “The nature of judgment,” namely,
that the truth of a proposition depends upon the existence
of something external to it.18 My interpretive suggestion,
then, is that Moore might have come to see his early primitiv-
ism as problematic because of its association with his own
17 My thanks go to Nic Damnjanovic for stressing this point to me.
18 In “True and false beliefs,” the lecture that follows “Beliefs and propositions,” Moore
goes on to discuss and endorse an early correspondence theory (1953: 270–87).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
56
www.ebook3000.com

problematic understanding of the all-too-close relationship
between truth and reality.
So how should we understand the relationship between
propositions and facts, if not in terms of composition?
Unfortunately, Moore does not tell us what this relation does
seem to involve, just that it is not simply a part/whole relation.
Richard Cartwright argues that Moore is misrepresenting
his own early view here by forgetting his own previous answer
to the question of how facts and propositions are related
(1987: 75–8). For the early Moore, the relationship between
facts and propositions is one of identity, not composition.
According to the later Moore’s understanding of primitivism,
facts consist in a proposition’s possessing the simple, unana-
lyzable property truth. But for the earlier Moore, facts are
identical to true propositions. In “The nature of judgment,”
Moore remains silent on the speciﬁc nature of facts. (He is
more interested in “existence.”) The identity claim is found
instead in an encyclopedia entry of Moore’s on truth ﬁrst
published in 1902. There Moore rejects the correspondence
theory due to the “impossibility of ﬁnding any such difference
between a truth and the reality to which it is supposed to
correspond” (1902: 717). Taking facts to be identical to true
propositions calls to mind what some call the ‘identity theory
of truth.’ Indeed, Candlish attributes the identity theory to this
early stage of Moore (1989: 344). I hesitate to follow suit, since
the thesis in question involves how Moore identiﬁes facts, not
the property of truth, but the issue is rather subtle and we shall
take it up later in Section 3.4.2.
Taking facts to be identical to propositions (rather than just
as being partly composed of propositions) introduces new
difﬁculties of its own. Since some propositions are false – recall
that Moore is committed to falsity being a simple, primitive
property just as much as truth – there must, in addition to facts,
be entities that are identical to false propositions. We might
The golden age of primitivism
57

call these things, foreshadowing our discussion of Russell,
“ﬁctions” or “objective falsehoods.” Fictions are identical to
false propositions, just as facts are identical to true proposi-
tions. On this view, the ﬁctions and the facts have the same
metaphysical status. Both are equally real. Perhaps such a
view, on reﬂection, was too intolerable for Moore to counte-
nance, and so when he discusses his early primitivism he does
so without committing it to ﬁctions (cf. Cartwright 1987: 76).
In any event, regardless of why Moore changed his mind about
the nature of facts (he himself does not raise the concern about
the existence of ﬁctions, although Russell makes much of it, as
we shall see), he is still left with an unsatisfying account of how
propositions and facts relate. Positing their identity results in
the problem of objective falsehoods; but positing a relation of
composition does not seem right either.
In a few years, Moore would be able to avail himself of
Russell’s logical atomism, and its distinctive claim that the
relationship between facts and propositions is one of making
true (Russell 1985: 40). Facts, for the atomist, are what make
propositions true (independently of the question of whether
propositions are a constituent of facts). Once we head down
this road, however, we have all but left behind primitivism in
favor of correspondence theory. Facts, on this view, are sepa-
rate entities from the propositions they make true, and so truth
emerges as a relational notion, the very view that Moore aimed
to disprove in his earliest writings.
Moore’s second objection to his old primitivist view con-
cerns the way it must handle falsity. In the lecture, Moore
expresses his doubts about the very idea of a proposition that
can exist in spite of being false, and so he has doubts about any
theory that requires the existence of propositions that exist
regardless of their truth value. If propositions are the objects
of belief, then there must be true propositions and false prop-
ositions, for beliefs can be true or false. Primitivism relies on
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
58
www.ebook3000.com

there being propositions (for it needs something to bear the
simple properties of truth and falsity), and so is committed to
the existence of false propositions. But Moore thinks that false
propositions are theoretically suspect (even if they are not
identiﬁed with “ﬁctions”; it is no presupposition of the 1911
lecture that false propositions just are ﬁctions, in the way that
Moore earlier thought that true propositions just are facts).
False propositions are theoretical posits that do not end up
accomplishing what they set out to do. Here is how Moore
puts the objection:
if you consider what happens when a man entertains a false belief, it
doesn’t seem as if his belief consisted merely in his having a relation
to some object which certainly is. It seems rather as if the thing he
was believing, the object of his belief, were just the fact which
certainly is not – which certainly is not, because his belief is false.
(Moore 1953: 263)
False belief, for Moore, simply cannot be accounted for by
way of connection to what is. For example, the proposition
that Russell is an Australian is false. When I believe that Russell
is an Australian, it is not enough, when accounting for the
falsity of my belief, to say that I stand in a relation to something
that exists; such an explanation, claims Moore, leaves out
something essential. False belief is a relationship to what does
not exist; that is what sets it apart from truth. Truth is inti-
mately related to what is; falsity is intimately related to what is
not. When I believe falsely, I stand in a certain relation to some
fact that fails to exist. Of course, this view faces difﬁculties
of its own, which Moore immediately recognizes: how can
someone be related to a non-existent? Moore writes: “In
order that a relation may hold between two things, both the
two things must certainly be; and how then is it possible for
any one to believe in a thing which simply has no being?”
(1953: 263). This puzzle notwithstanding, Moore abandons
The golden age of primitivism
59

his commitment to propositions altogether, and with it his
early primitivism.
We can better appreciate Moore’s conviction about the
nature of falsity by again keeping in mind some of his early
metaphysical thinking.19 As we saw in “The nature of judg-
ment,” Moore detects an extremely tight connection between
truth and reality. Crucially, he places a priority on truth over
existence: “existence is logically subordinate to truth; that
truth cannot be deﬁned by a reference to existence, but exis-
tence only by a reference to truth” (1899: 180). Existence is
deﬁned in terms of truth, and truths just are propositions,
which are composed of concepts. Moore then draws the con-
clusion that he admits is “paradoxical” and “contemptible”:
“All that exists is thus composed of concepts necessarily
related to one another in speciﬁc manners, and likewise to
the concept of existence” (1899: 181). Earlier, in an 1898
letter, Moore writes: “I have arrived at a perfectly staggering
doctrine . . . An existent is nothing but a proposition: nothing is
but concepts. There is my philosophy” (quoted in Baldwin
1990: 41).20 Finally, in his encyclopedia entry on truth,
Moore writes: “the truth that I exist differs in no respect
from the corresponding reality – my existence” (1902: 717).
What these early passages reveal is that reality and truth, for
the early Moore, are not really separable. Accordingly, we
19 Baldwin (1984) and Chapter 2 of Baldwin (1990) are excellent guides to the young
Moore’s metaphysics.
20 This passage might read, ironically it would seem, as a deﬁnitive statement of the
very idealism from which Moore was supposedly breaking free. But remember that
Moore is working with very non-psychological understandings of concepts and
propositions (they exist regardless of whether anyone entertains them), and so this
statement can read equally well as a deﬁnitive statement against idealism.
Cf. Baldwin (1990: 42–3). This ambivalence seems to suit the transitional nature
of “The nature of judgment,” as it represents but a resting point between Moore’s
early idealism and his eventual realism, as cemented by his later adoption of the
correspondence theory.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
60
www.ebook3000.com

cannot understand falsity in terms of reality, of what exists.
If there are false propositions, then they are a part of reality.
And so if false belief is understood in terms of a relation to a
portion of reality, then we have missed something crucial
about falsity. Falsity and the non-existent must be as closely
connected as are truth and reality. Hence, Moore can ﬁnd no
account of falsity satisfying if it is too closely grounded in
reality, and at the expense of the unreal. Now, I have already
suggested that by 1911 Moore may have softened his thinking
about the strict identity between truth and reality. But that is
not to say that he thinks there is no vital connection between
the two, and that understanding the distinction between truth
and falsity will in no way depend upon the distinction between
what does and does not exist. The correspondence theory to
which Moore soon turns certainly upholds a close relationship
between truth and reality, though not one that involves iden-
tity. What we are seeing now is that Moore believes that our
understanding of falsity, paradoxical as it might sound, needs
to be appropriately grounded in what is not, in what fails to
exist. One way to see Moore’s objection is to see it as the claim
that primitivists’ account of false belief too closely resembles
their account of true belief. Primitivists ground false belief in
existing objects (propositions) that have a simple property
(falsity). Primitivists ground true belief in existing objects
(propositions) that have a simple property (truth). By account-
ing for true and false belief in parallel fashion, and only in
terms of what is and how those things are, we miss something
crucial about the distinction between truth and falsity.
We have now seen Moore’s reasons for initially adopting –
and ultimately rejecting – primitivism. Let us now consider what
implications Moore’s views have for our own understanding of
primitivism. First, what was Moore’s primitivism about: word,
concept, or property? The 1899 essay refers to truth as being a
simple concept, but also as a property belonging to the fusions of
The golden age of primitivism
61

concepts that he takes to be propositions. But this essay also
argues for a metaphysical picture of the world as composed
solely of concepts, so it is unclear whether Moore’s conception
of concepts sufﬁciently matches our own. The 1902 encyclope-
dia entry conceives of truth and falsity as properties, as does the
1911 lecture. The nature of Moore’s primitivism poses a difﬁcult
interpretive question here, and the best answer may be that
Moore is simply operating outside the framework from which
I am approaching the nature of truth. Moore wields the concept/
property distinction far more loosely than I shall allow. (In fact,
a recurrent theme of this book is that we can make considerable
progress in our thinking about truth by always keeping this
distinction in mind.)
Nevertheless, there is a distinctly metaphysical tone to
Moore’s brand of primitivism. As we have seen, Moore’s
views on truth appear to evolve right alongside his views
about the nature of reality. Moore’s primitivism involves the
claim that propositions are true in virtue of their possessing the
property of truth. This kind of metaphysical claim – a claim
about what it is that makes propositions true – does not
provide the basis for the sort of primitivism that I endorse.
I defend primitivism as a conceptual claim. Conceptual prim-
itivism is not a view that seeks to answer any metaphysical
questions about what makes what true. Rather, it is a view
about the nature of our concept of truth, and its role in our
cognitive and linguistic lives.
I argue that the best way to understand what makes propo-
sitions true or false is not by way of claiming that those
propositions have certain properties (primitive or not). What
makes propositions true or false are the objects that exist in the
world. What makes it true that there are penguins is not the
proposition there are penguins possessing some property; what
makes it true are the actual penguins that exist in the world. As
I argue in Chapter 4, metaphysical questions surrounding truth
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
62
www.ebook3000.com

and what makes things true are best handled by truthmaker
theory, which is an enterprise that is independent of the theory
of truth itself.21 Hence, whereas Moore’s primitivist concludes
“that the real existence of lions – the fact to which the belief
‘that lions exist’ refers – consists simply in the possession by the
proposition ‘that lions exist’ of one simple property” (1953:
261), my primitivist maintains that the existence of lions con-
sists in lions. Lions themselves are what make it true that lions
exist. My primitivist rejects the Moorean claim that there is a
primitive property of truth that is responsible for the truth of
propositions. I also reject the earlier Moorean claim that reality
just is made up of true propositions. Like the later Moore,
I believe that reality is what makes propositions true or false;
unlike Moore, and as I argue in Section 4.5, we can maintain
this view without adopting a correspondence theory of truth.
For similar reasons, I do not ﬁnd Moore’s circularity/regress
argument for primitivism convincing. Take the proposition
that a penguin exists. Moore rejects any view that would take
the truth of the proposition to depend upon something exter-
nal to the proposition, such as a ﬂesh-and-blood penguin.
(Remember, if penguins just are concepts, as Moore’s early
metaphysics has it, then penguins are not external to the prop-
osition. Moore’s opponent in the argument assumes that
penguins are a distinct existence.) He reasons that if we take
the truth of the proposition to depend upon the existence of
some penguin, then it must be true that a penguin exists, and so
the truth of that a penguin exists turns out to depend on the
truth of that a penguin exists. We either have no explanation
here at all (we are just presupposing the very thing we are
trying to explain), or a deeply ﬂawed one (since nothing can
21 Armstrong (2004) is a locus classicus of truthmaker theory. I discuss the relation-
ship between theories of truth and theories of truthmaking in Asay (2011; 2012;
2013).
The golden age of primitivism
63

depend on itself). I believe that we can circumvent this
argument by attending more carefully to the dependence
claims at stake. On my view, the real dependency is between
the truth of that a penguin exists and actual penguins. The
former depends upon the latter, but not vice versa.22 Certainly,
the proposition is true if and only if a penguin exists. We
cannot have one without the other. But what we are dealing
with here is a Euthyphro case, and, as Plato adroitly argued
long ago, the mere fact that two things go together does not
establish that there is a symmetrical dependency between them
(see Plato 1997a). Yes, the truth of that a penguin exists
depends upon the existence of penguins. And yes, if penguins
exist, then the proposition that a penguin exists is true. But it
does not follow that the existence of penguins depends upon
the proposition’s being true. It would follow if the existence of
penguins just is the proposition’s being true, but that claim is
what Moore is trying to establish, not what his argument can
take for granted. Consequently, there is no vicious circle in
holding that the truth of that a penguin exists depends upon
penguins. The circle arises only if we neglect the asymmetrical
nature of dependence.
In its full detail, Moore’s brand of primitivism is not one
I endorse (my view comes much closer to Frege’s), though it is
an important predecessor. As we have seen, Moore himself is
not terribly attentive to the distinction between concepts and
properties; this is true just as much of his temporary primitiv-
ism about truth as his more permanent primitivism about
goodness. But this distinction is absolutely crucial, and
22 Here I echo Aristotle’s claim (and the founding claim of truthmaker theory) that
truth depends on being, and not vice versa (1995: 11–12; 14b12–22). Notice that to
say that truth depends on being in this sense in no way conﬂicts with primitivism
about truth. Whether or not some proposition is true depends upon what exists in
the world, but that is perfectly consistent with maintaining that the concept of truth
is fundamental and indeﬁnable.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
64
www.ebook3000.com

attending to it shows how different Moore’s metaphysical
primitivism is from Frege’s conceptual primitivism. Though
the two views deﬁnitely deserve to be classiﬁed together, they
are not quite so similar as they may ﬁrst appear.23
2.3
Russell
Russell’s trajectory in his turn-of-the-century thinking
closely parallels Moore’s. Like Moore, Russell was in the
process of breaking free from the idealism that dominated
Cambridge at the time, and settled on a primitivist account of
truth in the early days of the twentieth century. Also like
Moore, Russell abandoned the view within a decade, and
settled
instead on a
correspondence theory
of
truth.
According to Candlish (1989: 344) and Baldwin (1997: 2),
the primitivist view was originally Moore’s, and Russell
learned it from him. Accordingly, Russell’s primitivism
must be understood in the context of how he understood
the nature of propositions and judgments at the time, and,
crucially, how he approached the problem of falsity.
Russell’s published works, like Moore’s, are very brief on
the topic. In the 1903 The Principles of Mathematics, Russell
refers to truth as being an “indeﬁnable logical constant”
(1903: 11; see also 48–9). His ﬁrst substantive discussion
of primitivism comes in a 1904 paper on Meinong. In that
paper, Russell commits to the existence of both true and false
propositions, understood to be the “objects” of belief. When
we believe falsely, we still believe in something: there is a
difference between believing falsely and not believing at all.
Primitivism about truth emerges at the end of Russell’s discus-
sion of the nature of false propositions:
23 Indeed, many discussions of primitivism gloss right over these differences. See, e.g.,
Davidson (1996: 265) and Merricks (2007: 184).
The golden age of primitivism
65

It may be said – and this is, I believe, the correct view – that there is
no problem at all in truth and falsehood; that some propositions
are true and some false, just as some roses are red and some white;
that belief is a certain attitude towards propositions, which is
called knowledge when they are true, error when they are
false . . . What is truth, and what falsehood, we must merely
apprehend, for both seem incapable of analysis.
(Russell 1904: 523–4)
The next discussion of primitivism in Russell’s works comes
in “The nature of truth,” which he presented at Oxford in
1905 and left unpublished during his lifetime. The article is
striking both in the boldness of its doctrines (e.g., “Truth has
no connection with belief, it does not concern only what exists,
and the propositions which are true are themselves non-
existent” (1994: 506)) and the directness of his presentation
of them. Russell is clear that he agrees with Moore that his
theory of truth “places truth and falsehood wholly in the object
of belief,” whereas “The correspondence-theory placed truth
and falsehood in a relation between belief and its object”
(1994: 496). And quite similar to Frege’s presentation of the
treadmill in “The thought,” Russell offers an argument against
correspondence theory and then immediately generalizes it
against all deﬁnitions of truth:24
But even supposing some other deﬁnition of correspondence with
reality could be found, a more general argument against deﬁni-
tions of truth would still hold good. An idea is to be true when it
corresponds with reality, i.e. when it is true that it corresponds
24 Similar remarks can be found in Russell’s 1899 unpublished manuscript “The
fundamental ideas and maxims” (1990: 285). I have found no evidence that
Russell might have learned the treadmill from Frege. Frege did not publish the
treadmill until 1918, and I detect no mention of it in the correspondence between
the two (see Frege 1980). Furthermore, Russell did not begin his correspondence
with Frege until 1902, at which point both men had developed treadmill-style ideas
in their notebooks.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
66
www.ebook3000.com

with reality, i.e. when the idea that it corresponds with reality
corresponds with reality, and so on. This will never do. In short, if
we don’t know the difference between a proposition’s being true
and not being true, we don’t know the difference between a thing’s
having a property and not having it, and therefore we can’t deﬁne
a thing as true when it has a certain property such as correspond-
ing with reality.
(Russell 1994: 493–4)
With these few sentences, Russell dismisses all of correspond-
ence theory.25 Russell ﬁrst points to a regress. If something is
true if and only if it corresponds with reality, then it is true if
and only if it is true that it corresponds with reality, which is to
say that it corresponds with reality that it corresponds with
reality, which is to say that it is true that it corresponds with
reality that it corresponds with reality, and so on. Russell
obviously assumes that this regress is vicious, but why? It
cannot simply be that if truth is deﬁnable in this way, an
inﬁnity of related claims are true if one is; that consequence
holds of any theory of truth, given the truth schema. Look then
to Russell’s ﬁnal sentence. If we do not know the difference
between a proposition’s being true or not, we do not know the
difference between a thing’s having a property or not. If there is
a vicious regress to be found here, it must be due to the fact that
Russell understands the very idea of property possession in
terms of the truth of propositions. Suppose that what it is for
some object O to have some property P is for the proposition
that O is P to be true. (Recall that for Russell and Moore
during this period, truth was prior to being.) If so, then we
cannot deﬁne the truth of propositions in terms of their pos-
sessing some other property, like correspondence. For what it
is for some proposition p to have that property is just for some
25 He also suspects that the notion of correspondence is circular: “in order to deﬁne
the supposed correspondence, we have to bring in the notion of truth” (1994: 493).
This sentiment has been echoed repeatedly ever since. See, e.g., Patterson (2010).
The golden age of primitivism
67

other proposition (that p has that property) to be true. In short,
if property possession depends on truth, then truth cannot
depend on property possession.26
Russell’s growing ambivalence toward primitivism begins to
surface a few years later. In the 1906–7 “On the nature of
truth,” a critical discussion of Harold Joachim’s coherence
theory of truth, Russell writes that he does not know how to
choose between primitivism and a form of correspondence
theory. The former view, again, is one according to which
“Truth and falsehood . . . are ultimate, and no account can be
given of what makes a proposition true or false” (1906–7: 49).
On this view, as Russell argued in the earlier paper, all beliefs
are in propositions, of which there are two kinds. True prop-
ositions are facts; false propositions are ﬁctions. (Here we see
that Russell is assuming the identity view that Moore held and
later rejected.) This primitivist view provides an account of
what we believe when we believe falsely: our belief is in a
ﬁction, an “objective falsehood.” The correspondence view
dispenses with the existence of ﬁctions (and so with the view
that beliefs take propositions as their content). As a result, it
appears to be saddled with the view that false belief is belief in
nothing. True beliefs take facts as their object, but there is
nothing for false beliefs to latch on to. Russell concedes that
while the correspondence view is “more plausible,” he admits
that it faces “formidable” and potentially “insuperable” difﬁ-
culties (1906–7: 49).
By the time Russell revisits the topic in a 1910 essay, his
transition from primitivism to correspondence is complete,
26 My interpretation here matches Ricketts’s (2001: 105). However, I see Russell’s
argument as being much closer to Frege’s than Ricketts does. As I argue in
Section 5.1, Frege’s presentation of the treadmill illegitimately assumes that it is
true that p is prior to p. Similarly, Russell is claiming that some idea’s having a
purported deﬁning property of truth depends on its being true that the idea has that
purported deﬁning property. See also Korhonen (2009: 169–72).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
68
www.ebook3000.com

and he never looks back. Gone is the view that truth is a
primitive, unanalyzable quality, and with it the idea that belief
is captured by a relation between a mind and objects like facts
and ﬁctions. In its place is a new account of belief, one which
Russell toyed with in the earlier paper, according to which a
believer is related not to a single object, but a number of
different objects (1910a: 183–4). Hence, to believe that, say,
Moore hated his name is not to be related to a single object –
the proposition that Moore hated his name – but rather to a
number of different things, namely, Moore, the non-symmetric
hating relation, and ‘George Edward.’ The belief is true just in
case the “complex” of a hating relation (with the right direc-
tionality) between Moore and ‘George Edward’ exists, and is
false otherwise. If the complex exists, it stands in the corre-
spondence relation to the belief, and thus the belief is true. If
the complex does not exist, the belief does not correspond to
anything, and thus the belief is false.
Russell raises three distinct objections to primitivism during
his journey away from it. Let us tackle them in turn, in the
order of increasing severity. The ﬁrst objection arises (and is
quickly dismissed) in the 1904 paper, when Russell was most
in favor of primitivism. If truth and falsity are just two more
properties that a proposition can have, as primitivism main-
tains, then it seems that we are at a loss when accounting for
what is special about truth. Some folks prefer white roses,
while others prefer red. No one is mistaken in manifesting
such a preference. But truth and falsity are not properties like
that. There is something defective about someone whose
beliefs aim to coincide with the false propositions. We prefer
our beliefs to be true, and beliefs are successful in accomplish-
ing their aim in part by being true and not false. If truth is just
another property that a proposition might have or fail to have,
how are we to account for our preference for truth? Hence,
Russell writes that “this theory seems to leave our preference
The golden age of primitivism
69

for truth a mere unaccountable prejudice, and in no way to
answer to the feeling of truth and falsehood” (1904: 523).
Russell quickly dismisses the objection, saying that our
preference is based upon a further ethical proposition – that
it is good to believe true propositions and bad to believe false
ones. “This proposition,” Russell writes, “it is to be hoped, is
true; but if not, there is no reason to think that we do ill in
believing it” (1904: 524). Indeed, the idea that belief aims at
the truth may rest on this further premise, but this response just
pushes back our question. Why do we believe that it is good to
believe truly and bad to believe falsely, rather than the reverse?
We think this ethical proposition is true, but why is it true?
What is it about truth that makes it the aim of belief rather than
falsity? Russell’s worry remains unanswered.
We can offer a natural answer to Russell’s question by
stressing truth’s connection to reality. According to Russell’s
primitivism, truth and falsity are just two among many proper-
ties that a proposition might have. That said, only propositions
that reﬂect reality have the property of truth. Because the true
propositions are the ones that describe the way the world really
is, the true ones are the ones that help us get through the world
and succeed in our lives. We could not get on well in the world
if our beliefs were systematically false. If we want our beliefs to
represent reality, and not ﬁction, we need to hold only true
beliefs. Why did Russell not make this reply? It is possible that
he thought this view presupposed something like the corre-
spondence theory, in which case it would not be available to
him. It is also possible that he had in mind the idea that, given
primitivism’s commitment to objective falsehoods, false beliefs
also, in a sense, correspond to bits of reality. If so, then the
original problem resurfaces. Why do we care about facts more
than ﬁctions? The problem of falsity rears its head yet again.
Russell’s second objection to primitivism is simply its commit-
ment to propositions, in the sense of Fregean thoughts, such as
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
70
www.ebook3000.com

that penguins exist. Russell claims that “It seems evident that the
phrase ‘that so and so’ has no complete meaning by itself, which
would enable it to denote a deﬁnite object as (e.g.) the word
‘Socrates’ does” (1910a: 175). That-clauses succeed in being
meaningful, Russell says, only when they are paired with phrases
like ‘I believe,’ ‘I deny,’ and the like. So Russell is quite distrustful
that propositions, the objects which that-clauses purportedly
denote, even exist. (This is not to say that he believes that facts
do not exist; they remain a staple of his ontology for years to
come.) Russell returns to his problem with propositions in his
1917–18 lectures on logical atomism. There, Russell reports that:
it does not seem to me very plausible to say that in addition to facts
there are also these curious shadowy things going about such as
“That today is Wednesday” when in fact it is Tuesday. I cannot
believe they go about the real world. It is more than one can
manage to believe, and I do think no person with a vivid sense
of reality can imagine it.
(Russell 1985: 87)
Russell’s example here is of a false proposition, but his point
generalizes: “obviously propositions are nothing” (1985: 87).
The ensuing discussion focuses only on the “monstrous” posit
of false propositions, but it seems to me that this is only
because true propositions, if necessary, can simply be identiﬁed
with facts, which Russell continues to believe in (though he
does not take them to be the objects of beliefs; they are what
make beliefs true). By focusing on false propositions, Russell
thinks, we can see the shadowy nature of all propositions.
Russell’s ﬁnal objection is perhaps the main one, as it has
cast its shadow over our entire discussion of Moore’s and
Russell’s primitivism. Russell is concerned that the primitivist
is committed to an intolerable account of falsity. After pointing
out that primitivism is connected to the existence of objective
falsehoods, Russell writes:
The golden age of primitivism
71

This is in itself almost incredible: we feel that there could be no
falsehood if there were no minds to make mistakes. But it has the
further drawback that it leaves the difference between truth and
falsehood quite inexplicable. We feel that when we judge truly
some entity “corresponding” in some way to our judgment is to be
found outside our judgment, while when we judge falsely there is
no such “corresponding” entity . . . And if we do abandon this
view, and adhere to the opinion that there are both true and false
objectives [i.e., facts and ﬁctions], we shall be compelled to regard
it as an ultimate and not further explicable fact that objectives are
of two sorts, the true and the false. This view, though not logically
impossible, is unsatisfactory, and we shall do better, if we can, to
ﬁnd some view which leaves the difference between truth and
falsehood less of a mystery.
(Russell 1910a: 176)
First, we see Russell claim, more or less in passing, that false-
hood exists only because people are around to make mistakes.
The facts, Russell would say, exist regardless of whether or
not anyone believes them. If there are also ﬁctions – that is,
objective falsehoods – then they too would exist regardless
of whether or not anyone believes them. Russell ﬁnds this
intuitively problematic, but does not press the point. It is
possible that Russell is revealing here some ontological distrust
about the existence of objective falsehoods (akin to his distrust
of false propositions “going about”), but this is not his greatest
concern.
Russell’s main concern is that by positing facts and ﬁctions
as fellow objectives, we make the distinction between truth and
falsity inexplicable. True and false beliefs are sorted out
according to whether they take facts or ﬁctions as their objects,
but there is nothing more to be said about the difference
between facts and ﬁctions. We might as well say: facts have
the simple, unanalyzable property X, and ﬁctions have the
simple, unanalyzable property Y. We can ﬁnd no insight here
into the distinction between truth and falsity. Russell goes on
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
72
www.ebook3000.com

to anticipate something like Moore’s 1911 concern that falsity
does not seem to consist in a relation to something that is, like
an objective falsehood, or even a false proposition. Falsity
seems to involve a belief in something that is absent, which is
something that Russell thinks the correspondence theory can
accommodate. Russell’s objection also foreshadows Paul
Horwich’s later charge that primitivism saddles truth and
falsity with “impenetrable” mystery (1990: 10). If there is
nothing more to be said about the difference between
truth and falsity other than that there is a brute difference
between them, then the distinction between them appears to
be mysterious. And – hearkening back to Russell’s initial 1904
objection – we lose out on any resources for explaining why we
might prefer one to the other.27
It is important to realize that Russell’s complaint regarding
objective falsehoods is not that they are ontologically suspi-
cious “creatures of darkness”28 (though it is possible that this
thought might be lurking behind the ﬁrst sentence of the pas-
sage). Like Moore, Russell is drawing out some theoretical
problems with ﬁctions, not metaphysical ones. As a result,
their objections are more interesting and more subtle than
had they just appealed to metaphysical prejudice and taken
these entities to be metaphysically dubious. The objection is
rather this: If ﬁctions exist, they provide an inappropriate
account of false belief (which cannot be adequately understood
in terms of belief in something that really does exist), and their
similarity to facts results in the difference between truth and
falsity becoming brute and mysterious. What Russell does not
explicitly say is that ﬁctions are intrinsically spooky entities.
Russell does, as we have already seen, eventually make that
27 Commenting on Russell’s 1904 objection, Linsky observes that “The position
which Russell here adopts really amounts to a declaration of inability to account
for the truth of propositions at all” (1992: 253). Cf. also Hylton (1984: 384–5).
28 The phrase is Quine’s, which he applies to intensions (1956: 180).
The golden age of primitivism
73

claim with respect to propositions. Moore, too, announces
his distrust of propositions, in part because they fail to satisfy-
ingly serve the theoretical gap that they are posited to ﬁll
(1953: 263). Perhaps Russell and Moore also thought that
ﬁctions, were they to exist, would be curious shadowy things
going about alongside facts. But their published accounts of
primitivism do not explicitly pose this objection to ﬁctions.
Now, there are some interpretive hurdles here. Russell,
in the lectures on atomism, speciﬁcally discusses his suspicion
of false propositions. And false propositions might just be
ﬁctions, in the way that Russell used to maintain that true
propositions just are facts. But when Russell is discussing
false propositions in the lectures on atomism, it is clear from
the context that he is discussing true propositions as being
distinct from facts, and so would also, in that context, be
taking false propositions to be distinct from ﬁctions. In fact,
ﬁctions do not enter the discussion at all; objective falsehoods
and reiﬁed ﬁctions do not ﬁgure in the dialectic of the lectures.
Russell seems to have left them behind after 1910. He does,
however, continue to discuss the possibility of there being false
propositions, and continues to be dismissive toward them.
Russell’s preferred account of judgment, as we have seen,
places the believer in a relation to a complex of entities, not
some single entity like a proposition or objective.
Russell’s primitivism, like Moore’s, is fundamentally meta-
physical. As a result, I am happy to embrace several of Russell’s
own objections to his earlier view. The conceptual primitivism
I adopt is not committed to entities like objective falsehoods or
ﬁctions. Nor, for that matter, am I committed to facts. On my
view, whether we should be committed to entities like facts
(or states of affairs, as Armstrong [1997] calls them) depends
upon our overall views about truthmaking, and not the nature
of truth itself. Facts might ultimately deserve a place in our
ontology, but not because they fall out of or are needed to
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
74
www.ebook3000.com

support the theory of truth (cf. Section 4.2). As for proposi-
tions, I stated in Section 1.1.3 that I am ofﬁcially neutral
regarding their existence. It seems that there is less suspicion
concerning their existence now than in Russell’s and Moore’s
day. (Though Frege, at least, seemed unperturbed by their
existence.) As for how primitivists should account for falsity,
see Section 8.6.
The mystery charge has persisted to the present day, and we
shall deal with it in full in Section 3.3. In brief, I believe that the
objection is sound when offered to metaphysical primitivism.
If truth and falsity are primitive, unanalyzable properties then
yes, the difference between truth and falsity does not seem to be
adequately explained. But there is no plausible parallel charge
of mystery to be made against primitivism about truth.
Primitivism, as I defend it, is primitivism about the concept of
truth and not the property. Hence, we are free from the worry
of thinking, like the early Moore and Russell, that truth and
falsity are just two more properties that things can have,
irrespective of anything else. If there are lingering worries
about why we care about truth instead of falsity, then they
can be answered by drawing out all the many connections that
the concept of truth has with other notions. (Doing so is the
focus of Chapter 8.) Truth, but not falsity, is the mark of
assertion. Truth, but not falsity, is the aim of belief. Truths,
but not falsities, reﬂect reality. We do not have to look very far
to ﬁnd reasons that justify our “preference” for truth.
2.4
After the golden age
By 1911, Moore and Russell had both moved away from
primitivism and adopted a form of correspondence theory.
Only Frege remained an advocate of the view, holding onto it
for the rest of his life. In the decades that followed, the view
essentially disappeared from sight, though some claim to detect
The golden age of primitivism
75

primitivism here and there. Gerald Vision attributes primitiv-
ism (under the moniker ‘nihilism’) to Wittgenstein, though
Vision sees primitivism about truth being a natural conse-
quence of Wittgenstein’s general approach to philosophical
theorizing, and not necessarily anything particularly to do
with what he says about truth (2004: 191–205). Sluga
(1999: 38) claims to see primitivism in Carnap’s Aufbau
(1928), when Carnap was still strongly under the inﬂuence of
Frege and not yet aligned with Tarski. Timothy Nulty even
spots something akin to primitivism in Heidegger (2007).
Regardless of whether these attributions are accurate, what is
clear is that primitivism largely dropped off the radar.
With primitivism mostly left behind, and coherence views
tied up more or less essentially with an idealist metaphysics
whose appeal was quickly fading, correspondence theory
became the default view of truth for many philosophers,
Russell and Moore included. Nascent deﬂationary views
(which many have incorrectly taken Frege’s to be) would
soon appear on the scene in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth
century (e.g., Ramsey 1927; Strawson 1949; 1950; Ayer
1952), though they would not reach full steam until the last
two decades of the century (e.g., Horwich 1982; 1990; Field
1994a; Williams 1999). The middle of the century also saw the
development of epistemic theories of truth (e.g., Dummett
1958–9 and Putnam 1981). Most important of all, perhaps,
to understanding the twentieth century’s philosophy of truth is
its relationship to the work of Alfred Tarski and his semantic
conception of truth (e.g., Tarski 1944; 1956a). Tarski himself
is typically never classiﬁed as a primitivist about truth, but
Davidson sometimes appears to take him as one (1990b;
1996; see also Field 2008: 58). We shall confront the relation-
ship between Tarski and primitivism in Chapter 7.
Hence,
despite
some
brief
attention
–
mainly
from
Davidson – the primitivist conception of truth has received
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
76
www.ebook3000.com

very little notice since the golden age. Cartwright calls it
“a neglected theory of truth” (1987). But things have picked up
for primitivism in recent years.29 Still, it is far more common for
contemporary philosophers to express their sympathy with the
primitivist view than to give it a substantive defense. For exam-
ple, David Armstrong writes that “A fundamental concept such
as truth is likely to be so entwined with other fundamental
notions that no total explication of it in terms of other concepts
is possible” (2004: 17). E. J. Lowe writes that “I take the notion
of truth to be primitive and indeﬁnable, alongside the notions of
existence and identity ... truth itself, I believe, is too fundamental
a notion to admit of non-circular deﬁnition” (2007: 259 and
2009: 215). David Wiggins also endorses primitivism, but from
the perspective of a Strawsonian networker: “Truth is indeﬁna-
ble and irreducible, is not grasped by anyone through a deﬁni-
tion, but has certain marks by identifying which one may
elucidate the notion, without altogether demystifying it” (2002:
316). Strawson himself, as we saw in Section 1.2.3, is willing to
count truth among the set of privileged interdeﬁnable concepts
(1992: 24). Jonathan Schaffer also expresses his sympathy with
the view, ﬁnding it to be “very plausible” (2008: 309).
Primitivism has its allies. What it needs is more defenders. In
the next chapter, I lay out in full detail my primitivist theory of
truth, defend it from a preliminary objection, and distinguish it
from some nearby views. Having done so, we can then turn to
the defense of primitivism in Part II.
29 I address the major contemporary discussions of primitivism in Section 3.4.1, and
Davidson’s primitivism in Section 7.3.
The golden age of primitivism
77

3
A two-pronged theory of truth
In this chapter I conclude my articulation of the primitivist
approach to truth by offering the deﬁnitive statements of the
two components of my overall view. The chapters that follow
expand on and argue in favor of them. After stating the ofﬁcial
view, I reply to a common objection to it – the “impenetrable
mystery” objection – which I believe rests on a misunderstand-
ing of the primitivist theory of truth, and primitivist theories in
general. The chapter concludes by brieﬂy considering the
differences between my brand of primitivism and some nearby
views. Speciﬁcally, I consider the kinds of primitivism offered
by Ernest Sosa, Colin McGinn, and Trenton Merricks, and
also the so-called “identity theory of truth,” which at times has
been conﬂated with primitivism.
3.1
Metaphysical deﬂationism
With respect to the metaphysics of truth, and, speciﬁcally,
the property of truth, I espouse a position I call metaphysical
deﬂationism. According to metaphysical deﬂationism, there is no
substantive or “metaphysically robust” property of truth. These
descriptions, despite their proﬂigacy,1 are not terribly informa-
tive, and are too vague to be helpful. Section 4.1 offers a
comprehensive analysis of what I take to be a “metaphysically
1 See, e.g., Putnam (1991: 2), Wright (1992: 13), Blackburn (1998: 75), Engel
(2002: 41), and Lynch (2006: 68).
78
www.ebook3000.com

substantive” property. For now, the following brief remarks
will sufﬁce.
First, I take it to be manifest that there is a perfectly innoc-
uous sense in which truth is a property. To my ear, saying that
some of my beliefs are true (which I am happy to say) is
tantamount to saying, more stiltedly, that some of my beliefs
have the property of being true. So I do not deny that there is a
property of truth. What I do deny is that the property of truth is
in any sense metaphysically special. For example, consider the
two properties composed of H2O and located exactly 7,428
kilometers from a Texan county courthouse. One of these
properties might appear more distinguished than the other.
The members of the set of objects with the former property
seem to exhibit a deeper resemblance to each other than do the
members of the set of objects with the other. There are more
interesting generalizations and scientiﬁc laws to be discovered
with respect to the ﬁrst group. Only the ﬁrst might be said to
constitute a “natural kind,” or to “carve nature at the joints.”
According to metaphysical deﬂationism about truth, the prop-
erty of truth is like the second kind of property. There do not
appear to be any “genuine resemblances” between truths; the
set of truths is one remarkably heterogeneous collection.
Because metaphysical deﬂationists do not classify truth
among the “privileged” properties, they do not believe that
there is any metaphysical substance to the property of truth.
To borrow David Lewis’s (1983) terminology, truth is an
abundant but not a sparse property. Exactly how one should
go about drawing the sparse/abundant distinction is a matter
of controversy among metaphysicians. Some account for
sparse properties in terms of universals, others in tropes, and
still others in natural classes.2 However one draws the divide,
metaphysical deﬂationists locate truth on the side of the
2 See, respectively, Armstrong (1997), Campbell (1990), and Lewis (1983).
A two-pronged theory of truth
79

abundant properties. There is no universal truth, no collection
of truth tropes, and the class of truths is not a natural class.
Another important aspect to metaphysical deﬂationism is
that it maintains that truths are not true in virtue of their
possessing some kind of property (regardless of whether it is
primitive, or analyzable into further properties like corre-
spondence, coherence, or utility). The proposition that pen-
guins exist, for example, is true in virtue of existing penguins,
and not some property possessed by the proposition. The
proposition that echidnas exist, likewise, is true in virtue of
echidnas. So we do not need some property to explain why
truths are true. When we dig into the question of what makes
particular truths true, we see that no uniform story emerges.
Sometimes penguins are called for, other times echidnas. In
more complicated cases – like counterfactuals, modal claims,
truths involving causation – it is a very difﬁcult question to say
what makes them true. But this is a question best handled by
metaphysics, and not by a theory of truth that recommends
their being true in virtue of possessing the property of truth.
Hence, metaphysical deﬂationism is opposed to Moore’s
and Russell’s early primitivism. Moore and Russell initially
thought of truth and falsity as being primitive properties that
made propositions true or false. On my view, this neglects the
fact that truth-bearers are true or false in virtue of what is going
on outside of them; truth is an inherently relational notion
(even if there is no robust metaphysical relation or relational
property that truth is). Whereas Moore and Russell abandoned
their primitivism for a correspondence account of the rela-
tional nature of truth, I offer a different strategy. To capture
the relational nature of truth, and the idea that truths are made
true by what exists outside of them, we turn to the theory of
truthmaking. But in so doing, we reject the idea that truths are
true in virtue of their sharing some common property, the
property of truth (analyzable or not). Truthmaker theory is
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
80
www.ebook3000.com

thus an account of what makes truths true, but not an account
of what truth is.
As for what truth itself is, there is no need for a metaphysi-
cally robust property of truth, since we do not need it to explain
why truths are true, or to account for any genuine resemblances
between truths (more on this in Chapter 4). But we can pair this
deﬂationary attitude toward the property of truth with a deep
respect for the robustness of our concept of truth. That brings us
to the second dimension of my theory of truth.
3.2
Conceptual primitivism
Conceptual primitivism about truth is the view that our concept
of truth is substantive, fundamental, and foundational. The
concept TRUTH is substantive in that it is explanatorily potent;
truth is not merely a tool for expressive convenience. Instead,
truth is a crucial notion at work in our understanding of other
notions such as belief, meaning, and assertion. TRUTH is funda-
mental in that it cannot be analyzed, deﬁned, or explained in
terms of other concepts that are themselves more fundamental.
Perhaps – supposing that one is a networker of the variety
discussed in Section 1.2.3 – TRUTH can be elucidated, albeit
circularly, by other concepts. But if so, those concepts are them-
selves among the class of the most fundamental concepts (which
may in turn be explained in terms of TRUTH). If one is a founda-
tionalist, then TRUTH is a kind of conceptual atom; other concepts
may be composed by it, but TRUTH itself has no conceptual
composition. Foundationalists and networkers are agreed,
however, that TRUTH is fundamental. It takes center stage in our
conceptual scheme. As a result, TRUTH is a foundational notion.
Our grasp of other notions presupposes it, and, as I argue in
Section 5.2, it makes possible a number of features that are
central to our cognitive lives, including our very ability to form
thoughts and make judgments.
A two-pronged theory of truth
81

My statement of conceptual primitivism leaves it open as to
what exactly a concept is, and what exactly is involved in a
conceptual analysis or deﬁnition. It is no ambition of the current
project to take a stand on these broader, important issues. I tend
to think of concepts not as functions, as Frege (1951) took them
to be, but as tools of the mind; we utilize our concepts in order to
make sense of our experiences. Whereas properties are things in
(or exempliﬁed in) the external world, concepts belong to our
minds. When we classify the world around us, and form judg-
ments about it, we are employing concepts. To classify is to
ﬁt our experience into our concepts (‘That is a penguin’; ‘I’m
feeling hungry’); to judge is to relate concepts together
(‘All ravens are black’; ‘Echidnas live in Australia’). Seen in
this light, primitivism about our concept of truth is the view
that truth is at the very center of our cognitive lives. We need the
concept in order to form thoughts and beliefs, and to make
judgments and assertions. Indeed, several of the arguments in
the chapters to follow rely on truth’s tendency to show its face
all across the conceptual horizon.
Primitivism about TRUTH is a substantive, non-deﬂationary
perspective on the concept. As such, it acknowledges that truth
is an explanatorily potent notion, which is exactly what we
should expect from all of our conceptual primitives, whatever
others there may be. Because TRUTH is fundamental, we may
use it to offer accounts of other concepts; unlike deﬂationists,
primitivists can rely on truth in ways other than as just a device
for disquotation, forming generalizations, and the like.
Primitivists can accept that truth bears all the logical and
linguistic features that deﬂationists attribute to it. What they
deny is that these features exhaust everything interesting there
is to say about truth. In fact, primitivists can, in a sense, be seen
as the most anti-deﬂationary view. For deﬂationists, truth is a
fairly boring, thin, logical notion. For traditional substanti-
vists, truth is an important, thick notion, but one that can be
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
82
www.ebook3000.com

explained in more fundamental terms. Primitivists go further
still, and say that truth is even more important than traditional
substantivists acknowledge: TRUTH is in the class of the most
important and central concepts.
While primitivists can be seen in this light as the arch anti-
deﬂationists, they nevertheless have much in common with
their deﬂationary opponents. As I shall argue in Chapter 4,
primitivists about the concept TRUTH can (and should) accept
deﬂationism about the property truth. Along this metaphysical
dimension, primitivists have more in common with deﬂa-
tionists than traditional substantivists. Deﬂationists also resemble
primitivists in an important respect: they deny that truth can be
analyzed or deﬁned, at least in some of the important and classical
senses of analysis and deﬁnition. Not all deﬂationists think that
their theories “deﬁne” truth, but some do (e.g., Horwich 1990;
1998b). But the deﬁnitions offered by deﬂationists are different in
kind from those offered by traditional substantivists. The former
revolve around the truth schema, whereas the latter employ
further properties or concepts that are more basic than truth.
Primitivists reject both kinds of deﬁnitions.
3.3
A preliminary objection
Because primitivism has not received much attention over the
years, few objections have been put to the view. It has attracted
some scorn. Barnett Savery claims that Moore and Russell came
to the view – which he deems a “delightful fancy” – through a
“youthful aberration,” and notes that primitivism can be dis-
posed of with “abruptness” (1955: 515). Peter Hylton calls it
“evidently absurd” (1984: 385). Horwich refers to primitivism
as being “the least attractive conclusion” in the theory of truth
(1990: 10). Wolfgang Künne agrees with Horwich on this
point, and as a result is fairly dismissive of the view (2003:
A two-pronged theory of truth
83

13, 18). Such prejudices against primitivism about truth, simply
in virtue of its being a form of primitivism, are hardly justiﬁed.
One complaint in particular has been lodged time and again
against primitivism, and probably serves to explain why so
many have been inclined to dismiss the view before giving it a
fair hearing. What drives the derision seems to be the idea that
primitivists simply have nothing to say about truth. While others
are hard at work developing sophisticated theories that attempt
to capture the nature of truth, primitivists offer a shrug, take the
notion as primitive, and move on. But in so doing, objectors
claim, primitivists leave the notion of truth utterly mysterious.
“All we can do,” Thomas Baldwin writes when describing
Horwich’s take on primitivism (that Baldwin rejects), “is urge
each other to contemplate this mysterious notion, as if we were
tasting a particularly ﬁne claret, and then pass on” (1997: 1).
Horwich articulates this basic objection when describing
primitivism (he gives over all of one paragraph to the view):
there is the one-time thesis of Moore (1899, 1910/113) and Russell
(1904) that truth is an indeﬁnable, inexplicable quality that some
propositions simply have and others simply lack – a fundamental
property of which no account can be provided. This gives a sense
of impenetrable mysteriousness to the notion of truth and can be
the resort only of those who feel that the decent alternatives have
been exhausted.
(Horwich 1998b: 9–10; cf. 1990: 10)
Gerald Vision, in a similar vein, charges that primitivists
subscribe to the view that “there is nothing signiﬁcant to say
about truth” (2004: 45). Vision’s claim relies on a signiﬁcant
misunderstanding of primitivism.4 On his reading, if primitivism
3 Here Horwich is referring to Moore (1953).
4 The misunderstanding begins with his decision to label the view as a species of
nihilism (Vision 2004: 9). I hardly think that the connotations that accompany
‘nihilism’ deserve to be attached to the primitivist view; primitivists have the highest
respect for truth, taking it to be one of our most foundational and fundamental
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
84
www.ebook3000.com

were true, then it would be a most odd doctrine for it would have
to hold that its central thesis – namely, that TRUTH is a primitive,
foundational concept – is not a signiﬁcant claim. But what could
be more signiﬁcant than saying that truth belongs in the very
foundations of our conceptual scheme? The fact that TRUTH
cannot be analyzed into further concepts does not entail that
nothing signiﬁcant can be said about the notion. There is plenty
of interest to be said about truth that does not involve its
conceptual decomposition.
Other primitivists have taken on the mysteriousness objec-
tion directly. In articulating the primitivist conception of truth,
Davidson writes: “This does not mean we can say nothing
revealing about [truth]: we can, by relating it to other concepts
like belief, desire, cause, and action. Nor does the indeﬁnability
of truth imply that the concept is mysterious, ambiguous, or
untrustworthy” (1996: 265; cf. Patterson 2010: 22). Baldwin
also speaks up in defense of primitivism, writing that “it is
possible for a theorist of this persuasion to explain the position
by showing how the conception of truth as indeﬁnable ﬁts into
a broader understanding of judgment and the world of ‘truth-
bearers’ and ‘truth-makers’” (1997: 2). Trenton Merricks
argues that if we suppose that truth is mysterious because
primitive, then we must conclude that all concepts deﬁned
in terms of primitive concepts are equally mysterious. The
mystery would work its way up, not disappear, when TRUTH
is combined with other concepts to form new ones. If all
primitives are mysterious, then “analysable properties would
be equally occult, themselves ultimately analysed in terms of
notions. There is a sense, I suppose, in which primitivists are nihilists about the
business of analyzing truth – they think that there is no such analysis in the ofﬁng.
But would anyone call Williamson a nihilist about knowledge? Moore an ethical
nihilist? Vision claims to borrow the nihilist label from Scott Soames. But Soames is
as clear as can be that by ‘nihilism’ he means to pick out the redundancy theory of
truth (1999: 40). (Soames, in turn, attributes the origin of the nihilist moniker to
Tarski 1969: 66.)
A two-pronged theory of truth
85

the inscrutable primitive properties” (2007: 185). But since
not all properties are mysterious, neither are the primitives
from which they are constructed. And if not all primitives are
mysterious, then there is no reason to assume that TRUTH is
mysterious simply because it is primitive.
I share the sentiment of all of these responses to the mystery
objection. The inference from primitivism to mysteriousness
is fallacious. Primitive concepts and properties are no more
mysterious than the classical notion of an atom in physics, or of
a simple idea in modern British empiricism, or of a basic belief
in foundationalist epistemology. Primitives, like atoms, simple
ideas, and basic beliefs, are building blocks from which
complexes are constructed. Whether something is mysterious
or not is a distinct question from whether it is conceptually
fundamental or not. Mysterious concepts are those of which
we have no comfortable grasp: think of what Hume thought of
the scholastics’ notion of necessary connection or substance.
Truth is not like those. Truth, as Davidson writes, is “as clear
and basic a concept as we have” (1990b: 135). The proof
involves all the many conceptual connections we can draw
between truth and other notions. Many of these will arise in
the following chapters, and they will take center stage in
Chapter 8. Sentences express complete thoughts, which are
thoughts that can be true. To assert is to present as true. To
know what something means is to know the conditions under
which it is true. If someone tells it like it is, then he or she is
saying something true. Truth is one of our most familiar and
widespread concepts. Accordingly, it should come as no
surprise that truth ends up being connected to all sorts of
other notions. So rather than thinking that primitive concepts
are mysterious, we should in fact expect the opposite, that our
most fundamental concepts will be the least mysterious, for
they are the ones whose reach will extend throughout the web
of concepts that form our mental lives.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
86
www.ebook3000.com

Perhaps one of the reasons that many are tempted to asso-
ciate primitiveness with mystery is that they neglect the fact
that something has to be primitive.5 Despite all the focus
philosophers put on conceptual analysis, they seem to forget
that the analyses cannot go on forever. And if the analyses
cannot continue on forever, then we have to reach conceptual
bedrock at some point (see Section 6.2 below). With that in
mind, we need to consider what sorts of concepts will form that
bedrock. “Going primitive” can indeed appear to be a way of
dodging an analysis that needs doing. If Phil and Sophia are
debating about the nature of something, and Sophia offers an
analysis whereas Phil says, “I’ll just take that as a primitive,”
then it does seem as though Phil’s view is the mysterious one,
for Sophia has gone some distance toward saying what the
thing is, whereas Phil might be seen as having dodged the
question. But if we step back and think about the larger project
of analysis, we see that some things are going to have to be
primitive, and so we can argue about what the most plausible
primitives are. The mystery worry disappears when we step
back from the narrow discussion of a particular concept and its
analysis, and take in the broader picture that includes all of our
various concepts and their relations to each other.
Before moving on, let me admit a (limited) sense in which the
charge of mystery is deserved. I defend primitivism about
TRUTH. I do not defend primitivism about truth, understood
as a metaphysically robust and fundamental property (whether
understood in terms of universals, tropes, or natural classes)
that is not reducible into any further, more basic robust prop-
erties. In their early writings, Russell and Moore, it seems, were
primitivists about truth, which is best understood as a form of
metaphysical substantivism. When it comes to metaphysical
primitivism, Horwich’s description seems more apt: “truth is
5 Cf. Moore (1903: 10).
A two-pronged theory of truth
87

an indeﬁnable, inexplicable quality that some propositions
simply have and others simply lack” (1990: 10). Indeed, we
saw Russell come to much the same conclusion himself about
his own view (1910a: 176). If truths are true simply in virtue of
their having a certain primitive property, then we lose out on
the relational nature of truth, and the ability to explain truths
in terms of what is going on outside of them. The charge of
mystery is rightly placed against primitivism about truth; it
holds no water whatsoever against primitivism about TRUTH.
3.4
Nearby views
3.4.1
Sosa, McGinn, and Merricks
Primitivism about truth has not received anything near the sort
of systematic attention that other theories of truth have enjoyed.
Still, a few philosophers have taken up primitivist positions.
These views, ultimately, end up either eliding the distinction
between concepts and properties, or drawing different morals
from the distinction. As a result, it will be instructive to look at
these competing accounts, and how my primitivism differs.6
Ernest Sosa has defended a primitivist position in a number
of papers (1993a, 1993b, 2001). His main interest in the theory
of truth is to locate an account of truth that is suitable for a
“truth-centered epistemology,” that is, one that takes truth to be
“a main cognitive goal of inquiry” and “explains other main
epistemic concepts in terms of truth” (1993a: 1). This concern,
which I share, takes center stage in Section 8.5. Sosa’s discussion
is sensitive to the similarities between deﬂationism and primitiv-
ism, and at times presents his primitivist as being too deﬂationist.
For example, Sosa maintains that primitivists think that posses-
sion of our concept of truth is constituted by our disposition to
6 Given the importance of Tarski’s theory of truth for Davidson’s theory of truth, I
reserve discussion of Davidsonian primitivism for Section 7.3.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
88
www.ebook3000.com

accept the T-sentences (1993a: 11). This cannot be right, I argue
later, since we need the concept of truth long before we can even
grasp a T-sentence.
Sosa’s discussion of primitivism is not particularly sensitive to
our property/concept distinction. Most of his discussion is framed
in terms of the concept of truth, but I sense that he assumes that a
non-deﬂationist (because primitivist) about the concept of truth
must also have a non-deﬂationist attitude toward the property of
truth. Precisely that sort of view is what I reject. Metaphysical and
conceptual deﬂationism are orthogonal views. One can accept
the former but not the latter (as I do), or vice versa (as Alston
2002: 11 considers). To adopt primitivism and thereby abandon
deﬂationism on one dimension does not force one’s hand with
respect to the other. Sosa, by contrast, suggests that his primitivist
account of the concept may ﬁt comfortably alongside a corre-
spondence account of the property of truth. There is theoretical
space for such a position, but I do not believe that it is motivated.
In Chapter 4 I present my reasons for dispensing with any
metaphysical account of the property of truth.
Colin McGinn (2000; 2002) also defends a primitivist
account of truth, and provides a nice statement of the view:
The concept of truth seems simple in the following sense: it has no
conceptual decomposition, and no empirical essence or nature.
We cannot analyse it into conceptual constituents, and we cannot
expect to discover a hidden underlying empirical structure for it.
Truth is primitive, in this sense (which is not to say that nothing
illuminating can be said about the concept). In this respect, I
would say it is like the other logical concepts investigated in this
book: identity, existence, predication, necessity. These concepts
form a conceptual bedrock; they stand, as it were, underneath all
our other concepts. They have no analysis.
(McGinn 2000: 104–5)
What separates McGinn from other primitivists, myself
included, is that he thinks we can deﬁne truth in spite of its
A two-pronged theory of truth
89

being primitive, even in a non-circular way. We simply deﬁne
truth as the self-effacing property.7 That is, what it is for
something to be true is for something else to be the case:
“truth applies to a proposition in virtue of something other
than itself” (2000: 96). McGinn fully admits that this aspect of
his view has a paradoxical ring to it:
Put simply, the primitive property of truth applies to the proposi-
tion that snow falls from the sky in virtue of the fact that snow falls
from the sky – and not in virtue of the proposition meeting some
condition that analyses (or simply reuses) the concept of truth.
The predicate ‘is true’ holds in virtue of a condition not speciﬁed
by the use of some (intensionally or extensionally) equivalent
predicate. Yet it is still itself a genuine predicate standing for a
real property – as much as ‘blue’ is. Therein lies the essential
character of the truth concept, making truth an oddity in our
conceptual scheme. Truth is really a very exotic property indeed,
when viewed in the right light.
(McGinn 2000: 105–6)
Despite my overall sympathy with McGinn’s view, I get
off board with his presentation at a number of junctures.
First – and what is perhaps little more than a semantic quibble –
I do not see that his purported “deﬁnition” of truth is worthy
of the name. We can certainly identify or refer to the property
of truth in the way that McGinn points out. But to give a
unique way for identifying or referring to something is not
thereby to deﬁne it. McGinn’s sense of ‘deﬁnition’ does not
ﬁt well with how the others in the theory of truth use it.
Most fundamentally, though, my disagreement lies with
McGinn’s interpretation of the uniqueness of truth, speciﬁcally
regarding its “self-effacing” nature. The proposition that snow
is white has the property of truth just when snow has the
7 But see Wrenn (2004).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
90
www.ebook3000.com

property of being white. How odd! On the one hand we have a
certain sort of object – an ersatz or “abstract” object, even –
having a certain brute property that is irreducible to anything
else. On the other hand we have a very different sort of object –
a perfectly natural, physical object – having a perfectly
ordinary empirical property. Two very different objects, two
very different properties, and yet they go together. They have
to go together. That snow is white cannot have truth unless
snow has whiteness. From the substantivist’s point of view,
which takes truth to be a genuine, substantive property, just as
real as the property of being white, this scenario appears to be
very strange. (A related worry is behind my main argument
against metaphysical substantivism in Chapter 4.) Whether an
ersatz object has some non-empirical property depends upon
whether some physical object has a certain empirical property.
It is no wonder that deﬂationists see something ﬁshy here.
Seemingly distinct existences are constraining each other’s
existence. From the metaphysically deﬂationary point of
view, however, nothing odd is going on at all. Talking about
“the truth” of the proposition that snow is white is nothing
more than talking about the whiteness of snow. The truth of
the proposition and the whiteness of snow are not separate
things, and so it is no surprise that they stand or fall together. But
not so for McGinn. McGinn readily admits that the situation is
strange. Who would have thought that there would be such a
property, he wonders aloud (2000: 97). Truth is a “remarkable”
property that performs a “miraculous feat” (2000: 104). Truth
is that one unique property that takes us from facts about
propositions to facts about the world. “If this remystiﬁes the
concept of truth,” McGinn writes, “then so be it” (2000: 104).
We do not need to mystify, deify, or even reify truth in order
to understand and account for its self-effacing, disquotational
nature. My sympathies lie with the deﬂationists when it comes
to interpreting how truth comes to have its special powers.
A two-pronged theory of truth
91

McGinn takes on an extra explanatory burden by making the
truth of propositions an additional, genuine, and substantive
property that they possess. He needs to explain (or just accept
as a brute mystery) why some object a having some property
F should force some different thing b to have some different
property G. Metaphysical deﬂationists, by avoiding taking on
truth as an additional substantive property, do not face any
extra explanatory burden here.
I suspect that much of McGinn’s mystiﬁcation of truth could
have been avoided had he more carefully attended to the prop-
erty/concept distinction. (Look at the second block quote above
to see how quickly McGinn moves between talk of the concept
and talk of the property.) The view I develop in these pages is
one that takes truth to be conceptually primitive but metaphysi-
cally
deﬂationary.
McGinn’s
discussion
freely
alternates
between talk of concepts and talk of properties. He is clearly a
metaphysical substantivist: “Truth is a substantial, robust
property, as thick as any property, not the disappearing pseudo-
property it is sometimes said to be” (2000: 106). Furthermore,
“The truth property is a constituent of reality as much as
blueness or electric charge or goodness is” (2000: 107). But
the interesting features that truth enjoys can be fully captured
by a substantive account of the concept TRUTH. We need not and
should not conﬂate a substantive take on TRUTH with a substan-
tive take on truth. Once we draw the distinction, and appreciate
how much work primitive TRUTH can do for us, we can leave
behind McGinn’s double substantivism.
Finally we come to Trenton Merricks’s (2007) view.
Merricks also does not attend to the property/concept distinc-
tion with respect to truth, and his discussion of primitivism is
entirely couched in terms of properties. As a result, he ends
up defending an argument for the existence of a primitive
property of truth. His argument runs as follows. First, truth
is not a relational property, since some truths are not true in
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
92
www.ebook3000.com

virtue of their relation to other things. Negative existentials,
such as that there are no hobbits, are a paradigm example.
These truths are not related to anything, and so their truth
cannot be a relational matter. So if there is a property of being
true, then it is a monadic, non-relational property. But truth is
not an intrinsic property, as in many cases truths are true in
virtue of what is going on with other things. So if the property
of truth exists, it is a monadic, non-intrinsic property. If this
monadic property is to be analyzable, then there must be some
monadic property that every truth shares. But there are no such
properties. So if there is a property of truth, then it is monadic,
non-intrinsic, and primitive. Merricks goes on to discharge the
conditional by arguing against deﬂationary theories of truth,
which he takes to be committed to the view that there is no
property of truth.
Of course, I have already conceded that there is a property
of truth, albeit a metaphysically deﬂationary one. (Most
deﬂationists – except perhaps prosententialists – would likely
agree with me.) And if we reconstruct Merricks’s argument
such that if there is a metaphysically robust property of truth,
then it is monadic, non-intrinsic, and primitive, then I do not
grant his premise that there is such a property. So I ultimately
reject Merricks’s argument for metaphysical primitivism.
Moreover, there is no need for such a property, given
Merricks’s own admission that the truth property is non-
intrinsic. Truth-bearers are true in virtue of what is going on
outside of them, and so there is no need to suppose that they
have this additional, internal feature of being true in anything
but a deﬂationary sense.
Merricks claims to see his view inside the work of not only
Moore and Russell, but also Frege and Davidson. Here we
have another case of failing to attend to the crucial distinction
between truth and TRUTH. Merricks’s primitivism turns out to
resemble Frege’s and Davidson’s very little; the view it most
A two-pronged theory of truth
93

resembles is the one that Moore and Russell both eventually
rejected. (But even Russell and Moore would have rejected
Merricks’s claim that truth is a non-intrinsic property.) Once
we accept the distinction, the best path forward for the prim-
itivist is clear: primitivism is best suited for our concept of
truth, and not its other dimensions.
3.4.2
Identity theory
In our exploration of the early Moore and Russell, we encoun-
tered the suggestion that they subscribed to something called
“the identity theory of truth.”8 This attribution is due to the fact
that they happily accepted that facts are identical to true prop-
ositions. As a result, the primitivist view about truth has some-
times been conﬂated with the identity theory (cf. Candlish and
Damnjanovic 2007: 232–3). But the views are actually quite
distinct, and we should not run them together.9 Getting clear on
the distinction between the two views will enable us to remove
once and for all any temptation to equate the views, or to saddle
Moore and Russell (or Frege, for that matter) with the view.
Around the turn of the twentieth century, when they
still believed in propositions, Moore and Russell understood
them as being composed of actual objects. The proposition
that Russell was friends with Moore was composed in part
by Russell and Moore themselves. Some of those propositions
are true – those that have that primitive property of truth – and
those are the ones called ‘facts.’ Some of those propositions are
8 See, e.g., Candlish (1989: 344), Dodd (1995; 1996; 1999: 227), Hornsby (1999: 244),
David (2001: 684), and Engel (2001: 441; 2002: 38). Cartwright (1987) is sometimes
cited in this connection, but Cartwright never even uses the phrase ‘identity theory.’
Candlish (2007: 200, endnote 23) concedes this point, but maintains that Cartwright
equates primitivism with the identity theory, and so – from Cartwright’s perspective – it
is correct to say that he attributes the identity theory to Moore.
9 Cf. Candlish (2007: 101).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
94
www.ebook3000.com

false, and they troubled Russell and Moore, for they were
committed to the existence of false propositions. When prop-
ositions are understood as being composed of actual objects,
the thought of a realm of false propositions is indeed ontolog-
ically suspicious; in addition to “Russell and Moore’s being
friends” running around the world, so too was “Russell
and Moore’s being foes.” But if true propositions just are
facts, then there is no sense to be made of there being any
correspondence between truths and facts, for there being a
correspondence between them requires there being a difference
between them. Predictably enough, the abandonment of the
identity between true propositions and facts went hand in hand
with Russell’s and Moore’s departure from primitivism about
truth to correspondence theories of truth.10
But did Russell and Moore espouse an identity theory of
truth? Thomas Baldwin thinks not, and I wholeheartedly
agree: “Indeed since Moore holds that truth is an indeﬁnable
property of propositions . . . it is strictly incorrect to attribute to
Moore an identity theory of truth” (1991: 42).11 Moore and
Russell did not understand truth in terms of facts; that is, they
did not take the notion of a fact to be the more conceptually
basic notion in terms of which truth is to be understood. Truth
was the fundamental notion. Moore even goes so far as to
deﬁne reality in terms of truth: “So far, indeed, from truth
being deﬁned by reference to reality, reality can only be deﬁned
by reference to truth” (1902: 717).
So while Russell and Moore held on to their primitivism in
the context of their holding on to a certain conception of facts,
we should not take this state of affairs to suggest that they were
identity theorists. Frege, too, was happy to accept an identity
10 Hence Baldwin: “It is difﬁcult to overestimate the importance of this identity theory
in Moore’s early philosophy” (1990: 43).
11 See also Candlish (1995).
A two-pronged theory of truth
95

between true propositions and facts: “A fact is a thought that is
true” (1956: 307). Here, too, Frege is not explicating the
notion of truth in terms of facts. For Frege, truth is primitive.
In this passage, Frege is telling us what facts are, not what truth
is. Facts are explicated in terms of truth, and not the other way
around. And what Frege says here is completely innocuous.
There is a perfectly ordinary sense of the word ‘fact’ that is
synonymous with ‘true truth-bearer.’
The identity theory appears to suffer from an identity crisis.
Just what is the identity theory of truth supposed to be? Julian
Dodd, one of its chief defenders, has deﬁned it as follows:
“According to an identity theory of truth, a proposition is
true if and only if it is identical with a fact” (1995: 160). This
deﬁnition faces a dilemma. If we read the biconditional in a
rather weak way, as stating a mere material equivalence, then
Frege and the early Russell and Moore (not to mention all
competent speakers of English) are identity theorists. But of
course they were primitivists about truth. So on this weak
reading of the deﬁnition, the identity theory of truth is not a
theory of truth at all. Suppose, then, that we read the deﬁnition
in a stronger way, such that what follows the ‘if and only if’
tells us what constitutes that which came before. Then we
would be taking truth to be understood in terms of facts, taking
the latter notion to be more fundamental. This is the sort of
statement of the identity theory that Baldwin provides: “the
truth of a judgement consists in the identity of the judgement’s
content with a fact” (1991: 35; cf. Candlish 1999b: 199). Now
we have a theory of truth worthy of the name. But on this
reading, it is not clear that anyone accepts it. It is not Baldwin’s
theory, and Dodd and Jennifer Hornsby – two prominent
contemporary advocates of the identity theory – both reject
it. One will ﬁnd no support for it in Frege, Moore, or Russell.
Dodd himself distinguishes two ways of interpreting identity
theory, but his distinction does not correspond to the one just
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
96
www.ebook3000.com

drawn. Instead, Dodd distinguishes “robust” from “modest”
identity theories, according to the conception of facts that they
take on. Robust identity theorists take facts to be worldly
objects – objects in the “world of reference,” to evoke Frege’s
sense/reference distinction12 – composed of particulars and
properties. The young Moore is a robust identity theorist in
this sense, for his facts are true propositions, which in turn are
composed of worldly objects. But that Moore is a “robust
identity theorist” in Dodd’s terminology is an interesting fact
about his early metaphysics that is silent with respect to his
theory of truth. Furthermore, by Dodd’s deﬁnition, metaphy-
sicians like David Armstrong and Hugh Mellor also count as
robust identity theorists, given their metaphysics of facts. But
they do not see themselves as taking on a theory of truth when
they argue for the existence of what they call, respectively,
‘states of affairs’ and ‘facta.’13
Modest identity theorists, on the other hand, take facts to be
Fregean thoughts, and so as belonging only to the “world of
sense.”14 So Frege is a modest identity theorist par excellence.
But that Frege is a “modest identity theorist” in Dodd’s termi-
nology is an interesting fact about his take on facthood that,
again, has nothing to do with his theory of truth. Frege is a
primitivist; he thinks truth cannot be deﬁned, let alone deﬁned
in terms of facts. As we have seen, he takes on the inverse view:
facts are deﬁned in terms of truth.
12 See Frege (1952).
13 See Armstrong (1997) and Mellor (1995).
14 Why the account is modest I am unsure (but see Dodd 1996: 47, endnote 2).
Commitment to Fregean thoughts involves an extra ontological commitment to a
realm of objects above and beyond the physical world. Moorean propositions do
not require any such extra commitment. One might be worried about how to build
facts from the physical world’s constituents – see, for example, Lewis’s worries
about Armstrong’s states of affairs (1992; 2001b) – but this is not necessarily a less
modest task than building a third realm of Fregean thoughts. If one is antecedently
biased in favor of an ontology of Fregean senses, as I presume Dodd is, then of
course the view will appear modest.
A two-pronged theory of truth
97

Dodd must accept the ﬁrst horn of my original dilemma if
he is to ﬁnd Moore and Frege on opposite sides of his robust/
modest distinction. But if so his ‘identity theory of truth’ is a
jarring misnomer. What Dodd is really defending is a reduc-
tionist account of facts: “The identiﬁcation of facts with true
thoughts is not a merging of ontological categories; it is a
reduction of the former to the latter” (2000: 125). Dodd
should have called his view ‘the identity theory of facts’ and
spun his biconditional the other way round: something is a fact
just in case it is identical to a true proposition.
The fact that the identity theory of truth is not a theory
of truth has, it surprisingly turns out, been happily conceded
by its main advocates.15 Dodd writes: “To be sure, once a fact
has been deﬁned as a true Thought, the claim that a Thought is
true just in case it is identical with a fact by no means tells
us what truth consists in; it does not provide an analysis of
truth” (1996: 44–5). Hornsby, concluding a paper entitled
“Truth: the identity theory,” writes that in defending the
identity theory of truth, “I have not meant to develop any
new theory here. Indeed I do not think that we need any theory
of truth save insofar as we may go astray without one”
(1997: 22). In fact, Hornsby thinks that the identity theory
“acknowledges truth’s indeﬁnability,” and so presupposes
primitivism (1997: 3, footnote 5).
At the end of the day, Hornsby’s greatest interest seems to be
in resisting a false dichotomy: “I think that nowadays many
think that philosophers EITHER endorse some version of a
correspondence theory OR have to say distinctively deﬂation-
ary things about truth. I used the label ‘identity theory’ for a
statement by reference to which I hoped to show that there was
another option, and a defensible one” (1999: 245). Indeed.
There are defensible theories that avoid both correspondence
15 See also Candlish (1999a).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
98
www.ebook3000.com

theory and all-out deﬂationism; I defend one such theory. But
interest in ﬁnding such a theory ought not to be labeled ‘the
identity theory of truth,’ nor should it be coupled with, or
somehow reduced down to, the thesis that facts and true
propositions are one and the same. If we want to resist this
dichotomy, we should turn to primitivism.
A two-pronged theory of truth
99

www.ebook3000.com

part ii
Defending primitivism

www.ebook3000.com

4
Metaphysical deﬂationism
The history of primitivism about truth, as we saw in Chapter 2,
has brought us both primitivist accounts of the property of
truth and primitivist accounts of the concept of truth. The
primitivism I adopt is of the latter kind only. As regards the
property of truth, I advocate deﬂationism. There is no property
of truth in any metaphysically substantial sense, including the
primitivist sense that Moore and Russell once advocated. But
what is it for a property to be “metaphysically substantial”?
Despite the frequent invocation of truth being or not being a
metaphysically “robust,” “substantial,” or “genuine” prop-
erty, there has been far too little attention given over to the
question of just what it is for something to be that sort of
property. I aim to remedy that deﬁcit. I begin by offering an
account of metaphysical deﬂationism as the denial that truth is
a sparse property: truth is merely an abundant property.
However one conceives of the sparse/abundant distinction
(whether in terms of universals, tropes, or natural classes),
truth belongs on the abundant side of things. I argue for
metaphysical deﬂationism by relying on ideas that involve
both recombination and truthmaking. I show how taking
truth to be a metaphysically substantive property leads either
to contradiction or to an unmotivated metaphysical view.
But to deny that truth is a metaphysically substantive property
is not to think that truth is not in any way a “metaphysical”
notion, or that truths do not carry with them metaphysical
implications. Quite to the contrary: truth is deeply connected to
103

reality, and if truths do not carry metaphysical implications,
then nothing does. But the right way of understanding the
metaphysical import of truth is not through thinking of it as a
metaphysically rich property. The chapter ends with a discussion
of the right way to understand the metaphysics of truth, a way
that is fully compatible with being a metaphysical deﬂationist
about truth, and that ends up undermining the main motivation
for correspondence theory.
4.1
What is it for a property to be “metaphysically
substantive”?
Metaphysical deﬂationism is the thesis that there is no meta-
physically substantive property of truth. Although it is very
common to take this thesis to be the central tenet of deﬂa-
tionary theories of truth, it is much less common for theorists
to be clear about just what a metaphysically substantive
property of truth is supposed to be. Deﬂationism about
truth has frequently been deﬁned simply as the thesis that
there is no property of truth.1 Sometimes we are told that
deﬂationists believe that there is no “metaphysically substan-
tive,” “genuine,” “heavyweight,” or “robust” property of
truth.2 The thesis as it stands is fairly empty. What sense of
‘property’ is being evoked? What distinguishes the robust
properties from the non-robust properties? Our ﬁrst main
objective in this chapter is to give some content to this thesis
so that we may then defend it.
The natural place to turn in order to get a handle on what a
metaphysically substantive property of truth is supposed to be
1 E.g., Boghossian (1990: 161), Kirkham (1992: 307), Alston (1996: 41), Lynch
(1998: 112), Merricks (2007: 187), and Young (2009: 564).
2 E.g., Putnam (1991: 2), Wright (1992: 13), Blackburn (1998: 75), Engel (2002: 41),
and Lynch (2006: 68).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
104
www.ebook3000.com

is the literature on the metaphysics of properties.3 The philo-
sophical discussion about properties involves the attempt to
understand how it is possible that distinct objects can share the
same feature – the “problem of the one over the many.” Many
philosophers accept that there is more to objects sharing a
genuine feature than merely their falling under the same
predicate. Green objects resemble one another in a way that
grue objects do not. As a result, we may distinguish between
the sparse and abundant properties.4 The sparse properties are
those that account for the genuine resemblances between
objects. Abundant properties, by contrast, can be shared
between objects without bestowing any resemblance upon
them. There need not be any genuine feature held in common
between all the objects within a three-and-a-half-mile radius of
the exact center of Missouri, though there are genuine features
held in common between all samples of gold.
Views
regarding the metaphysics of properties offer
accounts of the nature of the sparse properties. Realists argue
that objects share features in virtue of the existence of univer-
sals, objects that can fully exist multiply instantiated. When
two objects share a genuine feature, they do so by instantiating
the same universal. Realism about universals may be divided
into extreme and moderate versions. Extreme realism is the
Platonic view that universals exist transcendently, independ-
ently of their being instantiated. Moderate realism is the
Aristotelian view that universals exist immanently, only when
instantiated. The two forms of realism are united in arguing
that the sparse properties all correspond to universals, whereas
the merely abundant properties do not.
3 In what follows, I follow Armstrong (1997) in my setup of the landscape. See also
Oliver (1996) for an overview of the terrain.
4 Consider also the distinction between “Cambridge” properties and “non-Cambridge”
properties (Shoemaker 1980).
Metaphysical deﬂationism
105

Nominalists, by contrast, argue that there are no univer-
sals: reality is exhausted by the particular. Still, many
nominalists also seek to distinguish the sparse from the
abundant properties. Moderate nominalism is the view that
the sparse properties correspond to sets of resembling tropes
(e.g., Campbell 1990). Tropes are particularized property
instances. If two objects share some feature, that is due to
their both possessing resembling tropes. Extreme nominal-
ism rejects the existence of both universals and tropes, and
maintains the sparse/abundant distinction by means of an
appeal to naturalness. David Lewis (1983) presents a view
that takes properties to be merely classes of objects. But some
classes are more natural than others, where naturalness is
taken to be a primitive notion that comes in degrees. The
(more or less) sparse properties are identiﬁed with the
(more or less) natural classes.
I have now outlined four different accounts of what a sparse
property is. My proposal is that we understand metaphysical
substantivism about truth along those same lines. What it is
for truth to be not just a property, but a metaphysically
substantive property is for it to belong on the sparse side of
the sparse/abundant divide.5 After all, it seems that truth is
undeniably a property in the abundant sense.6 Lots of things
are true – that snow is white, that grass is green, that two and
two are four – just like lots of things are grue. What is distinc-
tive about metaphysically deﬂationary theorists of truth is
5 Michael Lynch understands metaphysically substantive properties to be those that
determine a “minimally objective kind,” such that all the members of the kind belong
to the kind in virtue of having some shared property (in a non-projectivist sort of way)
(2006: 68). The possible shared properties Lynch has in mind (and that ﬁgure into his
own account) seem to correspond roughly with the notion of a sparse property, and so
his account of metaphysical substantivism coheres well with my own.
6 Perhaps a prosententialist (see, e.g., Grover, Camp, and Belnap 1975) might deny
this. But many other deﬂationists happily accept it (e.g., Horwich 1990: 38–41).
There may simply be a verbal disagreement here.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
106
www.ebook3000.com

that they do not see any genuine resemblances between all the
truths. Metaphysically substantive theorists of truth, though,
claim that truths do genuinely share a common feature, and the
traditional proposals attempt to give the correct analysis of it:
truth as correspondence with the facts, coherence in an ideal
system, useful belief, warranted assertibility, etc.
We may now deﬁne metaphysical substantivism about truth
as the disjunction of the following four theses:
(S1)
There is a transcendent universal truth.7
(S2)
There is an immanent universal truth.
(S3)
There is a resemblance class of truth tropes.
(S4)
There is a natural class of truths.
The goal of this chapter is to argue against each of (S1) through
(S4), and thereby defend metaphysical deﬂationism, the thesis
that there is no metaphysically substantive property of truth,
no matter how one understands the metaphysics of properties.
Truth is at best a mere abundant property.8
Notice that one can distinguish between rejecting certain of
these theses on grounds simply due to one’s views regarding the
theory of properties, and rejecting them on grounds speciﬁcally
to do with truth. One can, for example, reject all of them and still
be a Platonic realist about universals (for one need not think that
there is a universal for every predicate). But if one is already
committed on the problem of universals, that commitment will
limit one’s choices when it comes to the metaphysical status of
7 In this chapter, universals will be denoted by italicized words.
8 Wright describes the disagreement between deﬂationists and substantivists by claim-
ing that, for substantivists, “the character of the property [of truth] may not be
transparent from the analysis of the concept” (2001: 753). How well this ﬁts with
my sparse/abundant distinction depends on how one understands the notion of
transparency here. Wright’s example involves water, and the familiar thought that
the nature of the property is not immediately revealed by reﬂection upon the concept.
The same is probably true of most sparse properties – our concepts of them will not
automatically reveal their metaphysical essence.
Metaphysical deﬂationism
107

truth. Moderate realists, for instance, will reject (S1) and (S3)
simply in virtue of their view on properties. Whether they also
reject (S2) will depend on their speciﬁc attitudes about truth.
I shall be arguing against (S1) through (S4) without presupposing
any particular solution to the problem of universals. Thinking
directly about truth will lead us to reject each of these theses.
4.2
The point and purpose of properties
Having deﬁned our target, let us now turn to the argument
against metaphysical substantivism and in favor of metaphys-
ical deﬂationism. The argument proceeds in two stages. In this
section, I outline a familiar and useful methodology for the
theory of properties. According to this methodology, we posit
the existence of the sparse properties that are needed to fulﬁll
the roles of accounting for truthmaking, resemblance, and
causality, and no more. I argue that a sparse property of truth
(however understood) is not needed for any of these roles, and
thus positing its existence is unnecessary and ontologically
proﬂigate. In the next section, I argue that if we suppose that
such a property exists, we end up on the horns of a dilemma
between contradiction and an unmotivated metaphysics.
4.2.1
A metaphysical methodology
The methodology I am offering for the theory of properties is as
follows. In order to maintain ontologically parsimonious theo-
ries, we want to posit the existence of metaphysical “structure”
in the world as sparsely as is possible, without sacriﬁcing explan-
atory power.9 The speciﬁc kind of structure I have in mind here
is the existence of sparse properties (understood in terms of
9 I use the word ‘structure’ here rather loosely, and not in the more technical sense
that, say, Sider (2011) uses it.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
108
www.ebook3000.com

universals, tropes, or natural classes) and, as crucially discussed
below, necessary connections between distinct existences. These
sorts of metaphysical posits should be wielded cautiously, and
postulated only where our theorizing demands it.
When does our theorizing demand positing metaphysical
structure? The answer is threefold. We posit sparse properties,
necessary connections between them, and the like when they can
be used (i) to account for the genuine resemblances between
objects, (ii) to account for the causal properties of objects, or
(iii) to serve as truthmakers for truths. Here is David Lewis,
describing Armstrong’s moderate realism: “universals are
sparse. There are the universals that there must be to ground
the objective resemblances and the causal powers of things, and
there is no reason to believe in any more” (1983: 345).10 Lewis
here identiﬁes two of the sources of justiﬁcation for metaphysical
positing in the theory of properties. First, we posit universals
(or tropes or naturalness) when we need them to account for
the genuine resemblances between objects. What separates the
collection of green objects from the collection of grue objects is
that the former all share a single universal (green), which cannot
be said for the various grue objects. We also posit universals
(or tropes or naturalness) when we need them to account for the
causal properties of objects. The thought here is that objects have
their causal powers in virtue of the properties they enjoy. The
sparse properties are, in Armstrong’s phrase, “the ontologically
signiﬁcant properties of objects, those in terms of which the
world’s work is done” (2004: 17). Being massive or charged or
conductive are the sorts of properties that account for the causal
order of the world; it is these properties, and not being three feet
10 Armstrong himself also claims that “if it can be proved a priori that a thing falls
under a certain universal, then there is no such universal” (1978: 11). This princi-
ple, if true, would make our argument too easy, and so I will not dwell on it. But if
this principle holds, then because we can prove a priori that the proposition that
7 + 5 = 12 falls under true, there is no truth universal.
Metaphysical deﬂationism
109

from the Washington Monument or being either in Alaska or
Madagascar that ﬁgure into the causal laws of nature. A third
reason for positing universals and tropes, one which came to
fruition some time after Lewis’s discussion, involves their use as
truthmakers. Objects and their properties, whether understood
in terms of universals or tropes, are needed to serve as the
ontological grounds for the truths about the world. Truths are
true in virtue of the existence of both objects and their properties.
There are three sources of justiﬁcation, then, for positing
that a particular property belongs among the sparse properties.
The sparse properties are those that account for the genuine
resemblances between objects, have causal powers, and are
needed as truthmakers. We should posit such properties (and
any necessary connections between them) only if doing so serves
those needs. The overall argument of this section is that a
substantive property of truth is not needed to serve any of
those functions, and so positing it is ontologically gratuitous.
4.2.2
Truth, truthmaking, and necessary connections
The ﬁrst step to arguing against metaphysical substantivism
involves appreciating the truthmaking role that properties can
play. Those who embrace the existence of universals or tropes
do so not only because such things account for the resemblan-
ces between objects, but also because they are able to serve as
truthmakers for contingent predicative truths. Truthmakers
are the worldly items on which truth-bearers depend for their
truth.11 Suppose, for example, that Phil is six feet tall. Phil
himself is not a truthmaker for the proposition12 that Phil is six
11 See, e.g., Armstrong (2004).
12 I shall be employing propositions as my preferred truth-bearers in this chapter
merely for the sake of simplicity (see again my discussion of truth-bearers in
Section 1.1.3). My arguments do not turn on any particular view as to the nature
of truth-bearers. I use ‘<p>’ as shorthand for ‘the proposition that p.’
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
110
www.ebook3000.com

feet tall, since the existence of Phil himself does not guarantee
that the proposition is true. It is possible for Phil to exist and
not be six feet tall. Something else is needed to account for the
truth of the proposition.13 Someone who accepted universals
would hold that what makes it true is a fact or state of affairs,
the compound object non-mereologically composed of both
Phil and the six feet tall universal (e.g., Armstrong 1997).14
Someone who accepted tropes would hold that what makes it
true is a particular six feet tall trope that uniquely belongs to
Phil (e.g., Lowe 2007).
Notice, then, the truthmaking powers that belong to tropes
and universals. For any object x that instantiates some univer-
sal U, it will be true that x is U, and the state of affairs
composed of x and U will make that claim true. For any object
x that possesses a trope of type T, it will be true that x is T, and
the trope will make that claim true. Now suppose that truth is a
metaphysically substantive property in the manner of (S1), (S2),
or (S3), such that there is a universal truth or collection of truth
tropes. Any time a truth-bearer is true, it will instantiate that
universal, or possess a truth trope. Just as all green things
instantiate green, or possess resembling green tropes, all true
things – so says the metaphysical substantivist about truth –
instantiate truth or possess resembling truth tropes.
We may now notice how the substantivist about truth has
abundant truthmaking resources for contingent predications.
The proposition <Phil is six feet tall> is true, and true in virtue
of either a six feet tall trope that belongs to Phil, or the state of
affairs composed of Phil and the universal six feet tall. But the
13 Nearly all truthmaker theorists accept that truthmakers must at least metaphysi-
cally necessitate their truths (see Armstrong 2004; Merricks 2007). But see Schaffer
(2010) for dissent.
14 I am not assuming that, in fact, there is a universal corresponding to the property of
being six feet tall (or that any realist about universals thinks as much). I am just
using it as a convenient example.
Metaphysical deﬂationism
111

proposition itself instantiates truth, thereby creating a new state
of affairs, or possesses a truth trope. Those entities themselves are
also truthmakers for the proposition, as their existence guaran-
tees the truth of the proposition. The realist now has two states of
affairs that serve to make the proposition true, just as the mod-
erate nominalist has two tropes available to serve as truthmakers.
It is no objection to a view that it provides redundant truth-
makers for truths. There is no one−one correspondence between
truths and truthmakers. What is important to realize is how the
two truthmakers available to the substantivist are distinct
entities. For our purposes, we can think of distinct entities as
just entities that are not identical. Fully distinct entities do not
overlap at all in their composition; partially distinct entities do.
Suppose, for example, that some particular a contingently
instantiates the universal F. The state of affairs (a, F) that is
non-mereologically composed of the two objects is a distinct
existence from its components a and F because the whole is not
identical to either of its individual parts. But though (a, F) is
distinct from both a and F, it is not fully distinct, as it is
composed by them. As a result, there is a “one-way” necessary
connection between (a, F) on the one hand, and a and F on the
other. The former cannot exist unless the latter do, but not vice
versa. It is possible that a and F could both exist, but not (a, F).
Such would be the case if a existed but was not F, though
something else was. Hence, states of affairs are necessarily
connected to their components: the existence of (a, F) depends
upon the existence of its constituents, for (a, F) cannot exist
unless a and F both do. Notice that this necessary connection is
perfectly explicable, given the composition relations at work.
Consider now the two truthmakers that the realist has
available for <Phil is six feet tall>. One is a state of affairs
composed of Phil and six feet tall. The other is a state of affairs
composed of <Phil is six feet tall> and truth. These two objects
are fully distinct entities. They do not overlap at all in their
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
112
www.ebook3000.com

composition: they share no parts.15 Because they are fully
distinct, we should expect, at least absent some compelling
considerations to the contrary, that there are no necessary con-
nections between them. That is to say, because the two states of
affairs are fully distinct, we should expect that one should be able
to exist without the other. Normally, when we are confronted
with two different objects that do not overlap at all, the default
view would be that one could exist without the other. This is
just the idea that distinct objects are able to freely recombine
(see Armstrong 1989). Whether a given particular instantiates
some universal is a separate matter from what other particulars
are instantiating what other universals. To suppose otherwise is
to impose greater “structure” on the world – things of type
X cannot exist unless different things of type Y also exist.
Given that our two states of affairs – the one composed of Phil
and six feet tall, and the one composed of <Phil is six feet tall>
and truth – are distinct entities, the default, metaphysically
parsimonious position is that one ought to be able to exist with-
out the other. But this might seem highly implausible. (And, as
I argue in Section 4.3, it leads straight to contradiction.) How
could Phil instantiate that universal and yet the proposition fail
to instantiate truth? The view, again, is that the proposition <Phil
is six feet tall> cannot bind to truth unless Phil himself binds to
six feet tall (and vice versa). These states of affairs appear to be
necessarily connected despite being fully distinct existences. So
let us suppose that the metaphysical substantivist is committed to
there being a necessary connection that obtains between these
two fully distinct states of affairs. In keeping with our method-
ology, the question now arises whether the substantivist can
justify positing such a connection.
15 Similarly, it is evident that the truth trope belonging to <Phil is six feet tall> is a
distinct existence from the six feet tall trope belonging to Phil. The discussion that
follows is framed in terms of states of affairs, but can be formulated just as well in
terms of tropes.
Metaphysical deﬂationism
113

If there are necessary connections to be found between
the two states of affairs, then those connections ought to be
traceable to other necessary connections obtaining between
their components. Otherwise we will be forced to take the
connection to be brute. Consider a familiar case of necessa-
rily connected states of affairs: imagine a length of wire L that
instantiates the two universals made of copper and electri-
cally conductive. The state of affairs of L’s being made
of copper is necessarily connected to the state of affairs of
L’s being electrically conductive. What explains the neces-
sary connection between the two states of affairs is the
necessary connection that obtains between the two univer-
sals: conductivity necessarily accompanies copper.16 That
sort of connection is not to be found in our case. The two
universals – truth and six feet tall – do not depend upon each
other for their existence; they are just separate, unique
universals. They are instantiated by very different kinds
of objects: very few, if any, true truth-bearers are six feet
tall! Further, the connection we are looking for cannot be
accounted for by ﬁnding a connection between universals,
because we do not have one single object instantiating two
universals, as is the case with L. We are trying to account for
a connection between a proposition and a certain universal
on the one hand, and a person and a very different universal
on the other. Our two states of affairs do not even share a
common component, and so accounting for their mutual
dependence is all the more difﬁcult.17
16 See Armstrong (1983).
17 For those who subscribe to “Russellian” propositions, the proposition <Phil is six
feet tall> is composed of Phil and six feet tall, so there will be compositional overlap
between (Phil, six feet tall) and (<Phil is six feet tall>, truth). But this will still not
account for the needed connection. Even if <Phil is six feet tall> depends on Phil and
six feet tall for its existence, we do not have an explanation for why it depends on
them for its instantiating truth. For the proposition can exist even if false.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
114
www.ebook3000.com

The usual channels for accounting for necessary connec-
tions between states of affairs do not seem open to the realist
about truth. It looks like the only available option is just to bite
the bullet and accept the necessary connection as brute,
thereby forswearing the task of giving any further account of
the connection. While such a view may be defensible, it does
come at a cost. Accepting that there are necessary connections
between distinct existences is tantamount to restricting the free
recombination of distinct existences. When two universals are
very different in their nature, they ought to be able to freely
recombine, irrespective of what the other is doing. Other
universals like green and red may well impose constraints on
one another – objects that are green cannot be red. But such
failures of recombination are due to the intrinsic incompatibil-
ities in the universals. The same cannot be said for truth and six
feet tall. Although they do not tend to instantiate the same
kinds of objects, there is no impossibility of them doing so.
Furthermore, if truth exists, it places constraints on every other
universal: a cannot instantiate F, G, or H unless truth binds to,
respectively, <a is F>, <a is G>, and <a is H>. If truth exists as a
universal, it is mixed up in everyone else’s business. By
contrast, even if conductive and charged impose constraints
on one another, they appear to be indifferent toward red and
green, though these latter two may impose constraints on each
other as well. If truth exists, it imposes constraints on every last
universal. Accordingly, substantivists about truth take on
indeﬁnitely many restrictions on free recombination.
Hence, according to metaphysical substantivism about
truth, not only are there entities like Phil’s being six feet tall,
there are also entities like the proposition that Phil is six feet
tall’s being true. These entities cannot be the same thing – they
are composed of radically different sorts of objects – and yet it
seems that they are necessarily connected. There is no obvious
way of accounting for this necessary connection – and
Metaphysical deﬂationism
115

indeﬁnitely many others – and so it seems that they must
simply be taken as brute. The metaphysical substantivist
thereby takes on an imposing explanatory burden, positing
necessary connections between fully distinct objects, and
restricting free recombination in a radically broad way. The
next step in the argument is to show that there is no need to
take on this explanatory burden. Metaphysical substantivism
does not help us to explain or account for anything, and so
positing a substantive property of truth is ontologically
gratuitous.
4.2.3
Truth is unnecessary
Failures of free recombination worry some philosophers –
Humeans and Lewisians, for example – more than others. But
even those who are untroubled by the presence of some neces-
sary connections between distinct existences do not advocate
multiplying them beyond necessity, and so must recognize that
the substantivist about truth takes on an extra explanatory
burden that the deﬂationist does not. For any given truth, the
substantivist posits the existence of two very different states of
affairs (or tropes) that are composed of very different sorts of
things, and holds that these two distinct states of affairs
(or tropes) nevertheless necessitate the existence of each other.
If a view posits the brute existence of necessary connections
between distinct existences, it incurs a theoretical cost. Such
views impose greater structure on the world: things of one
type cannot exist unless things of a different type also exist.
Such costs can indeed be justiﬁed. Armstrong (1983), for
example, posits the existence of necessary connections between
distinct universals in order to give an adequate account of the
laws of nature. So positing such necessary connections is not in
and of itself fatal to a view. Still, positing brute necessary
connections should not be done lightly, and only when serving
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
116
www.ebook3000.com

a greater theoretical need. In keeping with the metaphysical
methodology of this section, the very same can be said for
positing entities (or a notion of naturalness) at all with respect
to the metaphysics of properties. Universals, tropes, and natu-
ral properties are not posited without cause; one need not
believe that for every predicate there is a corresponding
universal or set of tropes, or that every property is natural.
Not every property deserves to be sparse.
In order to justify the existence of sparse properties and
brute necessary connections, we need to ﬁnd some sort of
contribution that they can make to accounting for resem-
blance, causality, and truthmaking. First consider the topic of
resemblance. Sparse properties are those that account for the
genuine resemblances between objects. Objects resemble one
another in virtue of instantiating the same universal, possess-
ing resembling tropes, or belonging to the same natural class.
Now, not all classes exhibit any real resemblance (hence the
distinction between the class of green objects and the class of
grue objects). Our question is whether the truths are more like
the green things or the grue things.
Notice just how diverse the collection of truths is. It is true
that snow is white, that echidnas live on Kangaroo Island, that
hobbits do not exist, and that if I were to drop a piece of chalk
it would fall to the ﬂoor. The class of truths is one remarkably
heterogeneous collection. Indeed, each truth seems to be its
own individual affair. The proposition that snow is white is
true in virtue of snow’s being white, the proposition that
echidnas live on Kangaroo Island is true in virtue of echidnas
living on Kangaroo Island, and so on. The idea here is familiar
to deﬂationists – the truth of <Snow is white> does not appear
to “consist in the same thing” as the truth of <Echidnas live on
Kangaroo Island>. Sure, they “resemble” one another in that
they are both true, but the resemblance stops there. They are
both true, but for entirely separate reasons. The shared
Metaphysical deﬂationism
117

greenness of two things, by contrast, may well admit of a
common explanation, due to a genuine property shared by
both. In general, objects that instantiate the same universal
share their common property in virtue of their relationship to
that universal. But that is not how truth works. <p> and <q>
are both true, but <p> is true in virtue of p’s being the case, and
<q> is true in virtue of q’s being the case. The class of truths, it
seems, is a great candidate for being a perfectly unnatural class,
given its heterogeneity. If so, there is no need to promote truth
to the status of a sparse property on the basis of shared resem-
blances between all truths, for there are none.
If the various truths were to exhibit genuine resemblance
with one another, then it seems that truths should each enjoy
some intrinsic, recognizable feature that they share in common
with one another. Indeed, the point of a metaphysically sub-
stantive property of truth is to provide something to account
for that shared feature. But if there were such a feature, then it
seems that we should be able to determine a truth-bearer’s
truth or falsity simply by attending to it on its own, independ-
ently of anything else. If every true proposition instantiates
truth, then that fact should be accessible to us by examining
the proposition all by itself. Similarly, if some object instan-
tiates green, then that fact should be accessible to us when we
examine it, regardless of what is going on outside the object. In
the case of the green object, that fact is accessible to us. But we
cannot determine the truth of a proposition merely by examin-
ing it in isolation from everything else. So it seems that there is
no real resemblance between truths. If there were, we could
home in on the resembling property to determine the proposi-
tion’s truth or lack thereof. But no such procedure is possible.
Russell made this same observation when rejecting his own
early metaphysically substantive primitivism, because that
view “would make an intrinsic difference between true and
false judgments, and enable us (what is obviously impossible)
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
118
www.ebook3000.com

to discover the truth or falsehood of a judgment merely by
examining the intrinsic nature of the judgment” (1910a: 177;
cf. Wright 1999: 37–8; Lowe 2007: 237–8).
It also seems unlikely that anyone would posit truth to serve
any genuine causal role. We may posit mass and charge so that
they may discharge their causal duties, but truth seems to be an
altogether different kind of case. It is strange to think that truth
would be the sort of thing that contributes to the causal order
of the world studied by empirical science. By what mechanism
would truth interact with the other universals in order to bring
about various effects? Why does truth not ﬁgure into any
physical laws or equations?18
Still, it may seem natural to make causal judgments involv-
ing truth, as in ‘The truth of my beliefs caused me to do well in
my exam.’ Deﬂationists have a metaphysically innocuous
account of what is being said here, and it does not involve a
causally active truth property.19 Suppose the exam has a single
question: Which US president was succeeded by his own
predecessor? Because I believe that Benjamin Harrison was
succeeded by his own predecessor, that belief in part causes
my hand to write the answer, which in turn causes the instruc-
tor to give me full credit. What is crucial is that I believe that
Benjamin Harrison was succeeded by his own predecessor, and
that Benjamin Harrison was indeed succeeded by his own
predecessor. Nowhere are we forced to posit a causally active
universal truth to account for my academic success. The appeal
to truth in the initial causal judgment is nothing but another
instance of the useful anaphoric and abbreviatory features of
‘truth’ and ‘true.’ Rather than saying that my belief that
Benjamin Harrison was succeeded by his own predecessor
18 Cf. Levin (1984: 126), O’Leary-Hawthorne and Price (1996: 278), and McGinn
(2000: 108).
19 See Horwich (1990) for an extended defense of the line I am adopting here.
Metaphysical deﬂationism
119

when Benjamin Harrison was indeed succeeded by his own
predecessor caused me to do well in the exam, I can abbreviate
and say that it is the truth of my belief that caused my success.
This feature of truth becomes even more apparent in cases
where I need to appeal to several of my true beliefs in account-
ing for some particular practical success. Assuming the case is
typical, even if we do appeal to truth in certain causal judg-
ments, doing so only reveals the familiar logical and linguistic
functions of ‘truth’; such judgments do not push us into think-
ing that there is a universal truth replete with causal powers.20
Finally we come to truthmaking: does promoting truth into
a sparse property provide us with any needed truthmaking
resources? As we saw above, positing a universal truth or set
of truth tropes provides us with redundant truthmakers, not
useful ones. Many truthmaker theorists rely on universals,
states of affairs, and tropes in order to provide truthmakers;
what they do not do is posit universals, states of affairs, and
tropes speciﬁcally to do with truth. As before, the state of
affairs of Phil’s being six feet tall and Phil’s six feet tall trope
are perfectly adequate truthmakers for <Phil is six feet tall>.
We do not need another state of affairs or trope involving truth
to properly ground the truth of the proposition.
Other kinds of propositions do not call for a sparse truth
property either.
Existential propositions like <There are
penguins> do not require truth tropes or states of affairs; they
just require penguins. Negative existential propositions raise
notorious truthmaker questions: what makes it true that there
20 Nic Damnjanovic (2005) has argued that, given Jackson and Pettit’s (1990) account
of causal relevance, truth is a causally relevant property. But on this account, even
clearly “logical” properties like identity turn out to be causally relevant. Indeed,
nearly any property can turn out to be causally relevant in the relevant sense. So the
Jackson−Pettit account of causal relevance will not be useful in drawing the sparse/
abundant property divide, and so deﬂationists may accept that truth is a causally
relevant property in the Jackson−Pettit sense, a conclusion that Damnjanovic
acknowledges (2005: 67).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
120
www.ebook3000.com

are no hobbits?21 Perhaps there are negative facts (Russell 1985),
absences (Martin 1996), or one giant totality fact (Armstrong
2004) that makes it true, or perhaps it does not have any truth-
makers at all (Lewis 2001b). Regardless of who is correct here,
no one thinks that what we need is a sparse property of truth to
bind to the negative existential proposition.
All told, the positive case for treating truth as a sparse property
is weak. The class of truths is a great candidate for not exhibiting
genuine resemblance, truth is not a causal property, and truth is
not needed as a property to serve any obvious truthmaking
function. Furthermore, the view incurs an extraordinary explan-
atory burden by imposing indeﬁnitely many constraints on the
free recombination of distinct existences. There are numerous
theoretical costs to adopting metaphysical substantivism, and
yet no clear beneﬁts. Consequently, we have undermined the
motivation for believing any of (S1) through (S4). There is no
theoretical need for believing in metaphysical substantivism
about truth, and so there is good reason for rejecting it.
Now we may turn to a second line of argument against
metaphysical substantivism. If there were such a thing as a
universal truth or set of truth tropes, then they would provide
an army of redundant truthmakers. That fact in and of itself is
no objection to substantivism about truth; the real problem is
that they would provide an army of fully distinct redundant
truthmakers. If so, then the view runs straight into contradiction
or an unmotivated metaphysics.
4.3
Taking truth to absurdity
This second argument against metaphysical substantivism
about truth builds upon the ﬁrst, and takes the form of a
21 See Molnar (2000) for an excellent discussion of the truthmaking issues raised by
negative existentials.
Metaphysical deﬂationism
121

dilemma. Suppose that any of (S1) through (S3) is true.22 Then
it is the case that for any truth <p>, there will be both its
familiar truthmaker F and a redundant truthmaker for it R.23
F and R are typically fully distinct;24 the important question is
whether or not there are necessary connections between them.
If there are no necessary connections between F and R, then R
can exist even if F does not. R is a truthmaker for <p>, and so
<p> can be true even if F does not exist. This, I argue below, is
contradictory. If F and R are necessarily connected, then
there must be some metaphysical justiﬁcation for positing the
existence of R and its (possibly brute) necessary connection
to F. But there is no such justiﬁcation, and so the view is
unmotivated. Hence, metaphysical substantivism about truth
is either contradictory or unmotivated.
Let us dig into this argument with a concrete example. Take
again our sample true proposition, <Phil is six feet tall>. The
“familiar” truthmaker F here is either the realist’s state of
affairs composed of Phil and the universal six feet tall, or the
moderate nominalist’s six feet tall trope that belongs to Phil.
The “redundant” truthmaker R is either the state of affairs
composed of <Phil is six feet tall> and truth or the truth trope
belonging to <Phil is six feet tall>. F and R are fully distinct
existences. Either F and R can exist independently of each
other, or there are necessary connections that obtain between
them. Both ways lead to trouble.
22 Admittedly, this second argument does not bear on (S4).
23 Here I am supposing truthmaker maximalism – the claim that every truth has a
truthmaker. Those who reject maximalism (as I do in Asay 2011) must also reject
substantivism about truth, because substantivism entails maximalism. (On sub-
stantivism, there will be an R for every true <p>.)
24 “Typically” because some truth-bearers are about truth-bearers, and hence there
might be overlap in some cases between F and R. For example, suppose the
proposition that there are propositions is true. F in this case can be any proposition,
<There are propositions> included. R is the state of affairs composed by <There are
propositions> and truth. So here we have a case of overlapping composition.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
122
www.ebook3000.com

If F and R are not necessarily connected, then it is possible for
R to exist and for F to fail to exist. Notice just what this
possibility is. We have the proposition <Phil is six feet tall>
instantiating truth, and so we have a true proposition. But this
is also a possibility where Phil does not instantiate six feet tall.
What we have, in other words, is a possible scenario in which
Phil is not six feet tall, even though the proposition <Phil is six
feet tall> is true. But that is impossible, since, necessarily, the
proposition that Phil is six feet tall is true if and only if Phil is six
feet tall. In effect, taking F and R not to be necessarily connected
amounts to rejecting the necessary truth of a propositional
T-sentence. Even substantivists accept the legitimacy of the
propositional truth schema (i.e., necessarily, <p> is true if and
only if p). If F and R are not necessarily connected – which,
recall, I argue is the “default” view, given that they are fully
distinct – then substantivism about truth reduces to absurdity.
Suppose instead that F and R are necessarily connected, in
spite of being fully distinct; their existence is tied up with one
another, such that R cannot exist unless F also exists. I argued
in the previous section that this view is surprising and suspect;
there are no obvious independent grounds for taking F and R
to be necessarily connected, and so to ﬁnd them so connected
must involve positing a brute necessary connection between
them. But, drawing on the ﬁndings from the previous section,
we should posit entities like R, and their brute necessary con-
nection to more familiar things like F, only when there are
compelling metaphysical reasons for doing so, such as
accounting for resemblance, causality, and truthmaking. R is
not needed for any of those things, so positing its existence and
its brute connection to F is unmotivated.
Hence, if F and R are not necessarily connected, then
contradiction results. If F and R are necessarily connected,
then we have an unjustiﬁably ontologically expensive view.
Metaphysical substantivism about truth is either contradictory
Metaphysical deﬂationism
123

or unmotivated. The substantivist road is a costly one, and offers
no beneﬁts to justify the expense.
Notice also that this argument does not rely speciﬁcally on
truth being a property rather than a relation. Suppose that
truth is instead a two-place universal. (The correspondence
theorist might have such a view in mind.) The proposition
<Phil is six feet tall> stands in the truth relational universal to
some correspondent, C. Here we have three things: the prop-
osition, the relational universal truth, and the correspondent
C. The proposition is true, and so the state of affairs composed
of the three entities exists. There are two options for what
C could be. It could just be the familiar truthmaker F
(or something necessarily connected to it), in which case F itself
is all we need to account for the truth of the proposition. The
detour through the relational universal is unnecessary. Or
C could be something fully distinct from and not necessarily
connected to F. In that case, the state of affairs of the proposi-
tion’s standing in the truth relation to C could exist even if
F does not, for ex hypothesi they are not necessarily connected
entities. In that case, the proposition will be true in spite of
Phil’s not being six feet tall. And so we reach the same
conclusion as before: positing the relational universal truth
leads either to contradiction or an unmotivated metaphysics.
Metaphysical substantivism about truth is either contradic-
tory or unmotivated. Even for those who embrace a realist
metaphysics of properties and take truthmaker theory very
seriously, there is no need to take truth in particular to be a
metaphysically serious property. Indeed, it seems that there
would be absolutely no need for any property besides truth if
we embraced substantivism about truth. If all we need is R to
account for the truth of <Phil is six feet tall>, then we do not
need Phil or the property of being six feet tall. The proposition
and truth do all the necessary labor themselves. If truth were a
distinct entity, we could use it to create a possible world in
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
124
www.ebook3000.com

which all the propositions true in the actual world are true
(by having each of those propositions instantiate truth), despite
none of the familiar objects of the actual world existing in it.
But that is absurd. Yet if truth cannot do that labor by itself – if
it needs help from things like Phil and six feet tall – then it is just
a metaphysical deadbeat with nothing of its own to contribute.
4.4
Some objections and replies
In arguing against metaphysical substantivism about truth, I have
employed claims involving truthmaker theory. Substantivism
runs into trouble because it bestows false truthmaking powers
upon the property of truth itself. But is truthmaker theory itself
not a substantive theory of truth? And so have I not argued
against substantivism while at the same time presupposing it?
Indeed, many have thought that truthmaker theory is a theory of
the nature of truth.25 In fact, many believe that truthmaker
theory is a modern incarnation of correspondence theory. Alex
Oliver, for example, writes that truthmaker theory “is a sanitised
version of a correspondence theory of truth” (1996: 69).26
The problem with this objection is that truthmaker theory is
not a theory of truth at all. The thought that truths are made
true by reality cannot reveal the nature of truth because it must
already take for granted some antecedent notion of truth, and
there is no reason why that notion cannot be deﬂationary.
Suppose that all truths have truthmakers.27 Then for any
truth-bearer p, p is true just in case it has a truthmaker. But p
25 See, e.g., O’Leary-Hawthorne and Oppy (1997: 176) and Cameron (2008: 412).
26 See also Mulligan, Simons, and Smith (1984: 288–9), Fox (1987), Bigelow (1988:
122), Molnar (2000: 85), Read (2000: 67), Heathcote (2003), Armstrong (2004: 16),
Mumford (2005), and Parsons (2009: 217).
27 This thesis – truthmaker maximalism – is highly contentious, even within
the truthmaking industry. As noted above, negative existentials are candidate
counterexamples. Because some truthmaker theorists think that some truths lack
truthmakers, we can see that it cannot be any presupposition of truthmaker theory
Metaphysical deﬂationism
125

has a truthmaker just in case there exists some object in virtue
of which it is true. The notion of truthmaking needs to be
analyzed in terms of truth, for it must account for the truth
of truth-bearers, and not their other features.28 Hence, we
cannot, on pain of circularity, employ the truthmaking relation
when deﬁning the nature of truth.29 Truthmaker theory, then,
relies on an antecedent notion of truth. It cannot itself be
employed in saying what truth is. Hence, truthmaker theory
itself is not a theory of truth, let alone a metaphysically
substantive one. Truthmaker theory gives an account of what
the ontological grounds for truths are; it can accomplish that
task without also taking a stand on what truth itself is.
Relatedly, one might think that deﬂationism about truth
is inconsistent with truthmaker theory, and so one cannot
employ truthmaker theory in arguing for deﬂationism about
truth. The main reason, however, for thinking that truthmak-
ing and deﬂationism form an inconsistent pair involves taking
truthmaker theory to be itself some sort of substantive theory
of truth, or a correspondence theory even. But that view is
mistaken, for the reasons already given. We should be
careful not to conﬂate a deﬂationary attitude toward truth
with a deﬂationary attitude toward metaphysics in general.
Deﬂationists accept that <Penguins exist> is true if and only
if penguins exist, and think there is nothing more to the truth of
the proposition than the existence of penguins. But it is no part
of deﬂationism to deny that the proposition is true in virtue of
penguins. The truth of <Penguins exist> depends upon the
itself that it reveal the nature of truth, for according to non-maximalists there are
truths whose truth cannot be formulated in terms of truthmakers.
28 See Armstrong (2004), Rodriguez-Pereyra (2005), Lowe (2007), Merricks (2007),
and Schaffer (2010) for competing accounts of the truthmaking relation, all of
which employ an antecedent notion of truth.
29 See also Merricks (2007: 15). I develop this argument at greater length in Asay (2011),
where I show that the appearance of truth in truthmaker theory cannot be
“disquoted” away in order to offer a truthmaker-based non-circular theory of truth.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
126
www.ebook3000.com

existence of the ﬂightless birds, even if it does not depend upon
the existence of a realm of facts and a correspondence relation.
To say that truth is not a metaphysically substantive property
is in no way to deny that truths have truthmakers, or that
truths accompany metaphysical implications. Rather, there
are simply two distinct philosophical projects: giving an analy-
sis of the property of truth, and giving an account of what it is
in the world upon which certain truths depend. Deﬂationism
about truth denies that the ﬁrst project involves any sort of
metaphysical analysis; it in no way rejects the second project,
which does not even involve the attempt to say what truth is.30
A ﬁnal objection that might be raised is that I have from the
beginning mischaracterized the nature of metaphysically sub-
stantive theories of truth. Truth, goes the objection, was never
intended to be a substantive property in any of the senses of
‘property’ relevant to the problem of universals. To this objec-
tion, I can reply only by asking: If a substantive theory of the
property of truth is not to be characterized in any of the
familiar ways of characterizing substantive views of properties,
then what is a substantive theory of the property of truth?
Anyone who rejects my account faces the challenge of saying
just what it is that a metaphysically substantive property of
truth would be, if not a universal, set of tropes, or natural class.
Furthermore, that account must make it explicit why deﬂation-
ists are not entitled to a property of truth in that sense. For if
deﬂationists can accept that truth is a property in that yet to be
deﬁned sense, then that notion of truth cannot be used to
separate deﬂationists from substantivists. I take it that the
various traditional theories – correspondence, coherence,
pragmatic, epistemic – are indeed committed to metaphysical
substantivism. If those views can be resuscitated in such a way
30 See also Lowe (2007; 2009), which develop an account of truthmaking that is explicitly
metaphysically deﬂationist about truth in the sense that I have presented it here.
Metaphysical deﬂationism
127

that they are not committed to a metaphysically robust
account of the property of truth, then they can deﬂect my
argument. It is just not terribly clear what such views would
be, or why they would be anathema to deﬂationists.
Besides, there is ample evidence that many theorists would
accept my characterization of substantial truth as a sparse
property, however understood. Andrew Newman (2002)
defends a correspondence theory in the context of realism
about universals. Newman thinks that truth is a property –
that there is something shared by all and only true things.
Hence, given his defense of realism about universals, it seems
likely that he is committed to thinking of truth as being one such
universal. He even suggests that truth might be a natural kind
(2002: 45). Richard Fumerton writes that “realists” about truth
must think that there is a property of truth, but need not be
realists about universals (2002: 4). But if they are realists about
universals, does that mean that they must think that there is a
universal truth? Presumably, or else realism about truth turns
out to be consistent with its deﬂationary opponent.
More commonly, substantivist theorists about truth remain
agnostic about the nature of properties. Gerald Vision (2004)
defends the existence of a truth property, but is silent as to
what kind of property it is. Michael Lynch (2009) is a pluralist
(or functionalist) about truth in that he thinks truth sometimes
consists in correspondence with the facts, sometimes in being
superwarranted, and perhaps something else in other cases.
Lynch is also silent about what he means by ‘property,’ but he
is very clear that truths are true in virtue of their having one of
those properties. He explicitly says that the truth properties are
what make truths true: “Propositions about different subjects
can be made true by distinct properties each of which plays
the truth-role” (2009: 77).31 Others who shy away from
31 Lynch (2006) does discuss the nature of substantive properties.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
128
www.ebook3000.com

correspondence accounts have endorsed the idea that truth is a
property – and in so doing take themselves to be rejecting
deﬂationism – but fall silent on what metaphysical story they
think underlies the property (Alston 1996; Merricks 2007).
Most theorists seem to prefer remaining agnostic about how
we should understand the truth property, and hence they
remain silent on what they mean by ‘property.’ If their views
on truth do not turn on resolving the more general problem of
universals, then this neutrality is appropriate. But substantivists
do defend the view that truth is a substantive property, and so
they must think that at least the disjunction of (S1) through (S4)
is true, even while remaining neutral on the broader issue of
realism and nominalism, and so which particular disjunct is
true. What my argument shows is that regardless of which
position is correct in the overall realism/nominalism debate,
truth does not belong on the sparse side of the divide.
4.5
The metaphysics of truth and correspondence
I have argued that there is no property of truth in any meta-
physically robust or interesting sense. Truth is a mere abun-
dant property, and I have labeled this view ‘metaphysical
deﬂationism.’ Do I thereby adopt the view that truth is not a
“metaphysical” notion, that truth is disconnected from reality?
Must the metaphysical deﬂationist eschew the family of views
associated with “metaphysical realism”?
I stand by the label ‘metaphysical deﬂationist’ with respect
to my view about truth, but I hasten to add that being a
deﬂationist about truth in this sense does not bring in tow
any sort of overarching metaphysical anti-realism. Here is the
line of thought that I am urging we resist: It has traditionally
been thought that substantive theories of truth like the corre-
spondence theory are an essential part of a generally “realist”
Metaphysical deﬂationism
129

view of metaphysics, according to which there is a mind-
independent external world responsible for the truth or falsity
of our beliefs. Our beliefs are true in virtue of the way of the
world, and not the other way around. “Idealism” sees things
from the reverse perspective. Reality is mind-dependent; what
is true or false depends crucially on features about us. Such an
idealist perspective is intimately connected to coherence theo-
ries of truth, according to which beliefs are true or false in
virtue of how they cohere with our beliefs, and not with how
those beliefs correspond to an antecedent, independent reality.
By “going deﬂationist” with respect to the metaphysics of
truth, have we thereby abandoned realism and idealism, and
left this debate behind? Does deﬂationism about the property
of truth reveal this fundamental metaphysical debate to be null
and void, worthy of dissolution rather than resolution?32
No such thing follows from metaphysical deﬂationism.
To think that it does one must rely on a few misinterpretations
of deﬂationism about truth. First, one might think that by
being a deﬂationist about truth, and thereby denying the
correspondence theorist’s claim that truths correspond to
fact, one divorces truths from having metaphysical implica-
tions. To see why this view is mistaken, simply consider a few
famous deﬂationists. First is Quine. Quine is no friend of
correspondence theories (see, e.g., Quine 1970 and 1990).
But Quine also advocates a particular criterion of ontological
commitment: when we accept a theory, we are ontologically
committed to the objects over which that theory quantiﬁes:
“we are convicted of a particular ontological presupposition if,
and only if, the alleged presuppositum has to be reckoned
among the entities over which our variables range in order to
32 I detect this sentiment behind Arthur Fine’s discussion of the “natural ontological
attitude” (1984). See also Putnam (1981) and Rorty (1986), where the connection
between metaphysical realism and correspondence theory is extremely tight.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
130
www.ebook3000.com

render one of our afﬁrmations true” (1948: 32; see also Quine
1960). For Quine, one takes on ontological commitments by
accepting the truth of claims that quantify over objects, not by
adopting a correspondence theory of truth. For instance,
though Quine would deny that the sentence ‘There are
penguins’ corresponds to any fact, he would say that by accept-
ing the sentence (or, more speciﬁcally, its regimentation
into ﬁrst-order logic) one thereby takes on an ontological
commitment to penguins. Infamously, Quine’s indispensability
argument in the philosophy of mathematics aims to show
that because physical theory presupposes mathematical theory
that quantiﬁes over sets, commitment to our best physical
theories requires ontological realism about sets (Quine 1948).
Similarly, David Lewis is no fan of correspondence theories
(2001a). But in no way does that prevent him from taking on
substantial metaphysical views. Lewis denies that ‘There is a
pluriverse of concrete possible worlds’ corresponds to any
fact – he does not believe in any correspondence relation or
factual objects – but he does think that the sentence is true
(1986). He also thinks that accepting this sentence’s truth
carries with it a quite robust metaphysical commitment –
perhaps the greatest metaphysical commitment ever made!
The point is that being a deﬂationist about truth does not
preclude taking on robust and controversial metaphysical
stances. There is a temptation – easily found in the work
of Rorty (1986), for example – to think that “realism” and
“correspondence truth” are two sides of the same coin,
and that deposing one involves deposing the other. But the
assimilation is false. One can be a correspondence theorist
without being a realist: consider an error theorist who thought
there was nothing for moral or mathematical judgments to
correspond to, and so are systematically false (e.g., Mackie
1977 and Field 1980, respectively). One can be a realist
without being a correspondence theorist: Quine is a realist
Metaphysical deﬂationism
131

about sets, and Lewis is a realist about possible worlds. To be a
deﬂationist about truth is to think that there is nothing more
to the truth of the sentence ‘There are tables and chairs’ than
there being tables and chairs. But that is not to say that there
being tables and chairs is not a metaphysical matter. To the
contrary, a commitment to there being tables and chairs is a
metaphysical stance, and even, it turns out, a controversial
one: Peter van Inwagen (1990) and Trenton Merricks (2001)
both deny it.
The moral to be drawn is that metaphysical stances can –
and should – be articulated independently of any substantive
theory of truth. Our metaphysical stances are not given by
what we take the nature of truth to be, but rather by which
truths we are committed to. To understand my metaphysical
worldview, ask me what I take to be true, not what I take truth
to be. But metaphysical worldviews are not immediately settled
by which claims we hold to be true, for two people who agree
on a body of truths may well disagree as to what it is that
makes those truths true. Imagine a congress of metaethicists of
different stripe. They may all agree on the truth of a particular
moral judgment. But there will be rampant disagreement as to
what makes the moral judgment true. The non-naturalistic
realist cites a realm of sui generis non-natural moral facts
and properties, whereas the naturalistic realist cites a set of
perfectly naturalistic facts and properties. The relativist points
to a societal convention, and the subjectivist cites his own
desires. The constructivist names a counterfactual involving
an ideal observer, and the quasi-realist −well, the quasi-realist
says what the realist says, and claims it does not lead to
realism. Notice that the various ontological views that charac-
terize the various positions one stakes out in the moral realism
debate emerge when we ask after not the truth of moral judg-
ments, but rather their truthmakers. Metaphysical debates and
worldviews are better framed in terms of truthmakers rather
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
132
www.ebook3000.com

than truth. Such debates survive even if we accept metaphysical
deﬂationism about truth.33
Another way to make the point is to say that, according to
metaphysical deﬂationism, there is nothing metaphysically
heavier on one side of a (truth operator) T-sentence than the
other. But to say that the two sides are metaphysically equal is
not to say that both sides are metaphysically empty. What the
deﬂationist should say about
It is true that there are penguins if and only if there are penguins
is that there is no metaphysical commitment found on the
left-hand side that is not also present on the right-hand side,
and vice versa. (In Section 5.2 I argue that this is because the
two thoughts expressed by each side of the biconditional are
identical.) To deny that there is anything more to the left-hand
side than the right-hand side is not to say that nothing makes
either side true. That there are penguins is true because of the
existence of penguins. But the claim that penguins make true
that there are penguins is a theorem of truthmaker theory, not
the theory of truth.
There is a long tradition of deﬂationists (or, more broadly,
non-correspondence theorists) claiming that they, too, can
capture the basic thought that motivates correspondence
theories, namely, the idea that truth and reality are intimately
connected.34 Deﬂationists, however, cannot uphold what is
right about correspondence theories merely via their own
theories. The axioms of deﬂationary theories of truth are
typically just the T-sentences, such as:
<Snow is white> is true if and only if snow is white.
33 See Asay (2013) for discussion on how truthmaker theory can be put to work in
metaethics speciﬁcally, and Asay (2012) for how truthmaker theory applies to
realism debates more generally.
34 See, e.g., Horwich (1990), Quine (1990), and Wright (1992).
Metaphysical deﬂationism
133

Nothing about the T-sentence itself shows that the truth in
question here – that snow is white – depends in any way upon
reality. It is one thing to say that <Snow is white> is true if and
only if snow is white. It is quite another to say that <Snow is
white> has a truthmaker, and to say just what that truthmaker
is. A T-sentence states that there is some sort of equivalence
holding between its two sides, but is silent about how those
two sides, if true, depend upon the world.
Many theorists, however, write as if the “worldliness” of
truth is built right into the T-sentences already – in their right-
hand conditions, most likely.35 But the right-hand side of a
T-sentence does nothing to state what the truthmaker is for the
truth-bearer mentioned on the left-hand side. The right-hand
side is just another truth in need of a truthmaker. Of course,
<Socrates is a philosopher> is true if and only if Socrates is a
philosopher. Everyone can agree to that. But the issue of what
makes it true that Socrates is a philosopher is a substantive and
contentious issue – is it an Armstrongian state of affairs, trope,
Socrates himself under a counterpart relation, or perhaps noth-
ing at all?36 T-sentences do nothing to settle the issue about
what a truth’s truthmaker is, or even if it has one. Consider
also Jody Azzouni’s brand of mathematical nominalism
(2004). He agrees that ‘There are numbers’ is true, and is
happy to grant the truth of the T-sentence
‘There are numbers’ is true if and only if there are numbers.
For all that, he does not think that ‘There are numbers’ is
made true by reality (or at least a reality including numbers).
35 See, e.g., Popper (1963: 223–8), Quine (1970: 10–11; 1990: 81), Vision (2003), and
Young (2009). I suspect that this tendency can be traced back to Tarski, who
maintained that a theory of truth’s adherence to “Convention T” is sufﬁcient for
guaranteeing that the theory conforms to the classical “correspondence” concep-
tion of truth (1944; 1956a). See the related discussion in Chapter 7.
36 See, respectively, Armstrong (2004), Lowe (2007), and Lewis (2003; 2001b).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
134
www.ebook3000.com

The point is that the world does not automatically “show up”
in the right-hand side of the biconditional. Accepting the
T-sentences is one thing; to think that their conditions are
ontologically loaded is quite another. One needs an account
of truthmaking in order to take a stand on how and whether
truths depend upon reality. The T-sentences themselves do not
offer that. To suppose otherwise is to bring to the table an
antecedent understanding of how truth depends upon reality,
which is precisely to bring to the table an antecedent under-
standing of truthmaking.
To save the “correspondence intuition,” the idea that truth
depends on reality, metaphysical deﬂationists need only
embrace some sort of theory of truthmaking. Fortunately,
metaphysical deﬂationism is no obstacle to truthmaker theory.
My recommendation to deﬂationists (and to opponents of
correspondence accounts more generally) is that they continue
thinking that they too can salvage what is right about corre-
spondence theories. But to do so, they have to admit some sort
of theory of truthmaking in order to meet the challenge.
The worldliness of truth is not accounted for simply by
the T-sentences; they need to be supplemented by a theory of
truthmakers.
In advocating metaphysical deﬂationism, then, I am not
abandoning the primal motivation behind correspondence
theory and its desire to connect truth and reality. Perhaps
the most important insight we can learn from the recent resur-
gence of interest in the topic of truthmaking is that in order to
give an account of how truth is grounded in reality, we do not
have to do so by means of a substantive theory of truth, like a
correspondence theory. We can preserve the insight in a more
theoretically economical way by utilizing a theory of truth-
makers. As a result, I think that those attracted to correspond-
ence theories should ditch them and adopt instead truthmaker
theory (when understood not to be a theory of the nature of
Metaphysical deﬂationism
135

truth itself). Truthmaker theory undermines the very motiva-
tion for correspondence theory: it captures the correspondence
intuition, but without postulating all the theoretical baggage
that weighs down correspondence theories.37
The bottom line is that while truth itself is not a metaphysi-
cally robust notion, in the sense of being a sparse property, there
are important further claims about how truths depend upon
reality for their truth. These questions can be explored in full
compatibility with metaphysical deﬂationism. The overall pack-
age I offer is that of metaphysical deﬂationism paired with both
conceptual primitivism and a theory of truthmakers. This last
component does not tell us what truth itself is – that is the task of
the ﬁrst two – but does account for truth’s relationship to reality.
Now is not the time to enter into a full-ﬂedged discussion of
truthmaker theory, but let me provide a brief outline of what is
involved in advocating a theory of truthmakers. Any such
theory has at least three components: (i) an account of what
the truthmaking relation is, (ii) an account of which truths
have truthmakers, and (iii) an account of what objects and
sorts of objects are truthmakers. In short, I think that the
truthmaking relation is a kind of ontological dependence,
and that not all truths (such as analyticities and negative
existentials) have truthmakers. At present I am neutral about
what sorts of objects best play the truthmaker role. I develop
these views at length elsewhere,38 but what is important to
appreciate for present purposes is that truthmaker theory con-
ceived as I have presented it here does not offer an account of
the nature of truth, but rather an account of the nature of the
relationship between truth and the world. Truthmaker theory
takes the notion of truth for granted, and so does not give an
37 See David (2009) and Asay (2011) for more on the relationship between corre-
spondence theory and truthmaker theory.
38 See Asay (2011).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
136
www.ebook3000.com

account of what it is. The project of this book is to give an
account of the nature of truth, and so truthmaker theory does
not play a big role in it. The point of bringing up truthmaker
theory is that we can use it to retain what might be thought to
be lost when we give up substantive theories of truth like the
correspondence theory. The best way to go about connecting
truth and reality is to accept that while truth is a metaphysi-
cally deﬂated and conceptually primitive notion, what is true
turns out to depend upon what is real in a way that is better
articulated by a thoroughgoing account of truthmakers and
truthmaking.
Metaphysical deﬂationism
137

5
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills
and omnipresence
In the previous chapter, we deﬁned and then defended meta-
physical deﬂationism about truth: we saw reason to reject
substantive views of the property of truth. In this chapter, we
commence the defense of the primitivist view of the concept of
truth, a substantive, non-deﬂationary account of the concept.
Unlike other substantive views about the concept truth, prim-
itivism rejects the claim that truth can be understood in more
fundamental terms like correspondence, coherence, or utility.
Truth resides among our conceptual primitives.
This chapter’s focus is predominantly Fregean. We begin
with Frege’s treadmill, the most famous argument that has
been given for the indeﬁnability of truth. I offer my interpre-
tation of the argument – in both its circularity and regress
forms – and explain why it ultimately fails. However, I believe
that we can build a better argument for primitivism by relying
on the Fregean thesis of the omnipresence of truth. Equipped
with this thesis, we can show that all attempts at deﬁning truth
are viciously circular.
5.1
Frege’s treadmill
Frege’s treadmill attempts to establish the indeﬁnability of truth
by means of a vicious circularity (or regress) argument. As we
have seen, Frege is not the only one to formulate such an argu-
ment, though his version has been the most inﬂuential. Something
138
www.ebook3000.com

resembling the argument can also be spotted in Descartes (1991:
139; AT II 597), Moore (1899), and Russell (1994).1
The treadmill appears at least three times in Frege’s writings.
The ﬁrst occurrence, dated to 1897 by the editors of Frege’s
posthumous writings, is found in his “Logic” (1979: 128–9).
The second occurrence where the treadmill imagery appears is
also from the “Logic” (1979: 134). In 1918, when the tread-
mill ﬁnally appears in Frege’s published writings (in “The
thought”), it ﬁrst functions as a reductio of correspondence
theory, but Frege immediately generalizes it against all attemp-
ted deﬁnitions of truth:
Can it not be laid down that truth exists when there is correspond-
ence in a certain respect? But in which? For what would we then
have to do to decide whether something were true? We should have
to inquire whether it were true that an idea and a reality, perhaps,
corresponded in the laid-down respect. And then we should be
confronted by a question of the same kind and the game could
begin again. So the attempt to explain truth as correspondence
collapses. And every other attempt to deﬁne truth collapses too.
For in a deﬁnition certain characteristics would have to be stated.
And in application to any particular case the question would
always arise whether it were true that the characteristics were
present. So one goes round in a circle. Consequently, it is probable
that the content of the word “true” is unique and indeﬁnable.
(Frege 1956: 291)
The treadmill has attracted a great deal of attention. Many
commentators are unmoved by it.2 It is also contentious just
what sort of argument it is. Is it a regress argument?3 Is it a
1 Mayer (2007: 193) claims to see the argument in Kant (at 1992: 557–9). Candlish
detects something similar in Bradley (2007: 90).
2 See, e.g., Grossmann (1969: 192–4), Dummett (1973: 443), Carruthers (1981–2),
Baldwin (1997), Soames (1999: 26), and Künne (2003: 129–33).
3 See, e.g., Dummett (1973: 443; 1981: 526), Carruthers (1981–2; 1990: 36–9),
Ricketts (1986; 1996), Kemp (1995; 1999), Stanley (1996), Kalderon (1997),
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
139

circularity argument?4 Is it both?5 Since our primary interest
in this section is not exegetical, we can set aside the issue of
exactly how best to interpret Frege’s personal understanding of
the argument. Our question is rather whether a treadmill-style
argument is of any use for the defender of primitivism.
Accordingly, I suggest we attend to both interpretations of
the argument.
5.1.1
The circle
Frege speciﬁcally mentions a circularity in his presentation of
the argument in “The thought,” and does so in the context
of discussing how we go about “deciding” or “knowing”
whether something is true. So Frege’s interest in the treadmill
appears to be in the circularity version, and it has a distinctive
epistemological character. If truth is able to be deﬁned in terms
of other characteristics, then something is true just in case it has
those characteristics. But to determine whether something has
those characteristics, one has to determine whether it is true
that that something has those characteristics, and so our inves-
tigation into the truth of something leads us right back to truth.
Frege’s own presentation is enthymematic, so let us offer the
argument more explicitly:
(1)
There is some characteristic C that deﬁnes the concept truth
such that, for any truth-bearer p, p is true if and only if p is C.
[Supposition]
(2)
For any concept a and characteristic B, if a is deﬁned by B, then
in order to determine that something is A, one must ﬁrst
determine that it is B. [Premise]
Kremer (2000: 553; 2010: 269), Goldfarb (2001: 31), Heck (2002), and
Shieh (2002).
4 See, e.g., Levine (1996), Künne (2003; 2008), Stepanians (2003), Burge (2005: 140,
footnote 11), Mayer (2007: 193), and Reck (2007: 154).
5 See, e.g., Grossmann (1969: 192–3), Baldwin (1995), and Soames (1999: 25).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
140
www.ebook3000.com

(3)
For any truth-bearer p, in order to determine that p is true, one
must ﬁrst determine that p is C. [From (1) and (2)]
(4)
For any concept a and characteristic B, if a is deﬁned by B,
then in order to determine that something is B, one must do
so without deploying the concept a, on pain of epistemic
circularity. [Premise]
(5)
For any truth-bearer p, in order to determine that p is C, one
must do so without deploying the concept truth, on pain of
epistemic circularity. [From (1) and (4)]
(6)
For any truth-bearer p, in order to determine that p is C, one
must ﬁrst determine that it is true that p is C, thereby deploying
the concept truth. [Premise]
(7)
For any truth-bearer p, it is impossible to determine that p is
true without confronting an epistemic circularity. [From (3),
(5), and (6)]
(8)
For some truth-bearer p, it is possible to determine that p is
true without confronting an epistemic circularity. [Premise]
(9)
Contradiction [From (7) and (8)]
(10)
There is no characteristic C that deﬁnes the concept truth,
such that, for any truth-bearer p, p is true if and only if p is C.
[Reductio on (1) through (9)]
The reasoning of the argument is straightforward, so the
argument is only as strong as its premises. Supposition (1) is
the anti-primitivist claim to be reduced to absurdity. Premise
(8) provides the humdrum fact that fuels the contradiction: we
are not endlessly stuck in epistemic circularity. It is essential
that supposition (1) stresses that C is a deﬁniens of truth, and
not a mere coextensive concept. There are lots of concepts
coextensive with truth: being true and being either
true or false, for example. C, by contrast, is supposed to
be a prior or more fundamental concept, in terms of which we
understand the nature of truth. This clariﬁcation is vital
because it activates premise (2). Here the thought is that if
some concept is to be analyzed in terms of a prior, more
fundamental concept, then the way we learn about the
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
141

derivative concept is by learning about the more fundamental
concept. If what it is to be true is to be C, then the way to
discover that something is true is to discover it to be C. Premise
(2) thereby introduces into the argument a particular kind of
epistemic priority that accompanies conceptual priority.
To illustrate the idea at hand, suppose that the concept
bachelor can be deﬁned in terms of unmarried and male
in the very same way that the treadmill’s supposition supposes
that truth can be deﬁned in terms of C. Being a bachelor is the
derivative concept; being unmarried and being male are prior.
Accordingly, one determines whether something is a bachelor
by determining whether it is both unmarried and male.
Whether such epistemic priority always accompanies concep-
tual priority is an important question, but let us proceed on the
assumption that it does.
Premise (4) points out that because we understand deriva-
tive concepts in terms of more fundamental concepts, we had
better not end up relying on the derivative concepts again when
we come to the fundamental concepts. Given the one-way
direction of priority relations, a circle of understanding is
necessarily vicious. Hence, one must be able to determine
that something is C without having to rely on truth. If truth
were discovered by means of C, but C were in turn discovered
by means of truth, then we would have an unacceptable
epistemic circularity. In the case of bachelorhood, there is no
such circularity, for unmarried and male, even if they are not
absolutely fundamental concepts, are concepts that are not in
turn deﬁned by bachelor. If they were, then we would have
the problematic kind of circularity on our hands.
The crucial premise that introduces the problematic circu-
larity is (6). Indeed, if p is C, then it is true that p is C. All we
need recognize is an instance of the truth schema:
It is true that p is C if and only if p is C.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
142
www.ebook3000.com

Premise (6) takes account of the material equivalence between
‘p is C’ and ‘It is true that p is C’ and exploits it. Truth takes us
to C, and C takes us back again, via the truth schema, to truth.
But to make the case for premise (6), and thereby generate a
genuinely vicious circle, we must continue to pay attention to
the priority relations at hand. Given the epistemic priority
introduced by premise (2), if truth is indeed deﬁned in terms
of C, then determinations regarding C come ﬁrst. Because C is
prior to truth, we investigate into truth by investigating into
C. But notice that premise (6) relies on there being a further
case of epistemic priority: to determine that p one must ﬁrst
determine that it is true that p. Granted, p is C if and only if it is
true that p is C. But do we have to determine the right-hand
side of that biconditional in order to determine the left-hand
side? Only if what comes on the right is prior to what comes on
the left. But that is not the case here. What the advocate of
(6) needs to defend is that claims of the form ‘It is true that p’
are conceptually prior to claims of the form ‘p.’ If so, then the
epistemic priority we have been granting will kick in. But there
is no reason to think that ‘It is true that p’ is prior to just plain
‘p.’ If anything, the latter is prior to the former. (The best
answer, as we shall see, is that neither is conceptually prior to
the other.)
To see why, consider the difference between these two
biconditionals:
(11)
It is true that kangaroos hop if and only if kangaroos hop.
(12)
Kangaroos hop if and only if it is true that kangaroos hop.
T-sentences almost always take the form of (11) rather than
(12). Why? Read as material biconditionals, the difference
makes no difference: they are logically equivalent. However,
read as what we might call constitutive biconditionals – such
that the right-hand side is taken to be prior to, and to give an
account of the left-hand side – (11) is far more natural. What
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
143

explains the appeal of (11) over (12) is that the former places
an implicit priority on ‘p’ over ‘It is true that p.’ Taking the
former as prior is plausible because its “conceptual resources”
seem to be less (and are certainly no greater) than the latter’s.
Both sides involve p; but one explicitly involves p and truth.6
To fully understand ‘It is true that p,’ one would ﬁrst need to
fully understand ‘p.’ Consider Kripke’s suggestion of how we
might explain the notion of truth to someone (1975: 701). We
teach people how to use ‘is true’ by teaching them how to move
from ‘p’ to ‘“p” is true,’ and not the other way around. The
advocate of the treadmill, in effect, needs to favor (12) over
(11), which is to accept, implausibly, that the more involved
side of the biconditional is prior to the less involved side.
Premise (6) is false, and so the treadmill is unsound.
Let me summarize my criticism of the treadmill. Suppose
you thought that truth really could be deﬁned in terms of C.
Supposing you believed that kangaroos hop, you would also
believe a variety of different things:
(13)
Kangaroos hop.
(14)
It is true that kangaroos hop.
(15)
It is C that kangaroos hop.
(16)
It is true that it is C that kangaroos hop.
You would also believe a variety of material biconditionals
formed from (13), (14), (15), and (16). But you would not
believe many of the constitutive biconditionals using the
same components. For example, if one reads the biconditional
between (15) and (14)
6 The ‘explicitly’ here is crucial, because I ultimately reject what seems to be the case,
namely, that the conceptual resources behind the thought that it is true that p exceed
those behind the thought that p. On my view – and Frege’s too, ultimately – these
thoughts are identical, and so there is no priority between them, in either direction.
One cannot be prior to the other because they are identical. On this view, (6) remains
false. If doing X requires that one ﬁrst do X, one can never do X.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
144
www.ebook3000.com

(17)
It is C that kangaroos hop if and only if it is true that kanga-
roos hop
as a material biconditional, then it will be seen as true, for
being true and being C are, on the view at hand, coextensive.
But the priority runs in only one direction. C is prior to truth,
and not the other way around. So if one reads (17) in a con-
stitutive way, such that the right-hand side and its use of truth
constitutes the left-hand side and its use of C (in other words, if
one takes the right-hand side to be prior to the left-hand side),
then one will judge it to be false. What it is to be C is not to
be true, according to the view that deﬁnes truth in terms
of C. Instead, what it is to be true is to be C. To see (15) as
being prior to (14) – a priority that enables us to infer con-
clusion (3) in the argument – is not to see (16) as being prior to
(15), which is what the argument needs to defend premise (6).
The bottom line is that although the circularity argument
begins with a plausible enough claim about the order of deter-
mination between ‘p is true’ and ‘p is C’ when being true is
deﬁned in terms of being C, the argument still ends up going
wrong by incorrectly inferring a second order of determination
from the mere material equivalence between ‘p’ and ‘It is true
that p.’ Without that second relation of epistemic priority, the
argument fails to be sound. Frege’s treadmill is broken.
5.1.2
The regress
Though Frege himself deploys circularity language in describ-
ing the treadmill, many have interpreted the argument as a
vicious regress, and it is easy to appreciate why. The argument
on this reading runs as follows: supposing that truth is deﬁned
in terms of C, to discover that p is true one must ﬁrst discover
that p is C. But to discover that p is C one must ﬁrst discover
that it is true that p is C. But that in turn is to discover that it is
C that p is C. But to discover that, one has to discover that it is
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
145

true that it is C that p is C, and the regress is off. Since our ﬁnite
minds can discover truths without going through an inﬁnite set
of preliminary discoveries, the claim that truth can be deﬁned is
reduced to absurdity. Formally presented:
(1)
There is some characteristic C that deﬁnes the concept truth
such that, for any truth-bearer p, p is true if and only if p is C.
[Supposition]
(2)
For any concept a and characteristic B, if a is deﬁned by B, then
in order to determine that something is A, one must ﬁrst deter-
mine that it is B. [Premise]
(3)
For any truth-bearer p, in order to determine that p is true, one
must ﬁrst determine that p is C. [From (1) and (2)]
(4)
For any q, in order to determine that q, one must ﬁrst determine
that it is true that q. [Premise]
(5)
For any truth-bearer p, in order to determine that p is true, one
must ﬁrst determine that p is C, that it is true that p is C, that
that it is true that p is C is C, that it is true that that it is true that
p is C is C, and so on ad inﬁnitum. [From (3) and (4)]
(6)
For some truth-bearer p, it is possible to determine that p is true
without ﬁrst undergoing an inﬁnite number of determinations.
[Premise]
(7)
Contradiction [From (5) and (6)]
(8)
There is no characteristic C that deﬁnes the concept truth,
such that, for any truth-bearer p, p is true if and only if p is C.
[Reductio on (1) through (7)]
The regress begins and ends in the same manner as the circu-
larity argument, and breaks down for the same reason. As
before, if we are supposing that truth is deﬁned in terms of
C, then we are happy to grant that there is an epistemic priority
running from C to truth: C is prior to truth, and so one
discovers truth by discovering C. Where the argument goes
wrong is premise (4). Yes, there is a material equivalence
between ‘p’ and ‘It is true that p,’ and so a material equivalence
between ‘p is C’ and ‘It is true that p is C.’ But we need to
determine the latter prior to determining the former only if the
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
146
www.ebook3000.com

latter is epistemically prior. And since there is no reason to
assume that the seemingly more complex ‘It is true that p is C’
is epistemically prior to the seemingly simpler ‘p is C,’ there is
no reason to admit that one needs ﬁrst to determine its truth.
The regress is generated only if we assume that we have to
determine all the material implications of some truth-bearer p
prior to determining p itself, and there is no sound argument
that provides that conclusion.
The treadmill, regarded either as an argument to prove that
all attempts at deﬁning truth are viciously circular, or as an
argument to prove that all attempts at deﬁning truth launch a
vicious regress, fails. The argument exploits the equivalence
between ‘p’ and ‘It is true that p,’ and is sloppy about drawing
the right epistemic conclusions from it. The argument needs a
notion of epistemic priority if it is to justify its claim that one
discovers the truth about p by discovering that it has the
characteristics that deﬁne truth. We launch a vicious regress
only if there is something still prior to the grounding character-
istics. But the argument supplies no such grounds (it merely
points us to a materially equivalent claim, not a conceptually
or epistemically prior claim), and so raises no worries about
there being a vicious sort of inquiry required for any investi-
gation of truth.
As noted, the treadmill has a distinctly epistemic ﬂavor
to it: it tries to show that a deﬁnable concept of truth would
disenable us from ever discovering something to be true.
One might wonder whether the argument can be reformu-
lated in metaphysical or conceptual terms. Might any
attempt to say what it is to be true somehow circle back
onto the notion of truth? Whether the treadmill can be resus-
citated in different form is the topic of the next section. In
fact, I believe it can, and so we can mitigate the failings of the
treadmill by having it lead us to a successful argument for
conceptual primitivism.
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
147

5.2
The argument from omnipresence
5.2.1
The argument, informally presented
The treadmill and its epistemic approach fails. Might we some-
how resuscitate the argument in non-epistemic form? To do so,
we need to shed from the argument any emphasis on how we
go about determining or deciding whether something is true
and focus instead on what it is for something to be true. For the
new argument to work in parallel fashion to the treadmill, it
must show that any purported deﬁnition of truth must some-
how circle back onto truth itself. Is there any such argument?
It is easy enough to concoct circular accounts of truth.
Suppose one analyzed truth such that for any truth-bearer p,
p is true if and only if there is some fact to which p corresponds.
Here we have truth understood in terms of the further notions of
fact and correspondence. But what is a fact? Suppose a fact just
is a true truth-bearer. Now we have truth deﬁned in terms of
facts, and facts in terms of truth: something is true just in case it
corresponds to a true truth-bearer. This version of the corre-
spondence theory is particularly unilluminating; recalling our
discussion of foundations and networks from Section 1.2.3,
even if one thought that truth could only be understood in
terms of other fundamental concepts, all of which are collec-
tively deﬁned in terms of each other, one might hope for at least
a slightly larger circle of concepts than what is offered here.
Surely there are some circular theories of truth.7 But our new
treadmill needs to show that any deﬁnition of truth is circular.
One way to accomplish such a task is to show that truth is
somehow antecedently implicated by all of our judgments,
including any judgment that truth is deﬁned by thus and so.
7 Some have suggested that all the traditional deﬁnitions of truth are, in the end,
circular (e.g., Patterson 2010).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
148
www.ebook3000.com

A natural place to turn to is the Fregean doctrine known as
the “omnipresence” of truth. In “The thought” Frege writes:
“It may nevertheless be thought that we cannot recognize a
property of a thing without at the same time realizing the
thought that this thing has this property to be true. So with
every property of a thing is joined a property of a thought,
namely, that of truth” (1956: 293). This passage immediately
precedes one of Frege’s many insistences that the thought that
p and the thought that it is true that p are one and the same. In
the unpublished “Logic,” Frege similarly claims that what
“distinguishes [truth] from all other predicates is that predicat-
ing it is always included in predicating anything whatever”
(1979: 129). If truth is omnipresent, then it is found, explicitly
or not, within all of our judgments.
Suppose Frege’s doctrine of omnipresence is true, and so
truth is already a part of every judgment that we make. Truth is
thereby to be found inside any purported deﬁniens of truth. For
whatever claim is used to reveal the nature of truth, that very
claim already employs truth, and so the purported deﬁnition is
circular. In effect, omnipresence is the doctrine that truth is
already inside all of our judgments, and so no judgment could
reveal its nature without at the same time employing it. With
omnipresence in hand, we have an argument that truth cannot
be deﬁned without circularity, which is to say that truth cannot
be deﬁned in terms of concepts that are more fundamental.
Obviously, all of the weight in this new argument for primitiv-
ism is borne by the omnipresence thesis. Hence, I turn now to
an articulation and defense of the doctrine.
5.2.2
Omnipresence deﬁned
The omnipresence of truth is a vital part of Frege’s ideography
that he presents in his Begriffsschrift (1879), which develops
the formal language that Frege uses in formulating his logical
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
149

system.8 As Künne sums it up: “Each and every ideographic
sentence begins with the horizontal, so each and every ideo-
graphic sentence contains a truth-predicate in the guise of ‘is
identical with the True,’ and each and every thought expressed
by an ideographic sentence is about the truth-value True. So,
truth is omnipresent” (2008: 35). In the ideography signs like
‘2 + 2 = 4’ are preﬁxed with various kinds of strokes. In
particular, the two-part stroke ‘⊢’ marks that an assertion of
what follows has been made. The horizontal part of the symbol
designates the True,9 whereas the vertical part (the “judgment-
stroke”) represents the assertion. The striking feature of
Frege’s ideography is that every sentence includes the horizon-
tal (though non-asserted sentences will not include the
judgment-stroke). For Frege, truth is a part of every judgment,
a fact that gets built explicitly into his formal system.10
Setting aside Frege’s formal system, there are a variety of
theses that one might associate with the idea that truth is omni-
present. Künne deﬁnes omnipresence as the view that, necessa-
rily, if someone Vs that/whether p, then that person Vs that/
whether it is true that p (2003: 35). ‘V’ stands for any of the
variety of propositional attitudes or cognitive acts we can take
toward thoughts (such as believing, doubting, wondering, and
knowing), or propositional speech acts that make use of them
(such as asserting, questioning, or opining). For example, if one
believes that snow is white, then one also believes that it is true
that snow is white. If one asserts that grass is green, then one
also asserts that it is true that grass is green.
8 See Burge (1986: 145), Künne (2003: 34–7, 50–2; 2008: 34–5), Stepanians (2003),
and Taschek (2008). The system is developed further in Frege (1964).
9 For Frege, ‘the True’ is the name for the referent (Bedeutung) of every true sentence.
See Frege (1952), and the discussion in Section 2.1.
10 A medieval precedent for omnipresence might be found in the doctrine, often
associated with John Buridan, that “every proposition, because of its form, signiﬁes
or asserts itself to be true” (Buridan 1966: 194). See also Read (2002).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
150
www.ebook3000.com

Let me make three comments on Künne’s deﬁnition, after
which I shall offer my own. First, a biconditional is called for,
not a conditional. Ving that p accompanies Ving that it is true
that p and vice versa. Second, Künne’s deﬁnition leaves it open
whether, in any particular case, we are dealing with one or two
distinct cognitive states or speech acts. When I believe that p,
I believe that it is true that p. Is omnipresence the view that one
belief state requires a new one, or that we are dealing with just
one belief state under two different descriptions? The ﬁrst read-
ing is unacceptable, for it generates a genuinely vicious regress. If
to believe that p one must have the distinct belief that it is true
that p, then by the same reasoning to believe that it is true that p
one must also have a still further belief that it is true that it is true
that p, and so on. To engage in one cognitive act, one would have
to engage in inﬁnitely many cognitive acts, which is impossible
for ﬁnite minds like our own. Similarly, asserting that p cannot
require one to make a separate assertion that it is true that p;
since assertions are distinct speech acts, the existence of one act
of assertion cannot necessitate the existence of a second distinct
act of assertion. So according to omnipresence, the reason why
believing, judging, asserting, or what have you that p accompa-
nies believing, judging, asserting, or what have you that it is true
that p is that those two acts are exactly the same.11 Believing,
judging, or asserting that p is exactly the same thing as believing,
judging, or asserting that it is true that p. All we have here are
two ways of describing one single thing. Similarly, believing or
asserting that snow is white is identical to believing or asserting
that Schnee ist weiss or that la nieve es blanca.
The third observation concerning Künne’s deﬁnition involves
his appropriately drawing the equivalence between the thought
11 It is important to keep in mind the distinction between acts like believing and
asserting and the content of those acts. According to omnipresence, the act of
Ving that p is identical to the act of Ving that it is true that p, and thus these
“two” acts also have identical content.
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
151

that p and the thought that it is true that p, rather than the
thought that p is true. Consider the following four contents:
(i)
that snow is white
(ii)
that it is true that snow is white
(iii)
that the thought/proposition that snow is white is true
(iv)
that ‘Snow is white’ is true.
Omnipresence holds that (i) and (ii) are identical. (iii) appears
to involve an ontological commitment to thoughts and/or
propositions, and so one might reject the truth of (iii) while
admitting (i) and (ii). Unlike (iii), (ii) is not obviously commit-
ted to the existence of entities like thoughts or propositions.
Hence, those who reject the existence of such things can
happily use expressions like ‘it is true that.’ The function of
‘p’ in ‘It is true that p’ is to serve as a variable ranging over
sentential expressions, not propositions. (iv) concerns a partic-
ular sentence of English whose meaning is contingent, and so it
could differ in truth value from the others, had it meant
something different.
The doctrine of omnipresence, as I understand it, is a
conjunction of two claims. First is what we have seen
already, that for any sentential expression p, the thought
that p is identical to the thought that it is true that p.12
12 And, of course, the thought that it is true that p is in turn identical to the thought
that it is true that it is true that p, which in turn is identical to the thought that it is
true that it is true that it is true that p, and so on. There is no regress of thoughts or
truths here (these are identity claims), just of names. Furthermore, it would be
incorrect to conclude from this indeﬁnitely long list of names for the thought that
p that the thought somehow contains indeﬁnitely many predications of truth. To
judge that it is true that p is not to predicate truth of anything. (Not so for judging
that the thought that p is true, as noted already.) The idea behind Fregean
omnipresence is that the sense in which truth belongs to every thought is not
predicative (cf. Frege 1979: 194). It would perhaps be more accurate to say that
truth is a “logical” part (as is reﬂected in Frege’s own symbolism) −that which
accounts not for the thought’s particular content, but for its structure, for why
the thought is a thought and not a mere idea.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
152
www.ebook3000.com

It follows that a belief or assertion that p just is a belief or
assertion that it is true that p. But this ﬁrst thesis alone
does not capture the main thought behind omnipresence,
which is that truth is somehow contained in every judgment,
that it is present everywhere. So the second claim behind
omnipresence is that the concept truth in some sense
forms part of the conceptual content of any thought what-
soever. It is this presence of truth that accounts for what
makes the thought a thought, that is, a truth-apt content
suitable for judgment, belief, assertion, and the like.
Omnipresence thereby explains the difference between
thoughts (e.g., that kangaroos hop) and non-truth-apt con-
tents like ideas (e.g., kangaroos, hopping).
The second claim of omnipresence might be thought
to explain the ﬁrst. Borrowing some terminology from
Brandom, we might say that the expression ‘It is true that p’
makes explicit what is otherwise left implicit by ‘p.’ The reason
that the two thoughts are identical is that adding the operator
‘it is true that’ ends up adding nothing that is not already
present. As a result, in the very act of tokening a thought –
regardless of whether we go on to believe it, doubt it, or assert
it – we have already deployed our concept of truth; truth is
before our mind as soon as any thought is. This is not to say
that we take everything we ever contemplate to be true. For to
assent to the truth of the thought that p is not simply to
contemplate the thought that it is true that p, as Frege keenly
observed (1979: 129, 233). Piling on sentential operators
cannot turn a thought into an assertion.13 What omnipresence
does reveal is that we cannot believe, assert, or even under-
stand the thought that p without possessing and employing our
concept of truth.
13 As Frege writes: “it is really by using the form of an assertoric sentence that we
assert truth, and to do this we do not need the word ‘true’” (1979: 129).
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
153

5.2.3
Omnipresence defended
Let us turn now to the defense of omnipresence, which I
shall begin with an analogy. Omnipresence about truth has a
much better-known cousin: the omnipresence of existence.
Famously, Kant rejected the ontological argument for the exis-
tence of God by arguing that “Being is obviously not a real
predicate, i.e., a concept of something that could add to the
concept of a thing” (1998: 567; A596/B624). According to
Kant, there is no difference between (a) a concept of God as
being omniscient, omnipotent, and omnibenevolent, and (b) a
concept of God as being omniscient, omnipotent, omnibene-
volent, and existing. As a result, there is no pressure to take
things that satisfy the concept (b) as being more perfect than
things that satisfy the concept (a), and then infer that the most
perfect thing imaginable has to exist.
The doctrine is already present in Hume as well:
The idea of existence, then, is the very same with the idea of what
we conceive to be existent. To reﬂect on any thing simply, and to
reﬂect on it as existent, are nothing different from each other. That
idea, when conjoin’d with the idea of any object, makes no addi-
tion to it. Whatever we conceive, we conceive to be existent. Any
idea we please to form is the idea of a being; and the idea of a being
is any idea we please to form.
(Hume 2000: 48; 1.2.6.4)
Here we have as clear a statement as can be of the omnipre-
sence of existence. Like Kant and Frege after him, Hume
employs the language of “addition.” Nothing is added to a
conception of something by conceiving it as existing. If I ask
you to imagine a kangaroo, and then to imagine an existing
kangaroo, I have not, according to Hume and Kant, asked you
to do two separate things. Similarly, if I ask you to consider
whether kangaroos live in Australia, and then to consider
whether it is true that kangaroos live in Australia, I have not
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
154
www.ebook3000.com

asked you to do two separate things. Hence, just as adding
existence to an idea adds nothing, so too does adding truth to a
thought add nothing. When we are contemplating a thought,
we are already contemplating its truth, and so there is nothing
left to add that is not already present.
A second source of support for omnipresence comes from
trying to separate out in one’s mind thoughts that p from
thoughts that it is true that p. Try to place yourself in a state
of mind where you are considering the thought that p but not
the thought that it is true that p. Think to yourself, “I wonder
whether there are any kangaroos in Africa, though I do not
wonder whether it is true that there are any kangaroos in
Africa.” I for one cannot do it. But if these two thoughts are
not identical, then it should be possible to think one of them
without thinking the other. In fact, it should be possible to
accept one and reject the other. Granted, since the two nec-
essarily share the same truth value, such a state of mind
would be inconsistent. But it is perfectly possible to have an
inconsistent state of mind. Still, it does not seem possible to
accept that p while rejecting that it is true that p.14 I can
14 One possible source of counterexample here might arise from reﬂection on the liar
paradox. One might take the moral of the paradox to be that the equivalence
between ‘p’ and ‘“p” is true’ cannot be universal, given that the T-sentences for
liar sentences (e.g., ‘This sentence is not true’) are contradictory. But applying this
suggestion to omnipresence is contentious. First, it is notable that liar sentences
cannot be formulated with just the truth operator (‘it is true that’) on which
omnipresence is based; liars need truth predications, and so it is unclear that the
liar could motivate a restriction on the identity between thoughts that p and
thoughts that it is true that p. Second, it is an open question whether there even
are paradoxical thoughts (or propositions) in addition to paradoxical sentences
(e.g., Patterson 2010: 16). So again there is reason to doubt that there is an
immediate implication for omnipresence here. Finally, it is unclear that even if
omnipresence were to be restricted to the non-paradoxical cases, that this would
undermine the overall phenomenon that omnipresence is capturing. It is unclear
exactly how we should respond to the paradox, and so we should be cautious about
what philosophical implications we draw from it. In any event, the liar paradox
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
155

imagine no state of mind for which such a description would
be apt.15
A third source of support involves the empirical indistin-
guishability between thoughts that p and thoughts that it is
true that p. If the two thoughts are distinct, then believing one
is a different mental state from believing the other; there must
be an empirical difference between the two belief states.
Suppose I see Sophia smiling as she walks out of a classroom
where she has just taken an exam. To explain her smile,
I hypothesize that Sophia believes that she did well on the
test. My partner hypothesizes instead that Sophia believes
that it is true that she did well on the test. The opponent of
omnipresence holds that because my partner and I are attrib-
uting different beliefs to Sophia, we are offering competing
empirical claims about Sophia. Such a difference should there-
fore be empirically detectable, but that is highly implausible.
There is no empirical test to discriminate between a belief that
p and a belief that it is true that p.
A fourth and related point applies to the same kind of
example. If beliefs that p are distinct from beliefs that it is
true that p, then there ought to be cases where attributing
one belief rather than the other results in greater explanatory
or predictive power. If there is any genuine difference between
my and my partner’s hypotheses, one would expect there to be
some explanatory or predictive difference between them. But
I fail to see any such difference. My partner and I have given
equally good diagnoses of Sophia’s belief state. Nothing of
poses important questions for any theory of truth, and I take up the relationship
between the paradox and conceptual primitivism in Chapter 9.
15 What about non-cognitivism? Might, say, an emotivist about ethics (e.g., Ayer
1952) happily claim that murder is wrong, but not that it is true that murder is
wrong? Here the best response is that whatever non-cognitivists say about p, they
should say about it is true that p. If the former is taken not to be truth-apt, so too
should the latter (even if it involves ‘true’). Whatever non-cognitivist analysis is
provided of utterances that p applies equally to utterances that it is true that p.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
156
www.ebook3000.com

value is gained or lost by describing things in terms of ‘p’ rather
than ‘It is true that p.’ In essence, the opponent of omnipre-
sence is committed to there being some empirical contrast
between beliefs that p and beliefs that it is true that p, but no
such contrast appears to exist.
A ﬁnal source of support for the omnipresence of truth
comes from the previous chapter’s reﬂections on the metaphy-
sics of truth. There, I argued that truth is not a property in any
metaphysically robust sense. Accordingly, when predicating
truth of some thought, we do not really “add” anything to it,
for there is no real property to be added. If I ask you to enter-
tain the thought that Abraham Lincoln was president, and then
to entertain the thought that it is true that Abraham Lincoln
was president, I have not asked you to do two separate things.
But if I ask you to entertain the thought that Abraham Lincoln
was president, and then to entertain the thought that it is
widely disbelieved that Abraham Lincoln was president,
I have asked you to do two very different things. Frege puts
the point by writing that “nothing is added to the thought by
my ascribing to it the property of truth” (1956: 293). By
contrast, something is added to the thought by ascribing to it
the property of being widely disbelieved. If truth were a genu-
ine property, something that could be added to a thought, then
there would be much more space between the thought that p
and the thought that it is true that p, for the latter would
appear to indicate the presence of a property, or at least some
additional content not found in the mere thought that p.
To deny omnipresence, one must articulate some possible
phenomenon that could only be accounted for by appeal to the
thought that p, but not the thought that it is true that p (or vice
versa). There could never be any situation where only one of
those was true, so the phenomenon would have to involve
someone’s taking a cognitive attitude toward one of them but
not the other. The case would have to be something like: Phil
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
157

believes that p, but does not believe that it is true that p. In such
a case, Phil’s worldview is of course contradictory. But is the
description of Phil even coherent? Could there be someone
who believes that p but not that it is true that p? I do not see
how. Sure, someone might be willing to say the words ‘p’ but
not ‘It is true that p.’ But so long as I am inclined to describe a
person as believing that p, I am equally inclined to describe that
person as believing that it is true that p. (Likewise, I am willing
to attribute to Sophia the belief that snow is white, even if I
know that she does not speak English and would herself refer
to her belief with ‘Schnee ist weiss.’) The opponent of omni-
presence must ﬁnd some way of pulling the two apart, of
ﬁnding some explanatory or predictive value in employing
one but not the other.
The defense for omnipresence has so far focused on the
claim that thoughts that p are identical to thoughts that it is
true that p. But just as crucial to omnipresence is the idea
that truth already forms part of the content of any thought.
Above, I suggested that this second thesis can help us explain
the ﬁrst. If truth belongs already to the thought that p, then
there is nothing to distinguish it from the thought that it is true
that p, and so it is no surprise that the two are inseparable.
Furthermore, if one is willing to grant that truth is part of the
content of the thought that it is true that p, then by the identity
truth also belongs to the content of the thought that p. Even
opponents to omnipresence should ﬁnd it plausible that truth
forms part of the content of the thought that it is true that p;
otherwise, they would have no basis for thinking that the
thought that it is true that p is somehow conceptually richer
than the thought that p. As a result, those who deny the second
dimension of omnipresence face an explanatory challenge
in understanding how thoughts that p and thoughts that it is
true that p can be so strongly equivalent and yet differ in
their content.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
158
www.ebook3000.com

5.2.4
Omnipresence under attack
We can bolster the defense of omnipresence by next turning to its
detractors. Here is Künne, explaining his opposition to the view:
I ﬁnd this doctrine hard to swallow. Isn’t it possible to entertain
the thought that it is raining without exercising one’s mastery of
the concept of truth? (When we say that the cat, or the baby, has
noticed that it is raining, do we presuppose that the cat, or the
baby, has mastered the concept of truth?) Young children can
certainly understand lots of sentences without understanding the
word ‘true’ or any synonym thereof. We can, and we often do,
I think, explain to children what ‘true’ means by giving them
instructions such as: “If you say, ‘It is raining,’ and it is raining,
then what you say is true. But if you say, ‘It is raining,’ and it isn’t
raining, then what you say is not true. Or if you say, ‘It is snow-
ing,’ and it is snowing, then what you say is true. But if you say, ‘It
is snowing,’ and it isn’t snowing, then what you say is not true.
Got it?” To understand such an explanation, the child must of
course already understand sentences such as ‘It is raining’ and ‘It is
snowing.’ Whether the child has “got it” will become manifest in
her or his future use of ‘true.’
(Künne 2003: 51)
Künne’s charge is that the omnipresence thesis is too demand-
ing. To judge that snow is white one need not deploy one’s
concept of truth. Sure, snow is white just in case it is true that
snow is white. But, Künne asks, can we not judge that snow is
white without thereby judging in addition (or, better, at the
same time) that it is true that snow is white? Does the latter not
involve heavier conceptual machinery that children or animals,
for example, might lack?
Künne’s response to omnipresence reveals his view as to what
it is that indicates that someone possesses a concept of truth. His
focus concerns whether or not someone is competent with the
word ‘true’; because children can understand sentences like ‘It is
snowing’ before they can understand sentences like ‘It is true that
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
159

it is snowing,’ Künne infers that possessing a concept of truth
is not necessary for judging that it is snowing. What Künne is
presupposing is that one’s possession of a concept of truth is
indicated (if not also constituted) by one’s competence with
words like ‘true’ and ‘truth.’ This view, however, is untenable,
and the best response to Künne’s worries about omnipresence is
to defend an alternative conception of what it is to possess a
concept of truth. Hence, we can grant that Künne is correct when
it comes to developing a mastery of sentences involving ‘true.’
Perhaps we need to understand ‘It is snowing’ before we can
understand ‘It is true that it is snowing.’ But this admission leaves
untouched the issue of whether a concept of truth lies behind our
ability to form judgments.
In general, I see little reason to believe that conceptual com-
petence is constituted by linguistic competence. Anyone willing
to attribute concepts to non-linguistic animals (or pre-linguistic
humans) must reject the view that concepts require language.
With respect to truth in particular, there is great reason to
attribute it to speakers who nevertheless lack a truth predicate in
their language. To illustrate, consider a community of speakers
who speak a “Tarski-approved” language, i.e., a language that
does not include its own semantic machinery (and so would
avoid liar-related paradoxes), and so includes no truth predicate
(see Section 7.1). The speakers of our language are Rosencrantz
and Guildenstern, who are stuck on a desert island with only a
coin to toss. Their language is a semantics-free fragment of
English, and includes (or is even limited to) these two sentences:
(H)
The coin landed heads.
(T)
The coin landed tails.
Suppose we are anthropologists studying their behavior.
Rosencrantz ﬂips the coin, but Guildenstern cannot see the
result. Rosencrantz typically utters (H) when the coin lands
heads, and (T) when it lands tails, and always shows the result
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
160
www.ebook3000.com

to Guildenstern afterwards. But sometimes they act differently,
as when Rosencrantz utters (H) when the coin lands tails, and
(T) when it lands heads. He always smiles when he does this,
though, and they have a good laugh afterwards. It would not
take us long to understand what these two are up to. They
think it is funny when Rosencrantz does not tell the truth.
Guildenstern understands what it is for Rosencrantz to tell
the truth, and Rosencrantz fully understands the distinction
between truth and falsity as well – he exploits it in order to
have some fun on the island. They have this understanding in
spite of not having specialized semantic vocabulary to articu-
late it. The moral of this story is that the concept of truth is a
part of Rosencrantz’s and Guildenstern’s cognitive lives, in
spite of ‘true’ not being a part of their linguistic lives. The
concept of truth enters their mind not when ‘true’ does, but
when they form any thought at all. It would be incorrect to say
of a case where Rosencrantz witnesses a heads toss that he
believes that the coin landed heads but not that he believes that
it is true that the coin landed heads. Both expressions provide a
perfectly apt description of the phenomenon. Rosencrantz
would not use the latter description (he does not have the
words), but it is no less true of him for that.
The case of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern shows that it is
appropriate to attribute to them a concept of truth (as revealed
by their ability to engage in belief, assertion, deception, etc.) in
spite of having no truth predicate in their language. In a slogan,
truth is prior to ‘truth.’ My claim is not simply that because
we (who clearly possess truth) describe Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern using truth, that they therefore have a concept of
truth. That inference is obviously fallacious. Rather, it is that
their behavior involves the kinds of activities that are indicative of
possessing truth, activities that they could not perform without
having the concept. Hence, the evidence that someone has a
concept of truth is not revealed by an ability to wield ‘true,’ but
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
161

by an ability to believe, judge, assert, deceive, deny, etc. To see
this, we need to appreciate a basic fact about concepts, which is
that they allow us to sort and categorize the world that we
experience. Part of the function of having a concept horse, for
example, is that it enables us to sort the elements of our experi-
ences into things that satisfy it and things that do not. What is
constitutive of possessing the concept horse is an understanding
of the difference between something’s being a horse and not being
a horse. Similarly, what is constitutive of possessing the concept
truth is an understanding of the difference between something’s
being true and not being true, and we do not need ‘true’ to have
that. That understanding is precisely what Rosencrantz employs
as he engages with Guildenstern. He understands what it is for
his utterances to be or not to be true, and this competence is what
accounts for his possession of a truth concept.
To truly understand the thought that p, then, one must
understand the distinction between the truth of p and the falsity
of p. In effect, if one is insensitive to the distinction between p
and not-p, then one does not understand p. It follows that a
concept of truth is also necessary for forming beliefs, making
assertions, and the like. To believe that p, you ﬁrst have to
understand that p, and judge it to be true.16 Belief in something
just is belief in its truth. There is no believing without an implicit
understanding of the distinction between truth and falsity.
Similarly, to assert that p is to put forward p as being true.
One cannot make an assertion if one does not understand what
it is to put something forward as being true. What makes some-
one’s assertion an assertion (and not, say, a hypothesizing) is
that person’s attitude with respect to the truth of the remark,
and how others should regard the truth of the remark.
16 Recall from above the Fregean insight that judging something to be true cannot be
equated with predicating ‘true’ of something. Hence, we can judge something to be
true without using a truth predicate at all.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
162
www.ebook3000.com

Imagine, then, what it would be like for someone to be
linguistically competent but lack a concept of truth (assuming
this is even possible, which I doubt). Suppose Phil is one such
person, a young child, and hears his mother say that it is
snowing outside. Were Phil to have no concept of truth, he
could not do a number of things. For one, he could not believe
that it is snowing outside. There is a difference between Phil’s
entertaining the thought that it is snowing outside and his
believing that it is snowing outside. The difference is that in
the latter case Phil commits to the truth of the claim. To believe
that p, you have to understand that p, and judge it to be true.
Next, if Phil were to have no truth concept, then he would not
understand the distinction between truth and other things, like
falsity. But how could Phil understand what ‘It is snowing
outside’ means without understanding the difference between
the truth and falsity of ‘It is snowing outside’? The truth of ‘It is
snowing outside’ is a very different matter from the falsity of ‘It
is snowing outside’; the two represent very different states of
affairs. When Phil understands and believes his mother, he
forms a judgment of acceptance about the former state of
affairs but not the latter; this fact betrays an implicit under-
standing of truth on Phil’s part. Third, Phil could not commu-
nicate to his sister Sophia that it is snowing outside. For to do
that, Phil would have to assert something to his sister. And if
Phil is in a position to assert something, then he must under-
stand the difference between assertion and pretense. But that
difference is entirely one having to do with truth.17 To assert is
17 Künne considers this response, and argues against it by holding that a child might
understand assertion not by way of the concept of truth, but by way of justiﬁcation
(2003: 52). He is thus obliged to think that we can have a concept of justiﬁcation
prior to having one of truth. That we need not admit such a view about the
relationship between truth and justiﬁcation is one of the many beneﬁts that I
claim for primitivism, for it is quite plausible that we understand the concept of
justiﬁcation in terms of truth, and not the other way around (see Section 8.5). More
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
163

to present a thought as being true, unlike denying or playing
make-believe. (The very ability to engage in make-believe and
distinguish it from reality is still further evidence that young
children have a concept of truth.)
Simply put, the concept of truth is implicated in all sorts of
cognitive states and speech acts. Without a concept of truth, one
cannot understand the distinction between truth and falsity, form
beliefs, or make and recognize assertions. I would go so far as to
say that we cannot appropriately understand any thought what-
soever without a concept of truth.18 For if we cannot understand
the difference between the truth and falsity of a thought, then we
do not really understand the thought at all. Omnipresence
explains this phenomenon, as it claims that the concept of truth
is built into our judgments from the beginning, such that one
cannot entertain the thought that p without already grasping the
concept of truth. Künne’s worry presupposes that mastery of the
concept of truth is revealed by mastery of the word ‘true.’ I have
offered an alternative and independently plausible account that
locates our conceptual competence with truth with our ability to
engage in certain sorts of cognitive and speech acts. Once we see
that conceptual competence need not accompany linguistic com-
petence – that truth is prior to ‘truth’ – we no longer need to
suspect that the thought that it is true that p is somehow con-
ceptually richer than the thought that p.
I have now concluded my defense of omnipresence.
Equipped with the doctrine, we can explain the a priori infer-
ence between that p and that it is true that p. We can explain
the “transparency” of truth. We can explain the empirical
importantly, Künne reveals here the need to show that something prior needs to be
established in the child’s conceptual repertoire before he can understand the act of
assertion, and my suggestion is that truth is highly preferable to justiﬁcation as the
prior concept at work.
18 Cf. Davidson: “Truth is the prime semantic concept; we could not think or speak in
the sense of entertaining or communicating propositional contents without it”
(2005: 155). See also Davidson (1982: 326–7) and McGinn (2000: 101–2).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
164
www.ebook3000.com

indiscernibility between Phil who believes that p and Sophia
who believes that it is true that p. We can explain the impos-
sibility of imagining a person who believes that p but not that
it is true that p. We can explain why it is that when we under-
stand a claim, we understand what it is for that claim to be
true. And we can explain how even those without semantic
vocabulary can engage in cognitive and speech acts that
presuppose an understanding of truth. Opponents of omnipre-
sence think that the thought that p and the thought that it is
true that p are not identical, presumably because the latter is
thought to be conceptually richer. But where is this extra
substance coming from? We cannot simply say that the latter,
but not the former, involves truth, for that is simply begging
the question against omnipresence; moreover, it seems to
presuppose an untenable view regarding the relationship
between truth and ‘truth.’ truth is prior, not ‘truth.’
5.2.5
The argument, formally presented
Now that omnipresence itself has been defended, our next task is
to return to the thesis that truth is indeﬁnable, and therefore
primitive. As before, the argument is straightforward. If omni-
presence is true, then the thought that p is the same thing as the
thought that it is true that p. As a result, whatever conceptual
resources are needed for thinking that p are exactly the same as
the conceptual resources that are needed for thinking that it is
true that p. Furthermore, if omnipresence is true, then any
thought has truth already as part of its content. (For this
reason, ‘the thought that it is true that p’ is a more revealing
description of the thought than ‘the thought that p.’ Frege rec-
ognized this fact when he chose to include the horizontal in each
sentence of his ideography.) Even if one balks at this very general
claim, we can at least recognize that truth is part of the content
of the thought that it is true that p. (This idea, recall, seems to be
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
165

the driving force behind the resistance to omnipresence.) And
here we can infer from the initial identity that the plain old
thought that p also includes truth. The activity of deﬁning or
analyzing a concept in more fundamental terms requires that the
thoughts doing the analyzing not presuppose the concepts being
analyzed, on pain of circularity (and incoherent relations of
priority). If A is analyzed in terms of B, that is because B is the
more fundamental concept, which it cannot be if B in turn
presupposes A. Any purported analysis of truth must offer up
thoughts composed of concepts that are all prior to the concept
of truth. But because of omnipresence, those thoughts will them-
selves contain truth, and so cannot be more fundamental.
Consequently, any purported analysis of truth will fall victim
to circularity, for that analysis will already contain truth.
We may now present the argument formally:
(1)
For all p, the thought that p is identical to the thought that it is
true that p. [Premise]
(2)
For all p, the conceptual content that composes the thought that
p is identical to the conceptual content that composes the
thought that it is true that p. [From (1)]
(3)
For all p, truth is a part of the conceptual content that
composes the thought that it is true that p. [Premise]
(4)
For all p, truth is a part of the conceptual content that
composes the thought that p. [From (2) and (3)]
(5)
Suppose, for some C, that truth can be non-circularly analyzed
as follows: For all truth-bearers q, q is true if and only if C.
[Supposition]
(6)
truth is not a part of the conceptual content that composes the
thought that C. [From (5)]
(7)
truth is a part of the conceptual content that composes the
thought that C. [From (4)]
(8)
Contradiction [From (6) and (7)]
(9)
There is no C such that truth can be non-circularly analyzed as
follows: For all truth-bearers q, q is true if and only if C.
[Reductio on (5) through (8)]
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
166
www.ebook3000.com

Premise (1) is a key component of the omnipresence of truth,
which I have been defending at length in this section. Premise
(3) is actually weaker than omnipresence, and presumably
would be upheld even by its detractors. The conclusion is
acceptable even to those who, like Strawson (1992), might
hold that truth can be analyzed, albeit only circularly.
Notice how the omnipresence argument differs sharply from
the original treadmill. According to the omnipresence thesis,
judgments that p are identical to judgments that it is true that p.
Hence, there is no room for a relation of epistemic priority
between them, given that we just have one thing. So the epis-
temic circularity cannot get off the ground for the defender of
omnipresence. Why, then, did Frege offer the treadmill, given
that it rests upon a premise he rejects? My best guess is that
Frege was attempting to be dialectically fair, and did not
assume omnipresence because he thought that the argument’s
opponents – defenders of the traditional substantive views –
must reject it. After all, if truth is a genuine property, then
“adding” it to a thought ought to add new content to it.
5.2.6
Some deﬂationary responses
One way to resist premise (3) is to argue that the concept
truth does not ﬁgure into the content of any thought what-
soever. What explains the identity between the thought that p
and the thought that it is true that p is not that the former
already contains truth, but instead that the latter, despite
appearances, does not. Some deﬂationists might take up this
response, arguing that truth is too thin a concept to add any
genuine substance to a claim; far from being omnipresent,
truth is never present. There is a sense in which I agree that
truth does not add anything to a thought: appending a sentence
with ‘it is true that’ does not change what the sentence
expresses. But all that shows is that truth does not get into
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
167

thoughts by way of truth predicates or truth operators; it is
there already. Similar remarks apply to existence: an idea of a
lion just is an idea of an existing lion, but it does not follow that
the concept of existence has no conceptual content to contrib-
ute to thoughts involving it.
Furthermore, if deﬂationists reject (3) for the reason I have
suggested, they must hold that no thought whatsoever involves
truth as part of its content. If so, deﬂationists are at pains to
explain what claims like ‘To assert is to present as true’ mean.
In such cases, ‘true’ cannot be disquoted or denominalized
away: to assert that snow is white is not simply to present
that snow is white, for there are many non-assertoric ways of
presenting the thought that snow is white.19 On my view, this
sentence expresses a certain conceptual connection between
our concepts of assertion and our primitive concept of truth.
Deﬂationists must hold that even sentences with non-
disquotable uses of ‘true’ are given their content completely
independently of truth, which is not very plausible.20
It is paramount to recognize that the omnipresence argu-
ment sets both traditional substantive views and deﬂationary
views in its sights. If ‘C’ is something like ‘q corresponds with
the facts’ or ‘q coheres in an ideal system,’ then the omnipre-
sence argument shows that the purportedly deﬁning thoughts
already presuppose the concept of truth, and so their constit-
utive concepts cannot be more fundamental than truth itself.
19 See Section 8.2.
20 One might reject (3) by claiming that while truth contributes nothing to the
content of thoughts like the thought that it is true that p, it might still contribute
something to other thoughts like the thought that to assert is to present as true. This
bifurcating maneuver is not available to deﬂationists, however, for it requires truth
to have a non-deﬂationary contribution to make to thoughts like that to assert is to
present as true. The maneuver is fully consistent with primitivism itself and other
substantive theories of truth, however. Still, a uniform treatment of the contribu-
tion truth makes to thoughts, which is precisely what omnipresence offers, is more
desirable than a disjunctive one.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
168
www.ebook3000.com

The argument holds equally well against “deﬂationary deﬁni-
tions” of truth. For example, ‘C’ might take shape as in the
following: For all truth-bearers q, q is true if and only if q is
‘Snow is white’ and snow is white, or q is ‘Grass is green’ and
grass is green, and so on.21 Here ‘C’ takes the form of an
inﬁnitely long disjunction of conjunctions, but this in no way
inoculates it from omnipresence.
Next
consider
the
deﬂationary
account
favored
by
Horwich, who argues that truth can be “implicitly deﬁned”
by means of a set of principles that ﬁx the meaning of ‘true.’
Such principles are the most “fundamental principles” of truth
(1990: 18). In Horwich’s case, these principles are the propo-
sitional T-sentences, such as ‘The proposition that snow is
white is true if and only if snow is white.’ But if truth is deﬁned,
albeit implicitly, by the T-sentences, then it does not avoid the
threat of omnipresence. For the T-sentences themselves (as well
as their two constituents) express thoughts, and so to entertain
what they say one already has to deploy the concept truth.
Hence, primitivists reject the deﬂationists’ claim that the
T-sentences are the most basic facts about truth, in virtue of
which we understand the concept. To understand T-sentences,
we must already possess the concept of truth. After all, we must
accept the T-sentences themselves to be true; we cannot even
begin to think that they explain the concept of truth unless
we are happy to grant that they are true. As a result, any
deﬂationist theory that rests our understanding of truth on
the truth of the T-sentences falls prey to the omnipresence
argument. No thought can be given to explain the concept of
truth in more fundamental terms, for any thought whatsoever
already presupposes the concept of truth.
21 See, e.g., Leeds (1978: 121), Field (1986: 58), Resnik (1990: 412), and David
(1994: 107).
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
169

What of deﬂationists who get out of the business of deﬁning
truth altogether? On this approach to deﬂationism, we get at
the concept of truth not by deﬁning it, but by showing what it
does. What is truth? A device for disquotation, forming
generalizations, constructing anaphora, etc. Truth is just that
device that lets us “point through the sentence to the reality”
(Quine 1970: 11). It is the expressive device that lets us express
inﬁnite conjunctions and disjunctions. This species of deﬂa-
tionism is centered around the linguistic functions of ‘true’ and
its cognates. For example, Jc Beall writes that the “sole role of
[truth] – the reason behind its introduction into the language –
is to enable generalizations that, given our ﬁnite constraints,
we couldn’t otherwise express” (2005: 7). God would have no
need for truth, Beall thinks, since he does not suffer from our
cognitive ﬁnitude.
The problem with this species of deﬂationism is its exclusive
focus on ‘true’ and its cognates. There is something to the
thought that ‘true’ is merely of expressive use, that its reason
for being is simply to allow us to express things that our ﬁnite
limitations would otherwise prevent us from expressing.
Advocates of omnipresence, Frege included, can agree, to a
degree. The thought that snow is white already contains within
itself the concept of truth, and so saying ‘It is true that snow is
white’ does not express a different thought than saying ‘Snow
is white’ does. As a linguistic device, ‘true’ is often redundant.
But redundancy has its limits. The (intelligible, even if not true)
sentence ‘To assert is to present as true’ does not employ ‘true’
as a device for disquotation or forming generalizations. So here
we have a counterexample to Beall’s claim: without ‘true,’ not
even God would have a way of expressing the thought behind
‘To assert is to present as true.’ What the sentence actually does
is express a conceptual relationship between our concepts of
truth and assertion. These connections would still exist even if
‘true’ and ‘assert’ did not. A key lesson that we drew from the
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
170
www.ebook3000.com

discussion of omnipresence is that truth is prior to ‘truth’
and ‘true.’ Rational beings can possess a concept of truth even
in the absence of possessing any semantic vocabulary.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, for example, have a concept
of truth, one that provides them with their sole source of
entertainment, in spite of having no device for forming inﬁnite
conjunctions (or any need for it, for that matter).
Even if Beall and his fellow deﬂationists were correct that
the introduction of the words ‘true’ and ‘truth’ were of mere
expressive convenience, we could draw no conclusion about
the importance of the introduction of truth into our thought.
We might say that, similar to how ‘true’ is a device for dis-
quotation and the like, truth is a device for forming thoughts.
We deploy our concept of truth every time we make a judg-
ment, form a hypothesis, or question a belief. Rather than
being an innocuous, “merely logical” concept, truth is at the
very center of our cognitive lives.22 Omnipresence is thus
starkly at odds with conceptual deﬂationism, understood as
the thesis that the concept of truth is exhausted by the mere
expressive use of ‘true,’ and not explanatorily connected to
other concepts like belief, assertion, and justiﬁcation. In fact,
one plausible way of understanding conceptual deﬂationism is
as the view that we can exhaust everything there is to say about
truth by exhausting everything there is to say about ‘true.’23
Our defense of omnipresence shows that primitivism is deeply
opposed to conceptual deﬂationism. Primitivists, omnipre-
sence in hand, argue that truth is actually one of the most
central of our concepts, a concept, as Davidson puts it, without
which we would not have any other concepts (1996: 264).
Instead of being exhausted by an account of ‘true,’ our concept
of truth exists completely independently of ‘true.’
22 Cf. Davidson (1999: 110–14).
23 See Chapter 3 of Horwich (1990) and Williams (1999: 547; 2002).
Conceptual primitivism: treadmills and omnipresence
171

Appreciating the central role that truth plays in the forming
of our thoughts is crucial if we are to see how omnipresence is
opposed to conceptual deﬂationism. Omnipresence, as we
have seen, has two related components. First, omnipresence
entails that the thought that p and the thought that it is true
that p are identical. This is a thesis that deﬂationists can
(and should) uphold. But the other component of omnipre-
sence is that our concept of truth is utilized every time a
thought is formed. We cannot form a thought, believe a
thought, or assert a thought without deploying our truth
concept. Here we have a deep explanatory role for truth
that gives the lie to conceptual deﬂationism. Our concept of
truth far outstrips the linguistic account we may give of ‘true’
and ‘truth.’ Deﬂationists cannot admit this other feature of
omnipresence without giving up their conceptual deﬂationism.
Our concept of truth is ﬁrmly in place long before we are ever
willing to assent to a T-sentence.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
172
www.ebook3000.com

6
Conceptual primitivism: open
questions, foundations, and logical
apparatus
In this chapter we take up once again the direct case for
conceptual primitivism. As in the previous chapter, I begin
with a better-known argument for primitivism – in this case
the open-question argument – and show why I do not believe
that it is successful. I then turn to an assortment of different
arguments that I believe make a better case for primitivism.
6.1
The open question
6.1.1
Moore and ‘good’
The open-question argument immediately calls to mind
Moore’s defense of ethical non-naturalism (1903). According
to Moore, any attempt to deﬁne the good with some property
P leaves open the question ‘But is P good?’ Even if a utilitarian,
for example, equates the good with that which produces the
greatest happiness for the greatest number, it remains an
intelligible question whether producing the greatest happiness
for the greatest number really is good. Those who are fully
competent with ethical discourse could (and do) argue over the
validity of the proposed deﬁnition. By contrast, someone who
wondered whether bachelors are male or not does not fully
understand the notions at hand. It is a closed question whether
bachelors are male or not: they are. Since Moore thought that
every purported deﬁnition of the good would succumb to the
173

open question, he concluded that goodness was a simple,
unanalyzable, primitive property.
As we know, Moore thought the same thing about truth
for some time in his earlier years. But he never argues for
primitivism about truth in the manner that he argues for
primitivism about goodness.1 Still, we may wonder whether a
parallel open-question argument exists for truth, and whether
it is successful.2 My ultimate claim is that there is not.
The original open-question argument faces a battery of
charges. For one, it reeks of the paradox of analysis familiar
from Plato’s Meno. Meno asks Socrates: “How will you look
for it, Socrates, when you do not know at all what it is? How
will you aim to search for something you do not know at all? If
you should meet with it, how will you know that this is the
thing that you did not know?” (1997b: 880; 80d4–7). If we do
not know what goodness is, then we would not recognize its
true analysis even if we were to come across it. But if we would
be able to recognize it, that is because we would already know
what it is. Either way, looking into the matter is pointless. In
any case of analysis, and not just the case of goodness, the
open-question argument will threaten to undermine the pur-
ported analysis. For if some notion N is analyzed in terms
1 Alan White says otherwise, and claims that Moore wields the argument against
William James’s pragmatism (1957: 320, 323). He cites Moore (1907–8), but I ﬁnd
there only arguments that challenge the extensional adequacy of James’s conception of
truth, and not anything so systematic as the open question. Moore deﬁnitely does not
question all possible analyses of truth, which he would have to do were he to employ
the open-question argument. Ryle (1970: 95–6) sees connections between Moore’s
open-question argument for ethics and his primitivist argument from “The nature of
judgment,” though the latter is still best understood as a circularity/regress argument.
2 Davidson writes: “Putnam’s comparison of various attempts to characterize truth
with the attempts to deﬁne ‘good’ in naturalistic terms seems to me, as it does to
Rorty, apt” (1990a: 136). See also Putnam (1978: 108–9), Rorty (1986: 334),
Brandom (1988: 84), and Azzouni (2000: 126–32). Dummett later defends
Putnam’s use of the open-question argument for truth (1979: 219–20). I am actually
skeptical that Putnam employs an open-question argument at all, as I argue below.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
174
www.ebook3000.com

of M, then there seem to be two options. The claim that N is M
will be trivial, or not. If it is trivial, then there was no need to
engage in the analysis to begin with. But if the claim is not
trivial – if it marks a genuine discovery – then it will fall
vulnerable to the charge of the open question. For if the claim
that N is M is not trivial, it will sound like a substantive,
controversial claim. And so it will be open to challenge. If the
mere intelligibility of the corresponding open question is enough
to reject the view, then any substantive philosophical analysis
that purports to tell us something we did not already know will
fail. If the open-question argument is valid, it threatens to
devastate the very project of giving philosophical analyses.
Moore’s speciﬁc targets with the open-question argument
are naturalistic accounts of goodness. Unfortunately for
Moore, the open-question argument is particularly benign
when it comes to the sorts of analyses that contemporary
naturalists employ. For naturalists may hold that moral prop-
erties are identiﬁed with or reducible to natural properties, but
they need not hold that these identities or reductions hold as a
matter of conceptual necessity, or are discoverable a priori.
If there are metaphysical necessities discoverable only a poste-
riori, then of course it will be an open question prior to the
discovery whether the necessity holds. If naturalists hold
that the relationship between the moral and the natural holds
out of metaphysical but not conceptual necessity, then the
open-question argument holds no force.3
6.1.2
Open questions and truth
Perhaps the prospects for an open-question argument about
truth are better. After all, defenders of the analyzability of truth
are unlikely to ﬁnd solace in empirical investigation: truth is
3 But see Horgan and Timmons (1992) for further discussion.
Conceptual primitivism
175

rarely taken to be a naturalistic property, discoverable by
a posteriori investigation.4 So it is not obvious that the appeal
to a posteriori metaphysical necessities will be of aid to the
defenders of various accounts of truth. In 1955, Barnett Savery
offered an open-question argument with respect to truth that is
exactly parallel with Moore’s:
Let us examine a (1) naturalistic meaning of truth. As we have
stated, a naturalistic meaning is describable in other than truth
terms. For our example we select (1.434) where truth means
veriﬁability. If we assert: truth means veriﬁability, and if this is a
tautological expression, then it is trivial. No one will dispute that
veriﬁability means veriﬁability. If the expression: truth means
veriﬁability, is not a tautological expression, then it expresses a
synthetic proposition. If the expression is a synthetic one, then,
paraphrasing G. E. Moore’s reasoning as it applies to goodness, we
are forced to assert that truth is indeﬁnable . . . Following Moore
again, we can raise the question with respect to veriﬁability, and
ask, is veriﬁability truth? Moore should allow us to assert that this
is a meaningful and signiﬁcant question. Now, since this question
about (1.434), the veriﬁability meaning of truth, can be raised with
respect to all of the (1) naturalistic meanings of truth, it follows
that none of the naturalistic meanings of truth can be reduced to
naturalistic terms. Truth, in short, cannot be described in non-
truth terms. Any attempt to do so commits the naturalistic fallacy.
(Savery 1955: 514)
Savery counts all of the traditional theories of truth among the
camp of naturalistic deﬁnitions. Since the open question takes
care of all of them in one fell swoop, he sees three remaining
contenders: (i) a primitivist account parallel to Moore’s about
goodness, (ii) a normative account where truth is equated
with what ought to be believed, and (iii) an emotivist theory,
parallel to Ayer’s about ethics. Savery quickly dismisses (i):
“there are no adequate grounds, nor enough inadequate ones,
4 Perhaps the best-known exception here is Field (1972).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
176
www.ebook3000.com

to substantiate a belief in such a delightful fancy” (1955: 515).
Since our interest is in this delightful fancy (or at least a con-
ceptualist version of it), let us explore whether the open-question
argument really does lend it any support, as Savery suggests.
Let us ﬁrst get precise about the argument:
(1)
For any purported analysans of truth C, the question ‘But is
something that is C true?’ either (i) remains open (such that
something’s being C does not settle its being true or not), (ii) is
closed negatively (such that something’s being C settles that it is
not true), or (iii) is closed afﬁrmatively (such that something’s
being C settles that it is true). [Excluded middle]
(2)
For any purported analysans of truth C, if the question ‘But is
something that is C true?’ remains open, then C is insufﬁcient
for providing an adequate analysis of truth. [Premise]
(3)
For any purported analysans of truth C, if the question ‘But is
something that is C true?’ is closed negatively, then C provides
an incorrect analysis of truth. [Premise]
(4)
For any purported analysans of truth C, if the question ‘But is
something that is C true?’ is closed afﬁrmatively, then the
analysis in terms of C is trivial and renders the analysis inad-
equately circular. [Premise]
(5)
There is no adequate analysis of truth. [From (1) through (4)]
Premise (1) lays out all the various options that can result from
any open-question inquiry. The remaining premises purport to
show how each road leads to a dead end. If the question
remains open, as per premise (2), then the analysis has not
accomplished its task.5 If the analysis were truly an adequate
one, then the question would be closed. Now, those who
suspect open-question arguments in general would be wise to
question the argument’s second premise. Still, even if we grant
(2), there are further ﬂaws to be found in the argument.
5 Rorty (1986: 334) clearly endorses (2), and attributes it to Putnam (1978: 108) as
well. Azzouni is also quite sympathetic (2000: 129).
Conceptual primitivism
177

It is important to observe that there are two ways to close a
question. When the question is closed afﬁrmatively, we have a
good analysis (pending its non-triviality); when the question is
closed negatively, we have a bad analysis. Hence, (3) is unpro-
blematic. For example, the question ‘But is something that is
false true?’ is closed: No, things that are false deﬁnitely are not
true, and so deﬁning being true in terms of being false is (it goes
without saying) inadequate. The crucial premise is (4). Why
should we think that any purported analysis that closes the
question afﬁrmatively will be trivial and circular? The point is
not just that the only way to close the question at hand is to
render it trivial. If you believed (4) for that reason, you would
probably reject the purpose of open-question arguments
(or think that open-question arguments rendered substantive
conceptual analysis impossible). Instead, what is behind (4) is
the suspicion that every potential analysis of truth in partic-
ular will fail the open-question argument (as Moore thought
about goodness). Those that close the question afﬁrmatively
will do so only because truth is already built into the proposed
analysans, and those that do not already have truth built into
them will leave the question open.
Should we believe (4)? It is hard to see why, at least before
investigating each particular case. I see no special reason why
truth will always fail the open-question test. By contrast, one
might be suspicious of any naturalistic analysis of goodness,
and think that any proposed deﬁnition will fail the test because
of the recognition of the is/ought divide. According to this line
of thought, no naturalistic deﬁnition of goodness can bridge
the is/ought gap, and it is precisely that gap that enables the
open question to strike: no purely naturalistic matter travels
from how things are to how they ought to be, and so no purely
naturalistic matter can settle distinctly moral questions. Absent
some parallel observation for truth – and I am not sure what it
would be, and neither are any of the philosophers who have
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
178
www.ebook3000.com

considered the open question for truth – I see no reason to be
compelled by (4) independently of looking at the cases at hand.
Consider some cases of C that would close the question
afﬁrmatively. Suppose C is ‘would be believed by an omniscient
god.’ Anyone who understands truth and understands what an
omniscient god would believe can immediately see that the
relevant question is afﬁrmatively closed. Yes, something that
would be believed by an omniscient god would also have to be
true. But the problem with this deﬁnition is that the notion of
omniscience is tied up already with truth. Omniscience is knowl-
edge of everything there is to know, and knowledge requires
truth. Here we have a case that closes the question, but only by
importing the notion of truth. The advocate of (4) must think
that all other attempts to close the question must do so on pain
of falling victim to the same sort of circularity.
Consider now actual cases of theories of truth. Suppose C is
something like ‘useful to believe.’ Now consider the relevant
question: Is something’s being useful to believe enough to settle
the matter whether or not it is true? The answer here is ‘no.’
Something’s being useful to believe leaves open the question
whether it is true or not; perhaps it is, perhaps it is not. It is
entirely possible that a falsehood could be useful to believe. Such
cases happen all the time. Not only does something’s being
usefully believed not settle the question ‘Is it also true?,’ but it
is also completely compatible with its not being true at all.
Or consider the view that truth is warranted assertibility. No
one knows, no one ever knew, and no one will ever know
whether the number of hairs on Caesar’s left arm when he
was assassinated was even or odd. Neither view, it seems to
me, is warrantedly assertible. Does one of these claim’s not
being warrantedly assertible settle the question of whether or
not it is true? No. Not only does it not settle the question – it
could not settle the question. We have a case of two contrary
claims; it cannot be that they have the same truth-value.
Conceptual primitivism
179

But neither is warrantedly assertible. If not being warrantedly
assertible settled the question of whether something is true –
negatively, as the case would be – then both claims would be
false. That is impossible, and so warranted assertibility cannot
close the question on truth.
Suppose the advocate of warranted assertibility ﬁres back by
rejecting my claim that neither is warrantedly assertible. Sure,
we do not know which one is assertible, but one of them – at
least in principle – is. One of them we could be in a position to
assert, if only we had undergone the requisite inquiry some
time ago. The problem with this response, though, is how it
must go about explaining why one of the claims counts as
warrantedly assertible, but not the other. In fact, we know
the conditions under which each of them would end up being
the one that counts as assertible. ‘The number of hairs on
Caesar’s left arm when he was assassinated was odd’ is the
assertible one just in case, well, the number of hairs on Caesar’s
left arm when he was assassinated was odd. The other claim is
the assertible one just in case the number was even. But of
course, since the conditions where ‘p’ holds just are the con-
ditions where ‘It is true that p’ holds, we have managed to
identify the warrantedly assertible claim by means of picking
out the true one. In short, the attempt to rescue warranted
assertibility from leaving the question open fails because it
closes the question at the expense of circularity. The same
challenge exists for accounts that take truth to be some sort
of idealized assertibility. How can we specify ideal conditions
independently of truth in a way that will make the account
coextensive with truth? I fail to see how.6
Coherence accounts of truth also struggle with the open
question. Does something’s cohering with a particular (perhaps
ideal) set of beliefs settle the question of whether it is true? If it
6 Cf. Patterson (2010: 19).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
180
www.ebook3000.com

does not then the account fails; if it does, that would be quite
surprising. One would want the full details about how the view
understood coherence (and, possibly, how it was conceiving of
an ideally coherent system), such that the view settled the topic
of truth without clandestinely presupposing it.
Perhaps it might be thought that correspondence accounts
pass the open question’s test. Does something’s correspond-
ing with the facts settle its truth? Here, at least, I am inclined
to think that it does. But the fact that correspondence theo-
ries pass the test, if indeed it is a fact, does not establish the
truth of correspondence theories. For one thing, it remains to
be seen whether adequate accounts of correspondence and
facthood can be given independently of truth. If they can,
then (4) is false, and the open-question argument fails. If not,
then the question closes only because of a lurking circularity.
Further, the fact that it passes the test must be shown not to
turn on a triviality. Many authors think that the phrase
‘corresponds with the facts’ is really just a needlessly elabo-
rate way of saying ‘is true’ (e.g., Blackburn 1984: 227, which
refers to such phrases as being “Pentagon-type paraphrases,”
and Azzouni 2000: 130). If so, then saying that something
corresponds with the facts is just another way of saying that
something is true, and so the question is closed but trivial, in
accordance with (4). Correspondence theorists have a ﬁne
line to walk here; they must give accounts of correspondence
and facthood in such a way that will close the question, but
not give in to triviality or circularity. Still, they perhaps offer
the best challenge to (4).
One theory that does just ﬁne with the open question
is deﬂationism, though it does not really ﬁt the format of
the argument. Deﬂationists uphold the equivalence between
‘p’ and ‘It is true that p.’ So does settling on a truth value for ‘p’
determine a truth value for ‘It is true that p’? Absolutely.
According to deﬂationists, what it is for it to be true that
Conceptual primitivism
181

snow is white is for snow to be white, and snow’s being
white certainly does close the question of whether it is true
that snow is white.7 Of course, here we might have to concede
that “deﬁning” the truth of p in terms of p is trivial, and
thus deﬂationism does not provide us with an “informative”
deﬁnition in the manner of the traditional substantive
accounts. But of course, deﬂationists never intended to offer
any such deﬁnition. Hence, even if the open-question argument
is successful in its ambition, it cannot be used to refute deﬂa-
tionary theories of truth.
As it stands, the open-question argument relies on a very
strong premise, premise (4), and we have seen some reason to
doubt it. We have canvassed a number of potentially positive
instances supporting it, but they are not sufﬁcient to justify the
premise’s far more general ambitions. Absent some forthcom-
ing argument for (4), we cannot use the argument to defend the
indeﬁnability of truth in one fell swoop. Again, we would need
some independently motivated premise, analogous to the
thought that there is an is/ought gap, that suggested that
there was some principled reason for doubting the tenability
of any purported deﬁnition of truth.
Jody Azzouni comes close to offering an open-question
argument for truth, albeit in the service of deﬂationism
rather than primitivism (2000: 126–32). Azzouni begins with
Tarski’s adequacy condition on theories of truth, which main-
tains that any adequate account of truth must entail the instan-
ces of the schema
(T)
X is true if and only if p.
The ‘p’ is to be replaced by a sentence, and the ‘X’ by a name of
that sentence (Tarski 1944; 1956a). Because we can name
7 Cf. McGinn (2000: 107).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
182
www.ebook3000.com

sentences by encasing them within single quotation marks, (T)
can be formulated as
(T2)
‘p’ is true if and only if p,
which reveals that ‘is true’ is disquotational: from ‘“p” is true’
we may infer ‘p.’ Because truth is disquotational, any notion
deﬁnitional of truth must be disquotational. Furthermore, if
some notion C deﬁnes truth, then it is necessarily coextensive
with truth. And so the following schema would also have to
hold with necessity:
(C)
‘p’ is true if and only if ‘p’ is C.
But, Azzouni claims, all extant offerings for ‘C’ generate, via
schema (C), consequences that violate what Azzouni calls
“Putnam modals.” For example, suppose ‘C’ is ‘warrantedly
assertible.’ Then, necessarily, ‘The number of hairs on Caesar’s
left arm when he was assassinated was odd’ is true if and only
if ‘The number of hairs on Caesar’s left arm when he was
assassinated was odd’ is warrantedly assertible. But – and
here is the Putnam modal – that sentence might not have
been warrantedly assertible, even if it were true. Such modal
facts were behind my claims above to the effect that certain
claims could be assertible, useful, or coherent, and still fail to
be true. After considering a number of contenders, Azzouni
concludes that this point generalizes: “It seems any attempt to
augment, constrain, or deﬁne truth that intuitively goes
beyond the disquotational role of the truth-predicate fails
because of a Putnam modal” (2000: 129).
Perhaps the lesson we can draw from Azzouni’s discussion is
that truth’s disquotational nature can be the source analogous
to the is/ought divide that a true open-question argument
requires. Is there something about the disquotation schema
that reveals that it is inevitable that any purported deﬁnition
of truth will succumb to the open question? We would have
Conceptual primitivism
183

what we are searching for if any purported deﬁnition must
necessarily fail to be disquotational. In the ethics case, the
thought is that any naturalistic property just cannot perform
the functions that a normative property does. What we need to
say in the truth case is that any other notion just cannot be
disquotational. But I still see no conclusive argument for that
claim.8 We do have good inductive support for it. Nearly all
existing attempts to deﬁne truth appear to fail the disquotation
test. But as noted above, it is not clear that the correspondence
theory fails. Azzouni holds that the correspondence theory
avoids failing only at the expense of it being unclear what the
notion of correspondence actually adds to truth above and
beyond disquotation. Many others have shared this suspicion,9
myself included, but I do not have a non-question-begging
argument against correspondence theorists who disagree.
Hence, while it is certainly correct to observe that any
purported deﬁnition must itself be disquotational, I still do
not see an argument for the claim that every purported
deﬁnition must inevitably fail to be disquotational. Even if
such an argument were forthcoming, it would not be of much
help to primitivists. Azzouni aims to defend a deﬂationary
theory via his open-question-style argument, and deﬂationary
accounts of truth are not threatened by open-question consid-
erations. So even if a sound open-question argument could be
8 Azzouni suggests that our ever-changing epistemological practices explain why no
purported deﬁnition of truth will be disquotational: “the truth-idiom is supposed to
be open-ended as far as our truth-seeking practices are concerned. This property of
the predicate ‘true’ allows us to ask of any methods we have if they really are truth-
seeking methods” (2000: 132). I am not convinced that purported deﬁnitions of
truth are as intrinsically and intimately related to epistemology as Azzouni main-
tains. (The case is best made, of course, for epistemic theories.) So I do not see here a
sufﬁcient basis for arguing that all purported deﬁnitions are inevitably non-
disquotational.
9 See, e.g., Ramsey (1927: 158), Cousin (1950: 168), Blackburn (1984: 225), and
Quine (1990: 93). Cf. also Russell (1994: 493).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
184
www.ebook3000.com

produced, it would not tell the difference between primitivism
and deﬂationism. Here we see an important disanalogy
between the truth case and Moore’s original ethics case. In
the ethics case, the open-question argument, if successful,
points toward primitivism. In the truth case, the open-question
argument, if successful, points equally to deﬂationism and
primitivism. Even if open-question arguments can put pressure
on the traditional substantive accounts, they are of no help to
primitivists in arguing against deﬂationism.
6.1.3
Coextension arguments
In closing, it would be wise to distinguish open-question argu-
ments from closely related extensional challenges to a concept.
If some concept C is analyzed in terms of some further concept
D, then the two concepts have identical extensions; anything
that is C is also D, and vice versa. Furthermore, the two must
necessarily have identical extensions. If what it is to be C is for
it to be D, then something cannot be one but not the other.
Conceptual analyses are not mere contingent truths; the con-
nections between concepts hold regardless of what contingent
matters of fact exist. One way to refute a purported analysis of
C in terms of D is to demonstrate that the two concepts either
in fact have different extensions, or just that they could have
had different extensions. To argue in this way is simply to
indulge in good old-fashioned counterexampling, and not
necessarily to be deploying the open-question argument or its
cousin, the naturalistic fallacy. In Moore’s critique of pragma-
tism (1907–8), for example, he challenges both the actual and
necessary coextensionality of James’s pragmatic deﬁnitions of
truth with truth itself. He gives counterexamples of true beliefs
that aren’t veriﬁable, and false beliefs that are (or just might
have been) useful. Such counterexamples refute the claims that
truth is veriﬁability or utility. What Moore does not do is
Conceptual primitivism
185

evoke his open-question argument or naturalistic fallacy
(contra White 1957: 320, 323).
Putnam, too, along with his commentators, appears to
conﬂate the open-question/naturalistic fallacy argument with
ordinary coextensionality arguments.10 In order to argue
against the view that truth is warranted assertibility, Putnam
gives an example of a sentence (‘The rug is green’) and points
out that it might be warrantedly assertible even though the rug
is not green (1978: 108). Putnam then observes that his “argu-
ment has been described by Dummett as a sort of ‘naturalistic
fallacy’ argument” (1978: 108). So far as it goes, though, I see
Putnam only challenging the necessary coextension of truth
and warranted assertibility. A true open-question argument
would generalize, and argue that any purported analysis of
truth would fall victim to something like the naturalistic
fallacy.11 Brandom likewise succumbs to the conﬂation. In
describing the “naturalistic fallacy point” with respect to
the view (admittedly a non-starter) that equates ‘It is true
that p’ and ‘I claim that p,’ Brandom writes: “there is nothing
self-contradictory about the claim ‘It is possible that I claim
that p and it is not true that p’” (1988: 84). Indeed. But the
fact that it is possible that something can be C but not D shows
only that the two concepts are not necessarily coextensional.
This is just the standard and familiar way of objecting to a
purported analysis; it need not carry the additional baggage
associated with open questions and naturalistic fallacies.
10 See Rorty (1986: 334) and Davidson (1990a: 136).
11 Dummett, in his comments on Putnam, attributes this more general argument to
him (1979: 219–20), though I do not detect it in the original. It is entirely possible
that Putnam was clear – in person though not in print – that he thought his
observations regarding warranted assertibility generalized to any attempt to deﬁne
truth. Even if that is the case, neither Putnam nor any of his commentators who
attribute the view to him offer an argument for that strong claim of generalization.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
186
www.ebook3000.com

To be fair, there are important similarities between open-
question arguments and necessary coextension arguments. If C
and D are not necessarily coextensional, then it seems that
something’s being C has to leave open its being D, for it is
possible for something to be one but not the other (supposing
that C and D are not necessarily opposed, either). Hence,
implications for one style of argument have implications for
the other. Still, the true force behind Moore’s open-question
argument about goodness is that it tries to ﬁnd a deﬁciency in
any attempt to analyze goodness in natural terms. There seems
to be no parallel case to be made for theories of truth.
Challenging individual theories of truth by putting pressure
on the necessary coextension point is dialectically necessary,
and wholly familiar and ordinary: it amounts to the business of
ﬁnding counterexamples to purported analyses.
Coextension arguments against theories of truth have a rich
heritage. G. F. Stout (1907) and Bertrand Russell (1908; 1910b)
both argued against pragmatism by pointing out that, by the
pragmatists’ lights, it could be true that there were other minds –
since this belief could “work” for us or be most useful to us –
even if solipsism were true. In other words, according to
pragmatism (they charged), it could be true that there were
other minds even if there were not other minds. Hence, it is not
necessary that something satisfying the concept of working or
being useful also satisﬁes truth. Russell argued similarly against
coherence theories of truth (1906–7).12 He points out that
although the sentence ‘Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder’
is false,13 it might still end up ﬁtting inside the right kind of
coherent system, and thus qualify as true by the coherence
theorist’s lights. Given that Bishop Stubbs was not hanged for
12 See also Van Cleve (1996: 875).
13 For those not well versed in turn-of-the-century Oxonian history, William Stubbs,
Bishop of Oxford, died of illness in 1901.
Conceptual primitivism
187

murder, coherence theorists must show that the sentence cannot
after all ﬁt the coherentist’s criteria, and here Russell suspects
that they cannot do so without importing an antecedent and
“more usual meaning of truth and falsity” (1906–7: 33).
Russell’s charge, in effect, is that coherentists cannot get the
extension right on their account of truth without succumbing
to a vicious circularity.
The open-question argument – even assuming the validity of
its overall strategy – fails to establish primitivism. To do so, it
would have to be demonstrated that any attempt to deﬁne truth
would fail the open-question test, but I do not see an argument to
prove that point, at least not without rendering all of substantive
conceptual analysis impossible. But in appreciating the failure of
the open question’s global ambitions, we have seen the local
success of various coextension arguments. Those arguments by
themselves do not establish primitivism; at best they take out the
competition one by one, and help contribute to an overall argu-
ment by elimination (of the sort favored and advanced by
Patterson 2010). Seeing as how our focus is on positively defend-
ing primitivism, and not just arriving at it by elimination, let us
return now to some more arguments in its defense.
6.2
The foundationalist argument
There are two familiar reactions to primitivism in the literature
on the nature of truth. One camp (Horwich, Künne, Savery)
holds that primitivism is a view of last resort, something
we turn to only if all other options have failed. I argued against
this reaction in Section 3.3, as it seems to rest on the presuppo-
sition that primitivist views in philosophy are necessarily
mysterious. The other camp (Armstrong, Davidson, Schaffer)
maintains that primitivism about truth is quite pre-theoretically
plausible, if not the most pre-theoretically plausible view to hold
about truth. “Why then should we expect,” Davidson asks
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
188
www.ebook3000.com

rhetorically, “to be able to reduce these concepts [like truth]
deﬁnitionally to other concepts that are simpler, clearer, and
more basic?” (1996: 264; cf. 1990a: 135–6). Primitivism about
truth seems to be an obvious starting point for conceptual
analysis. If the goal of analysis is to deﬁne or understand certain
concepts in terms of more fundamental ones, then there must
be a set of foundational concepts, and truth seems as good a
candidate as any to serve such a role. In this section I defend this
latter viewpoint via a two-stage defense. The ﬁrst part seeks to
establish that there are conceptual primitives; the second part
then argues that truth is among them.
6.2.1
There are conceptual primitives
Suppose we can in fact deﬁne knowledge as justiﬁed true belief.
Here we have the concept knowledge being analyzed in terms
of the further concepts justification, truth, and belief.
Given that knowledge is being analyzed, it is not taken to be
a conceptual primitive. But what of the offered analysans?
Take justification. How are we to analyze it? It might itself
be a conceptual primitive. If it is not, though, then it also has an
analysis. That analysis in turn either depends upon knowl-
edge or it does not. If it does, then we run into a circle, which
has traditionally been taken to be problematic. If it does not,
then it must be analyzed in terms of some further concepts not
involving knowledge. Those concepts, by the same reasoning,
are either primitive, land in a circle, or are analyzed in terms of
still further concepts, of which we can ask the same set of
questions over again. What we cannot do is have this chain
go on forever, ad inﬁnitum, for such a regress would involve an
inﬁnity of concepts. Hence, any concept on the inﬁnite chain
would be composed by an inﬁnity of concepts. If we grasp a
concept by means of its components, then we would be unable
to comprehend any such concept, as our minds are ﬁnite. So it
Conceptual primitivism
189

is implausible that conceptual analyses will generate such a
regress. If circular analyses are also unacceptable, then there
remains one option: there are conceptual primitives.
We can now generalize the argument above, and present it
formally.
(1)
For any concept C, either C is primitive or C depends on some
other concept D for its analysis. [Excluded middle]
(2)
For any concept C, if C depends on some other concept D for its
analysis, then, if there are no primitive concepts, then either D
depends on C for its analysis, or on some further concept E,
which in turn either depends on C or D for its analysis, or on
some further concept F, and so on ad inﬁnitum. [From (1)]
(3)
There are no circularly analyzed concepts. [Premise]
(4)
For any concept C, if C depends on some other concept D for its
analysis, then, if there are no primitive concepts, then D
depends on some further concept E for its analysis, which in
turn depends on some further concept F for its analysis, and so
on ad inﬁnitum. [From (2) and (3)]
(5)
No chain of analyses can continue ad inﬁnitum. [Premise]
(6)
For any concept C, if C depends on some other concept D for its
analysis, then there are primitive concepts. [From (4) and (5)]
(7)
There are conceptual primitives. [From (1) and (6)]
The argument should be familiar from discussions of founda-
tionalism in epistemology, where a parallel argument aims to
establish that there are basic, self-justiﬁed beliefs (e.g., BonJour
1978). If analyses do not end in primitives, then they must loop
onto themselves or carry on indeﬁnitely. Premise (3) rules out
the ﬁrst option; premise (5) rules out the second.
Premise (3) is the ﬁrst substantive step of the argument. Its
truth does seem to be presupposed by most of those who
engage in conceptual analysis. Bumping into a circularity is
often taken to be fatal to an analysis. In the theory of truth,
there is a long tradition of rejecting circular accounts.14 Recall
14 But see Gupta and Belnap (1993).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
190
www.ebook3000.com

Russell’s charge that coherence theories of truth can succeed in
capturing the right extension of what is true only by bringing in
some prior notion of truth (1906–7: 33; cf. Russell 1912: 123).
Tarski made it adamantly clear that since he aimed to deﬁne
truth in terms of satisfaction, he could not in turn deﬁne
satisfaction in terms of truth (1944: 353). More recently,
Horwich concedes that using substitutional quantiﬁcation to
deﬁne the deﬂationary conception of truth would result in a
circularity, and so he offers an inﬁnitary deﬁnition instead
(1990: 27). The prohibition on circularity seems to rely on a
prior conception of how we go about understanding concepts.
We understand what it is for something to fall under a concept
by understanding what its components are. But if those further
concepts end up depending on the original for their under-
standing, then we are left with an impenetrable closed circle
of understanding. We can never break into this circle unless we
already have a grasp on something within it. If we do in fact
understand these concepts, that would seem to prove, prob-
lematically, that we have innate knowledge of them, since there
is no way of acquiring any independent grasp of them.
Premise (5) is the second substantive step of the argument. If
some concept is deﬁned by some further concept, and that
concept by a still further one, and so on ad inﬁnitum, we
launch an inﬁnite regress. Here the regress is one of conceptual
composition. A is composed of B, which is composed of C,
which is composed of D, and so on. Any concept on the chain is
of inﬁnite composition. Assuming that we comprehend con-
cepts by understanding their components, we cannot compre-
hend any of the concepts that form the inﬁnite chain.
How might the networker of Section 1.2.3 respond to
our present argument? The networker rejects the claim that
successful analyses cannot result in conceptual circles. The
networker thinks that there are no non-circularly deﬁned prim-
itives, and so will ﬁnd the argument to be unsound (assuming
Conceptual primitivism
191

that the conclusion is taken to imply that there are concepts
that do not depend on any other concepts). But recall
that networkers need not think that all concepts are equally
fundamental. There may be a number of conceptual circles, but
some circles may be more fundamental than others. Hence,
networkers might try to rework the argument in a way con-
sistent with their metaphilosophical approach to analysis.
To get started, we can take a cue from Strawson himself,
who argues that one way of distinguishing the fundamental
circles from the derivative circles is as follows: “the ability to
operate with one set of concepts may presuppose the ability to
operate with another set, and not vice versa” (1992: 21).
Suppose some concept C is elucidated by means of the circle
generated by A, B, and C: these three concepts are elucidated in
terms of each other. Compare this set with other similar circles.
The ability to operate set {A, B, C} either presupposes the
ability to operate with some other set, or it does not. If it
does not, then {A, B, C} is a fundamental set of concepts. If
it does, then it depends upon some other set S. S, in turn, either
requires some further set, or is itself fundamental. If it requires
some further set, that set cannot be {A, B, C}, because then we
would not have two sets depending on each other, but just one
set identical to the union of the two. In other words, if S is, say,
the set {X, Y, Z}, then what we have here is a case where {A, B,
C, X, Y, Z} is one of the fundamental circles. So if S depends on
some further set, then we can ask of that set whether it is
fundamental or derivative. What we cannot do, as above, is
launch a regress. What we can do, though, is conclude that
there are some fundamental sets of concepts. So the founda-
tionalist argument can be rehashed in networking terms, where
the foundations turn out not to be individual concepts, but sets
of interdeﬁnable concepts.
Since all analyses must end in either primitives, circles, or
regresses, and the argument as presented rules out both circles
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
192
www.ebook3000.com

and regresses, the argument concludes that there are primitive
concepts. In fact, it proves much more: it shows that all analyses
end in primitives. If all we really want to show is that there are at
least some primitives, we can soften the argument considerably.
Instead of premises (3) and (5), we could adopt the weaker claims
that not all analyses end in either circles or regresses. There being
primitive concepts is consistent with there being some circular
analyses, or some regresses. (The case for the former strikes me as
far more plausible than the case for the latter.)
What is quite strange about the business of analyzing con-
cepts in philosophy is that, even for those who take conceptual
analysis seriously, the thought of taking some notion as prim-
itive is perceived as being a kind of failure, a “giving up” of the
traditional ambitions of analysis. (I presume that some such
suspicion must be behind Horwich’s (1990: 10) and Künne’s
(2003: 18) shared view that we should consider taking truth as
primitive only if all else fails.) This perspective seems to be
forgetting that there have to be at least some conceptual prim-
itives. Anyone who takes conceptual analysis seriously must
recognize that, unless all analyses end in circularity or regress,
there must be conceptual primitives. Primitives are just as
much a part of conceptual analysis as the non-primitives;
you cannot have the latter without the former.15 Perhaps the
moniker obscures the point. If we spoke of primitive concepts
as being “foundational” or “fundamental” concepts instead,
perhaps they would be more popular. Foundationalists in
epistemology commit to the existence of foundational beliefs
that confer justiﬁcation onto the rest of our beliefs (without
themselves needing to be justiﬁed by other beliefs); atomists in
metaphysics commit to the existence of foundational existents
out of which everything else is composed. So too we should
15 Cf. Moore (1903: 10): “That there must be an indeﬁnite number of such [indeﬁnable]
terms is obvious, on reﬂection.”
Conceptual primitivism
193

recognize that there are foundational concepts as well, the
ones – to borrow Davidson’s apt phrase yet again – without
which we would have no concepts at all (1996: 264).
So even if there are some circles or regresses, I think we can
safely conclude that not all analyses end in circularities or
regresses. If so, there are primitive concepts. And even if all
analyses do end in circularities (as on the networker’s preferred
methodology), then we can resuscitate the thesis in terms of
there being foundational sets of concepts. With this ﬁrst claim
about the existence of primitives established, we can move on
to the second part of the argument that shows that truth
resides among their number.16
6.2.2
truth is conceptually primitive
Many philosophers are sympathetic to the idea that truth
is a fundamental concept. David Armstrong writes that
“A fundamental concept such as truth is likely to be so
entwined with other fundamental notions that no total expli-
cation of it in terms of other concepts is possible” (2004: 17).
E. J. Lowe writes that “truth itself, I believe, is too fundamental
a notion to admit of non-circular deﬁnition” (2007: 259;
2009: 215). Jonathan Schaffer has also noted his sympathy
with the view (2008: 309). Here we have three contemporary
16 Of course, to say that some concepts are primitive (or foundational, or atomistic) is
not to say that all or most concepts are primitive, foundational, or atomistic. So
primitivism is not committed to Jerry Fodor’s “concept atomism,” according to
which most of our concepts evade deﬁnition or decomposition (1975; 1981). If
most concepts are primitive, as on the Fodorian view, then primitivism about
truth might appear to be a less interesting view. Perhaps so, but only if the
Fodorian does not have the resources to distinguish between more or less funda-
mental concepts, or more or less philosophically interesting concepts. Such distinc-
tions will not be drawn in terms of being primitive or not, but it does not follow that
there are not other resources available. Recall from Section 1.2.3 that after
Strawson rejects the existence of conceptual atoms, he goes on to show how to
account for some concepts being more fundamental than others.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
194
www.ebook3000.com

metaphysicians expressing the idea that truth is such a funda-
mental notion that its analysis into still more fundamental
notions is unlikely. The mere plausibility of the idea may be
enough to convince some, but it will be worthwhile to put
together an argument for why truth is a likely candidate for
fundamentality.
What should we expect from our primitive concepts? There
are a number of things that we might say about them. As before,
we might say that our primitive concepts are those without
which we would not have any others. That is to say, we need
primitive concepts in order to have other, derivative concepts.
We might put the point by saying – in a bit of a Kantian vein –
that primitive concepts are those that are necessary for the
possibility of a rich, cognitive life. Primitive concepts are those
that are more or less necessary for having any conceptual life at
all. Concepts like love, friendship, politics, and religion
may all play an important and meaningful role in our lives, but
we could have done without them. They are not necessary
preconditions for being able to conceptualize our experience.
By contrast, hearkening back to our discussion of omnipresence
in Section 5.2, truth may well be one of those concepts that we
need in order to deploy any others. Making any judgment or
assertion whatsoever seems to be a judgment or assertion that it
is true that such-and-such. If judging that p just is judging that it
is true that p, then truth is implicated every time we make a
judgment. As a result, it seems that truth is among the concepts
that we must have if we are to have any semblance of a cognitive
life. It is a contingent fact that we have ended up with concepts of
color, music, ﬂuorescent light, and postmodernism. We might
not have developed those concepts, had things turned out differ-
ently. But we had to have a concept of truth, for to grasp any
thought whatsoever just is to grasp the truth of that matter.17
17 This perspective is shared by Davidson. See, e.g., Davidson (1999; 2005: 155).
Conceptual primitivism
195

Primitive concepts are also distinguished by their generality,
similar to how logical concepts are often characterized in terms
of their “topic neutrality” (e.g., Ryle 1954: 115). truth is not
the province of some particular domain of thought, as right-
ness belongs to morality and deity to religion. Truth is rele-
vant to every domain of thought. Notions like truth (and
alongside it knowledge, identity, existence, change, etc.) are
of great philosophical interest, in part because their range is in
no way restricted. If philosophy is interested in the most fun-
damental notions, those whose application can be found in any
area of our cognitive lives, then we should suspect that many
of the notions philosophers spend their lives studying belong
to the primitivist camp. (It is perhaps ironic, then, that the
concepts that most interest philosophers may well be the least
amenable to analysis.)18
I submit that the case for truth being primitive is quite
plausible. The ﬁrst argument in this section shows that there
are primitives. The second part of the section identiﬁes where
the primitives lurk. Where we look to ﬁnd primitives is among
our most familiar and general concepts, the ones that seem to
be presupposed by many of our other concepts. We look to see
which concepts enable us to have other concepts, but not vice
versa. We also look to see which of our concepts are the most
general, and ﬁnd the most frequent application across our
thinking. Given these various marks of fundamentality,
truth is a perfect candidate for primitivism. Chapter 8 inves-
tigates a number of the connections between truth and other
notions (as do the subsequent sections of this chapter), and
thus further buttresses my claim here that truth, precisely
because of its central role in so many of our concepts, is a likely
candidate for fundamentality.
18 Cf. Davidson (1996: 264).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
196
www.ebook3000.com

6.3
The argument from logical apparatus
The omnipresence argument of Section 5.2 purports to show
that, given the very nature of judgment, every single judgment
presupposes the concept of truth. The argument of the present
section proceeds similarly, but now exploits the connection
between truth and the particular pieces of logical apparatus
at work in any judgment. First I consider some arguments for
the conclusion that the quantiﬁers presuppose truth, and then
some arguments for the conclusion that the connectives
presuppose truth.
6.3.1
Quantiﬁers
In the literature on deﬂationism, there is a familiar point often
made concerning the truth schema and substitutional quanti-
ﬁcation.19 For deﬂationists, the primary content of the theory
of truth is given by the truth schema, here in its propositional
version:
(T3)
The proposition that p is true if and only if p.
If we were to turn (T3) into a proper sentence, we would have
to employ quantiﬁcation. But the quantiﬁcation in this case
cannot be ordinary objectual quantiﬁcation, that is, quantiﬁ-
cation over objects (including, in particular, sentences). For the
variable ‘p’ in the ﬁrst instance helps to form a ‘that’ clause,
and in the second instance must be a complete sentence as it
forms the right-hand side of a biconditional. So we cannot
substitute ‘p’ with names for objects, as we would have to if
we employed objectual quantiﬁcation. If we did, then instances
of the truth schema would look like this:
19 See, e.g., Horwich (1990: 26–31), David (1994: 78–93), Hill (2002), and Künne
(2003: 356–60).
Conceptual primitivism
197

(1)
The proposition that ‘2 is prime’ is true if and only if ‘2 is prime.’
Both sides of this biconditional are nonsense. What we need
instead are, in effect, used sentences rather than mentioned
sentences. What we need are instances like the following:
(2)
The proposition that 2 is prime is true if and only if 2 is prime.
What (2) does is substitute the variable with a sentential
expression, and not the name for an actual sentence.
Consequently, what is required is substitutional quantiﬁcation
instead of objectual quantiﬁcation. Substitutional quantiﬁers
range over a domain of relevant expressions instead of objects.
Equipped with substitutional quantiﬁcation, we can give a
statement of the truth schema:
(3)
For any expression from the relevant substitution class p, the
proposition that p is true if and only if p.
(3) is true, but we cannot use it for giving a deﬁnition of
truth. This is because the standard semantics given for the
substitutional quantiﬁers are already given in terms of truth.
As Horwich notes: “the notion of substitutional quantiﬁcation
is trivially interdeﬁnable with that of truth and itself requires
theoretical elucidation” (1990: 27; see also Kripke 1976).
Hence, taking the substitutionally quantiﬁed statement of the
truth schema to offer a deﬁnition of truth results in circularity.
The typical presentation of the semantics of the substitutional
quantiﬁers is as follows (see, e.g., David 1994: 86):
(4)
A particularly substitutionally quantiﬁed sentence ‘Σx(. . .x. . .)’
is true if and only if there is an expression (from the relevant
substitution class) such that substituting it for ‘x’ in ‘. . .x. . .’
yields a true sentence. A universally substitutionally quantiﬁed
sentence ‘Πx(. . .x. . .)’ is true if and only if every expression
(from the relevant substitution class) is such that substituting
it for ‘x’ in ‘. . .x. . .’ yields a true sentence.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
198
www.ebook3000.com

Employing substitutional quantiﬁcation to deﬁne truth leaves
us with an explicitly circular deﬁnition of truth.20
There is a second source of circularity lurking in the notion of
substitutional quantiﬁcation that deserves mention. The substi-
tutional quantiﬁers range over expressions like ‘Snow is white,’
‘Grass is green,’ and ‘2 is prime.’ The expressions substituted into
(3) are such that they produce well-formed sentences. What the
quantiﬁers do not range over are sub-sentential expressions like
‘grass,’ ‘snow,’ and ‘2.’ Furthermore, not only do we need
to distinguish sentential from sub-sentential expressions, we
also need to distinguish declarative sentential expressions from
non-declarative sentential expressions. What is substituted into
(3) cannot be interrogatives or imperatives, for example. ‘The
proposition that go to bed is true if and only if go to bed’ is
nonsense. In order to specify the relevant substitution class, some
notion of a declarative sentence must be at work. There must be
some way of drawing the distinction between ‘Snow is white’
and ‘Grass is green’ on the one hand and ‘snow,’ ‘grass,’ ‘Go to
bed,’ and ‘Is it time for dinner?’ on the other. The former, but not
the latter, we might say, express a complete thought (or can be
used to assert a complete thought). What is it to express a
thought? Is it not to express something that is truth-evaluable?
So one natural way of specifying the distinction between declar-
ative sentential expressions and the others is in terms of truth.
(I return to this argument in Section 8.3.) If we avail ourselves of
this method, then we cannot in turn use it to deﬁne truth by
means of substitutional quantiﬁcation and its essential use of the
class of sentential expressions, on pain yet again of circularity.21
20 But see Azzouni (2005; 2006) for dissent.
21 What we cannot do (at least without the proper heroics) is deﬁne the relevant set of
sentences syntactically. For ordinary syntactical rules allow us to form nonsense
(‘Flying green ideas dine on metaphysical necessity’) and performatives (‘I now
pronounce you husband and husband’), neither of which belong in the truth
schema.
Conceptual primitivism
199

The point of this little foray into substitutional quantiﬁca-
tion is to show that sentence (3), which otherwise might have
been an attractive statement of the nature of truth (especially
for deﬂationists) because it gives the conditions under which
every potential truth-bearer is true without having truth
show up explicitly on its right-hand side, is contaminated by
the notion of truth creeping into the logical apparatus of the
statement. Deﬁning truth by means of (3) fails, for its use of
substitutional quantiﬁcation renders the proposed deﬁnition
circular. Perhaps we can generalize this argument, and wield it
in favor of the primitivist thesis that truth is not deﬁnable at all.
To do so, we would have to argue for the view that other pieces
of logical apparatus, just like substitutional quantiﬁcation, are
likewise infected by truth. If so, then any purported deﬁnition
of truth that uses them will be circular.
If the foregoing is correct, then any proposed deﬁnition of
truth that employs substitutional quantiﬁcation is circular, and
so inadequate. Can we say the same of objectual quantiﬁca-
tion? To ﬁnd out, we need to consider the semantics for the
objectual quantiﬁers. One approach is metalinguistic, just as
above with substitutional quantiﬁcation, and has been adop-
ted by quite a number of logic texts.22 Universal sentences are
true just in case each of their instances is true; existential
sentences are true just in case at least one of its instances is
true. More formally:
(5)
For any sentence of the form ‘∀xφ,’ where ‘φ’ is a well-formed
formula, ‘∀xφ’ is true if and only if every substitution for ‘x’ in
‘φ’ results in a true sentence. For any sentence of the form ‘∃xφ,’
where ‘φ’ is a well-formed formula, ‘∃xφ’ is true if and only if at
least one substitution for ‘x’ in ‘φ’ results in a true sentence.
22 See, e.g., Resnik (1970: 189, 195), Mates (1972: 60–3), Bessie and Glennan
(2000: 230), and Copi and Cohen (2005: 405).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
200
www.ebook3000.com

For example, the sentence ‘∀xFrog(x)’ is true if and only if
‘Frog(a)’ is true, ‘Frog(b)’ is true, and so on. The sentence
‘∃xFrog(x)’ is true if and only if ‘Frog(a)’ is true, or ‘Frog(b)’
is true, and so forth. Accordingly, we have here deﬁned the
semantics for objectual quantiﬁcation in terms of truth.
However, it seems that we are able to dispense with this
reference to truth in standard deﬂationist fashion. To say that
every instance of ‘∀xFrog(x)’ is true is just to say that Frog(a)
and Frog(b) and Frog(c), and so forth. To say that at least one
instance of ‘∃xFrog(x)’ is true is to say that Frog(a), or Frog(b),
or Frog(c), and so forth (cf. Haack 1978: 42). Hence, it is not
obvious that deﬁning the objectual quantiﬁers in this way ends
up blatantly presupposing the notion of truth. However, it
does remain to be seen whether these lists of instantiations –
and the attending notion of a well-formed formula – can be
procured without resorting again to the notion of truth
(see Section 8.3 below). Furthermore, we might hope for a
ﬁnite deﬁnition that need not resort to an inﬁnite list.
So now consider some other ways that have been used to
deﬁne the quantiﬁers. These involve deﬁning the quantiﬁers in
terms of satisfaction. Say that some object ‘a’ satisﬁes the
predicate ‘F(x)’ if and only if F(a). For example, Albert satisﬁes
‘is a frog’ if and only if Albert is a frog. So we might deﬁne
the quantiﬁers accordingly, in terms of satisfaction (see, e.g.,
David 1994: 81; Barwise and Etchemendy 2007: 236):
(6)
For any sentence of the form ‘∀xφ,’ where ‘φ’ is a well-formed
formula, ‘∀xφ’ is true if and only if every substitution for ‘x’
satisﬁes ‘φ.’ For any sentence of the form ‘∃xφ,’ where ‘φ’ is a
well-formed formula, ‘∃xφ’ is true if and only if at least one
substitution for ‘x’ satisﬁes ‘φ.’
Unlike (5), (6) makes no explicit mention of truth in its right-
hand sides. Instead it puts all the weight on the concept of
satisfaction. For (6) to offer a truth-free deﬁnition of objectual
Conceptual primitivism
201

quantiﬁcation, satisfaction must be able to be accounted for
independently of truth. Hence, we cannot deﬁne satisfaction as
follows: some object a satisﬁes the formula ‘φ’ if and only if
replacing each free variable in ‘φ’ with a name for a results in a
true sentence. Nor can we deﬁne satisfaction in any way that
relies on objectual quantiﬁcation, since we are already trying to
use the former to deﬁne the latter.
Instead (and in order to accommodate languages with a
potentially inﬁnite number of sentences), satisfaction needs to
be deﬁned recursively, as Tarski in fact deﬁned it:
To obtain a deﬁnition of satisfaction we have rather to apply again
a recursive procedure. We indicate which objects satisfy the sim-
plest sentential functions; and then we state the conditions under
which given objects satisfy a compound function – assuming that
we know which objects satisfy the simpler functions from which the
compound one has been constructed. Thus, for instance, we say
that given numbers satisfy the logical disjunction “x is greater than
y or x is equal to y” if they satisfy at least one of the functions “x is
greater than y” or “x is equal to y.”
(Tarski 1944: 353)
To accomplish the recursive deﬁnition, one needs to specify the
base cases and build from there. The way Tarski goes about
doing this is, in effect, to produce a giant list that incorporates
all the names and predicates of a language: a satisﬁes F if and
only if a is F, and b satisﬁes F if and only if b is F, and c satisﬁes
G if and only if c is G, and so on.23
The problem with such lists is that they can be used to deﬁne
satisfaction only relative to a language, and only for languages
that are truth-functional and formally characterizable. If satis-
faction is deﬁned in terms of such language-speciﬁc lists, then
satisfaction-in-L1 is deﬁned in terms of the list incorporating the
23 The details of Tarski’s theory (and its overall relationship to primitivism) are
tackled in Chapter 7.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
202
www.ebook3000.com

names and predicates of L1, and satisfaction-in-L2 is deﬁned in
terms of the list incorporating the names and predicates of L2.
But the two notions share no common core. And so we can
never arrive at any general notion of satisfaction. As Davidson
puts the point: “by employing a ﬁnite and exhaustive list of
basic cases in the course of deﬁning satisfaction (in terms of
which truth is deﬁned), [Tarski] necessarily failed to specify how
to go on to further cases” (1990b: 287). Lacking the ability to
“go on” makes it impossible to say, in general, what satisfaction
is. Hence, Tarski admits that he can only deﬁne what truth is for
a speciﬁc language (and only then for speciﬁc kinds of lan-
guages), and not what the common notion is that all languages
employ. Furthermore, since our ordinary, natural languages
(and hence our ordinary language quantiﬁers) are not formally
speciﬁable in the way that Tarski’s method demands (natural
languages are not truth-functional), it appears that we cannot
even use his method for deﬁning satisfaction with regards to the
sentential functions of English.
Consequently, if we want to deﬁne the objectual quantiﬁers
by way of satisfaction, it looks as though we have to accept
satisfaction as a primitive notion, or as being deﬁned in terms
of truth. What is not available is Tarski’s recursive method. It
does not apply to the natural languages we are most funda-
mentally interested in, and even if it did, it would not capture
what the most general notion of satisfaction is −the notion
that lies behind the various satisfaction relations found in
various languages. What all this means for primitivism is that
deﬁnitions of truth face a dilemma, should those deﬁnitions
involve objectual quantiﬁcation deﬁned by way of satisfaction.
If quantiﬁcation is spelled out in terms of satisfaction, which
in turn is spelled out in terms of truth, then the deﬁnition
is encumbered with circularity. If quantiﬁcation is instead
spelled out in terms of a primitive notion of satisfaction, then
a problem of motivation arises. Why assume that satisfaction is
Conceptual primitivism
203

a better primitive than truth? As Davidson points out: “Which
of the two semantic concepts, satisfaction or truth, we take as
basic is, from a formal point of view, open to choice. Truth, as
Tarski showed, is easily deﬁned on the basis of satisfaction;
but, alternatively, satisfaction can be taken to be whatever
relation yields a correct account of truth” (1990b: 299, empha-
sis added). Formally speaking (but only formally speaking), the
choice between primitives here does not matter. The deﬁnitions
offered by the differing accounts would be equally adequate.
So we could just take satisfaction as primitive instead of truth.
But it is only when we are speaking of form that the choice does
not matter; the choice does matter when we ask about which
of the notions is in fact more fundamental. The question of
which notion is in fact conceptually and explanatorily basic is a
further question, one left unsettled by the “formal” consider-
ations to which Davidson is referring. To settle the issue as
to which is the better choice of primitive, we have to consider
which choice is more pre-theoretically plausible as a concep-
tual primitive, and which choice produces more theoretically
fruitful results.
I happen to think that truth is the more natural choice
for a conceptual primitive than is satisfaction. The latter
comes to the fore when dealing with the difﬁcult questions of
the philosophies of logic and language, but is not nearly as
crucial and central to our cognitive lives as is truth. It is arguable
that lots of people do not even have the concept of satisfaction,
and for many it takes some wrestling with Tarski to acquire it.
Everyone has a concept of truth; if everyone also has a concept
of satisfaction, certainly most are unaware of that fact.
Satisfaction is a relation between objects and sentential func-
tions. As such, it is unsuited to be a more fundamental concept
than truth. Satisfaction as a concept is relevant only for those
who make use of sentences with complex subject−predicate
structure. If thought can take place independently of possessing
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
204
www.ebook3000.com

such languages, and engaging in thought requires truth
(as I argued in Section 5.2.4), then truth is more fundamental
than satisfaction. It seems to me that the natural gloss on
satisfaction captures this priority relation. Objects satisfy the
sentential functions they do because this results in truth. On the
reverse view, we have to maintain that our concept of truth is
somehow derivative of a notion that relates objects to sentential
expressions.24
In general, the question as to which choice of conceptual
primitives is preferable is a complicated one, and one that can
be decided only by attending to the various theoretical fruits
that fall from the different choices. As for the speciﬁc theoret-
ical virtues of taking truth rather than satisfaction as primitive,
one has to take into account the entirety of the current project.
Chapter 8 speciﬁcally takes on the issue of what theoretical
work we can accomplish with a primitive conception of truth.
As it turns out, we can do a lot. Precisely because of truth’s
ubiquity – its tendency to show up all over the place in our
thought – taking it as a primitive is quite useful, as we can then
put it to work in understanding the nature of belief,
24 A further reason to take truth but not satisfaction to be primitive is that there appears
to be no omnipresence argument for the latter. (My thanks go to Nic Damnjanovic
for suggesting that there might be such an argument.) First, I have been understanding
satisfaction as a sentential notion, in which case omnipresence (a claim about
thoughts or propositions) would not apply. But suppose that the appeal to sentences
is dispensable. Second, there is no “satisfaction schema” parallel to the truth schema.
The truth schema reveals that for any thought p, there is an identical truth-involving
thought it is true that p. But because there is no parallel schema for satisfaction, not
every thought can be reconﬁgured as a thought “about” satisfaction. Even if that
Socrates is a philosopher were identical to that Socrates satisﬁes PHILOSOPHER,
how is one to construe that Socrates believed it likely that Homer, if he existed, mostly
wrote poems that, necessarily, are true, at least depending on the possibility that
Socrates himself knows this to be true? Satisfaction is a natural enough notion for
simple predications; not so for the genuine complexities of natural thought. Finally, it
is doubtful that that Socrates is a philosopher is identical to that Socrates satisﬁes
PHILOSOPHER. For one thing, the latter but not the former appears to be onto-
logically committed to concepts.
Conceptual primitivism
205

justiﬁcation, assertion, meaning, and others. It is not obvious
that the same can be said for satisfaction.
Even if we do take satisfaction to be a conceptual primitive,
it remains to be seen whether (6) still offers a truth-free account
of objectual quantiﬁcation. For it requires the notion of a well-
formed formula. Like the class of sentential expressions
required for understanding substitutional quantiﬁcation, the
class of well-formed formulas needs to be speciﬁed independ-
ently of the concept of truth. But what is a well-formed
formula? ‘x is a frog’ ﬁts the bill, but ‘x’ does not. Why not?
The former, but not the latter, produces a declarative sentence
when its variable is replaced by a name. And why is ‘Albert is a
frog’ but not ‘Albert’ a sentence? As before, sentences are
things that communicate full thoughts, or, in other words,
something that can be true. Again, the defender of truth-free
objectual quantiﬁcation has some explaining to do, and we
shall take up the question again in Section 8.3. Note that purely
syntactic approaches will only go so far in helping to deﬁne
well-formed formulas. For we are ultimately interested in
understanding quantiﬁed expressions for natural languages,
not formal ones, and so we lack the ability to simply stipulate
what counts as a well-formed formula, as we can do when
deﬁning formal logical languages.
6.3.2
Connectives
So much for the quantiﬁers. Perhaps truth can be found deeper
still. Consider the standard logical connectives: ‘and,’ ‘or,’ ‘if,’
‘only if,’ and ‘it is not the case that.’ At least some of the
connectives will make their way into any purported analysis
of truth – deﬂationary analyses included – since any analysis
will be giving the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for some-
thing to be true, and will thus be making use of ‘if,’ ‘only if,’
and ‘and’ all at once. If the logical connectives are themselves
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
206
www.ebook3000.com

deﬁned in terms of truth, then we cannot use them to deﬁne
truth, on pain of circularity. If the very tools of deﬁnition
presuppose truth, then truth cannot be non-circularly deﬁned.
Tarski brings up this very argument himself, and appears to
grant its validity:
In formulating the deﬁnition we use necessarily sentential connec-
tives, i.e., expressions like ‘if. . ., then,’ ‘or,’ etc. They occur in the
deﬁniens; and one of them, namely, the phrase ‘if, and only if ’ is
usually employed to combine the deﬁniendum with the deﬁniens.
However, it is well known that the meaning of sentential connec-
tives is explained in logic with the help of the words ‘true’ and
‘false’; for instance, we say that an equivalence, i.e., a sentence of
the form ‘p if, and only if, q,’ is true if either both of its members,
i.e., the sentences represented by ‘p’ and ‘q,’ are true or both are
false. Hence the deﬁnition of truth involves a vicious circle. If this
objection were valid, no formally correct deﬁnition of truth would
be possible; for we are unable to formulate any compound sen-
tence without using sentential connectives, or other logical terms
deﬁned with their help.
(Tarski 1944: 356)
To respond to the argument, Tarski does not question its
validity, but rather attacks its premise that the connectives
are deﬁned in terms of truth and falsity. Such deﬁnitions are
not necessary, he claims, for we might take the connectives as
simply being undeﬁned. We might. But in that case our ques-
tion becomes: which theory – the one that takes truth as
primitive, or the one that takes the logical connectives as
primitive – produces the most desirable theoretical results?
The hypothesis of this work is that taking truth to be prim-
itive is not some consequence to be avoided (as seems to be
implied by Tarski’s quick dismissal of this argument), but one
that turns out to be theoretically useful and quite compelling.
As with quantiﬁcation, presupposing the notion of truth
affords us a straightforward way of accounting for the
Conceptual primitivism
207

connectives; it is this idea to which Tarski refers before
dismissing it. After all, the connectives in question are the
“truth-functional” connectives. We might, for instance, deﬁne
the connectives via their truth tables. Truth tables show how
truth-functional compounds can be deﬁned in terms of their
components. Take ‘and.’ A conjunctive sentence ‘p and q’ is
true if and only if ‘p’ is true and ‘q’ is true. In other words, a
conjunction is true just in case both of its conjuncts are true.
Similar and familiar remarks can be made for all the other
truth-functional connectives. If we allow ourselves the freedom
to deﬁne the connectives in terms of truth, we have another
way of seeing how truth spreads itself throughout the great
web of thought.
Others have thought that the connectives are not to be
deﬁned in terms of their truth tables, but rather in terms
of their inferential role, by way of their introduction and
elimination rules. Arthur Prior offers a helpful statement of
this view:
For if we are asked what is the meaning of the word ‘and,’ at least
in the purely conjunctive sense (as opposed to, e.g., its colloquial
use to mean ‘and then’), the answer is said to be completely given
by saying that (i) from any pair of statements P and Q we can infer
the statement formed by joining P to Q by ‘and’ (which statement
we hereafter describe as ‘the statement P-and-Q’), that (ii) from
any conjunctive statement P-and-Q we can infer P, and (iii) from
P-and-Q we can always infer Q. Anyone who has learnt to per-
form these inferences knows the meaning of ‘and,’ for there is
simply nothing more to knowing the meaning of ‘and’ than being
able to perform these inferences.
(Prior 1960: 38)
Prior actually rejects this inferentialist view of the meaning of
the logical connectives. He takes himself to have reduced it to
absurdity by introducing the infamous connective ‘tonk,’
which allows us to infer anything from anything by means of
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
208
www.ebook3000.com

its introduction and elimination rules. Commentators such as
J. T. Stevenson responded to Prior by pointing out that infer-
ences employing ‘tonk’ are not automatically justiﬁed, even if
‘tonk’ is constituted by its introduction and elimination rules
(Stevenson 1961). To justify the inference we need to rely on a
prior conception of a sound inference, which we can use to
determine whether a connective’s constitutive inferences are
valid or not. One way to do that is to rely on a connective’s
truth table, as above. (Stevenson does not think that we can
generate an adequate truth table for ‘tonk.’)
Suppose that the tonk problem can be avoided, and that we
can maintain the inferentialist reading of the connectives.25
Now the connectives are deﬁned in terms of inference. And
what is it to make an inference? Here we face an important
and difﬁcult philosophical question, but notice that there is a
natural answer, if only a ﬁrst pass: to infer q from p is to take
p’s being true to guarantee q’s being true. To draw an inference
is to move from (purported) truth to (purported) truth. Valid
inference rules are truth-preserving. Invalid inference rules
need not preserve truth. Here we see that an easy way to
answer the question of the nature of some notion is to employ
truth. Helping ourselves to such an analysis disenables us from
using that notion to deﬁne truth, but that is no worry at all for
the primitivist who thinks all such attempts at deﬁnition are
futile anyhow. Hence the attempt to deﬁne the logical connec-
tives by their inferential role rather than their truth tables may
also end up presupposing truth by way of employing the
notion of inference, which itself may presuppose truth.26
Now, perhaps we are not absolutely compelled to deﬁne
inference in terms of truth. Perhaps one might take the notion
of an inference to be a primitive. One wonders, though, how
inference ended up being a more fundamental notion than
25 See, e.g., Belnap (1962).
26 Cf. Gupta (1993a: 74).
Conceptual primitivism
209

truth. Just imagine what it would be to have a concept of
inference without also having a concept of truth. One moves
from p to q, but without any appreciation that this move has
implications for reality, and which bits of it depend on which
other bits. This view would also have to show what the theo-
retical beneﬁts are of taking inference rather than truth as a
primitive. Or perhaps there is some other non-primitivist way
of characterizing the nature of inference without appealing to
truth. Perhaps there is, but what is the motivation for seeking it
out? Taking truth as primitive allows us to give an account of
what it is to draw an inference. We need primitives at some
point, and here we have yet another payoff of taking truth as a
central primitive. Why be suspicious about taking truth as a
primitive? Given the historical distrust of the notion of truth,
due to its supposed metaphysical baggage, such suspicion of
truth was perhaps warranted. But philosophical progress has
been made over the last century; we can now see how truth can
be a conceptually rich notion without automatically bringing
in its wake an abundance of problematic metaphysical com-
mitments. The ability to deﬁne inference in terms of truth in
good conscience is a beneﬁt of primitive truth that we should
embrace, and not try to work around.
Of course, there is a long and important tradition of philos-
ophers who take on the competing “inference-ﬁrst” approach
(Brandom 1994 being the locus classicus), and I do not in any
way take myself to have refuted their views.27 My goal in this
book is to show how far we can go with a primitivist concep-
tion of truth, and what philosophical fruits it can bear. Since
primitivists avoid the problematic metaphysical excesses of
other substantive theories of truth, primitivism blocks one
potential motivation for joining the inferentialist camp. At
the end of the day, there are probably no knock-down
27 See also the discussion of assertion in Section 8.2.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
210
www.ebook3000.com

arguments that can decide once and for all between competing
systems with different sets of primitives. The choice of primi-
tives must be justiﬁed in terms of the utility and simplicity of
the theories that may be built upon them. The inferentialists
have made their case; it is time for primitivists about truth to do
the same. We shall see what a primitivist theory of truth can do
for us in Chapters 8 and 9.
There is a larger lesson to be learned from this section. When
we get down to asking after the details of some of our most
basic notions – in this case, the very logical apparatus we
employ when putting together any judgment we make – we
ﬁnd truth cropping up in the discussion. The primitivist can
accept at face value all of these appearances, and not worry
that they pose any threat of circularity. But those who seek to
deﬁne truth in terms of these basic notions are at pains to give
truth-free accounts of those notions. Furthermore, deﬂationists
who deny that there are any explanatory links between truth
and these notions must also ﬁnd a way of denying the appear-
ances, and showing the links to be friendly to deﬂationism.
There are surely other cases where truth shows up in our
thinking that have not been explored in this chapter; some
will be explored in Chapter 8. The primitivist can welcome
the abundant presence of truth in our thinking. Others must
resort to theoretical maneuvering to show that the presence
of truth does not end up threatening their deﬂationism or
deﬁnition of truth. Primitivism, in short, need not ever go on
the defensive, as other views must so often do.
6.4
Conclusion
In the last two chapters we have surveyed a battery of arguments
in favor of primitivism. Since they do not all unequivocally tell in
favor of primitivism, we would be wise to pause and take stock
of what has been accomplished. Frege’s treadmill is the most
Conceptual primitivism
211

famous argument for primitivism, but it does not successfully
establish its conclusion. Ironically, the argument fails because of
the core insight behind the omnipresence argument (which,
arguably, is a more central plank of Frege’s views on truth).
The treadmill requires that the thought that it is true that p
take epistemic priority over the thought that p; the omnipresence
argument suggests that these two are on a par, metaphysically
and epistemically. So while the treadmill argument does not
establish primitivism, the omnipresence argument does.
The other canonical argument for primitivism, the open-
question argument, also fails to establish primitivism. Even
assuming
(perhaps
quite
dubiously)
that
open-question
arguments are not fallacious, there is simply no good reason
to believe that every theory of truth will fall foul of the
open question. Nevertheless, some arguments – coextension
arguments – have mistakenly been thought to be versions of
the open-question argument. These arguments are not falla-
cious, but they do not establish primitivism directly; they only
help to weed out the competition. The other arguments of this
chapter, the foundationalist argument and the argument from
logical apparatus, do successfully argue in favor of primitivism.
Taken collectively, the arguments of the last two chapters
offer an account of truth that places it right at the foundation
of our conceptual scheme. Truth is at work in the very act of
forming thoughts, hence its omnipresence. That truth is in
effect presupposed by every judgment shows how any attempt
to deﬁne truth must ultimately fail. Truth is the right sort of
concept to belong among our conceptual foundations; it is
sufﬁciently general, and applicable in all domains of thought.
It is so generic a notion that it appears to be presupposed by the
logical connectives and quantiﬁers. Because truth is primitive
and foundational, it is ubiquitous. Hence, it is no surprise that
so many of the arguments we have canvassed are premised on
hidden circularities found in potential deﬁnitions of truth.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
212
www.ebook3000.com

7
Tarski and primitivism
No one has been more inﬂuential in the theory of truth in the
last hundred years than Alfred Tarski. Since Tarski’s pioneer-
ing work on truth in the 1930s, much subsequent discussion
has been focused around the question of whether Tarski’s
work better motivates a robust, correspondence-style theory
of truth,1 or a more deﬂationary approach.2 I reject this dichot-
omy, and argue in this chapter that Tarski’s work on truth is
actually most consonant with a primitivist perspective; hence,
his views should not be thought to lend support to either
correspondence or deﬂationary theories. Given that Tarski
shows how to offer a deﬁnition of truth, the congeniality
between his views and primitivism may not be immediately
obvious, and my aim is to draw the appropriate connections.
1 See, e.g., Popper (1963: 223–8; 1979), Davidson (1969: 758), Jennings (1987),
Horwich (1990: 9), Kirkham (1992: 170), Niiniluoto (1999), and Fernández
Moreno (2001). Wolen´ski argues that Tarski employs a form of “weak correspond-
ence” (1993). Others demur from the correspondence interpretation: see, e.g.,
Haack (1976; 1978), Keuth (1978), Putnam (1985: 72), Davidson (1990b; 1996:
268; 1999: 110), Künne (2003: 213), and Simmons (2009: 555–6).
2 See, e.g., Black (1948: 63), Horwich (1982), Soames (1984: 416; 1999: 238), Stoutland
(1999: 83), and Patterson (2010: 25). Those who argue against the deﬂationary
interpretation include Davidson (1990b; 1996: 269; 1999: 110), Schantz (1998),
Ketland (1999), Horwich (2005), and Simmons (2009: 556–8). See Field (1994a:
269–70) for an intermediate view. Obviously, much turns on what exactly is meant
by ‘correspondence theory’ and ‘deﬂationism,’ and so some subtlety in interpreting
these attributions is called for. For general discussion about how to interpret Tarski
vis-à-vis correspondence and deﬂationism, see Kirkham (1992: 170–3), Künne (2003:
208–13), and Patterson (2012: 140–3).
213

I do not argue that Tarski himself subscribed to a primitivist
conception of truth, though I shall show how the view is open
to him, and is more amenable to his views on truth than are the
more familiar theories of truth.
I begin by presenting the basics of Tarski’s semantic con-
ception of truth, in particular those dimensions that are most
relevant to primitivism. I then turn to a discussion of how
Tarski’s work recommends a form of primitivism more than
any other theory of truth. To do so I emphasize the role of
indeﬁnability, explanatory power, and metaphysical neutrality
in Tarski’s work, as well as its relationship to the T-sentences.
I then turn to a discussion of Donald Davidson’s primitivism,
as it is directly inﬂuenced by Tarski. Finally, I show how
primitivists should understand Tarski’s “Convention T,” and
what primitivists should say about the T-sentences.
7.1
Tarski’s theory of truth
In his seminal work on truth, Tarski (1944; 1956a) advances
and defends what he calls the “semantic conception” of truth.
His main goal is to offer a satisfactory deﬁnition of truth for
a language that (i) remains faithful to our “classical concep-
tion” of truth, (ii) deﬂects positivist skepticism, and (iii) avoids
paradox.
Consider the ﬁrst desideratum. “The desired deﬁnition,”
Tarski writes, “does not aim to specify the meaning of a familiar
word used to denote a novel notion; on the contrary, it aims to
catch hold of the actual meaning of an old notion” (1944: 341).
The old notion is the intuitive view of truth that Tarski attributes
to Aristotle, and which he thinks contemporary correspondence
theorists are attempting to uphold. According to Aristotle,
“A falsity is a statement of that which is that it is not, or of
that which is not that it is; and a truth is a statement of
that which is that it is, or of that which is not that it is not”
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
214
www.ebook3000.com

(1966: 70; 1011b25–8). Tarski saw his work as offering “a
more precise expression of our intuitions” to the effect that
truth somehow consists in a kind of correspondence with reality
(1944: 343; cf. 1956a: 153). Hence, it is understandable why
many have taken Tarski’s work to motivate – or even just be – a
kind of correspondence theory of truth.
So Tarski clearly thinks that his work aims to do justice to our
classical conception of truth, a goal that he takes himself to share
with correspondence theorists (but not pragmatists or coherent-
ists). In fact, Tarski thinks his work outperforms correspondence
theory: “I do not have any doubts that our formulation does
conform to the intuitive content of that of Aristotle. I am less
certain regarding the latter [correspondence] formulations of the
classical conception, for they are very vague indeed” (1944: 360).
Next, by offering a precise deﬁnition of truth, Tarski is
hoping to make the notion safe from those who have voiced
skepticism about the very idea of truth. Semantic concepts like
truth, Tarski writes,
have been treated for a long time with a certain amount of
suspicion. From a historical standpoint, this suspicion is to be
regarded as completely justiﬁed. For although the meaning of
semantic concepts as they are used in everyday language seems
to be rather clear and understandable, still all attempts to charac-
terize this meaning in a general and exact way miscarried.
(Tarski 1944: 346; cf. 1956b: 401)
Bearing in mind that Tarski’s work on truth was developed in
the heyday of logical positivism, his concern here is under-
standable. His intent is to offer a precise deﬁnition of truth
that is free of any “alleged metaphysical implications,” so that
any lingering distrust in the notion of truth may “evaporate”
(1944: 364; cf. 1956a: 252).
Part of the project of making the notion of truth “safe” for
philosophy and science involves developing a metaphysically
neutral account of the concept; the other crucial part is
Tarski and primitivism
215

showing that the notion is not infected with paradox. The
semantic paradoxes – including, most notoriously, the liar
paradox – threaten to undermine the legitimacy of the notion
of truth. To see why, consider that in order to ensure that the
semantic conception of truth conforms to the classical
Aristotelian conception, Tarski offers his famous adequacy
condition. In order for a given language’s deﬁnition of truth
to be adequate it must, for every sentence of the language,
imply an instance of the schema:
(T)
X is true if and only if p.
The ‘X’ is to be replaced by a name of a sentence from
the target language whose truth predicate is being deﬁned,
and ‘p’ by a translation of that sentence in the language doing
the deﬁning.3 A deﬁnition that meets this condition offers
necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for the truth of every
sentence of the language in question in a way that ﬁts with
Aristotle’s dictum (1944: 344). The adequacy condition reveals
that Tarski thinks we do have a pre-linguistic conception of
truth, and that any purported deﬁnition of truth had better
conform to it.4
Paradox arises when we apply sentences like the following
to the truth schema:
(L)
The ﬁrst-named sentence in Section 7.1 of The Primitivist
Theory of Truth is not true.
If we plug (L) into our schema, we have:
(TL)
(L) is true if and only if the ﬁrst-named sentence in
Section 7.1 of The Primitivist Theory of Truth is
not true.
3 Whether Tarski intends the condition as a necessary or sufﬁcient one is contentious;
see Patterson (2006a).
4 Cf. Heck (1997: 541–2).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
216
www.ebook3000.com

Bearing in mind the identity of (L), we can see that (TL)
is equivalent to:
(TL*)
(L) is true if and only if (L) is not true.
(TL*) is contradictory, and so any language that allows
the formation of (L) and meets the adequacy condition con-
cerning schema (T) will produce a contradiction (assuming
classical logic).
Tarski’s positive account of truth is formulated so as to be
inoculated from paradox. Most crucially, Tarski offers deﬁni-
tions of truth that are relative to a particular language (1944:
342). Rather than offering a general deﬁnition of truth that
applies across all languages, Tarski deﬁnes language-relative
truth predicates, such as ‘true-in-L1,’ ‘true-in-L2,’ and the like.
Secondly, truth cannot be deﬁned within the language for which
it is being deﬁned. Instead, truth must be deﬁned in a meta-
language. The metalanguage for an object language is a language
that includes names for all the sentences of the object language,
and other resources necessary for deﬁning semantic predicates
for the object language. If truth is to be deﬁned for some lan-
guage O, then O cannot include the truth predicate ‘true-in-O.’
The predicate is instead a part of the metalanguage M. Because
O does not contain its own truth predicate, liar sentences cannot
be formulated within O, and so paradox is avoided.
Hence, for Tarski, truth is deﬁnable only relative to certain
sorts of languages. Those languages cannot be “semantically
closed,” which is to say that they cannot include their own
semantic machinery, such as names for their sentences and
their own truth predicate. Truth predicates for a given object
language can be deﬁned only from within a metalanguage that
is expressively more powerful than the object language.
Given these constraints, we can now offer a deﬁnition of
‘true-in-O’ for any qualiﬁed object language O. The deﬁnition
is constructed via the notion of satisfaction. Satisfaction,
Tarski and primitivism
217

ordinarily, is a relation between objects and the sentential
functions that constitute a given language. First we deﬁne
the satisfaction relation by listing the most basic cases: for
example, Socrates satisﬁes the sentential function ‘x is a
philosopher,’ and the sequence <Socrates, Plato> satisﬁes
the sentential function ‘x is a teacher of y.’ We then deﬁne
satisfaction recursively by showing how the satisfaction con-
ditions for compound sentential functions (and those involving
quantiﬁcation) are to be given in terms of the satisfaction
conditions for the basic functions.
For Tarski, the deﬁnition of satisfaction is somewhat more
involved, since he deﬁnes it as a relation between sentential
functions and inﬁnite sequences of objects. To see how the
deﬁnition works, we ﬁrst need to establish a correlation
between variables and the objects in the inﬁnite sequences.
If we set up the list of variables in the standard way (i.e.,
<a, b, c, d, . . ., x, y, z, a1, . . .>), then x is correlated with the
twenty-fourth object in the sequence. Now we can say that a
sequence satisﬁes ‘x is a philosopher’ if and only if the twenty-
fourth object in the sequence is such that it is a philosopher.
A sequence satisﬁes ‘x is a teacher of y’ just in case the twenty-
fourth member of the sequence is a teacher of the twenty-ﬁfth
member of the sequence. Now consider sentences, which are
just sentential functions with no free variables. Any sequence
whatsoever satisﬁes ‘Socrates is a philosopher’ and ‘Socrates is
a teacher of Plato,’ as they involve no variables at all. For the
existentially quantiﬁed sentence ‘There is some x such that x is
a philosopher,’ a sequence S satisﬁes it just in case there is a
sequence S′ that differs from S at most with respect to the
objects in their twenty-fourth positions, and whose twenty-
fourth object is a philosopher. So long as there is some philos-
opher in existence, there will be an S′ with a philosopher in
the twenty-fourth position. As a result, the existential will
be satisﬁed by every inﬁnite sequence should there be a
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
218
www.ebook3000.com

philosopher, and satisﬁed by no inﬁnite sequence should there
not be any philosophers.
This procedure deﬁnes the satisfaction relation for a given
language, which can now be used to deﬁne truth itself.
Sentences are true-in-O if and only if they are satisﬁedO by
each and every inﬁnite sequence of objects; sentences are false-
in-O if and only if they are satisﬁedO by no object or sequence
of objects (1944: 353; 1956a: 195). Hence we have arrived at
Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth: true sentences are those that are
satisﬁed by every inﬁnite sequence of objects.
7.2
Primitivism and the semantic conception
We have now seen Tarski’s semantic conception of truth in
outline, and the method he provides for deﬁning truth for a
given language. My contentions are that, of all the contempo-
rary theories of truth, primitivism is the most compatible with
the semantic conception, and that primitivists can take advant-
age of Tarski’s work for their own purposes. To see how, let us
turn now to four crucial aspects of Tarski’s work, namely, his
contention that truth is ultimately indeﬁnable, his admission
that truth is explanatorily valuable, the relationship between
truth and the T-sentences, and the metaphysically neutral
character of truth.
7.2.1
Indeﬁnability
Primitivism is the thesis that truth cannot be deﬁned or analyzed.
So how can Tarski’s work, which shows how to offer precise
deﬁnitions of truth, motivate primitivism and its key commit-
ment to the indeﬁnability of truth? To resolve this tension, we
need only attend to the limitations inherent to Tarski’s method.
As we have seen, Tarski shows how to deﬁne truth for a
Tarski and primitivism
219

particular language, and only for languages of a particular type.
The languages in question are (i) formal languages which are (ii)
not semantically closed but (iii) satisfy the condition of essential
richness. Absent these features, truth is indeﬁnable.
First, the language needs to be formal (1956a: 165). This
criterion is important because it enables us to offer a precise
deﬁnition of the notion of satisfaction, which relies on there
being an exact account of what the sentential functions of the
language are. Tarski writes: “The problem of the deﬁnition of
truth obtains a precise meaning and can be solved in a rigorous
way only for those languages whose structure has been exactly
speciﬁed. For other languages – thus, for all natural, ‘spoken’
languages – the meaning of the problem is more or less vague,
and its solution can have only an approximate character”
(1944: 347). “Our everyday language,” Tarski goes on to
say, “is certainly not one with an exactly speciﬁed structure.
We do not know precisely which expressions are sentences”
(1944: 349). Tarski thus draws a crucial distinction between
natural and formal languages, and is explicit that his methods
apply only to the latter.
Next, Tarski requires that the languages for which truth can
be deﬁned not be “semantically closed” (1944: 348). A seman-
tically closed language is, essentially, a language that includes
its own semantics. Hence, a semantically closed language
includes names for all its constitutive sentences; if the sentence
‘Snow is white’ belongs to the language, so too does the name
of that sentence, ‘‘Snow is white.’’ Semantically closed lan-
guages also include their own truth predicate, whose extension
includes sentences of that very language. As a result, semanti-
cally closed languages enable the formation of paradoxical liar
sentences, which disqualiﬁes them from Tarski’s method.
Natural languages exhibit semantic closure by way of their
“universality”: “A characteristic feature of colloquial language
(in contrast to various scientiﬁc languages) is its universality. It
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
220
www.ebook3000.com

would not be in harmony with the spirit of this language if in
some other language a word occurred which could not be
translated into it” (1956a: 164). Hence, in his positive account,
Tarski must rely on the object language/metalanguage distinc-
tion, for the truth predicate to be deﬁned cannot belong to the
language to which it applies.
Finally, the metalanguage deﬁning truth for its object lan-
guage must satisfy the condition of “essential richness.” What
is required is that the metalanguage doing the deﬁning be essen-
tially richer than the object language. Tarski notes that it is not
easy to give a precise characterization of essential richness.5
What he does say is that “If we restrict ourselves to languages
based on the logical theory of types, the condition for the meta-
language to be ‘essentially richer’ than the object-language is that
it contain variables of a higher logical type than those of the
object-language” (1944: 352). If the metalanguage fails to be
richer than the object language, then an interpretation of the
metalanguage can be offered within the object language. This, in
turn, will permit the possibility of constructing self-referential
sentences that enable the semantic antinomies to resurface.
Hence, the condition of essential richness is in place in order to
ensure that the right sort of relationship exists between the object
language and the metalanguage. The metalanguage needs to be
richer than the object language so that it can offer a “broader” or
“higher” perspective from which to contain and deﬁne truth in
the object language. If the metalanguage is on the same level as
the object language, so to speak, then the semantic paradoxes
will be at play, and the deﬁnition will not succeed.6
5 See DeVidi and Solomon (1999) for an argument that no tenable account of essential
richness is available to Tarski, and Ray (2005) for a defense of Tarski.
6 In the original version of “The concept of truth in formalized languages,” the
languages that satisfy the condition of essential richness are the “languages of ﬁnite
order” discussed in Section 4, such as the language of the calculus of classes (1956a:
209). Languages that do not satisfy the condition are the languages of inﬁnite order
Tarski and primitivism
221

In fact, Tarski offers a proof for why truth cannot be deﬁned
within a language (or from any metalanguage of the same or
lower order). Tarski’s formal “indeﬁnability” proof employs
some of the same diagonal reasoning that lies behind Gödel’s
work on incompleteness. I shall offer only a brief informal
sketch of the proof here, which basically presents it as a form
of Grelling’s heterological paradox, a connection Tarski
observes (1956a: 248, footnote 2).7 For some language of
sufﬁcient expressive power L, we ﬁrst suppose that there is a
predicate ‘Tr’ such that its extension contains all and only true
sentences of L. But we can now form a new predicate, ‘is not Tr
of itself,’ and ask whether it holds of itself or not. If ‘is not Tr of
itself’ is not Tr of itself, then it belongs in its own extension,
and so is Tr of itself after all. But if ‘is not Tr of itself’ is Tr of
itself, then it is not Tr of itself, given that the predicate holds
only of predicates that are not Tr of themselves. Either way,
contradiction follows. The assumption reduced to absurdity is
that there is such a predicate ‘Tr’ that contains all and only true
sentences of L. There is no such predicate, and so truth is not
deﬁnable for L.
Where the condition of essential richness is not satisﬁed,
truth cannot be deﬁned in Tarskian fashion. Interestingly,
however, Tarski notes that a different road is left open to
these languages. Though truth cannot be deﬁned within
discussed in Section 5, such as the general theory of classes. For these languages, the
satisfaction relation cannot be deﬁned by the method previously outlined, and so no
Tarski-style deﬁnition of truth can be constructed for them (1956a: 244). However,
Tarski later revises the view in the postscript to his monograph (1956a: 268–78).
There, he argues that truth in languages of inﬁnite order can be deﬁned, so long as it
is deﬁned from a language of a higher order, which is now possible given Tarski’s
embrace of the transﬁnite. Hence, what matters for Tarski is the nature of the
relationship between the object language and metalanguage, and not whether the
object language in question is of ﬁnite or inﬁnite order.
7 For more formal presentations of Tarski’s proof, see Simmons (1990: 288–9; 1993;
2009: 550–3), Patterson (2006a: 16–24; 2012: 144–60), and Chapter 2 of Field
(2008). See Martin (1968) for more on Grelling’s paradox.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
222
www.ebook3000.com

them, we can introduce a primitive term ‘true’ and then give an
account of it, not by way of deﬁnition, but axiomatization:
If we want to develop the theory of truth in a meta-language which
does not satisfy this condition [of essential richness], we must give
up the idea of deﬁning truth with the exclusive help of those terms
which were indicated above . . . We have then to include the term
“true,” or some other semantic term, in the list of undeﬁned terms
of the meta-language, and to express fundamental properties of
the notion of truth in a series of axioms. There is nothing essen-
tially wrong in such an axiomatic procedure, and it may prove
useful for various purposes.
(Tarski 1944: 352)
Tarski goes on to provide some of the details as to how such an
axiomatization would proceed (1956a: 255–65). Here we see
one way in which Tarski thinks we can make use of a primitive
notion of truth. For some of the languages for which truth
cannot be deﬁned, we can nevertheless make “consistent and
correct use” of the concept of truth by way of taking truth as a
primitive notion, and giving it content by introducing the
relevant sorts of axioms (1956a: 266).8
Let us now return the discussion to conceptual primitivism.
The primitivism about truth that I am defending is not about
truth as deﬁned for any particular language. Primitivism con-
cerns our concept of truth, which in turn gives content to the
various truth predicates and operators that occur in our natural
and formal languages. So we must be cautious about drawing
implications for primitivism too quickly from Tarski’s work.
Nevertheless, a few points of connection are important to note.
First, Tarski despairs of the attempt to offer a deﬁnition of
truth in natural language. If any truth predicate were to express
our most general notion of truth (for which primitivism hopes
8 See Halbach (2011) and Horsten (2011) for contemporary treatments of the
axiomatic approach to truth.
Tarski and primitivism
223

to account), it would be the truth predicate of natural
language. But Tarski is committed to the view that his methods
cannot offer a deﬁnition of that most wide-ranging truth pred-
icate, for natural languages fail his requirements of formality
and of not being semantically closed. As it turns out, Tarski
thinks the matter goes beyond indeﬁnability: given natural
language’s semantic universality, the very consistency of
our use of truth within it is suspect.9 Tarski writes: “the very
possibility of a consistent use of the expression ‘true sentence’
which is in harmony with the laws of logic and the spirit
of everyday language seems to be very questionable, and
consequently the same doubt attaches to the possibility of
constructing a correct deﬁnition of this expression” (1956a:
165; emphasis removed). Note Tarski’s hedged language here.
He does not claim to have “proved” that truth in natural
language is indeﬁnable or inconsistent.10 Later he writes that
“We may at best only risk the guess that a language whose
structure has been exactly speciﬁed and which resembles
our everyday language as closely as possible would be incon-
sistent” (1944: 349). Absent a full account of the nature,
structure, and limits of natural language, Tarski refuses to
make a deﬁnitive pronouncement on the deﬁnability of truth
in natural language (1944: 347).
9 See Ray (2003) and Patterson (2006b; 2012: 160–8) for more on Tarski and the
potential inconsistency of natural languages.
10 Davidson repeatedly claims that Tarski has “proved” that the concept of truth is
indeﬁnable (1990b: 285–6; 1996: 265, 269–70, 275–6), but it is unclear what proof
he is referring to. Tarski’s formal indeﬁnability proof (as found in Section 5 of
Tarski 1956a) applies only to formal languages that fail to satisfy the condition
of essential richness. As for Tarski’s pessimistic remarks concerning the deﬁnability
of truth for natural languages (as found in Section 1 of Tarski 1956a), these do not
constitute a proof, as the hedged language of the passages quoted in this paragraph
reveals. Like Davidson, I believe that primitivists can ﬁnd plenty of value in Tarski’s
work on deﬁnability, but I do not believe, as Davidson appears to, that Tarski has
proven the truth of primitivism (or that Tarski believes himself to have done so). See
also García-Carpintero (1999: 142–3).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
224
www.ebook3000.com

Despite Tarski’s caution, primitivists may take some solace
in his conclusions regarding natural language. Primitivists
claim that our concept of truth admits of no analysis. If any
purported deﬁnition of a truth predicate could falsify that
claim, it would be a deﬁnition of the truth predicate of natural
language.11 At the very least, Tarski shows that his methods
for deﬁnition do not apply to the natural language ‘true.’ So the
lesson primitivists may draw from Tarski is that one potential
source of falsiﬁcation to their view is of no threat. Hence, the
primitivist may argue as follows: if, contra primitivism, our
concept of truth is deﬁnable, then the natural language truth
predicate should admit of a Tarski-like deﬁnition. However,
no such deﬁnition is available, and thus our concept of truth is
not deﬁnable. Despite the fact that various formal languages
and fragments of natural language admit of a deﬁnable truth
predicate, our most basic and general concept of truth allows
no such deﬁnition. Of course, whether there are other, non-
Tarskian ways of deﬁning our most basic concept of truth is an
open question, and Tarski is wise not to pronounce deﬁnitively
on the possibility of other methods. (I have argued against such
deﬁnitions already.) Still, primitivists share Tarski’s suspicion
that the prospects for deﬁnition are grim.
The primitivist argues that our general, inter-linguistic
(and, I would add, pre-linguistic) notion of truth is what can-
not be deﬁned. Tarski appears to be in full agreement with this
particular thesis. His entire approach to the theory of truth can
be taken as an argument in favor of it (though not, as we have
11 I happen to doubt the truth of the antecedent here, since I believe that our concept
of truth is prior to its use in our language, and is not fully exhausted by the use that
‘is true’ plays in our language. (For example, it is not clear how a Tarski-style
deﬁnition of truth can illuminate what it means to say that to assert is to present as
true.) But I suspect that Davidson believes something along these lines, since he
appears to take Tarski’s negative results concerning the possibility of deﬁning a
fully general, inter-linguistic truth predicate to establish the primitive nature of our
concept of truth.
Tarski and primitivism
225

seen, some kind of conclusive proof). Truth can only be deﬁned
with respect to certain limited kinds of languages. As for our
most basic notion of truth, deﬁnition is not to be had. Hence,
even though Tarski’s deﬁnitions do justice to our classical,
intuitive conception of truth, they by no means exhaust that
conception.
Tarski’s work on truth, at the end of the day, offers no
positive solution to the problem of deﬁning the notion of
truth at its most basic and fundamental level. As a result,
Tarski would reject the traditional substantive theories of
truth that intend to do precisely that. In particular, Tarski
would reject the correspondence theorist’s attempt to deﬁne
truth in terms of the more fundamental notions of correspond-
ence and reality (or facts). But as we saw, Tarski thought of
himself as partly engaged in the same project as correspond-
ence theorists, in the sense that both are interested in giving
an account of truth that adheres to the traditional classical
conception of truth. (Hence, as we have seen, many commen-
tators have interpreted Tarski as a correspondence theorist.)
What we may appreciate is that Tarski thinks that the best way
of staying true to the classical conception is not by analyzing
truth by way of correspondence, but by holding one’s account
of truth accountable to the T-sentences formed from schema
(T). As a result, we do not see Tarski try to give accounts of the
notion of correspondence and fact, and then use those notions
to deﬁne truth. Here we have another point of intersection
between Tarski and primitivism: the best way to account
for the “correspondence intuition” (i.e., whatever basic under-
standing of truth it is that Aristotle’s formulation intends
to capture) is not by way of deﬁning truth in terms of corre-
spondence, but by way of adherence to the T-sentences.12
12 But recall that I do not believe that the T-sentences alone sufﬁciently account for the
correspondence intuition. See Section 4.5.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
226
www.ebook3000.com

Tarski, like the primitivist, rejects correspondence theory
(understood as the project of trying to deﬁne truth in terms of
correspondence) as a way of understanding the nature of truth
itself. The correspondence theorist’s deﬁnition is not necessary
for capturing what is right about the thought that truth in some
sense consists in a kind of correspondence with the world.
Finally, it is worth noting that even for those languages
where a Tarskian deﬁnition of truth is available, it is unclear
that his deﬁnitions capture the real nature – or intension, we
might say – of truth. If they do not, then Tarski’s deﬁnitions do
not in any way conﬂict with primitivists’ claims regarding the
indeﬁnability of truth. For primitivists argue that no deﬁnition
of truth can reveal the nature of truth in more fundamental
terms. If Tarski is not even intending to do that (see Patterson
2008a: 178), then we can appreciate how Tarski’s project is
in full harmony with primitivists’. Tarski deﬁnes true senten-
ces, where they are deﬁnable, as those that are satisﬁed by
every inﬁnite sequence of objects. As Tarski shows, this deﬁ-
nition is “materially adequate” and “formally correct” (1944:
341; 1956a: 152). That is to say, it entails all the T-sentences
(and therefore captures our intuitive notion of truth, and not
something else), and suffers no internal problems such as
circularity. Furthermore, the deﬁnition captures the right
extension: it includes all and only true sentences of the lan-
guage. However, it is quite implausible to think that Tarski’s
deﬁnitions have hit on the correct intension or meaning of
truth.13 One way to press the point is as follows. Granted,
sentences are true if and only if they are satisﬁed by all inﬁnite
sequences of objects. But are they true because they are
13 For one thing, Tarski’s discussion of indeﬁnability in Section 5 of Tarski (1956a)
reveals that he thinks his satisfaction-based method of deﬁnition is in a certain
sense arbitrary. Appealing to satisfaction for languages of ﬁnite order works, so
he uses it. But he is open to the idea that had satisfaction not worked, some other
notion might have.
Tarski and primitivism
227

satisﬁed by each and every inﬁnite sequence of objects? Is
the right account of the truth of ‘Snow is white’ that every
inﬁnite sequence satisﬁes it, or does the right account have
something to do in particular with snow and its color? If the
former answer seems insufﬁcient (as it does to me), then there is
reason to suppose that Tarski’s deﬁnitions were never intended
to capture the nature of truth and its intension in more funda-
mental or basic terms.14
This conclusion becomes all the more apparent given Tarski’s
recognition that, for some languages, truth is not to be cashed
out in terms of satisfaction at all, but rather by a process of
axiomatization. So we may conclude that, formally speaking,
truth is not “univocal” as it appears in formal languages that do
or do not satisfy the condition of essential richness. Sometimes
truth is deﬁned in terms of satisfaction, sometimes it is intro-
duced through axiomatization. But if we believe there to be
one more basic notion at hand behind both kinds of languages,
then we must reject the idea that truth is to be understood in
terms of the more fundamental notion of satisfaction. That is
not the kind of analysis that Tarski offers. Such an analysis is
what correspondence theorists, coherence theorists, and prag-
matists offer. They deﬁne truth in terms of other notions that
they take to be more fundamental. But Tarski is not engaged in
such a process, even when he is offering deﬁnitions of truth.
Consequently, Tarski’s work on truth leaves it entirely open
how we are to understand the basic meaning or intension of
truth. The most natural position for Tarski to take is that we
cannot deﬁne this more general notion of truth; here again we see
Tarski and primitivism being natural allies.
All told, where Tarski shows truth to be indeﬁnable, prim-
itivists can readily agree. The kind of indeﬁnability of truth
that primitivists advocate is precisely the kind of indeﬁnability
14 Cf. Patterson (2006b: 162–3).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
228
www.ebook3000.com

that Tarski’s work allows for and motivates. Where Tarski
advocates the deﬁnability of truth, it is clear that his deﬁnitions
should not be thought of as capturing the nature of truth in
more fundamental terms. That is to say, while his deﬁnitions
represent an important kind of formal achievement, they
should not be thought of as capturing the nature of truth in a
way similar to the attempts of correspondence, coherence, and
pragmatic theorists. Nor is there any reason to think that this
result caused Tarski any despair. As we shall see in the next
subsection, Tarski puts his deﬁnition to work in the service of a
variety of mathematical and logical tasks. Tarski’s deﬁnitions
of truth are best appreciated in light of these more formal
accomplishments.
7.2.2
Explanatory value
The previous section illustrates some of the grounds Tarski
has for rejecting the traditional substantive theories of truth
(grounds that he may happily share with primitivists). Those
theories purport to analyze in full our concept of truth, a
project that Tarski rejects and may well deem impossible.
In this section we turn to why Tarski can also side with prim-
itivists (and now against deﬂationists) in favor of truth’s
explanatory capabilities.
The ﬁrst point to notice is that Tarski explicitly rejects the
idea that if truth were to be deﬁnable and so in principle
eliminable from language without expressive loss, then the
notion of truth would thereby be “sterile”:
Consequently, the term “true” when occurring in a simple
sentence of the form “X is true” can easily be eliminated, and
the sentence itself, which belongs to the meta-language, can be
replaced by an equivalent sentence of the object-language . . .
Some people have therefore urged that the term “true” in the
semantic sense can always be eliminated, and that for this reason
Tarski and primitivism
229

the semantic conception of truth is altogether sterile and useless.
And since the same considerations apply to other semantic
notions, the conclusion has been drawn that semantics as a
whole is a purely verbal game and at best only a harmless hobby.
(Tarski 1944: 358)
Not all deﬂationists would draw the conclusion that truth is
a sterile and useless concept, but the standard deﬂationist
line is that careful attention to truth’s expressive role does
reveal truth to carry little philosophical or explanatory worth
(e.g., Horwich 1990 and Williams 1999). But Tarski detects a
fallacy in inferring sterility from deﬁnability:
If, however, anyone continues to urge that – because of the theo-
retical possibility of eliminating the word “true” on the basis of its
deﬁnition – the concept of truth is sterile, he must accept the
further conclusion that all deﬁned notions are sterile. But this
outcome is so absurd and so unsound historically that any com-
ment on it is unnecessary. In fact, I am rather inclined to agree
with those who maintain that the moments of greatest creative
advancement in science frequently coincide with the introduction
of new notions by means of deﬁnition.
(Tarski 1944: 359)
Hence, Tarski resists any suggestion that truth’s importance is
in any way compromised by establishing its deﬁnability or
subsequent eliminability from the language. In fact, truth will
not even belong to those languages for which truth can be
deﬁned! Nonetheless, understanding the notion of truth for a
language is paramount for understanding that language.
For Tarski, the importance of seeking a deﬁnition of truth
is not so as to eliminate the notion, but to put it to work. What
can truth do for us? Tarski is adamant that his work on truth
and semantics “can ﬁnd applications in various domains
of intellectual activity” (1944: 364). Tarski argues that his
work can produce important results, not only for philosophy,
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
230
www.ebook3000.com

but for both the empirical and deductive sciences.15 As to
philosophy, Tarski notes that his deﬁnition can be taken to
have addressed “one of the fundamental problems of the
theory of knowledge” (1956b: 407). Tarski also thinks that
his approach to truth plays a vital role in “establishing seman-
tics on a scientiﬁc basis” (1956b: 407), and thereby produces
various empirical and logical fruits. His research has obvious
direct ramiﬁcations for the study of linguistics, and “indirect”
implications for the natural sciences, by way of the use of
truth and other semantic notions within the methodology of
science and scientiﬁc theory construction and acceptance
(1944: 366–8). Furthermore, Tarski points out that his deﬁni-
tion of truth leads to important results in logic, mathematics,
and metamathematics (1944: 368–9). His deﬁnition of truth
can be used to prove the metalogical versions of the laws of non-
contradiction and of excluded middle (1956a: 197; cf. 1944:
354). It can also illuminate the notions of provability, deﬁnabil-
ity, consistency, and completeness (1944: 368–9). In summariz-
ing the potential positive beneﬁts of his approach to truth for the
deductive sciences, Tarski writes that “the establishment of
scientiﬁc semantics, and in particular the deﬁnition of truth,
enables us to match the negative results in the ﬁeld of metama-
thematics with corresponding positive ones, and in that way to
ﬁll to some extent the gaps which have been revealed in the
deductive method and in the very structure of deductive science”
(1956b: 408).
In short, Tarski believes that the notion of truth can play an
important explanatory role in other areas of thought, inside
and outside philosophy. Rather than thinking of his project as
having deﬂationary results, Tarski believed his work to be
quite constructive, and only increase the import of the notion
of truth. This attitude toward the theory of truth is shared by
15 See also Soames (1999: 100–7).
Tarski and primitivism
231

primitivism. For primitivists, truth is a foundational notion; its
importance is demonstrated by showing how the notion can be
put to work in other kinds of intellectual projects (including
those that Tarski addresses). One of the reasons to take some-
thing as primitive is to put it to various kinds of explanatory
work. Primitivists may grant to deﬂationists that ‘true’ plays
various kinds of expressive roles in ordinary language, and
that in many cases expressions with ‘true’ are equivalent to
expressions that lack it. But primitivists and Tarski are in
agreement that such facts about truth do not exhaust all that
there is to be said about it; on the contrary, truth is a central,
key notion that is highly relevant to our understanding of other
important notions in science, mathematics, and philosophy.
7.2.3
T-sentences
A third connection between Tarski and primitivism (and
one that also serves to further distance him from deﬂation-
ism) involves the relationship between the T-sentences and
the concept of truth. A standard deﬂationary interpretation
of the T-sentences is that they are the most fundamental
principles about truth, in terms of which we grasp the
concept (e.g., Horwich 1990).16 T-sentences thus play the
role that other principles (which might involve correspond-
ence, coherence, or utility) play in other theories. Primitivists
reject the idea that there are any fundamental principles
about truth, in terms of which the concept can be deﬁned,
reduced, or analyzed, and so must reject this deﬂationary
interpretation of the T-sentences. On this point, Tarski
sides with the primitivists.
16 See also the deﬂationary deﬁnitions of truth that involve the truth schema, as found
(but not always endorsed) in Leeds (1978: 121), Field (1986: 58), Resnik (1990: 412),
and David (1994: 107).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
232
www.ebook3000.com

The T-sentences ﬁgure into Tarski’s account of truth by way
of serving as a kind of “check” on the material adequacy of any
purported deﬁnition of truth; theories meet the condition
when they entail all of the T-sentences. The notion of material
adequacy at hand is not simply extensional adequacy (Patterson
2012: 109–11). Tarski’s interest is instead in deﬁning relativized
truth predicates that conform to our intuitive notion of truth.
Entailing the T-sentences is one way of guaranteeing that the
notion deﬁned has not strayed away from our most basic notion
of truth. As Davidson puts the point, the T-sentences “alone
constitute an unmistakable test that a theory has captured a
concept of truth we are interested in” (1973: 77).
If the T-sentences are taken to be the fundamental facts
about truth, in terms of which truth may be deﬁned, then
Tarski’s adequacy condition is empty. If the deﬂationary con-
ception of truth is deﬁned by the T-sentences, then of course
the deﬂationary conception will meet the adequacy condition
by entailing them. Hence, the deﬂationary perspective on the
truth schema and its T-sentences makes Tarski’s adequacy
condition vacuous and trivial. Since Tarski did not take the
condition to be empty, we may appreciate at once how Tarski
rejects the idea that the T-sentences provide the most funda-
mental facts about truth.17 Primitivists, like Tarski, maintain
that the T-sentences express important facts about truth.
(And, perhaps more to the point, important facts about the
truth conditions of sentences.) But they are not the fundamen-
tal facts about truth. One’s theory of truth needs to explain the
T-sentences (and not the other way around, as deﬂationists
maintain).
17 I hasten to add that this fact also shows that Tarski does not think of the T-sentences
as being empirically empty logical truths, contra Putnam (1985), Etchemendy
(1988), and Heck (1997). If they were, then the adequacy condition would again
be vacuous. See also Davidson (1990b) and Patterson (2008b) for further criticism
of this reading, as well as Section 7.5 below.
Tarski and primitivism
233

7.2.4
Metaphysical neutrality
One ﬁnal core issue on which Tarski and primitivists are in
complete agreement is the metaphysically neutral nature of
truth. To accept Tarski’s approach to truth is not to take on
any metaphysical stance, such as realism or anti-realism:
“we may accept the semantic conception of truth without
giving up any epistemological attitude we may have had; we
may remain naive realists, critical realists or idealists, empiri-
cists or metaphysicians – whatever we were before. The
semantic conception is completely neutral toward all these
issues” (1944: 362). Likewise, taking truth to be a primitive,
undeﬁnable concept also requires no particular metaphysical
stance. As I argued in Section 4.5, one’s metaphysical stance is
better articulated through truthmaker theory, not the theory
of truth.
By way of contrast, it is instructive to understand the tradi-
tional substantive theories of truth as building metaphysical
stances directly into their accounts of truth.18 For correspond-
ence theories, something is true just in case it stands in the
correspondence relation to some fact. As a result, truths are
from the outset entangled with ontology. If p is true, there
must be some entity E to which it corresponds. For correspond-
ence theory, there is no truth without some accompanying
ontology. This commitment might seem innocuous, but
consider some problematic cases. Take the sentence ‘There
are no hobbits.’ One might think that this sentence can be
true without the beneﬁt of anything existing: after all, it
appears that it is true because nothing of a certain sort exists.
But correspondence theorists must grant that there is some
entity for it to correspond to, lest they allow some truths to
18 Deﬂationary theories of truth, however, share the metaphysical neutrality of the
semantic conception and primitivism.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
234
www.ebook3000.com

be true in spite of not corresponding to anything, thereby
giving up their theory. Consider also mathematical and
analytic truths: to what are they supposed to correspond?
My intention is not to show that such questions cannot be
answered; rather, it is that correspondence theories immedi-
ately face a distinctively metaphysical challenge that Tarski
and primitivists can avoid. Any fully ﬂeshed-out correspond-
ence theory must give a comprehensive account of the nature
of the corresponding objects, and in so doing will impose a
particular metaphysical view onto the nature of truth.
Similarly, coherence theorists and pragmatic theorists can
be understood as incorporating partisan metaphysical views
into their accounts of truth. If the truth of ‘Snow is white’
consists in a certain kind of coherence between our beliefs,
then this highly suggests an (at least in part) idealist meta-
physics that connects the whiteness of snow with features of
what other beliefs we hold. If the truth of my beliefs is in part
a function of what other beliefs I hold, then it is not the case
that the truth of ‘Snow is white’ is a matter fully independent
of me and my particular beliefs. Likewise, if the truth of
‘Snow is white’ is in part a function of what it is useful for
me to believe, then the truth of the matter is again mind-
dependent. Hence, coherence and pragmatic accounts of
truth, just like correspondence theories, cannot embrace the
metaphysical neutrality inherent to primitivism and Tarski’s
semantic conception of truth.
To say that Tarski’s theory of truth is neutral is to allow
that it could be paired with the metaphysical ideas underlying
the traditional substantive theories of truth, if one were so
inclined. Hence, Tarski’s work on truth does not show that
the metaphysical concerns of interest to the traditional theo-
rists of truth are nonsense, or that they disappear once we
adopt the semantic conception. It is just that these concerns
are better explored not from the perspective of the theory
Tarski and primitivism
235

of truth, but from the theory of truthmaking. According
to Tarski, any adequate theory of truth will usher forth the
equivalences like
‘Socrates is a philosopher’ is true if and only if Socrates is a
philosopher.
What we have here is one sentence (from the language doing
the analyzing) being used to give the necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions for the truth of another (not necessarily distinct)
mentioned sentence (from the language being analyzed). But
to say that ‘Socrates is a philosopher’ is true if and only if
Socrates is a philosopher is to say nothing whatsoever about
what it is, if anything, that makes ‘Socrates is a philosopher’
true. What we cannot say is this: Socrates is a philosopher
makes true ‘Socrates is a philosopher.’ That is ungrammatical
nonsense. And we must be extremely cautious in saying
that what makes ‘Socrates is a philosopher’ true is that
Socrates is a philosopher. For what does ‘that Socrates is a
philosopher’ refer to? It cannot refer to a proposition, because
propositions do not make true the sentences that express them.
If it refers to something like a “fact” or “obtaining state of
affairs” (i.e., “Socrates’s being a philosopher”), then we have
entities that can serve as truthmakers; but notice that this
view is now burdened with some serious metaphysical commit-
ments, and to say that all sentences are made true by such
entities takes one perilously close to a traditional correspond-
ence theory.
Ultimately, the question of what, if anything, makes ‘Socrates
is a philosopher’ true is a separate metaphysical question
left unanswered by everything that Tarski says. Perhaps it is
made true by a fact or state of affairs (Armstrong 1997), by a
trope (Lowe 2007), or by Socrates under a counterpart relation
(Lewis 2003). Perhaps it does not have a truthmaker at all
(Lewis 2001b). Perhaps it is made true by the relations that
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
236
www.ebook3000.com

obtain between my beliefs, or by the utility to me that would
exist were I to believe what the sentence says. Regardless of
which metaphysical view is correct, we can all agree that the
Tarskian equivalence above is true.19 Metaphysical disputes
regarding what it is that makes truth-bearers true are best
explored from within the metaphysical enterprise of truthmak-
ing, and not the theory of truth itself.20 This neutral perspective
is yet another point of common ground between Tarski and
primitivism.
7.3
Tarski, Davidson, and primitivism
No discussion of contemporary primitivism (not to mention its
connection to Tarski) would be complete without a discussion
of Donald Davidson’s important work on the topic. Unlike
other contemporary advocates of primitivism, Davidson’s
primitivism is a direct result of his appreciation of Tarski’s
work. As I suggested back in Section 7.2.1 (see footnote 10),
I am less convinced than Davidson that we can ﬁnd a proof for
conceptual primitivism in Tarski’s writings. But I am in full
agreement with Davidson that we can take Tarski’s work to
motivate and argue for primitivism, as I have suggested already
in this chapter. Let us now see how Davidson interprets
primitivism, and how it arises from his thinking about Tarski.
19 At least, we ought to agree. See again Sections 6.1.3 and 7.4 below.
20 It is worth noting that Tarski’s claim to metaphysical neutrality is in some tension
with his claim to be doing justice to our classical conception of truth −what I have
called the “correspondence intuition.” If the correspondence intuition has any
metaphysical pull to it – and I believe that it does – then it ought not to receive
any support from a metaphysically neutral view. On my view, consistency with the
T-sentences is necessary but not sufﬁcient for capturing the correspondence intu-
ition. For this reason, I have argued (in Section 4.5) that deﬂationists cannot capture
the correspondence intuition by their conformity to the truth schema alone, contra
Horwich (1990). What is needed, in addition, is a particular view about what
makes truths true.
Tarski and primitivism
237

Davidson, like Frege and the early Moore and Russell,
rejects correspondence theories and advocates a kind of prim-
itivism about truth. His motivations, however, differ greatly.
Moore and Russell were drawn to primitivism more or less as a
consequence of how they conceived of facts and propositions.
Their truth-bearers, in effect, had nothing in reality to corre-
spond to since they were reality. When they abandoned their
early views of facts and propositions, they also abandoned
their primitivism. Frege was drawn to primitivism in part
by the treadmill, and in part by his recognition that truth
is a conceptually substantive notion. Like the early Moore
and Russell, Davidson objects to traditional correspondence
theories because he thinks that there are no facts for truths to
correspond to (see, e.g., Davidson 1969). That is not because
he thinks truths are facts (in the sense of being suitable entities
in the world that make things true), but because he rejects “a
representational picture of language and the idea that truth
consists in the accurate mirroring of facts” (1990b: 281).
“There is nothing interesting or instructive,” Davidson writes,
“to which true sentences might correspond” (1990b: 303).
Indeed, it is the ontological picture of a fact-shaped world
held by the early correspondence theorists (perhaps best exem-
pliﬁed by Wittgenstein’s Tractatus (1922)) that Davidson
rejects. Tarski, Davidson thinks, shows how we can abandon
that picture. Davidson arrives at his primitivism through
reﬂection on the implications of Tarski’s program for the
theory of truth, and, in turn, the theory of meaning.
Davidson’s views on truth evolved signiﬁcantly over the years.
In his 1969 paper “True to the facts” Davidson offers a Tarski-
style theory of truth deﬁned in terms of satisfaction that he is
happy to classify as a form of correspondence theory, a classi-
ﬁcation he later retracts (1990b: 302). At the same time,
Davidson argues against traditional correspondence theories
that posit the existence of a realm of facts for truths to correspond
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
238
www.ebook3000.com

to. Taking his inspiration from Frege and the True, Davidson
argues that if any truth corresponds to a fact, then every truth
corresponds to a single fact. Davidson treats this argument, now
known as the ‘slingshot,’ as more or less a reductio of corre-
spondence theory.21 (Frege, recall, was happy to embrace the
True, though he was no correspondence theorist.) During those
early days, Davidson seemed to think that we can give an account
of truth by taking on the notion of satisfaction, which is deﬁned
recursively and without reference to truth. Following Tarski,
Davidson accepts the deﬁnition of a true sentence as one that is
meaningful and satisﬁed by every inﬁnite sequence of objects.22
But within a decade, primitivism appears in Davidson’s philoso-
phy, and it remained for the rest of his life.23
Primitivism shows up in the Davidsonian corpus as early as
1977. In “Reality without reference” Davidson draws a crucial
distinction between relativized and absolute conceptions of
truth. Tarski, he notices, only offers us a recipe for establishing
relativized deﬁnitions of truth: deﬁnitions of truth for a partic-
ular language. Davidson realizes that “In a theory of the sort
I am describing, the [absolute] truth-predicate is not deﬁned,
but must be considered a primitive expression” (1977b: 248;
cf. 1990b: 285).
Davidson’s interests are ﬁrst and foremost empirical. He
wants to develop a method for giving a theory of truth
21 See Neale (2001) for more on the slingshot.
22 Interestingly, since every inﬁnite sequence satisﬁes every true sentence, Davidson
sees a commonality between Tarski’s deﬁnition and Frege’s view that every true
sentence refers to the True: “You could say that though this was not his intention,
Tarski here indirectly vindicates Frege’s slingshot argument” (1999: 110).
23 Truth was not the only thing that Davidson took to be primitive: “When it comes to
the large, grand concepts that concern philosophers, like the good, truth, belief,
knowledge, physical object, cause, and event . . . I think the search for such a
deﬁnition or analysis is doomed” (2001: 85; cf. 1996: 264). Given the holistic
nature of much of Davidson’s philosophy, it is quite plausible to attribute to him the
networker view of Section 1.2.3. This is how Grayling reads him (2007: 39–53). Cf.
Malpas (1999: 119).
Tarski and primitivism
239

conditions, and thereby a theory of meaning, for actual
languages. Davidson’s distinctive contribution was to argue
that we can use a Tarskian-style theory of truth as a theory of
meaning. What he acknowledges is that a theory of truth in the
above sense can only ever give us an account of what a true
sentence is for a particular language. This limitation is not
worrisome for Davidson’s own interests:
The interest of a theory of truth, viewed as an empirical theory of a
natural language, is not that it tells us what truth is in general, but
that it reveals how the truth of every sentence of a particular L
depends on its structure and constituents. We do not need to
worry, then, over the fact that a theory of truth does not fully
analyze the preanalytic concept of truth.
(Davidson 1977b: 251)
The idea that our concept of truth cannot be explicated by a
Davidsonian theory of meaning or a Tarskian theory of truth
ﬁnds its way into much of Davidson’s subsequent writings.
“Truth,” he writes, “is beautifully transparent compared to
belief and coherence, and I take it as primitive” (1983: 425).
By taking truth as a primitive, Davidson realizes that he is, in
a sense, inverting Tarski’s own strategy:
One thing that only gradually dawned on me was that while
Tarski intended to analyse the concept of truth by appealing
(in Convention T) to the concept of meaning (in the guise of
sameness of meaning, or translation), I have the reverse in mind.
I considered truth to be the central primitive concept, and hoped,
by detailing truth’s structure, to get at meaning.
(Davidson 1984: xiv)24
A central motivation behind Davidson’s primitivism, then, is
to be clear on the priority between truth and meaning. Why
24 Recall that, on my reading, Tarski was not actually trying to analyze truth in any
way that conﬂicts with Davidson’s primitivism.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
240
www.ebook3000.com

should we take truth as the more primitive notion? Well,
Davidson asks rhetorically, “Why on earth should we expect
to be able to reduce truth to something clearer or more funda-
mental?” (1990a: 136). Truth is “as clear and basic a concept as
we have” (1990a: 135). Truth just is not the sort of thing that we
should expect to be further explicable in terms of even more
basic, fundamental notions. Hence, taking truth to be a primitive
concept seems to Davidson to be highly plausible, and to be
expected. One could strive to understand truth in terms of mean-
ing, but it is not obvious that one should. Davidson adhered to
the primitivist view for the rest of his career. In one of his last
works, he writes: “Truth is the prime semantic concept; we could
not think or speak in the sense of entertaining or communicating
propositional contents without it” (2005: 155).
Davidson’s conceptual primitivism, like my own, is clearly
substantivist and non-deﬂationary, as he draws many of the
same connections between truth and other concepts that we
shall explore in Chapter 8. As a result, Davidson contends that
deﬂationists miss many important facts about truth:
My own view is that Tarski has told us much of what we want to
know about the concept of truth, and that there must be more.
There must be more because there is no indication in Tarski’s
formal work of what it is that his various truth predicates have in
common, and this must be part of the content of the concept. It is
not enough to point to convention-T as that indication, for it does
not speak to the question how we know that a theory of truth for a
language is correct. The concept of truth has essential connections
with the concepts of belief and meaning, but these connections
are untouched by Tarski’s work. It is here that we should expect
to uncover what we miss in Tarski’s characterizations of truth
predicates.
(Davidson 1990b: 295)
Attention to T-sentences alone cannot reveal everything
that there is to say about truth. In particular, Davidson is
Tarski and primitivism
241

interested in the relationship between truth and meaning,
and is skeptical of deﬂationary accounts of truth (like
Horwich’s) that would invert the priority relation between
truth and meaning. (We shall return to this topic in greater
detail in Section 8.4.)
As we have seen, Davidson thinks that there is a tight
connection between truth and meaning. To give a theory of
meaning for a language is to give an account of the truth
conditions for the sentences of that language. Horwich, by
contrast, thinks that we can give an account of meaning that
is wholly divorced from the notion of truth. Hence, Horwich
(1998a) advocates a kind of use theory of meaning, rather
than a Davidsonian truth-conditional account of meaning.
Meaning is to be understood in terms of the proper grounds
for assertion – we understand a sentence not when we know its
truth conditions, but when we understand the grounds for
properly asserting it – and assertion in turn is understood in
isolation of truth. Davidson is not sympathetic to the
“assertion-ﬁrst” camp:
I think the sort of assertion that is linked to understanding already
incorporates the concept of truth: we are justiﬁed in asserting a
sentence in the required sense only if we believe the sentence we
use to make the assertion is true; and what ultimately ties language
to the world is that the conditions that typically cause us to hold
sentences true constitute the truth conditions, and hence the
meanings, of our sentences . . . it would be a shame if we had to
develop a theory of meaning for a speaker or a language inde-
pendently of a theory of truth for that speaker or language, since
we have at least some idea how to formulate a theory of truth, but
no serious idea how to formulate a theory of meaning based on a
concept of assertability or use.
(Davidson 1996: 275)
I too share Davidson’s concerns about whether we can give a
truth-free account of assertion (and so a truth-free account of
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
242
www.ebook3000.com

meaning built upon it). But the defense for that view will come
later, in Section 8.2.3.25
7.4
Convention T
Before concluding our discussion of Tarski and primitivism,
we should consider the matter of how primitivism can handle
Tarski’s “Convention T,” and, in general, what its attitude is
toward the T-sentences. After all, many think that a theory
of truth cannot be successful unless it respects the T-sentences
in the right way. Since Tarski’s work on truth, it has been a
dogma in the theory of truth that any adequate theory of truth
must respect the truth schema. That much almost everyone
seems to agree on.26 But what exactly is the truth schema, and
what is it to respect it? Is such respect necessary for adequacy,
sufﬁcient for it, or both? Such questions are all highly
contentious.
Convention T, for Tarski, involves what it is for a theory of
truth of some language to be materially adequate, and this
requires the theory to entail a number of sentences, which all
take the form offered by the schema
(T)
X is true if and only if p.
The variable ‘X’ is to be replaced by a name of a sentence of
the object language for which truth is being deﬁned, and ‘p’
is replaced by a sentence from the metalanguage that is equiv-
alent in meaning to X. The convention can now be stated: “we
wish to use the term ‘true’ in such a way that all equivalences of
the form (T) can be asserted, and we shall call a deﬁnition
of truth ‘adequate’ if all these equivalences follow from it”
(1944: 344; cf. Tarski 1956a: 187–8).
25 See Horwich (1999) for his response to Davidson’s objection.
26 But see Gupta (2002) and Patterson (2002; 2006a).
Tarski and primitivism
243

Notice
how
Tarski’s
presentation
explicitly
presents
Convention T as a sufﬁcient condition on adequacy, not a neces-
sary one. Accordingly, it is not clear that even Tarski thought
that every adequate theory of truth had to entail all of the
T-sentences.27 Furthermore, it is not clear that Tarski’s discus-
sion even makes claims about what other theories of truth – those
that do not conform to the semantic conception – ought to do.
This is not the place to engage in an historical analysis of what
Tarski in fact intended – see Patterson 2006a for that discussion –
nor need we really care: that Tarski did or did not think there was
a particular adequacy condition on all theories of truth is beside
the point. What matters is what conditions a theory of truth
must in fact satisfy in order to be adequate, not what someone,
authority though he may be, thinks those conditions are.
Why care about the T-sentences? Well, one thought is that
because T-sentences give the conditions under which sentences
are true, it is natural that they should fall out of a theory of
truth. A theory of some notion should give you the conditions
under which that notion obtains. A theory of bachelorhood
tells you under what conditions someone is a bachelor: if and
only if he is both male and unmarried. Similarly, a theory of
truth should give you the conditions under which something is
true, and that is what the T-sentences do. They give you the
conditions under which sentences like ‘Snow is white,’ ‘Grass is
green,’ and ‘2 is prime’ are true. But notice that there are a
variety of truth schemas, and so a variety of T-sentences.
For example:
27 But see, just a page before, Tarski’s claim that “if the deﬁnition of truth is to
conform to our conception, it must imply the following equivalence,” at which
point he names his most famous T-sentence (1944: 343). Patterson (2006a) argues
that the appearances of the convention being a necessary condition are due – as is
quite apparent in the passage just quoted – to the fact that satisfying the convention
is indeed necessary for those attempting to give a semantic theory of truth in the
method Tarski favors, but not for giving a theory of truth tout court.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
244
www.ebook3000.com

(1)
‘2 is prime’ is true if and only if 2 is prime.
(2)
It is true that 2 is prime if and only if 2 is prime.
(3)
The proposition that 2 is prime is true if and only if 2 is prime.
(4)
Any belief that 2 is prime is true if and only if 2 is prime.
But even (1), (2), (3), and (4) house further ambiguities: what is
the nature of their biconditionals? Do they employ the material
conditional, the indicative conditional, the “constitutive” con-
ditional of Section 5.1.1, or one of the various conditionals
deﬁned by various logicians for their various logics? The ques-
tion is a poor one. For each separate conditional, there just is a
separate reading of each of our four biconditionals. Of each,
we can ask whether it is true, and what its relevance is to the
adequacy of a theory of truth.
My suspicion is that all of these conditionals – regardless
of the conditional or truth-bearer they employ – are true.28
(This suspicion obviously assumes, given (3), that propositions
exist. I admit that there is room for debate here.) Is any one
class of them especially relevant to the adequacy of a theory of
truth? Given my promiscuity and egalitarianism about truth-
bearers (see Section 1.1.3), I am inclined to say no. Supposing
that all of these various conditionals are true, however, I am
conﬁdent in stating the following as an adequacy condition on
theories of truth:
(5)
A theory of the nature of truth is adequate only if the theory is
consistent with all the various T-sentences.
Here we have a requirement – a necessary condition – for
theories of truth that is weak enough to be acceptable. The
T-sentences are true; that much is uncontroversial. So any
theory of truth had better not contradict them. But by (5)
I also hope to capture something stronger. The various
28 Of course, the status of T-sentences corresponding to paradoxical sentences is
obviously problematic. I defer further discussion of the paradox until Chapter 9.
Tarski and primitivism
245

T-sentences have various modal statuses. (1) is contingently
true; (2), (3), and (4) are necessary. Any adequate theory of
truth must also respect these modal facts.
It might be thought that (5) is so uncontroversial as to be
useless in wielding any force in the debate over truth. After all,
any theory – whether it be about truth, thermodynamics, or
Taekwondo – had better satisfy it, since any theory that contra-
dicts the T-sentences has false consequences. Indeed. But in fact
many have used it to argue against other views. We caught a
glimpse of such arguments back in Section 6.1.3 under the
guise of coextension arguments. Suppose that, given my socio-
economic circumstances, mental constitution, Pascal’s Wager,
etc., it is extraordinarily useful for me to believe in God.
Suppose that this belief meets some condition P that a prag-
matist might identify as the real nature of truth. But notice that
God’s not existing is fully consistent with the Wager recom-
mending belief to the contrary, and atheism being a state of
mind that would cripple me and cause society to burn me at the
stake. According to this pragmatist, the following holds:
(6)
Any belief that God exists is true if and only if any belief that
God exists is P.
(7)
It is possible that: God does not exist and any belief that God
exists is P.
But from these two premises we can derive
(8)
It is possible that: any belief that God exists is true and God does
not exist.
And (8) contradicts the modalized T-sentence
(9)
Necessarily, any belief that God exists is true if and only if
God exists.
The defender of P as an analysis of truth must either reject the
necessity of the relevant T-sentences – and thus happily
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
246
www.ebook3000.com

accept (8) – or ﬁnd a way to deny (7). This second sort of
pragmatism insists that adequate theories of truth must respect
the T-sentences, but ﬁnds fault with the imaginings that lead us
to conclude – falsely, it turns out – that God can fail to exist
despite a belief to the contrary being quite useful.29 Such a
defense can lead very quickly to some anti-realist metaphysics.
For our pragmatist subscribes to both:
(10)
Necessarily, any belief that God exists is true if and only if God
exists.
(11)
Necessarily, any belief that God exists is true if and only if the
belief is P.
From these we can derive
(12)
Necessarily, God exists if and only if any belief that God
exists is P.
If we read (12) as saying that what it is for God to exist is
for the belief to that effect to be useful, we have a radically
mind-dependent perspective on reality on our hands: the exis-
tence of God is constituted by the utility of our belief in him
(cf. McGinn 2000: 88–9). There are perhaps other ways of
reading (12), such that the utility of belief in God is guaranteed
to accompany (though not constitute) the existence of God.
But it is striking that reality – as described by the left-hand side
of the conditional – ends up necessarily matching up with
useful belief. Hence, I think we can use (5) to put pressure on
various theories of truth that attempt to deﬁne it in terms of
other notions.30 Those other notions must end up being neces-
sarily coextensive with truth, given the necessity that obtains
between the truth of ‘p’ and the truth of ‘It is true that p.’
29 Cf. Azzouni on “Putnam modals” (2000: 126–32).
30 We can also use it to put pressure on deﬂationary theories that take (1) to be a
necessary truth. See Field (1986) and Section 8.1 below.
Tarski and primitivism
247

Those who uphold the necessity of Tarski’s Convention T,
however, think not just that theories of truth should be con-
sistent with the T-sentences, but that the T-sentences should
follow from them. The requirement raises a number of ques-
tions. It is unclear what the relevant sense of ‘following’ is,
since Tarski was not explicit about what sense he intended
(see Gupta 2002). One might question whether theories of
truth that do not center on sentences are obligated to entail
the sentential T-sentences. Do theories of truth have to entail
all of the various T-sentences, regardless of which truth-
bearers those theories take to be primary? If Convention T
only applies with respect to one’s primary truth-bearers, then
those that employ propositions or beliefs are off the hook, for
the requirement is empty when it comes to T-sentences like (2),
(3), and (4). As necessary truths, they follow from any theory
(supposing that following is understood as necessary truth
preservation). So the stronger requirement is only an addi-
tional burden with respect to sentential T-sentences like (1).
Let us set aside these unanswered questions, and home
in on a potential objection to the necessity reading of
Convention T, which would require primitivists to be able to
derive the T-sentences from their theory. Consider the follow-
ing T-sentence:
(13)
‘II primus est’ is true if and only if 2 is prime.
(13) comes in handy when teaching an English speaker how to
understand Latin. In fact, (13) is a case of using one language,
English, as a metalanguage for giving the semantics of the
object language −in this case Latin. (13) is not fundamentally
different from its cousin we met earlier:
(1)
‘2 is prime’ is true if and only if 2 is prime.
The only difference is that (13) gives the truth conditions for a
sentence of Latin whereas (1) gives the truth conditions for a
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
248
www.ebook3000.com

sentence of English. Both are stated in the metalanguage
English, but they could have been stated in, say, Spanish:
(14)
‘2 is prime’ es verdad si y sólo si 2 es primo.
(15)
‘II primus est’ es verdad si y sólo si 2 es primo.
Here, then, is the question for the advocate of Convention
T. Which of these T-sentences must be entailed by a theory of
truth in order to qualify as an adequate theory of truth? If the
theory must entail both of them (and, by parity of reasoning, all
T-sentences drawing on all possible object languages), the
requirement is far too demanding. A theory of the nature of
truth would have to somehow have contained within it the
semantics for every language, actual and possible. Such a
requirement would miss the point of what is involved in giving
an account of the nature of truth. Were correspondence theorists
and coherence theorists neglecting their duties to the nature of
truth by not learning Hungarian, and building it into their
theories? Indeed they were not. But if Convention T requires
theories only to entail a subset of these T-sentences, then which
ones? Which languages are to be privileged, and which set aside?
The point of this foray into mixed-language T-sentences is to
bring out a very important lesson about Tarski’s approach to
truth that gets lost when we set our attention exclusively on
“homophonic” T-sentences like (1) that use the targeted object
language also as the metalanguage. Tarski uses Convention T
in order to give what he thought was an adequate deﬁnition of
truth for a given language. He would not have cared about
the distinction between (1) and (14), or between (13) and (15).
Use whatever metalanguage you prefer. But the question ‘(1) or
(13)?’ would strike Tarski as just confused. (1) forms part
of the deﬁnition of true-in-English; (13) forms part of the
deﬁnition of true-in-Latin. They are not in competition with
each other, and there is no making sense of the thought of a
deﬁnition of truth that had to include both.
Tarski and primitivism
249

It now makes abundant sense why Convention T is a require-
ment by Tarski’s lights. There can be no general deﬁnition of
truth, only deﬁnitions of truth relativized to certain limited for-
malized languages. Those interested in understanding the nature
of truth in a way that applies across languages, and to bearers
other than sentences are not going to ﬁnd Tarski’s convention
compelling, and rightly so. Above, we saw how Tarski states
Convention T as a sufﬁcient criterion of adequacy, but many
have taken it to constitute a necessary condition of adequacy as
well.31 We can now appreciate why satisfying the convention is
not necessary for theories of truth of the sort in which we are
engaged. For the sentential T-sentences involve information
about what the sentences of a language mean, and so no theory
can entail them that does not already include that semantic
information. Let us dig into this argument more deeply.
The question we are addressing is whether a requirement
for a theory of truth is that it entail T-sentences like ‘“2 is
prime” is true if and only if 2 is prime.’ Attending to T-sentences
like ‘“II primus est” is true if and only if 2 is prime’ helps us
keep in mind the fact that T-sentences offer truth conditions
for sentences of an object language in terms given by some
(possibly, but not necessarily distinct) metalanguage. Now,
how could a theory possibly entail both of these T-sentences?
The theory would already have to have built into it the seman-
tics for both English and Latin. If so, then we could provide
the requisite derivation. Hence, suppose that some theory of
truth (spelled out in the metalanguage of English) contained
the following axiom:
(16)
‘II primus est’ means that 2 is prime.
Together with the necessary truth
31 See, e.g., David (1994: 63), Horwich (1998a: 104), Soames (1999: 69), and
Wiggins (2002: 320).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
250
www.ebook3000.com

(17)
Anything that means that 2 is prime is true if and only if 2
is prime
we can derive
(13)
‘II primus est’ is true if and only if 2 is prime.
The same process enables us to derive more familiar T-sentences
for English as well. How does our theory entail (1)? It needs an
axiom parallel to (16):
(18)
‘2 is prime’ means that 2 is prime.
Taken together with (17) we can now derive (1). T-sentences
like (1) appear to be trivial, but the triviality is only a conse-
quence of the fact that its object language sentence is also a
member of the metalanguage. As theorists, we will always be
working in a metalanguage we understand, and so applying
that metalanguage to itself will yield apparently trivial claims
like (18). But (18) is no more trivial than (16); ‘2 is prime’
might have meant something else. That it appears trivial
merely reﬂects a bias on the part of the theorist and his or her
metalanguage.
The upshot of all this is that Convention T may be ﬁne as a
requirement for those attempting to deﬁne truth in a language,
or who, like deﬂationists, take the T-sentences to be concep-
tually basic, thus giving content to the theory of truth. Since the
T-sentences form the theory, there is no question that the
theory also (trivially) entails them. But for those interested
in a notion of truth that transcends any particular language,
the requirement is too demanding.32 To satisfy the demand one
would have to build into the theory of truth the semantics for
every possible language. It is not the business of the truth
theorist to tell you what all the sentences of Latin mean. That
32 Cf. Gupta and Belnap (1993: 25–7), David (1994: 103), and Patterson (2002: 8–12).
Tarski and primitivism
251

is the Latinist’s job. But once the meanings of the sentences
are settled, the truth theorist tells you under what conditions
they are true. This last step is fairly easy, of course. If some
Latin sentence L means that p, then L is true just in case p. The
theory of truth – at least of the sort in which we are presently
engaged – is not in the business of translating the sentences of
some target language into the home metalanguage. But what it
cannot do is contradict those ﬁndings, which is exactly what
my modest adequacy condition given by (5) upholds.33
Finally we can return to primitivism. What can and should
primitivists say about the T-sentences? Well, the thesis that
truth is an unanalyzable, fundamental concept does not con-
tradict any T-sentence, and is consistent with their actual
modal statuses, which satisﬁes my own adequacy condition.
It entails all the necessary T-sentences, and so satisﬁes an
analog of Tarski’s Convention T for propositional, belief,
and ‘it is true that’ T-sentences, if there is such a (trivial)
thing. It does not by itself entail the sentential T-sentences for
the sentences of a given language, but it does when combined
with the semantics for that language. The derivation is quite
simple. We ﬁrst rely on this general principle:
(19)
For any sentence s and expression p, if s means that p, then s is
true if and only if p.
This principle is uncontroversial, and instantly acceptable to
anyone who has an elementary grasp of the relationship
between meaning and truth. We do not need to worry about
whether primitivists are entitled to it or not – perhaps because
its appeal to the notion of meaning might be thought to
33 Obviously this discussion raises very important questions about the relationship
between the theory of truth and the theory of meaning. These will be taken up in
Section 8.4. Note that, in the language of Quine (1970), I am interested in what we
can say about a transcendent (i.e., language-independent) notion of truth, not a
merely immanent (i.e., language-dependent) one.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
252
www.ebook3000.com

presuppose the notion of truth – for it is simply putting our
concept of truth to work, not trying to analyze it. As it stands
(19) employs two kinds of quantiﬁcation. The variable ‘s’ is
used objectually, and will be replaced by names of sentences;
‘p’ is used substitutionally, and will be replaced by sentential
expressions. A couple of its instances include:
(20)
If ‘2 is prime’ means that 2 is prime, then ‘2 is prime’ is true if
and only if 2 is prime.
(21)
If ‘2 is prime’ means that snow is white, then ‘2 is prime’ is true
if and only if snow is white.
Together with the semantic principle
(18)
‘2 is prime’ means that 2 is prime
we may infer
(1)
‘2 is prime’ is true if and only if 2 is prime
but not
(22)
‘2 is prime’ is true if and only if snow is white,
which is exactly as it should be. Primitivism recognizes (1) as a
contingent truth because it derives it from the contingent,
empirical premise (18). Hence, primitivism fares better than
any deﬂationary theory that accepts (1) to be necessarily true.
Primitivism
recognizes
the
sentential
T-sentences
for
what they are: empirical claims that offer truth conditions for
the sentences of an object language in terms of some (possibly
distinct) metalanguage. What of the propositional T-sentences?
Given their necessity, there is no question of their derivability
from the primitivist theory. Primitivists see the propositional
T-sentences as central to our concept of truth; one has not fully
mastered the concept unless one has mastered the inferences
from one side of a T-sentence to the other. The T-sentences do
not exhaust the concept, as certain deﬂationists hold. But they
Tarski and primitivism
253

are conceptual truths, and show how truth relates to, well,
everything there is.
7.5
Conclusion
As we have seen, Tarski’s semantic conception of truth has
sometimes been thought to motivate correspondence theories,
and sometimes deﬂationary theories. My alternative sugges-
tion is that Tarski’s work is best paired with the primitivist
perspective on truth. Primitivists stress the indeﬁnability of our
most general concept of truth, its explanatory value, and its
metaphysical neutrality. All of these features, together with
primitivism’s perspective on the T-sentences, are shared by
Tarski’s semantic approach to truth. Hence, although Tarski
himself never says anything that commits him to primitivism,
he says plenty of things that distinguish him from both the
traditional substantive theories and deﬂationary theories. If
Tarski were to accept any contemporary account of our gen-
eral concept of truth, primitivism would be the view most
acceptable to him.34
Tarski’s reticence regarding what we should say about
our natural language understanding of truth has led several
philosophers to protest that by restricting his positive views
to formal languages, Tarski’s work fails to be of any philo-
sophical interest. Armed with our primitivist perspective on
Tarski’s views, we can confront these objections directly.
For example, according to Max Black, “The philosophical
34 Patterson observes that “Tarski had no speciﬁc concerns at all about the content of
the concept of truth itself” (2012: 139). On Patterson’s view, Tarski’s fundamental
interest is not in analyzing our intuitive notion of truth, but in showing how to
consistently and adequately introduce a truth predicate (that conforms to the intuitive
notion) into certain kinds of languages. If so, then Tarski would have been ofﬁcially
neutral regarding primitivism; my contention is that the view is open and amenable to
him, if he were to throw his hat into this particular philosophical ring.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
254
www.ebook3000.com

relevance of [Tarski’s] work will depend upon the extent to
which something similar [to his formal language deﬁnitions]
can be done for colloquial English” (1948: 56). But this
response begs the question against primitivism: Tarski’s work
on the limits of deﬁnability encourages the thought that truth
as conceived in ordinary thought and speech is not deﬁnable,
and this fact is of profound philosophical relevance. The ques-
tion of which of our concepts are foundational and fundamen-
tal is an important one; Black, to the contrary, assumes that
showing something to be indeﬁnable and primitive cannot be
philosophically relevant.
Other philosophers have also objected to Tarski’s theory of
truth on the grounds that it has little to offer, philosophically
speaking. In the most infamous case, Putnam declares that “As
a philosophical account of truth, Tarski’s theory fails as badly
as it is possible for an account to fail” (1985: 64), and denies
that what Tarski deﬁnes “is in any way similar in meaning” to
our intuitive use of truth (1983b: 37). Putnam’s worry derives
from his view of Tarski’s truth predicates, which (according to
Putnam) apply to sentences regardless of what they mean. In
effect, whether or not a sentence possesses “Tarskian truth”
does not depend on what it means, and so Tarskian truth
cannot be real truth, which does depend on meaning.
This is not the place to evaluate Putnam’s objection in full;35
what we may appreciate instead is how a Putnam-style worry
simply dissolves when we view Tarski’s work through the
primitivist lens. Tarski’s ambitions did not include offering
anything like a reductive deﬁnition in the mold of the tradi-
tional theories of truth. One should not turn to Tarski in order
to learn the ultimate nature of truth, for Tarski may well agree
35 For further discussion, see Davidson (1990b), Raatikainen (2003; 2008), and
Patterson (2008a; 2008b). See also the closely related discussions in Soames
(1984), Etchemendy (1988), and Heck (1997).
Tarski and primitivism
255

with primitivists that no such theory can be provided.36
However, this does not show that Tarski’s work fails as a
“philosophical” theory, for that response presupposes that
the only philosophical theory of truth worth having is a reduc-
tive, non-primitivist one. We may grant to Putnam that equiv-
alences like ‘“Snow is white” is true-in-L if and only if snow is
white’ (even if read in Putnam’s problematic way, as necessary
logical truths) do not reveal at all the real nature of truth.
But that was never their purpose. Tarski offers his deﬁnitions
of truth in order to provide semanticists, logicians, mathema-
ticians, interpreters of science, and others predicates that
are safe from paradox and metaphysical baggage, and yet
remain true to our basic understanding of the notion of truth.
The T-sentences, again, provide a kind of “check” that his
deﬁnitions conform to that basic understanding; they are not
themselves supposed to be deﬁning our basic concept of truth.
Putnam’s objection misunderstands the role that T-sentences
play in the theory of truth, and supposes Tarski to be up to
something that he does not think can be done.
John Etchemendy (1988) has also voiced a number of inﬂu-
ential criticisms of Tarski’s work. He argues that Tarski’s
project of deﬁning truth is actually at odds with the project of
understanding semantics, despite appearances to the contrary.
Etchemendy argues that Tarski, in order to deﬁne a notion of
truth that does not succumb to paradox, effectively stipulates a
deﬁnition of truth, and any such stipulative deﬁnition cannot
contain the empirical information essential to the semantic
theory of a language. Tarski’s deﬁnitions will usher forth
equivalences such as ‘“Snow is white” is true (in the Tarskian
sense) if and only if snow is white,’ guaranteeing that truth
36 Putnam brieﬂy suggests that the primitivist line is not open to Tarski (1985: 72), but
he does not say why. Perhaps he has in mind the sorts of considerations Etchemendy
considers, as discussed below.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
256
www.ebook3000.com

(in the Tarskian sense) gets the right extension. But this equiv-
alence does not give us any semantic information about the
English sentence ‘Snow is white.’ To do that, we need not the
(supposedly) logical truth above involving (Tarskian) truth,
but rather the equivalence ‘“Snow is white” is true (in the
ordinary sense) if and only if snow is white.’ Unlike Tarski’s
equivalence (according to Etchemendy), this second equiva-
lence expresses contingent, empirical information about the
sentence ‘Snow is white.’ Tarski’s equivalences might help
deﬁne a notion that dodges paradox, but they will not tell us
anything about the semantics of natural language.
Now, Etchemendy goes on to claim that one can move
from Tarski’s “list-like” deﬁnition of truth for a language to a
semantic theory for that language by employing a primitive
notion of truth (1988: 59). On this approach, we take the addi-
tional theoretical step of holding that any particular truth pred-
icate deﬁned in Tarskian fashion expresses our ordinary notion
of truth, and thus hold that anything true (in the Tarskian sense)
is true (in the ordinary sense). So it might appear that one can
use (a properly supplemented form of) Tarski’s project to aid
in semantics. But the appearances here are deceptive, says
Etchemendy, and “little more than a fortuitous accident”
(1988: 52). For Etchemendy argues that amending Tarski in
this primitivist fashion is in conﬂict with Tarski’s ambitions.
Tarski wants an eliminative notion of truth – and so one that is
properly inoculated from paradox – and the attempt to make
Tarski’s theory philosophically informative ends up relying on
an uneliminated primitive conception of truth.
Even setting aside my aforementioned doubts that Tarski
reads the T-sentences as being purely stipulative logical truths,
I do not believe that we need to follow Etchemendy in seeing
the primitivist maneuver as being antithetical to Tarski’s ambi-
tions. As we have seen, Tarski’s interest was never in replacing
our ordinary conception of truth with the kind of deﬁnitions he
Tarski and primitivism
257

offers. Rather, Tarski’s deﬁnitions work in conjunction with
our ordinary conception of truth. We know that Tarski’s deﬁ-
nitions are successful only if they are materially adequate, in
which case they entail all the T-sentences. For the T-sentences to
provide an independent check on Tarski’s deﬁnitions, they must
be expressing important facts about our ordinary conception of
truth (or, at least, about the truth conditions of our sentences),
and not vacuous logical truths. So whereas Etchemendy sees a
prior, primitivist conception of truth as somehow conﬂicting
with Tarski’s project, the correct interpretation is that Tarski’s
project relies on there being such a prior conception. As I have
argued, primitivism about that prior conception is the view that
is most consonant with Tarski’s theory.
What remains to be seen is whether primitivists can con-
vince Tarski that our use of truth in ordinary thought can be
consistent. Tarski worried that our use of truth in natural
language was inconsistent, though he stopped short of drawing
that conclusion. So the question arises how the primitivist may
approach the semantical paradoxes as they arise in natural
language. That topic is one that we shall take up in Chapter 9.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
258
www.ebook3000.com

8
Primitive truth at work
In this chapter we shift our attention to the indirect case for
primitivism. Rather than arguing directly for the conclusion
that truth is primitive, the new goal is to show what the
theoretical payoffs are of accepting a primitivist conception
of truth. Primitivism offers a very appealing account of how a
variety of key philosophical notions ﬁt together. In particular,
the package primitivism has to offer is far superior to what the
deﬂationist can put forward.
The chapter begins with a discussion of deﬂationism, where
I rehearse a number of familiar complaints that have been
lodged against it. I also suggest that the motivation for deﬂa-
tionism severely declines when traditional substantive views
are set aside, and primitivism enters the debate. I do not
pretend that deﬂationists have no responses to the objections
I and others have offered; but that primitivism does not face
these objections at all is a strong point in its favor. Then I turn
to a discussion of the many theoretical virtues that accompany
taking truth as a conceptual primitive. Here again the discus-
sion will constantly refer to deﬂationism, with the hope of
showing how primitivists can approach these other philosoph-
ical projects in a more satisfying way than can deﬂationists.
8.1
Problems for deﬂationism
‘Conceptual deﬂationism’ is a name for a cluster of views that
take truth to be an explanatorily impotent concept. Some
259

characterize deﬂationism as the view that truth is merely a
“logical” concept (Damnjanovic 2010), or as a concept
whose content is exhausted by the truth schema (Horwich
1990). Accordingly, conceptual deﬂationism about truth
accompanies the thesis that truth is not explanatorily con-
nected to other notions – such as belief, desire, assertion,
meaning, etc. – in ways beyond its expressive function as a
device for disquotation, generalization, and the like. One way
to argue against deﬂationism is to demonstrate that there are
such explanatorily important connections between these con-
cepts and truth; such arguments contend that deﬂationism
does not satisfy what Anil Gupta calls “the adequacy thesis,”
the claim that deﬂationism can adequately explain all the facts
about truth (1993b: 361). I offer arguments in this vein in the
subsequent sections of this chapter. Others have challenged
deﬂationism directly, and it will be worthwhile to examine
their objections, if only brieﬂy.1
One familiar charge against deﬂationism is that it requires
a maximally large ideology (Gupta 1993a: 70–1; 1993b:
365, and David 1994: 126–30). Suppose that instead of
truth being deﬁned in terms of correspondence and
fact, say, that it is instead deﬁned by the instances of the
truth schema. But there is an instance of the truth schema for
every proposition, and every concept whatsoever ﬁnds its
way into some proposition or other. In effect, if truth is
deﬁned by the truth schema, then the “ideology” of the
deﬂationist’s theory of truth requires each and every last
1 It goes without saying, of course, that I assume neither that all of these objections
affect all forms of deﬂationism equally, nor that there are not potential responses
available to deﬂationists. Consequently, my remarks against deﬂationism are not
meant to be conclusive, and are directed largely toward the well-known forms of
deﬂationism found in Horwich (1990) and Field (1994a). (See Azzouni 2006 for a
more recent sophisticated form of deﬂationism that may avoid some of the objec-
tions below.) My main focus is in advocating primitivism based on its own merits,
not tearing down other views.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
260
www.ebook3000.com

concept. Gupta does not take this fact about deﬂationism to
be itself damning to the theory.2 Rather, he interprets it as
giving the lie to the deﬂationist’s claim to offer a simple
theory of truth. A theory that explains the phenomena of
truth by way of a maximally large ideology is thereby far less
simple than a theory that explains those phenomena without
resorting to such an inﬂated ideology.
A repository of objections to deﬂationism can be found
in Chapter 5 of David (1994).3 One such objection is that
deﬂationists cannot state their views in a ﬁnite manner.
Recalling the discussion of the quantiﬁers from Section 6.3.1,
if deﬂationists want to deﬁne their theories in terms of a
generalized statement of the truth schema, then they need to
employ some notion of substitutional quantiﬁcation, thereby
rendering the deﬁnition circular. Horwich, at least, happily
accepts this consequence, and admits that he can offer only
an inﬁnitary theory (1990: 21).
Another of David’s objections – found also, among other
places, in Jackson, Oppy, and Smith (1994) and Patterson
(2010) – involves the modal status of the T-sentences.
Consider the sentential T-sentence
(1)
‘2 is prime’ is true if and only if 2 is prime.
Any version of deﬂationism that takes (1) to be a partial
deﬁnition of truth must take it to be analytic, a conceptual
truth, or something in the neighborhood. Accordingly, such
deﬂationists are committed not only to the truth of (1), but also
its necessity (e.g., Field 1994a). But on the face of it, (1) is as
2 But here is one way of ratcheting up the objection into something internally unstable:
if one deﬁnes truth by way of the instances of the truth schema then one ends up with
a circular deﬁnition by way of those instances of the schema that involve truth. For
example: ‘The proposition that truth is incompatible with falsity is true if and only if
truth is incompatible with falsity.’
3 See also O’Leary-Hawthorne and Oppy (1997).
Primitive truth at work
261

contingent as it gets.4 Had the English word ‘prime’ meant
something else – say, “odd” – then (1) would be false. For in
that possibility, the sentence ‘2 is prime’ would be true if and
only if 2 is odd. Since 2 is necessarily not odd, (1) would be
false had ‘prime’ meant “odd.”
Before committing to deﬂationism himself, Hartry Field
pointed out this consequence of (sentential) deﬂationism, but
did not take it as an objection to the view. In fact, Field points
out that deﬂationists must accept that “if we had used the word
‘white’ differently, grass might have been white” (1986: 58).
That deﬂationists must take T-sentences like (1) to be necessary
shows that they are committed to a revisionary conception of
truth, for sentences like (1) are not conceptual truths according
to our ordinary conception of (sentential) truth. If T-sentences
are revised to get around this problem (by building into them
conditions that ﬁx the meaning of the sentences),5 then new
problems appear. For example, suppose that the T-sentences
that deﬁne truth are not like (1) but rather the following:
(2)
‘2 is prime’ is true-in-my-idiolect if and only if 2 is prime.
If my idiolect holds as an axiom the claim that ‘2 is prime’ is
true if and only if 2 is prime, then the necessity problem is
avoided: (2), unlike (1), is plausibly necessary. This move
requires idiolects to have all the sentences that they have essen-
tially, such that it becomes impossible to add to or modify
one’s idiolect; all changes in idiolect are changes from one
idiolect to another. And since each idiolect carries its own
truth predicate – and no two people plausibly share exactly
the same idiolect – it is highly unlikely that any of us share a
truth predicate. Every time we learn a new sentence, our truth
4 Hence, no parallel problem arises for propositional deﬂationists like Horwich who
appeal to instances of the truth schema like ‘The proposition that 2 is prime is true if
and only if 2 is prime,’ which are indeed necessary, even according to substantivists.
5 See McGee (1990) and Field (1994a).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
262
www.ebook3000.com

predicate changes (David 1994: 134–5). Furthermore, (2) and
the like cannot be used to deﬁne truth in general, but only
(at best) a relativized conception of truth (a lesson familiar
from Chapter 7). Even if there are indeﬁnitely many truth
predicates, each corresponding to a single idiolect, it seems
that they are all instances of a broader, more general notion
that resists any such attempt at deﬁnition. Deﬂationist resour-
ces do not appear to be able to capture that notion.
A vast number of other objections have been launched
at deﬂationism, many of which we shall encounter below.
It has been objected, for instance, that deﬂationists cannot
adequately handle notions like meaning, assertion, and falsity.
In what follows, my engagement with deﬂationists will not be
an attempt to show that deﬂationists cannot handle these
notions, but rather that primitivists can handle them better.
The case for primitivism is buttressed even further when we
consider the overall motivations for deﬂationary theories of
truth. One motivation behind deﬂationism is the desire to have
a “metaphysically austere” theory of truth, one that is divorced
from the ontological commitments that accompany the tradi-
tional substantive views (such as facts and a correspondence
relation, or the metaphysical idealism often accompanying
coherence views). The ability to do without such things is a
beneﬁt of deﬂationism over the traditional views, but not over
conceptual primitivism, which may reject metaphysical substan-
tivism and its metaphysical posits. Conceptual primitivists
acknowledge that truth is a “metaphysical” notion only to the
extent that it acknowledges that truths are true in virtue of
reality. ‘There are penguins’ is true because of the existence of
penguins. This fact, I have argued, is better captured by a theory
of truthmakers, not by the theory of truth itself, and is presum-
ably not something that deﬂationists would like to deny.
Deﬂationists score no points over primitivists when it comes
to ontological parsimony. If the Gupta objection is sound, then
Primitive truth at work
263

deﬂationists lose points with respect to one aspect of theoret-
ical parsimony, since deﬂationist truth requires a massive
ideology. Furthermore, since every view has to have its
primitives – deﬂationism too – those views that do more with
fewer primitives also fare better with respect to theoretical
parsimony. I think it is plausible that primitive truth can do
a lot more work for us than taking other notions as primitive.
The proof of that claim, of course, is to be found in the overall
theoretical merits of the view, as will be a common theme in
the sections that follow. So even if deﬂationists fare better
in terms of ontological and/or theoretical parsimony than
do traditional substantivist theories, they enjoy no such
advantage over primitivists. Accordingly, the motivations for
deﬂationism are themselves deﬂated when we set aside its
traditional competitors and consider in their place the primi-
tivist conception.
Make no mistake, I believe that the focus on deﬂationary
theories of truth has led to some of the most important advan-
ces on the topic of truth to take place in the twentieth century.
Deﬂationists helped bring truth “back down to earth” by
deﬂating it of its metaphysical presuppositions, and have
done important work in uncovering and articulating the
expressive functions of ‘true.’ Primitivists beneﬁt from this
work, and they need not deny any of the positive things
about truth that deﬂationists have to say. What they need to
reject are deﬂationism’s negative claims about truth, claims
which lose much of their force when the main dialectic switches
from deﬂationism versus traditional substantivism to deﬂa-
tionism versus primitivism.
Let us turn now to an exploration of all the many things
that primitivism can do for us. Even if other theories can
accomplish some of these things, the overall package that
primitivism presents is quite appealing, and illustrates the
many virtues of the view.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
264
www.ebook3000.com

8.2
Assertion
8.2.1
A positive account
When I make an assertion – say, that 2 is prime – I put forward
a particular thought as being true. I do not put out the thought
as something to be questioned, denied, wondered about, or
hypothesized. When I assert that 2 is prime, I make a claim
about the way things are, and take on various commitments
with respect to it. What marks my assertion as an assertion is
not simply that I uttered the words ‘2 is prime.’ I might have
uttered the words in an interrogative tone (‘2 is prime?’),
thereby communicating that I was questioning the thought’s
truth, or expressing my own ignorance of its truth. I might
have uttered the words in a sardonic or sarcastic tone, thereby
committing myself to the negation of the claim that 2 is prime.
I could have used the words ‘It is true that 2 is prime’ to make
my assertion, but I did not have to. In some cases, a simple nod
of the head might be sufﬁcient to make the assertion. And using
‘true’ explicitly would not have guaranteed that I was putting
forward the thought as true: I still might have used the words
interrogatively or sarcastically, or in a context (such as acting
or playing make-believe) in which such words do not perform
an assertoric role.
Assertion, then, is but one of many kinds of speech acts that
can engage one and the same thought. The thought that 2 is
prime can be asserted, denied, hypothesized, conjectured, or
questioned. Any of these different kinds of speech acts can take
one and the same thought as its content. What distinguishes
these speech acts is the kind of force that accompanies them;
assertions are put forward with a different kind of force than
are conjectures, questions, and the others. Furthermore, what
distinguishes one kind of speech act from another cannot be
given syntactically. It is not the words you use, but how you use
Primitive truth at work
265

them. Two questions immediately arise concerning the nature
of assertion. First, what is it to make an assertion, as opposed
to a denial, conjecture, or question? Second, how does one go
about making an assertion?
As for the ﬁrst question, what distinguishes assertions of the
thought that p from denials of the thought that p, conjectures
of the thought that p, and hypothesizings of the thought that
p is that assertions of the thought that p involve putting it forth
as true. Denying the thought that p puts it forth as false,
conjecturing the thought puts it forward as being possibly
true, and hypothesizing it puts it forth as being worthy of
investigation. But when we assert we take a deﬁnitive, positive
stand with respect to the truth of the thought that p. If you
interpret me as having asserted that p, then you have taken
me to think that it is true that p. It would be no defense of
some politician to backtrack some political campaign promise
by saying, “Look, I admit that I asserted that I would not
raise taxes during the campaign, but that does not mean
I was offering that as something to be taken as true.”6 When
we assert, we put claims out there as being true. We take a
stand on how things are. Assertoric force, we might say, is
understood in terms of truth.
As for the second question, how it is that we make assertions,
we can start with a negative answer: even though assertions
present thoughts as being true, we do not go about making
assertions by means of predicating truth of thoughts. We can
predicate the truth of a thought without thereby asserting it. The
actor who utters the words ‘It is true that all the world’s a stage’
or ‘“All the world’s a stage” is true’ does not thereby assert that
all the world’s a stage. As we have seen, employing truth
6 I hasten to add that in April 2011, US senator Jon Kyl was rightly mocked for
responding to criticisms that an assertion of his made on the Senate ﬂoor was
blatantly false by claiming that his assertion was “not intended to be a factual
statement.”
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
266
www.ebook3000.com

predicates or truth operators is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient
for making an assertion. So we do not assert thoughts simply by
predicating truth of them. Hence, ‘true’ is not the mark of
assertoric force, even if assertoric force is best accounted for in
terms of truth. Since we do not communicate assertoric force by
means of ‘true,’ how do we do it? Through the usual contextual
means. Assertions are recognized as assertions because of how
they are communicated: because of the surrounding speech acts
that contextualize them, the tone of voice that speaks them, the
body language that accompanies them, etc.
8.2.2
A challenge for deﬂationism
The view of assertion I have just laid out is perfectly natural, and
all entirely available to the primitivist. It is also, as we saw in
Section 2.1, Frege’s view: “In order to put something forward as
true, we do not need a special predicate: we only need the
assertoric force with which the sentence is uttered” (1979:
233). Primitivists grant that truth is an explanatorily potent
concept, one that we can use to help us understand other
notions, such as assertion. Having such an account readily at
hand is a beneﬁt of taking truth as a conceptual primitive. As I
shall now argue, it is a beneﬁt that conceptual deﬂationists lack.7
To assert is to present as true. For example, to assert that 2 is
prime is to present the thought that 2 is prime as true. Denying
the thought does not present it as true; neither does conjectur-
ing it. The worry for deﬂationism is that the appearance of
‘true’ here does not ﬁt the standard deﬂationist mold; it is
not disquotable, and does not obviously admit of a quantiﬁed
analysis akin to how deﬂationists handle ‘Something/every-
thing Kant said is true.’ If deﬂationists are to countenance
7 See Bar-On and Simmons (2007) for an expert presentation of the following
argument.
Primitive truth at work
267

this claim about assertion, they must do so by taking
advantage only of the resources available to their view. Now,
there are two distinct senses in which deﬂationists need to
“countenance” the claim that to assert is to present as true.
First, because this claim strikes me as a fact about assertion
that any view ought to be able to uphold, deﬂationists need to
show that their view can allow for it being true. But suppose a
deﬂationist rejects this claim about assertion as false. Even in
that case, the deﬂationist still needs to countenance it in the
sense that it is perfectly intelligible, even if false. Whatever else
we say about the claim, it is not nonsense. Deﬂationists need to
show that the appearance of ‘true’ in the claim does not violate
any deﬂationary theses about truth. So the challenge I am
posing to deﬂationists is two-fold: show that you can account
both for the intelligibility and truth of ‘To assert is to present
as true.’ This sentence challenges deﬂationism on two separate
fronts: it purports to reveal an explanatory connection
between truth and assertion, and that ‘true’ is not exclusively
a disquotational, expressive device.
For deﬂationists, truth is a meager, thin concept that is
not useful in explaining other notions except by way of its
logical uses of disquotation, expressing generalizations, and
the like. Recall (from Section 1.1.2) the easy case for deﬂation-
ism. Knowledge is likely deﬁned (in part) in terms of truth: S
knows that p only if ‘p’ is true. But here ‘true’ just lets us easily
express an otherwise inﬁnitely long conjunction: S knows that p
only if p is ‘snow is white’ and snow is white, or p is ‘grass is
green’ and grass is green, and so forth. There is a crucial differ-
ence, however, between the case of knowledge and the case of
assertion. The difference even boils down to a single crucial
letter. S knows that p only if ‘p’ is true. But to assert that p is
to present ‘p’ as true. The difference between ‘is’ and ‘as’ turns
out to make all the difference in the world. One way to see the
difference is to appeal to the distinction between ﬁrst-order and
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
268
www.ebook3000.com

second-order uses of ‘true’ (Simmons 2006: 200). First-order
uses of ‘true’ involve truth-bearers that are either immediately at
hand, referred to, or quantiﬁed over. Familiar examples are
found in ‘“Snow is white” is true,’ ‘What Phil just said is true,’
and ‘Everything Sophia says about empiricism is true.’ Second-
order uses tend to be, in Simmons’s words, “more reﬂective
or theoretical” (2006: 200). ‘To assert is to present as true’
involves such a case, as does ‘To believe is to regard as true.’
With second-order cases, truth is not being ascribed to anything,
as is the case with ﬁrst-order uses. What appears to be going
on instead is that certain conceptual connections are being said
to obtain between truth and other notions. The question at hand
is whether deﬂationists can accommodate these connections.
The predicate ‘is true’ functions disquotationally, and so
when it shows up in analyses, deﬂationists may handle it easily.
We cannot say the same for ‘as true,’ for it does not function
disquotationally. To present p as true is not to present p. There
are many ways of presenting p: one can present it as true, as
false, or as worthy of belief. Assertion is but one mode of
presentation. We know which mode of presentation – the one
that presents thoughts as being true – but this is not an answer
that deﬂationists can give without ceding their deﬂationism,
for it reveals that assertion is to be explained in terms of a
non-disquotational appeal to truth. The present account of
assertion is not relying on ‘true’ as a logical device; rather, it
is citing a deep conceptual connection between the concept of
truth and the concept of assertion.
One way of understanding the present objection to deﬂa-
tionism is to see it as pointing out a place in our conceptual
scheme where truth is of central importance, even though the
predicate ‘true’ is nowhere to be found. Deﬂationists identify
the workings of ‘true’ in our language, and take their ﬁndings
to exhaust everything there is to say about truth. Substantivists
try to ﬁnd the corners of thought where truth creeps in,
Primitive truth at work
269

even if ‘true’ does not, and assertion presents a paradigm
example. We saw this idea at work in the discussion of
omnipresence, particularly in the case of Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern (see Section 5.2.4). The two friends speak a
“Tarski-approved”
language
that
includes
no
semantic
vocabulary, and so no truth predicate. Yet in no way are they
thereby prevented from making assertions about their lonely
coin tosses to one another. Furthermore, the most natural
account of what Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are doing on
their desert island proceeds in terms of truth. Rosencrantz uses
his words to make two different kinds of speech acts, assertions
and deceptions. The former aims to report the truth, about
how things stand with respect to his coin tosses. The other is
deliberately not reporting the truth, for the sake of entertain-
ment. The important point is that the natural way to describe
their behavior is in terms of truth, and it is not obvious that
deﬂationists may avail themselves of this explanation. These
castaways have two kinds of speech acts, both deﬁned in
contrasting ways with respect to truth. This is so even though
there is nothing even approximating a truth predicate in their
language. And it is not just we the anthropologists who have a
concept of truth and are employing it to explain the scenario;
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern also reveal themselves to have a
concept of truth, in spite of not having a word for it. As I
argued earlier, their ability to engage in assertoric practices
reveals that they possess a concept of truth. We need truth to
make assertions, form beliefs, and the like, even if we have no
practical or linguistic need of ‘true’ to form generalizations or
“semantically ascend.” truth runs far deeper than ‘true.’
Perhaps there is a way for deﬂationists to capture these
central insights about the nature of assertion. But even if
there is, it will take some theoretical maneuvering on their
part. My goal is not to offer a knock-down argument against
deﬂationism (although I believe that we have a fairly powerful
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
270
www.ebook3000.com

one here), but rather to illustrate one of several theoretical
virtues that primitivism enjoys. Primitivists can take on a per-
fectly natural account of assertion without pause; deﬂationists
either have to deny the appearances, or go out of their way to
show that they too can accept these straightforward claims
about assertion.
8.2.3
Assertion ﬁrst?
I have offered up an account of assertion that is framed in terms
of truth, and centers around the claim that to assert is to present
as true. Primitivists can agree, and will argue that truth is the
more fundamental notion. Others might seek to uphold the
close connection between truth and assertion, but run things
in reverse. On that view, assertion is primary, and we deﬁne
truth out of it. Such a view would not be deﬂationary, for
deﬂationary views think that just as truth does not explain
other substantive philosophical concepts, we do not need any
other substantive philosophical concepts to explain truth. But if
one took assertion to be prior to truth, then we would be giving
up primitivism about truth. Truth is not the ultimate unex-
plained explainer, but something explicable after all.
The “assertion-ﬁrst” view has a rich heritage, and can be
found in the work of seminal thinkers like Dummett (1976;
1991), Wright (1992), and Brandom (1994). Dummett offers
an elegant statement of his view:
What do we need the concept of truth for, and where do we get it
from? Without doubt, the source of the concept lies in our general
conception of the linguistic practice of assertion. It is fundamental
to this practice that an assertion may be judged as correct or
incorrect: it may be accepted as correct, or rejected as incorrect,
by a hearer; the speaker may subsequently be compelled to with-
draw it as incorrect, or the hearer to acknowledge it as correct.
This is, of course, to appeal to an intuitive conception of the
Primitive truth at work
271

correctness or incorrectness of assertions, without offering any
analysis of it. That analysis will be given by the part of the
meaning-theory which makes up the theory of force, which will
describe the various linguistic practices of making assertions,
requests, and so forth . . . It is, therefore, here that the connection
will be established between the notion of truth and the practice of
making assertions.
(Dummett 1991: 165; cf. 1976: 83)
Dummett is here drawing some fundamental connections
between truth, assertion, and the theory of meaning. These are
connections that I do not deny, and neither should primitivists.
Where primitivists disagree with Dummett is in the order of
explanation between these various key notions. (And, of course,
with Dummett’s over-the-top assertion that his view about the
priority relations is “without doubt.”) Dummett starts with an
“intuitive conception” of the correctness and incorrectness of
making assertions. From this (in conjunction with our linguistic
practices) we build up a theory of meaning, and from there give
content to our concept of truth. Primitivists, by contrast, start
with truth, and then use it to give an account of assertion and,
perhaps, meaning (via a truth-conditional theory of meaning;
more on this below in Section 8.4).
There is no simple way to adjudicate disputes between those
who agree on a set of connections between concepts, but
disagree on the direction of the priority relations that obtain
between them. Dummett takes as prior the notions of asser-
tion, correctness, and incorrectness, and thus holds truth to be
derivative. I take truth as my primitive notion, with assertion
and “correctness” being derivative. We all need primitives,
and the most honest way of arguing for our own preferred
set (besides arguing directly for it, as I have done in the pre-
vious chapters) is to manifest the virtues of taking one set of
primitives on instead of another. This book is being offered as a
testament to the many virtues of taking on truth as a primitive.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
272
www.ebook3000.com

I also hope that my view has some pre-theoretical pull to it
(though it is not by accident that I mention this consideration
last). For one thing, taking the notion of correctness as being
prior to truth is rather suspect: to say that an assertion is
correct sounds suspiciously similar to saying that an assertion
is true. Do we really have a grasp on the notion of a correct
assertion that is prior to and independent of our understanding
of a true assertion? Those in the assertion-ﬁrst camp must
be especially careful that their prior notions do not end up
presupposing truth. Primitivists, of course, face no such worry.
Crispin Wright’s interest in the assertion-ﬁrst camp is not
universal. Wright is a pluralist about truth, in that he thinks
different notions of truth, all of which share a common funda-
mental core, are operant in different domains of thought and
language. One of his suggestions is that in some domains, such
as ethics, truth is best understood in terms of superassertibility.
So for some domains truth is understood in terms of assertion, or,
to be more precise, warranted assertion. According to Wright, a
statement is superassertible “if and only if it is, or can be, war-
ranted and some warrant for it would survive arbitrarily close
scrutiny of its pedigree and arbitrarily extensive increments to or
other forms of improvement of our information” (1992: 48).
The basic idea is that the truth of superassertible statements can
never outstrip our possible evidence for them. Once all the infor-
mation is in, the question is settled. It falls to Wright either to
offer an account of what it is for something to be warranted (in a
way that does not antecedently presuppose truth), or to take the
notion of warrant as a primitive (in which case the case for its
being a superior choice of primitive needs to be made). The same
must be done for the notion of information. Primitivists face
no difﬁculty here. Warrant may be cashed out in terms of
truth (see Section 8.5 below on epistemic justiﬁcation), and
information can easily be deﬁned as sets of truths. Those who
take assertion to be prior to truth, even for restricted domains,
Primitive truth at work
273

must be careful not to end up inadvertently employing it. Here we
see yet another instance of a common theme: those who do not
take truth as primitive constantly face the challenge of either
having to tiptoe around it when offering accounts of other
notions that seem to presuppose it, or offering in its place far
less plausible primitives.
To conclude, let us consider one ﬁnal way of adjudicating
between the truth-ﬁrst crowd and the assertion-ﬁrst crowd.
Both camps stress the connection between truth and assertion;
what they disagree about is which of the two is more fundamen-
tal.8 In these sorts of cases, we can raise the “Euthyphro ques-
tion,” so named for the Platonic dialogue that ﬁrst raised it (Plato
1997a). In the dialogue, Socrates and his interlocutor Euthyphro
end up agreeing that what is pious is loved by all the gods. In
effect, they acknowledge that ‘is loved by all the gods’ and ‘is
pious’ are coextensive notions. But then Socrates asks: is some-
thing pious because it is loved by the gods, or is something loved
by the gods because it is pious? The question concerns which of
the coextensive notions is more fundamental. The parallel case
we are dealing with recognizes that correct assertions are true.
Suppose p is one such case. Is p correctly assertible because it is
true, or is p true because it is correctly assertible? The truth-ﬁrst
camp takes the former view; the assertion-ﬁrst camp takes the
latter. When phrased this way, the truth-ﬁrst view strikes me as
more pre-theoretically compelling. Now, perhaps this is just a
way of framing the debate (and stating my view), and not a
means of adjudicating it. Certainly our gut reactions to the
Euthyphro question do not constitute an independent argument
for how to answer it. (And if Wright is right, then we might
answer the question differently for different domains.) But fram-
ing the issue in these terms is helpful, and helps to bring out just
8 Perhaps networkers have the easiest time here, for they can take both to be funda-
mental concepts.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
274
www.ebook3000.com

what is at stake when we attempt to deﬁne truth in terms of
assertion (or vice versa).
8.3
Declaratives and truth aptness
Not all bits of natural language are truth-apt. Only a special
class of expressions qualify for being true or false. Back in
Section 6.3.1, I raised the question ‘What is a declarative sen-
tence?’ and suggested that we might put truth to work in answer-
ing it. If so, then we see yet another way that substitutionally
quantiﬁed sentences may end up presupposing truth, and another
advantage for primitivism. If we cannot even account for what
separates ‘Snow is white’ from ‘Is snow white?’ without bringing
in truth, then primitivism looks to be pretty well inevitable.
When we consider the truth schema, at ﬁrst glance it seems
absolutely innocuous: For any p, it is true that p if and only if p.
But what may we substitute for ‘p’? Not single words. Not
sub-sentential expressions. It seems that we can only substitute
full sentences. But not just any old sentence, since questions
and commands do not cut it. We need something like declar-
ative sentences. (Furthermore, we might need something like
non-paradoxical declarative sentences, but let us set aside this
issue for the time being.) Declarative sentences, like so many
things in life, are easy to recognize, but difﬁcult to pin down.
We know them when we see them. The question for the present
section is what options are available to a primitivist about
truth in giving an account of declaratives, and, moreover,
truth aptness in general.9
9 Note that I am not asking after any sort of grammatical (or syntactic) account of
what makes a sentence declarative. Linguists, equipped with the understanding of
what declarative sentences are, can give an account of how particular languages
make use of the notion in their own idiosyncratic way. What I am after is that notion
that linguists must already have when they approach a language, on the lookout for
its declaratives.
Primitive truth at work
275

It is important to keep in mind the distinction between the
sentences themselves and the different kinds of speech acts that
we perform with them. ‘Snow is white’ is a declarative sentence
while ‘Yes’ is not. But both could be used to express the same
fact, such as an assertion of ‘Snow is white’ or using ‘Yes’ as an
answer to the question ‘Is snow white?’ Declarative sentences
are one thing; assertions are another. They often go hand in
hand, but do not have to. For a familiar case, consider ‘I promise
to go to the movies.’ This is a declarative sentence, and it ﬁts just
ﬁne into the truth schema: ‘I promise to go to the movies’ is true
if and only if I promise to go to the movies. But the sentence is
not normally used to state fact; it is used to make a promise, not
report on one (though of course it can do both). Similarly, my
utterance of the declarative sentence ‘I wish someone would
pass me the asparagus’ may be intended as a command, and
not as a report on my current mental states and desires.
The distinction between declarative sentences and, say,
assertions, is important if we are to guard against a mistaken
account of what a declarative sentence is. We cannot simply
deﬁne declarative sentences as those that are used to state fact,
as in: Any sentence S is declarative if and only if S is used to
state fact. Some declarative sentences are not used to state fact,
and things that are not declarative sentences can be used to
state fact. To state facts we make assertions – we deploy a
particular kind of force, not necessarily a particular kind of
grammar. So what does separate ‘The door is shut’ from ‘Is the
door shut?’ and ‘Shut the door,’ such that only the ﬁrst may be
substituted into the truth schema?
Something that does seem clear is the distinction between
three different kinds of speech act: asserting, asking, and
commanding. The three kinds of sentences roughly correspond
to those three kinds of speech acts, but as we have seen, the
correspondence is not perfect. Our linguistic practices are
much more ﬂuid than our grammatical conventions. Still, we
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
276
www.ebook3000.com

are not wrong to say (provided we supply sufﬁcient qualiﬁca-
tion and hedging) that what distinguishes declarative sentences
is that they are typically the kinds of sentences that can most
naturally be used in making assertions. If I want to assert
that the door is shut, I use ‘The door is shut’ instead of ‘Shut
the door.’ Not unrelatedly, declaratives are the only candidates
for being truth-bearers. One might have some philosophical
scruples about saying that the sentence ‘The door is shut’ – the
very marks on the page – is itself true. What is true is not those
marks, but rather what is expressed by those marks: namely,
the thought or the proposition that snow is white. But even if
this view is correct, there is at least some derivative sense of
what it is for sentences to be true. (E.g., a sentence is true if and
only if it expresses a true proposition.) Yet there is not even a
derivative sense in which ‘Is the door shut?’ or ‘Shut the door’
might be true or false.10
If declarative sentences are the kind of sentences that can
admit of truth and falsity, then it makes sense why they should
be substitutable into the truth schema. For what we need in the
instances of the truth schema are biconditionals, where both
left- and right-hand conditions themselves admit of truth
and falsity. It might seem that we are merely belaboring
the obvious: of course what takes the place of ‘p’ in the truth
schema has to be something that can be true or false. Otherwise
the instances will not be well formed. And of course this is true.
But if we characterize the substitution class as being formed
from the class of declarative sentences, where declarative sen-
tences are characterized in terms of their truth aptness, then we
are characterizing the truth schema itself in terms of truth.
In other words, in order to get up and running a general
10 But see Lewis (1970: 54–61): “if we liked, we could also call an imperative or
interrogative or other non-declarative sentence true iff its sentence radical has the
value truth, but we customarily do not” (1970: 56).
Primitive truth at work
277

statement of the truth schema (whether a ﬁnite one involving
substitutional quantiﬁcation, or an inﬁnite one that gives some
guidance on which instances belong on the inﬁnite list), we
seem to be already making use of the notion of truth (and
truth aptness). Deﬂationists should be worried about this char-
acterization if they hope to use the truth schema to explain the
nature of truth. But primitivists have nothing to fear: that truth
ﬁnds its way into the basic notion of a declarative sentence is
exactly what we should expect if truth is truly fundamental.
I am not saying that primitivists about truth have in their back
pocket an exact account of the nature of declarative or truth-
apt sentences (though I have offered a sketch of the beginnings
of such an account). What I am saying is that they do not have
to dodge any such account that resorts to relying on truth, on
pain of circularity. Primitivists are not interested in giving a
deﬁnition of truth, and so it is no problem for them if the
familiar tools for giving deﬁnitions end up presupposing truth.
If we need truth already to understand the nature of declar-
ative sentences (and, in turn, substitutional quantiﬁcation and
the truth schema), then so much the worse for theories that
utilize these notions when deﬁning truth. If there are ways
around these appearances that strongly suggest that truth
enters into the analysis of these notions, then non-primitivists
must seek them out. Primitivists dodge both horns of this
dilemma, for they admit up front that truth is not amenable
to any deﬁnition, precisely for the sorts of reasons we are now
considering. Truth shows up everywhere.
Some time ago, Bernard Williams argued that if we are
going to use truth to give an account of the distinction between
imperatives and indicatives, then we cannot employ a thin
deﬂationary conception of truth: “For if all that ‘is true’ does
when applied to an assertion is, roughly, to repeat it, there
seems no reason why this expression or one trivially different
from it should not do the same job for imperatives” (1966: 19).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
278
www.ebook3000.com

The idea is that if truth is merely used to signal an agreement
with an assertion, then there should be no problem with apply-
ing truth to imperatives that we can also get behind. If you tell
me to shut the door, and I am happy to oblige, I should respond
to your command with ‘Okay’ and not ‘That is true.’ But if you
tell me that the door is shut, and I am happy to oblige, then
I can respond to you with ‘That is true.’
Williams goes on to suggest that one central goal of a sub-
stantial theory of truth is to give an account of the distinction
between fact-stating and non-fact-stating discourse (roughly,
the distinction between assertoric discourse on the one hand
and interrogative and imperative discourse on the other).11 It is
not clear that primitivism counts as a substantial theory in this
sense, for it is not the primitivist theory itself that will be used
in giving an account of the distinction. Rather, primitivists can
embrace any account of the distinction that makes use of truth
and falsity in drawing the distinction, for they need not fear the
appearance of any lurking circularity. Moreover, it seems that
the task of drawing the distinction between these two different
types of discourse belongs to the broader project of giving an
adequate theory of language and of meaning; the theory of
truth may play an important role in that project, but it need not
be assumed that it is the task of the theorist of truth in partic-
ular to draw the distinction between declaratives on the one
hand and imperative and interrogatives on the other.
Here, though, is a sketch of how one might go about
drawing the distinction. Imagine a community of three: Amy
(the asserter), Charlie (the commander), and Quincy (the ques-
tioner). At some point the three will need to prepare their
dinner, and each in his or her own mind homes in on the
same particular state of affairs that will need to obtain before
11 David Wiggins (1980) aims to give such a theory; Huw Price (1987; 1988) argues
that there can be no such theory.
Primitive truth at work
279

their hunger will be satiated: the making of the ﬁre. Amy,
Charlie, and Quincy each have before their minds the state of
affairs of the ﬁre’s being made, but each does something differ-
ent with it. Amy judges that the ﬁre is made. (She just made it
herself). In her own mind, Amy recognizes the thought that the
ﬁre is made, and presents it to herself as being true. She now
communicates this internal judgment to her fellows out loud by
asserting to them that the ﬁre is made. Charlie manages not to
hear Amy’s assertion, but wants the state of affairs before his
mind to obtain. He desires that the state of affairs of the ﬁre’s
being made obtains. He also wants Quincy to bring it about,
and so commands Quincy to make the ﬁre. Quincy, a bit
confused by being both told by Amy that the ﬁre has been
made and commanded by Charlie to make it, forms a question
in his mind by wondering about whether or not the state of
affairs obtains. He now out loud questions whether the state of
affairs of the ﬁre’s being made obtains.
On the one hand, the scenario just described draws distinc-
tions between three different mental states, each of which takes
as its content the state of affairs of the ﬁre’s being made: Amy
judges it to have obtained, Charlie desires that it obtain, and
Quincy wonders whether or not it has obtained. On the other
hand, the scenario also draws distinctions between three cor-
responding speech acts: Amy asserts that the ﬁre is made,
Charlie commands the ﬁre to be made (by Quincy), and
Quincy questions whether the ﬁre has been made. I did not
say how they went about these speech acts. They might have
linguistic conventions such that they all uttered the same
words – e.g., ‘The ﬁre is made’ – but then held up a different
number of ﬁngers. One ﬁnger corresponds to assertion, two
to commands, and three to questions. We do not have that
convention. We have an elaborate system of grammar involv-
ing the order of words, vocal inﬂection, and the like. The
distinctions between declarative, imperative, and interrogative
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
280
www.ebook3000.com

sentences arise from the social and linguistic conventions that
are born to facilitate the expression of different kinds of speech
acts that express different kinds of mental states.
Declarative sentences have thus become our vehicle for
making the assertions that express our own inner judgments.
As we have seen, we do not make an assertion simply by
uttering a declarative sentence. Declarative sentences can also
be employed when pretending, acting, hypothesizing, ridicul-
ing, denying, etc. Nor do we have to use them to make asser-
tions; sometimes a simple nod of the head can be used to make
an assertion. But declarative sentences are our standard
socially sanctioned linguistic vehicles for making assertions.
Now, ultimately what we want to explain is why declarative
sentences can be substituted into the truth schema, but not
imperative or interrogative sentences. We can now appreciate
the following explanation: The T-sentences themselves need to
be truth-valued, and worthy of assertion, since they serve as
axioms of theories, ﬁgure in inferences, and the like. The
T-sentences are used to make assertions, such as how we use
the sentence ‘“Snow is white” is true if and only if snow is
white’ to make the assertion that ‘Snow is white’ is true if and
only if snow is white. So whatever gets substituted into the
truth schema must itself be worthy of assertion and truth
valued. Declarative sentences are the convention of choice
that we have decided to employ when making assertions, and
so they are deserving of being substitutable into the truth
schema.
Return now to Quincy’s question: Is the ﬁre made? Suppose
Amy answers with ‘The ﬁre is made’ and Charlie with ‘Yes.’
Both responses are true, and the truth conditions are easily
provided because they are the same in both cases:
(1)
‘The ﬁre is made’ is true if and only if the ﬁre is made.
(2)
‘Yes’ is true if and only if the ﬁre is made.
Primitive truth at work
281

It might seem that (1), but not (2), is “an instance of the truth
schema.” But that depends on what the truth schema is. If the
schema in question is
(T2)
‘p’ is true if and only if p
then that is true. Here we are using ‘p’ to pick out a single
syntactic string (that is indifferent to ﬁrst-letter capitalization).
But if the truth schema is identiﬁed as Tarski identiﬁed it,
namely,
(T)
X is true if and only if p,
where X is a sentence that means that p, then both (1) and (2)
are instances of it, for ‘The ﬁre is made’ means that the ﬁre is
made just as much as ‘Yes’ (in this particular context) means
that the ﬁre is made. What can “go into” the truth schema (on
the left-hand side) is anything (be it a sentence, nod of the head,
or what have you) that can mean that p. If X means that p, then
X is true if and only if p, even if X is some sort of grunt. What
goes into the truth schema on the right-hand side in place of ‘p’
has to be something truth-evaluable in the metalanguage that is
giving the truth conditions for X. When the metalanguage is
English, we use declarative sentences, for they are English
speakers’ device (in conjunction with the usual contextual
factors) for presenting thoughts as being true (as opposed to
being desired to be made true, or as being wondered about).
In short, the sentences that are classiﬁed as declarative are
roughly those that we use in conjunction with other contextual
and pragmatic devices to present thoughts as being true. As
such, we do not hesitate in ascribing truth values to declara-
tives but not interrogatives or imperatives, neither of which
put forward thoughts as being true (though they do put
forward thoughts). My answer to the question of what
makes a sentence declarative is thus parasitic on the account
of assertion from the previous section, which was itself
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
282
www.ebook3000.com

parasitic on a prior notion of truth. Primitivists need not have
any reservations about this account (though of course they are
not forced into it either). Deﬂationists, by contrast, must offer
an account of declaratives that does not in any way presuppose
the notion of truth. There may be such a route, but primitivists
need not bother looking for it.
8.4
Meaning
The relationship between truth and meaning runs deep.
According to Dummett, we use a prior theory of meaning to
fund a theory of truth. According to Davidson, we use a prior
notion of truth to deﬁne a theory of meaning. According to
Horwich, we must specify the theories of truth and meaning
independently of one another. My intention for the present
section is not to determine once and for all which of these
perspectives is correct. Rather, my ambition is to showcase
the many appealing options that are available to primitivists
about truth.
At least since Dummett published his seminal paper on truth
(1958–9), it has been widely taken for granted that deﬂation-
ism about truth and truth-conditional theories of meaning
are incompatible.12 Deﬂationism denies that there are any
deep, explanatorily potent conceptual connections between
truth and other notions, meaning included. Truth-conditional
theories of meaning specify the meaning of the sentences
of a language by way of specifying their truth conditions.
Hence, many have thought that deﬂationism about truth and
truth-conditional theories of meaning are incompatible.13 The
thought is that by using a theory of truth conditions to give a
theory of meaning, one is drawing an explanatorily important
connection between truth and meaning, which is precisely the
12 But see Williams (1999).
13 See Collins (2002) and Horisk (2008) for discussion.
Primitive truth at work
283

sort of connection whose existence deﬂationists must deny.
If this incompatibility is indeed true, then the following famil-
iar dialectic emerges. Committed deﬂationists about truth
must give a theory of meaning in some way that does not
make use of truth conditions.14 Here deﬂationists often
look to Wittgenstein-inspired “use” theories of meaning (e.g.,
Horwich 1998a). Those who take truth conditions to be
central to the theory of meaning end up arguing against deﬂa-
tionism (e.g., Davidson 1990b; 1996). One initial advantage of
primitivism about truth is that it need not antecedently take
sides. Primitivism about truth as such is not committed to
either a use theory or a truth-conditional theory of meaning.
Primitivists are free to explore the merits of each approach.
Assuming that incompatibility is true, primitivists, unlike
deﬂationists, are free to take on a truth-conditional theory of
meaning, since they do not deny that truth can take center stage
in a theory of meaning. But primitivists are also free to accept
the arguments of use theorists, if indeed they are sound.
The strategy of taking on truth as primitive, and then putting
it to work in a Tarski-style deﬁnition of truth for a language in
the service of establishing a truth-conditional theory of meaning
is the cornerstone of Davidson’s semantic program. This section
is not the place to examine and evaluate the merits of that
approach (see instead Lepore and Ludwig 2005; 2007), but it
is important to note that it is available to primitivism, and that
the doctrines have often gone hand in hand. It is less natural for
a primitivist to take on a use theory of meaning. If truth is indeed
a foundational concept, then we should predict that it will play a
central explanatory role in a variety of important corners of
14 In fact, Field even identiﬁes the “main idea behind deﬂationism” as requiring “only
that what plays a central role in meaning and content not include truth conditions”
(1994a: 253). Dummett writes that “to accept the redundancy theory is to deny that
a grasp of the meaning of a sentence consists in an apprehension of its truth-
conditions, in knowing what has to be the case for it to be true” (1973: 458).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
284
www.ebook3000.com

philosophy, such as the theory of meaning. And if truth is
theoretically available, why not put it to work in one’s theory
of meaning? In any event, a use theory of meaning is in principle
available to the primitivist, at least so long as the theory does not
maintain that meaning is prior to truth. According to primitiv-
ism, nothing is prior to truth.
Another advantage for primitivism in this arena is that it can
dodge an argument facing deﬂationists. Supposing it is correct
that deﬂationists cannot be truth-conditional theorists, it is
understandable that they take refuge in use (or other) theories.
But if it can be shown that any acceptable theory of meaning
must make use of truth conditions (even if truth conditions are
not the whole story), then deﬂationism is compromised, for
then it would be true that everyone needed the notion of a
truth condition, which deﬂationists cannot have. That is the
argument of a paper by Bar-On, Horisk, and Lycan (2000), to
which we shall now turn.15
The crucial premise of the argument, which the authors draw
from Lewis (1970), is that a sentence’s truth condition gives at
least part of its meaning. Even if a theory of truth conditions
does not exhaust a theory of meaning, a theory of meaning must
at least involve a theory of truth conditions. To support this
premise, consider the fact that a sentence’s meaning, when taken
together with a possible world, determines the truth value of that
sentence at that world. For example, given that ‘Snow is white’
means that snow is white, the truth value of the sentence at this
world (where snow is white) is true; in a different world where
snow is not white, the sentence is false. Hence, meanings are at
the least functions from possible worlds to truth values. (The
meaning of ‘Snow is white’ takes us from the actual world to
‘true,’ and from some world where snow is not white to ‘false.’)
15 See also Patterson (2005; 2007a) for critical discussion of the argument.
Primitive truth at work
285

But such functions just are truth conditions, and so meanings are
at least in part truth conditions.
The “determination” premise of the argument – that a
sentence’s meaning taken together with a possible world deter-
mines its truth value – is beyond reproach. (Note that we need
not here commit to any particular metaphysical view about
possible worlds.) It amounts to little more than the premise
that if S means that p, then S is true if and only if p. This is just a
basic conceptual connection between meaning and truth that
no one can deny. Meanings of sentences just are whatever it is
that determines their truth value at a world.
The argument can also be presented in epistemic terms. For
some sentence S, if you know that S means that p, and you
know whether or not p, then you are in a position to know the
truth value of S. In general, if you know what a sentence
means, then were you to know all the non-semantic facts
about the world, you would be in a position to know the
truth value of the sentence. Since knowing enough about
sentences to be able to determine their truth values given the
non-semantic facts is enough to know their truth conditions,
knowledge of meaning at least involves knowledge of truth
conditions. For example, suppose I know all the non-semantic
facts about the world. I know, for instance, that snow is white,
and that grass is green. What it is for me to know the truth
condition for ‘Snow is white’ is to know which of the many
obtaining worldly conditions is responsible for its truth. Is it
snow’s being white, or grass’s being green? To know that
‘Snow is white’ means that snow is white is to know that
snow’s being white (and not grass’s being green) is the truth
condition for ‘Snow is white.’
Suppose that meanings were not explained by truth condi-
tions, but in some other terms, like conceptual or inferential
role, or assertibility conditions. It would remain a striking fact
that sentences’ meanings, taken together with the facts, would
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
286
www.ebook3000.com

still determine their truth value. For example, suppose that
the meaning of ‘Snow is white’ is not explained by its truth
condition, but by something else: X. The meaning of ‘Snow is
white’ is explained by X, which is not a truth condition, even
though the meaning of ‘Snow is white’ that X purports to
explain sufﬁces to determine the truth of the sentence. Put
another way: given that meaning and fact determine truth
value, the question arises as to what meanings are such that
they can play this role. If meanings are explained in terms of
truth conditions, then the equation makes perfect sense. The
theory of meaning tells you what truth condition a sentence
has, and the facts determine which truth conditions obtain,
and so together we arrive at truth values for sentences. But if
meaning is not understood in terms of truth conditions – if it is
understood in terms of X, whatever it may be – then there is an
explanatory gap: how does meaning get us to truth, if it does
not already somehow involve truth? According to Bar-On,
Horisk, and Lycan, the deﬂationist “must show how features
that constitute meaning on her preferred view can determine
truth-value given fact, but without at least tacitly containing a
truth-condition” (2000: 18).
Primitivists help themselves to the concept of truth, and so
can admit an explanatorily potent conception of a truth con-
dition. Primitivists are thereby in a perfect position to explain
how meaning and fact determine truth and falsity. If Bar-On,
Horisk, and Lycan are correct and everyone needs to make use
of truth conditions, then primitivists have nothing to fear. They
can understand meaning in terms of truth conditions and truth,
for they take meaning to be a derivative notion, explicable
(if need be) in terms of the prior notion of truth. Moreover, if
meaning involves more than just truth conditions – if meaning
is determined by truth conditions and something else like con-
ceptual or inferential role – then primitivists are also entitled to
take on such a view. For primitivists are not forced into a strict
Primitive truth at work
287

truth-conditional theory of meaning. Plus, primitivists are in a
better position for adopting, say, an inferential role account of
meaning, since they can take the notion of truth as helping us
to understand the notion of inference. Traditionally, inferen-
tial role theories are opposed to truth-conditional theories, and
their advocates try to advance their program independently of
the notion of truth (e.g., Brandom 1994). I have already
expressed my skepticism toward those who try to understand
inference independently of truth (see Section 6.3.2). In any
event, regardless of what goes into the theory of meaning –
truth conditions, inferential role, or other things – primitivists
have more freedom than do other theorists who seek to make
sense of meaning without truth.
8.5
Epistemic justiﬁcation
The topic of epistemic justiﬁcation is intimately related to
the topic of truth. Ernest Sosa’s discussion of primitivism, in
fact, is motivated by his desire to offer a “truth-centered
epistemology,” one that “explains other main epistemic con-
cepts in terms of truth” (1993a: 1). On this conception of
epistemology, we freely make use of truth in understanding
what epistemology is all about. Furthermore, this approach
takes truth to be prior to epistemic notions. In this section,
I argue that this “truth-ﬁrst” perspective is both widespread
and plausible. Primitivists are best situated for taking on this
stance (though it may be available to deﬂationists as well), and
so we see here yet more indirect support for the view.
Some of the canonical accounts of the nature of epistemic
justiﬁcation have been framed in terms of truth. In his classic
discussion of reliabilism, Alvin Goldman writes that “The
justiﬁcational status of a belief is a function of the reliability
of the process or processes that cause it, where (as a ﬁrst
approximation) reliability consists in the tendency of a process
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
288
www.ebook3000.com

to produce beliefs that are true rather than false” (1979: 10).
According to Goldman’s brand of externalism, beliefs are
justiﬁed only if they are formed through reliable cognitive
processes; what it is for such processes to be reliable is that
they tend to produce true beliefs rather than false ones.
On the internalist side of the debate, Laurence BonJour
offers the following perspective on the nature of epistemic
(as opposed to moral, pragmatic, or religious) justiﬁcation:
Knowledge requires epistemic justiﬁcation, and the distinguishing
characteristic of this particular species of justiﬁcation is, I submit,
its essential or internal relationship to the cognitive goal of truth.
Cognitive doings are epistemically justiﬁed, on this conception,
only if and to the extent that they are aimed at this goal – which
means roughly that one accepts all and only beliefs which one has
good reason to think are true. To accept a belief in the absence
of such a reason, however appealing or even mandatory such
acceptance might be from other standpoints, is to neglect the
pursuit of truth; such acceptance is, one might say, epistemically
irresponsible . . . A corollary of this conception of epistemic justi-
ﬁcation is that a satisfactory defense of a particular standard of
epistemic justiﬁcation must consist in showing it to be truth-
conducive, i.e. in showing that accepting beliefs in accordance
with its dictates is likely to lead to truth . . . To insist that a certain
belief is epistemically justiﬁed, while confessing in the same breath
that this fact about it provides no good reason to think that it is
true, would be to render nugatory the whole concept of epistemic
justiﬁcation.
(BonJour 1978: 5)
Here BonJour claims that there is a distinctive norm associated
with epistemology. Epistemology is the study of what makes
beliefs praiseworthy from an epistemic point of view. That a
belief makes you feel good, or that utterances expressing it
involve some internal rhymes, are not grounds for taking a belief
to be epistemically justiﬁed (even if they confer other sorts of
non-epistemic justiﬁcation). What makes a belief epistemically
Primitive truth at work
289

justiﬁed is that it serves what BonJour calls “the cognitive goal
of truth.” Belief is a mental state that is truth-directed. A belief
that p just is a belief in the truth of p. Thus, reasons for belief
that p are themselves reasons in favor of the truth of p. If some
factor is irrelevant to the truth of some belief, then that factor
offers no epistemic reason for that belief.
The idea that truth and epistemic justiﬁcation are insepara-
ble seems to be common ground between the two major
factions in the literature on justiﬁcation. Indeed, Earl Conee
writes that “The existence of some special and intimate con-
nection between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth seems to be
beyond reasonable doubt” (1992: 657; see also Cohen 1984).
If we take these appearances at face value, and accept that we
utilize truth in understanding the distinct nature of epistemic
justiﬁcation, then there are three different perspectives we
might take in trying to explain this connection.
First consider the primitivist about truth. What is distinctive
about primitivism is that it can accept everything that has been
said so far about justiﬁcation and truth at face value, with no
theoretical maneuvering required. Both internalists and external-
ists about justiﬁcation try to capture that notion by framing it in
terms of truth. Primitivists not only can allow there to be such an
unproblematic connection, but they also predict its existence:
because truth is such a foundational notion in our conceptual
scheme, it is unsurprising that it should show up when we try to
understand other deeply important notions. That truth is prior to
justiﬁcation is implicit in the passages from both Goldman and
BonJour. It is especially clear with BonJour that he thinks we
have a conception of a cognitive goal – the goal of believing all
and only true beliefs – that is prior to our notion of justiﬁcation.
Our notion of justiﬁcation aids and abets that goal. Mainstream
epistemology, then, seems to operate on the assumption that
truth is a notion that is prior to justiﬁcation, an assumption
which primitivists can countenance without hesitation.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
290
www.ebook3000.com

In claiming that primitivists can accept and explain the con-
nections between truth and justiﬁcation I do not also claim that
other views cannot. But what is unique to primitivism is just
how easily it can go about accepting and explaining those
connections. Consider how a deﬂationist might handle the
case of justiﬁcation. Suppose that some belief p is justiﬁed only
if p is likely to be true. Internalists and externalists seem to agree;
internalists think we are justiﬁed in believing when our evidence
suggests that those beliefs have a good chance at being true,
whereas externalists think our beliefs are justiﬁed when they are
formed by processes that are likely to produce true beliefs. The
deﬂationist has some explaining to do, in order to show that
‘true’ is being used here only in deﬂationist fashion, namely, as a
device for expressing generalizations. Take the case of Phil’s
believing that snow is white. According to some forms of inter-
nalism, Phil is justiﬁed in believing that snow is white only if
Phil’s evidence makes it likely that snow is white. According to
some forms of externalism, Phil’s belief that snow is white is
justiﬁed only if the belief was formed by a process that tends to
produce beliefs that snow is white only when snow is white.
Here, I take it, are statements that deﬂationists can offer to show
how ‘true’ functions in the above accounts of justiﬁcation only
as an expressive device.
A further question for deﬂationists, however, involves
whether they can accommodate some of the other notions at
stake here, like evidence, or “making likely.” After all, what is
the evidence for a claim other than the information that points
toward the truth of that claim? Is not likelihood just likelihood
of being true? Deﬂationists must be able to say what it is
for p to be evidence for q, or for p to make it likely that q,
without running into a deep conceptual connection with
truth. Conceptual deﬂationists deny that there are any deep
connections, connections that go beyond mere expressive
convenience, between truth and other concepts. Similar remarks
Primitive truth at work
291

apply to those who think that justiﬁcation is cashed out infer-
entially, such that beliefs are justiﬁed when they can be correctly
inferred from other beliefs. Now deﬂationists must offer up an
account of inference that does not end up giving the lie to
conceptual deﬂationism. The point of these remarks, again, is
not to show that deﬂationists cannot handle these cases. (In fact,
I believe that their prospects are far better for handling justiﬁ-
cation than for handling assertion.) Rather, it is to show that
they have to go on the defensive, as opposed to primitivists who
can happily accept without ﬂinching that truth can be and
should be used in helping us to understand justiﬁcation.
As with the case of assertion, there is a third alternative to be
considered. Grant that truth and justiﬁcation are intimately con-
nected, but reverse the order of priority: take justiﬁcation to be
prior to truth. According to this view, primitivism must be false
since truth is not one of our conceptual fundamentals. Such a
view can be found in the writings of Hilary Putnam that surround
what is variously called “pragmatic” or “internal” realism. As
opposed to “externalist” proponents of correspondence theories,
Putnam advocates an “internal” view of truth, according to
which truth “is some sort of (idealized) rational acceptability”
(1981: 49–50). He claims to be breaking free from Dummett
here, who is said to identity truth and justiﬁcation. For Putnam,
truth is an idealized form of justiﬁcation (1983a: xvi−xvii).
The burden facing advocates of the “justiﬁcation-ﬁrst”
approach is giving accounts of both justiﬁcation and ideal con-
ditions that are independent of the notion of truth. Putnam
recognizes that justiﬁcation is distinct from truth: a belief can
justiﬁed even if it is false. What it cannot do is be ideally justiﬁed
and false. Those in the “truth-ﬁrst” camp can easily explain how
truth and justiﬁcation can come apart, even if truth and ideal
justiﬁcation cannot. For example, suppose one is a reliabilist. A
belief that p is justiﬁed only if it is formed by a process that tends
to produce true beliefs. Because reliable processes are fallible,
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
292
www.ebook3000.com

they may sometimes result in producing false but nevertheless
justiﬁed beliefs. An ideal belief-forming process, though, would
be infallible, and so would only ever produce true beliefs. Hence,
reliabilists can explain how truth and justiﬁcation can come
apart, but not in ideal situations (which is not to say that what
it is to be true is to be ideally justiﬁed – that gets the direction of
priority wrong). Ideal situations just are those where our beliefs
are formed by infallible cognitive processes. But this explanation
of the relationship between truth and justiﬁcation takes for
granted a prior notion of truth, and so is not available to those
in the justiﬁcation-ﬁrst program. Their challenge is to say what it
is for a belief to be justiﬁed in a way that is independent of its
truth. Further, they must specify what an ideal cognitive
situation is such that it results in ideal justiﬁcation being
coextensive with truth, though not presupposing it. The notions
we would expect to be appealed to here – states of information,
total evidence, etc. – are all notions that look to presuppose the
notion of truth. What is it to gain a piece of information other
than to learn a new truth? What is evidence if not that which
makes truth probable? Justiﬁcation-ﬁrst approaches to truth
may look favorable when the only opposition looks to be some
unsavory form of correspondence theory. What we continue to
see is that there is a far better alternative to be found in taking
truth as conceptual bedrock.
8.6
Falsity
Truth and falsity go hand in hand, though the former usually
receives most of the philosophical attention. Still, it is always
worthwhile to explore what a theory of the nature of truth can
say about the nature of falsity. I shall brieﬂy consider four
possible accounts of falsity, and argue that primitivists, unlike
those with other views, are free to choose whichever best suits
their needs.
Primitive truth at work
293

As we saw back in Chapter 2, the topic of falsity played an
important role in the early days of primitivism, especially in the
thought of Moore and Russell. Moore objected to his earlier
primitivist theory because he thought that it was committed to
the existence of propositions, and Moore was suspicious of the
existence of false propositions. The early Moore conceived of
true propositions as being identical to facts, and it is unclear
what false propositions can be identical to, since the world, it
seems, is exhausted by the facts. Russell, too, worried about
the existence of “objective falsehoods” (see Russell 1906–7:
45–9), and later about the existence of propositions entirely:
Time was when I thought there were propositions, but it does not
seem to me very plausible to say that in addition to facts there are
also these curious shadowy things going about such as ‘That today
is Wednesday’ when in fact it is Tuesday. I cannot believe they go
about the real world. It is more than one can manage to believe, and
I do think no person with a vivid sense of reality can imagine it.
(Russell 1985: 87)
Russell’s and Moore’s worries about objective falsehoods and
false propositions can be separated from primitivism about
truth: one might be a primitivist even if one takes sentences
to be one’s primary truth-bearers (e.g., Davidson), and one
might be happy with propositions true and false but not be a
primitivist (e.g., Horwich).
One perspective on falsity that might seem natural for
primitivists about truth is to take falsity as yet another con-
ceptual primitive. Russell was equally primitivist about truth
and falsity (though his primitivism was about the properties of
truth and falsity, not the concepts) (1904: 524). Moore, too,
seems to treat falsity as a primitive property (1899: 180–1;
1902).16 Nothing about primitivism about truth rules out
16 Though Cartwright disputes this (1987: 92, endnote 8; 2003: 112). See footnote 16
in Chapter 2.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
294
www.ebook3000.com

being a primitivist about falsity as well. Taking both as prim-
itive is to take both as equally fundamental concepts in our
conceptual scheme. It would certainly be strange for anyone
other than a primitivist about truth to be a primitivist about
falsity. If falsity, but not truth, is primitive, then falsity is a
more fundamental concept than truth.17 But it seems that truth
is at least as fundamental as falsity, if not more so. So primitiv-
ism about falsity is plausibly open only to primitivists about
truth, if they should choose to adopt it. But one is not obliged
to be doubly primitivist, if there are tenable ways of deﬁning
falsity in terms of truth. The availability of deﬁning falsity in
terms of truth is appealing, for it would free us from having to
take on an additional conceptual primitive. As a matter of
theory choice, it is better, ceteris paribus, to make do with as
few primitives as possible. So if one of the following proposed
deﬁnitions of falsity is successful, so much the better for prim-
itivists. If not, though, at least primitivists have a fallback
position in taking falsity on as a second primitive, a position
not open to non-primitivists about truth.
A second account of falsity deﬁnes it as the absence of truth.
What it is for p to be false is for p not to be true (e.g., Horwich
1990: 74–5). This account needs at least one immediate emen-
dation, for plenty of things fail to be true but are not thereby
false. I count myself as one such example. The same holds for
bits of language like sub-sentential expressions, interrogatives,
and imperatives. So for p to be false is for p to both not be true
and be a truth-bearer. (Hence, drawing on the earlier discus-
sion of truth aptness, deﬂationists who take up this option
must be able to give a truth-free account of truth-bearers.)
The worry about this account of falsity is that it stumbles on
truth-bearers that suffer truth-value gaps. Suppose that some
17 But consider Dummett’s surprising view that incorrectness is prior to correctness
(1976: 124).
Primitive truth at work
295

claims fail to be either true or false. Perhaps certain vague
sentences (‘Harry is bald’), or sentences with non-denoting
terms (‘The Queen of Oregon hates fried green tomatoes’) are
neither true nor false. Such sentences are not true, but are
truth-bearers, and so would be automatically rendered false
by the current account of falsity. But ex hypothesi such sen-
tences are not false. Hence, falsity as the absence of truth
cannot be sustained in the presence of truth-value gaps.
A third account takes falsity as the truth of negation
(see David 1994: 148). What it is for p to be false is for p’s
negation to be true. In the context of classical logic, without
any truth-value gaps, the third account and the second are
equivalent. For if every truth-bearer is either true or false,
and the law of excluded middle holds, then for every truth-
bearer either it or its negation must be true. So for any p, if p is
false then its negation is true. The equivalence does not hold if
there are truth-value gaps. For if p suffers a truth-value gap, it
is neither true nor false, and so is not true. But that does not
make p false, for p is not false, either.
For this account to work, one must be able to specify the
nature of negation independently of the notion of falsity, lest
the account end up being circular. If negation is deﬁned in
terms of the truth tables (which Horwich describes as being
the traditionally supposed “best way to deﬁne both it and the
other logical constants” (1990: 74)), then we might have the
circle immediately, for truth tables involve both truth and
falsity. But let us set aside this preliminary worry. Perhaps
negation can be taken as a primitive, or admit of some other
non-circular analysis.
Falsity as truth of negation can better handle truth-value
gaps. But it suffers some independent problems (here I follow
Scharp 2010). First, the account holds that when we appear to
be ascribing some property to something, we are actually
ascribing a different property to something else. Predicating
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
296
www.ebook3000.com

falsity of p is actually predicating truth of p’s negation. Second,
consider some things that do not have negations, like ques-
tions, such as ‘Is snow white?’ To say that ‘Is snow white?’ is
false is to say that the negation of ‘Is snow white?’ is true,
according to the third account. But the claim that ‘Is snow
white?’ is false is itself false, for the question is neither true nor
false, and so not false. But the claim that the negation of ‘Is
snow white?’ is true is messier, for there is no such thing. So the
second claim is either false or neither true nor false, depending
on how one handles sentences with non-denoting terms. Even
if one takes sentences with non-denoting terms to be false,
thereby taking both
(1)
‘Is snow white?’ is false
(2)
The negation of ‘Is snow white?’ is true
to be false, the way we land at their falsity is different. That is,
the falsity of (1) is manifest, and our evaluation of it as such
takes no detour through any view about non-denoting terms,
since (1) employs none. But (2) does involve a non-denoting
term, and so we arrive at the view that (2) is false – if we arrive
at that view at all – only through a separate view about the
truth value of sentences that employ non-denoting terms. The
fact that (1) and (2) must be analyzed very differently suggests
that (2) does not provide an analysis of the nature of (1).
A third problem with the third account is related to the
second. Some things lack negations because of their nature
(you and I lack negations, as do interrogatives and impera-
tives). Others lack negations because of a paucity of language.
Take, for example, the impoverished language of Rosencrantz
and Guildenstern from Section 5.2.4. Their language (which
includes just the two sentences (H) and (T)) involves no neg-
ations, but their sentences can still be false. A ﬁnal problem
for the third account is that the concept of negation is not
univocal. There are lots of kinds of negations, corresponding
Primitive truth at work
297

to different logics. This observation is especially poignant
given that we are considering languages with truth-value
gaps, which invites us to consider both exclusion negation
and choice negation. (The exclusion negation of a gappy sen-
tence is true, whereas the choice negation of a gappy sentence is
itself gappy. The two negations are equivalent with respect
to non-gappy sentences.) If falsity is truth of negation, which
negation are we talking about? Is it the same in every instance?
Proponents of the third account must offer a principled
answer to such questions.
Our fourth and ﬁnal view of falsity (the one actually endorsed
by Scharp 2010) deﬁnes falsity in terms of truth, as do the
second and third views, but does not employ negation.
Instead, this view holds that falsity is the property of belonging
to the anti-extension of truth. On this view, p is false just in case
it falls into the anti-extension of the predicate ‘is true.’ The
extension and anti-extension of ‘is true’ cannot collectively be
exhaustive, lest you, I, and the non-declarative sentences end up
being false (for we are certainly not within the extension of ‘is
true’). Gappy sentences must also be shown not to belong to the
anti-extension of ‘is true.’ Perhaps there is a way for this to be
done, but it will take some maneuvering. Take the predicate ‘is
green.’ A natural way to specify the extension of the predicate is
as follows: An object belongs to the extension of ‘is green’ just in
case it is green, and belongs to the anti-extension of ‘is green’ just
in case it is not green. But replace ‘is green’ with ‘is true,’ and
here we have speciﬁed the anti-extension of ‘is true’ in accord-
ance with the second option above of falsity as non-truth. If all it
takes to fall into the anti-extension of ‘is true’ is to not be true,
then truth-value gaps (not to mention you and I, along with
interrogatives and imperatives) fall into it, which gives us the
wrong result. Suppose we say instead that an object belongs to
the extension of ‘is green’ just in case substituting a name for it
into ‘x is green’ results in a true sentence, whereas an object
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
298
www.ebook3000.com

belongs to the anti-extension of ‘is green’ just in case substituting
a name for it into ‘x is green’ results in a false sentence. This
account is as overtly circular as can be when applied to the case
of deﬁning falsity in terms of the anti-extension of ‘is true.’ If we
replace ‘results in a false sentence’ with ‘does not result in a true
sentence,’ we do not advance any further than the previous
attempt, for gappy sentences will end up in the anti-extension.
Hence, the fourth account faces the difﬁcult hurdle of account-
ing for its central notion of an anti-extension of truth.
As we can see, there is no simple answer regarding the
nature of falsity. How one understands the nature of falsity
depends on a number of other key issues, such as whether one
adopts classical logic and how one handles truth-value gaps.
One’s attitudes about the three non-primitivist accounts of
falsity surveyed here may also differ: some might be happy
with denying the existence of truth-value gaps (e.g., Horwich
1990), some might be willing to tolerate the objections
launched at the third account, and others might be more
optimistic about the prospects for non-circularly specifying
the anti-extension of ‘is true’ in a way that keeps out gappy
sentences but keeps in all the false ones (e.g., Scharp 2010).
Primitivists have a lot of room to breathe here; for instance,
they are unproblematically able to countenance truth-value
gaps (see Section 9.3), a feature not shared by deﬂationists,
and so are able to take on the third account without any
immediate hesitation.18 If none of the three non-primitivist
18 I am hedging here because some deﬂationists have tried to make their theories fully
consistent with truth-value gaps. See in particular Field (1994b). But notice that to
do so Field takes on the additional machinery of a ‘deﬁnitely’ or ‘determinately’
operator. Hence, even if deﬂationists can salvage truth-value gaps, they have to
“hesitate” in doing so because their extra machinery must be shown to be consistent
with both the letter and the spirit of deﬂationism. Furthermore, building such an
operator into our ordinary thinking about truth strikes me as a revisionary move,
and so the value of any technical advance that it brings is mitigated by its not being
true to our ordinary thinking.
Primitive truth at work
299

accounts of falsity look promising, then primitivists have the
exclusive luxury of being able to fall back on taking falsity as
another primitive. The advantage for primitivism lies in its
ﬂexibility in handling these other concepts. Unlike other
views, primitivism about truth neither forces a theory of falsity
on anyone, nor holds any back.
8.7
Scientiﬁc theories
Another realm where primitivism outperforms deﬂationism is
with respect to the nature and interpretation of scientiﬁc theo-
ries.19 In the philosophy of science, particularly with respect to
scientiﬁc realism, issues arise regarding the nature of scientiﬁc
theories, and what it is for a scientiﬁc theory to be true. Scientiﬁc
realism, for example, is often deﬁned as the view that science
takes as its aim the construction of true (as opposed to merely
empirically adequate) theories (see van Fraassen 1980: 8). But
what is a scientiﬁc theory? According to the “syntactic” or
“received” view of theories familiar from the days of logical
positivism, theories are understood simply as sets of sentences.
On such an account, specifying what it is for a theory to be true
is quite simple, even for a deﬂationist. A theory T is true just in
case T implies that p only if p (where this schema gets cashed out
using either substitutional quantiﬁcation or inﬁnite lists). The
syntactic view, however, has been subjected to substantial
attack (see, e.g., van Fraassen 1980: 53–6; Suppe 1989). In its
place stands the “semantic” or “model-theoretic” account of
theories, which takes theories not to be sets of sentences, but sets
of models. A theory is constituted by its models, and so “is true
if the real world itself is (or is isomorphic to) one of these
models” (van Fraassen 1989: 226).
19 This section draws on the arguments I present at greater length in Asay (2009).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
300
www.ebook3000.com

Because the semantic conception understands truth in
terms of isomorphism between model and reality, deﬂation-
ists cannot immediately bring their standard tools (like
disquotation) to bear on accounting for the truth of theories.
Models cannot be quoted or disquoted, unlike sentences.
Hence, whatever the scientiﬁc merits are of the semantic
view, it introduces new challenges about the nature of theory
truth that the syntactic view does not face. To get a sense for
how the semantic conception works, consider a very simple
universe. This universe has two parts: a left half and a right
half. Each of these parts can have one of two properties:
being illuminated or being dark. At any given moment,
each of the parts of the universe can be illuminated or dark.
Hence, for a given moment, there are four possible states of
the universe:
(S1)
Left is illuminated and Right is illuminated.
(S2)
Left is illuminated and Right is dark.
(S3)
Left is dark and Right is illuminated.
(S4)
Left is dark and Right is dark.
To offer a model-theoretic account of this universe is to pro-
vide it with the appropriate mathematical structure. To model
the universe, we only need make use of some simple, easily
deﬁned functions. Let the set O = {L, R}, and the set P = {i, d}.
Now we can deﬁne four functions that assign members of P to
members of O:
(F1)
{<L, i>, <R, i>}
(F2)
{<L, i>, <R, d>}
(F3)
{<L, d>, <R, i>}
(F4)
{<L, d>, <R, d>}
We can take the four functions F1 through F4 to be the
four models of our theory T. The theory by itself, notice, is
just a bunch of sets of ordered pairs. (I have not yet interpreted
Primitive truth at work
301

L, R, i, and d.) The theory is exhausted by its mathematical
structure. But we can use this theory to model our toy universe.
To do so we have to interpret the models. That involves
connecting the actual objects and properties of the universe
with the mathematical sets O and P.
We can accomplish the needed interpretation quite easily.
We just need two functions. One function (I1) assigns Left and
Right to members of O:
I1(Left) = L
I1(Right) = R.
The other function (I2) assigns the properties of being illumi-
nated and being dark to members of P:
I2(illuminated) = i
I2(dark) = d.
Equipped with this minimal apparatus, we can now express all
the possible “facts” of the toy universe using just our mathe-
matical model. Hence:
(1)
For all n, ‘Left is illuminated’ is true-in-Fn if and only if
Fn(I1(Left)) = I2(illuminated).
(2)
For all n, ‘Left is dark’ is true-in-Fn if and only if Fn(I1(Left)) =
I2(dark).
(3)
For all n, ‘Right is illuminated’ is true-in-Fn if and only if
Fn(I1(Right)) = I2(illuminated).
(4)
For all n, ‘Right is dark’ is true-in-Fn if and only if Fn(I1(Right)) =
I2(dark).
Suppose the universe is as S1 states it to be, where both parts
are illuminated. Theory T is true because one of its models, F1,
is isomorphic to reality. To see why, we simply observe that the
following are both true:
(5)
F1(I1(Left)) = I2(illuminated).
(6)
F1(I1(Right)) = I2(illuminated).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
302
www.ebook3000.com

I1(Left) = L, F1(L) = i, and I2(illuminated) = i. So (5) is true.
I1(Right) = R, F1(R) = i, and I2(illuminated) = i. So (6) is true.
Given how I have stipulated my models, (5) and (6) come out
as mathematical truths; they merely state relations that obtain
within the functions that constitute the theory. From (5) and
(6), taken together with (1) and (3), we can derive both:
(7)
‘Left is illuminated’ is true-in-F1
(8)
‘Right is illuminated’ is true-in-F1.
The two facts of our toy universe are thus accounted for by F1;
likewise, ‘Left is dark’ and ‘Right is dark’ will both fail to be
true-in-F1. Hence, T provides an accurate picture of our uni-
verse. One of its models is perfectly isomorphic to reality, and
so T is true. Had one of the other states of affairs obtained, one
of the other models would have been isomorphic to reality.
I argue that this setup, required by the semantic conception
of theories, compromises deﬂationism about truth. Using (1)
through (4), I have deﬁned four different notions (truth-in-F1,
truth-in-F2, truth-in-F3, and truth-in-F4), and done so for each
of the four sentences needed to have an expressively complete
language for our little toy universe. I have, in effect, offered
Tarskian deﬁnitions of truth for each model for our four-sentence
language. But here’s the rub: in deﬁning the four different instan-
ces of truth-in-Fn, I was freely helping myself to an antecedent
conception of truth. I decided to use the functions I1 and I2 to
deﬁne truth-in-Fn. This was sheer stipulation on my part. Here
is another function, I3: I3(illuminated) = d and I3(dark) = i.
Now suppose I deﬁne a new notion, frue-in-Fn, using I3 wherever
(1) through (4) use I2. For instance, (2) would become:
(9)
For all n, ‘Left is dark’ is frue-in-Fn if and only if Fn(I1(Left)) =
I3(dark).
We can now derive that ‘Left is dark’ is frue-in-F1 if and only if
F1(I1(Left)) = I3(dark), which is in fact the case. So ‘Left is dark’
Primitive truth at work
303

is frue-in-F1. But ‘Left is illuminated’ is not frue-in-F1, and
neither is ‘Right is illuminated.’ Hence:
(10)
‘Left is illuminated’ is not frue-in-F1
(11)
‘Right is illuminated’ is not frue-in-F1.
Our two target sentences succeed in being true-in-F1, but fail to
be frue-in-F1. So is F1 isomorphic to reality or not? It succeeds
if true-in-Fn is relevant to isomorphism, and frue-in-Fn is not.
Now, in spelling out what it is for T to be isomorphic to reality,
I unhesitatingly made use of the notion of true-in-Fn, and not
frue-in-Fn. But this was sheer prejudice on my part, for both,
mathematically speaking, are on a par. Each is equally legit-
imate. But only one is relevant to the truth of T. Do not be
misled by my calling true-in-Fn ‘true-in-Fn.’ I could have called
true-in-Fn ‘frue-in-Fn’ and vice versa. In that case, ‘frue-in-Fn’
would have picked out the notion relevant to the truth of
T. The point is that of all the many mathematically deﬁnable
notions, only a very special set is relevant to the truth of
the theory and its models. That set is the one that tracks an
antecedent notion of truth.
The moral of the story is that there is an explanatory import
to true-in-Fn that other notions like frue-in-Fn do not share. This
import is precisely how the semantic conception of theories
compromises conceptual deﬂationism. The semantic conception
relies on the notion of isomorphism in order to account for when
a theory is true, and in cashing out that notion of isomorphism
we have to rely on our antecedent notion of truth.
A further reason to doubt that deﬂationists can accept
the semantic conception is that even after we have isolated
the relevant notion – true-in-Fn – it turns out not to be a device
of disquotation. The English ‘is true’ is a device for disquota-
tion because we can infer from an application of it whatever it
applies to. If you tell me that ‘Bosons obey Bose−Einstein
statistics’ is true, I can infer that bosons obey Bose−Einstein
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
304
www.ebook3000.com

statistics (even if I have no idea what that means). But if you tell
me that ‘Left is illuminated’ is true-in-F1, I cannot infer that
Left is illuminated. The reason is simple. The sentence
(7)
‘Left is illuminated’ is true-in-F1
is necessarily true. ‘Left is illuminated’ is indeed true-in-F1,
regardless of whether the world is isomorphic to F1 or not. If
the world is isomorphic to F2, (7) is still true. To see why,
observe that (7) really amounts to no more than:
(5)
F1(I1(Left)) = I2(illuminated),
which is true by deﬁnition of the three functions F1, I1, and I2.
We can only use ‘is true-in-F1’ as a device for disquotation if we
are also given the information that ‘is true’ and ‘is true-in-F1’
are coextensive, which indeed they are if the world is isomor-
phic to F1.
In summation, the objection posed to deﬂationists is that
since they have to account for what it is for a theory to be true
on the semantic conception of theories, they have to go about
deﬁning truth in terms of truth-in-a-model, but in so doing end
up deﬁning a notion that is not a device for disquotation, and a
device that turns out to presuppose an antecedent, more gen-
eral notion of truth. Primitivists, by contrast, face no such
trouble at all. They admit that there is a more general notion
of truth, and that it is the one presupposed by all attempts to
deﬁne more speciﬁc, relativized cases of truth-in-a-model.
When we deﬁne truth-in-a-model à la Tarski, we do not have
a guarantee that truth-in-a-model is properly related to truth
until we specify that it expresses our prior conception of truth
(and that other notions like frue-in-a-model do not). This is
similar to the point that Etchemendy makes about Tarski’s
own work (though, as above, I think Etchemendy is incorrect
to think that Tarski thought the T-sentences were, like (7) and
(8), vacuous mathematical truths):
Primitive truth at work
305

Getting from a Tarskian deﬁnition of truth to a substantive account
of the semantic properties of the object language may involve as
little as the reintroduction of a primitive notion of truth. For the
subsequent claim that all and only the true sentences are members
of the set deﬁned may then provide genuine information about
the semantic properties of the language, may indeed be logically
equivalent to an illuminating semantic theory of the language.
(Etchemendy 1988: 59)
As we have seen over and over again, life goes much more
smoothly with primitivism about truth.
8.8
Conclusion
The theme of the current chapter is clear. Given that appealing
to truth is so tempting when trying to account for other notions
(such as meaning, justiﬁcation, assertion, declarativeness, etc.),
the response is both easy to see and easy to accept: give in
to temptation! By admitting that truth is primitive, we add it
to our conceptual arsenal, enabling us to employ it without
hesitation in giving philosophical accounts of other concepts.
Furthermore, there are no obvious downsides to primitivism.
Given that we need some set of conceptual primitives, truth is
an overwhelmingly plausible candidate for inclusion. Plus,
taking truth as a conceptual primitive need not accompany
any ontological baggage. Unlike other substantive views, con-
ceptual primitivism is not committed to truth being a meta-
physically substantive property. Primitivism is neutral between
various metaphysical views (notably between whether the
world is a world of facts or a world of things); such metaphys-
ical debates are best carried out via the theory of truthmakers,
not the theory of truth.
To the extent that deﬂationism is motivated by its ability to
dodge the robust theoretical commitments of the traditional
theories of truth, it enjoys no advantage over primitivism.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
306
www.ebook3000.com

To the extent that deﬂationism has to go to great lengths
to attempt to countenance the many apparently substantive
connections between truth and other notions, it fails to be
motivated over primitivism. When the established dialectic in
the theory of truth is between, say, deﬂationists and corre-
spondence theorists, the strengths for one count as weaknesses
for the other. The challenges for deﬂationism lend support to
correspondence theories, and the troubling commitments of
correspondence theories lend support to deﬂationism. But the
debate over the nature of truth suffers when it ignores primi-
tivism, which has not been highly visible, despite its starring
presence in the very origins of analytic philosophy. When the
primitivist conception comes into view, the standard dialectic
regarding truth is overthrown. Primitivists can capture the
beneﬁts of deﬂationism without having to concede its strong
negative claims, and can bypass the weaknesses of deﬂationism
without succumbing to the theoretical and ontological com-
mitments of the traditional substantive theories.
Primitive truth at work
307

9
Primitivism and the liar
We come now to the elephant in the room of so many theories
of truth: the liar paradox. Of course, the liar is just one of many
semantic paradoxes that plague the theory of truth. But it is the
best known, and so will serve us as a ﬁne paradigm case as we
determine the prospects of primitivism in the face of paradox.
As we have seen, the liar paradox ﬁgures crucially in Tarski’s
work on truth, and can even be used to argue for a particular
kind of indeﬁnability of truth. In this chapter, we shall see what
resources primitivists have when approaching the paradox,
and what impact the paradox has for primitivists.
The paradox arises as follows. Consider the following
sentence:
(L)
The ﬁrst-named sentence of Chapter 9 of The Primitivist
Theory of Truth is not true.
If we construct a T-sentence for (L), we have:
(TL)
(L) is true if and only if the ﬁrst-named sentence of
Chapter 9 of The Primitivist Theory of Truth is not true.
Bearing in mind that the ﬁrst-named sentence of Chapter 9 of
The Primitivist Theory of Truth is (L), we can see that (TL) is
equivalent to:
(TL*)
(L) is true if and only if (L) is not true.
(TL*) is obviously contradictory, and so some basic reasoning
from apparently sound principles leads to contradiction.
308
www.ebook3000.com

(L) is an “empirical” liar, in that its paradoxical nature depends
upon the contingent fact that (L) happens to be the ﬁrst-named
sentence of this chapter. If the ﬁrst sentence named in this
chapter had been ‘Pufﬁns are mammals,’ then (L) would be
true, not paradoxical. As things turn out, (L) is paradoxical:
if it is true it is false, and if it is false it is true.
Two distinct questions arise. First, what constitutes a satisfy-
ing solution to the paradox? Second, what implications does the
paradox have for the theory of truth?
9.1
Perspectives on paradox
As for the ﬁrst question, what we want in a solution is not just
some principled way of showing how to avoid (or perhaps
embrace) the contradiction, but also some kind of explanation
or “diagnosis” as to why the paradox arises in the ﬁrst place
(Chihara 1979). Does the paradox reveal some ﬂaw in our
ordinary thinking about logic and truth?
Though this chapter is not the place to engage in a compre-
hensive discussion of the liar paradox and the various attempts
at its resolution,1 we do need to consider the different camps
into which the various solutions fall. One broad distinction to
draw is whether or not a solution maintains classical logic.
Indeed, Tarski identiﬁes commitment to classical logic as being
one of the main assumptions driving the paradox (1944: 348).
Some solutions to the liar crucially rely on rejecting certain
aspects of classical logic, such as the law of excluded middle
(Field 2008), or the law of non-contradiction (Priest 1979).
Other solutions are motivated by the desire to preserve classical
logic in full (Simmons 1993; Horwich 2005).
A second distinction to draw is between those approaches
that focus on the nature of truth and those that do not. Views
1 For this, see Field (2008).
Primitivism and the liar
309

of the ﬁrst kind aim to resolve the paradoxes by addressing
previously unnoticed features of truth. Simmons (1993) argues
that truth is context-sensitive, while Gupta and Belnap (1993)
argue that truth is circularly deﬁned. Other views do not focus
on truth, and instead home in on some problematic feature
about the liar sentence itself. These views typically hold that
the liar sentence is meaningless, does not express a proposition,
or something in the same vein (Grover 1977; Beall 2001).
A third distinction to draw is between revisionary and
non-revisionary approaches to the paradox. Revisionary
approaches grant that the concepts in question inevitably
lead to paradox, and thus the only escape from them is
to abandon those concepts for others. Non-revisionary
approaches attempt to ﬁnd a solution without any such con-
ceptual revision; the success of such efforts therefore depends
on how plausibly the theoretical tools in question apply to
ordinary thought and language.2 Thomas Hofweber (2007),
for example, argues for a non-revisionist solution, claiming
that what causes the paradox is our mistaken belief that valid
inference rules hold universally, and not generically. On
Hofweber’s view, classical logic is ﬁne as is, in spite of those
who fail to recognize its generic character. The success of
Hofweber’s view depends in part on how plausible it is
that ordinary thought operates with a generic conception of
validity. Kevin Scharp’s (2007) approach to the liar, by con-
trast, is explicitly revisionist, as he holds that our actual
concept of truth is inconsistent. In its place, Scharp recom-
mends two replacement truth concepts, ascending truth
and descending
truth, which, unlike truth, are
2 Cf. Schiffer (1996) on happy- and unhappy-face resolutions to paradoxes. Happy-
face resolutions diagnose one of the paradox-producing assumptions as being false
(thereby raising the question as to why we thought it true in the ﬁrst place).
Unhappy-face resolutions admit that the status quo results in paradox, and provide
a suggested revision to our conceptual repertoire.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
310
www.ebook3000.com

consistent. Scharp’s account is therefore judged by what it
promises to offer, and not by how true it rings to ordinary
thinking about truth.
A ﬁnal important distinction for our purposes is between
those solutions that end up maintaining expressive universality,
and those that put restrictions on the limits of what can be
expressed. Keith Simmons writes: “A solution to the Liar must
do justice to the expressive capacity of natural language. Tarski’s
intuition that natural languages are semantically universal is not
easily dismissed. We should beware of claims that natural lan-
guage is not semantically universal, that certain semantic con-
cepts are inexpressible” (1993: 61; cf. 2007: 354–5). Kripke’s
(1975) approach to the liar, for example, relies on the notion of
groundedness. But the notion of groundedness cannot itself be
deﬁned in the language for which truth is being deﬁned, as
“revenge” paradoxes can be formulated using groundedness
itself.3 The sentence ‘This sentence is false or ungrounded’ is
paradoxical. Similar remarks have been made against Field’s
(2003; 2008) approach to the liar and its use of “determinate
truth” (see Priest 2005: 44; Simmons 2007: 355, footnote 22).
To avoid the sorts of revenge paradoxes generated by
the new notions of groundedness and determinate truth, one
might “ascend to a metalanguage,” and hold that while truth
can be deﬁned without paradox for the object language,
the new semantic notion can only be expressed within a meta-
language. This move just is to concede the expressive incom-
pleteness of the object language in question. Furthermore,
those availing themselves of this route must also admit that
they are embracing a revisionary account, for it is implausible
that our ordinary thought and language is stratiﬁed into a
hierarchy of languages. Some might describe this hierarchical
approach as “Tarskian” (e.g., Haack 1978: 143–5), though
3 See Beall (2007) for a collection of essays on revenge paradoxes.
Primitivism and the liar
311

the attribution is somewhat misleading. If the liar paradox is
understood as a paradox that plagues ordinary thought and
language, then Tarski’s hierarchy is in no way intended to
solve the paradox. Tarski employs the hierarchy when devel-
oping paradox-free formal languages. To put the hierarchy
to work in solving the paradox for ordinary language would
be to implement a radical revision: we would have to cease
speaking and thinking in terms of ordinary languages, and
conduct our thought and speech within semantically open,
formalizable languages. Tarski at one point mentions that one
might take up this task, but it is unclear whether doing so
would be at all desirable (1956a: 257). Tarski’s work on truth
does motivate a particular kind of response to the liar para-
dox, though it does not involve his hierarchy; we shall take up
this view below in Section 9.4, as it provides the primitivist
with a rather natural perspective on the paradox (though not
an outright solution).
9.2
Three attitudes concerning paradox and truth
We have now surveyed a variety of kinds of responses to the
paradox. Let us turn next to the second basic question, of what
the speciﬁc implications of the liar paradox are for the theory
of truth. In particular, I want to identify three distinct attitudes
that the theorist of truth might take toward the relationship
between the theory of truth on the one hand, and the liar
paradox on the other.
The ﬁrst attitude is fairly nonchalant. According to this,
the liar paradox equally poses a problem for all theories of
truth, and so has little role to play in the dialectic between
primitivists,
deﬂationists,
and
traditional
substantivists.
Marian David embraces this attitude when he writes: “I have
completely neglected the paradox of the liar in my discussion
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
312
www.ebook3000.com

of disquotationalism and the correspondence theory. The rea-
son is simple. Since it afﬂicts both candidates, considerations
concerning the paradox will not be of much help in advancing
the debate between substantive and deﬂationary theories of
truth” (1994: 191).4 This attitude is also probably implicit in
the works of those offering theories of truth who do not engage
the paradox. No mention of the paradoxes at all is to be found
in the book-length treatments on truth from Alston (1996),
Dodd (2000), Newman (2002), and Lynch (2009).
Horwich is famously brusque in his treatment of the liar
paradox, admitting that his theory needs to be “restricted
in some way so as to avoid paradoxical results” but giving
no indication as to how to do so (1990: 41).5 In fairness to
Horwich, he is not dismissive of the importance of the para-
doxes or their resolution. He writes:
My point is merely that there are manageable and philosophically
fruitful problems of truth that are independent of the search for a
constructive solution to the paradoxes: ﬁrst, to outline a theory of
truth; secondly, to specify what we mean by the truth predicate;
thirdly, to explain its role in our conceptual scheme; and, fourthly,
to say whether there is some theory of the underlying nature of
truth. There is no reason to suppose that the minimalist answers
that are advanced in this essay could be undermined by any
particular constructive solution to the paradoxes – so we can
temporarily set those problems aside.
(Horwich 1990: 42)
I agree with the sentiment of the ﬁrst sentence, but deny the
claim made in the second. After all, this project is an attempt to
do all the things that Horwich mentions, though I shall not be
claiming to advance a particular solution to the paradoxes. But
4 Cf. Vision (2004: 29) and Gupta (2005).
5 See Armour-Garb and Beall (2005) for a critical discussion of how Horwich can
approach the paradoxes.
Primitivism and the liar
313

it is mistaken to think that particular solutions to the paradox
will be fully neutral with respect to the various theories of
truth. To see why, let us consider the second attitude one
might take with respect to truth and paradox.
The second attitude maintains that offering a theory of truth
and offering a solution to the paradoxes are tasks that need to
be taken up in tandem. Or, more modestly, one might at the
least think that the positions one stakes out on truth have
ramiﬁcations for what one can say about the paradoxes, and
vice versa. If so, then we cannot assume alongside Horwich
that our preferred theory of truth is safe from attacks that
might be generated by various proffered solutions to the para-
doxes. And given the ingredients that lead us to paradox – an
application of ‘true’ and a T-sentence – it has often been
thought that it is the task of theorists of truth to solve the
paradox (e.g., Kripke 1975: 690). Indeed, getting around the
paradox seems to be the raison d’être for a number of theories
of truth.6
I adopt the second attitude, as I believe that the set of resour-
ces one may employ when tackling the paradoxes is in part a
function of one’s overall theory of truth. Beall and Glanzberg
(2008), for instance, argue that deﬂationists are compelled by
the paradoxes toward adopting a non-classical logic. Indeed,
Beall and Field are both disquotationalists, and both reject
classical logic in order to solve the paradoxes. (Beall opts for a
paraconsistent logic that rejects the universality of the law of
non-contradiction, whereas Field opts for a paracomplete logic
that rejects the universality of the law of excluded middle.)
Priest, on the other hand, opts for a non-deﬂationary theory
of truth, and accepts non-classical logic for plenty of other
independent reasons (2006). Simmons (1999), meanwhile,
argues that correspondence theorists have certain appealing
6 See, e.g., Kripke (1975), Gupta and Belnap (1993), and Simmons (1993).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
314
www.ebook3000.com

approaches to the paradoxes open to them – such as the appeal
to truth-value gaps, contextual solutions, and hierarchies – but
which are closed off to deﬂationists. Beall (2001) has argued
that deﬂationism can offer a principled motivation for one
traditional perspective on the liar. Overall, it seems that the
theory of truth is not completely neutral when it comes to the
liar paradox. Not all positions are equally affected by it, and not
all theoretical options are open to all views.
The ﬁnal attitude takes the second to its limit, and holds that
solving the liar paradox is of paramount importance for theo-
ries of truth, and that its resolution is of immediate concern.
According to this attitude, views of truth are held hostage, so to
speak, by the paradox. As we have seen, ordinary reasoning
with liar sentences leads to the formulation of inconsistent
T-sentences like (TL). And so theories of truth – given their
acceptance of the T-sentences – are inconsistent until proven
otherwise by some appropriate solution to the paradox.
There is some truth to this third attitude. Certain theories
of truth – speciﬁcally, certain deﬂationary theories of truth –
hold that the T-sentences are deﬁnitional of the notion of
truth. Anyone who takes the T-sentences to be deﬁnitional of
truth faces a dilemma. Either all the T-sentences constitute the
deﬁnition of truth, or some proper subset of them do. On the
ﬁrst horn of the dilemma, we are stuck with an inconsistent
deﬁnition, due to inconsistent T-sentences like (TL). But on the
second horn we need some principled and non-question-
begging account of how to mark the distinction between
healthy and paradoxical T-sentences. As we have just seen,
Horwich gestures toward the need for such an account, but
does not give it.7 Hence, the liar paradox poses a very genuine
7 Horwich later suggests that the healthy T-sentences are those that are formed from
grounded propositions (2005: 81). One major problem this suggestion faces is that
the T-sentence formed from the ungrounded truth-teller (i.e., ‘This sentence is true’)
is perfectly innocuous and tautologous.
Primitivism and the liar
315

threat to deﬂationary theories that take the T-sentences to
be deﬁnitional of truth. Those who do not attribute such foun-
dational status to the T-sentences are not likewise endangered.8
For example, consider correspondence theories of truth.
They face potential paradox due to sentences like
(LC)
(LC) corresponds to no fact.
To get from (LC) to an explicit contradiction we need its
T-sentence
(TLC)
‘(LC) corresponds to no fact’ is true if and only if (LC)
corresponds to no fact.
Paired with the correspondence theorist’s
(CT)
For any sentence S, S is true if and only if S corresponds
to some fact
we may derive
(TLC*)
(LC) is true if and only if (LC) is not true.
What matters is that the derivation requires (TLC), and the
T-sentences, (TLC) included, form no part of the correspond-
ence theorist’s deﬁnition of truth.
One might respond by arguing that although other theories
of truth might not take the T-sentences to be deﬁnitional, any
adequate theory of truth must eventually entail them. So every
theory of truth must somehow reign in the truth schema, lest it
8 Here I am in complete agreement with Patterson, who writes:
Without this assumption [of the deﬁnitional status of the T-sentences] the
paradoxes do not impugn our understanding of our ordinary notions of truth
and falsity at all; they impugn only our understanding of the conditions under
which certain problematic sentences are true. If truth is otherwise deﬁned, we
might understand it full well while remaining thoroughly perplexed about the
liar paradox.
(Patterson 2006a: 28)
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
316
www.ebook3000.com

end up entailing an inconsistency. (Perhaps one might cite
Tarski’s Convention T here, though we have seen reason to
doubt that even Tarski thought this adequacy condition
applied to different kinds of theories of truth.) I have two
replies. First, as I argued in Section 7.4, it is a mistake to
think that every theory of truth needs to entail the T-sentences,
in particular the sentential T-sentences. Non-deﬂationary
theories of truth cannot do so unless they also include the
full semantics of a language, and that is an inappropriate
request for a theory of truth. Hence, because the problematic
T-sentences are a necessary source of the paradox, non-
deﬂationary theories are not immediately threatened because
the T-sentences do not form their content.
Second, I grant that once one brings in a semantic theory
and conjoins it to a theory of truth, one had better not then be
able to derive a contradiction. Of course, if the combined
theory of meaning and truth ends up entailing an inconsis-
tency, then that only impugns the conjunction of the two,
and not necessarily the theory of truth. For example, if one
can derive a contradiction from conjoining primitivism about
truth with a particular semantic theory of English, then we
cannot immediately infer that the problem lies with primitiv-
ism. In fact, it is unclear how the problem could derive from
primitivism alone. In any event, so long as the paradox remains
unsolved, there is a danger of contradiction arising in the form
of an inconsistent T-sentence. However, this danger could
spring from a variety of sources: from the theory of meaning,
from logic, or from the theory of truth. For those who do
not take the T-sentences to be deﬁnitional of truth, there is
some room to breathe here. One might use one’s theory of
meaning to show that liar sentences are meaningless, or adopt
a non-classical logic in order to avoid deriving a contradiction.
Such options are available to substantivists (including non-
primitivist substantivists like correspondence theorists), for
Primitivism and the liar
317

they may at least state their theories without making use of any
T-sentence. Everyone needs eventually to quarantine the prob-
lematic T-sentences; my present point is only that this task is
less urgent for non-deﬂationary theorists of truth.
9.3
Paradox and primitivism: neutrality
How should primitivists approach the paradoxes? In accord-
ance with the second attitude described above, primitivists
should not ﬂat out ignore them. But neither are primitivists
immediately threatened by them, given that they do not take
the T-sentences to be deﬁnitional of truth, or the fundamen-
tal facts about truth. In this section, I highlight one positive
feature of primitivists’ options when facing paradox, which
is their ability to travel down a number of theoretical roads
without obstacle. Here we ﬁnd a comparative strength of
the view. If primitivists have more theoretical tools at their
disposal in virtue of their primitivism, if they close fewer
doors than do their competitors, then they are able to jump
aboard whatever solution to the paradoxes looks to be the
most promising. In the next section, I take up one (fairly
non-standard) approach to the paradox that primitivists
in particular might avail themselves of.
Let us brieﬂy consider three approaches to the liar paradox,
in order to show how primitivism is compatible with each
of them. One traditionally popular way of handling the liar
sentence is to take it as suffering a truth-value gap: it is neither
true nor false. This might be due to its being meaningless,
expressing no proposition, or something similar. Some have
argued that deﬂationists are unable to accommodate such gaps
(see again Simmons 1999).9 Suppose some sentence ‘p’ is, for
whatever reason, neither true nor false (perhaps ‘p’ involves a
9 Cf. Dummett (1958–9: 145).
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
318
www.ebook3000.com

penumbral application of a vague predicate). Now consider
the T-sentence for ‘p’:
(TS)
‘p’ is true if and only if p.
By supposition, ‘p’ is neither true nor false. Hence it is false that
‘p’ is true. The left-hand side of (TS) is false, whereas the right-
hand side is neither. Depending on how one interprets the logic
of truth-value gaps, (TS) is either false or gappy. What it
deﬁnitely is not is true. But if deﬂationary theories are given
by the instances of the truth schema, then (TS) looks to be an
axiom of deﬂationary theories of truth. Deﬂationists ought to
think that (TS) is true, and so must ﬁnd some way of ﬁnding it
to be true, or of banishing it from their theories.10 In any event,
some theoretical maneuvering is called for. For instance, Field
(2008) develops a non-classical conditional that preserves the
truth schema by abandoning the universality of the law of
excluded middle.
Are primitivists under any pressure to resist truth-value gaps?
Not obviously so. Primitivists do not take the T-sentences to
be conceptually privileged. The T-sentences are not the most
fundamental facts about truth. For primitivists, there are no
more fundamental facts that give content to the concept of
truth, for truth is itself conceptually fundamental. Since primi-
tivism does not arise from a virtually unrestrained commitment
to the truth schema – as deﬂationism does – it is not under any
particular pressure to resist taking some T-sentences as gappy or
even false, if in fact certain ordinary sentences are gappy. The
concept of truth, according to primitivists, does not tell us what
the correct logic is, or whether we should accept bivalence,
unrestricted excluded middle, or what have you. As logicians
argue about and discover such things, we learn more about the
laws of truth, though we do not, strictly speaking, thereby learn
10 See Field (1994b).
Primitivism and the liar
319

more about the nature of truth. (Compare the difference
between learning about the chemical composition of water
and learning the laws involved in how water interacts with
other chemicals.) Truth-value gaps, then, are in principle avail-
able to primitivists, and so approaches to the liar that employ
them are too.
Turn now to dialetheism, the view that some contradictions
are true. Dialetheist approaches solve the paradox (or, alterna-
tively, invite us to live with it in harmony) by accepting
that liar sentences like (L) are both true and false, just as
our intuitive reasoning with it suggests. As already noted, dia-
letheist approaches have been taken up by both substantivists
(Priest 2006) and deﬂationists (Beall 2005). I submit that it
could also be taken up by primitivists, if they are so inclined.
The issue of whether there are true contradictions is not an issue
that is settled by primitivism. If truth turns out to be compatible
with falsity (even if in only very restricted scenarios), then that is
an interesting discovery about what many took to be a law of
truth, namely, that nothing can be both true and false. Being a
primitivist about truth does not force one’s hand with respect to
one’s favored logic, and so leaves open the many varieties of
perspectives that one might take toward the liar.
Finally, let us consider inconsistent approaches to the liar
(e.g., Eklund 2002; Scharp 2007). Inconsistent approaches are
centered on the idea that truth is an inconsistent concept.
Concepts are inconsistent, according to Scharp, when their
“constitutive principles are incompatible” (2007: 607). Allow
me to introduce you to the concept crumber. For any object x,
x is a crumber just in case x is a number, and x is not a crumber
just in case x is a number. Since 2 is a number, it is also a
crumber (by way of the ﬁrst conjunct of my deﬁnition); also,
2 is not a crumber (by way of the second conjunct of the
deﬁnition). So 2 both is and is not a crumber. crumber is as
explicitly inconsistent as a concept can be. Inconsistency
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
320
www.ebook3000.com

theorists hold that truth is like crumber in that applying its
constitutive principles leads to inconsistency. The relevant
principles are the two inferences enshrined by the truth
schema: from ‘p’ we may infer ‘“p” is true’ and vice versa.
These principles lead to inconsistency, as made manifest by the
liar paradox.
So deﬁned, the inconsistency approach is inconsistent
with primitivism, for primitivism denies that there are any
constitutive principles governing truth. But we can under-
stand inconsistent concepts somewhat more broadly, since the
principles leading to inconsistency need not be constitutive of
their respective concepts. (One might think, after all, that no
concept is constituted by sets of inference rules.) Inconsistent
concepts can thus be identiﬁed as those concepts such that
inferences involving those concepts alone lead straight to
contradiction. The inferences that lead to inconsistency are
generally accepted by primitivists, and so in principle one
could
be
a
primitivist
and
an
inconsistency
theorist.
According to this view, truth is a primitive concept, and an
inconsistent one at that.
The inconsistency approach brings to light the distinction
between the descriptive question of which concepts we in fact
possess, and the normative question of which concepts we
ought to possess. The inconsistency approach to truth holds
that the concept we in fact have is inconsistent, and that it
ought to be replaced by something consistent. Hence, one
can be a primitivist about truth and think that it is an
inconsistent concept, but in that case one might infer that
we ought to abandon truth altogether. It certainly seems
possible that one could then be a primitivist about one’s
recommended replacement concept(s). (Though the question
would arise as to what the difference is between inconsistent
truth and the supposedly new and revised consistent
concept truthr.)
Primitivism and the liar
321

In summation, it seems that primitivists have more right
than does Horwich to the claim that we can temporarily
set the liar paradox aside, since, unlike Horwich’s own deﬂa-
tionism, there is no reason to suppose that primitivism gets in
the way of any particular solution to the liar paradox. In
particular, primitivism is neutral with respect to any adjust-
ments that might need to be made to classical logic in order to
block the paradoxes. This perspective on the relationship
between the paradoxes and truth is, appropriately enough,
Fregean. Frege writes that “it falls to logic to discern the laws
of truth” (1956: 289). This injunction comes on the ﬁrst page
of “The thought,” the essay where Frege also argues for the
indeﬁnability of truth. Obviously he thinks that taking truth as
conceptually basic is fully compatible with discovering all sorts
of laws that involve it. These laws of truth – what we would
normally call the laws of logic – further our understanding
of truth, but not by way of telling us about its analysis or
deﬁnition, since it has none. When we are trying to solve the
paradoxes, we are simultaneously trying to uncover how we
should think about logic, and thereby uncovering the laws of
truth. From this point of view, it is no part of primitivism
to assume that unrestricted classical logic is true, and so prim-
itivists are free to jump on the bandwagon of those who
attempt to solve the paradox by, say, paraconsistent or para-
complete means.
9.4
Paradox and primitivism: inexpressibility
In the previous section I stressed the relative neutrality of
the primitivist’s position when it comes to the liar paradox.
Primitivists are not forced to close any theoretical doors simply
in virtue of their primitivism. As a result, they enjoy a theoretical
advantage over competing views that must be more partisan in
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
322
www.ebook3000.com

their maneuvering with the liar. In this section I consider a
perspective on the liar paradox that, while not very well
explored, may be of distinctive interest to primitivists. I do not
claim that this perspective constitutes a solution; rather, I believe
that primitivism sheds light on some theoretical territory that is
worth exploring. This perspective draws its inspiration from a
variety of topics we have covered so far, and its origin lies in
Tarski’s work on indeﬁnability, which, as we saw in Chapter 7,
primitivists can make use of when defending their own view.
Primitivism about truth is ﬁrst and foremost a thesis about
truth, our concept of truth. One way to handle the liar para-
dox is to identify it as a problem not for truth, but for ‘true.’ By
drawing on our earlier reﬂections about truth, we can begin to
make the case for the idea that the paradox does not impugn it
at all. If so, then we can maintain that primitivists’ theory of
truth is not threatened by the paradox, and that it might provide
some insight into where and why the paradox arises.
First, recall that I have argued that truth is prior to ‘truth.’
The case of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern (see Section 5.2.4)
reveals that they possess a concept of truth in spite of not
possessing a language with ‘true.’ This ﬁnding is reinforced
by Tarski’s discussion of the paradox, and his demonstration
that a language that lacks ‘true’ can be expressively quite
powerful while not allowing paradoxical sentences to be
formable. The speakers of such a language possess truth,
but do not speak a language that generates paradox.
Next, note that omnipresence, the thesis that truth forms
part of the conceptual content of any judgment whatsoever,
can and should be stated without making use of the truth
predicate. Omnipresence holds that judgments that p are
identical to judgments that it is true that p: omnipresence is
here deﬁned in terms of the truth operator, not the predicate.
Once again we do not need ‘is true’ to capture the critical facts
about truth, of which omnipresence is among the most
Primitivism and the liar
323

important. (If omnipresence were framed in terms of predica-
tions, it would be false.) But notice that what we do need
the truth predicate for is forming liar sentences. The truth
operator alone is not sufﬁcient for forming liar sentences,
which predicate non-truth of themselves. So the paradox
most fundamentally seems to be a problem not for ‘true’
generally, but speciﬁcally for the predicate ‘is true.’
My ﬁrst suggestion, then, is that primitivists may maintain
that the liar paradox is fundamentally a problem about
language, and speciﬁcally about the truth predicate ‘is true.’
The liar need not, from the outset, impugn truth or even ‘it is
true that.’ Deﬂationist views, by contrast, take the analysis of
‘is true’ to be paramount to the theory of truth. When Quine
says “Truth is disquotation,” he expresses this view about
what the theory of truth is all about (1990: 80). Hence, we
can see again how the paradox threatens deﬂationary accounts
more than primitivist ones. Primitivists are in a position to
argue that the trouble lies with ‘is true,’ and that facts about
how ‘is true’ works are not fundamental to the theory of truth,
as deﬂationists maintain.
Hence, suppose that the problem is indeed found to lie with
‘is true.’ If the liar reveals that there is some sort of deﬁciency in
language, what is its nature? Here, I suggest that primitivists
again turn to Tarski, and speciﬁcally his work on indeﬁnability
(see again Section 7.2.1). What Tarski shows in his work on
indeﬁnability is that, for formal languages of a certain degree
of expressive power, there is no predicate whose extension is
given by the set of all and only the true sentences of the
language. If we apply this insight to natural language (though
we should be extremely cautious and tentative in doing so,
given how Tarski’s proof is directed at explicitly formal lan-
guages), we arrive at the conclusion that the predicate ‘is true’
does not have for its extension the set of all and only true
sentences of English. No predicate has such an extension, and
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
324
www.ebook3000.com

so a fortiori ‘is true’ does not either.11 But if no predicate of
natural language has for its extension all and only things that
are true, then it looks like natural language is incomplete: there
is some notion that cannot be fully expressed. Patterson arrives
at much the same conclusion when he writes: “we are not to
conclude that the concept of truth itself is somehow incoher-
ent, but that nothing can properly express it in colloquial
language . . . Tarski appears to think that, somehow, the notion
is just ﬁne, and there is rather a problem with the language in
which we try to express it” (2008a: 169). If this Tarskian
insight is correct, it is yet more grist to the primitivist’s mill.
For primitivists, truth is prior to ‘true.’ Only a deﬂationist
could think that an exhaustive account of the concept is
obtained from an exhaustive examination of the truth predi-
cate. What Tarski shows is that whatever ‘is true’ is, it is not
something that fully accounts for or expresses truth.
Consequently, a natural position for primitivists to take is
that the liar poses a paradox for the truth predicate, which
we have independent reason (coming from our discussions
of omnipresence and Tarski) to think cannot fully express
our concept of truth. At most, we can say that ‘is true’ only
approximately expresses our concept of truth, much as
someone who introduced ‘division’ but did not specify what
to do in the case of 0 would only be approximately expressing
division.12 As a result, primitivists may have to concede that
natural language is not expressively complete. Now, keeping in
mind Simmons’s admonition that we “not easily dismiss”
the Tarskian idea that natural language is expressively univer-
sal (1993: 61), we should not take this conclusion lightly.
11 Patterson goes further, arguing that Tarski is further committed to the view that
there is no such set (2006b: 166). Patterson goes on to offer a different and more
radical Tarskian response to the paradox that admits, in effect, that no sentence of
English is true.
12 My thanks go to Keith Simmons for this analogy.
Primitivism and the liar
325

However, we have seen that, on at least one interpretation,
Tarski himself provides the grounds for concluding that
natural languages cannot be expressively complete, given that
they are unable to have a predicate that takes as its extension
the set of all and only truths.13
Let us recall the overall dialectic introduced by the liar.
We begin with the easy formation of paradoxical sentences.
If we attempt to classify these sentences as intelligible but
untrue, we face the threat of being immediately forced to
conclude that they are true. If we resist this contradictory
move by diagnosing the sentences as being ungrounded, not
expressing a proposition, being neither true nor false, or what
have you, we seem to make expressible a new paradoxical
sentence, such as ‘This sentence is false or ungrounded’ or
‘This sentence is false or fails to express a proposition.’ The
“ascent to a metalanguage” in which to express the new
notions of ungroundedness or failing to express a proposition
just are concessions that the original language is expressively
limited. There seems to be something we can say, but we have
to go to a new language to say it. Once in that language, we
face new potential paradoxes that force us to ascend again.
The present approach stops this regress before it begins, and
suggests that we bite the bullet and accept some inexpressibility
from the get-go.
13 In an intriguing twist on Tarski’s indeﬁnability theorem, Patterson argues that
Tarski can be interpreted as proving that there are no semantically closed lan-
guages, despite appearances to the contrary (2006b: 168). A semantically closed
language has its own truth predicate, and Tarski shows that seemingly universal
languages cannot have such predicates. The languages for which truth can be
deﬁned are not semantically closed, and languages for which truth cannot be
deﬁned thereby do not have a genuine truth predicate either. So no language can
have its own truth predicate, and so no language can be semantically closed.
Consequently, English does not have its own truth predicate, and so English is
not semantically closed after all. (Again, this argument turns on the availability of
carrying over Tarski’s indeﬁnability proof for formal languages to natural
languages.)
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
326
www.ebook3000.com

Do we even have a solution to the paradox here, given
that we are jettisoning the expressive universality of natural
language? Well, if the challenge posed by the liar is to offer a
consistent resolution to the paradoxes that preserves the
semantic universality of natural language, then we do not
have a full solution. But we do seem to have a principled resting
point. The inexpressibility approach draws a new consequence
from Tarski’s indeﬁnability proof, one that is more compatible
with primitivism than other views. After all, if truth is deﬁn-
able, then one should expect it to be fully expressible: the
deﬁning notions themselves could be used to fully express our
concept of truth. By refusing to grant that truth may be deﬁned,
primitivists appear to occupy the most principled ground for
accepting that natural language is expressively incomplete,
especially when it comes to truth.
It remains to be seen how we should handle the paradox-
generating T-sentences. They appear to give the truth conditions
for paradoxical sentences, and so any semantic theory that
includes them will be contradictory. One can maintain that
these T-sentences do reveal the truth conditions for paradoxical
sentences, and thereby conclude either that there are true
contradictions (Priest 1979) or that the semantics for English
are contradictory (Patterson 2007b). Or one can maintain
that these T-sentences do not reveal the truth conditions for
paradoxical sentences. In that case, the question arises as to
what paradoxical sentences do mean, if they mean anything at
all. We need not assume that the full story of a sentence’s truth
conditions is to be revealed by considering what we might call
its “homophonic T-sentence.” This point was stressed long ago
by Davidson, who argued that sentences need not wear their
truth conditions on their sleeves (e.g., 1967; 1977a; see also
Lycan 2000: 137). So an important moral to this story is that the
question of what the truth conditions of a sentence are, or
whether it has them at all, is a crucial one in understanding
Primitivism and the liar
327

the nature of the liar paradox. My argument has been that
primitivists do not need to take sides on this debate, and that
questions concerning how to understand paradoxical sentences
and their accompanying T-sentences are further questions that
have no impact on the truth of primitivism.
The ﬁnal conclusion I draw, then, is that for a complete
account of how to respond to the semantic paradoxes, we
need to look beyond the boundaries of the theory of truth,
and into the theory of meaning as well (and perhaps also to the
nature of logic). Unlike, say, Kripke’s (1975) “ﬁxed point”
theory and Gupta and Belnap’s (1993) “revision” theory, the
primitivist theory of truth does not exist for the purpose of
solving the liar paradox. As a result, primitivism itself does not
offer its own intrinsic solution to the paradoxes. But it is
compatible with a number of approaches that might be
taken, and in particular can be used to motivate the inexpres-
sibility thesis (that no predicate can fully express truth),
which attempts to dodge (or perhaps just soften) the paradox
by admitting up front that natural language is inherently
limited in its expressive power. What is clear is that the most
natural stance for the primitivist to take is that the semantic
paradoxes most fundamentally pose a problem for ‘is true’ and
for natural language, and not truth itself, with which primi-
tivism is most fundamentally concerned. As a result, the prim-
itivist view is not immediately threatened by the paradox in the
way that certain deﬂationary theories are. After all, had we
evolved to speak a language that lacked all semantic machinery
(the language spoken by Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, say),
then the paradox would not arise, though we would still
possess truth.
The Primitivist Theory of Truth
328
www.ebook3000.com

Conclusion
Primitivism about truth has been with analytic philosophy
from the beginning, and so it is quite surprising that it has
received so little attention over the years. Nevertheless, the
current state of affairs is fairly explicable. Moore and Russell
rejected their version of the view early on, and rightly so:
their metaphysical take on primitivism is indeed unsustainable.
Frege’s far more tenable conceptual primitivism was in some
cases mistaken for an early deﬂationary theory, and in other
cases thought to rely on the ﬂawed treadmill argument.
Following Tarski’s pioneering work on truth, the theory of
truth began to focus on the dialectic between correspondence
theorists and deﬂationists, both of whom took themselves
to be the true inheritor of Tarski’s insights. Finally, many
have thought that taking truth to be conceptually primitive
is theoretically uninteresting, a move of last resort that is
philosophically uninformative, if not outright cowardly.
My hope has been to revive primitivism about truth,
and show how it is a theoretically compelling, metaphysi-
cally respectable, and philosophically defensible account of
the nature of truth. Primitivism can avoid the metaphysical
pitfalls of the early Moore/Russell view, and is better moti-
vated by Tarski’s work on truth than either correspondence
theory or deﬂationism. Far from rendering the concept of
truth uninteresting and vacuous, primitivism elevates truth
to its rightful place as a foundational and fundamental
concept.
329

As with any primitivist view, the best argument for conceptual
primitivism is to be found in the fruits that it yields in other areas
of philosophy, namely, its ability to help us understand notions
like meaning, assertion, belief, paradox, etc. Foundations are
best evaluated by what can be built upon them. As I hope to
have shown, my “truth-ﬁrst” approach has much to recom-
mend it. In the past, part of what has motivated philosophers
to seek alternative approaches and alternative primitives
(such as assertion) is the suspicion that truth is a dangerously
metaphysical notion. Perhaps the greatest lesson from the
twentieth century’s dialectic on truth – beginning with Frege,
continuing in Tarski, and following through with contemporary
deﬂationism – is that we can understand the nature of truth in a
metaphysically innocuous way. The sense in which truth is a
metaphysical notion (the idea that what is true depends on
reality) is better captured by a theory of truthmakers, and not
a metaphysically substantive property of truth. The assumption
in the theory of truth, however, has been that those who
reject the metaphysical nature of truth must take on an austere,
deﬂationary account of truth. By attending to primitivism,
we see that there is a third, superior option. Metaphysical
deﬂationism need not lead to conceptual deﬂationism. Truth
can be a foundational concept without being a metaphysically
substantive property.
Accordingly, the marriage between metaphysical deﬂation-
ism and conceptual primitivism that I have defended here
offers the most attractive option in the theory of truth. We
can take advantage of all the explanatory potential that the
concept of truth offers, and do so in clear metaphysical con-
science. We can capture what is right about correspondence
theory, and what is right about deﬂationism, but without
taking on the burdens of either.
Conclusion
330
www.ebook3000.com

References
Alston, William P. 1996. A Realist Conception of Truth. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
2002. Truth: concept and property. In What is Truth?, ed.
Richard Schantz, 11–26. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Aristotle. 1966. Metaphysics, trans. Hippocrates G. Apostle. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
1995. Categories. In Selections, ed. and trans. Terence Irwin and
Gail Fine, 1–12. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Armour-Garb, Bradley, and Jc Beall. 2005. Minimalism, epistemicism, and
paradox. In Deﬂationism and Paradox, ed. Jc Beall and
Bradley Armour-Garb, 85–96. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Armstrong, D. M. 1978. Universals and Scientiﬁc Realism, vol. II:
A Theory of Universals. Cambridge University Press.
1983. What is a Law of Nature? Cambridge University Press.
1989. A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility. Cambridge University
Press.
1997. A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge University Press.
2004. Truth and Truthmakers. Cambridge University Press.
Asay, Jamin. 2009. Constructive empiricism and deﬂationary truth.
Philosophy of Science 76: 423–43.
2011. Truthmaking, Truth, and Realism: New Work for a Theory of
Truthmakers. Doctoral dissertation. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina.
2012. A truthmaking account of realism and anti-realism. Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly 93: 373–94.
2013. Truthmaking, metaethics, and creeping minimalism. Philosophical
Studies 163: 213–32.
Austin, J. L. 1950. Truth. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
supplementary volumes 24: 111–28.
Ayer, Alfred Jules. 1952. Language, Truth, and Logic, reprint edn. New
York: Dover.
1971. Russell and Moore: The Analytical Heritage. London: Macmillan.
Azzouni, Jody. 2000. Knowledge and Reference in Empirical Science.
London: Routledge.
331

2004. Deﬂating Existential Consequence: A Case for Nominalism.
Oxford University Press.
2005. Anaphorically unrestricted quantiﬁers and paradoxes. In
Deﬂationism and Paradox, ed. Jc Beall and Bradley Armour-Garb,
250–73. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
2006. Tracking Reason: Proof, Consequence, and Truth. Oxford
University Press.
Baldwin, Thomas. 1984. Moore’s rejection of idealism. In Philosophy in
History: Essays on the Historiography of Philosophy, ed.
Richard Rorty, J. B. Schneewind, and Quentin Skinner, 357–74.
Cambridge University Press.
1990. G. E. Moore. London: Routledge.
1991. The identity theory of truth. Mind, new series 100: 35–52.
1995. Three puzzles in Frege’s theory of truth. In Frege: Sense and
Reference One Hundred Years Later, ed. John Biro and Petr Kotatko,
1–14. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
1997. Frege, Moore, Davidson: the indeﬁnability of truth. Philosophical
Topics 25: 1–18.
Bar-On, Dorit, Claire Horisk, and William G. Lycan. 2000. Deﬂationism,
meaning and truth-conditions. Philosophical Studies 101: 1–28.
Bar-On, Dorit, and Keith Simmons. 2007. The use of force against
deﬂationism: assertion and truth. In Truth and Speech Acts: Studies in
the Philosophy of Language, ed. Dirk Greimann and Geo Siegwart,
61–89. London: Routledge.
Barwise, Jon and John Etchemendy. 2007. Language, Proof and Logic.
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Beall, Jc 2001. A neglected deﬂationist approach to the liar. Analysis 61:
126–9.
2005. Transparent disquotationalism. In Deﬂationism and Paradox, ed.
Jc Beall and Bradley Armour-Garb, 7–22. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
ed. 2007. Revenge of the Liar: New Essays on the Paradox. Oxford
University Press.
Beall, Jc, and Michael Glanzberg. 2008. Where the paths meet: remarks
on truth and paradox. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 32: 169–98.
Belnap, Nuel D. 1962. Tonk, plonk and plink. Analysis 22: 130–4.
Bessie, Joseph, and Stuart Glennan. 2000. Elements of Deductive Inference:
An Introduction to Symbolic Logic. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Bigelow, John. 1988. The Reality of Numbers: A Physicalist’s Philosophy
of Mathematics. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Black, Max. 1948. The semantic deﬁnition of truth. Analysis 8: 49–63.
Blackburn, Simon. 1984. Spreading the Word: Groundings in the
Philosophy of Language. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1998. Ruling Passions: A Theory of Practical Reasoning. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
References
332
www.ebook3000.com

Blackburn, Simon, and Keith Simmons, eds. 1999. Truth. Oxford
University Press.
Boghossian, Paul A. 1990. The status of content. Philosophical Review
99: 157–84.
BonJour, Laurence. 1978. Can empirical knowledge have a foundation?
American Philosophical Quarterly 15: 1–13.
Bradley, F. H. 1912. The Principles of Logic. New York: G. E. Stechert
and Company.
Brandom, Robert B. 1988. Pragmatism, phenomenalism, and truth talk.
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 12: 75–93.
1994. Making it Explicit: Reasoning, Representing, and Discursive
Commitment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burge, Tyler. 1986. Frege on truth. In Frege Synthesized: Essays on the
Philosophical and Foundational Work of Gottlob Frege, ed.
Leila Haaparanta and Jaakko Hintikka, 97–154. Dordrecht: Reidel.
2005. Postscript to “Frege on truth.” In Tyler Burge, Truth, Thought,
Reason: Essays on Frege, 133–52. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Burgess, Alexis G., and John P. Burgess. 2011. Truth. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Buridan, John. 1966. Sophisms on Meaning and Truth., trans. Theodore
Kermit Scott. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Butler, Joseph. 2006. Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel. In
The Works of Bishop Butler, ed. David E. White, 33–146. Rochester,
NY: University of Rochester Press.
Cameron, Ross P. 2008. How to be a truthmaker maximalist. Noûs 42:
410–21.
Campbell, Keith. 1990. Abstract Particulars. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Candlish, Stewart. 1989. The truth about F. H. Bradley. Mind, new series
98: 331–48.
1995. Resurrecting the identity theory of truth. Bradley Studies 1:
116–24.
1999a. Identifying the identity theory of truth. Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, new series 99: 233–40.
1999b. A prolegomenon to an identity theory of truth. Philosophy 74:
199–220.
2007. The Russell/Bradley Dispute and its Signiﬁcance for
Twentieth-Century Philosophy. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Candlish, Stewart, and Nic Damnjanovic. 2007. A brief history of truth.
In Philosophy of Logic, ed. Dale Jacquette, 227–323. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Carnap, Rudolf. 1928. Der Logische Aufbau der Welt. Leipzig: Felix Meiner
Verlag.
Carruthers, Peter. 1981–2. Frege’s regress. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, new series 82: 17–32.
1990. The Metaphysics of the Tractatus. Cambridge University Press.
References
333

Cartwright, Richard L. 1987. A neglected theory of truth. In Richard
L. Cartwright, Philosophical Essays, 71–93. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
2003. Russell and Moore, 1898–1905. In The Cambridge Companion
to Bertrand Russell, ed. Nicholas Grifﬁn, 108–27. Cambridge
University Press.
Chihara, Charles. 1979. The semantic paradoxes: a diagnostic
investigation. Philosophical Review 88: 590–618.
Clark, Maudemarie. 1990. Nietzsche on Truth and Philosophy.
Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, Stewart. 1984. Justiﬁcation and truth. Philosophical Studies 46:
279–95.
Collins, John. 2002. Truth or meaning? A question of priority. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 65: 497–536.
Conee, Earl. 1992. The truth connection. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 52: 657–69.
Copi, Irving M., and Carl Cohen. 2005. Introduction to Logic, 12th edn.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Cousin, D. R. 1950. Truth. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
supplementary volumes 24: 157–72.
Damnjanovic, Nic. 2005. Deﬂationism and the success argument.
Philosophical Quarterly 55: 53–67.
2010. New wave deﬂationism. In New Waves in Truth, ed. Cory D. Wright
and Nikolaj J.L. L. Pedersen, 45–58. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
David, Marian. 1994. Correspondence and Disquotation: An Essay on the
Nature of Truth. Oxford University Press.
2001. Truth as identity and truth as correspondence. In The Nature of
Truth: Classic and Contemporary Perspectives, ed. Michael P. Lynch,
683–704. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
2004. Don’t forget about the correspondence theory of truth. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 82: 42–7.
2009. Truth-making and correspondence. In Truth and Truth-Making,
ed. E. J. Lowe and A. Rami, 137–57. Stocksﬁeld: Acumen.
Davidson, Donald. 1967. Causal relations. Journal of Philosophy 64:
691–703.
1969. True to the facts. Journal of Philosophy 66: 748–64.
1973. In defense of Convention T. In Truth, Syntax and Modality:
Proceedings of the Temple University Conference on Alternative
Semantics, ed. Hugues Leblanc, 76–86. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
1977a. The method of truth in metaphysics. Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 2: 244–54.
1977b. Reality without reference. Dialectica 31: 247–58.
1982. Rational animals. Dialectica 36: 317–27.
1983. A coherence theory of truth and knowledge. In Kant oder Hegel?
Über Formen der Begründung in der Philosophie, ed. Dieter Henrich,
423–38. Stuttgart : Klett-Cotta.
References
334
www.ebook3000.com

1984. Introduction. In Donald Davidson, Inquiries into Truth and
Interpretation, xii−xx. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1990a. Afterthoughts, 1987. In Reading Rorty: Critical Responses to
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (and Beyond), ed. Alan
R. Malachowski, 134–8. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
1990b. The structure and content of truth. Journal of Philosophy
87: 279–328.
1996. The folly of trying to deﬁne truth. Journal of Philosophy
93: 263–78.
1999. The centrality of truth. In Truth and Its Nature (If Any), ed.
Jaroslav Peregrin, 105–15. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
2001. The irreducibility of the concept of the self. In Donald Davidson,
Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective, 85–91. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
2005. Truth and Predication. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Descartes, René. 1984. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. II,
trans. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch.
Cambridge University Press.
1991. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. III: The
Correspondence, trans. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff,
Dugald Murdoch, and Anthony Kenny. Cambridge University Press.
DeVidi, David, and Graham Solomon. 1999. Tarski on “essentially richer”
metalanguages. Journal of Philosophical Logic 28: 1–28.
Dewey, John. 1941. Propositions, warranted assertibility, and truth. Journal
of Philosophy 38: 169–86.
Dodd, Julian. 1995. McDowell and identity theories of truth. Analysis
55: 160–5.
1996. Resurrecting the identity theory of truth: a reply to Candlish.
Bradley Studies 2: 42–50.
1999. Hornsby on the identity theory of truth. Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, new series 99: 225–32.
2000. An Identity Theory of Truth. London: Macmillan.
Dummett, Michael. 1958–9. Truth. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
new series 59: 141–62.
1973. Frege: Philosophy of Language. New York: Harper and Row.
1976. What is a theory of meaning? (II). In Truth and Meaning: Essays
in Semantics, ed. Gareth Evans and John McDowell, 67–137. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
1979. Comments. In Meaning and Use: Papers Presented at the Second
Jerusalem Philosophical Encounter April 1976, ed. Avishai Margalit,
218–25. Dordrecht: Reidel.
1981. The Interpretation of Frege’s Philosophy. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
1991. The Logical Basis of Metaphysics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
1993. The Seas of Language. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
References
335

Eklund, Matti. 2002. Inconsistent languages. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 64: 251–75.
Engel, Pascal. 2001. The false modesty of the identity theory of truth.
International Journal of Philosophical Studies 9: 441–58.
2002. Truth. Chesham: Acumen.
Etchemendy, John. 1988. Tarski on truth and logical consequence. Journal
of Symbolic Logic 53: 51–79.
Fernández Moreno, Luis. 2001. Tarskian truth and the correspondence
theory. Synthese 126: 123–47.
Field, Hartry. 1972. Tarski’s theory of truth. Journal of Philosophy
69: 347–75.
1980. Science Without Numbers. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
1986. The deﬂationary conception of truth. In Fact, Science and Morality:
Essays on A. J. Ayer’s Language, Truth and Logic, ed.
Graham Macdonald and Crispin Wright, 55–117. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
1994a. Deﬂationist views of meaning and content. Mind, new series
103: 249–85.
1994b. Disquotational truth and factually defective discourse.
Philosophical Review 103: 405–52.
2003. A revenge-immune solution to the semantic paradoxes. Journal
of Philosophical Logic 32: 139–77.
2008. Saving Truth from Paradox. Oxford University Press.
Fine, Arthur. 1984. The natural ontological attitude. In Scientiﬁc Realism,
ed. Jarrett Leplin, 83–107. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Fodor, Jerry A. 1975. The Language of Thought. New York: Thomas
Y. Crowell Company.
1981. The current status of the innateness controversy. In Jerry
A. Fodor, RePresentations: Philosophical Essays on the Foundations
of Cognitive Science, 257–316. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fox, John F. 1987. Truthmaker. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 65:
188–207.
Frege, Gottlob. 1879. Begriffsschrift: Eine der Arithmetischen
Nachgebildete. Halle: Verlag von Louis Nebert.
1951. On concept and object, trans. P. T. Geach, rev. Max Black. Mind,
new series 60: 168–80.
1952. On sense and reference, trans. Max Black. In Translations from
the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, ed. Peter Geach and
Max Black, 56–78. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
1956. The thought: a logical inquiry, trans. A. M. Quinton and
Marcelle Quinton. Mind, new series 65: 289–311.
1964. The Basic Laws of Arithmetic: Exposition of the System, trans.
and ed. Montgomery Furth. Berkeley: University of California Press.
1979. Posthumous Writings, ed. Hans Hermes, Friedrich Kambartel,
and Friedrich Kaulbach with the assistance of Gottfried Gabriel and
References
336
www.ebook3000.com

Walburga Rödding, trans. Peter Long and Roger White, with the
assistance of Raymond Hargreaves. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
1980. Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence, ed.
Gottfried Gabriel, Hans Hermes, Friedrich Kambartel,
Christian Thiel, and Albert Veraart, abridged by Brian McGuinness,
trans. Hans Kaal. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
1984. Logical investigations, part I: Thoughts, trans. Peter Geach
and R. H. Stoothoff. In Collected Papers on Mathematics, Logic,
and Philosophy, ed. Brian McGuiness, 351–72. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Fumerton, Richard. 2002. Realism and the Correspondence Theory of
Truth. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
García-Carpintero, Manuel. 1999. The explanatory value of truth theories.
In Truth and Its Nature (If Any), ed. Jaroslav Peregrin, 129–48.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Gettier, Edmund L. 1963. Is justiﬁed true belief knowledge? Analysis
23: 121–3.
Goldfarb, Warren. 2001. Frege’s conception of logic. In Future Pasts: The
Analytic Tradition in Twentieth-Century Philosophy, ed. Juliet Floyd
and Sanford Shieh, 25–41. Oxford University Press.
Goldman, Alvin I. 1979. What is justiﬁed belief? In Justiﬁcation and
Knowledge, ed. George S. Pappas, 1–23. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Goodman, Nelson. 1954. Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. London: Athlone
Press.
Grayling, A. C. 2007. Truth, Meaning and Realism. London: Continuum.
Greimann, Dirk. 2000. Explicating truth: minimalism and primitivism.
Journal for General Philosophy of Science 31: 133–55.
2004. Frege’s puzzle about the cognitive function of truth. Inquiry 47:
425–42.
Grossmann, Reinhardt. 1969. Reﬂections on Frege’s Philosophy.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Grover, Dorothy. 1977. Inheritors and paradox. Journal of Philosophy
74: 590–604.
1992. A Prosentential Theory of Truth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Grover, Dorothy L., Joseph L. Camp, Jr., and Nuel D. Belnap, Jr. 1975.
A prosentential theory of truth. Philosophical Studies 27: 73–125.
Gupta, Anil. 1993a. A critique of deﬂationism. Philosophical Topics 21:
57–81.
1993b. Minimalism. Philosophical Perspectives 7: 359–69.
2002. An argument against Convention T. In What is Truth?, ed.
Richard Schantz, 225–37. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
2005. Do the paradoxes pose a special problem for deﬂationism? In
Deﬂationism and Paradox, ed. Jc Beall and Bradley Armour-Garb,
133–47. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
References
337

Gupta, Anil, and Nuel Belnap. 1993. The Revision Theory of Truth.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haack, Susan. 1976. Is it true what they say about Tarski? Philosophy 51:
323–36.
1978. Philosophy of Logics. Cambridge University Press.
Halbach, Volker. 2011. Axiomatic Theories of Truth. Cambridge
University Press.
Heathcote, Adrian. 2003. Truthmaking and the alleged need for relevance.
Logique et Analyse 183–4: 345–64.
Heck, Richard G., Jr. 1997. Tarski, truth, and semantics. Philosophical
Review 106: 533−54.
2002. Meaning and truth-conditions: a reply to Kemp. Philosophical
Quarterly 52: 82–7.
Hill, Christopher. 2002. Thought and World: An Austere Portrayal of
Truth, Reference, and Semantic Correspondence. Cambridge
University Press.
Hofweber, Thomas. 2007. Validity, paradox, and the ideal of deductive
logic. In Revenge of the Liar: New Essays on the Paradox, ed. Jc Beall,
145–58. Oxford University Press.
Horgan, Terence, and Mark Timmons. 1992. Troubles for new wave
moral semantics: the “open question argument” revived.
Philosophical Papers 21: 153–75.
Horisk, Claire. 2008. Truth, meaning, and circularity. Philosophical Studies
137: 269–300.
Hornsby, Jennifer. 1997. Truth: the identity theory. Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, new series 97: 1–24.
1999. The facts in question: a response to Dodd and to Candlish.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, new series 99: 241–5.
Horsten, Leon. 2011. The Tarskian Turn: Deﬂationism and Axiomatic
Truth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horwich, Paul. 1982. Three forms of realism. Synthese 51: 181–201.
1990. Truth. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
1998a. Meaning. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1998b. Truth, 2nd edn. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1999. Davidson on deﬂationism. In Donald Davidson: Truth, Meaning
and Knowledge, ed. Urszula M. Z˙ eglen´, 18–22. London: Routledge.
2005. A minimalist critique of Tarski on truth. In Deﬂationism and
Paradox, ed. Jc Beall and Bradley Armour-Garb, 75–84. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Hume, David. 2000. A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. David Fate Norton
and Mary J. Norton. Oxford University Press.
Hylton, Peter. 1984. The nature of the proposition and the revolt against
idealism. In Philosophy in History: Essays on the Historiography of
Philosophy, ed. Richard Rorty, J. B. Schneewind, and Quentin Skinner,
375–97. Cambridge University Press.
References
338
www.ebook3000.com

Jackson, Frank, and Philip Pettit. 1990. Causation in the philosophy of
mind. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 50 (supplement):
195–214.
Jackson, Frank, Graham Oppy, and Michael Smith. 1994. Minimalism
and truth aptness. Mind, new series 103: 287–302.
James, William. 1981. Pragmatism, ed. Bruce Kuklick. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett.
Jennings, Richard C. 1987. Is it true what Haack says about Tarski?
Philosophy 62: 237–43.
Joachim, Harold H. 1906. The Nature of Truth. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Johnson, W. E. 1921–4. Logic. Cambridge University Press.
Kalderon, Mark Eli. 1997. The transparency of truth. Mind, new series
106: 475–97.
Kant, Immanuel. 1992. Lectures on Logic, trans. and ed. J. Michael Young.
Cambridge University Press.
1998. Critique of Pure Reason, trans. and ed. Paul Guyer and Allen
W. Wood. Cambridge University Press.
Kemp, Gary. 1995. Truth in Frege’s “Law of Truth.” Synthese 105: 31–51.
1999. Frege: assertion, truth and meaning. In Truth and Its Nature
(If Any), ed. Jaroslav Peregrin, 1–14. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kenny, Anthony. 1995. Frege: An Introduction to the Founder of Modern
Analytic Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ketland, Jeffrey. 1999. Deﬂationism and Tarski’s paradise. Mind, new series
108: 69–94.
Keuth, Herbert. 1978. Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth and the correspondence
theory. Philosophy of Science 45: 420–30.
Kirkham, Richard L. 1992. Theories of Truth: A Critical Introduction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Korhonen, Anssi. 2009. Russell’s early metaphysics of propositions.
Prolegomena 8: 159–92.
Kremer, Michael. 2000. Judgment and truth in Frege. Journal of the History
of Philosophy 38: 549–81.
2010. Sense and reference: the origins and development of the distinction.
In The Cambridge Companion to Frege, ed. Michael Potter and
Tom Ricketts, 220–92. Cambridge University Press.
Kripke, Saul A. 1975. Outline of a theory of truth. Journal of Philosophy
72: 690–716.
1976. Is there a problem about substitutional quantiﬁcation? In Truth
and Meaning: Essays in Semantics, ed. Gareth Evans and
John McDowell, 325–419. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Künne, Wolfgang. 2003. Conceptions of Truth. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
2008. Frege on truths, truth and the true. Studia Philosophica Estonica
1: 5–42.
Lange, Marc. 2009. Laws and Lawmakers: Science, Metaphysics, and the
Laws of Nature. Oxford University Press.
References
339

Leeds, Stephen. 1978. Theories of reference and truth. Erkenntnis 13: 111–29.
Lepore, Ernie, and Kirk Ludwig. 2005. Donald Davidson: Meaning, Truth,
Language, and Reality. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
2007. Donald Davidson’s Truth-Theoretic Semantics. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Levin, Michael. 1984. What kind of explanation is truth? In Scientiﬁc
Realism, ed. Jarrett Leplin, 124–39. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Levine, James. 1996. Logic and truth in Frege. Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, supplementary volumes 70: 141–75.
Lewis, David. 1970. General semantics. Synthese 22: 18–67.
1983. New work for a theory of universals. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 61: 343–77.
1986. On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
1992. Critical notice of D. M. Armstrong’s A Combinatorial Theory of
Possibility. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 70: 211–24.
2001a. Forget about the “correspondence theory of truth.” Analysis 61:
275–80.
2001b. Truthmaking and difference-making. Noûs 35: 602–15.
2003. Things qua truthmakers. In Real Metaphysics: Essays in
Honour of D. H. Mellor, ed. Hallvard Lillehammer and
Gonzalo Rodriguez-Pereyra, 25–42. London: Routledge.
Linsky, Leonard. 1992. The unity of the proposition. Journal of the
History of Philosophy 30: 243–73.
Lotze, Hermann. 1980. Logic, 2 vols. New York: Garland Publishing.
Lowe, E. J. 2007. Truthmaking as essential dependence. In Metaphysics
and Truthmakers, ed. Jean-Maurice Monnoyer, 237–59. Frankfurt:
Ontos Verlag.
2009. An essentialist approach to truth-making. In Truth and
Truth-Making, ed. E. J. Lowe and A. Rami, 201–16. Stocksﬁeld:
Acumen.
Lycan, William G. 2000. Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary
Introduction. London: Routledge.
Lynch, Michael P. 1998. Truth in Context: An Essay on Pluralism and
Objectivity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
ed. 2001. The Nature of Truth: Classic and Contemporary Perspectives.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
2006. ReWrighting pluralism. The Monist 89: 63–84.
2009. Truth as One and Many. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
McGee, Vann. 1990. Truth, Vagueness, and Paradox: An Essay on the Logic
of Truth. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
McGinn, Colin. 2000. Logical Properties: Identity, Existence, Predication,
Necessity, Truth. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
2002. The truth about truth. In What is Truth?, ed. Richard Schantz,
194–204. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
References
340
www.ebook3000.com

Mackie, J. L. 1977. Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong. London: Penguin.
Malpas, Jeff. 1999. Mapping the structure of truth: Davidson contra Rorty.
In Truth and Its Nature (If Any), ed. Jaroslav Peregrin, 117–27.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Martin, C. B. 1996. How it is: entities, absences and voids. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 74: 57–65.
Martin, Robert L. 1968. On Grelling’s paradox. Philosophical Review
77: 321–31.
Mates, Benson. 1972. Elementary Logic, 2nd edn. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Maudlin, Tim. 2007. The Metaphysics Within Physics. Oxford University
Press.
Mayer, Verena. 2007. Evidence, judgment and truth. Grazer Philosophische
Studien 75: 175–97.
Meinong, Alexius. 1983. On Assumptions, ed. and trans. James Heanue.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Mellor, D. H. 1995. The Facts of Causation. London: Routledge.
Merricks, Trenton. 2001. Objects and Persons. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
2007. Truth and Ontology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Molnar, George. 2000. Truthmakers for negative truths. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 78: 72–86.
Moore, George Edward. 1899. The nature of judgment. Mind, new series
8: 176–93.
1902. Truth and falsity. In Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology,
vol. II, ed. James Mark Baldwin, 716–18. Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith.
1903. Principia Ethica. Cambridge University Press.
1907–8. Professor James’ “pragmatism.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, new series 8: 33–77.
1953. Some Main Problems of Philosophy. London: George Allen and
Unwin.
2011. Early Philosophical Writings, ed. Thomas Baldwin and
Consuelo Preti. Cambridge University Press.
Mulligan, Kevin, Peter Simons, and Barry Smith. 1984. Truth-makers.
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 44: 287–321.
Mumford, Stephen. 2005. The true and the false. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 83: 263–9.
Neale, Stephen. 2001. Facing Facts. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Nehamas, Alexander. 1998. The Art of Living: Socratic Reﬂections from
Plato to Foucault. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Newman, Andrew. 2002. The Correspondence Theory of Truth: An Essay
on the Metaphysics of Predication. Cambridge University Press.
Niiniluoto, Ilkka. 1999. Tarskian truth as correspondence – replies to
some objections. In Truth and Its Nature (If Any), ed. Jaroslav Peregrin,
91–104. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Nulty, Timothy J. 2007. Primitive disclosive alethism. Metaphysica 8: 1–15.
References
341

O’Leary-Hawthorne, John, and Graham Oppy. 1997. Minimalism and
truth. Noûs 31: 170–96.
O’Leary-Hawthorne, John, and Huw Price. 1996. How to stand up for
non-cognitivists. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74: 275–92.
Oliver, Alex. 1996. The metaphysics of properties. Mind, new series
105: 1–80.
Parsons, Josh. 2009. Are there irreducibly relational facts? In Truth and
Truth-Making, ed. E. J. Lowe and A. Rami, 217–26. Stocksﬁeld:
Acumen.
Patterson, Douglas Eden. 2002. Theories of truth and Convention
T. Philosophers’ Imprint 2.5: 1–16.
2005. Deﬂationism and the truth conditional theory of meaning.
Philosophical Studies 124: 271–94.
2006a. Tarski on the necessity reading of Convention T. Synthese
151: 1–32.
2006b. Tarski, the liar, and inconsistent languages. The Monist 89:
150–77.
2007a. On the determination argument against deﬂationism. Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly 88: 243–50.
2007b. Understanding the liar. In Revenge of the Liar: New Essays on
the Paradox, ed. Jc Beall, 197–224. Oxford University Press.
2008a. Tarski’s conception of meaning. In Douglas Eden Patterson,
New Essays on Tarski and Philosophy, 157–91. Oxford University
Press.
2008b. Truth-deﬁnitions and deﬁnitional truth. Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 32: 313–28.
2010. Truth as conceptually primitive. In New Waves in Truth, ed.
Cory D. Wright and Nikolaj J. L. L. Pedersen, 13–29. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
2012. Alfred Tarski: Philosophy of Language and Logic. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Plato 1997a. Euthyphro, trans. G. M. A. Grube. In Complete Works, ed.
John M. Cooper, associate ed. D. S. Hutchinson, 1–16. Indianapolis,
IN: Hackett.
1997b. Meno, trans. G. M. A. Grube. In Complete Works, ed. John
M. Cooper, associate ed. D. S. Hutchinson, 870–97. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett.
Popper, Karl R. 1963. Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of
Scientiﬁc Knowledge. New York: Harper and Row.
1979. Is it true what she says about Tarski? Philosophy 54: 98.
Price, Huw. 1987. Truth and the nature of assertion. Mind, new series 96:
202–20.
1988. Facts and the Function of Truth. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Priest, Graham. 1979. The logic of paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic
8: 219–41.
References
342
www.ebook3000.com

2005. Spiking the ﬁeld-artillery. In Deﬂationism and Paradox, ed.
Jc Beall and Bradley Armour-Garb, 41–52. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
2006. In Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent, expanded edn.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Prior, A. N. 1960. The runabout inference-ticket. Analysis 21: 38–9.
Putnam, Hilary. 1975. The meaning of “meaning.” Minnesota Studies in
the Philosophy of Science 7: 131–93.
1978. Meaning and the Moral Sciences. Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
1981. Reason, Truth and History. Cambridge University Press.
1983a. Introduction: an overview of the problem. In H. Putnam, Realism
and Reason: Philosophical Papers, vol. III, vii−xviii. Cambridge
University Press.
1983b. On truth. In How Many Questions? Essays in Honor of Sidney
Morgenbesser, ed. Leigh S. Cauman, Isaac Levi, Charles Parsons, and
Robert Schwartz, 35–56. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
1985. A comparison of something with something else. New Literary
History 17: 61–79.
1991. Does the disquotational theory really solve all philosophical
problems? Metaphilosophy 22: 1–13.
Quine, Willard Van Orman. 1948. On what there is. Review of Metaphysics
2: 21–38.
1956. Quantiﬁers and propositional attitudes. Journal of Philosophy
53: 177–87.
1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
1970. Philosophy of Logic. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
1990. Pursuit of Truth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Raatikainen, Panu. 2003. More on Putnam and Tarski. Synthese 135:
37–47.
2008. Truth, meaning, and translation. In New Essays on Tarski and
Philosophy, ed. Douglas Patterson, 247–62. Oxford University Press.
Ramsey, F. P. 1927. Facts and propositions. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, supplementary volumes 7: 153–70.
Ray, Greg. 2003. Tarski and the metalinguistic liar. Philosophical Studies
115: 55–80.
2005. On the matter of essential richness. Journal of Philosophical Logic
34: 433–57.
Read, Stephen. 2000. Truthmakers and the disjunction thesis. Mind, new
series 108: 67–79.
2002. The liar paradox from John Buridan back to Thomas Bradwardine.
Vivarium 40: 189–218.
Reck, Erich H. 2007. Frege on truth, judgment, and objectivity. Grazer
Philosophische Studien 75: 149–73.
Resnik, Michael D. 1970. Elementary Logic. New York: McGraw-Hill.
1990. Immanent truth. Mind, new series 99: 405–24.
References
343

Ricketts, Thomas G. 1986. Objectivity and objecthood: Frege’s metaphysics
of judgment. In Frege Synthesized: Essays on the Philosophical and
Foundational Work of Gottlob Frege, ed. Leila Haaparanta and
Jaakko Hintikka, 65–95. Dordrecht: Reidel.
1996. Logic and truth in Frege. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
supplementary volumes 70: 121–40.
2001. Truth and propositional unity in early Russell. In Future Pasts:
The Analytic Tradition in Twentieth-Century Philosophy, ed.
Juliet Floyd and Sanford Shieh, 101–21. Oxford University Press.
Rodriguez-Pereyra, Gonzalo. 2005. Why truthmakers. In Truthmakers:
The Contemporary Debate, ed. Helen Beebee and Julian Dodd, 17–31.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rorty, Richard. 1986. Pragmatism, Davidson and truth. In Truth and
Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson, ed.
Ernest LePore, 333–55. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Russell, Bertrand. 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge
University Press.
1904. Meinong’s theory of complexes and assumptions (III.). Mind, new
series 13: 509–24.
1906–7. On the nature of truth. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
new series 7: 28–49.
1908. Transatlantic “truth.” Albany Review 2: 393–410.
1910a. On the nature of truth and falsehood. In Bertrand Russell,
Philosophical Essays, 170–85. London: Longmans, Green, and Co.
1910b. William James’s conception of truth. In Bertrand Russell,
Philosophical Essays, 147–59. London: Longmans, Green, and Co.
1912. The Problems of Philosophy. London: Oxford University Press.
1985. The Philosophy of Logical Atomism, ed. David Pears. La Salle,
IL: Open Court.
1990. The fundamental ideas and axioms of mathematics. In The
Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, vol. II: Philosophical Papers
1896–99, ed. Nicholas Grifﬁn and Albert C. Lewis, 261–305. London:
Unwin Hyman.
1994. The nature of truth. In The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell,
vol. IV: Foundations of Logic, 1903–05, ed. Alasdair Urquhart with the
assistance of Albert C. Lewis, 490–506. London: Routledge.
Ryle, Gilbert. 1954. Dilemmas. Cambridge University Press.
1970. G. E. Moore’s “The nature of judgment.” In G. E. Moore: Essays in
Retrospect, ed. Alice Ambrose and Morris Lazerowitz, 89–101.
London: George Allen and Unwin.
Savery, Barnett. 1955. The emotive theory of truth. Mind, new series 64:
513–21.
Schaffer, Jonathan. 2008. Truth and fundamentality: On Merricks’s Truth
and Ontology. Philosophical Books 49: 302–16.
References
344
www.ebook3000.com

2010. The least discerning and most promiscuous truthmaker.
Philosophical Quarterly 60: 307–24.
Schantz, Richard. 1998. Was Tarski a deﬂationist? Logic and Logical
Philosophy 6: 157–72.
Scharp, Kevin. 2007. Replacing truth. Inquiry 50: 606–21.
2010. Falsity. In New Waves in Truth, ed. Cory D. Wright and Nikolaj
J. L. L. Pedersen, 126–36. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Schiffer, Stephen. 1996. Contextualist solutions to scepticism. Proceedings
of the Aristotelian Society, new series 96: 317–33.
Schmitt, Frederick F., ed. 2004. Theories of Truth. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Shieh, Sanford. 2002. On interpreting Frege on truth and logic. In From
Frege to Wittgenstein: Perspectives on Early Analytic Philosophy, ed.
Erich H. Reck, 96–124. Oxford University Press.
Shoemaker, Sydney. 1979. Identity, properties, and causality. Midwest
Studies in Philosophy 4: 321–42.
1980. Causality and properties. In Time and Cause: Essays Presented to
Richard Taylor, ed. Peter van Inwagen, 109–35. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Sider, Theodore. 2011. Writing the Book of the World. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Simmons, Keith. 1990. The diagonal argument and the Liar. Journal of
Philosophical Logic 19: 277–303.
1993. Universality and the Liar: An Essay on Truth and the Diagonal
Argument. Cambridge University Press.
1999. Deﬂationary truth and the Liar. Journal of Philosophical Logic
28: 455–88.
2006. Deﬂationism and the autonomy of truth. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 72: 196–204.
2007. Revenge and context. In Revenge of the Liar: New Essays on the
Paradox, ed. Jc Beall, 345–67. Oxford University Press.
2009. Tarski’s logic. In Handbook of the History of Logic, vol. V: Logic
from Russell to Church, ed. Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods,
511–616. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Sluga, Hans D. 1980. Gottlob Frege. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
1999. Truth before Tarski. In Alfred Tarski and the Vienna Circle:
Austro-Polish Connections in Logical Empiricism, ed. Jan Wolen´ski
and Eckehart Köhler, 27–41. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
2002. Frege on the indeﬁnability of truth. In From Frege to Wittgenstein:
Perspectives on Early Analytic Philosophy, ed. Erich H. Reck, 75–95.
Oxford University Press.
Soames, Scott. 1984. What is a theory of truth? Journal of Philosophy 81:
411–29.
1999. Understanding Truth. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sosa, Ernest. 1993a. Epistemology, realism, and truth. Philosophical
Perspectives 7: 1–16.
1993b. The truth of modest realism. Philosophical Issues 3: 177–95.
References
345

2001. Epistemology and primitive truth. In The Nature of Truth: Classic
and Contemporary Perspectives, ed. Michael P. Lynch, 641–62.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stanley, Jason. 1996. Truth and metatheory in Frege. Paciﬁc Philosophical
Quarterly 77: 45–70.
Stepanians, Markus. 2003. Why Frege thought it to be “probable” that
truth is indeﬁnable. Manuscrito: Revista Internacional de Filosoﬁa
26: 331–45.
Stevenson, J. T. 1961. Roundabout the runabout inference-ticket. Analysis
21: 124–8.
Stoljar, Daniel, and Nic Damnjanovic. 2010. The deﬂationary theory
of truth. In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available at: http://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/truth-deﬂationary.
Stout, G. F. 1907. Critical notice for Studies in Humanism by F. C. S. Schiller.
Mind, new series 16: 579–88.
Stoutland, Frederick. 1999. Do we need correspondence truth? In Truth
and Its Nature (If Any), ed. Jaroslav Peregrin, 81–90. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Strawson, P. F. 1949. Truth. Analysis 9: 83–97.
1950. Truth. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supplementary
volumes 24: 129–56.
1959. Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics. London:
Methuen.
1992. Analysis and Metaphysics: An Introduction to Philosophy. Oxford
University Press.
Suppe, Frederick. 1989. The Semantic Conception of Theories and
Scientiﬁc Realism. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Tarski, Alfred. 1944. The semantic conception of truth: and the
foundations of semantics. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 4: 341–76.
1956a. The concept of truth in formalized language. In Alfred Tarski,
Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers From 1923 to 1938,
trans. J. H. Woodger, 152–278. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1956b. The establishment of scientiﬁc semantics. In Alfred Tarski, Logic,
Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers From 1923 to 1938, trans.
J. H. Woodger, 401–8. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1969. Truth and proof. Scientiﬁc American 220.6: 63–77.
Taschek, William W. 2008. Truth, assertion, and the horizontal: Frege on
“The Essence of Logic.” Mind, new series 117: 375–401.
Van Cleve, James. 1996. Minimal truth is realist truth. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 56: 869–75.
van Fraassen, Bas C. 1980. The Scientiﬁc Image. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1989. Laws and Symmetry. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
van Inwagen, Peter. 1990. Material Beings. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
References
346
www.ebook3000.com

Vision, Gerald. 2003. Lest we forget “the correspondence theory of truth.”
Analysis 63: 136–42.
2004. Veritas: The Correspondence Theory and its Critics. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
White, Alan R. 1957. Truth as appraisal. Mind, new series 66: 318–30.
Wiggins, David. 1980. What would be a substantial theory of truth? In
Philosophical Subjects: Essays Presented to P. F. Strawson, ed.
Zak Van Straaten, 189–221. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
2002. An indeﬁnibilist cum normative view of truth and the marks of
truth. In What is Truth?, ed. Richard Schantz, 316–32. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter.
Williams, B. A. O. 1966. Consistency and realism. Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, supplementary volumes 40: 1–22.
Williams, Michael. 1999. Meaning and deﬂationary truth. Journal of
Philosophy 96: 545–64.
2002. On some critics of deﬂationism. In What is Truth?, ed.
Richard Schantz, 146–58. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Williamson, Timothy. 2000. Knowledge and its Limits. Oxford University
Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1922. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. New York:
Harcourt Brace.
Wolen´ski, Jan. 1993. Two concepts of correspondence. From the Logical
Point of View 2.3: 42–55.
Wrenn, Chase B. 2004. Truth and other self-effacing properties.
Philosophical Quarterly 54: 577–86.
Wright, Crispin. 1992. Truth and Objectivity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
1999. Truth: a traditional debate reviewed. Canadian Journal of
Philosophy Supplementary 24: 31–74.
2001. Minimalism, deﬂationism, pragmatism, pluralism. In The Nature
of Truth: Classic and Contemporary Perspectives, ed. Michael P. Lynch,
751–87. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Young, James O. 2001. A defence of the coherence theory of truth.
Journal of Philosophical Research 26: 89–101.
2009. Truth, correspondence and deﬂationism. Frontiers of Philosophy
in China 4: 563–75.
References
347

Index
Alston, William P., 16, 19, 89, 104,
129, 313
Aristotle, 64, 214, 215, 216, 226
Armour-Garb, Bradley, 313
Armstrong, D. M., 39, 109, 113,
114, 116
facts, 74, 97, 111, 236
primitivism about truth, 3, 77, 188
properties, 79, 105, 109
truthmakers, 63, 110, 111, 121, 125,
126, 134, 194
assertion, 22–3, 24–5, 153, 162, 168,
170, 265–75, 276–7
assertion-ﬁrst views, 242, 271–5, 330
deﬂationary theory of truth, 267–71
See also declarative sentences; Frege,
Gottlob
Austin, J. L., 12, 18
axiomatic theories of truth, 223, 228
Ayer, Alfred Jules, 13, 53, 76, 156, 176
Azzouni, Jody, 134, 181, 199, 247, 260
open-question argument, 174, 177,
182–5
Baldwin, Thomas, 44, 49, 56, 60, 65, 84,
85, 95, 139, 140
identity theory of truth, 95, 96
Bar-On, Dorit, 22, 24–5, 267, 285–8
Barwise, Jon, 201
Beall, Jc, 13
deﬂationary theory of truth, 170,
171, 315
liar paradox, 310, 311, 313, 314,
315, 320
Belnap, Nuel D., 13, 19, 106, 190, 209,
251, 310, 314, 328
Bessie, Joseph, 200
Bigelow, John, 125
Black, Max, 213, 254
Blackburn, Simon, 4, 18, 19, 78, 104,
181, 184
Boghossian, Paul A., 17, 19, 104
BonJour, Laurence, 190, 289–90
Bradley, F. H., 42, 45, 51, 52, 139
Brandom, Robert B., 19, 153, 174, 186,
210, 271, 288
Burge, Tyler, 140, 150
Burgess, Alexis G., 3
Burgess, John P., 3
Buridan, John, 150
Butler, Joseph, 38
Cameron, Ross P., 125
Camp, Joseph L., Jr., 13, 19, 106
Campbell, Keith, 79, 106
Candlish, Stewart, 4, 26, 45, 65, 94, 139
identity theory of truth, 57, 94, 95,
96, 98
Carnap, Rudolf, 76
Carruthers, Peter, 45, 139
Cartwright, Richard L., 54, 57, 58, 77,
94, 294
causality, 109–10, 119–20
Chihara, Charles, 309
Clark, Maudemarie, 42
classical logic, 296, 299, 309, 310,
314, 322
coextension arguments. See open-
question argument
Cohen, Carl, 200
Cohen, Stewart, 290
coherence theory of truth, 12, 68, 76,
127, 130, 180–1, 187, 215, 235
Collins, John, 26, 283
348
www.ebook3000.com

Conee, Earl, 290
connectives, 206–11, 296
negation, 297–8
tonk, 208
convention T. See Tarski, Alfred
Copi, Irving M., 200
correspondence intuition, 135, 136, 137,
226, 237
correspondence theory of truth, 6–7, 12,
16, 35, 58, 76, 127, 137, 227, 238,
293, 329
Frege, Gottlob, 139
liar paradox, 314, 316, 317
metaphysical commitments, 135–6, 234
Moore, George Edward, 56, 57
open-question argument, 181, 184
realism, 131, 292
Russell, Bertrand, 65, 66, 68–9, 238
Tarski, Alfred, 213, 215
truthmakers, 125, 236
See also correspondence intuition;
Tarski, Alfred
Cousin, D. R., 184
Damnjanovic, Nic, 26, 49, 94,
120, 260
David, Marian, 251
correspondence theory of truth, 12,
136
deﬂationary theory of truth, 169, 232,
260, 261, 263
falsity, 296
identity theory of truth, 94
liar paradox, 312
quantiﬁcation, 197, 198, 201
Tarski, Alfred, 250
Davidson, Donald, 28, 171, 194, 195,
196, 294
correspondence theory of truth, 238
deﬂationary theory of truth, 26, 241
open-question argument, 174, 186
primitivism about truth, 3, 4, 65, 85,
86, 93, 164, 171, 239; initial
plausibility, 188
satisfaction, 204
slingshot, 239
Tarski, Alfred, 76, 203, 204, 213, 224,
225, 233, 237–43, 255
truth and meaning, 239–41, 242,
283, 284
truth conditions, 327
T-sentences, 233
declarative sentences, 43, 199, 206,
275–83
speech acts, 276–7
truth schema, 275–8, 281–2
deﬂationary theory of truth, 6–7, 13,
17–26, 76, 171, 191, 211, 232,
234, 251, 271, 285, 306–7,
329, 330
epistemic justiﬁcation, 291–2
ﬁnite stateability, 261
ideology objection, 260–1
liar paradox, 315–16, 318–19, 324
meaning, 283–4
metaphysical deﬂationism, 78–81, 91,
103–37, 157, 330
modal objection, 247, 261–3
objections to, 241, 259–64, 278
omnipresence, 167–72
open-question argument, 181–2
prosententialism, 19, 93, 106
semantic view of theories, 301, 304–5
similarity to primitivism, 26, 83, 88
Tarski, Alfred, 213
truthmakers, 126–7
See also assertion; Beall, Jc;
determination argument; David,
Marian; Davidson, Donald; Frege,
Gottlob; truth, explanatory value of
Descartes, René, 40–1, 45, 48, 139
determination argument, 285–8
DeVidi, David, 221
Dewey, John, 12
dialetheism. See liar paradox
Dodd, Julian, 94, 96–8, 313
Dummett, Michael, 295, 318
assertion, 271–3
epistemic theory of truth, 12, 76, 292
Frege, Gottlob, 45, 48, 139
open-question argument, 174, 186
truth and meaning, 283, 284
Eklund, Matti, 320
Engel, Pascal, 19, 78, 94, 104
epistemic justiﬁcation, 88, 163, 288–93
epistemic theory of truth, 12, 76, 127,
179–80, 273–4
Etchemendy, John, 201, 233, 255, 256,
305
objection to Tarski, 256–8
Euthyphro question, 64, 274–5
expressive completeness. See liar
paradox
Index
349

facts, 35, 94–5, 96
correspondence theory of truth, 35,
238
Frege, Gottlob, 97
identity theory of truth, 96–8
Moore, George Edward, 54, 56,
57–8
Russell, Bertrand, 68–9, 71, 72–5
truthmakers, 74, 111, 236
false propositions. See propositions
falsity, 74, 293–300
as absence of truth, 295–6
as anti-extension of truth, 298–9
as primitive, 294–5
as truth of negation, 296–8
Moore, George Edward, 51, 53, 54,
58–61
Russell, Bertrand, 70, 71–4
See also propositions
Fernández Moreno, Luis, 213
Field, Hartry, 176
deﬂationary theory of truth, 13, 76,
169, 232, 247, 260, 261, 262,
284, 319
error theory, 131
liar paradox, 309, 311, 314, 319
Tarski, Alfred, 76, 213, 222
truth-value gaps, 299
Fine, Arthur, 130
Fodor, Jerry A., 194
foundationalist argument, 188–96, 212
foundations vs. networks, 32–6, 42, 77,
81, 148, 191–2, 239
Fox, John F., 125
Frege, Gottlob, 1–2, 18, 43–50, 76, 97,
157, 239, 322, 330
assertion, 22–3, 24–5, 46–8, 153, 267
concepts, 31, 46, 82
deﬂationary theory of truth, 43–5,
49, 76
identity theory of truth, 95–6, 97
omnipresence, 149–50, 152, 165, 170
primitivism about truth, 3, 42, 44, 49,
93, 238, 329
thoughts, 28, 48–9, 75, 97
treadmill argument, 45–6, 66, 138–47,
167, 211, 238
See also Dummett, Michael
Fumerton, Richard, 12, 128
García-Carpintero, Manuel, 224
Gettier, Edmund L., 38
Glanzberg, Michael, 13, 314
Glennan, Stuart, 200
Gödel, Kurt, 222
Goldfarb, Warren, 140
Goldman, Alvin I., 288, 290
Goodman, Nelson, 20
Grayling, A. C., 239
Greimann, Dirk, 2, 50
Grelling, Kurt, 222
See also heterological paradox
Grossmann, Reinhardt, 139, 140
Grover, Dorothy, 13, 19, 106, 310
Gupta, Anil, 209, 313
deﬂationary theory of truth, 260, 263
revision theory of truth, 13, 190, 251,
310, 314, 328
Tarski, Alfred, 243, 248
Haack, Susan, 201, 213, 311
Halbach, Volker, 223
Heathcote, Adrian, 125
Heck, Richard G., Jr., 140, 216, 233, 255
Heidegger, Martin, 76
heterological paradox, 222
Hill, Christopher, 197
Hofweber, Thomas, 310
Horgan, Terence, 175
Horisk, Claire, 283, 285–8
Hornsby, Jennifer, 94, 96, 98–9
Horsten, Leon, 223
Horwich, Paul, 21, 294
correspondence intuition, 133, 237
deﬂationary theory of truth, 13, 18,
23, 76, 83, 106, 119, 169, 171, 191,
230, 260, 262
falsity, 295–6, 299
ﬁnite stateability, 261
Frege, Gottlob, 49
liar paradox, 309, 313–14, 315, 322
primitivism about truth, 4, 73, 83, 84,
87, 188, 193
substitutional quantiﬁcation, 197, 198
T-sentences, 232
Tarski, Alfred, 213, 250
truth and meaning, 242, 243, 283, 284
Hume, David, 86, 154
Hylton, Peter, 4, 73, 83
idealism, 42, 60, 65, 130, 235, 263
identity, 1, 33–4, 37
identity theory of truth, 57, 94–9
incompleteness theorem, 222
Index
350
www.ebook3000.com

inconsistent concepts. See liar paradox
inference, 288, 292, 321
connectives, 208–11
inference-ﬁrst approach, 210
internal realism, 292
Jackson, Frank, 120, 261
James, William, 12, 174, 185
Jennings, Richard C., 213
Joachim, Harold H., 12, 68
Johnson, W. E., 18
Kalderon, Mark Eli, 49, 139
Kant, Immanuel, 41, 139, 154
Kemp, Gary, 139
Kenny, Anthony, 44
Ketland, Jeffrey, 213
Keuth, Herbert, 213
Kirkham, Richard L., 3, 5, 19, 104, 213
Korhonen, Anssi, 68
Kremer, Michael, 140
Kripke, Saul A., 13, 144, 198, 311,
314, 328
Künne, Wolfgang, 5, 197
Frege, Gottlob, 42, 44, 45, 139, 140
omnipresence, 150–2, 159–60, 164
primitivism about truth, 3, 28, 83,
188, 193
Tarski, Alfred, 213
Lambert, Johann Heinrich, 41
Lange, Marc, 39
Leeds, Stephen, 13, 169, 232
Lepore, Ernie, 284
Levin, Michael, 119
Levine, James, 140
Lewis, David, 29, 39, 97, 132, 277
correspondence theory of truth, 131
properties, 20, 79, 106, 109
truth conditions, 285
truthmakers, 121, 134, 236
liar paradox, 155, 160, 308–28
dialetheism, 320
expressive completeness, 311, 322–8
inconsistency approach, 320–1
primitivist theory of truth, 318–28
relationship to theories of truth, 13,
312–18
revenge paradox, 311, 326
Tarski, Alfred, 215–17, 220
Linsky, Leonard, 73
logical positivism, 215, 300
Lotze, Hermann, 45
Lowe, E. J., 119
primitivism about truth, 3, 77, 194
truthmakers, 111, 126, 127, 134, 236
Ludwig, Kirk, 284
Lycan, William G., 285–8, 327
Lynch, Michael P., 4, 313
pluralist theory of truth, 13
property of truth, 19, 78, 104,
106, 128
McGee, Vann, 262
McGinn, Colin, 21, 37–8, 89–92, 119,
164, 182, 247
Mackie, J. L., 131
Malpas, Jeff, 239
Martin, C. B., 121
Martin, Robert L., 222
Mates, Benson, 200
Maudlin, Tim, 38–9
Mayer, Verena, 139, 140
meaning, 213, 238, 239–43, 252, 272,
279, 283–8, 317, 328
See also determination argument;
truth-conditional theory of
meaning; use theory of meaning
Meinong, Alexius, 42, 65
Mellor, D. H., 97
Merricks, Trenton, 19, 104, 129, 132
mystery objection, 85
primitivism about truth, 65, 92–4
truthmakers, 111, 126
Mersenne, Marin, 40
minimalist theory of truth. See
deﬂationary theory of truth
Molnar, George, 121, 125
Moore, George Edward, 28, 38, 45,
51–65, 69, 87, 139, 185, 193
correspondence theory of truth, 56
false propositions, 57–8, 294
falsity, 54, 58–61, 294
identity theory of truth, 94–5, 96, 97
open-question argument, 173–5, 176,
178, 185, 187
primitivism about goodness, 36–7,
173–4
primitivism about truth, 3, 42, 51–65,
80, 87, 93, 238, 329
See also facts
Mulligan, Kevin, 125
Mumford, Stephen, 125
mystery objection, 72, 73, 75, 84–8
Index
351

Neale, Stephen, 239
negation. See connectives
Nehamas, Alexander, 42
Newman, Andrew, 12, 128, 313
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 42
Niiniluoto, Ilkka, 213
Nulty, Timothy J., 76
O’Leary-Hawthorne, John, 119,
125, 261
Oliver, Alex, 105, 125
omnipresence, 148–72, 195, 212, 323
argument from, 149, 154–8, 165–7
deﬁnition of, 152–3
deﬂationary theory of truth, 167–72
objections to, 159–60
See also Frege, Gottlob; Künne,
Wolfgang
open-question argument, 174, 182
coextension arguments, 185–8,
212, 246
goodness, 37, 173–4, 175
truth, 175–85, 212
See also correspondence theory of
truth; deﬂationary theory of truth;
Moore, George Edward; paradox of
analysis
Oppy, Graham, 125, 261
paradox of analysis, 174
Parsons, Josh, 125
Patterson, Douglas Eden, 67, 148,
180, 261
determination argument, 285
liar paradox, 155, 316, 325, 326, 327
primitivism about truth, 5, 85, 188
Tarski, Alfred, 213, 216, 222, 224,
227, 228, 233, 243, 244, 251,
254, 255
Pettit, Philip, 120
Plato, 64, 174, 274
pluralist theory of truth, 13, 17, 128, 273
Popper, Karl R., 134, 213
pragmatic theory of truth, 12, 127, 174,
179, 185, 187, 215, 235, 246–7
Price, Huw, 119, 279
Priest, Graham, 309, 311, 314, 320, 327
primitive concepts, 36, 189–94, 195–6,
239
falsity, 53, 294–5
goodness, 36–7
knowledge, 38
laws of nature, 38–9
metaphysical vs. theoretical, 29–30
satisfaction, 203–4
topic neutrality, 196
vs. primitive properties, 30–1
See also foundations vs. networks;
Moore, George Edward
primitivist theory of truth
as view of last resort, 4, 83–4, 188, 193
concept vs. property, 61–2
deﬁnition of, 13, 81–3
Prior, A. N., 208–9
properties
nature of, 19–20, 104–6
sparse vs. abundant, 19–20, 30–1, 79,
103, 104–6, 108–10, 117
propositions, 28, 114, 238
false propositions, 57–9, 68, 71–4,
140, 294
See also falsity; Moore, George
Edward; Russell, Bertrand
Putnam, Hilary, 16, 183
deﬂationary theory of truth, 19,
78, 104
epistemic theory of truth, 12, 76
internal realism, 130, 292
justiﬁcation, 292–3
objection to Tarski, 233, 255–6
open-question argument, 174,
177, 186
Tarski, Alfred, 213, 256
Putnam modals. See Azzouni, Jody; open
question argument
quantiﬁcation
objectual, 200–6
substitutional, 191, 197–200,
261, 278
Quine, Willard Van Orman, 18, 73, 131,
184, 252
correspondence intuition, 133, 134
deﬂationary theory of truth, 13, 21,
170, 324
ontological commitment, 130–1
Raatikainen, Panu, 255
Ramsey, F. P., 13, 76, 184
Ray, Greg, 221, 224
Read, Stephen, 125, 150
realism, 60, 129, 131, 133, 234
about properties. See properties
scientiﬁc realism, 300
Index
352
www.ebook3000.com

Reck, Erich H., 140
recombination, 113, 115, 116, 121
resemblance, 79, 105, 109, 117–19
Resnik, Michael D., 169, 200, 232
revision theory of truth. See Belnap,
Nuel D; Gupta, Anil
Ricketts, Thomas G., 68, 139
Rodriguez-Pereyra, Gonzalo, 126
Rorty, Richard, 130, 131, 174,
177, 186
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern example,
160–2, 171, 270, 297, 323, 328
Russell, Bertrand, 3, 27, 45, 65–75,
118, 187
coherence theory of truth, 187–8, 191
correspondence theory of truth, 12,
67, 68–9, 184
facts, 58, 121
false propositions, 71–4, 294
falsity, 54, 294
identity theory of truth, 94–5, 96
primitivism about truth, 3, 4, 28, 42,
65–75, 80, 87, 93, 139, 238, 329
propositions, 70–1
See also treadmill argument
Ryle, Gilbert, 51, 174, 196
satisfaction, 191, 201–6, 217–19, 220,
228, 239
See also Davidson, Donald; semantic
conception of truth
Savery, Barnett, 4, 83, 176–7, 188
Schaffer, Jonathan, 3, 77, 111, 126,
188, 194
Schantz, Richard, 49, 213
Scharp, Kevin
falsity, 296, 298, 299
liar paradox, 310, 320
Schiffer, Stephen, 310
Schmitt, Frederick F., 4
scientiﬁc theories, 300–6
semantic view of, 300–1
syntactic view of, 300
Sellars, Wilfrid, 18
semantic conception of truth, 214–19
essential richness, 221, 222, 228
formal vs. natural languages, 220
language relativity, 217, 250
metaphysical neutrality, 234–7
object language vs. metalanguage,
217, 221
satisfaction, 217–19
semantic closure, 217, 220–1, 326
See also Tarski, Alfred
Shieh, Sanford, 140
Shoemaker, Sydney, 19, 105
Sider, Theodore, 108
Simmons, Keith, 4
assertion, 22, 24–5, 267
ﬁrst- and second-order uses of ‘true,’
22, 269
liar paradox, 309, 310, 311, 314,
318, 325
Tarski, Alfred, 213, 222
Simons, Peter, 125
slingshot. See Davidson, Donald
Sluga, Hans D., 41, 43, 45, 46, 76
Smith, Barry, 125
Smith, Michael, 261
Soames, Scott, 85
Frege, Gottlob, 45, 139, 140
Tarski, Alfred, 213, 231, 250, 255
Solomon, Graham, 221
Sosa, Ernest, 4, 16, 26, 28, 88–9, 288
Speech acts. See declarative sentences
Stanley, Jason, 139
states of affairs. See facts
Stepanians, Markus, 140, 150
Stevenson, J. T., 209
Stoljar, Daniel, 49
Stout, G. F., 187
Stoutland, Frederick, 213
Strawson, P. F., 32–3, 34, 35, 76, 77,
167, 192, 194
See also foundations vs. networks
Suppe, Frederick, 300
T-sentences, 89, 133–5, 143, 169, 232–3,
241, 243–54, 281, 314, 315,
317, 319
modal status, 246, 261–3
paradoxical T-sentences, 245, 315, 327
See also truth schema
Tarski, Alfred, 76, 85, 191, 201, 203,
213–58, 284, 305, 329, 330
connectives, 207, 208
convention T, 134, 182, 240, 243–54,
317
correspondence intuition, 134
correspondence theory of truth, 215,
226–7
deﬂationary theory of truth, 229–32
indeﬁnability of truth, 203, 219–29,
323, 324, 325, 327
Index
353

Tarski, Alfred (cont.)
liar paradox, 215–17, 309, 311,
312, 323
primitivist theory of truth, 219–37
satisfaction, 202–3, 204
truth schema, 282
See also Davidson, Donald;
Etchememdy, John; semantic
conception of truth
Taschek, William W., 150
Timmons, Mark, 175
tonk. See connectives
topic neutrality. See primitive concepts
treadmill argument, 45, 66, 138–47,
167
Moore, George Edward, 52
Russell, Bertrand, 66
See also Frege, Gottlob
truth
and ‘true,’ 15, 20–3, 270
concept of, 14, 23–6, 161–4
concept vs. property, 16–17, 89, 92–4
explanatory value of, 14–15, 23–4,
172, 211, 229–32
property of, 14, 19
substantive theories of, 17
truth-aptness. See declarative sentences
truth-bearers, 26–8, 245
See also propositions
truth-conditional theory of meaning,
240, 242, 272, 283–5, 288
See also Davidson, Donald;
determination argument
truth schema, 18, 43, 67, 123, 142,
182, 197–9, 216–17, 275–8,
281–2, 319
See also semantic conception of truth;
T-sentences
truth tables, 208, 209, 296
truth-value gaps, 295–7, 298, 299,
318–20
truthmakers, 58, 62–3, 110–12, 120–1,
122, 125–7, 135–7, 234, 235–7,
238, 306, 330
See also correspondence intuition;
facts
metaethics, 132–3
use theory of meaning, 242, 284–5
Van Cleve, James, 187
van Fraassen, Bas C., 300
van Inwagen, Peter, 132
Vision, Gerald, 12, 76, 84, 128, 134,
311, 313
White, Alan R., 174, 186
Wiggins, David, 3, 77, 250, 279
Williams, B. A. O., 278–9
Williams, Michael, 23, 24, 76, 171,
230, 283
Williamson, Timothy, 38
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 76, 238, 284
Wolen´ski, Jan, 213
Wrenn, Chase B., 90
Wright, Crispin, 13, 16, 119
assertion, 271
correspondence intuition, 133
epistemic theory of truth, 273–4
property of truth, 19, 78, 104, 107
Young, James O., 12, 19, 104, 134
Index
354
www.ebook3000.com

