www.ebook3000.com

The Messages We Send

www.ebook3000.com

The Messages
We Send
Social Signals and Storytelling
G.R.F. Ferrari
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© G.R.F. Ferrari 2017
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First Edition published in 2017
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017943895
ISBN 978–0–19–879842–2
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
www.ebook3000.com

To Zebedee
who could never have read this book
but helped me write it

www.ebook3000.com

Preface
This is a book about social interactions that approach outright commu-
nication but do not quite reach it. Its backbone consists in a communica-
tive scale or switch, which goes from ‘off’ (no communication intended) to
fully ‘on’ (outright communication), with most of the interest concen-
trated on the stages between those two extremes. The book begins with a
gently theoretical chapter that borrows an account of communication
from contemporary philosophy of language and uses it to cash out the
metaphor of a communicative scale with three positions: off, half-on, and
fully on. Subsequent chapters apply the theory. First comes the half-on
position, for which I introduce the term ‘intimation’. Intimation tends to
be more discreet than outright communication. Naturally, then, it plays a
large role in our management of how others see us. In Chapter 2, I mine
one especially rich vein of impression-management in social life: how we
dress. It turns out that, although we can dress at each of these three
positions on the communicative scale, with the switch off, half-on, or
fully on, the switch for dress is much more often either half-on or off
than it is fully on. Tempting though it is to think of our clothes as
‘making a statement’, true communication with clothes is rare. Most of
the messages we send when we dress, we send as intimations. Chapter two
investigates why this should be so.
Up to that point in the book, the reader has been asked to imagine a
communicative scale with only three positions. But then the plot thick-
ens. (And since the book is not in fact a story but an argument, I will go
ahead and spoil the surprise for the reader here.) In the course of
chapters three and four, we come to understand that two more positions
need to be added to the scale: the ‘quarter-on’ and ‘three-quarters-on’
positions. These too are kinds of intimation, which by that point has
become my term for every transaction between ‘off ’ and ‘fully on’. Both
of them have an element of covertness, unlike intimation at the half-on
position. Intimation at the quarter-on position is entirely covert: it is
directed at an audience, but conceals that fact. It is common enough in
daily use, since we often seek to impress without wanting to be detected
in the attempt. It belongs somewhere between the off and the half-on

position. The three-quarters-on position, by contrast, is one that mixes
the overt with the covert, in such a way as to reach out to an audience
more fully than a half-on intimation does. Nevertheless, it still falls
short of outright communication. Once again, daily life contains many
examples—often conditioned by politeness or by self-protectiveness—and
I begin chapter three by applying my analysis to these. The main goal of the
chapter, however, along with its elaboration in chapter four, is to show
how the very same pattern that applies to the three-quarters-on intim-
ations we use in daily life applies also to the intimations that storytellers
make to their audiences in the established narrative arts. An investiga-
tion of the quarter-on position, which does not come until the second
section of chapter four, is included for the sake of completeness and for
the artistic parallel it enables me to draw. The parallel is not with the
narrative arts this time but with lyric poetry, which turns out to exemplify
the same pattern of quarter-on intimation. But my focus throughout
chapters three and four remains on intimation at the three-quarters-on
position and on how it is exempliﬁed by storytelling.
Inevitably, these two chapters do have something to say about storytell-
ing as such, and tussle on occasion with the large philosophic literature on
the topic. But whatever contribution they make to the study of narrative is
secondary; they are out to convince you, above all, that transmissions at the
same position on the communicative scale have the same underlying
structure, regardless of whether they are made in the arts or in daily life
outside of the arts. Nevertheless, that identity of structure is not without
implications for what storytelling is and what its purposes might be.
Chapter ﬁve is a short coda to the treatment of storytelling in chapters
three and four. It looks to occasions when the whole world can seem
intimative, can feel like a story—situations we tend to call ‘ironic’. And it
concludes that, despite appearances, such ironies anchor us after all in
the messageless mundane.
The book has been nourished by a selection of relatively technical
writing in the philosophy of language, speciﬁcally in the ﬁelds of ‘speech-
act theory’ and of ‘pragmatics’ that the work of Paul Grice did much to
inspire. But it is not itself technical and is not intended as a contribution
to those academic ﬁelds. It is more at home in social philosophy and in
aesthetics. In any case, I strive throughout to be simple and direct. You
do not need to know any philosophy to appreciate this book; all you need
is an interest in its philosophic themes.
viii
PREFACE
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
Acknowledgements
xi
1. Intimation
1
2. Dressed to Communicate—Or Not
13
3. Storytelling as Intimation: The Model Presented
65
4. Storytelling as Intimation: The Model Defended and Reﬁned
113
5. Situational Irony: The World Made Intimative
166
Bibliography
179
Index
185

www.ebook3000.com

Acknowledgements
The ideas presented here have been gestating for over twenty years. The
seed was sown in the early 1990s, when my former colleague Stephen
Neale impressed on me the importance of the work of Paul Grice and
introduced me to its development in the ﬁeld of ‘relevance theory’, new
at the time. With the support of the Townsend Humanities Center at our
university, the University of California, Berkeley, we jointly organized a
faculty working group to discuss the theory. Though I continued to mull
over the ideas that germinated at that time, it was not until 2008–9 that
I ﬁnally sat down to turn them into a book. In that year I had the leisure
afforded by a generous fellowship from the John Simon Guggenheim
Memorial Foundation and began to receive a two-year Research Bridging
Grant from UC Berkeley. The latter is an innovative grant designed for
those who wish to extend their research beyond its zone of immediate
specialization, as I was doing with the topics in this book. A draft of the
entire work was completed during a sabbatical year in 2014–15, further
sustained by a Humanities Research Fellowship from my university, for
whose support over the entire period during which I have been at work
on these themes I am truly grateful.
Over the years, I have of course discussed these ideas with fellow
professors. Three names stand out in particular. Gregory Currie gave
me written comments on the content of what appear now as the ﬁrst two
chapters of the book, and, just as importantly, his encouragement for the
overall project. That he was willing to make use of my ideas in his article
on ‘The master of the Masek beds’ at an early stage of the project put
wind behind its sails. Eileen John provided me with a forum in which to
present my thoughts on storytelling through the auspices of the Philoso-
phy and Literature Program at the University of Warwick. Conversation
with her at that time gave me reassurance and direction. Later, she was
kind enough to read a draft of the entire work. Her comments cut all the
deeper because she was willing to try on for herself the patterns of
thought proposed in the book. As a result, I made more than just isolated
improvements to these chapters, although the book is indeed the better
for her input at every turn: Eileen also prompted me to modify the

communicative scale itself. (It was a suggestion of hers that led me to
supplement the scale with a quarter-on position.) I doubt that I would
have met either Gregory Currie or Eileen John were it not for Joshua
Landy. The ﬂourishing programme in Philosophy and Literature at
Stanford University that he co-founded with Lanier Anderson has been
a fertile resource for me, and twice gave me the opportunity to present
my work-in-progress. My views have been sharpened over the years by
the many exchanges I have had with Josh on the topics raised in this
book, culminating in his generous reading of a draft of the whole. I thank
him for standing behind this project as it developed.
My old friend Chuck Reichmann made time to serve as a non-
specialist reader for chapters one and two. True to form, he saved me
from infelicities and steered me right.
xii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
www.ebook3000.com

1
Intimation
When discussing impression-management, we have gotten into the habit
of saying that our social behaviours and the artefacts we sport ‘send a
message’. We inquire into what they might ‘mean’. Our clothes make
‘fashion-statements’; our demeanour speaks with a ‘body-language’.
To move easily within one’s culture is to have internalized its ‘cultural
grammar’.
These linguistic metaphors, however shopworn, remain serviceable
enough for most contexts. Where they fall short is in failing to convey
the peculiar genius of the human way of managing how others will see us,
when we are not directly declaring how we wish to be seen. They suggest
that what we do in such cases is communicate; communication, after all,
is what language is for. What we in fact do in such cases, however, would
be better described as not-quite-communicating.
The ﬁrst step toward clarity on these issues is to appreciate that
language is not required for communication.1 And by this I do not
simply mean that we can communicate with each other without using
words. I mean something less obvious: that we are able to communicate
without using language of any sort, verbal or nonverbal. Any language
involves a code—a special kind of system that pairs signs as input with
messages as output. Communication need not. By pointing to my watch,
I let you know we are late; by wrinkling my nose, I suggest your proposal
1 In this and in all subsequent footnotes, works are cited by author’s name alone, where no
confusion would result; otherwise, by author’s name and title of the work. Full details, in each
case, can be found in the bibliography. This paragraph and the next derive from the ﬁrst
chapter of Sperber and Wilson, Relevance—in particular, from their account of how the
inferential and the code models of communication differ and how they interact. The pair
have since extended the ‘relevance theory’ that they introduced in this book, and defended
the theory against criticism, in Wilson and Sperber, Meaning and Relevance. But the details
of their theory do not concern me in this book. I explain an important difference between
my approach and theirs, however, in chapter two, pp. 54–5 (with n. 40).

stinks; dropping my spoon to the table, grasping the hair at my temples
and opening my eyes wide, I announce to the world that this is the best
crème brûlée I have tasted in years. No pre-established code associates
these messages with those actions; nor do I try to conjure the makings of
a brand new code when I act in this way. (A code is a system, remember,
not an isolated association.) No: I simply expect you to ﬁgure out my
meaning. To succeed, communication requires only an ability on the
part of the person communicated with to make inferences about the
intentions of the person communicating.
A code is a special mechanism that languages employ; communication
needs no special equipment, but is one kind of intentional activity among
others. What underlies an inquiry into someone’s meaning is the more
basic question ‘what is this person intending to do by this action?’ It is a
question that could equally be asked about, say, the shadowy and quite
uncommunicative ﬁgure lurking near one’s house at night. Certainly, the
special tools of language enable us to convey messages of greater preci-
sion and sophistication than we otherwise could. Also, in most situations
our understanding of what is communicated is so immediate as to
preclude active puzzlement over a communicator’s intentions. Never-
theless, the existence of nonlinguistic communication, and its continuity
with linguistic communication, reveals the fundamental process at work
in communication as a whole. Language simply provides the tool that
human beings typically use to get their informative intentions recognized.
Although communication is one kind of intentional activity among
others, the structure of its intentionality turns out to be rather striking.
(The analysis that I am about to report is one that the philosophy of
language owes to H. Paul Grice.)2 Communicators get themselves under-
stood by getting their intention to get themselves understood recognized.
They want their audience to know something, and the way they choose to
let their audience know that thing is by letting them know that they want
them to know it. (I am using the word ‘know’ quite informally; it is not
intended to contrast with ‘believe’ or ‘think’.) Full-blown communication
2 Grice’s seminal article ‘Meaning’ dates from 1957. Its fundamental insight into the
recursivity of the communicative intention has survived criticism and been incorporated
into the later theories of Searle, of Sperber and Wilson, and of Bach and Harnish. (The
many differences between these theories need not disturb the framework of analysis that
I develop in this chapter.) My account of the role of audience uptake in communicative
success is modelled on Bach and Harnish, p. 16.

INTIMATION
www.ebook3000.com

has the recursive, self-embedded structure of a box within a box. When
I communicate with you, I don’t just ‘want you to know’, I ‘want you to
know that I want you to know’. Communicators succeed in what they are
trying to do just by getting their audience to recognize what they are trying
to do.
You may feel that a sleight of hand is going on here. When we commu-
nicate, it seems we are doing something, succeeding in some action. But
how can anything actually get done merely by virtue of someone else’s
having recognized my attempt to do it? This sounds more like registering a
nice try than causing an intention to be fulﬁlled. However, when the object
is simply to secure an audience’s uptake—when the object is simply to get
the audience to recognize the intentions of the communicator—no magic
is involved. Where communication is concerned, securing an audience’s
uptake counts as success. A successful request, for example, is not a request
that gains your compliance but merely one which conveys to you my
desire that you comply.
To illustrate the kind of intentionality we deploy in communication it
is best to choose a case in which code plays no part and therefore cannot
distract analysis. Consider, then, a dog who takes up a position by the
garden door at a time when it is usually allowed to go outside to play. It
looks eagerly in the direction of its owner; but he is busy and remains
oblivious to the dog’s wishes. Imagine that the dog waits patiently until
its owner ﬁnally notices it sitting there. The dog’s no doubt increasingly
forlorn gaze may be indicative of its frustration, but such eloquence is
guileless. This dog is not communicating with its master.
Now consider a different dog in the same predicament. This dog goes
to the garden door at the appropriate hour and scratches on it before
looking toward to its owner. So alerted, the owner turns and immediately
grasps the situation. Assume, as the dog’s owner does, that the scratching
is no mere reﬂex born of frustration. This dog is communicating with
its master.
When the absent-minded owner of the ﬁrst dog ﬁnally turns and sees
the dog sitting patiently at the garden door, he recognizes that the dog
wants to go out to play in the garden. When the owner of the second dog
turns at the sound of the scratching, he recognizes that the dog wants
him to know that it wants to go out to play in the garden. This is what the
scratching was for. Scratching at the door was never going to get the door
open by itself; nor (let us suppose) has the dog been trained to scratch at
INTIMATION


the door. The dog has found a way to let its owner know that it wants
him to know that it wants to play in the garden. The owner’s recognition
does not simply fulﬁl the dog’s intention to alert its owner (though it
does that too, of course); it fulﬁls the dog’s intention to get its intention
to alert the owner recognized.
This account may seem unnecessarily complicated. What harm is there,
you might think, in describing the second situation simply as one in which
a dog intends to alert its owner that playtime in the garden has arrived, and
ﬁnds a way to do so? To see why this simpler way of putting the case is
inadequate, consider a third situation.
Once again the dog takes up position by the garden door. What it does
differently is quite subtle, so let us make the dog a poodle this time. It
does not scratch at the door, but nor does it simply wait for its owner in
the expectation that, this being garden playtime, it will shortly be allowed
to go out in the garden and play. Instead, it assumes that its owner will
notice that its bed by his desk is now empty, think to wonder why, and go
looking in the dog’s direction. The dog is accustomed to pay constant
attention to its owner’s movements, and expects no less in return. Its
leaving the bed and moving to the door is behaviour to which it intends
its owner to react, and by this reaction to recognize what the dog wants.
Now, the dog who scratches at the door—at least if that scratch has no
frustration in it, and especially if it is paired with an expectant look—will
surely be taken by its owner as communicating something, and most
probably this something will be the very thing that the dog intended to
communicate. By contrast, there could be many reasons for our poodle’s
vacating its bed that have nothing to do with letting its owner know that
it wants to play in the garden. And for this reason, the message may not
get through. The busy owner may glance at the empty bed, assume that
the dog has gone to drink at its waterbowl, and turn back to his work.
But the door-scratching has its disadvantages too: a dog who inﬂicts
scratches on the garden door risks annoying its master. Whatever the
poodle’s motive for not alerting its owner more directly—whether it acts
out of conﬁdence in its owner’s attention and power of surmise, or in a
spirit of canine diplomacy—the upshot is that this dog is not-quite-
communicating with its owner. But since its message may well get
through, particularly if its owner is used to this behaviour, we need a less
negative term to describe its action. Let us say, then, that this dog intimates
to its owner that it wants to play in the garden.

INTIMATION
www.ebook3000.com

If we are to open a theoretical space for the dog who intimates its
desire to its owner rather than communicates with him, we must
acknowledge that it is too simple to describe the situation of the dog
who scratches at the garden door as one where a dog intends to alert its
owner that playtime in the garden has come, and ﬁnds a way to do so.
This simpler description applies properly to the poodle who leaves its
bed noticeably empty, and who, we have seen, conveys its message at a
quite different level of directness than the dog who scratches at the door.
The recursive structure of full-strength communication enables us to
capture this difference.
What we have here is a switch with three positions. In the ‘off’ position
we should place the behaviour of the dog who goes to the door out of habit
and patiently awaits its owner’s cooperation. Even though the owner may
notice the dog’s movements and draw the appropriate inference, the dog
does not move to the door with the intention that its owner should draw
inferences from its behaviour. It simply goes to the door in anticipation of
its opening. It is neither communicating with its owner nor intimating
anything to him. In the fully ‘on’ position stands the behaviour of the dog
who scratches at the door. This behaviour has the recursive structure
of true communication: it is intended to be recognized as intended to be
recognized. Not only does this dog (in whatever doggy way it has of
conceptualizing such things) intend its owner to draw the appropriate
inference from its behaviour, but it also intends its owner to recognize that
intention, and for this recognition to factor into his inferences.3 It wants its
owner to know that it wants him to know that it wants to play in the
garden. In the ‘half-on’ position between these two comes intimation, as
seen in the behaviour of the poodle. The poodle acts with the simple
intention that its owner should draw the appropriate inference from its
action. The structure of its intention is not recursive. It simply wants its
3 My example is not intended as a contribution to the theory of animal cognition. Those
who do not accept that dogs can think in the way described should substitute for the dog in
each case a human being who is capable of communication but has no command of a
linguistic code—e.g. a deaf-mute child who has not yet learned sign-language, or a severely
retarded adult. For a serious attempt to investigate animal cognition in terms of the
distinction between what I am calling the inferential and the code models of communica-
tion, see Scott-Phillips. He argues that only humans are capable of communicating infer-
entially (or ‘ostensively’, as he puts it, following Sperber and Wilson). He sets out his
position on the cognitive ability of dogs on pp. 90–1 of his book.
INTIMATION


owner to know—intends its owner to recognize—that playtime in the
garden has come.
When we turn our attention to purely human interactions, the deci-
sion to intimate rather than communicate gains signiﬁcance from the
fact that human beings, unlike dogs, so often make their intentions
explicit through language. It quickly becomes apparent that the genius
of intimation in a human context resides in such qualities as its discre-
tion, its ambiguity, its suggestiveness, as well as in its plausible deniabil-
ity. That would be why intimation crops up so frequently in the realm of
politics and diplomacy.
Cases abound in the early days of a new administration. Take, for
example, the decision of an American President to name a special envoy to
the Middle East and to send him on an ofﬁcial visit to Israel before two
weeks had elapsed since inauguration day. Since Israel was itself about to
hold a general election at the time, all involved were aware that no serious
progress toward negotiating peace could take place during the visit, which
was instead widely interpreted by the media as a ‘signal’ from the President
of the importance he attached to the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict.
In our terms, this ‘signal’ of the President’s view was rather an intim-
ation of it. That is, since there were other tasks than directly negotiating
peace for the envoy to set his hand to at the time, his visit was not purely
symbolic. Israel had recently invaded Gaza; this too could have been a
factor in the early timing. Alas, the envoy, once in Israel, undid the subtlety
of the President’s action by explicitly describing the timing of his visit as an
indication of the urgency gripping Washington over the issue.
All new Presidents feel the need to show their colours early to a public
eager to see evidence of change. They seek to put their stamp on a new
era. But they also wish actually to act early, not merely to advertise their
intended early actions. To intimate rather than communicate by one’s
actions achieves both ends together. The President acts, and is seen to
act. Both aspects are important.
That acting as well as being seen to act are both important to intim-
ation would explain why, the more an action seems aimed above all at
being seen, the more we tend to dismiss it as ‘merely’ symbolic. A NATO
ﬂyover of a country that is engaged in aggressive behaviour of which
NATO has already expressed its disapproval may be criticized by the
media as an ineffective token if their focus is only on its not amounting to
a genuine military operation against the offending country. The verdict

INTIMATION
www.ebook3000.com

of the media would be different if they recognized the ﬂyover instead as a
genuine sample of NATO’s collective resolve, a way for NATO to act
collectively as well as to be seen to act. Or consider how Californians
might feel about some of the water-saving measures taken by service
industries in a time of drought. Restaurants that serve water only if
directly requested; hotels that invite guests not to have their towels and
sheets changed daily by default: those who focus on how little water such
measures actually save compared to what is required rather than on the
ethos that they represent and help to instil are more likely to consider
them the kind of symbolism that gets dismissed as ‘political correctness’.
For a case in which plausible deniability plays a role, consider a newly
elected British Prime Minister who pays an ofﬁcial visit to the American
President quite soon after taking ofﬁce, but only after having ﬁrst paid
visits to the most important European heads of state. Is he letting the
President know that Britain’s foreign policy priorities have changed? Or
is he just paying his visits in the order which previously scheduled
international summits have made most suitable? Assume that the more
calculated move is the one intended by the Prime Minister. As always
with intimation, the ‘message’ being sent may be too subtle to reach its
destinatee. Nevertheless—and again, as always with intimation—there
are good social reasons to run the risk of failed delivery. By not announ-
cing to the Press a change of foreign policy, he avoids the tension that an
outright declaration of change would create, keeps his policy options
open, and preserves plausible deniability if challenged.
Where politicians are concerned, it is safe to assume that the more
calculated construal of ambiguous behaviour such as that of the British
Prime Minister in our example will be the correct construal. But we are
not all politicians, no matter what the cynics may tell us. Often enough,
our social behaviour is innocent of the intention that others should draw
inferences from it. It then resembles the behaviour of the ﬁrst of the three
dogs, the one who goes to sit by the door out of habit and in anticipation
of a garden romp. In human groups, too, much is done out of habit; and
much is done as well from conformity to norms, standards, or rules. The
typical lunchtime varies among classes and cultures; dinner knives, when
held, are held in the right hand; some Christians go to church on
Sundays; Australians drive on the left.
The sense in which such behaviour is innocent of the intention that
others should draw inferences on its basis is not at all that it is somehow
INTIMATION


private, or directed only at oneself. Rather, others’ beliefs and expect-
ations, together with our own beliefs and expectations about others, are
already built into the behaviour, operating in the background as its
conditions. They are not sparked by the behaviour, but fuel it; for the
behaviour is sustained by mutual belief.4 At my university, for example,
I believe that lectures begin ten minutes after the ofﬁcially scheduled
time, believe that each of my students believes it, and believe that each of
my students believes that I and their fellow students believe it. This
mutual belief helps classes follow each other smoothly. But although
I am bearing my students’ beliefs in mind when I show up to class some
ten minutes into the hour, I am not trying to let them know anything by
my action. I do not, for example, intend them to infer from my showing
up ten minutes into the hour that I have just followed the ten-minute
rule. (Students new to the campus certainly might infer this; but I do not
show up when I do for their particular beneﬁt.) Rather, it is because
I follow the ten-minute rule, and expect my students to follow it too, that
I have showed up ten minutes into the hour. My rule-following is neither
a communication nor an intimation. The switch is off.
It may seem, however, that the switch can never be turned off where
self-presentation is concerned. We all devote considerable energy to
managing how others see us; is it not inevitable that such conduct will
aim to spark inferences in those others about the kind of person we are?
Notice, ﬁrst, that the political examples just considered do not quite
come into this category. Although those actions of the American Presi-
dent and the British Prime Minister surely contribute to the general
impression that the public receives of them, what they primarily intimate
is not information about the character of these politicians, but informa-
tion about their foreign policy. And so we were able to imagine (if only to
reject as implausible) an uncalculated construal of their motives, accord-
ing to which their actions were pure exercises of foreign policy and not
also advertisements of it. But how would it be possible so to construe our
public demeanour and projections of style? I mean such things as the
street-swagger of certain teenaged males, or the skateboarder’s noncha-
lant slouch; I mean the ceremonial bustle and clatter of the busy barista,
the aloofness of the on-duty policeman, or the fact that female TV
4 For more on the connection between mutual belief and social behaviour, see the
appendix on ‘Mutual belief and social concepts’ in Bach and Harnish.

INTIMATION
www.ebook3000.com

presenters in America readily cross their legs on camera, while female
TV presenters in Japan never do.
In his classic report on the topic, The Presentation of Self in Everyday
Life, the sociologist Erving Goffman chose to describe our management
of how others see us as if it were a performance in the theatre. The
solicitous sales assistant; the junior executive who shows his colleagues at
the meeting a uniformly attentive face; the senior executive who glad-
hands his way down the corridor: such people may feel themselves to be
on stage, playing a part before an audience. Let it be the case that they
play their part with conviction, uncynically: still, they cannot but act with
the intention that others should draw inferences from their behaviour.
Or so it may seem.
And yet there is after all a sense in which even a presentation of self need
not be primarily directed at an audience. Picture John Travolta as Tony
Manero walking a Brooklyn street behind the opening credits of Saturday
Night Fever. He wears maroon-brown lizard shoes with Cuban heels
(I think lizard), a tight black leather jacket cut short and hanging open,
slim black pants, a red shirt spread wide at the neck, the collar outside
his jacket. ‘Well, you can tell by the way I use my walk I’m a woman’s man,
no time to talk’, go the Bee Gees. Travolta steps in time to the soundtrack.
Yes, he looks around him as he walks, and yes, he turns at least one
woman’s head and runs back after another: but is it as if he were on stage,
performing for an audience? Or does that happen only later, when he dons
the three-piece ice-cream suit and steps out under the disco ball? The
answer depends on how you parse the line from the song. Is Tony using
his walk to get people to see that he’s a woman’s man; or is he walking like
the woman’s man he is, as anyone who sees him walking can tell?
These are not exclusive alternatives, to be sure. It could be that Tony,
being the woman’s man he is, is working his walk so that others can see
him for a woman’s man. But it does not matter in the end which
interpretation is right. My aim is simply to isolate a sense in which
even self-presentation need not be intended by the presenter to send a
message. This would be the case if Tony is just walking like the woman’s
man he is (or thinks at this stage in the movie that he would like to be).
He is aware of wanting to be a woman’s man, and conscious that the walk
beﬁts his status; so we should add that he is walking to be like the
woman’s man he wants to be. But he is not (on this interpretation)
walking to look like a woman’s man to others. He knows, of course,
INTIMATION


that others, seeing his walk, will take him for a man of that type. But this
is just to say that his behaviour is both intentional and overt. Let others
draw their inferences; he walks to be the man he is.
Even when it comes to self-presentation, then, the communicative
switch can be off. But as the term ‘self-presentation’ itself suggests, it is
more than likely to be in the half-on position. This is particularly the case
when the self-presentation is occasional rather than the habitual behav-
iour exempliﬁed by Tony Manero’s walk. Into this category falls what
Goffman calls ‘body gloss’: the effort we put into ensuring that others see
a particular action of ours for what it is.5 Brief encounters in the street
or corridor afford many examples. By directing a ten-mile stare ahead of
me I fend off the demands of the panhandler looming to my left. By
quickening your pace and looking absorbed in some serious purpose you
let me know that you cannot pause for an exchange of pleasantries as we
pass in the hallway of our ofﬁce building.
Demeanour adopted for the exercise of an occupation tends also to fall
into this category. The barista could surely clamp the plug of espresso to
his machine just as effectively with a less ﬂorid twist of the forearm; could
remove the old plug as completely with less banging; could keep the
counter as clean with fewer and less vigorous swipes of the dishcloth. But
he intends me to recognize his assiduousness and commitment to the
task at hand. He is a barista through and through, if only in this place and
for certain hours; and that is how he seeks to come across. As with the
example of the U.S. President, he both acts and is seen to act.
The barista’s expressive behaviour is overt; he makes no attempt to
conceal the degree to which he stylizes his movements. This contrasts
with covert self-presentation such as that of a nurse who engages in a
welter of otiose chart-checking, syringe-tapping, sheet-smoothing, and
the like when in the vicinity of her patients. The patients do not under-
stand that these actions are unnecessary; nor does the nurse want them
to understand this. Instead, she intends her actions to look purposeful to
the patients and to convey to them that their care is in the hands of a
devoted and competent staff—a fact they might not otherwise be conﬁ-
dent of. For the nurse, the communicative switch is half-on; she intends
by her behaviour to intimate something to her anxious patients. Her
5 Goffman discusses body gloss at length on pp. 122–37 of ‘Remedial Interchanges’,
chapter four of Relations in Public.

INTIMATION
www.ebook3000.com

actions have in fact no other purpose. Yet because the intimation is
covert, the patients act as if the communicative switch were off. They
take themselves simply to be watching a nurse busy at her work, and
doing a good job of it. Covert intimation is a manipulative act, however
benign the manipulation may be.
When the intimation is overt, as in the example of the barista, both
parties to the transaction are aware that the switch is half-on. Notice,
however, that the overtness of the behaviour still does not ﬂip the switch
all the way to on. Recall how full-blown communication was character-
ized, when we were dealing with the dog who scratches at the door. Not
only does the dog intend its owner to draw the appropriate inference
from its behaviour, but it also intends its owner to recognize that
intention, and for this recognition to factor into his inferences. Now
substitute the barista for the dog. He intends me to draw the appropriate
inference from his behaviour, and, since his behaviour is overt, he knows
that I will more than likely recognize his intention, at least if I am the
kind of customer who pays attention to his barista. That is, he takes the
same attitude toward his act of intimation—an action in the half-on
position—that we saw Tony Manero take toward his self-enacting
streetwalk—an action in the off position. Others are welcome to recog-
nize the intentions involved; but their recognition is not key to the
fulﬁlment of those intentions. It is not by recognizing that the barista
intends me to infer from his stylish movements that he loves his job and
is good at it that I do so infer. Rather, I infer this directly from his stylish
movements, even while assuming that it was with this outcome in mind
that the barista developed his style.6
It is rare for self-presentation to rise to the level of outright commu-
nication. (I am setting aside verbal self-introductions.) It belongs rather
6 At one point in his article ‘Meaning’ (p. 218 of the reprint), Grice writes: ‘What we
want to ﬁnd is the difference between, for example, “deliberately and openly letting
someone know” and “telling” and between “getting someone to think” and “telling”’. The
focus of his analysis, however, is on the ‘telling’. That is why he is interested in ﬁnding this
difference. He does not linger over the social advantages that might accrue to those who
choose deliberately and openly to let people know something rather than telling them. But
that is exactly what I intend to do in this book, by concentrating on intimation. Hence, too,
I make no attempt to incorporate Grice’s notion of ‘implicature’ into my theoretical
framework. What a person implicates are the assumptions necessary to bridge the gap
between what that person said and what he meant. Implicature is a concept that belongs at
the level of ‘telling’—of full-strength communication.
INTIMATION


in the half-on or the fully off position. Indeed, to turn the barista’s style
into a case of communication we would have to invent some rather
unusual situations. For example, imagine that I ask him whether he
enjoys his job, and rather than answer me in words he launches into a
pantomime of his typical routine, whistling as he goes. Or the panto-
mime might become self-parody in response to a public complaint from
his boss about sloppy work. Slow-motion punctilio in the placement of
spoon on saucer, origami-like folding of the dishcloth, accompanied
perhaps by long glances in the customer’s direction: such things could
amount to a declaration of aggrievement and a request for sympathy.
Watching him, I recognize not just that the barista is feeling aggrieved,
but that he wants me to know he is feeling aggrieved. That would be why
he is acting so strangely.
In such cases, it is not that the barista has done no more than amplify
his style to the level of full communication, as if his communicative
switch moved on a continuum from fully off to fully on, its exact position
determined only by how much he chooses to exaggerate his style. Rather,
our barista here has coopted his own style for a purpose quite extraneous
to it. He did not develop that style so that he could ‘talk’ with it. It was
meant instead, we might say, to do the talking for him: to be expressive of
his performance at work, but without making his intention to work
expressively the subject of a further performance. That further perform-
ance would in fact be at odds with the expressiveness of his performance
at work. He is not often likely to engage in such antics.
In general, true communication through demeanour and other modes
of self-presentation is rare, and it is rare for a good reason: because the
social advantage of these types of behaviour derives mostly from such
features as their discretion, their deniability, their suggestiveness.
But we now have enough theory in hand to pursue those social
ramiﬁcations by applying the theory in detail and at some length to a
single area of impression-management in social life. Earlier, I described
what Tony Manero was wearing but left his clothes out of account in
assessing his self-presentation. The next chapter makes good that omis-
sion. In few if any areas of our social life are the metaphors of message-
sending and statement-making more rife than when it comes to the
choices we make of what to wear. Let us see, then, what clariﬁcation
our approach can bring to the topic. And for our ﬁrst case-history, let us
take an extended visit to ancient Greece.

INTIMATION
www.ebook3000.com

2
Dressed to Communicate—
Or Not
1
When an Athenian man of the ﬁfth century BC dressed himself for public
view, and was not expecting to engage in physical labour, his outﬁt would
typically consist of two pieces.1 Underneath went a tunic of linen or
wool, the ‘chiton’, cut short above the knee and pinned or tied at the
shoulders. It could also be belted. Sleeves were generally vestigial or non-
existent. Over the chiton was draped the ‘himation’. This, the principal
garment with which the Classical Athenian male faced the world, was
nothing more than a large woollen blanket. No fasteners of any kind held
it in place, only dexterous wrapping and discreet gripping, governed by
various norms. (A similar traditional dress is worn to this day by the
Masai warriors of Kenya, although they make life easier for themselves
by knotting the blanket at the top.) If thrown over one shoulder, as the
himation most often was, that shoulder had to be the left. Thus the right
arm remained free. Speakers at a public assembly tended by contrast to
wrap themselves tightly about as a restraint on unseemly exuberance. It
was likewise considered unseemly to allow the garment to ride above the
knees when seated, or to hang too low on the body while walking.
The relative simplicity of this arrangement could have impressed itself
on the ﬁfth-century BC Athenian in several ways. For one thing, it had
taken some time for the new style to become established. Previously, an
ankle-length version of the linen chiton had been a conventional gar-
ment for men as well as women. We are told by a historian writing
toward the end of the ﬁfth century that it had not been long since elderly
1 Sources for this information are Bieber; Geddes; and Losfeld.

men of means had ﬁnally stopped wearing the fashion.2 (Compare how
in the twentieth century Queen Mary of England wore throughout her
life the Edwardian fashions of her youth.)3 With its many swishing
pleats, its pins, its afﬁnity for the decorative shawl, the long linen chiton
and its customary accessories made for a more elaborate and conspicu-
ously luxurious costume than the combination of himation with short
chiton that came to displace it. (Those elderly men of means typically
crowned their outﬁt with gold hairpins shaped like cicadas.) Hence it
remained in ceremonial use as the robe of priests, musicians, actors, and
racing charioteers, which is to say of people who appeared in public in a
formal role associated with civic festivals and celebrations.4 This bears
comparison with a tendency over the last three centuries for fashions
abandoned by masters or patrons to continue to adorn their servants or
purveyors of service—at least those of them who labour in the public eye.
When breeches and stockings gave way to pantaloons, they remained as
the ceremonial livery of the footman; when the lounge suit replaced the
dinner jacket for evening wear, the dinner jacket hung on as the uniform
of waiters and the maître d’.
In his own society, then, the Athenian could if he wanted note a
contrast between his respectable himation and a showier, more stagey
costume that also had its place in his culture. And he could draw the
same contrast with the long chitons standardly worn by foreigners from
the Near East—Syrians and Persians, for example—whose robes were
often gaudily coloured and elaborately patterned. The Greeks of the
Eastern colonies (what is now the Aegean seabord of Turkey) were no
less ﬂashy. Such clothes contributed to the stereotypical image of the
Easterner in the eyes of any mainland Greek who wished to accentuate
the negative: the image of a dissolute roué softened by gourmandise and
a luxurious lifestyle.
That the Athenian’s clothes were less showy and ﬂashy than these does
not imply, however, that they were merely plain. The himation took on
different names depending on its weight, its length, or the ﬁneness of its
weave. When made of good quality, heavier cloth, it was called a
‘chlaina’; when coarser in weave and shorter in length, it was known as
2 The historian who mentions this is Thucydides (1.6.3–5).
3 Her manner of dress is noted by Wilson, p. 90.
4 The ceremonial use of the long chiton is discussed by Bieber, p. 32.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

a ‘tribon’; and if woven from particularly ﬁne and delicate wool, it
became a ‘chlanis’. Elegant dressers could be mocked for effeminacy; at
the other extreme, the philosopher Socrates was known for going bare-
foot and wearing no more than a skimpy ‘tribon’, without undergarment,
in summer and winter alike. Such discrimination would not have been
possible if the prevailing attitude toward clothing had been indifference,
whether studied or real.5
The historian who reported the passing from fashion of the long
chiton describes the outﬁt that replaced it as a moderate style of dress,
and suggests that it rendered the differences between rich and poor less
conspicuous. But ‘less conspicuous’ does not amount to ‘invisible’. Com-
pare a modern corporate culture whose dress code requires suits. Of the
suits worn, some will have come from warehouse outlets, others perhaps
from bespoke tailors, with many variations in between, depending on the
wearer’s status, purchasing power, ambition, or style-consciousness. The
gradations in the quality of these garments will be nothing like so salient
as was the case, say, in Elizabethan England, when sumptuary law
reserved certain furs, certain colours of silk, certain types of trim for
different ranks of the nobility. Detecting the gradations in business suits
takes a more discerning and motivated eye. But in a competitive envir-
onment where the range of dress is restricted, those gradations may be
carefully noted.
The comparison with a suit-wearing environment is pertinent in
another way. There is in general a striking similarity between the sartor-
ial shift that took place in Athens in the ﬁfth century BC, on the one hand,
and the shift from the doublet and hose worn by gentlemen in late
medieval and early modern times to the new ensemble of frock coat,
waistcoat, and breeches, on the other—an ensemble which was itself the
direct ancestor of the three-piece suit. At Athens, what had been the
outer garment, the chiton, was converted to an undergarment, and in
the course of this conversion not only lost prominence to the himation
but also shrank in size. So too the doublet, a long-sleeved hip-length
5 Aeschines derides his enemy Demosthenes in court for wearing ‘those elegant, petite
chlanisses of yours, and those soft little chitons’, and imagines the jury would be incapable
of telling for sure whether these were a man’s or a woman’s clothes without ﬁrst seeing who
wore them (Against Timarchus, 131). Socrates’ habits of dress are remarked upon in Plato
(Protagoras 335d, Symposium 174a, 219b) and in Xenophon (Memorabilia 1.6.2).
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


garment worn over shirt and hose, tightly buttoned and heavily padded
so as to emphasize the belly, retreats in the later seventeenth century
beneath a new garment, the open frock-coat. The doublet is transformed
into the waistcoat, tight-buttoned and belly-ﬂaunting still, but minus the
padding and the long sleeves.
The result of this shift, in both cases, is that an enveloping, body-
shrouding garment built to take pattern and to entice by the intricacy of
its surface was replaced by a body-revealing composite silhouette whose
appeal lay in the seamlessness of its ﬂow and the quality of its fabric.
(True, the doublet revealed a man’s lower body; but not even this much
was apparent if he wore the other favourite garment of the time, a long
gown.) A further parallel: where men’s and women’s ﬁnery had before
been equally decorative, now the men’s clothes grew more severe than
the women’s. Women at Athens continued to wear the long chiton, even
if they chose to drape it with a himation.
Ann Hollander in her book Sex and Suits has convincingly argued that
the visual form of clothing can possess its own authority and can develop
for aesthetic as much as for social reasons. The clean modern lines of the
suit, she proposes, would not have come together had the visual culture
of the time not been pervaded by neo-classical images, an artistic vogue
which was itself sparked by the rediscovery of the heroic male sculptural
nude of classical antiquity. This vogue swept through lands quite differ-
ent in their political arrangements; nor, in the particular case of the
man’s suit, have the social upheavals experienced in the centuries since
its advent succeeded in altering the garment’s archetype. Such facts
suggest to Hollander that more than purely social conditions determine
new fashions and explain their traits and persistence.
A similar account ﬁts the ancient Greek context too. The new severity
of the himation by comparison with the chiton matches a general trend
toward severity in the sculpture and painting of the time. Just as the long
chiton linked its Greek wearer to the visual environment of the Near
East, so the Archaic Greek art contemporary with this fashion in dress
kept touch with oriental art in various ways. Statues, for example, had a
tendency toward geometrical detail as well as toward surface frills and
ﬂounces moulded on a relatively ﬂat, stiff envelope. The austere style of
the early Classical sculpture that followed the Archaic simpliﬁes the
surface geometry and ornament and quietens the facial expression, but
at the same time relaxes the ﬂow of the ﬁgure, releases the energy of its

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

drapery, ﬁlls out the body beneath. It stands to its predecessor as the
himation does to the long chiton. Thus the new fashion in dress emerges
from a larger pool of available visual form, to which it also contributes.6
This is not to say that hostility toward the Persian empire and there-
fore to the oriental stereotype played no role in the disappearance of the
oriental element in Greek art. Persia during this period was the great
enemy who united the Greeks in defence of the mainland. That so
dramatic a development as the Greeks’ triumphant emergence from
this threat should be reﬂected in their art is only natural. I am not
suggesting, either, that the wealthy Athenian’s deference to the sensibility
of an engaged populace would have contributed nothing to the modesty
of his dress. Athens was a proudly radical democracy. Conspicuous
expenditure by the wealthy was frowned upon unless the public was its
beneﬁciary. A wealthy man might wear a luxurious gown to the civic
ceremony he had himself ﬁnanced; elsewhere, such conspicuous con-
sumption would offend.
But it is one thing to concede these points, quite another to arrive at
such a conclusion as the following, which I cite from a pioneering article
on the subject by A.G. Geddes: ‘Athenian clothes boasted the character-
istics that seemed desirable in the world of the classical city state. The
citizens of these city states were proud of being leisured, ﬁt—ﬁghting ﬁt
one might say—equal and like-minded, and that is the message that the
clothes are meant to communicate.’7
This conclusion begins from a set of general attributes that Athenian
men’s clothes undeniably possessed. Some of these attributes relate to the
body of the wearer: the himation, held in place without fasteners,
restricted the movements required by physical labour, and had to be
removed before the wearer could set to work. By the same token, when
the actual moment came to remove the himation—as, for example, in
gymnastic exercise, which Athenian men performed naked—the lack of
fasteners proved a boon. Stripping for action was easy. Other attributes
distinguish the clothes as a type from clothing of a different type:
6 See Pollitt; Ridgeway; Stewart. Pollitt considers the connection between this artistic
transition and its cultural and political context on p. 49; Stewart in part 3 of ‘The Persian
and Carthaginian invasions . . . ’, summarized on pp. 60–3 of his Classical Greece and the
Birth of Western Art.
7 The quotation is taken from Geddes’ conclusion on p. 331.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


Athenian men’s clothes were subtler in their variety and less conspicu-
ously luxurious overall than the clothes of their Eastern neighbours.
The questionable step is to turn each of these general attributes,
without further ado, into a message communicated by the clothes.
Attributes of the clothes become the meaning of the clothes. The himat-
ion, on this account, does not just enforce leisure; it proclaims it.8 The
very same attribute—absence of fasteners—would also, apparently, be
sending what is in some respects the opposite message: a message of
readiness for strenuous athletic or military action. The simplicity of the
garments would be telling the world that Athens is no society of Eastern
fops. Their narrow range would amount to a caution from the populace
and a ‘we hear you’ from the elite.
A consequence of Geddes’ having taken this step is that he disregards
the intentions of the individuals who actually wear the clothes—
intentions that may vary widely. The clothes have one cultural message,
which they endlessly repeat. In a move that is typical of this approach,
the intentions of individuals are addressed only to be dismissed: ‘the
wearer of clothes may give out a message of which he is not fully aware.
He wants the right “look” but may not know what it means. A “look” is a
communal decision achieved because of an unspoken agreement about
what feels “right”. But even though its meanings are inarticulate and for
the most part unconscious, they still exist.’9
Let us tease out the implications of this statement. If those who wear
the clothes do not fully understand the meaning of the clothes they wear,
who does, then? The answer seems to be: the scientiﬁc observer does, the
inquiring ethnographer who can take a global, external view unavailable
to those within the culture. But what sense does it make to say that what
this observer understands is a ‘meaning’—the meaning of the clothes
worn in this culture? Meaning is what gets conveyed when people
communicate. Here, then, the suggestion is that the clothes can commu-
nicate—‘give out a message’—on their wearer’s behalf, without the
wearer’s knowledge. The cultural artefacts communicate directly with
the scientiﬁc observer. And through them, the whole culture speaks. That
is why the characteristics of the clothes to which the observer responds
8 The statement that the himation proclaims leisure as well as enforcing it comes on
Geddes p. 324.
9 The quote comes on p. 323 of Geddes.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

are culture-wide, applying to any himation in Athens. The sartorial self-
expression of the individual plays no part in the account.
It is tempting to suppose that this implicit claim—the claim that the
clothes give out a message to the ethnographer, communicate with
him—does no more than apply a linguistic metaphor to the inferences
made by the observer in the course of his research. Taking the global
view of Athenian modes of dress, the ethnographer ﬁnds them apt for a
people who collectively value social equality and public unity, abhor
selﬁsh display, disparage Eastern luxury and softness by comparison
with their own physical ﬁtness, and are proud of the leisure that accrues
to the Athenian citizen by virtue of his citizenship. The clothes are apt
not because they in effect announce or declare these values, but simply
because they either support these values (the himation slips off readily
for exercise), or are instances of them (the himation is an equal-
opportunity garment.) Because, however, the ethnographer can discern
those larger values in the clothes, the clothes seem to be ‘telling’ him
something. In reality, they are no more communicating with him than
your muddy shoes communicate with me when they ‘tell’ me or ‘mean’
that you have taken a forbidden short-cut across the ﬁeld. But since the
inferences themselves are quite reasonable, why not allow the linguistic
metaphor to pass?
Yet there is more to the matter than this. The ethnographer’s implicit
claim does not dissolve upon analysis into harmless metaphor. For he
draws no distinction of kind between the meaning of the clothes
observed at the global level, of which individuals within the culture
may not be fully aware, and the meaning of the clothes when consciously
deployed within the culture. And the latter, in the ethnographer’s view,
would be a clear case of actual communication. When Socrates, for
example, regularly chooses the coarse tribon over the himation and
fails to keep it clean, he is cultivating a look and broadcasting a message
about his values. No less—so goes the theory—does Athenian culture
broadcast a message about its values when it moves from the chiton to
the himation.
This kind of claim is widespread and ongoing in the analysis of
clothing styles. It is not by any means conﬁned to the study of ancient
Greek dress. (In fact, it migrated to the study of ancient Greek dress from
studies of the more recent history of clothing.) Thus we can read that the
clothing of the bourgeois matron in nineteenth-century France was
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


‘heavily coded’ to express the prevailing social view of what behaviour
suited a woman of that class. The corsets and crinolines, the long trains,
the elaborate headgear, all ‘served as an indication’ that the woman who
wore such garments had servants and did not need to perform physical
labour.10 Compare the argument that because the himation constrains
the body to leisure it also proclaims the value of leisure.
Once again, an attribute of the clothes is turned into the meaning of
the clothes. And an equivalent countermove is available. That the dec-
orative, constricting dress of the nineteenth century bourgeoise was
impractical for physical labour, the fact that it enforces leisure, does
not amount to a declaration that bourgeois women should not engage
in such labour. These clothes are apt for a woman who appreciates her
leisure and the opportunity it gives her to achieve elegance. She is not
going to dress in workclothes if she does not have to work. But she does
not dress elegantly in order to demonstrate that she has no need to work;
rather, she has no need to work, and therefore chooses to dress elegantly.
(In this period, the basic choices were two: smart dress, in its various
registers, or workclothes. Sportswear had not yet come into existence as a
third basic option.) Also, of course, she is conforming to a social norm.
On Sundays, on holidays, on outings, the working classes too tended to
dress in a simulacrum of bourgeois clothing. More bowler hats, for
example, would be seen at a working man’s picnic than in his work-
place.11 But again, these workers do not put on their Sunday best in order
to demonstrate that they are not working. Rather, it is a day of rest;
accordingly, they leave their workclothes in the closet.
This is not to deny, however, that people may choose to wear a
particular kind of clothing for its associations—to look rich, to look
leisured, to look sporty, to look earthy, and so on. That is what Tony
Manero, from the previous chapter, would be doing if he were dressing to
look like a woman’s man to others rather than to be the woman’s man he
is. The clothing typically worn by certain strata of society, or for certain
activities, will become associated with that stratum or that activity. These
associations then provide a resource for those who wish to intimate with
their clothes rather than simply to follow a convention. They may even
be pressed into service for outright communication, as we are going to
10 The quotations about the ‘coding’ of their clothes are from Crane, p. 29.
11 See Crane, p. 87.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

see in the next section of this chapter. But that is quite different from
attributing meaning to the clothes—a message—just by virtue of their
style or of the associations that they possess.
The feeling that the clothes worn within a culture must mean some-
thing is doubtless nourished by the fact that clothing styles are a matter
of convention, and much of their detail appears arbitrary. To that extent,
an observer of the culture may feel himself in the presence of a code, a
system of signs matched to messages. Clothing styles look to be signs,
because, like signs, the differences between them are systematic but how
that difference is realized in the garment does not seem to matter.
Suppose that pleated trousers are thought more dressy than ﬂat-front
trousers; were pleats instead to be thought the less dressy option, the
contrast between more and less dressy styles would remain intact. Simi-
larly, it would not matter if the distress signal in Morse code were three
dahs on either side of three dits rather than, as it actually is, the reverse,
provided international users agree on which it is to be. And such
agreement is a prime example of convention.
When the cultural historian infers a society’s values from the clothing
of its members, or ﬁnds already familiar values conﬁrmed by the cloth-
ing, the clothing no more tells him this, I claimed, than the mud on your
shoes tells me, communicates to me, that you have taken a forbidden
short-cut across the ﬁeld. I simply infer your path from the fact that your
shoes are muddy. You did not intend me to make this inference, still less
intend me to infer that you intended me to infer it. As you crossed the
ﬁeld, your shoes, unfortunately for you, got muddy; that is all. But isn’t
there an important difference, we might think, between mud-spattered
shoes and, say, mud-coloured ones? The mud that sticks to your shoes
we could call a natural sign. It is imposed on you by the world, and can be
used as evidence against you. But shoes the colour of mud were designed
to be that way. They will look ﬁne at a barbecue but inappropriate at a
black-tie event, where, for men, black shoes are expected. And these
distinctions are a matter of convention. Much about a shoe is func-
tional—made to serve a practical purpose. A shoe’s colour generally is
not. If the colour is not functional, and if it varies systematically with the
social context, all that may seem left for it to be is a conventional sign,
whose only purpose is to convey meaning.
Past attempts to lay out explicitly and in detail the signs or ‘signiﬁers’
that supposedly make up the clothing code went nowhere, however.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


It proved impossible to sort the categories of clothing according to their
differences and to correlate them with their meanings in anything like
the systematic, complex, and generally stable way in which the words of a
language seemed to correlate with theirs. (Roland Barthes’ attempt to do
so in The Fashion System is the most famous of these failures; but there
were others.)12 These attempts left their sting behind, however, in the
form of an assumption that bedevils treatments of the topic still: the
assumption that the various manners of dress in a society must indeed
constitute a code, even if we cannot lay it out precisely. The fact that we
encounter such an impasse would merely go to show that the meanings
enabled by the code are unstable, ambiguous, open-ended, and contest-
able from within. It would not show that the meanings are not there in
the ﬁrst place.13
Those who make this assumption are inclined also to posit a wide-
spread cluelessness in the culture.14 Recall the quote about Greek dress:
even though the meanings of a look ‘are inarticulate and for the most
part unconscious, they still exist’. The people just want to look right.
They stride the cultural stage encumbered with sandwich boards whose
message they cannot read.
It is true enough that someone’s motive for choosing certain clothes
may simply be the desire to look right; true also that the choice may
contribute toward a communal decision, an unspoken agreement as to
the right look. But there is no need to see this as the dumb substrate of a
culture that is articulate mainly at the global level. The mere fact that the
right look is conventional does not make it a sign belonging to a larger
cultural code, nor does the right look (black shoes with evening wear)
inevitably derive meaning from its contrast with the wrong look (brown
shoes with evening wear). The conventionality of the right look need
only be a consequence of how it has been arrived at, not of its position in
a system of differences. For a convention can be adequately analysed as
12 In addition to Barthes, the 1970s and early 1980s saw attempts by Sahlins, by
Descamps, and by Lurie. Sahlins (ch. 4) is vigorously contested by Connerton. Barthes
and Lurie are targets of Svendsen, ch. 4. Davis, p. 6, criticizes Barthes and Descamps.
13 For this view, see McCracken, ‘Clothing as language,’ p. 117 (p. 66 of the reprint);
Davis, p. 9–11; Crane, p. 126; also, though with a broader application than to clothes alone,
Sewell, pp. 48–55.
14 See Davis, p. 71, on the widespread wearing of jeans, even by those who are not ‘swept
up by’ the garment’s ‘imagery’; Crane, pp. 126–7, on early feminists being ‘unaware of the
symbolic meanings of their unorthodox clothing’.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

the resolution of a coordination problem. (I follow here the account of
these matters in David Lewis’ book Convention: A Philosophical Study.)
This is the sense in which it is conventional in America to drive on the
right, or conventional for houses in a certain municipality to be set a
minimum of 10 feet away from their neighbours and from the street.
This is the sense in which the rules of football or of chess are conven-
tional. Our conformity to the convention is conditional on what we
expect others will do; by conforming we satisfy our interest in getting
along with each other, or conducting some mutual enterprise. And some
conventions are reinforced by legal sanction. But none of the conven-
tions just mentioned (and examples could be multiplied) is designed to
convey a message. They are designed rather to enable a coordinated
activity or condition of things.
This is true also of the convention we follow in order to look right.
When dressing appropriately for the social situation, we take into account
how others will be dressed, and dress as we do at least partly because
others too will be dressed like this, or within a range that includes this. We
follow the convention. The conventionality of our clothes permits coord-
ination in the group; it does not, just by itself, send a message.
Now, it is undoubtedly possible to dress appropriately for the social
situation without consciously taking into account how others will be
dressed, but simply to act out of habit. Heading for the ofﬁce, the
executive dons a suit, as always. He need not pause to take into account
how others will be dressed; he need only assure himself (assuming he
does not take much interest in his clothes) that his own suit is clean, and
not the same one he wore yesterday, or if the same one, at least not worn
with the same tie as yesterday. Wearing a suit because others do has
become automatic for him. This is not, however, for him to be uncon-
scious of the meaning of his clothes (since even if such a meaning existed,
his acting from habit would not entail that he is unconscious of it); nor is
it even to be unconscious of the reasoning by which he follows the
convention, if ‘unconscious of ’ means ‘unaware of ’. It is only for that
awareness of his, that knowledge, not to be rehearsed each time at the
level of conscious thought.
I readily concede also the existence of another sort of unconsciousness
in those who wear clothes. This unconsciousness affects the formation of
our likes and dislikes in the matter of personal appearance. It is well
known, for example, that different body types are preferred in different
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


societies and in different historical periods of the same society. Marilyn
Monroe’s fulsomeness can seem slightly absurd today. That it may seem
so even to a man who would otherwise warm to a buxom woman, as a
matter of sexual proclivity, will have little to do with his considered view,
but be largely the result of his slow and mostly unconscious osmosis of a
slimmer female silhouette over the years. And a similarly unthinking
process may cause him to choose to dress in certain clothes rather than
others.15 He thinks he chooses them simply for their visual appeal, but
fails to see that he is like a man on an extended stay in South Carolina
who begins to acquire a drawl, though he cannot hear it and will lose it
anyway on his return home.
Despite this, it remains true that he chose the clothes for their visual
appeal. His cultural blindness does not change that fact. It merely implies
that, because he does not take into account the extent to which his
current taste was formed by what he has been seeing around him, he
may underestimate how readily it will change with the times. But this
does not make him the unconscious vehicle of some other creature’s act
of communication—whether the clothing designer’s, the clothing com-
pany’s, or the culture’s. It may make him a victim of their commercial
enticement, but that is different.
People who dress in clothes that come from a named designer, for
example, do not turn themselves into walking statements uttered by that
designer, nor do they turn themselves into actors who perform a drama that
the designer has conceived. At most, the designer provides the resources on
which the individual can draw when operating with clothes at chosen
points of the communicative scale. Students of fashion tend to agree that
the ﬂow of inﬂuence between designer and customer runs both ways.16
15 Compare Lewis, p. 121, on tastes that are actually caused by the prevailing fashion
even though the wearer of the clothes attributes his choice to other factors. In the Republic
Plato proposes to exploit unconscious osmosis in order to form true taste in the young, as
opposed to merely fashionable taste: ‘We must seek out the craftsmen with a gift for
tracking down the nature of what is ﬁne, what has grace, so that our young can live in a
healthy environment, drawing improvement from every side, whenever things which are
beautifully fashioned expose their eyes or ears to some wholesome breeze from healthy
regions and lead them imperceptibly, from earliest childhood, into afﬁnity, friendship and
harmony with beauty of speech and thought’ (401c-d; Tom Grifﬁth translation). Note that
‘imperceptibly’.
16 Hollander, Seeing Through Clothes, pp. 349–65, brings out the business reality behind
the ﬁction of artistic freedom in dress design. Retail impresario and designer Joseph
Ettedgui, cited in Coleridge, p. 141, insists: ‘I do not dictate a look. What I create is an

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

Designers are engaged in a business. When striving to entice the customer,
they must strive also to anticipate changing needs, tastes, and trends intheir
customer base.
Even in the rareﬁed atmosphere of haute couture, where the designers
who act most like artistic free-spirits or artistic tyrants dress clients who
have the money it takes to become fashion victims, there is an expect-
ation that the client will adapt the dress to her taste rather than buy it
exactly as shown on the runway. In fact, that is one of the privileges the
client is purchasing. (When Arabian money began to be spent on
couture, the clientele was looked on condescendingly, it seems, precisely
because in those early days they tended to order the clothes as is.)17 On
the other hand, some people of means choose instead to spend their
money on a professional stylist who can dictate their appearance from
head to toe, freeing them from what they regard as a chore or are
otherwise reluctant to do for themselves. In a sense, these people have
indeed made themselves the instrument of another’s expressive choices;
but that is only because they have willingly abdicated the individual
freedom they would otherwise have had, delegating it to another. What
is more, those professionals are paid to make choices that complement
the client’s individuality, rather than to express their own.18
Two statements of Giorgio Armani’s are both telling and emblematic
in this regard. In a short documentary about the designer that Martin
Scorsese ﬁlmed in 1990, Made in Milan, Armani at one point draws an
analogy between his clothes and the costumes for a movie—an analogy
that is all too typical in discussions of the cultural importance of clothing.
(I will discuss it at some length in the ﬁnal section of this chapter.) But
does he resort to it because he thinks a clothing designer is like a ﬁlm
attitude, all the ingredients are there. You can pick and choose or become a fashion victim
as you wish.’ Craik begins her chapter six with the claim that fashion is a ‘supply driven’
industry (p. 207), but comes to acknowledge that it is in fact conditioned by both supply
and demand, by the ‘push’ of producers in concert with the ‘pull’ of consumers (p. 210),
whose preferences are assiduously anticipated and researched (p. 212 ff.). Davis, chapter
seven, ticks off a wide (‘polycentric’) variety of inﬂuences that trigger the onset of the typical
stages of the fashion cycle, from ‘invention,’ through multiple levels of diffusion, to
‘waning’.
17 Coleridge, p. 175: ‘Redesigning the dress is the privilege of couture buyers.’ The
situation of Arabian clients is described on pp. 201–2.
18 Coleridge, pp. 152–4, interviews one such stylist. The profession has only expanded
since he wrote.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


director? Not in the least, as the full context of the remark shows (and
despite Armani’s confessing at a later point in the documentary that,
were he not a clothing designer, he would have enjoyed being a ﬁlm
director): ‘Society changes, and my clothes must change. But I try to ﬁlter
my guiding ideas in accordance with the realities that I periodically
encounter. It’s as if I were on the set of a movie: life is the movie, and
my clothes are the costumes.’ Armani is not directing this movie, he is
providing the resources from which the actors can dress appropriately
for their roles. He does not control the movie but must adapt to it.
Armani makes free with the theatrical metaphor, then, but does not use
it in the way we might expect. In another scene he is equally free with our
old friend the linguistic metaphor, declaring that ‘Clothes today are a real
language. They are used as a means of communication.’ But does he mean
that clothes made by Armani say what Armani wants them to say? On the
contrary, as the continuation of the statement shows: ‘We can work in
them and play in them. We don’t experience them as an imposition, but
make them personal through the attitude we express.’ The point of
the metaphor for Armani, then, is to capture the expressive freedom
of the modern individual. There was a time when dress codes were
rigid, options were few, and clothing—a man’s jacket, in particular—
was a concealing carapace. There was a time when clothing was dumb;
Armani has given it the power of speech. But it is the individual wearer of
the clothes who actualizes that power.19
Up to this point, I have been mounting an argument against misuse of
the linguistic metaphor as applied to clothes: that is, against treating the
general attributes of clothes as if they were the meaning conveyed by those
clothes. It might be thought, however, that by taking this position I run the
risk of quashing evidence of social oppression. Might it not be that those
who fail to hear a ‘message’ of paternalistic control in the constricting and
decorative costume of the nineteenth century bourgeois matron in France
19 Armani is speaking in Italian in this documentary, and since the subtitles translate
him rather loosely, it may be worth recording his actual words here (with thanks to Sara
Magrin for her help in deciphering them). Statement #1: ‘La società cambia, e devono
cambiare i miei vestiti. Cerco comunque di mediare le mie idee-guida con le realtà che mi
trovo di fronte di volta in volta. E come se fossi sul set di un ﬁlm: il ﬁlm è la vita e i miei
vestiti ne sono i costumi.’ Statement #2: ‘Oggi il vestito è un vero linguaggio. Lo si usa come
un mezzo di comunicazione. Ci si può lavorare e divertire. È reso personale da un
atteggiamento, non subito come una imposizione.’

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

might also fail to acknowledge the oppressive nature of the control
‘announced’ by the clothing? But in fact my account runs no such risk.
Let the clothing of the bourgeoise be evidence of her oppression; if so, it will
be direct evidence. It will not be the sort of evidence that is used in
communication: evidence of one’s intention to come across in a certain
way. It will be evidence because it enables, supports, exempliﬁes, or is of a
piece with the oppressive social values in question. (She cannot move in
those clothes, but then, she does not need to. Her clothing is frivolous, and
so is her life.) If I have airily described the clothes of the bourgeoise as
suitable for a woman who appreciates her leisure and the opportunity it
gives her to achieve elegance, this is to see the matter through the eyes of a
woman who is content with her social position. That her view is distorted
would be an issue for separate political and historical argument.
Despite having resisted the position that renders individuals clueless
or inarticulate within a culture that does the ‘talking’ for them, however,
I am far from wanting to reverse the polarity and deny all articulacy to
the style of clothing worn by entire groups, reserving it instead for
individuals. A group’s style of clothing may derive a good part of its
value from having a look that is meant to come across in a certain way to
those outside the group. By this means, the group gains solidarity and a
sense of being special.
The cliques that teenagers form at school, for example, tend to cor-
relate with distinguishable styles of dress. In terms of the communicative
scale that we have been using, those teenagers are intimating something.
There is something about themselves they want to get known—that they
are rebels, say, or preppy, or artistic. The intimation is both for them-
selves and for others. When they are in the process of ﬁnding each other
and bonding in the group, the intimation may, indeed, be mainly for
themselves; but once the group is bonded and established, the intim-
ations it makes with its clothes are just as likely to be intimations aimed
at outsiders—or even more likely to be, since the members of the group
no longer need to intimate its character to each other in order to feel
internally afﬁliated. Whatever the intimation’s particular content, the
underlying implication of an intimation to outsiders would be: ‘This is
what we are like; you do not belong.’20
20 Postrel, pp. 101–9, discusses this topic in terms of a group’s ‘aesthetic signals’, which,
she points out, have in the main ‘nothing to do with status hierarchy. They establish
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


The intimation that members of a group with a certain look make to
each other within the group might still be thought of as the intimation of
individuals, each to the other; but there can be no doubt that the
intimation made to outsiders, when it is made, is made by the whole
group, acting as a collective agent. That the intimation is collective
would, in fact, be essential to its point. And if I accept this much, you
might wonder, why should I not concede that an entire culture can be
said to send a message through its clothes, as was supposedly the case
with Athenian culture in the ﬁfth century BC?
Four reasons. First, those who take this view are susceptible to the
thought that styles of clothing within a culture are structured like a
language—a position that, as we saw, has prompted unsustainable
attempts to discover the ‘grammar’ of clothes. Second, their view inclines
them also to neglect the variety and the power of intentions and prefer-
ences among individuals when it comes to clothes. Clothing is instead
reduced to an expression of ideology. And this is to miss out on a lot of
what needs saying about how we get things across with our clothes.
Third, when attributes of a society’s clothes are automatically treated as
the ‘meaning’ of the clothes, no space is left within analysis for individ-
uals to wear their clothes with the communicative switch in the ‘off ’
position. No space is left in which individuals can wear their clothes
without intending to get something across to others by this means. At
most, a space is left for individuals to remain unconscious of the message
that, despite them, their clothes are sending. What those individuals are
not allowed to be, however, is authentically messageless. And yet we saw
that Tony Manero might indeed be walking simply to be the woman’s
man he is, rather than to let the world know him for a woman’s man. If
so, his appearance and demeanour would be part and parcel of his
authenticity. Being a woman’s man would in the ﬁrst instance give his
own actions ‘meaning’ (that is, importance) for himself, rather than
horizontal differences, not vertical ones.’ They are ‘signs of afﬁliation, not prestige’ (p. 106).
Postrel’s corrective to those who focus exclusively on status hierarchy in discussing this
issue is laudable; nevertheless, even a horizontal difference can aim to exclude as well as
afﬁliate. Sean Adams, too, in Millman, pp. 218–19, frames the topic solely in terms of
afﬁliation: ‘people can attach themselves to a code that signiﬁes to others, “I’m in this group.
This is my tribe. This is what I believe in. . . . ” And if I meet you and you have the same
signs, then it’s clear to me that you’re part of that group too. This allows me to feel
comfortable with you . . . ’ (Note also, in this quote taken from an interview, the easy
propagation of the terminology of semiotics.)

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

imbue them with ‘meanings’ (that is, messages) for others. Analysis runs
ahead of itself when it cannot pause to appreciate authenticity at this
position of the communicative scale before deploring the behaviour it
supports (as, in the ﬁlm, Tony himself comes to deplore it).
Finally, even if the appeal to ‘language’ is so much metaphor, there is
in any case a better metaphor than that of language for how the clothing
style of large cultural groups can be said to intimate something to the
observing eye: the metaphor of the brand.21
The Oxford English Dictionary shows the modern use of ‘brand’
developing out of the branding or burning of trademarks on commod-
ities like timber or metal, as a result of which the term came to designate
any particular class or quality of commercial goods (‘ale of a very good
brand’). But at least since brands ceased to be mere marks of identiﬁca-
tion or ownership, to group things by brand has gone beyond classifying
them and has stretched to assessing and ranking them. And the advan-
tage to commerce of cultivating a brand is to get the quality of the
branded product appreciated by consumers—whether that quality is
real or only perceived. A brand, these days, is never just a product or a
service of some particular kind, but a product or service that comes
across to consumers in a certain way. The very ‘identity’ or, as it is
sometimes called, the ‘personality’ of the brand is a matter of perception.
It is telling, then, that the term ‘brand’ can be used just by itself to refer to
the actual business behind the brand (as in ‘Coca-Cola’s annual report
shows the brand continuing to gain market share over Pepsi’).22
What holds widely for commerce, however, holds more narrowly for
cultures. Commercial enterprises exist to reach out to customers; how
the enterprise is perceived beyond its boundaries is a fundamental
component of its raison d’être as an enterprise in the ﬁrst place. The
21 Asked by Debbie Millman to deﬁne branding, Wally Olins comes up with the
following: ‘Fundamentally, branding is a profound manifestation of the human condition.
It is about belonging: belonging to a tribe, to a religion, to a family. Branding demonstrates
that sense of belonging. It has this function for both the people who are part of the same
group and also for the people who don’t belong.’ (Millman, p. 11.)
22 Karim Rashid, interviewed in Millman, p. 267, says this: ‘A brand is basically a
business that has an identity. If it doesn’t have an identity, it’s not a brand.’ Wally Olins,
for his part, says ‘a brand is a product with a distinct personality. And that distinctive
personality is what enables people to differentiate one brand from another.’ (Millman,
p. 12.) The concepts of brand identity and brand personality are fully discussed in chapters
three and ﬁve of Aaker.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


same is not true of cultures. Cultures are home environments ﬁrst; only
secondarily are they home bases from which sallies are made into a
broader environment. Their most important relations are internal.
Even when cultures venture out to create empires, there is pressure on
those empires to be thought of as the home environment writ large. Nor
do cultures known for their trading turn into businesses as a result. (Not
even in the heyday of its use was the phrase ‘Japan, Inc.’ seriously meant.)
A culture that existed only or even principally to ‘broadcast its brand’
would be a culture gone crazy.
Nevertheless, cultures do have what we can think of as ‘brands’.
A culture’s brand comprises those traits that make it distinctive among
other cultures and for which it becomes known to other cultures as well as
to itself. It is easy for these traits to be reduced to stereotypes and
caricatures, leaving us with the stiff-upper-lip of the Englishman, the
hot-bloodedness of the Italian, and so on. Some national cultures, on the
other hand, seem only weakly branded, whether due to fragmentation into
roughly equal subcultures each of which is more strongly branded than
the whole, or to the inﬂuence of one or more strongly branded nations
nearby, or to a bit of both. The important point, however, is that, as
with any brand, a culture’s brand is oriented to what lies beyond its
boundaries.
The ‘brand’ metaphor does a good job of capturing something I have
been insisting upon in this discussion, namely that what all too readily
gets called the ‘meaning’ of clothes is actually a set of attributes proper to
the clothes, which can be seen to ﬁt with, support, or exemplify broader
cultural values. Athenian modes of dress, on this account, are all of a
piece with the brand that is ﬁfth-century Athens. The social equality,
public spirit, ﬁghting ﬁtness, and civic leisure in which Athenians take
pride go to make up Athens’ brand identity. They constitute the brand
identity whether or not they are genuine or fully realized attributes of the
culture. Let them be instead the stuff of aspiration; let them be little better
than myth: still they can legitimately serve the brand, because brand
identity is a matter of perception.
At the same time, the metaphor captures why attributes of Athenian
dress are not just characteristic of Athenian values but can also be
expressive of them. In a commercial context, the components of brand
identity are never just internal to the brand, never fully explicable in
terms of what companies like to call their ‘culture’ (a metaphor which

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

neatly reverses that of a culture’s brand). The components of brand
identity demand assessment in terms of their potential appeal to con-
sumers. Even if a company decides to emphasize some of those compo-
nents over others in its publicity (to extract what has been called a ‘brand
position’ from the larger brand identity), the perceptions of the con-
sumer are never absent from its overall sense of itself.23
While the perceptions of others do not deﬁne the identity of cultures
to the same degree that they deﬁne that of corporations, still, on those
occasions and in those contexts when a culture addresses its distinctive-
ness from neighbours, even in their absence, or is brought up against it,
most likely in the neighbours’ presence, its brand-consciousness will be
paramount. These may be occasions of civic celebration or memorial
(parades, festivals, anniversaries, state funerals) or contexts that call for
diplomatic negotiation with other cultures or, indeed, hostility against
them. At such times, becoming alert to its brand, a culture (through its
representatives) may become alert also to its ‘look’. The way the culture
dresses can be an important component of that look—although it can
hardly be the whole of it, particularly in modern times, when dress has
become so varied within cultures. And because the awareness is a brand-
awareness, the look of the culture will be understood as coming across in
a certain way to others. Just as brands can be thought of as having a
personality, so in these contexts a culture takes on a personality—not a
way of life or a set of customs and institutions, which are constants and
in the background, but a personality. This, for a culture, is something
salient. Through it, the culture makes a collective intimation. It lets the
world know what it wants known about itself. Ethnographers, for their
part, are not the audience for this intimation; rather, they are attempting
to understand what the content of that intimation would be, if and when
it takes place.
By using the brand metaphor, we do justice to the kind of communi-
cation a culture can be said to perform with its clothes. First, we do
justice to its rarity. We take a concept from the realm of commerce,
where it is fundamental, and apply it where it can indeed be seen to
apply, but less fundamentally, less deﬁnitively—not as a constant of
practice. And second, we locate the transaction at the correct position
23 This understanding of brand position is Aaker’s: see his discussion on pp. 176–8.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


of the communicative scale. What Athenian dress conveys about the
Athenian brand, it conveys by intimation rather than by outright com-
munication. This is how the culture dresses; this is its personality. Dress
makes the personality visible, but only when the dress is actually noticed.
Most of the time, it is invisible, as is the cultural personality. Therefore,
when these things do become visible, the viewer sees what, potentially,
was always there to be seen. As with the U.S. President or the barista of
chapter one, the cultural personality acts, and is seen to act. This, in fact, is
how the personality becomes concrete in the ﬁrst place. (A cultural
personality, like a brand, looks outward, not inward.) And the inferences
that the audience makes about the personality (whether the group is
performing for itself or for the neighbours) are direct. It is not by
recognizing that the Athenians intend the audience to infer from their
style of dress that they are free, equal, ﬁghting-ﬁt, and so on, that an
audience does so infer. Rather, the audience infers this directly from the
style of dress, on those occasions when the Athenians, as it were, allow it
to be seen—when the style of dress is on display and thereby made salient.
Let this much sufﬁce on the issue of large-scale cultural messaging. In
this chapter on the messages we send through our clothes, I want instead
to focus on the intentions of the individual—that is, to continue to do
what I began by doing in this book. I have two reasons for maintaining
this focus. First, when it comes to theories of clothing and fashion, the
microscopic level of engagement between social agents has mostly been
neglected in favour of the macroscopic. Second, and more importantly,
this chapter is preparing the ground for an application of the commu-
nicative scale to practices of storytelling. I want to understand what the
narrative arts, even at their most formal and reﬁned, have in common
with the mundane social messaging in which we engage every day. To
that end, a continued focus on the intentions of individuals or small
groups is essential.
2
Let us return, then, to the example provided by the Athenian in his sober
himation, and rather than assess how his clothes reﬂect the values of his
culture consider instead the variety of intentions he might or might not
deploy in wearing what he does. And although, as we shall soon see, one
and the same person can wear his or her clothes at a variety of positions

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

on the communicative scale, I will begin by dividing the possibilities
among different characters, each with his own attitude to clothing. It will
help if I give each character a name.
Ameletus has slept in his tunic and, on waking, has quickly draped
himself in the clean himation left out for him the night before by his wife.
He wears what he is given, without self-consciousness, and would only
notice that he has been wearing what other men wear if he should
suddenly ﬁnd himself among men who are unconventionally dressed.
He follows the norm, but is scarcely aware that he does so.
Harmodius is more self-conscious. He is concerned to ﬁt in, and
refuses to wear the himation his wife has left out for him this morning,
for fear that its elaborate border will draw comment. He wants neither
his clothes nor anything else about him to stick out in a crowd, and has
no other purpose than this in dressing as he does. He consciously intends
to follow the norm.
Metrodorus, though he is a man of means, likes to live simply. He
avoids luxuries, but without ostentatious asceticism. He chooses his
clothes accordingly—nothing too coarse, nothing too fancy. He may
formulate this to himself purely as a personal preference or he may
formulate it as a principle. In either case, he does not dress as he does
in order to let the world know him as one who lives simply; he dresses as
he does because this is one way among others of living simply. He is not
dressing to follow the norm, even though the norm in his society is for
simple dress. His manner of living may therefore go unnoticed until such
time as he is called upon to sponsor a public event and shows up on the
day dressed in his usual fashion rather than in the long robe that a typical
sponsor would wear. He does this still without intending to be recog-
nized for the man he is, but only out of ﬁrmness of preference or
principle. Unless he is very impervious to the norms of his society,
however, he will know that others are going to draw inferences about
the simplicity of his lifestyle from how he appears that day. They might
even be offended by it. For such reactions he does not feel himself
responsible. He did not ask to sponsor the event (at Athens such
sponsorships were imposed on the wealthy in the manner of a tax);
and his audience, he thinks, should not expect him to dress for the
event as other than the man he feels himself to be.
But now Metrodorus is sent on an embassy to the Persian satrap.
Wishing to show this foreign governor of an Eastern Greek province
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


how a free Greek can present himself, he takes great care not to alter his
usual outﬁt in any way that could be interpreted as a nod in the satrap’s
direction. He knows that the simplicity of his dress will strike the eye by its
contrast with Eastern magniﬁcence. This is just the effect he intends. He
wants the Persian to know that an Athenian can hold his own on the
international stage without the aid of ﬁnery. His clothes offer the Persian a
sample both of Metrodorus the man and Metrodorus the Athenian.
An unpleasant surprise awaits him, however, on his return to Athens: his
son Laconicus, just turned twenty, who until then had dressed in his father’s
style, turns up to greet him wearing a coarse tribon. He has allowed his hair
and beard to grow long in his father’s absence. Nevertheless, he makes no
apology for his appearance. Metrodorus sees immediately that his son is
making a silent declaration of protest. His appearance, at such a time,
constitutes an announcement: he is rejecting his father’s democratic, egali-
tarian values and taking up with the oligarchic, pro-Spartan faction in the
city. This faction held that power should belong to the tough, noble, and
virtuous few, men such as the Spartans were, men of few words who won
Greece’s battles. (Such was the Spartan ‘brand’.) When affected by the
Athenian elite—and democratic Athens did have an elite—this shaggy
coarseness of appearance was the mark of pro-Spartan afﬁliation.24
I offer this ascending series of imaginary cases partly in order to
demonstrate how unusual a thing outright communication through
clothes will tend to be. Recall the switch with its three positions for social
interaction, only the last of which is true communication. Laconicus’
coup de théâtre ﬂips the switch to the fully on position. He wants his
father to know that his son wants him to know that he has gone over to
the pro-Spartan faction. Laconicus is declaring himself before his father.
It is not simply by sporting a pro-Spartan appearance, however, that
he achieves this communication. It is by ﬂaunting that appearance before
his father in a situation where he knows it will startle, will draw attention
to itself, and will demand explanation. At that ﬁrst deﬁant meeting,
Metrodorus is being told to get used to the new Laconicus.
But now let us suppose that Metrodorus acquiesces in his son’s
alteration. When Laconicus’ new ways have become tiresomely familiar,
then what? Clothing is not like a permanent radio beacon (though some
24 The Athenian practice was known as ‘Laconizing’ (from the ancient Greek word for
‘Spartan’). For details, see Geddes, n. 19, Losfeld, pp. 146–51.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

have thought so).25 Laconicus will sometimes wear his shabby outﬁt so as
to ﬁt in with his new friends—when they gather for a private drinking-
party, say, and bandy complaints against the current system. He will then
be following the social norm of their subgroup, as Harmodius in our
series was keen to follow the norm of society at large. And this is neither
communication (position three) nor intimation (position two, the half-
on position). It is behaviour in which the switch is off. (I am assuming
that Laconicus’ group, to use the terms I earlier applied to high school
cliques, is fully bonded and established.) Laconicus is not trying to let his
friends know anything by wearing the clothes he does; rather, he is
anticipating their expectations of him, and expecting that they will pay
him the same courtesy. The manner in which his coterie dresses is
sustained by mutual belief, just as the ten-minute rule at my university,
described in chapter one, on p. 8, is sustained by mutual belief.
Walking home from the party in the company of his friends, Laconi-
cus will wear those same clothes with an additional inﬂection. Other
revellers too are weaving through the streets of Athens, torches guiding
their way. They do not belong to Laconicus’ faction, and are not dressed
in the pro-Spartan manner. Laconicus now ﬁnds himself wearing his
clothes with two intentions at once. He wears them to make a team with
his friends, and he wears them to let outsiders know that he and his
friends are a team. He is always ready for both situations, separately or
together.
For his friends, Laconicus’ switch remains off. He does not need to
intimate his pro-Spartan sympathies to them. It is to the outsiders that he
intimates this (an intimation in which his friends collectively join—this,
too, we saw when discussing teenage coteries in the previous section). It
is for the outsiders that his switch is half-on. But he does not deﬁantly
proclaim those sympathies as he did to his father; instead, his behaviour
is akin to the uncompromising yet tactful diplomacy that his father
deployed in the face of the Persian satrap. For imagine that one of
those tipsy revellers, veering suddenly into his path, picks a ﬁght with
him. (‘Hey, tyrant boy! You with the scraggly beard and the rag for a
25 My target here is Joseph (and through him, it would seem, David Riesman): ‘Clothing
is a visual system of signs that, unlike speech, projects itself by its very presence. To use an
analogy of David Riesman's, it is akin to a perpetual radio transmission, whereas speech is
more like radar to which one responds only when probed’ (p.49).
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


cloak! Think that makes you better than the rest of us?’) Laconicus, in
response, would be within his rights to deny the implication. (‘Calm
down, OK? I’m walking with my friends and we’re not out to bother
anyone. Let me dress as I please.’) In doing so, he would not be denying
his afﬁliation—denying what he intends his clothes to intimate to out-
siders. He would be denying an intention to accost outsiders with his
clothes, as this outsider has accosted him. His intimation, at least in his
own eyes, is more discreet than the accoster allows.
Consider the difference between what Laconicus and his friends are
doing with their clothes and what, say, a modern politician would be
doing who is driven around the streets at election time, continuously
repeating his pitch through a megaphone. (This is standard practice in
Japan.) The only function of the politician’s pitch is to announce his
afﬁliation, declare where he stands. To that end, he provides evidence of
his intention to let the public know where he stands, evidence provided
for this precise purpose. It is his pitch that constitutes this evidence. He
intends the public to take his words as reason to think that he believes
himself a politician of a certain stripe, and that he wants them, too, to
believe that he is a politician of that stripe. They recognize both parts of
his intention, as well as that he intended them to do so. That is, they
recognize that his words amount to a declaration.26
Laconicus, making his way home, does no such thing. His clothes do
not evince an intention to let the public know his afﬁliation, nor did he
choose them for this purpose. They are evidence of his afﬁliation, it is
true. But, for one thing, they are more than just evidence of afﬁliation;
they go to make him an afﬁliate. By donning these clothes, he takes
himself to be joining a club. And for another thing, he does not proffer
the evidence of his afﬁliation to the public; he allows it be visible. To use
once more the language we have applied to the President or the barista of
chapter one, as well as to the ‘cultural personality’ of the previous section,
Laconicus both acts and is seen to act, and that is how he wants it to be.
His clothing and his clubbish behaviour are not evidence of his intention
to make his political sympathies known; they are direct, visible evidence
of his political sympathies—evidence which he allows to be seen.
26 I model my analysis of the politician’s behaviour on the account of ‘assertives’ (speech
acts of assertion) in Bach and Harnish, pp. 16, 39–42.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

It may even be that Laconicus and his pals are walking the street as in
chapter one I said Tony Manero might be; that is, that their behaviour
remains in the off position all round rather than moving to half-on with
regard to outsiders. This would be the case if they adopt the public
appearance they do simply in order to feel like the afﬁliates they are—
simply in order to be, rather than to appear to be, the afﬁliates that they
are. Their behaviour as recognizable afﬁliates is both overt and inten-
tional; they do not care who sees it. But they do not seek to be seen.
Social interaction is a mutual engagement, however. He who wears the
clothes may ﬁnd his intentions misunderstood. Imagine that Laconicus
accepts the drunken accoster’s challenge instead of attempting to defuse
it as a misunderstanding. (‘So what if I do? Got a problem with that?’) He
is then allowing the incident to convert the intimation we supposed his
clothes to carry into an outright declaration, of the sort he used them to
make when he originally presented himself before his father. A different
sort of misunderstanding would occur if the drunken reveller mistook a
threadbare, unkempt philosopher, who is merely careless of his appear-
ance, for a posturing pro-Spartan. For it is quite difﬁcult even to intimate
reliably with one’s clothes, let alone to communicate with them. We
certainly cannot simply presume that they are intended for communi-
cation, as we can with words. But nor can we presume they are intended
for intimation, even partly. Perhaps they are just a suitable cover for
one’s nakedness.
It may also be quite unreasonable of those who wear the clothes to
expect to be understood as they intend. In the case of Laconicus and his
friends, the more hostile the environment, the less reasonable it would be
for them to stroll it Manero-like, not intending to intimate their afﬁli-
ation. They are a gang; and the members of a modern street-gang,
wearing their gang colours, would be very foolish to walk where they
can be seen by members of an enemy gang without assuming that their
enemy will take them to be intimating their afﬁliation. Were they to
march in their colours directly into enemy territory, it would be unrea-
sonable of them not to expect to be taken as issuing a full-blown
challenge—no longer an intimation, but a communication.
It is not the mere fact of their wearing gang colours that issues the
challenge; it is the fact that they carry them like a ﬂag onto their rival
gang’s turf. The clothes communicate because they are ﬂaunted. The
same would go for members of a gang who demonstrate solidarity with a
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


fellow gang member in the dock by showing up in court dressed in full
gang regalia.27 Others in the public area are in ordinary clothes; the
defendant is in a prison jumpsuit; both contrasts jar. This licenses the
assumption that they wore the regalia in order to get their intention to
show solidarity with the defendant recognized, not merely to let their
afﬁliation and their solidarity be known. By wearing these clothes they do
not merely demonstrate their solidarity; they declare it. That is, the
means by which they choose to demonstrate their solidarity is to declare
it in public.
Sometimes we do not have to ﬂaunt our clothes to be able to commu-
nicate through them; sometimes the audience is already primed to look
for communicative intent without special effort on our part. An example
would be wearing a red armband to a rally in support of a workforce on
strike, a workforce to which you do not belong but with whose cause
you wish to show sympathy.28 Let us suppose that red armbands are
the agreed token of solidarity in this cause. At the edge of the rally some
demonstrators carry placards inviting passing motorists to honk their
horns if they support the strike. Your wearing of the red armband is
an action equivalent to that of a motorist who chooses to honk his
horn. Both are communications. True, your armband provides direct,
visible evidence of your sympathy. But the strikers are not looking for
direct evidence of your sympathy. They are looking for you to express
your sympathy in public. They have made a request of you, and so are
primed to interpret your wearing the armband as a response—not a
show of sympathy, but evidence of your intention to show sympathy.
(Picket lines, on the other hand, do not merely seek out communica-
tive intent; they go so far as to impose it, or the appearance of it. Should
the non-striker choose to cross the line in order to get to work, the striker
will have turned what would otherwise have been the non-striker’s daily
round into a declaration.)
The red armband is a kind of badge, a badge of solidarity; but that is
not why its use at the rally constitutes a communication. Black armbands
27 I take the example from Joseph, p. 83.
28 Joseph discusses such cases in his section on ‘witnessing,’ pp. 50–1. Because he
assumes from the outset that clothing is ‘a visual system of signs’ (p.49), Joseph never
attempts to draw the distinction that I am urging in this chapter between intimation
through clothes and full-out communication.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

used to be widely worn at funerals, as a badge of mourning, and
sometimes still are. But their conventional use at funerals never consti-
tuted a communication. The reason is that those in attendance were not
looking for a declaration from their fellow mourners. Respect for the
deceased was taken as read. They were all just wearing the appropriate
status-marker, part of their equipment for the event. Only those who
conspicuously failed to wear the armband—in an age when wearing the
armband was de rigueur—would excite speculation. Were they merely
thoughtless, or were they out to communicate their reservations about
the deceased? And if communication it was, it would be the kind that
comes about through ﬂaunting, not the kind that comes about with the
help of an audience primed for uptake.
I have been using examples in which the parameters of acceptable
dress are sharply deﬁned, and where this strictness serves to mark off a
social group. In other words, I have chosen examples in which the
clothing comes close to being a uniform. Anyone who supposes clothes
can communicate just by themselves is likely to suppose this most readily
when the clothes are uniforms; for uniforms seem to have their meaning
stitched right on the surface. Some might therefore see uniforms as doing
what all clothes do to some extent, but doing it in a particularly clear-cut
way.29 It is in order to resist this idea that I have sought to explain how
even very badge-like clothes need not be worn to communicate, nor even
to intimate; and that when communication is what they are worn for, it is
not their badge-like quality alone that brings the communication off.
But it is time to confront the topic of uniforms in its own right.
3
Odd as this may sound, the wearing of uniforms has little or nothing to
do with sending a message through one’s clothes. To don a uniform is to
engage in one of the least communicative of sartorial actions, not one of
29 This is Joseph’s view (p. 2):
If we are to study clothing as a form of communication, then the logical
jumping-off point would seem to be where the rules of nonverbal discourse
are most clearly stated.
Within contemporary society, the clothing that approaches such clarity
and precision is the uniform which is used by various organizations, usually
bureaucratic in structure.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


the most. Those who wear uniforms do not seek an audience; they seek to
bring about a social fact. By donning the uniform, they take on the rights
and responsibilities of the rank they occupy within the organization
whose uniform it is. They do so intentionally, and in the belief that
their intention will be understood by others, both within and outside
their organization. That is, their behaviour is overt. But it is not in order
to have their intention recognized nor, more generally, in order to elicit
inferences from others about their behaviour that they dress in uniform.
That recognition and those inferences matter only to the extent that they
serve the real point of dressing in uniform, which is to invest the wearer
with ofﬁcial rights and responsibilities.
The linguistic parallel to dressing in uniform, then, is not an act of
verbal communication but a form of words that, just by being uttered
under the right conditions, counts as an action of a certain sort, where
that action is something other than communication. These are actions
such as those of a judge pronouncing sentence, a priest marrying the
couple, a provost graduating the class, a policeman declaring the appre-
hendee under arrest. (In speech-act theory, they are known as ‘performa-
tives’.) Such actions are not essentially audience-directed. The speaker is
intent that his action conform to the rules—be executed in the right way
by the right person in the right circumstances. The right circumstances
might include performance before the right audience. (The judge cannot
pronounce sentence unless the defendant’s lawyer, for example, is pre-
sent.) But if so, that is because the audience is speciﬁed by the rules, not
because it is a target of communication. Audience uptake, as philo-
sophers of language have put it, is not so much the point of such acts
as their veriﬁcation.
That is why a policeman is not off-duty unless he is out of uniform (and
why, if he is on-duty but not in uniform, he acquires a special designation:
the plainclothes ofﬁcer). It is not up to him to suppose the uniform void,
any more than a priest who has just married a couple could turn around
and insist that they are not married after all, since he did not mean what he
said when he pronounced them husband and wife. And this is why, too,
the convent school girl who gets caught shoplifting will be in even greater
trouble at school if she got caught while wearing her school uniform. For
then she disgraced not just herself, but her school.
Wearing the uniform invests the wearer with responsibilities, which
can be thought of as responsibilities ‘to the uniform’. Saluting the

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

captain, whom he despises, the sergeant salutes ‘the uniform’, not the
man. The uniform confers on its wearer the power and the protection of
the organization to which it belongs, and imposes corresponding duties.
If the organization is military or quasi-military, its uniforms will be
coded with formal insignia to indicate rank. But this code does not serve
to communicate, it serves to assign the appropriate level of responsibil-
ities and privileges, as well as to make the fact of that assignment
available for audience uptake, amounting to its veriﬁcation. (Of course,
one does not become an ofﬁcer in the military simply by wearing an
ofﬁcer’s uniform; nevertheless, an ofﬁcer is not properly on duty unless
in uniform.) To use the insignia for communication is to coopt them for
an irregular purpose, as when the general in civilian clothes, whose car is
stopped by the military police for speeding, reaches into his bag, pulls out
his general’s cap, and places it meaningfully on his head.30
Insignia on a uniform are to be distinguished from coded items of
clothing whose only or principal purpose is communication. Take, for
example, the elaborate system of handkerchief signals adopted by
leather-wearing gay males in the heyday of the gay bar subculture. Was
the handkerchief blue, or black? From which pocket did it peek, the left
or the right? This was a means by which the wearer could indicate to the
inquiring eye his preferences for the sexual encounter he was inviting. As
with the red armband at the rally, in this venue the viewer is primed to
infer communicative intent. The handkerchiefs answer a question hang-
ing in the air. The viewer does not simply infer the other’s sexual
preference—something a passerby in the know could also do if the pair
later leave the bar with their handkerchiefs still in place. Inside the bar,
the viewer infers that the other wants him to know his preference; this is
the inferential route he takes toward recovering that information. He
does not merely gather information; he gets answered. And the answer,
by being an answer rather than just a display, implies an invitation.
Let leather be the unvarying costume in this venue; grant the hand-
kerchief code all the formality of military stripes and epaulettes; acknow-
ledge, too, that to be ‘top’ rather than ‘bottom’, ‘bottom’ rather than ‘top’
in the solicited encounter is to occupy a role with its own demands,
expectations, and responsibilities. Nevertheless, that costume, that code
30 The example is cited by Goffman on pp. 168–9 of The Presentation of Self in Everyday
Life.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


does not invest the wearer with the responsibilities of his role; at most, he
promises through his clothes to fulﬁl those responsibilities. He is not in
uniform, not even if, ringing the changes on leather for once, he happens
to have come in a uniform.
Not all uniforms—rather few, in fact—entail legal consequences when
properly worn, as military and police uniforms do. More common are
the uniforms associated with various professions and trades, or with
particular commercial concerns. Doctors wear their white coats, chefs
their high-buttoning tunics, topped perhaps with bandana or toque; the
machinists wear their regulation overalls with company logo; each fast-
food chain has its special servers’ costume. When worn by those who
serve the non-uniformed public, the uniforms help identify staff for the
customer’s beneﬁt. Nevertheless, the principal function of such uniforms
remains that of investing the wearer with duties and privileges. The
uniformed staff go uninvited through the door marked ‘authorized
personnel only’; only the chefs and waiters, in their white jackets, must
wash their hands after using the lavatory. The working costume does not
seek an audience, it is merely open to an audience, available for recog-
nition by the customer. Workers wear it in order to conform to the rules,
and, more positively, in order to take on their role for the working day, a
role that customers are welcome to observe. The clothes draw attention
from the customer rather than project intention from the worker.31
31 An anecdote told by Wally Olins when interviewed by Debbie Millman (Millman,
p. 13) makes my point very nicely:
I was on a cruise with my wife, and there was an old Dutch lady at our
table . . . and she hurt her knee. She told us all about it. [Speaks with an
accent.] ‘Ja, I vent down to the doctor, and I knocked on the door. There was
a young man there, probably nineteen or twenty years old, wearing jeans
and a T-shirt. And I said, “Can I see the doctor, please?” and he said, “I am
the doctor,” but I didn’t believe him. So then he left and he came back two
minutes later with a white coat and a stethoscope around his neck. And
I said, “Ahh! Now you are za doctor.”’
The point that Olins uses this anecdote to make, however, is different:
That is a manifestation of branding. That is a classic manifestation of
branding. Because he had the marks and identity, she was able to see he
was the person with whom she could make the medical relationship. That is
classic branding.
This may be valid as an account of what classic branding is, but it does not seem right as an
account of what the uniform was doing in this case. Yes, the lady was able to recognize the
young man as a doctor only after he had put on his uniform; but what she was able now to

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

Conforming to the rules may be experienced as oppressive; the uniforms
themselves may be found demeaning in some way—frumpy or infantilizing
or vulgar or impossibly perky. But none of this turns the costume into
metaphor.32 The uniforms do not signify infantility; they make you look
infantile. They do not signify managerial control; they are instruments of it.
And although I have insisted that to don a uniform is to engage in
among the least communicative of sartorial acts, I readily concede that
the dampening effect is not complete. For one thing, we have already
seen that uniforms can be coopted for outright communication, as in the
case of the general caught speeding. For another, any teenager who has to
wear uniform at school knows how to tweak individuality from between
the rules, or can at least recognize the tweakings of others; and these
tweakings are intimations of character, samples of self such as Metro-
dorus offered to the Persian satrap. The sixth form dandies at my high
school, for example, achieved their effects by such measures as leaving a
blazer unbuttoned at the top, allowing large amounts of shirt-cuff to
protrude, knotting a tie minutely or letting it hang a little loose. Uni-
forms permit quite a range of sartorial actions in which the communi-
cative switch is half-on, however narrow the range and however subtle its
indicators. But generally such actions are mounted despite the uniform;
they do not serve its point.
The outﬁts worn by modern street gangs, to return to the earlier
example, straddle the categories we have been considering in this section,
and remind us not to treat their boundaries as hard and fast. Are they
uniforms? For obvious reasons, wearing them does not have conse-
quences in law (or only does so in those communities which have
made wearing them actually illegal); but neither does wearing most
kinds of uniforms, as we saw. For the members of a gang, and for
their gang enemies, the standard outﬁts with their formal insignia do
recognize, as she had not been before, was that he had taken on his working role for the day.
She does not say ‘Ahh! Now I see you are za doctor.’ She says—rightly, if hyperbolically—
‘Now you are za doctor.’ (Branding, by contrast, is all about reaching out to the customer.)
32 My target, once again, is Joseph. He describes the militaristic uniforms imposed on
young shoe blacks, pavement sweepers, and rag collectors in nineteenth-century London as
constituting a military ‘metaphor,’ since these youths are not actual soldiers (pp. 119–22). If
all that is meant by this is that the uniforms made them look like soldiers (as I would put it),
the talk of ‘metaphor’ is relatively harmless. ‘Metaphor’ would itself be just a metaphor. But
it is the natural afﬁnity of terms like ‘metaphor’ for phrases like ‘the symbolic context within
which society operated’ (p. 121) that makes the metaphor-talk dangerous.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


invest the wearer with privileges and responsibilities—privileges to turf,
responsibilities to their fellow members. That their organization is legally
clandestine does not block this investiture.
At the same time, gang costume differs from the uniforms that I have
been passing in review to the extent that its accepted function is not only
to invest the wearer with ofﬁcial privileges and responsibilities but also to
put those privileges and responsibilities on display. Gang costume is
oriented toward an audience in a way that conventional uniforms are
not. Display need not amount to ﬂaunting; it does not have to rise to the
level of communication, as when a gang marches boldly into enemy
territory. It can remain at the level of intimation. But the reason display
of some sort is essential to gang uniform (there is no need to avoid the
term) is this: display is partly the means by which the gang maintains its
authority. Although violence is the ultimate sanction, if a gang is to retain
control of its turf it must also remain visible in the streets.
In a legitimate organization, it is by virtue of that legitimacy that the
uniform invests the members with their ofﬁcial rights and duties—a
legitimacy grounded in mutual belief and in some cases also in formal
law.33 Clearly, an illegitimate organization such as a gang lacks the
support of formal law. More importantly, the mutual belief that sustains
the validity of the uniform requires constant shoring up. Wearing the
gang colours counts as assuming for oneself the privileges and duties of
the gang; but it will count for nothing if the gang is not taken seriously as
a gang by the relevant others. This requires getting others to recognize
the validity of the uniform. Maintaining visibility in your gang colours,
intimating your afﬁliation, is a way of soliciting this recognition. But it
will not be accorded for free; ultimately, it must be won by violence.
Hence the ease with which intimation in this arena escalates to outright
communication. The gangs stalk the streets on a hair-trigger, ready at
every turn for their clothes to be perceived by others as a direct challenge,
ready also to take the regalia of others in this direction themselves.
This readiness reﬂects the weakness of their organization as a formal
33 In their discussion of ‘counts-as rules’ (rules that govern when doing one thing also
counts as doing another), Bach and Harnish analyse such rules in terms of mutual belief.
Actions that, if done in certain situations, count as doing something else, count as such
‘only because mutually recognized, perhaps by having been agreed upon’ (p. 109). (The
formal deﬁnition that they go on to provide is also dependent on the concept of mutual
belief.)

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

institution and its corresponding strength as an engine of violence. An
organization that must publicly insist on its authority is institutionally
weak; one that is eager to insist, when insistence brings the threat of
extinction, had better be conﬁdent of its brute power.
The upshot is this. Gang costume is a uniform to the extent that it
vests the gang member in his gang membership. Even he, however, does
not trust it for the uniform that it is. The institution is too uneasy for
that. A gang member, then, is never truly vested. He puts the gang
clothes on each day; each day brings a temporary self-vesting.
The uneasiness of the modern street gang has something in common
with the restlessness of the modern commercial brand. The corporation
that rests on the achievements of its brand will become invisible; the
challenge is to be ‘continually surprising’. (So says a vice-president of
design at Coca-Cola.)34 Branding is an exercise in maintaining visibility;
maintaining visibility is also the imperative of the street gang. I suggested
earlier that a culture which existed solely or even principally in order to
broadcast its brand would be a culture gone crazy. Some street gangs—
not the criminal business enterprises, but kids’ gangs out to rule turf
rather than to make money, vintage gangs like the Jets and Sharks of
West Side Story—seem afﬂicted by exactly that kind of craziness.
On this account of uniforms, it should be clear how they differ from
the outﬁts customary in various sports, despite the fact that these too are
often described as uniforms. The cyclist’s tight spandex breeches and
helmet, the fencer’s mask and padded tunic, the baskbetball player’s
singlet and sneakers: these are equipment for the task.35 They do not
34 David Butler in Millman, p. 120.
35 My way of putting this is inﬂuenced by Wayne Buck’s account of the tuxedo on
pp. 107–8 of his 1987 doctoral dissertation (‘Language as a Model for Social Life’, Yale
University, Philosophy Department). The dissertation as a whole is a pioneering work in the
application of Gricean ideas to nonverbal communication, as well as in its resistance to
imposing the linguistic model (which I have been calling the code-model) on the analysis of
social life. The venture that Buck does not make, however, but which is of greatest importance
to me, is to discover and analyse a middle ground between cases of what Grice would call
‘non-natural meaning’ and ‘natural meaning’. ‘Non-natural meaning’ corresponds to the fully
on position of the communicative scale. Something has ‘natural meaning’ when it is direct
evidence for something else (those clouds mean rain; that look means trouble). Natural
meaning thus includes but is not limited to cases in which the communicative switch is off.
For Buck, clothes have only natural meaning. We can infer all manner of things about a
person from his clothes, but only in the way that the ornithologist identiﬁes a bird from its
behaviour, locations, and song, even when he cannot see it clearly (p. 107). I can vividly recall
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


invest the wearer with rights and responsibilities. (That is what the rules
of the sport do.) It is a different matter when the uniforms are those of an
identiﬁable team, whether professional or amateur, being worn by that
very team. These are bona ﬁde uniforms in the same way that outﬁts
peculiar to a commercial enterprise such as a chain of fast-food restaur-
ants are bona ﬁde uniforms. It is different, too, when the outﬁt is one that
only a winner may wear, such as the yellow jersey in the Tour de France,
which is given to the cyclist with the lowest overall time at the end of
each stage and conveys the right to start the next stage.
With those exceptions, a cyclist’s or fencer’s or basketball player’s
costume is best regarded as equipment for the task. But it is equipment
not simply in the practical sense, but also in the way that the mourner’s
black armband is, or as a dinner jacket worn at a black tie gathering is.
It is what one brings to the event, so as to be dressed as the others are.
Much about sports costumes, after all, tends to be traditional and
conventional rather than purely practical. Seeing someone lay out the
spandex breeches or the dinner jacket and bow tie, we anticipate the
activity in which they are about to engage; but they do not dress
themselves in these clothes in order to elicit our inferences. When
clothes are almost as regimented as bona ﬁde uniforms, they tend,
like bona ﬁde uniforms, not to be audience-directed. Certainly, many
subtle variations are possible within the strict limits of men’s formal
wear, as we saw them to be within the strict limits of school uniform;
and certainly, you can let the world know your sporting preferences by
wearing the blazon of a favourite team or the number of a favourite
player. But just as, in the case of bona ﬁde uniforms, sending messages
seemed to be an action mounted despite the uniform rather than
serving its point, so with these highly regimented quasi-uniforms: the
messages are tangential to the overwhelming point of dressing in such
outﬁts (setting aside the practical reasons), which is to dress as pre-
scribed for the activity, and thus to ﬁt in.
dismissing Buck’s ideas out of hand when he gave me their gist over lunch at Yale in the mid-
1980s. I was still loyal to structural semiotics in those days. Perhaps the vividness of my recall
is enhanced by the fact that I failed utterly to prevail in our lunchtime argument. Despite my
failure, I was not won over to Buck’s side. So it is strange to me that I should have ended up in
such sympathy with his ideas now, and stranger still that I should have taken such a circuitous
intellectual route to arrive at this condition.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

It is quite different, of course, when either bona ﬁde uniforms or
quasi-uniforms are worn solely as fashion items or for sartorial idiosyn-
crasy rather than in the context of the activity for which they were
originally made. In that case they participate on equal terms in the full
communicative range that clothing permits; and to which my account
can now return.
4
The ascending series that I peopled with a cast of imaginary Athenians
was intended to correspond to the three positions of our communica-
tive switch. For Ameletus, Harmodius, and, under normal circum-
stances, Metrodorus, the switch was off. Their clothing followed the
norm; they did not dress with the intention of eliciting inferences from
an audience. Ameletus conformed unwittingly, uncaringly, through the
good ofﬁces of his spouse; Harmodius followed the norm scrupulously
and rigidly; Metrodorus followed his own preference for austerity,
happy enough that this was also the social norm but not dressing as
he did in order to conform to it. (Even Harmodius, who of the three is
the most sensitive to the opinions of others, does not dress as he does in
order to elicit inferences from others. Rather, he dresses in the expect-
ation that others will be dressed in the same way, and that they will
expect him too to dress this way. If anything, he dresses as he does in
order to avoid eliciting inferences from others—critical inferences.)
The switch moved to half-on when Metrodorus was presented to the
Persian satrap and dressed himself with the intention of letting the
satrap know how a man of Metrodorus’ personal stamp, and a proud
Athenian, sees ﬁt to dress even in surroundings of foreign grandeur.
And the switch was fully on when Laconicus dressed himself for his
father’s return with a recursive intention: intending his father to rec-
ognize that his son’s intention in dressing as he did was to have him
recognize his political transformation.
The series runs, then, from behaviour that is not directed at an
audience—in the sense of not being intended to elicit inferences from
an audience—to fully communicative behaviour, for which an audience
provides the rationale. But I want to concentrate now on the mid-point,
the position in which the switch is half-on. We have seen enough to
appreciate why full-blown communication through clothes is at least
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


rare, if not downright bizarre.36 (The basic idea is that, unless the
audience is already primed for a communication, your clothes must
startle if they are to make your communicative intention unmistakable.)
But about intimation through clothes there is more to be said.
First, however, it would be well to draw a distinction between the
intention to elicit inferences from an audience and the intention to get an
audience to feel a certain way.37 I may dress with the hope of attracting
you, repelling you, exciting you sexually, delighting you, puzzling you,
astounding you, putting you at ease, or making you feel awkward, to
name a few possibilities. In such cases, my intention is directly to have an
effect on you, directly to do something to you, by means of my clothes.
Such is my intention also when I intimate something to you by means of
my clothes, but only in the case of intimation is the direct effect that
I intend to have on you with my clothes the effect of informing you, of
letting you know something, of getting you to recognize something.
Of course, what I let you know may delight, repel, anger, or astound
you, and I may or may not have this purpose in mind when I choose to
intimate whatever it is that I intimate to you with my clothes. Still, my
intimative intention is distinct from the intention that my intimation
should have this further effect.
So, for example, I can intend to put you at ease by wearing jeans to
your dinner party, knowing that you like to keep things casual and that
you feel uncomfortable entertaining friends who are dressed more for-
mally than you. Left to myself, I would probably not wear jeans to a
dinner party, but I do so for your sake. I neither expect nor want you to
notice my effort on your behalf; this would only detract from your sense
of ease. I simply wish to preserve your comfort zone. I am not intimating
36 When dealing with large-scale cultural groups in the ﬁrst section of this chapter,
I made the point that such groups rarely even intimate as a collective agent before an
audience, let alone communicate with it. Yet intimation with one’s clothes, we are about to
see, is common among individuals; only communication is rare. The reason for the
difference is that widespread intimation at the individual level is a crucial way for cultural
groups to become established in the ﬁrst place. Unless it were common within the context of
a culture, there would be no culture to provide that context. (The chicken-and-egg
reasoning here is benign.) Because cultures are established from the inside out in this
way, however, collective intimation at the level of the entire culture is more of an option
than a necessity. It does not even have to be frequent, still less continual.
37 The distinction between my intimation and the effect that I intend my intimation to
have on you is akin to that between illocution and perlocution in speech-act theory.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

anything. Contrast with my behaviour that of a professor on sabbatical
who chooses to remain on campus during his leave, but who takes to
wearing jeans to his ofﬁce, having previously made a rule for himself not
to wear jeans when teaching or when dealing professionally with stu-
dents and colleagues. Let us suppose that the majority of his students and
a good number of his colleagues wear jeans without a second thought.
This professor is not wearing his jeans in the interest of achieving a
uniform sartorial environment. Rather, he is intimating to the students
and colleagues whose path he crosses that although he is present on
campus he is off-duty and should not be inveigled into ofﬁcial activity.
He expects them to infer this from his change of habitual dress. It is
behaviour intended to elicit the desired inference.
(They infer this directly from his change of habitual dress, however,
not by recognizing his intention that they infer it. It is insufﬁciently
arresting and speciﬁc a move to make for full-blown communication—
unlike, say, the fully communicative performances attributed to the
barista in chapter one. Some of those students and colleagues may
simply suppose that the professor is dressed in his jeans because he
feels himself to be off-duty. They will, accordingly, treat him as off-
duty, but without sensing that the communicative switch is half-on.
They will fail to appreciate the tact which has prompted him to intimate
his change of status rather than announcing it outright. Such is the risk
the intimator runs.)
Likewise, if Tony Manero is wearing his outﬁt not simply to be
the woman’s man he is (as we supposed in chapter one) but to look
like a woman’s man to the women he passes, then he is intimating this
fact to them. He intends them to recognize this about him. And he would
be doing so, presumably, in the hope of interesting them sexually.
Nevertheless, his intimative intention is distinct from and independent
of his intention to arouse. For suppose that underneath his outﬁt he
wears a thong. When the moment of revelation arrives, he will not be
wearing it in order to intimate his sex appeal; he will be wearing it to
excite his partner directly.
Using your clothes to get others to feel a certain way might seem to be
audience-directed behaviour. But those others are not really an audience;
they are more like a target, and sometimes a victim. Because, however,
this behaviour is indeed directed at others, it does not belong on the ﬁrst
position of the communicative scale, where your switch is off and any
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


inferences made about you by others are made on their own initiative. It
does not, indeed, belong anywhere on the communicative scale. Message-
sending is not its point. Nor, however, is its point the kind of belonging
together and coordination without the need for sending messages
that characterizes behaviour on the ‘off ’ position of the scale—acting
acording to norms, habits, or rules. Its point is manipulation of others’
feelings. This may be a matter of adjusting others to one’s wishes
(perhaps openly, perhaps surreptitiously) or, as with my wearing jeans
to the party, it may be a quiet adjustment of oneself to another’s ways.
Intimating with your clothes is different. Its point is to get something
across to another. And because your clothes are the face you present to
the world, what you intimate will most likely be something about
yourself. Your clothes can serve as the display window, indicating to
passers-by a little of the shopping experience that awaits should they
venture inside. You are offering a sample of yourself.
The sample does not, however, have to be accepted as genuine by
those to whom it is presented; they are aware that samples can mislead.
With intimation, as with communication, there is a gap between uptake
and actual belief.
Recall the politician making his pitch with the megaphone. He intends
those in earshot, we saw, to take his words as reason to think he believes
himself a politician of a certain stripe, and as reason to think he wants
them, too, to believe that he is a politician of that stripe; and he intends
them to recognize this compound intention. For his intention to succeed,
however, it is not necessary that they actually do believe him to be the
kind of politician he claims to be. As we have seen, a communication
succeeds simply by securing audience uptake. That is, it succeeds as a
communication. It may fail, however, as an exercise in persuasion.
So too with intimation. If Tony Manero is intimating with his clothes
and with his streetwalk that he is a woman’s man, then his intimation
succeeds if those he passes recognize him as one. That is, they see that he
has the look of a woman’s man. They do not, however, have to believe
that he really is a woman’s man—a woman’s man to the core. (Nor, of
course, do they have to ﬁnd his coming across as a woman’s man
appealing.) Perhaps it is an elaborate pose, engineered in the belief that
women are susceptible to this look.
With communication, the gap between uptake and actual belief, or
between uptake and compliance in the case of a request, is opened by the

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

fact that mere recognition of the communicator’s intention to get himself
understood sufﬁces to get him understood. With intimation, however,
recognition of the intimator’s intention to come across in a certain way is
not essential to the success of the intimation. Tony Manero’s audience
will doubtless assume that he knew what he was doing when he put his
outﬁt together and developed his walk; but the reason they see him as a
woman’s man is simply that he is dressed as a woman’s man would dress
and walking as a woman’s man would walk. The gap between uptake and
belief is opened in this case not by the peculiarity of the communicative
intention (the fact that it is fulﬁlled merely by being recognized) but by a
much more widespread phenomenon: the fact that appearance may not
be the reality. And since clothes are a matter of appearance, that gap is
always going to be there when we use them to intimate.
Nevertheless, it is not a gap that we necessarily exploit. Much of our
intimating through clothes, perhaps most of it, amounts to providing a
sample of who we genuinely take ourselves to be, or of how we genuinely
feel at the time. In such cases, our intimation has an authenticity to it.
Authenticity is by no means conﬁned to cases where the communicative
switch is off—as when we imagined Tony Manero walking simply to be
the woman’s man he took himself for, rather than to broadcast his status.
Broadcasts too can have their own authenticity.
Consider the following actual responses from women who were asked
the question ‘what do you want to convey through your appearance?’
(They come from research conducted in the late 1980s by Efrat Tseëlon.)38
‘I’m a career person who wears practical clothes.’ (In the photograph,
she wears a crisp, straight-cut dress with an elaborate ﬂoral pattern in
strong silhouette and a contrasting narrow white placket on the chest, cut
in a deep ‘V’ and rising high at the neck to match the white bands deﬁning
the end of each half-sleeve. The dress falls to just below the knee. Her shoes
are white ankle-strap pumps with open toes.) ‘My clothing is reasonably
smart with attention to detail.’ (Her dress too has a ﬂoral pattern, but the
effect is more painterly. It appears to be multi-coloured, and the colours to
be soft, so far as a black-and-white photograph can show. The neck is cut
straight and wide, the long sleeves and pleated skirt are full, the waist is
strongly marked. The dress falls to mid-calf. Her shoes are closed black
38 The women’s self-descriptions and photographs of them are reprinted from Tseëlon’s
1989 doctoral dissertation in Kaiser, pp. 316–17.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


strapless pumps with high, perhaps stiletto heels. The ensemble manages
to seem at once muted and dramatic.) ‘I'm individual in style, chic but not
totally aloof.’ (This woman is wearing a bright, strongly patterned dress to
what looks to be mid-calf, but the dress is seen only through the chinks of
an unbuttoned, oversized dark coat, loosely constructed at the shoulder
and with shawl lapels. The coat falls like a ﬂag to the ankles, to reveal pale-
toned pumps with closed toe and a satin sheen.)
The general implication behind such responses is: if this is what I am
like with my clothes, the part you can readily see, then this is what
I am like with the parts of my life that you cannot see. I am sensible
and career-minded; or: I pay attention to detail but not obsessive atten-
tion; or: I like to be different but not too different.
A sample is direct evidence of what you want to get across, whether
sincerely, as in these cases, or insincerely. It is a demonstration, an
exempliﬁcation. It is as if, before dressing themselves for the day, these
women silently announced to the world: Allow me to demonstrate what
I can do, what I am like; allow me to show you an example of what I can
do, of what I am like. Offering a sample has the discretion of intimation.
The women are not in fact making an announcement, nor staking a
claim, nor making a request; they do not offer the sample as evidence of
their intention to come across in a certain way; they are not communi-
cating. They aim to come across in a certain way by providing some
direct evidence of what they are like. They act, and are seen to act.
Dressing themselves for the day is one activity among others that they
can and do perform in their characteristic manner; however, its results
are peculiarly visible. They are sensitive to this, and so are at pains to
make those results representative.
The fact that intimation is discreet by comparison with outright
communication is an important reason why those who choose to intim-
ate with their clothes should go to the conscious effort this involves. It is
not that we cannot also communicate discreetly, when we need to; but it
is a good deal harder to communicate discreetly when the content of the
communication is something ﬂattering to ourselves. And this is the kind
of thing we typically try to convey when we intimate with our clothes. An
outright announcement would risk seeming unduly self-assertive or
boastful. If we did choose to convey the favourable information by
communicating it, we would doubtless hedge our claim with politeness,
indirection, self-deprecation, or any of the vast store of rhetorical devices

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

to which people resort in such situations. Allowing our clothes to
intimate the favourable information instead has several advantages. We
avoid seeming boastful, of course; yet we are at the same time able to be
quite forthright. The clothes described by the women respondents above
intimate discreetly but not vaguely. No air of circumlocution hangs
about these garments.39 They are direct samples of what these women
can do or are like. What is more, their intimation can remain publicly
available all day, yet not be thought repetitious or haranguing. (To say
that their intimation can remain available all day is not, however, to treat
it as equivalent to a radio beacon with a single unalterable signal—a
position I took exception to earlier. The women might intentionally
make their intimation available to be treated differently by different
audiences, as we saw Laconicus do.)
Just because the intimation is forthright, however, does not mean that
it will be correctly understood. Tseëlon’s survey of reactions to the
photographs of these women in fact reports varying degrees of match
between the impressions the women intended to give and the impres-
sions received by observers. The third woman was the least well under-
stood, presumably because she was trying—directly, forthrightly—for an
intimation more difﬁcult to bring off, because more idiosyncratic. (She
wanted to convey, recall, that she was individual in style—chic, but not
totally aloof.) But in all three cases, what makes for discretion is the
simple fact that recourse was not had to full-out communication—not
until the interviewer got involved, at least. So there was no need to resort
to hedging or vagueness in order to achieve this effect.
That intimation does not have to be vague in order to be discreet
shows that intimation is not just another word for suggestive, nebulous
communication. This bears emphasizing, since someone might take issue
with my argument in this chapter by insisting that when clothes send a
message they are indeed communicating the message, it is just that the
communication is generally amorphous and ambiguous—although for
that very reason it can be rich in implications. (We have already seen that
39 Here I take a step beyond McCracken, ‘Clothing as language’, who points out that
‘material culture can speak sotto voce’, and explains why this would be a good thing (p. 121;
p. 69 of the reprint), but does not include among the advantages this further good thing: the
frankness that such ‘quiet speaking’ permits of the ‘speaker’.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


those who regard clothes as coded are willing to resort to the idea that the
code exists even if we cannot lay it out precisely, since its meanings are
unstable and open-ended.)
Let us consider a nice example taken from the literature on these
matters.40 The example is presented there as just such a case of nebulous,
suggestive communication. Mary goes to the window of the seaside hotel
where she and her companion Peter have arrived on vacation. With Peter
nearby, she throws the window open and inhales the sea air with a deep,
audible, and appreciative sniff.
I have myself claimed suggestiveness as among the possible advantages
of getting something across by intimation; but am I merely attributing to
intimation what belongs properly to suggestive communication, as (pur-
portedly) in this example? No; the contrast between intimation and
communication is not one of degree. Mary’s suggestive sniff could be
one or the other, and which of them it is depends not on its degree of
suggestiveness but on Mary’s intention. The sniff is an intimation if her
intention is simply to stimulate Peter to come to the window and take a
sniff himself because he has noticed her doing so. She wants her sniff to
be noticed, since that is how she will succeed in intimating to Peter how
grand the whole experience of being by the seaside is (or something
along those lines). But she does not care about getting him to notice that
she wanted her sniff to be noticed; she would not mind if he assumed that
she was acting entirely for her own beneﬁt. Only if she took pains to get
him to notice that she wanted her sniff noticed would she be communi-
cating. Her sniff would then become a ‘meaningful’ sniff. Neither the
meaningful sniff nor the intimating sniff are precise in their content;
both are equally suggestive, evocative. We see, then, that an intimation
40 The example comes from Sperber and Wilson, Relevance, p. 55. My focus on intim-
ation in this book could, perhaps, be thought of as a focus on what Sperber and Wilson call
the ‘informative intention’—the intention to modify ‘the cognitive environment of the
audience’ by making something manifest to them (p. 59). Sperber and Wilson themselves,
by contrast, treat the informative intention as bound up with a communicative intention,
which is the intention to make an informative intention mutually manifest between
audience and communicator (p. 61). Although they recognize that the information con-
tained in an informative intention could be recovered independently of a communicative
intention (p. 50), they do not dwell on this possibility. (Compare what was said about Grice
in chapter 1, p. 11 n. 6.) Instead, they treat the distinction between ‘showing’ and ‘telling’ as
embracing a continuous spectrum of cases, all of which are cases of ostensive communica-
tion (pp. 53–4).

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

can be vague, and it can be precise; and that when it is vague, the fact that
it is an intimation is not what makes it so.
But although an intimation does not have to be vague to be an
intimation, and although the distinction between the three positions of
the communicative scale is not a matter of degree, the intentions with
which we act are not always transparent to others. Or they may be
transparent to some but not to all. And the unclarity that results is
sometimes problematic.
We have seen that intimators risk having their intimation missed
entirely, as when the jeans-wearing professor on sabbatical is taken to
be merely enjoying his freedom, when in fact his intention was to make
his new status apparent in a tactful way. Conversely, Tony Manero, if his
communicative switch is off and he is merely walking to be rather than to
look to others to be the woman’s man he is, may be taken by some
women he passes as being on a more active prowl than he actually is, and
so, perhaps, give unintended offence. It is in fact very hard to see what
measures Tony could take, should he wish to prevent this interpretation
of his demeanour. He must simply walk with his customary self-
possessed sexuality, and trust that the self-possession as well as the
sexuality will be apparent.
On the other hand, the uncertainty that can hang over the position of
our actions on the communicative scale may also be to the agent’s
advantage. The British Prime Minister in chapter one could if challenged
have plausibly denied that Britain’s foreign policy with regard to America
had altered. By intimating rather than announcing the change, he left his
behaviour ambiguous between the half-on and the fully off position, and
beneﬁted from the ambiguity. And for an example of ambiguity between
half-on and fully on, consider again the barista who is aggrieved with his
boss. By performing his duties with exaggerated perfection he communi-
cates to the customer his sense of having been unjustly used by the boss. If
he nicely calibrates the exaggeration, however (it must exceed his typical
stylishness, but not degenerate into outright buffoonery), and if he takes
advantage of the disparity between the customer’s angle of view from the
café ‘auditorium’ and his boss’s from behind the ‘stage’, he can succeed in
communicating with the one while maintaining deniability to the other.
A different sort of problem arises from the fact that clothes are worn in
public and the public is not a monolithic audience. If Tony Manero is
walking to look like the woman’s man he is, if he is intimating his sexual
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


conﬁdence, some of the women he passes may turn their heads appre-
ciatively, but others may turn away in contempt. And what of the men he
passes? Some may be oblivious; some may understand the intimation
and emulously admire it; others may understand the intimation and feel
hostile, or cowed, or incredulous, or amused, or have any of a wide range
of other reactions. Tony, for his part, might care about none but the
appreciative or emulous portions of the audience. The equivalent prob-
lem would be sharper for, say, a woman who wears a nicely tailored suit
with a short, tight skirt to the ofﬁce, in a workplace where, although such
an outﬁt will not seem radical, it is not simply the norm. Whatever
impression it is that she intends to give, she may need to anticipate that
her male boss will think one thing, and his female P.A. quite another.
Dress simply lacks the ﬂexibility of language when it comes to man-
aging multiple audiences, an inﬂexibility which makes this particular
problem difﬁcult to resolve—at least, difﬁcult to resolve satisfactorily. On
the one hand, it may generate a pressure to conform, in an attempt to
please all of the people all of the time. But that way blandness lies.
Alternatively, you could make pleasing all of the people all of the time
a positive ambition rather than a compromise. The diverse audience
would engage you as a sartorial challenge; your goal would be to appeal
to all segments while still dressing interestingly and well. But this is by far
the most difﬁcult path to take, and the one most likely to end in failure.
Among those who despair, then, of pleasing all of the people all of the
time, the recourse could instead be strategic: take aim at the audience
that counts most for you; try to placate the rest in some other way. In
doing so, however, you ﬂirt with cynicism. Perhaps, after all, the optimal
recourse would be to give a genuine sample of yourself. Maybe you
cannot please all of the people all of the time, but at least the pleasure
and displeasure will be directed at the real you, not at some ﬁgment. You
will have done your part; let the world react as it will. Using our clothes
to provide a sample of who we genuinely take ourselves to be seems a
common practice among those who take pains to intimate with their
clothes. It may well be that their very awareness of the intractability of
the problem of multiple audiences contributes to its prevalence.41
41 McCracken considers the problem of multiple audiences in the context of commercial
marketing in Culture and Consumption II, p. 185. He too regards it as a sometimes
intractable one.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

Not only do we often use our clothes to provide a sample of who we
genuinely take ourselves to be, we also use them, I claimed, to provide
samples of how we genuinely feel at the time. We adjust clothes to our
mood; or we adjust them to the mood of the occasion, generally in the
hope of adjusting our own mood to its. We dress brightly or coolly or
seductively for a party, depending on how we intend to go about the
occasion, but aware that the occasion demands an effort of some kind,
and wanting to rise to it. But what if it is a party to which we have been
press-ganged? Then our feelings will not match the occasion at all, even
though we may still go to some effort with our clothes. Intimations, like
any action, can be extracted under duress. Clothing, then, is a less reliable
sample of feeling and mood than it is of character, mood being transient
and occasional while character projects itself sartorially over the long
term and by means of a variety of outﬁts. But the unreliability can be put
to good use: our clothes can serve to disguise our real mood.
5
The comparison between clothing and disguise or between costume for
the social occasion and costume for the stage is so natural a comparison to
draw that it takes a special resolve to resist its blandishments. It is too easy
to treat what we do with our clothes as so much social theatre—whether to
celebrate the spectacle or to decry it. The analogy is not without its uses,
for sure. In the ﬁrst section of this chapter we saw Giorgio Armani using it
quite casually and without theoretical pretension, when he compared his
clothes to the costumes on a ﬁlm set. To apply it universally, however, and
as a matter of theory, would obscure the fact that our manner of dress
does not have to be insincere to be playful.42 Goffman, who used the
42 Introducing a 2011 collection of articles (Accessorizing the Body) intended to repre-
sent something of the cutting edge in the social theory of clothing and fashion, Cristina
Giorcelli provides a good illustration of the ease and the perils of comparing clothing to
disguise. She begins (p. 2) with the unimpeachable truth that ‘dress . . . can be used as a
mask to deceive others as well as to protect one’s inner freedom’. Within a few lines,
however, a claim that had been limited to a possible use of dress is being unnecessarily
generalized to apply to the very essence of dress. The unhedged assumption that clothing is
a means of communication helps make this transition: ‘As clothing is a means of commu-
nication, such communication produces information that, by deﬁnition, must partake in
the general condition of illusion, allusion, and simulation: . . . ’ But ‘partake in’ is ambigu-
ous: does clothing partake in illusion merely to the extent that it can be used to deceive, as
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


dramaturgical metaphor constantly, was careful to defuse its potential for
cynicism. To play a role, he thought, is not to conceal the (perhaps
ghastly) truth, but to screen out what is not appropriate for the occasion.
Disruptions of the performance reveal, not the underlying reality, but
embarrassing or painful or otherwise recalcitrant information that the
performance was designed to manage well enough without.43
Take, for example, what we might call ‘aspirational’ dressing. In the
nineteenth century, women employed as clerks or in factories spent large
amounts of their discretionary income avoiding dowdiness. They dressed
fashionably and well, in the manner of the bourgeoisie. Some groups
experimented with a louder and more adventurous twist to fashionable
dress than would have been thought proper among the bourgeoisie, but
they too were dressing with an eye for fashion rather than succumbing to
a dreary utilitarianism.44 Another example of aspirational dressing can
be seen in the perfectly pressed suits, dazzlingly white shirts and scru-
pulously dimpled ties worn today by certain young men when out
proselytizing for their religious group.
I propose to resist the temptation to see this kind of dressing as
deceptive. It does not amount to pretending to be what you are not.
Aspirational dressers too are offering a sample of themselves, showing
what they can do, what they are like. And in particular, they are showing
that they can dress as well and as meticulously as those of higher or
senior status are able to afford to dress. But they are not aping those
before, or because it belongs, in its entirety, to the realm of illusion? The continuation of the
sentence gives us our answer: ‘the self dresses and disguises itself on the great stage of the
world, a ﬁction reﬂecting other (and perhaps more disquieting) ﬁctions’. Giorcelli is not
alone: Amelia Groom makes the same leap when discussing Harajuku style for one of the
case-studies in Craik (pp. 159–61). Her accurate description of the ‘masquerade’ and ‘self-
costuming’ that is local to the youthful street-culture of this Tokyo neighbourhood cul-
minates in a grand metaphysical ﬂourish: the self-costuming youngsters ‘show’ through
their behaviour that ‘identity is nothing but masquerade’. Yet the youngsters ‘show’ this
only insofar as it constitutes the claim they collectively intimate (or, perhaps, communi-
cate). That they do even this much is arguable, but suppose they do: still, the youngsters’
behaviour does nothing at all to ‘show’ something about the nature of identity, in the sense
of establishing or proving it.
43 Examples of Goffman’s refusal to treat playing a role in social life as a kind of
insincerity or bad faith occur on pp. 65 and 169 of The Presentation of Self in Everyday
Life. For developments of this idea, see Tseëlon, ‘Self presentation through appearance,’ and
chapter two of The Masque of Femininity; also Velleman (esp. pp. 66–70).
44 I take this example from Crane, pp. 59–61.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

people. (Hence the greater adventurousness or intensity that is common
in aspirational dressing.) They are showing pride in themselves rather
than the desire to be someone else. The aspiration is toward enhance-
ment of self, not toward the status of another.45
The male graduate student who wears a business suit and tie to his
interview for an academic job is an interesting, even poignant case in this
regard. The aspiration with which he dresses is indeed toward the status
of another; but those others, the professors conducting the interview, are
unlikely to be wearing business suits themselves, or if they are, almost
certainly do not wear them when going about their regular academic
business. The graduate student is dressed more formally, perhaps, than
anyone else in the room. Yet he never wears suits on his own campus,
and if he gets the job may never wear one to teach. Is he play-acting,
then? Yes and no; for the pretence is imposed on him by the situation,
and by going along with its requirements he shows his interviewers that
he is willing to play the game. He dresses as he does with the intention of
getting them to recognize this fact. They, for their part, recognize his
willingness simply by checking the imaginary box for appropriate dress.
So this is not a communication. (Showing up for the interview in typical
male graduate student garb would be communication.) It is, however, an
intimation. The suit is not merely equipment for the task; it is not like the
black armband at a funeral. The student seeks to send a message, not
simply to be appropriately dressed.
Now, it would be foolish not to acknowledge that play-acting, un-
coerced play-acting, is among the things that we do with our clothes.
We consciously adopt ‘looks’ that belong properly to others. Cases
might include older women who adopt ‘the preschool look’, well-to-
do boys who adopt ‘the tough teen look’, non-dancers or ex-dancers
who adopt ‘the ballerina look’. (The labels are Toby Fischer-Mirkin’s
from a chapter of her book Dress Code tellingly entitled ‘Role-playing:
Reinventing Yourself with Fashion’.) The wide variety of ‘retro’ looks, if
the look is fully realized, also belongs in this category. The ‘Teddy Boy’
style recalled fashion of the Edwardian age; and although the age of the
Teddy Boy itself has passed, drape-jackets and brothel-creepers could
always make a come-back.
45 In treating aspirational dressing this way, I ﬁnd myself in happy agreement with
Postrel, pp. 117–21.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


Notice the difference between such examples and that of the
woman who wanted to convey that she was ‘a career woman who
wears practical clothes’, or of Tony Manero, on the assumption that he
walks and dresses to look like a woman’s man to others. Both of these
are cases of intimation. But unless you are yourself an actual ballerina,
and possibly not even then, you do not adopt the ballerina look in
order to seem to others to be a ballerina; you just want the ballerina-
look. And you may want it for any number of reasons. Some of them
do not belong on the communicative scale at all. (You want it because
your mother was a ballerina. You want it because you have always
longed to be a ballerina. You want it because you ﬁnd it a delightful
look.) Others do, and they range across the scale in its entirety. You
want it to ﬁt in with your friends, because it is currently the rage at
school. You want to intimate something by it—not that you are a
ballerina, but, say, that you can be athletic and active without sacri-
ﬁcing gracefulness. A case of communication, as usual, is harder to
imagine. But the mother of a young ballerina might show up to her
daughter’s audition wearing the ballerina-look in order to declare her
solidarity—especially if she had until then discouraged her daughter’s
ambition to be a dancer.
The important point to appreciate is that play-acting with one’s
clothes is not equivalent to wearing a costume on stage or in a ﬁlm. An
actor in a drama is taking part in a ﬁction. The audience, as they follow
the plot, draw their inferences from the actions of the character the
costumed actor is depicting. If the dramatist, director, scriptwriters,
actors, and others have done a good job, then the inferences of the
audience will include some at least of those the artists intended to give
them reason to draw. But it is not by recognizing the artists’ intentions—or
rather, not straightforwardly by recognizing the artists’ intentions—that
the audience draws its inferences about the action depicted. The artists are
not communicating with the audience. (Just what they are doing will be
the topic of the next two chapters.)
Faced in real life with the ballerina-look, however, or the pirate-look,
the gangsta-look, the cowboy look, or whatever it might be, the viewer
does not draw his inferences from the character depicted, the role being
played, but from the originator of the role, the person in the position
analogous to actor and author—the actual person wearing the clothes.
The viewer does not treat the spectacle as an audience would when

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

dealing with a ﬁction.46 He only does so in those very special real-life
contexts when people temporarily turn themselves into ham actors:
fancy dress parties, or Hallowe’en. In those cases the viewer will be a
sport and try to guess (if it is not already obvious) who the players are
supposed to be. Or he will expect some behaviour in character. If you
have come to the fancy-dress party done up as a pirate, some swash-
buckling swordplay and rambunctious gnashing of teeth will (alas) be in
order. Not so if you have come to an ordinary party wearing the pirate-
look. In that case, viewers will be content to consider what, if anything,
you are intimating by it; or they may just see it as fashionable. Either way,
the inferences are about the action of wearing that particular look, rather
than about the imagined action of the character suggested by the look.
When we play-act with our clothes, or dress to indulge a fantasy, we
do not become images in a ﬁgurative painting, nor do we become
characters in a dramatic ﬁction; at most, our look becomes painterly or
dramatic. That is, our look evokes the possibility of being deployed in a
painting, a drama, a movie. And this is only natural, since quite often the
look will itself derive from or be inﬂuenced by the visual and dramatic
arts. (But our look can be painterly or dramatic whether or not it is
directly derived from some actual artistic work.)47
Japanese youth culture, however, originated a practice which interest-
ingly straddles the distinction between the action of wearing a look and
the imagined action of the character suggested by the look: the practice of
‘cosplay’. The word is a portmanteau term for ‘costume play’, and refers
to the practice of dressing up as a favourite character, typically a ﬁctional
character taken from manga, anime, or computer games. Cosplayers
gather for photo and video shoots and compete at formal events, where
they strike poses suited to their chosen character. Their activities go well
beyond those of the girls who promenade together in the Harajuku
46 The contrast I draw between how we engage with the ballerina-look and how we
would engage, say, with a ﬁction such as Moira Shearer’s performance in The Red Shoes has
been inﬂuenced by the account of jokes and storytelling in Bach and Harnish, pp. 97–8. As
they put it, ‘the story or joke may itself require the audience to make certain inferences, but
these reﬂect the intentions of the originator of the lines. In general, it is irrelevant whether
the originator happens to be the speaker.’ We will return to their account of storytelling in
chapter three (p. 74).
47 That the look of clothes tends to be inﬂuenced by painting and ﬁlm and is sometimes
directly derived from them is a constant theme of Anne Hollander’s Seeing Through
Clothes.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


neighbourhood displaying a look—be it the Lolita look, or the Kogal, or
Princess, or French Maid.
But how far beyond? The inferences generated by the Harajuku prom-
enaders (even though their activity too is sometimes called cosplay) are
inferences about the action of wearing that particular look, not inferences
about the imagined action of the character suggested by the look. A full-
out cosplayer, however, attempts to be a ﬁctional character come to life.
In this respect cosplay is the very opposite of what might otherwise seem
a comparable practice, the making of tableaux vivants. A popular form of
entertainment in the nineteenth century, the tableau vivant (‘living
picture’) is a composition of motionless, silent human participants who
are costumed, posed, and stage-lit in such a way that, when the result is
brieﬂy revealed to an audience, the composition looks, from a distance,
like a painting. The tableau may evoke a famous work of visual art or a
moment from literature, mythology, or sheer fancy. But whatever it
evokes, its goal is to make living people appear two-dimensional. More
exactly, its goal is to replace the natural three-dimensionality of living
people with the kind projected by a ﬂat painted surface. But this is the
reverse of what the cosplayer does. Cosplay takes a look from the visual
arts and makes it ﬂesh. Natural, three-dimensional materiality is its goal.
More important, though, than the difference between cosplay and the
tableau vivant is the difference between what the cosplayer does and
what an actor in a movie does. Cosplayers use only their appearance to
evoke the imagined action of the character they play. They strike poses,
but those poses do not make up a story. At some competitions, admit-
tedly, cosplayers may perform brief skits or mimes in character, while in
certain videos the poses morph into action sequences—typically, rather
minimal ones. None of this amounts to a story, but it does resemble the
behaviour of our swashbuckling pirate at the fancy dress ball, which
I compared to the performance of a ham actor. Some cosplayers, then, do
at times cross the line and turn themselves into actors. But the essence of
the practice seems rather to reside in costuming oneself for the perfect
character-pose.
Let us consider the inferences generated in an audience by that core
practice. On the one hand, because there is no story for us to follow, they
are, in their way, inferences about the action of wearing that particular look,
as with the Harajuku promenaders. We recognize which ﬁctional character
the player is evoking and judge the player’s skill in reproducing and

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

realizing the look of that character. Despite the vividness of the reproduc-
tion, we continue to draw our inferences from the actions of the originator
of the role, the player, rather than from the role being played. The player
does not disappear into the imagined action of a story as an actor would.
On the other hand, there is an aesthetic purity to those inferences that
is absent from the Harajuku promenade. The Harajuku girls are sending
a message about themselves; they are intimating group afﬁliation and
something about their character and tastes. Cosplayers, however, do not
seem bent on intimating something about themselves, or, for that matter,
about anything else. Cosplayers are dressing for beauty, above all. They
are out to capture the sheer beauty of a very particular look—the look of
a known ﬁctional character. Of course, which character they choose to
reproduce implies something about their enthusiasms and helps them
meet fellow enthusiasts. But to say that this is the point of their efforts
would be like saying Monet’s paintings of water-lilies were done to
express his enthusiasm for gardening and to secure himself an introduc-
tion to the local horticultural society. No: instead, cosplayers are aiming
to perfect the pure art of dress-up. Their art is pure in the sense that it
is free from the need to send messages, to make meaning. Its beauty
is delightfully meaningless.48 (The costumes themselves, however, are
sometimes quite raunchy, and it is little surprise to ﬁnd cosplay showing
up also in the productions of the porn industry. Pornography and
costumes have a long afﬁliation. But in those manifestations cosplay
has lost not just its moral purity but its aesthetic purity as well.)
Certainly, many people in their daily lives treat dressing themselves as
an art—as an activity guided by an eye for beauty.49 One does not have to
be a cosplayer to have this ambition. I have left beauty out of account so
far in this chapter, since the task in this chapter has been to assign the
various ways in which we wear our clothes to appropriate positions on
the communicative scale. To dress with an eye for beauty, however, to
dress with the aim of combining sartorial elements in a way that is
satisfying to the senses, ﬂattering to the form, and constitutes an exercise
of intelligence, is not something people do in order to send a message.
48 I have written at some length about the comparable meaninglessness of a different art,
gardening, in my article ‘The meaninglessness of gardens’.
49 Postrel, pp. 74–87, is eloquent on the importance of beauty and pleasure as factors
that go to determine how we dress.
DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT


They will surely want to satisfy the viewer as well as themselves, and they
may also want the beauty of their outﬁt to impress or even to astound.
But such effects belong to the category of using your clothes to get
another to feel a certain way, which we have seen to be distinct from
using our clothes to get something across to another. They may also be
dressing as they do in order to give a sample of themselves as people who
have an eye for beauty. Then, indeed, they are sending a message; but
they would no longer be dressing with an eye for beauty, at least not
primarily. Dressing with an eye for beauty is nevertheless something that
many people take pleasure in doing.
Because, however, an actual life, the life of the clothed person, is
crucially involved in the art, dressing as an art can almost never be
aesthetically pure. To dress oneself is never just to combine colours,
patterns, textures, sheens, and potential movements of fabric; it is always
also to choose a jacket where one might have chosen a cardigan, decol-
letage where one might have chosen a turtleneck. It is to choose garments
that import inescapable associations with activities, situations, and
(sometimes) characters in society, and therefore in the life of the person
they are to clothe. It is to choose a look; and the look will trigger
inferences about the actual person wearing the clothes. It cannot simply
be to choose beauty—not unless you take extraordinary measures.
Cosplayers take those measures.
For most of us, however, dressing is a hybrid activity (as, in its
commercial way, is the designing of clothes). When dressing is not
simply equipping ourselves for the task or toeing the social line, it
uneasily but somehow deliciously combines the pleasures and anxieties
of art with those of self-presentation, leaving neither in a pure state,
although self-presentation is surely uppermost.
There is much more to be said about the communicative scale than has
so far come to light in this book from consideration of how we dress. In
order to tap the full resources of that scale I will consider a different set of
social interactions from those we have scrutinized up to this point, and on
that basis transfer attention from the hybrid art of dressing to a different
art—one that, although not itself a hybrid between art and self-
presentation, turns out nevertheless to be related in unexpected ways to
the intimations that are at work in the dressing of men and women and in
social self-presentation more generally. I mean the art of storytelling.

DRESSED TO COMMUNICATE—OR NOT
www.ebook3000.com

3
Storytelling as Intimation
The Model Presented
1
Bear with me as I describe an imaginary case.
Nero is smitten with Blanka, who occupies the carrel next to his in the
college library. He wants to declare his feelings to her; but he is shy, and
fears rejection. So he resorts to a ruse. That night, at home, he pours out
his feelings for Blanka in the pages of a private journal. The feelings are
genuine enough, but Nero does not in fact keep a journal; he is only
making it look as if he does. He brings the journal to the library with him
the next day. As they study side by side, with only a low partition for
privacy, Nero produces the journal—an exotic addition to the usual
textbooks and laptop—and ensures that Blanka sees him hunched over
the volume, scribbling away. After some minutes of this he takes a look at
his watch, gasps, grabs the laptop and some textbooks and rushes off,
telling Blanka that he is late for class.
The journal has been left open on his carrel. Blanka cannot read it
from where she sits, and only notices that Nero has left it behind when
she gets up to stretch her legs. But she has recently begun to ﬁnd her
carrel-partner intriguing. Once noticed, then, the open journal lures
irresistibly, overcoming any scruples Blanka might have felt about read-
ing it. With mounting eagerness she takes in Nero’s declaration of love.
But to whom has he declared it? To himself, in soliloquy, as private
journals require? The warmth of Blanka’s interest will not allow this to be
so. She does not want to have stumbled upon Nero’s secret; she wants to
think he has arranged her discovery of it. She would rather be his
audience than his accidental voyeur. So she reasons: Nero meant me to
ﬁnd his journal, meant me to read it at just the page he so conveniently

left open. He expected me to notice it standing out among his usual
things, expected me to notice he was writing rather than typing; and
I did. But here’s the sweet part: he also wanted me to suppose I was
coming across the journal by myself. Rushing off late to class like that,
making sure I thought he was ﬂustered: this was a pretext. He wanted me
to be able to explain why he would have left something so private out in
public without intending to. He’d be embarrassed, probably, to think I’d
realize he engineered the whole thing. The boy’s shy; he’d rather leave the
initiative to me. OK then; I’ll take it.
Blanka is right about Nero in most respects, but there is one thing that
she is missing. Blanka thinks Nero intended to stage an accidental
discovery on her part, but that she has penetrated his ruse. The accidental
discovery would have been delightful enough; how much more delightful
to have discovered for oneself that it is no accident! To Blanka’s happy
surprise at being the object of Nero’s hopes is added the stimulus of self-
congratulation. But what Blanka fails to see is this: her entire experience,
not just her stumbling across the journal but also her detection of Nero’s
staging, is what Nero has in fact staged. A double staging, not a single
staging, is at work. The balance that Nero constructed between signs of
haste (the rushing to class) and signs of scheming (conspicuous manipu-
lation of a new journal) was calculated to produce in Blanka just the
reasoning that it did. Or at least it was calculated to do so if Blanka had
enough interest in him to welcome an overture (and therefore discount
an accident), as he hoped she would.
Had Blanka supposed herself truly to have discovered Nero’s feelings
for her by accident, she might have felt qualms about approaching him;
for any approach would have entailed admitting she had peeped in his
private belongings. She might have held back and waited for him to
approach her, as other boys would. Instead, when she approaches him
now, although she will indeed suppose him to think she thinks she
discovered his feelings by accident and therefore takes herself to have
peeped, at least she will know her approach is in fact not only welcome
but an action that Nero was taking steps to bring about. The peeping is
something she can feel conﬁdent he will forgive. On the other hand, by
not declaring himself directly, Nero has invigorated Blanka with the
sense that she rather than he is in control of events. He has read her well.
Intuitively, we would not want to say that Nero is communicating his
love to Blanka. How could behaviour so devious and indirect as his

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

amount to communication? Imagine that, short of declaring his love to
her outright, he had awkwardly thrust the journal into her hands and
rushed from the scene, calling out as he goes ‘I can’t take this any more!
Just read it!’ That, in its histrionic way, would be communication.
Perhaps then, what Nero does, if we are to describe it in the terms we
have been using so far, is to intimate his love to Blanka?
The interaction between Nero and Blanka does, to some extent, ﬁt the
pattern of intimation. Nero intends Blanka to recognize that he loves her;
but it is not by means of recognizing this intention of his that she will
recognize that he loves her. After all, Blanka thinks that Nero wanted her
to think her discovery of his journal an accident. She thinks that,
although he did in fact want her to know he loved her, he did not want
her to know that he wanted her to know he loved her. Rather, he wanted
her to believe she was discovering his feelings by herself.
But how does she know this? (I am writing this paragraph from
Blanka’s perspective.) How does she know that he wanted her to believe
she was discovering his feelings by herself? Precisely by means of recog-
nizing this intention of his—his intention that she think she has made
the discovery on her own. Which is to say, it is by means of recognizing
(that is, taking herself to have recognized) that he does not want her to
know that he wants her to know that he loves her, that she recognizes
that he does want her to know, does intend her to recognize, that he loves
her. Otherwise, if she thought her discovery really was an accident, she
would not know one way or the other whether he does or does not want
her to know that he loves her. All she would have discovered is that he
loves her.
But Nero, as we know, has staged this entire process. What Blanka
takes herself to recognize, the thought she entertains, is a thought he took
steps to ensure she would entertain. He wanted her to think that he did
not want her to think that he wanted her to think he was in love with her.
He wanted Blanka to think he wanted her to think she had made the
discovery by herself. He wanted her to believe she had penetrated his
ruse. To this end, he took steps to ensure that she would penetrate its ﬁrst
layer of staging and recognize that he had not in fact left his journal
behind by accident. She thereby comes to believe what happens to be
true, that he did indeed want her to know he was in love with her.
Blanka recognizes Nero’s intention that she recognize he is in love
with her. Why is this not communication? Because it is not by means of
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


her recognizing this intention of his that Nero intends she recognize he
loves her; nor is this the means by which Blanka does in fact recognize
that he loves her. Rather, it is by the more complicated process of Nero’s
double staging that the recognition comes about, just as Nero intended
it would. It is not the case that Nero intends Blanka to recognize he
loves her by means of her recognizing that very intention—which would
amount to communication. Rather, he intends her to recognize that he
loves her by means of believing that he has staged an accident, that is, by
means of thinking he intended her not to think he intended her to
recognize he loves her.
Although Nero does not communicate his love to Blanka, he does not
simply intimate it either. He does intimate his love to her, but not simply.
His is an intimation of a convoluted sort, in which the overt and the
covert are peculiarly intertwined.
Nero intends Blanka to recognize his love for her. He further intends
this intention of his to be manifest to her. He makes it overt when he
allows himself to be seen staging her discovery of his journal. This
ensures that Blanka thinks, not just that he is in love with her, but that
he intended to get her to see he was in love with her. But here is the twist.
The means by which Nero makes his intention overt is itself covert. It is a
trick. Nero is not really staging Blanka’s discovery of his journal. Or
perhaps we should say he is not simply staging Blanka’s discovery of his
journal. What he is doing is to make it look as if he were simply staging
Blanka’s discovery of his journal. His intention to get Blanka to think
that he is staging this discovery remains hidden from her, as he intended
it should. It is a covert intention—one that is intended not to be
recognized.
2
The transaction between Blanka and Nero is complex and the demands it
makes on its agents are subtle. That is why my analysis has been long. It
may therefore seem that such transactions could hardly be very common
in social life. Yet this is not the case. Any of the countless social situations
in which one of the participants does not want to risk outright refusal or
is seeking neither to give nor to have reason to take offence could readily
give rise to a transaction along these lines. Let the example of Nero and
Blanka seem contrived, let their situation seem singular, even a little

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

bizarre: so seeming, it demanded detailed analysis. But the payoff is this:
the complexity of social transactions that share its structure but are less
extravagant will not escape notice, as they otherwise might.
For example, consider a wife who wants her husband to know she is in a
mood for lovemaking tonight, but who would rather not make her wish so
manifest to him that it amounts to a request, since a request, if he happens
not to be in a similar mood, might then involve them both in a rigmarole
of making and accepting excuses, reassuring one another that everything
is ﬁne, and so on. What she could do instead is to break a habit of
cleansing her face for bed while fully clothed. Tonight she is in a state of
relative undress, and wearing one of her more romantic nightgowns, as
she stands at the bathroom mirror next to her husband. Or perhaps she
chooses to appear in the same state of undress when she goes to the door
of her husband’s study to ask whether he is coming to bed. Or, if he is
already under the covers, her movements may be more languorous than
usual as she gets into her nightwear before joining him. Any action that he
can suspect was engineered for his beneﬁt, but whose engineering is not
blatant, will serve the purpose. He can then take it that she wanted him to
notice her allure tonight while not noticing her desire that he notice it.
This wife stands to her husband in the same relation as Nero to Blanka
and, like Nero, avoids the potential awkwardness of direct refusal by
leaving her partner free to ignore the intimation she makes.
For an example of a ﬂirtatious action designed to avoid causing rather
than being caused embarrassment or offence, consider this situation in a
kendo class. A woman taking the class asks the instructor if it would be
all right for her to text him outside of class-hours. Let’s imagine that the
student is quite a bit older than the instructor, which makes it easier for
him to assume that her intention is only to follow-up on issues related to
the class—ﬁner points of technique, a mutual interest in Japanese cul-
ture, and so on. Only after permitting their contact to escalate to a
meeting over coffee does the instructor ﬁnally twig to the fact that his
student’s interest in him is romantic. Unfortunately for her, it is also
unwelcome. So what does the instructor do? He asks his girlfriend to
meet him at the kendo school toward the close of the class. As it happens,
this is not something he has done before. He does not introduce his
girlfriend to the class; he simply engages with her in front of them in
ways that only a couple would. Suppose she touches his arm and they
leave the class together holding hands.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


Perhaps the student will feel some chagrin at having to behold the
girlfriend in the ﬂesh rather than being told about her by the instructor;
nevertheless, she may be thankful to have been given the message while
being spared the embarrassment of a direct rebuff. She may be thankful
too for having felt no pressure to confess her romantic interest—a
pressure that outright communication from the instructor would have
imposed.
The relevant information would come across, of course, even if the
student thought the girlfriend’s presence coincidental. But there is more
at stake in this situation than just conveying information. Instead of
assuming a mere coincidence, the student assumes something more
complex: she thinks, rightly, that the instructor has staged the arrival
of his girlfriend for the student’s beneﬁt; she also thinks, this time
wrongly, that he did not want the student to see that this is what he
had done. And it is only on this more complex assumption that the
relevant information is conveyed in a way that leaves the student feeling
in control of the situation, the instructor feeling generous, and both
feeling tactful. To assume a mere coincidence would leave the student
with a sense of having been overlooked.
Alternatively, imagine if the intimation were construed by both stu-
dent and instructor as overt—rather than the mix of overt and covert
that it is in the example. The student assumes the instructor knew she
would take his girlfriend’s presence as engineered for the student’s
beneﬁt rather than a coincidence, and that he further knew she would
assume he knew this. Then instructor and student stand to each other as
the barista to the customer in chapter one. While the student has still
been spared a direct rebuff (amounting to outright communication),
she may feel more uncomfortable and exposed in this scenario, and the
instructor may feel he has acted coldly. That would presumably be why,
in any actual playing out of the girlfriend’s appearance at the class, where
the intentions and construals of the agents can no longer simply be
stipulated, the understandings that instructor and student have of each
other—whether correct or not—are likely to gravitate toward the inter-
pretation that casts everyone in the most ﬂattering light.
Romantic situations hold rich veins from which to mine embarrass-
ment and offence; but transactions of the type represented by the case of
Nero and Blanka are by no means conﬁned to the romantic. Consider
something as simple as the quick glance at one’s watch when in company.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

You might glance at your watch purely to keep track of the time for
yourself. You might also do it because you are anxious about the time.
But you need not be doing it in order to have me, your conversation
partner, notice you doing it. That would be why the gesture has become a
frequent recourse by which to end a conversation politely. It is open to
me to assume that the gesture was in fact performed to be noticed but at
the same time look self-directed. I may then be molliﬁed by the thought
that you are at pains to ﬁnd a way to let me know about your desire to
bring the conversation to a close without compelling me to acknowledge
that desire.
Here is another case involving politeness. You are the host of a dinner
party.1 The party is well advanced and the wine has been circulating
freely. When you offer to top up a guest’s glass, she responds ‘Goodness
me, how generous you are with your wine! But perhaps I’d better not; I’m
worried I’m becoming a bit drunk.’ This remark is coming from a guest
who does not seem in the least drunk and in fact has not been drinking
much all evening, which is why you offered to top her up in the ﬁrst
place. You, on the other hand, have been drinking liberally, perhaps
more liberally than a wise host would. Putting two and two together, you
recognize that the guest has found a tactful way to show you her concern
that so much wine is going round that you (and perhaps others) might be
getting a bit drunk. On the one hand, her remark has the look of self-
direction (concern about drinking too much at a party is a conventional
worry for guests to have about themselves); at the same time, it is clear
enough that this guest’s fear for herself is insincere, and therefore most
likely a pretence for your beneﬁt. You suppose she has sneaked her actual
worry about how much wine was circulating at table into an expression
of fear for herself; and you are right. The only part you do not see is that
1 This example is the ﬁrst in the book of a verbal exchange that falls short of full
communication. There will be others. In delineating the communicative scale, I intend to
move easily between verbal and nonverbal behaviours. This is in the spirit of the seminal
work of Goffman and of Grice, particularly Grice’s original article, ‘Meaning’, and the
subsequent work that follows its model, such as the ‘relevance theory’ of Sperber and
Wilson. Brown and Levinson, too, in their pioneering Gricean study of politeness, are
careful to include ‘the broader communicative spectrum including paralinguistic and
kinesic detail’ among the social realizations of politeness that they have in mind, even if,
for the sake of technical richness and accuracy, the focus of their study falls on linguistic
realizations (p. 92).
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


you are not in fact uncovering her manipulation when you see this. She
intended you to suppose it all.
Sometimes it is not embarrassment or offence that is being avoided
by such transactions but only the risk of being called to account for an
action that one actually hopes will prove disruptive and be registered as
a protest; sometimes the self-protective aspect of such transactions is
paramount. Take, for example, the ‘blue ﬂu’. This is what police or
ﬁreﬁghters come down with when they arrange among themselves to
call in sick in much larger numbers than would be normal, as a way of
protesting perceived mistreatment by management, or adverse public
opinion. An equivalent action is the sudden, ‘mysterious’ go-slow.
Trafﬁc citations have been known to decrease by a large percentage
when the police are feeling aggrieved. These actions substitute for the
ofﬁcial strike action that police are legally prevented from taking.
A strike, if it were permitted, would amount to full-strength commu-
nication of their protest. What the police do instead is to provide
evidence that they are collectively withholding their labour. The evi-
dence is the sudden statistical abnormality of behaviour resulting in a
work-reduction. They do this assuming that it will draw the attention of
management, who will see it not just as an act of collective disgruntle-
ment, a simple venting of feelings on the part of the police, but rather as
an act aimed at management. Management will see things this way,
their subordinates can assume, because the management of a workforce
that is not permitted to strike is especially primed to detect behaviour
that is tantamount to a strike. For their part, and for the very same
reason, management is likely to assume that although police wanted
their act of collective disgruntlement to be noticed by management,
police did not want management to notice that they wanted manage-
ment to notice this. Management take police to be getting their dis-
gruntlement surreptitiously noticed. And that is just what the police
want management to think, since it affords them greater protection
from disciplinary action.
(Admittedly, this analysis applies better to a period when such tactics
of protest are relatively new and unfamiliar than after they have become
a familiar ritual. Once the behaviour has been ritualized, everyone knows
what is going on, and the police no longer have the covert upper hand. It
would be as with the alternative version of the intimation between the
kendo instructor and his student—the version in which both instructor

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

and student construe the intimation as overt. The police action in that
case has less delicacy and more of a ‘we dare you’ quality.)
Self-protective intimations of the Nero–Blanka type are common
enough; here is another example (and it will be the last in this sequence).
You are accompanying your aged mother to the bank. As you are about
to enter the bank’s revolving door, someone comes rapidly from behind
and pushes in ahead of you, sending the door into a spin that forces you
to pull back. ‘Watch out, Ma, this guy’s in a god-awful hurry’, you turn to
your mother and say. But you say it in such a way that the man is sure
to hear. This, in effect, is a Nero–Blanka intimation between you and
him, which uses your mother as a convenient prop. By addressing
the remark to your mother, you attempt a convincing show of having
said something to a third party that the man, still being close, will just
happen to overhear. You intend him to recognize that it is only a show, of
course—otherwise your dig at him would fail. But as with the case of the
blue ﬂu, you want him to think you are getting your disapproval of his
haste surreptitiously noticed. If he calls you on it (‘Would you stop with
the sarcastic remarks? Do you want a punch on the nose?’), you at least
have the protection of being able to claim that you were only talking to
your mother.2
Let these examples sufﬁce to indicate the range and prevalence in
ordinary social life of transactions along the lines of that between Nero
and Blanka. In what follows, however, I wish to focus on one particular
domain of social life for which the transaction between Nero and Blanka
can serve as a template. It is a familiar and well established social activity,
but one to which the Nero–Blanka model may not seem to apply, at least
at ﬁrst blush: the activity of storytelling. We all tell stories (often in the
form of jokes) when gathered socially; but under the term ‘storytellers’
I mean also to include—and in this and the next chapter am primarily
interested in—playwrights, narrative poets, novelists, the makers of ﬁlm,
2 In Ferrari, ‘Socratic irony as pretence’, I use a different version of the sequence at the
revolving door. In that version, you are unaccompanied, and address your comment about
the other person’s haste directly to that person, as if you were excusing yourself for having
gotten in his way. I treat this as a case of solitary irony—a pretence not intended to be
penetrated by its target but savoured only by the ironist—and I contrast it with openly
ironic pseudo-apologies you might have made instead, which would amount to communi-
cations with the target. The version being considered now contrasts with both cases. You do
address your irony at its target; but you do not address the target openly.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


television dramas, opera, classical ballet, comics, and any other formal
storytelling arts that may come to mind. The communicative relation
between such storytellers and their audience is that in which Nero stands
to Blanka. It has the same special kind of indirectness and occupies
the same position on the communicative scale. Or so I hope we will
come to see.
3
In chapter two I distinguished play-acting with one’s clothes from wear-
ing a costume on stage or in a ﬁlm. An actor in a drama is taking part in
the presentation of a story. The audience, as they follow the plot, draw
their inferences not from the actions of the costumed actor, at least not
directly, but from the actions of the character the costumed actor is
depicting. They get swept up by the story; they become engaged by its
characters and care about what happens to them. But when we encounter
in real life a ‘look’ that plays at a particular role—the ballerina-look, the
ghoul-look, the gangsta-look, and so on—we do not draw our inferences
from the character depicted, the role being played, but from the origin-
ator of the role: the actual person wearing the clothes. Our inferences are
about the action of wearing that particular look, rather than about the
imagined action of the character suggested by the look.
As I acknowledged at the time, this distinction shows the inﬂuence of
Kent Bach and Robert Harnish’s account of storytelling as an act in
which the communicative presumption is suspended.3 When a speaker
either tells a story or takes part in the presentation of one, what the
speaker is saying, as they put it, ‘cannot be taken, either literally or
ﬁguratively, directly or indirectly, as expressing any attitude’ on the
speaker’s part. ‘The story . . . may itself require the audience to make
certain inferences, but these reﬂect the intentions of the originator of
3 The acknowledgment came on p. 61 (n. 46). The relevant account of jokes and
storytelling can be found in Bach and Harnish, pp. 97–8. There they classify storytelling
among the ‘collateral acts’—conversational acts ‘performed in conjunction with or in lieu of
illocutionary acts’. These include such acts as kidding, mimicking, changing the subject,
engaging in small talk, managing embarrassment, respecting verbal taboo, using innuendo
or deliberate ambiguity. Presumably, this is the category into which the verbal, conversa-
tional cases of Nero–Blanka interaction that we have considered (the guest at the dinner
party, the encounter at the revolving door) would also fall—if indeed they ﬁt anywhere in
Bach and Harnish’s theoretical schema.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

the lines. In general, it is irrelevant whether the originator happens to be
the speaker.’
I take it that the sense in which our inferences can be said to ‘reﬂect’
the intentions of the story’s originator or author, according to Bach and
Harnish, is not that they are inferences that result from inquiring into
and recognizing the author’s intentions, but is rather this: they are
inferences that the author, in crafting the work, intended to give us
reason to make as its audience. It is not necessary for us to recognize
the author’s intention in order to make these inferences. So on this
account the author, the originator of the lines, if he is distinct from the
speaker of the lines, is not communicating with the audience any more
than the speaker is. The only communication with the audience is to the
effect that what they are about to experience is a story. This message may
be implicit in the social situation, or it may be explicitly stated. A speaker
might preface a story with the words ‘let me tell you a story . . . ’; novelists
sometimes put the words ‘A Novel’ on their title page.
Bach and Harnish seem content to point out what storytelling is not: it
is not communication. But there is more to be said about what is going
on when a story generates inferences in the audience that ‘reﬂect the
intentions’ of its author. It is here that a space opens in which the author
can play Nero to the audience’s Blanka.
Looking back on the transaction between Nero and Blanka, together
with the other more commonplace examples that I proposed as equiva-
lent in structure, it is apparent that in every case the means by which the
person in the Nero-position gets across to the person in the Blanka-
position what he or she wants to get across is to produce evidence from
which the Blanka-equivalents can directly infer or otherwise have
induced in them the thought that the Nero-equivalents want them to
entertain. From the diary that Nero leaves behind, anyone who came
upon it could believe they were learning of his feelings; the langourous
spouse might look to an observer to have lovemaking on her mind; the
person who came to meet the kendo instructor tonight is surely his
girlfriend; glancing at one’s watch is the typical behaviour of someone
who is concerned about the hour; the dinner guest’s response would turn
any listener’s thoughts to the large amount of wine that is circulating; the
drop in police activity is too sudden not to be the product of disgruntle-
ment; no one overhearing your remark to your mother would suppose
you were condoning the other man’s cutting-in.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


But while robust enough to support a spontaneous inference, the
evidence is at the same time produced in a manner or in circumstances
suggesting that it has been staged for the beneﬁt of an audience. This is
how the transaction achieves its blend of overt and covert; this is how the
Nero-equivalent keeps the Blanka-equivalent at a distance that protects
and liberates both parties while at the same time reaching out to secure
contact between them. The Nero-equivalent makes no direct overture
but lays the evidence out for the Blanka-equivalent to take up at will and
draw appropriate inferences. The Nero-equivalent strives, however, to
be detected doing so, even while taking steps to ensure that it is only the
laying out of evidence and not the striving that is detected. So a double
staging is taking place.
That the evidence is staged at all, let alone doubly staged, means that
the Nero-equivalent is engaged in a strategic pretence. The evidence
seems simply to be there, but this appearance is deceptive: it has in fact
been deliberately arranged with reference to its intended audience. The
audience’s discovery of the arrangement puts a further spin on the
deception: the discovery seems to be spontaneous but has in fact been
engineered.
But stories, you might think, are not deceptive pretences at all; they
bear their inventedness on their face; they are obvious pretences. And
you would be right. Any story—any story that is also a ﬁction, at any
rate—is a pretence from the get-go, and one that its audience knows to be
a pretence.4 In a play or a ﬁlm, the actors, as we know, are pretending to
be certain types of people in a variety of situations, through which they
move as the author, writer, director, etc. has planned. In novels and the
like, if I may render their pretence derivative in this way, the author
operates as if he were describing and at times mimicking for us the action
of a play or a ﬁlm that he has seen and we have not.5 So no author can
expect his audience to think he intended them to ﬁnd the pretence
convincing in the sense that Nero expects Blanka to think he intended
her to ﬁnd his pretence convincing—since Nero expects Blanka to think
he intended her not to ﬁnd it a pretence at all.
4 I will have something to say later in this chapter about the grip that ‘true tales’ can also
have on us—see pp. 104–5.
5 There will be more to say about this derivation in chapter four—see pp. 146–7.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

To look here for the analogue to Nero’s deception, however, is to be
looking in the wrong place. This is not the factor in the production of a
story that corresponds to the kind of intimation in which Nero engages.
The openness of the pretence involved in any story is, rather, the
openness of full-strength communication. The obviousness of the pre-
tence makes clear to us at the outset the author’s intention that we
recognize his intention to tell or show us a story. As we have seen, it is
a communication that may in fact be put into words—as when old
movies, especially foreign movies, include in their opening credits a
phrase such as ‘un ﬁlm de . . . ’, followed by the name of the auteur.
But this is typically the last communication we receive from the author,
at least until the story comes to a close. Once we are launched into the
story and caught up in its action, we draw our inferences from that
action—inferences that may or may not be those the author intended to
give us reason to make—rather than by recognizing the author’s inten-
tions directly.
Now, it is just here, in the process by which he captivates his audience,
that the author employs a strategic, deceptive pretence of the same
structure as the one Nero employs with Blanka.
The members of the audience know, of course, that what is being
presented to them or described for them is a pretence—an invention.
This knowledge, however, does not prevent them from being captivated
by the story, swept up by its action so as to care, often mightily, for the
characters and their fate. In short, this knowledge does not prevent them
from ﬁnding the pretence, as we like to say, ‘dramatically’ convincing.
Blanka takes herself to have uncovered Nero’s pretence but assumes
also that he intended her to be convinced by it, taken in by it. She believes
she has caught him in the act of laying out evidence from which she can
directly infer the thoughts that he wants her to entertain. How is this
equivalent to the audience’s position in relation to an author? Well,
dramatic conviction in an audience does not (or at least should not)
cause the audience to lose its sense of the author’s presence. The obvi-
ousness of the storyteller’s pretence is of assistance here. The audience
remains aware throughout that the story is an invention of the author’s,
although that awareness recedes into the background as dramatic con-
viction is achieved. But its effect continues to be felt as the audience
follows the traces of the author’s hand. That is to say, stories have plots,
and plots require their audience to track them, if the audience is not to
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


become lost. We are constantly assessing what motivates the characters
and where those motives are likely to take them next; we gauge the
hidden relevance of apparently casual, accidental, or otherwise unrelated
information; we wonder how the hero will get out of his scrape this time;
we sense the approach of a climactic moment. Yet none of this activity, if
the story is well told, will sap our dramatic conviction.
It is this combination of dramatic conviction and plot-tracking that
puts the audience in a position equivalent to Blanka’s. As Blanka takes it
that Nero wanted her to be convinced that his actions were not directed
at her, and congratulates herself for seeing that, and how, they actually
are directed at her, so the audience members take it that the author
wanted them to ﬁnd the story dramatically convincing—which is to say,
to ﬁnd the actions presented or described compelling in their own terms,
rather than as a device to elicit thoughts and reactions in them—while at
the same time they happily follow the twists and turns of what they know
to be a plot constructed with their thoughts and reactions in mind.
Nero’s actions have to be of a kind that could, with some plausibility,
lead Blanka spontaneously to infer the thoughts that he wants her to
entertain; otherwise, she would not believe he intended his pretence to
escape notice. In other words, even though Blanka is not convinced by
Nero’s pretence, she does still have to ﬁnd it ‘convincing’—convincing-
looking. By virtue of their ability to become engaged by a story, an
audience is put in an equivalent situation. The author arranges evidence
by which to induce in the audience the thoughts that the author wishes
them to entertain. The evidence that the author arranges are the talk,
gestures, movements, and mutual engagements of the agents of the story,
their plans, their reactions to events—in short, the elements from which
the author constructs a plot. From this evidence, the audience comes
spontaneously to entertain beliefs enabling them to connect together
the actions and events presented to them. And this is just what the
author wants them to do. But they will only do so if the presentation
is dramatically convincing (just as Blanka will only respond as Nero
intends if she ﬁnds his little act convincing-looking). Only a dramatically
plausible story will be found understandable in its own terms, the stuff of
spontaneous inference. A dramatically unconvincing story will refuse to
come together in spontaneous understanding, instead giving undue
prominence to the intentions of the author, as questions and complaints
arise in the minds of the audience about the job the author is botching.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

They will see actors performing on stage instead of characters involved in
a situation they can care about; as they turn the pages, they will be
considering a writer’s struggle for effect rather than appreciating the
trajectory of the action.
Even when a presentation is found dramatically convincing, however,
the audience retains awareness that what is being presented is an inven-
tion of the author’s. This is just what happens, too, with Nero and
Blanka. For Blanka to ﬁnd Nero’s little act convincing-looking, she
must be aware that it is, after all, only an act. She would otherwise be
quite missing his point.
It is not hard to imagine, though, how Blanka might indeed have
missed Nero’s point. The evidence supplied by the Nero-equivalent
could readily enough be interpreted in its own terms without ever
being connected to its staging. Blanka might have taken herself to be
no more than a bystander or witness to Nero’s behaviour. She would
have failed to appreciate Nero’s intimation, or even that he was intim-
ating at all. She would have seen Nero apparently realize with shock that
he was late for class, and would have taken his alarm to be genuine.
Yielding to the temptation to look into his diary, she would have
assumed she was making a discovery about an actual state of affairs in
the world. The evidence might itself be deceptive, of course, whether or
not Blanka links it to its staging: Nero could be a foreign spy who only
pretends to be in love with Blanka—the daughter of a high-up ofﬁcial in
the secret service—in order to inﬁltrate the enemy network. But what she
takes it to be evidence of, should she fail to appreciate its staging and
simply be convinced by it—convinced of its truth, not dramatically
convinced—is an actual state of affairs.
Here a contrast is apparent with the particular kind of Nero–Blanka
interaction that storytelling is. It is not normally open to an audience, as
it would be to Blanka, to fail to notice the staging that is involved.
Institutional conventions generally ensure that the audience of a ﬁction
will know that it is one. Just this expectation is what gets exploited in
exceptional and notorious cases where journalists or memoirists have
systematically faked their facts, or where audiences otherwise mistake
ﬁction for reality. The result is that an audience can generally be relied
upon to appreciate that the action of the story in which they are swept up
is being staged for their beneﬁt, so that turns of events in the action are to
be treated not simply as turns of events but as deftly managed pivots in a
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


plot. Like our Blanka who successfully pierces the ﬁrst layer of Nero’s
staging, they will appreciate for themselves the evidence presented to
them, while at the same time tracing in it the hand of the arranger. But,
unlike Blanka, their success does not rely on hypothesis but on socially
secure institutions—the established storytelling arts.
The transaction between Nero and Blanka, as we know, involved not
merely a single but a double staging. Nero did not in fact intend his ruse
to escape notice, as Blanka supposes he did. He carefully calibrated his
performance to seem, on the one hand, sufﬁciently contrived that Blanka
would realize he meant her to see through it—see that his forgetting the
diary was only apparent—yet, on the other hand, convincing enough that
Blanka could assume he meant her to take it at face-value. This was the
difﬁcult balance he struck. And the result is that Blanka’s entire train of
reasoning, for which she credits only herself, was in reality deliberately
induced by Nero, working in the shadows.
And so it is with authors. Despite the obviousness of the pretence in
which they engage by presenting an invented story in the ﬁrst place,
authors too work in the shadows to bring about our self-content as their
audience. They strive to keep just the right distance from us. To this end,
they try to compose in such a way that, although we feel their presence
animating the action of the story, we never have the sense that they are
breaking into that action to tell us how it all hangs together, like Jehovah
breaking through the clouds. This is the difﬁcult balance that authors
strike. Just as Nero combined signs of contrivance with signs of spon-
taneity, authors must allow their presence to be felt without destroying
the dramatic conviction that their stories carry. For it is this conviction
that gives us our sense of independence—the feeling that we are on our
own, observing the action unfold and reacting accordingly. Only from
the standpoint of such independence can we then credit ourselves for
tracking the plot as a creation of the author’s. We as audience assume,
rightly, that the author wants us to feel that we are uncovering for
ourselves the various indicators of how the plot hangs together. The
author achieves this effect on us by making the story dramatically
convincing, which has the result that we remain absorbed in the ﬁctional
action even as we track the touches of the author’s hand.
Now, to the extent that we in the audience do indeed remain absorbed
in the action of the story, we have accepted that the author is not being
open with us. We are acting on the assumption that the author has

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

hidden the traces of his hand—this is why we are able to grow absorbed
by the action in the ﬁrst place—and that we must work to uncover them.
If the work goes well, we congratulate ourselves on our perspicacity. Yet
all the while, if the author’s work too has gone well, we will have been
doing just what the author wants—as Blanka is doing just what Nero
wants. For in addition to hiding the traces of his hand, the author has
striven to make those traces traceable. But we, provided we remain
caught up by the action, will attend only to the traces, not to their
traceability.
4
The author will ﬁnd it that much easier to strike his difﬁcult balance by
virtue of our tendency as audience to think magically when we are
absorbed in stories.6 Most of us learnt from childhood that magical
things happen frequently in stories. Even after we have left fairytales
behind, we still expect things to happen in stories when it seems they
need to, when it seems they should, with a neatness and a rightness that
could not come to pass in the world, at least not on a regular basis, unless
the world were ﬁlled with magic. (Presumably this is one of the things
that makes us love stories.)
Even though we see through the pretence, then—see through it insofar
as we feel that a turn in the story is not only a turn of events but has its
part to play in the development of the plot—we are also primed to
suppose that the author intended us to trace that development for
ourselves, on the basis of the story-elements that we ﬁnd, and without
acknowledging the author’s agency. Because we are ready to accept that
magical things happen in stories, connections that in real life would seem
too convenient, too good to be true, will not, in stories, render events
dramatically unconvincing. And just as Nero’s actions, by looking con-
vincingly real, allowed Blanka to suppose Nero intended her to discover
for herself that he had fallen for her rather than to recognize his intention
that she believe it, so the author’s story, by being dramatically convin-
cing, allows the audience to suppose the author intended them to
understand the story for themselves, through their appreciation of its
6 I am indebted here to Gregory Currie’s discussion of the topic on pp. 313–14 of his
‘Narrative representation of causes’.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


elements, rather than by recognizing his intention to give them reason to
understand it—that is, his intention to have them entertain the beliefs
that will render the story understandable.
Yet in the end it is not necessary to resort to magical thinking always
and everywhere in order to maintain dramatic conviction. A story might
make no call on our credulity, might straightforwardly depict say, cour-
age overcoming adversity, and still hold us in its grip. Indeed, it is
important to see that plot-tracking and dramatic conviction are not
such natural enemies that nothing short of magical thinking could
make them friends. So far from sapping dramatic conviction, our plot-
tracking is in fact an important factor in achieving that conviction. Let
me illustrate this with a simple example.
Say I am a child watching a story unfold on children’s TV. A stop-
animated persimmon is attempting to climb the inward sloping sides of a
fruit bowl.7 On its ﬁrst try it shimmies a little way up, then tumbles back
down. A perplexed expression comes over its previously happy face.
A second try; a bead of sweat comes into view. This time the little
persimmon makes it two-thirds of the way up before tumbling back
down. Now it looks upset. On its third attempt, a second persimmon
bounces in, all smiles, and with its ﬁnal bound lands on the slope of the
bowl, arresting the downward slide of the ﬁrst persimmon. It then gives a
helpful nudge. Together the pair get further up the slope than the ﬁrst
had managed alone; but they slip back down again in the end. Perplexed
expressions all around. A second paired ascent; persimmon number two
shows the bead of sweat this time. They get close, so close to the lip of the
bowl . . . but no, back they tumble. Now both are upset. Enter, grinning, a
mighty kabocha squash. The ground booms at its every bound. The
persimmons decide to make their third ascent, number one in the lead.
Nearing the top, they begin to ﬂag. Meanwhile, the kabocha has shufﬂed
along the ground and come to rest against the bowl. Its bulk alone
brings it to the level of the persimmons. With a quick nudge from the
kabocha the persimmons are in the bowl, peeking over its rim at the
viewer. The kabocha, too, is now looking out into the audience. There is a
7 The child is invented, but the animation is not. I happened upon it while watching a
children’s programme on a Japanese-language television channel—which is why the fruits
and vegetables that are the heroes of the tale are characteristically Japanese.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

moment of silence as the achievement sinks in. Then all three burst into
delighted chuckles.
Whether the number three has an intuitive fascination or not,
children quickly learn that, in stories, it is a powerful number. In a
way, it is the number of story as such—the number of beginning, middle,
and end. So I am not content, even as a child, to sit and watch and root
for the plucky persimmons, however cute they are and however endear-
ing the busy little sounds they make. I am also doing the math. I expect
something quite different to happen on the ﬁrst persimmon’s third try,
although I do not know what it will be. When something different does
happen, I feel vindicated. And when the sequence begins again at the new
level, I am delighted, and once again expectant. When character number
three ﬁnally appears, and turns out to be a character on a quite other
scale, I know the end is near. I can judge a climax when I see one. And
when the characters burst into chuckles, I have an achievement of my
own to share with them.
Do I also see how pretty the structure of the story is? How the end of
the ﬁrst sequence of three is the beginning of the second, and how this
foreshortens the second sequence so as to accelerate the story toward its
climax? Do I notice that the count is not 1, 1, 1 . . . 2, 2, 2 . . . 3, 3, 3, but
1 . . . 1 . . . 2 . . . 2 . . . 3? Do I remark that, while the rescuer in the ﬁrst
sequence adds to the number of characters arithmetically, the ﬁnal
rescuer adds to their number arithmetically but to their collective bulk
geometrically? Come on, I’m just a kid! But perhaps the prettiness of its
structure makes the story that much easier for me to track. I sense its
shapeliness, even if I cannot yet describe it.
How does such a case illustrate what plot-tracking can do for dramatic
conviction? Simply enough, as you might expect from a children’s tale:
by keeping count, I ramp up my excitement. I feel the approach of a
climax. Not that dramatic conviction cannot also be attained by a more
passive approach: certainly, I could sit there doing nothing more than
root for the persimmons until the end and cheer when they succeed. But
my involvement would be of a different order. The story will engage me
more if I chase its climax down than if I merely bob along in its stream.
This pattern holds true also of more sophisticated mechanisms for
tracking a plot, as for example with ‘intertextuality’, which occurs when
elements of one story seem to allude to elements of another, often
composed by someone else. That is to say, it holds true even of those
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


aspects of storytelling that would seem most literary, most likely to turn
the thoughts of an audience toward the author’s professional or historical
situation, perhaps breaking their dramatic conviction thereby. Let us
take Virgil’s Aeneid as our exhibit.
This epic story of the refugee from Troy who came to Italy after Troy
had fallen to the Greeks and who became head of the Latin League, the
confederation from which ancient Rome would eventually arise, is struc-
tured in a way that recalls the two great epic poems concerning the
Trojan War and its aftermath that were passed down by the Greeks,
Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey. The Iliad, as Christopher Logue memorably
put it, is ‘war music’; it narrates Achilles’ mighty sulk in the Greek camp
at Troy and eventual return to battle to avenge himself on Hector, the
Trojan champion who had killed his dearest friend Patroclus.8 The
Odyssey narrates the struggles of the Greek king Odysseus to get home
safe after Troy has fallen and to re-establish himself in his palace, which
has been overtaken in his twenty-year absence by suitors for his wife’s
hand. The Aeneid adopts both of these patterns, but in reverse order of
narrative chronology. First come six books of journeying and struggle, as
the Trojan prince Aeneas escapes from Troy and overcomes challenges
abroad in order to make his way to Latium, which oracles have desig-
nated as his new home. Those oracles also remind him and us that
Latium was the original home of the Trojan people, whose founding
father migrated from there. So Aeneas is engaged in a kind of home-
coming, and this is the Aeneid’s ‘Odyssean’ half.
Next comes the war music. Odysseus’ ﬁght to re-establish himself at
home and recover his wife melds with the struggle of Greek and Trojan
heroes on the Trojan battleﬁeld to yield a narrative of pitched combat as
Aeneas campaigns to win himself a new-old home and the hand of the
local king’s daughter. The campaign culminates in a duel between
Aeneas and the enemy champion, Turnus, who is also a suitor for the
daughter’s hand. The ﬁt of anger that drives Aeneas to slay Turnus at the
end of the work, ignoring his pleas for mercy, is exacerbated by a
reminder that Turnus had killed Aeneas’ dear protégé—as Achilles was
motivated to kill Hector by the wish to avenge his beloved Patroclus.
These six books, then, are generally thought of as the Aeneid’s ‘Iliadic’
8 ‘War music’ is the title of the partial rendering of the Iliad that Logue originally
published through Jonathan Cape, Ltd., in 1981.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

half, despite the strong Odyssean element that persists in them. Even the
Odyssean half of the work is not in fact without its Iliadic elements, such
as the athletic games that Aeneas organizes in memory of his father, who
died while en route to Latium. These games recall those that occur near
the close of the Iliad, organized by Achilles in memory of Patroclus.
One thing the use of Homeric models enables readers of the Aeneid to
do is to track the story’s progress and appreciate its structure. In Book 2,
when Aeneas, shipwrecked at Carthage, recounts for Queen Dido the fall
of Troy and his travails since then, we recall Odysseus, shipwrecked at
Phaeacia, recounting his voyages at the court of King Alcinous, and
recognize in Dido the crystallization for Aeneas of the many women in
the Odyssey, including the King’s daughter Nausicaa, who entice and
distract the hero from his onward journey. Even if we did not hold in our
hands, courtesy of modern print-culture, a hefty volume with many
pages left to go, we would still know that Dido cannot succeed in
detaining the hero indeﬁnitely. Again, when Aeneas arrives in Latium
in Book 7 and the poet invokes the muse for only the second time since
the outset of the work, but this time calls on her to help him compose
graver, more warlike material, we sense the transition from Odyssean to
Iliadic themes, and we rightly expect a second half to balance what in
retrospect we now think of as the ﬁrst. Or again, when Aeneas and
Turnus arrange to settle their campaign with a duel, we anticipate that
this will be the climax of the war-narrative, as Achilles’ combat one-on-
one with Hector was the climactic scene that the Iliad gave us of the
warfare at Troy.
If, ﬁnally, we look back on the work as a whole through the lens of
Odyssey and of Iliad, we appreciate that one reason why those models
must be used in reverse order of narrative chronology is that Aeneas,
unlike Odysseus and unlike Achilles, is not righting merely private
wrongs, nor achieving merely personal glory, nor making his way back
to his former home and family. We appreciate that Aeneas is an Odys-
seus who must make his way not home but to a new homeland; not to a
family but to establish his family as a dynasty. We appreciate that he is a
nationbuilder who must ﬁght like an Achilles to establish the founda-
tions, not of his own undying renown, but of that of imperial Rome. First
must come the quest, and only then the war music.
In what sense are we appreciating all of this for ourselves (that is, from
our judgment of the story’s elements)? No one seriously doubts that
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


Virgil took Homer for a model, after all. Controversy centres rather on
how Virgil used Homer, and with what implications. In what sense, then,
can it be said that Virgil intended us to recognize this for ourselves, and
not by recognizing his intention to get us thinking about the Iliadic and
Odyssean motifs?
Once again, dramatic conviction provides the answer. For Virgil’s
Roman audience, thorough knowledge of the Iliad and Odyssey would
have been a cultural given, something Virgil could have relied on them to
bring to their understanding of his poem. For us, reading Virgil now, a
thorough knowledge of the Homeric poems comes instead from special-
ized study, and we must be instructed to apply that knowledge to Virgil’s
poem, on pain of missing a good deal of its riches. Despite these
differences, the fundamental structure of the intimation between poet
and public remains the same, provided both types of audience are
reading (or hearing) the poem with dramatic conviction. In that case,
the Homeric allusions serve to keep us involved in the onward sweep of
the story and to appreciate the journey when it is over. This holds true
whether Homer is a cultural staple for us or a topic of special study.
But here is the thing: not only will the Homeric allusions play this role
as a consequence of our dramatic conviction, they will contribute to our
attaining conviction in the ﬁrst place. They will do so in much the way
that, by keeping count, the child who watches the story of the kabocha
and persimmons deepens its involvement in the action. The circle here is
a virtuous one: plot-tracking and dramatic conviction are concurrent,
mutually enhancing each other. If dramatic conviction comes ﬁrst in
principle—since without it, mere plot-tracking would stand as a road-
block to conviction, whereas a degree of conviction is possible even
without plot-tracking—neither has to come ﬁrst in time.
Literary detective work can of course unearth evidence of an author’s
intentions and inﬂuences, conscious and unconscious. Where prefatory
material, personal letters, interviews and the like exist, there too we may
ﬁnd explicit authorial declarations of intention and inﬂuence. But such
things we must treat only as grist for the mill when we want to appreciate
a story as an audience appreciates a story, getting caught up in its action
or development. The knowledge that we gain through our own or others’
literary scholarship perfects our awareness of the author’s staging, an
awareness that does not detract from but instead complements dramatic
conviction. Literary scholarship can serve both as end and as instrument;

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

it can offer its own independent satisfactions and it can aid an audience’s
appreciation of the story. But it cannot do both at once.
With dramatic plausibility established as a key element in the corres-
pondence between how storytellers treat their audiences and how Nero
treats Blanka, it becomes possible to extend the domain to which the
Nero–Blanka model applies so as to include the pictorial along with the
narrative arts. That is because painting and sculpture, when they are
representational rather than abstract, have a feature akin to dramatic
plausibility in the narrative arts. We can call it pictorial conviction. It is
the property by which a painting or sculpture engages our imagination in
the ﬁgure or scene that it depicts, so that we trace its visual passages
not simply by observing formal patterns but by considering what is
represented as a whole, even as we strive for a connected understanding
of its elements.
Pictorial conviction does not require pictorial realism. What is neces-
sary for the act of picturing a unicorn is that the design in question look
like a unicorn; and this in turn means no more than that it is capable of
being seen as a unicorn. (Here I follow the account of these matters given
by the philosopher Nicholas Wolterstorff.)9 Two circles widely separated
on a blank page cannot convincingly picture a unicorn, no matter
what the artist claims on his work’s behalf. But two slightly ﬂattened
semicircles joined in a line may convincingly picture a bird—all the more
so if a number of these lines are sprinkled against the representation
of a cloud.
If this is correct, then the Nero–Blanka model would apply not only to
stories but to every kind of artistic ﬁction. In what follows, however, I will
maintain a focus on storytelling in particular rather than on ﬁction-
making in general, and take all of my examples from that realm. It seems
to me that we have a better intuitive grip on what is involved in
appreciating and interpreting stories than on what is involved in appre-
ciating and interpreting works of visual art—appreciating such works for
themselves, at least, as opposed to when they serve to illustrate a story, as
they so often, perhaps tellingly often, do. The simpler and safer course,
then, will be for me to conﬁne myself in what follows to the narrative
arts. Provisionally, however, everything I propose about the relation
9 See p. 285 of his Worlds and Works of Art.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


between storytellers and their audiences should be taken also to apply,
mutatis mutandis, to the relation between ﬁction-makers in general and
their audiences.
5
The structure of the intimation that takes place between storyteller and
audience, I have argued, is the same as that between Nero and Blanka
and their equivalents in contexts other than storytelling. There is an
important contrast to be drawn, however, between the nature of the
participants in the storytelling transaction and the participants in those
other cases. Nero and Blanka; the wife and husband; the kendo instructor
and his student; you and I in conversation, when you meaningfully
consult your watch; host and dinner guest; police and management;
you and the man at the revolving door: these and other such parties
are already known to each other and engaged in shared activity, or at
least moving in each other’s ambit. The evidence that the Nero-
equivalent lays out for the Blanka-equivalent to take up at will is evidence
that the Blanka-equivalent will take up, if he or she does, out of interest
in the shared activity—an activity larger than just the laying out and
taking up of evidence—or an interest in the existing relationship into
which the evidence is inserted. Not only will it be understood in light of
that activity or relationship; it will also be taken as intended to steer any
pre-existing connection in some direction.
Storyteller and audience, however, either have no personal connec-
tion, or, if they do, the connection is not directly relevant to how the
storyteller’s intimation is understood. (So a father telling a ghost story to
his children is less likely to succeed in keeping them spellbound if he
continually connects the plot to facts about the actual children listening
to him; instead, he may just raise a laugh.) And not only is the relation
between storyteller and audience independent of any personal connec-
tion between them—whatever cultural connection they may broadly
share—but also the audience for a story is potentially limitless. Hence
there are authors who consciously create for posterity.
The consequence is this: whereas in the non-storytelling cases the
Nero-equivalent can rely on the Blanka-equivalent to take a personal
interest in the transaction between them and to interpret it in light of that
interest, a storyteller must work to earn the interest of an audience; and it

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

is the story itself that has to do most of that work. (I say ‘most’ to allow
that the storyteller’s reputation will have its part to play in attracting at
least initial interest.) Accordingly, what serves as the content of the
storyteller’s intimation, what the storyteller seeks to get across to an
audience, at least in the ﬁrst instance, is just the story itself—that is to
say, a connected understanding of the story’s elements.
Although Nero does not have to work to earn the interest of his
audience, he does have to work to achieve something that a storyteller
can take for granted: he must work to get his performance understood
for the pretence that it is. If he is to intimate his feelings for Blanka with a
subtlety that he hopes will win her heart, his performance must be
convincing; but it must also be penetrable. And Blanka’s current rela-
tionship with Nero will not just help the intimation come across, it is in
fact a precondition of the intimation’s coming across. The only way in
which Nero’s behaviour will make sense to Blanka as an intimation is if
she can connect its content directly to her own situation. She does not
have the option of remaining a spectator to Nero’s little act, watching it
unfold as if she were watching a play on stage. That is because for Blanka
to recognize Nero’s behaviour as a staging at all is for her already to have
understood it as aimed personally at her. Blanka is not just Nero’s
audience, she is also his target. The only way in which she could be his
mere audience would be if she failed to appreciate his behaviour as any
kind of intimation, let alone one directed personally at her. She would
then be his ‘audience’ not in the manner of an audience attending to a
story but simply as a bystander to his actions. For there is nothing in the
situation to compel her to recognize that Nero is putting on a perform-
ance. It is only her personal connection to the performer, in this case the
warmth of her interest in Nero, that tips her off (all being well) to
indications of staging that another might miss.
The audience to a story has the option that Blanka lacks. Because any
story is a pretence from the get-go, announcing itself as such through
conventions of format, the audience can make sense of it as staged for
their beneﬁt, as aimed at getting them to entertain certain thoughts, even
if their involvement is no greater than that of being viewers or listeners.
Unless they somehow mistake ﬁction for fact, they cannot think of
themselves as mere bystanders to action.
Now, since we as audience do not have a personal interest connecting
us to the storyteller as one individual to another (or at least no personal
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


interest that is relevant), that sort of interest is not available to help us
understand what the story intimates. In fact, the process goes the other
way around: it is rather what the story intimates that must create our
interest. The evidence that the storyteller lays before us in order to
generate our inferences—the elements from which the author creates a
plot—has an interest of its own for us. If the story is well chosen and well
presented, we will want its actions and events to come together for us in
spontaneous understanding. We will do our part in the work of making
this happen.
When I say that the story has an interest of its own for us, I do not
mean to deny the validity of the many well-known reasons why audi-
ences seek out stories. I am not saying that stories must be treated as ends
in themselves. We may seek out stories to escape from our cares; for the
sheer pleasure of imagining alternatives to our daily existence; to have a
good cry or a good laugh; for the thrill; to be challenged by a conundrum;
for the prompting of moral reﬂection; to expand our sympathetic hori-
zons; to clarify the possibilities of experience; to conﬁrm our cultural
inheritance, or to question it; to reﬁne our judgement; to change the way
we see the world. The reader can add to this list.10 My point, however, is
that these are experiences that we learn will only follow if we accept
the promise implicit in the storyteller’s decision to present a story in
the ﬁrst place: the promise that the elements the author has arranged
for our considered attention will be worthy of it, just as the elements
that they are.
When Nero performed for Blanka, it was their existing relationship
that made him conﬁdent she would pay due attention to his perform-
ance; but between storyteller and audience it is the story that makes the
relationship. Whatever other effects storytellers may hope to have on
their audience, their ﬁrst and most fundamental task is to interest us. For
then we will play our part in bringing the elements of the story together
in uniﬁed understanding, engaged by the action. And it is just this
engaged understanding of ours, working alone, unsupplemented by
personal connection to the author, that fulﬁls the purpose of the story
as an intimation. What authors seek to get across is not something about
them and us but a connected understanding of the story’s elements. That,
10 An impressively full list is on offer in the introduction to Joshua Landy’s How To Do
Things With Fictions, pp. 4–8.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

at least, is the point of their performance when considered simply as an
intimation. But of course, as a result of that intimation a range of other
effects may follow that the author also had in mind, cognizant of the
many reasons that make audiences seek out stories.11
This conclusion is undisturbed by the fact that, although we need no
personal connection to a storyteller in order to serve as audience, any
audience will need to bring to the task some understanding of the
storyteller’s culture, whether it comes from study or from belonging to
that culture themselves. The audience will also need to share with the
storyteller a general encyclopedia of background knowledge, including
knowledge of artistic conventions, on which the storyteller can rely to
make the story comprehensible. It is also true enough of practitioners of
the formal storytelling arts that, despite not knowing each of the mem-
bers of their audience by name, they are likely at least to have an idea of
what kinds of people they hope to address, and may well have a quite
particular ‘market’ in mind. There are writers of novels intended for
young adults, after all; of romances intended for women; of children’s
stories. There are makers of action movies aimed at young men.
But none of this changes the fact that our interest is in the story, not
in the author as such, and that an author’s interest, likewise, is not in
the audience as such but in the kind of story that will interest the
intended audience. If we are interested in the author as such, then it is
for a scholarly purpose, or out of curiosity. (About the origins of this
curiosity there will be more to be said—see p. 110.) Generally speaking,
however, what we need to learn about an author’s culture, when that
culture is not our own, we learn in order to fulﬁl our interest in the
story. And as for the encyclopedia of background knowledge that we
bring to the transaction: it is of the same kind as the one Blanka brings
to her transaction with Nero, yet this by itself does nothing to lend
storytelling the personal quality common to non-storytelling transac-
tions of the Blanka–Nero type.
11 In chapter two (p. 48), I drew a distinction between the intention to use one’s clothes
to elicit inferences from an audience and the intention to use them to get an audience to feel
a certain way—a distinction which I compared to that between illocution and perlocution in
speech-act theory. The distinction drawn now between our inferences about how the
elements of the story combine and the effects that may follow when those inferences are
made is similar, though seen from the viewpoint of the audience rather than that of the
storyteller.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


What authors seek to get across to an audience, then, is a connected
understanding of the story’s elements. This is the point of their perform-
ance, considered simply as an intimation; the intimation itself is distinct
from any effects on the audience that may follow from that understand-
ing. I have already pointed out that I do not mean that all stories should
be treated as ends in themselves. But now I should add a further caveat:
I also do not mean to identify the content of the intimation with a sense
of the story’s structure. I do not mean that the point of the intimation is
simply to give the audience their bearings within the tale.
Think back to how the Aeneid appeared to us when seen through the
lens of the Iliad and Odyssey. If our connected understanding of its
elements includes the thought that Aeneas is an Odysseus who must
make his way not home but to a new homeland, not to a family but to
establish his family as a dynasty; if it includes the thought that he is a
nationbuilder who must ﬁght like an Achilles to establish the founda-
tions, not of his own undying renown, but of that of imperial Rome—if it
includes such thoughts as these, then Virgil’s intimation is doing much
more than just enabling us to track his plot. In fact, the process works the
other way around: tracking the plot is one component of the activity by
which we come to understand what Virgil is intimating—the other being
our attainment of dramatic conviction, which allows us as it were to
inhabit his intimation, while Virgil recedes behind his story. When these
two components are smoothly enmeshed, plot-tracking, as we have seen,
itself serves as an aid to the attainment of dramatic conviction. And as a
result of their meshing, the content of the intimation can come into
focus. That content will then be our focus—the focus of our interest. For
to understand how the elements of Virgil’s story hang together is not
simply to follow its progress but to appreciate what makes it special. We
will not merely learn what befalls Aeneas but why we should care what
befalls him, why what befalls him deserves our consideration.
This pattern is not restricted to stories with the depth and complexity
of the Aeneid. It is a general pattern, deriving from the kind of intimation
that storytelling is—namely, a double staging intimation, in which the
two components of the double-staging must mesh smoothly if the intim-
ation is to succeed. Take our little tale of the kabocha and the persimmons.
Previously, I dwelt only on its structural shapeliness. But there is much
more for a child to learn while watching it than how the persimmons
struggled and how they were at last enabled to succeed. The child can see

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

two small creatures who are unafraid of one much bigger than they; can
see the three creatures succeed by cooperating and by contributing their
different skills and attributes; can see the persimmons’ persistence receive
its reward, though not without a bit of good luck. It would be easy enough
for a parent to follow up by expressing these understandings to the child
as distinct, thumping morals; for the child, however, the understanding is
a single continuous experience, uniﬁed by the appearance of well-timed
beads of sweat and a thunderous shaking of the ground. The child does
not care that even small creatures can make progress if they work hard; it
just wants the persimmons’ hard work to pay off. The child does not care
that cooperation is achievable even by very disproportionate partners; it
just hopes the genial, giant kabocha will help the little persimmons out.
But this is already to care about a lot more than simply what happens to
the characters of the tale. It is to care that what happens to them happens
for the right reasons—reasons that have their own importance.
‘Right reasons’ in this connection do not have to be ethical reasons
(although in the story of the kabocha and the persimmons this is what
they happen to be). They need only be reasons that seem justiﬁed or
natural in their narrative context—not a mere caprice or plot-saving
device on the author’s part—and that either ﬁt with our larger sense of
what motivates agents or, it may be, clash with that sense, if it is by so
clashing that they seem justiﬁed in their narrative context. This way of
understanding the term makes room for any thriller, detective story, or
action movie that succeeds in making us care about its characters and
their situation, even if it is only for the duration of the tale rather than
for any thoughts it generates that might continue to live with us after the
tale is done.
The limit case here would be the kind of whodunnit that deploys its
human ciphers on the story’s chess board, where they can play out a
chess problem of the author’s devising. Agatha Christie has been criti-
cized for the lifelessness of her characters; yet even a mystery with so
standardized and uninteresting a cast of players as And Then There Were
None is an undeniably gripping read. It is just that we have nothing more
than the plot itself to absorb and challenge us. It is as if the plot were itself
a character, and the only one that we actually care about. We are anxious
for its fate. Or perhaps we should say that the only character we care
about is Agatha Christie, as we observe her at work and wonder what
she will do next. However we frame the issue, it is clear that in this case
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


plot-tracking is not merely an aid to dramatic conviction but its object. It
is only the plot that grips us.
6
In the previous section I have been intent on drawing a distinction
between storytelling and non-storytelling transactions of the Blanka–
Nero type on the basis of how personal they are. I have pursued the
distinction because it helps explain why the storyteller wants to interest
us in the story as such, as well as how stories can take on a subsequent life
of their own, detaching themselves from their authors. I readily concede,
however—indeed, I embrace the fact—that the distinction is only a
difference of degree. It is not a difference in kind.
It is easy enough to ﬁnd transitional cases, so as to construct a
spectrum. We have in fact already considered one such case: the ‘blue
ﬂu’. Here both intimators and audience are large groups in negotiation
rather than individuals. The connection between them is less personal
than that between Blanka and Nero. Still, the groups are related to each
other by more than just the intimation itself, and much more closely than
by simply sharing a culture. Furthermore, that relationship is crucial to
making sense of the intimation. This makes the case different from, say,
the father telling a bedtime story to his children. In that case storyteller
and audience just happen to be related and we could imagine the same
father telling the same story to an audience of children unrelated to him.
The crucial background to the blue-ﬂu intimation, however, is a pre-
existing relationship between employee and employer. At the micro-level
of the particular police precinct, indeed, intimators and audience will be
directly acquainted.
In the blue-ﬂu example, the personal quality of the intimation is
diluted by the number of participants, yet it remains an intimation that
only makes sense because of the pre-existing and special relationship
between the two groups. The converse extreme would be an intimation
of the Nero–Blanka type which, despite being transacted between two
individuals, depends for its uptake on no pre-existing personal connec-
tion between the two. Rather, it would be the intimation itself that creates
the connection—makes for the interest between the two. The dynamic of
their intimation would to that extent bear comparison with how, in the

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

absence of a personal connection between author and audience, it is the
story itself that must create the audience’s interest.
For an example that ﬁts this bill, take what can happen when two
people previously unknown to each other catch each other’s eye at a party
and ﬂirt together. The two are conversing, exchanging information—to
that extent, then, engaging in full-blown communication. It is when we
take a step back and consider the impression that each is trying to make
on the other by choosing to communicate as they do that their interaction
can be seen to match that of Nero and Blanka. (There is this difference,
though: that because the ﬂirting is mutual, each is acting as Nero to the
other’s Blanka.) Boy wants girl to feel that she is penetrating for herself
what she takes to be the only apparently unstudied and untargeted
remarks he chooses to make; he wants her to feel that she is able to
appreciate in them a casual quality that deliberately belies and thereby
betrays the boy’s interest in her. Girl wants the same thing in reverse.
Compliments may be traded, but they are indirect; information that may
attract the other party arrives unexpectedly, or requires coaxing; ques-
tions may be innocent, or they may not. That is the kind of thing that
makes the exchange ﬂirtatious rather than outright seductive.
A ﬂirting couple may be taking their ﬁrst steps toward establishing a
personal relationship that transcends mere ﬂirtation. But if we imagine
that our couple at the party meet, enjoy a ﬂirtatious conversation, and
part without a backward glance, then their exchange could be said to
have about it the quality of art. (That would be why, when ﬂirting, we
sometimes feel as if we are on stage, playing ourselves.) Don’t people
speak of cocktail-party conversation, after all, as something of an art? Are
there not cultures, East and West, in which, conversely, an artform may
have the quality of a conversation between performers? I am thinking of
the collaborative linked-verse (renga) that is traditional in Japan, or, in a
more competitive vein, the singing-matches portrayed by the Greek poet
Theocritus (third century BC),12 with their modern equivalent, the Italian
‘cut-and-thrust’ (botta e risposta) debating contest—all of them practices
that depend on an ability to develop or cap the previous speaker’s
contribution. Provided storytelling and non-storytelling transactions of
12 They can be found in Theocritus Idylls 5, 6, and 8.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


the Nero–Blanka kind differ only in degree when it comes to how
personal they are, none of this should surprise.
The two transitional cases we have been considering that do not
belong to established arts, however, resemble in a crucial point all our
previous examples of Nero–Blanka intimations that are not themselves
cases of storytelling: what the intimators seek to get across to the
audience, even in the ﬁrst instance, is something about the relation
between the audience and themselves. The police are complaining to
their bosses about their mutual working relationship; the ﬂirting couple,
for all that they had no personal connection before and may never have
one again, are the stars of the show they themselves are putting on.
That this should be true of all the non-storytelling examples so far
considered is no mere accident of the examples. Transactions of the
Nero–Blanka type are preeminently suited to situations where tact is
required or where full commitment to communication is hazardous.
Since situations of that sort are typically generated by something about
the relation between the Nero-ﬁgure and the Blanka-ﬁgure (whether pre-
existing or not), it is more than likely that the content of the intimation,
too, will concern that relationship. Otherwise, why bother to take so
indirect a route toward getting the message across? The indirectness is
there to cope with a sensitive situation; the sensitivity, in turn, is a quality
of the relationship between intimator and audience; ergo, what is intim-
ated will be something about that relationship. Or so we might think.
Well, not quite. If we want a counter-example, we should look for a
non-storytelling Nero–Blanka intimation that is designed to get infor-
mation across about some third party, neither Nero nor Blanka, or about
some aspect of the situation in which both parties ﬁnd themselves and
which the Nero-ﬁgure wishes to bring to the Blanka-ﬁgure’s attention.
I ﬁnd it quite difﬁcult to come up with examples of this kind; and I take
this experience to support my contention that the focus of the examples
so far considered is no accident. (I mean their focus on the relation
between the parties to the intimation.) But the job can be done, and it will
serve to cast further light on storytelling as intimation.
A group of friends at college have decided to save money by cooking
for each other. Each takes turns making dinner for the group; the others
contribute to the costs of the meal and do the washing up. One of the
group fancies himself something of a Chinese cook. The Chinese ﬂavours
come from a collection of bottles whose content he mixes with abandon.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

He likes to call the bottles his ‘chemistry set’. One evening, in response to
a question from the group about what exactly went into tonight’s meal,
he brings out the chemistry set and explains its virtues. Somewhere in the
group a woman muses out loud: ‘So that would be why the ﬂavour is so
consistent . . . ’
Under the right conditions, this comment would count as a Nero–
Blanka intimation about a third party. The intimator, knowing as she
does the pride the cook takes in his Chinese cooking, can assume he will
treat her remark as complimentary or, at worst, as a neutral comment.
She has taken the Nero-position, but the cook is not her audience; her
real audience (those in the Blanka-position) are the others in the group.
To these others, whom she supposes are as bored as she is by the same-
iness of ﬂavour in their Chinese dinners, she has offered a staging
designed to be penetrated (the pretence of a neutral or even favourable
comment), but one which is nevertheless convincing enough to seem as
if it were not so designed (she has made it sound as if she were simply
musing to herself).
Notice why this is not just a case of one person making a ‘snide’
comment in public—a comment that would be overt to those in the
know but covert to its victim, all of whom are present. (No one would
have any trouble coming up with examples of that kind of transaction.)
Our current example is more subtle, and would require a careful gauging
of tone by the critic. Her comment must seem solitary, directed primarily
at herself, not at the cook—let alone at the others in the group. Other-
wise, the others in the group will not ﬁnd the pretence convincing
enough to seem as if it were not designed to be seen through. For the
same reason, she and the others cannot have been openly complaining to
each other already about the ﬂavour-proﬁle of the Chinese food, for then
her comment would most likely be understood by the others as directly
collusive—a snide comment. But what, then, tips the others off to her
pretence? Here she must simply rely on the assumption that they are
fellow sufferers. Surely she cannot mean it, she supposes they will think.
Despite which (she supposes they will also think), she has made it sound
as if she were musing only to herself, and people can’t really be insincere
to themselves . . .
This is a case in which self-protection is uppermost. For a more
positive example, one whose content is still not something about the
relationship between the two parties, but which, rather than concerning a
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


third party, conveys information about some aspect of the situation or
experience shared by the two, we can turn back to Mary’s suggestive
inhalation of sea-air at her open window. I discussed the case in the
previous chapter, on pp. 54–5. There I analysed how it might work as an
intimation at the half-on position of the communicative scale: Mary
wants her sniff noticed, so that Peter will join her at the window and
share her experience. She would not care, however, if Peter assumed she
was acting entirely for her own beneﬁt, just so long as he comes to the
window. I also analysed how it might work as full-on communication:
Mary takes pains to get Peter to notice that she wanted her sniff noticed.
It then becomes a ‘meaningful’ sniff.
Intimations of the Nero–Blanka type, however, fall between these two
positions on the communicative scale. Although Nero is not communi-
cating with Blanka, he is not indifferent about how much Blanka notices
of his intentions, as Mary is when intimating rather than communicating
with Peter. (I will have a lot more to say about this intermediacy in the
ﬁrst three sections of the next chapter.) Let us see, then, how Mary’s
interaction with Peter might work if it were the same sort of intimation
as Nero’s intimation with Blanka.
At least two conditions are necessary. First, for the inhalation let us
substitute a solitary, ecstatic sigh, to all appearances drawn involuntarily
out of Mary by the sublimity of the view, but in fact deliberate. (This is
the equivalent of the solitary-seeming remark made by the critic of the
Chinese cook.) Then let us suppose that Mary and Peter have been
travelling for a while already and that she has been complaining to him
about his lack of romantic feeling for the beautiful scenery they have
encountered at each stop on the way. (This establishes a context for the
intimation equivalent to the critic’s assumption that the others in the
group share her boredom with the same-iness of the Chinese food.) To
clinch things, perhaps we should also suppose that Mary has not been in
the habit of reacting quite so ecstatically as she now does to the view
through the window.
With these conditions in place, let us go back and watch as Mary and
Peter enter their hotel room. Mary moves directly to the window while
Peter is busy bringing in the bags. Next, he makes a detour to the
bathroom. He does not pause over the view. From the bathroom, he
hears Mary’s ecstatic sigh. Most likely, Peter will not take this for an
involuntary exclamation but will suppose, as Blanka did with Nero, that

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

Mary is deliberately staging a situation in which he gets to overhear her.
He reasons, correctly, that rather than hectoring him about his lack of
romanticism as she has been doing, she is now just trying to set him an
example by drawing his attention to a romantic experience that they
could share, but without being too obvious about it. The only thing he
misses (as always with a Nero–Blanka intimation) is that he is not in fact
seeing through her entire strategy but that his self-congratulation at
penetrating her staging was also part of her plan, since she would think
it a feeling likely to fuel romance.
Now let us apply what we have learned from all these cases to the
particular kind of Nero–Blanka intimation that storytelling is. The key
point is that with storytelling the intimation must be like those that, in
the ﬁrst instance, concern third parties or that draw attention to a
shareable experience rather than like those that concern the relation
between intimator and audience. The reason has to do with the obvi-
ousness of the pretence that any story is—the fact that any story is a
pretence from the get-go. In a play or a ﬁlm, the actors are pretending to
be certain types of people moving through a variety of situations. The
relation between the actors and the audience for the play or ﬁlm cannot
be personal, because the individual actors have disappeared into the parts
that they are playing. So the intimation in which the actors are engaged
cannot concern the relation between intimator and audience; it cannot
be about them and us. There is no ‘them’ for it to be about. Even when an
actor breaks role to address the audience directly, as is common in staged
comedy, the practice is parasitic on the actor’s having disappeared into
the role in the ﬁrst place, and does not radically alter the situation.
Conversely, the small boy in the school pageant who calls out a greeting
to his mother in the audience when he recognizes her from the stage has
simply forgotten how the relation between actors and audience is meant
to work. He is communicating with his mother directly, rather than
playing his part in the intimation.
The mimicry of actors is fundamental to storytelling; indeed, some
established forms of storytelling (mime and ‘improv’, for example)
consist of nothing but this. What playwrights, scriptwriters, and ﬁlm
directors do is derivative—planning the moves of actors who have
disappeared into their parts—and what novelists do is more derivative
still, for it is as if they describe and at times mimic for us the action of a
play or a ﬁlm that they have seen and we have not. But if a storytelling
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


format that cannot be about the personal relation between intimator and
audience is fundamental to storytelling as such, then this impersonality
will carry through to the other forms. All storytelling is therefore com-
pelled instead, at least in the ﬁrst instance, to concern third parties or
to draw attention to some experience that intimator and audience
can share.
But what third party, what experience? All that is available to intima-
tors and audience for this purpose is what is created by the mimicry and
its derivatives. The third parties are the characters of the story; the joint
experience is of the situations through which those characters move.
This, as it were, is the view that the audience, as Peter, are called to stand
and watch through the window beside the intimator’s Mary. Or could it
be that intimators and audience already have something available for
joint attention: the culture that they share? No; this is too large a shared
possession; it serves rather as necessary background (along with special
knowledge of the conventions and genres of story) to what is actually
picked out by the intimator for joint attention: the intimator’s creation.
My analysis here has been inﬂuenced by but ultimately differs from
that of Gregory Currie, from whom I take the idea that the audience’s
experience of a story is a matter of ‘jointly attending’.13 Currie assumes
not just that the Mary-ﬁgure wants the Peter-ﬁgure to frame the visible
world in the way that she is framing it (something I too assume), but that
in such situations it is common knowledge between the parties that they
are jointly attending. He then ﬁnds this common knowledge at work in
how we match our mood to that of the narrator at the opening of
Dickens’ Little Dorrit, with its vivid description of Marseilles. This
approach, however, strikes me as putting too little distance between
authors and audiences. Rather than catching the mood from Dickens
(or from his narrator), we catch it, I want to say, from attending to his
story. In the event that Peter takes Mary’s sniff for a private meditation,
for example, as he might if Mary were attempting a half-on intimation,
he would be directed to the window without the knowledge of their joint
13 Currie also illustrates the experience by borrowing from Sperber and Wilson the case
of Mary and Peter at the window (Narratives and Narrators, pp. 94–5). He does not,
however, feel a need to adjust the original case so as to make it ﬁt the storytelling
transaction, as I have done. That he does not do so is a consequence of the difference
between our positions that is explained in this paragraph.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

attention being common to both—mutually manifest to both parties.
Audiences cannot, of course, take a published ﬁction for a private
meditation, since it is an obvious pretence; but dramatic plausibility, as
we have seen, serves to rebuild the screen between author and audience
that the obviousness of the author’s pretence might seem to have
removed. The screen is more transparent, admittedly, than that between
Mary and a Peter who takes her sniff for a private meditation. This is
clear from the version of the Mary and Peter incident that we have just
been considering, the one that matches the transaction between Nero
and Blanka. In this version, Peter sees through Mary’s ostensibly private
reaction, and his doing so is part of Mary’s plan. Even so, it would not
under these circumstances be ‘common knowledge’ to both parties that
they are jointly attending—the situation Currie applies to storytelling.
Mary is still hiding something from Peter.
In non-storytelling transactions of the Nero–Blanka type—transactions
between intimators who must work at getting their pretence recognized
for the pretence that it is and an audience who must be susceptible to their
efforts—it is standard, as we have seen, for the intimations to concern the
relation between intimator and audience, and rare for them to concern a
third party or to draw attention to something in the shared environment.
What is rare in everyday life, however, becomes not just standard but
compulsory in storytelling. Presumably this disparity with everyday life is
among the attractions of the format in the ﬁrst place. On the one hand,
storytelling has the subtlety and indirectness of Nero’s transaction with
Blanka. Like Mary, the storyteller does not lecture us; like the college
friend who is bored with the Chinese food, storytellers protect themselves
from risk. On the other hand, storytelling is not, for once, a transaction
centred on ‘them and us’, on the personal relation between intimator
and audience. And what a relief that can be! And this is not even to
mention how, by directing attention away from any personal relation
between intimator and audience, a story has the potential to enlarge
one’s horizons. I am suggesting, then, that the fact that storytelling is not
and cannot be a transaction centred on ‘them and us’ gives the practice a
good part of its point.
This is not to deny that, through the story, we may come to achieve,
after all, a kind of intimacy with the story’s creator, the author. (That is
why I have repeatedly phrased the concern of storytelling with third
parties or to draw attention to a shareable experience as a concern that
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


holds ‘in the ﬁrst instance’.) Not an intimacy with the authorial ‘persona’;
not with the ‘implied author’: with the ﬂesh-and-blood author.14 But it
would be an intimacy based solely on a commitment we come to share
with the author, our joint commitment to bringing the elements of the
story together in connected understanding. Anything else we share with
the ﬂesh-and-blood author, such as a culture, serves only as background
to that joint commitment. Depending on the quality of that commitment
on either side, we may then come to have a sense of the author as a
person—the person who created the work.
In many storytelling formats the relationship must remain one-sided,
of course. A novelist does not come to have a sense of the audience
members as persons, even collectively. (He can make assumptions about
them on the evidence of their enthusiasm for his work, but that is paltry
by comparison with the sense they can achieve of him through reading
it.) Other formats are more interactive and offer greater scope for a two-
sided relationship. We have already considered artforms that resemble a
conversation, in which the performers are their own audience and any
others are onlookers. (About what might emerge from efforts at collab-
orative storytelling on-line, I offer no predictions.) In a different way,
stand-up comedians and other sorts of live performers and improvisers
would also qualify for consideration here. But none of this alters the
fundamental limitation on the scope of any personal relationship estab-
lished through storytelling: the fact that it is conﬁned to the joint
attention of intimator and audience on the story itself.
This is true even of the more confessional kind of storytelling. There
are novels in which the protagonist seems a thinly disguised version of
the author, who wants to get something off his chest. Any novel that is
taken for nothing more than this, however, is likely be judged a failure—a
vehicle for authorial rant. It is rather the character the author can make
of himself within the story who must hold our attention. Stand-up
comedy further proves this point, since self-confession is rife in the
genre. There are many different types of stand-up, of course, some
revolving less than others around the persons the performers are. But
it seems intrinsic to the art that it is their own characters, their own
experiences that stand-up comics should come across to us as stylizing
14 I will have more to say on this point in chapter four (pp. 155–9), in connection with
Fielding’s Tom Jones.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

and exaggerating, to whatever degree. It is natural, as a result, that the art
should involve as much direct and mutual interaction between per-
former and audience as it typically does. But despite all this, comics are
playing a role—even if that role is themselves. From this position, they
are permitted to experiment with matters normally deemed unspeakable.
In combination with their seeming to speak of their own characters and
experience, this experiment makes for the confessional aspect of the art.
But as with the confessional novel, it is the performance itself, the
storytelling, that must hold our attention. Only the hecklers in the
audience are trying to interact with the comic as a person.
This limitation on the scope of any personal relation established
through storytelling is a consequence of deriving all forms of storytelling
from a kernel of mimicry, through which actors disappear into their
parts. Only the story is left for attention. A personal relation between
‘them’ as intimators and ‘us’ as audience cannot, then, be what the
intimation is about.
Certainly, not all mimicry requires this kind of self-effacement. It is
common enough for people to accompany descriptions of their activity
with an illustrative mime of that same activity. Describing an awkward
phone conversation to a colleague, I put hand to face with extended
thumb and little ﬁnger, using the standard telephone-mime. Perhaps
I quote from the conversation directly, bringing my action that much
closer to the performance of a little scene. Or perhaps your wife, wanting
to show you the lengths to which she was driven that day because of a
persistently buzzing ﬂy, gets up on a chair and re-enacts with empty
hand her mad swatting at the window blind, where she ﬁnally cornered
the beast. There is nothing impersonal about such transactions. On the
contrary, the existing personal relations between mime and audience
help give the mime its point. Your wife wanted to raise a laugh in you at
the end of a long day; I want my colleague to sympathize with me for the
discomﬁture caused by that phone call.
These are cases of mimicry as an aid to full-out communication. Cases
in which wordless mimicry carries the communication in its entirety are
equally easy to imagine: as when the standard telephone-mime in com-
bination with raised eyebrows constitutes a request to make a call on
someone else’s phone. None of them is the mimicry of the storyteller;
none of them is an interaction of the Blanka–Nero type. The more
elaborate the mime, however, the more it will come to resemble
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


storytelling. For then it may seem that the mime is being performed
more for its own sake than for purposes of information. When things
happen to us in daily life that seem good enough to feature in a story, we
often end up performing them later for an audience. ‘I could write a
book,’ we sigh. And then we turn ourselves into ersatz storytellers. There
are also people who do this kind of thing promiscuously: who accom-
pany their every description, even of the most mundane activities, with a
little mime of the action; who cannot recall a conversation, however
banal, without re-enacting in character the exchanges on both sides. Such
people risk being accused of self-dramatization. It is as with the pair who
ﬂirt together at a party and feel they are on stage, playing themselves.
That was because their interaction had an impersonal quality resembling
art. Self-dramatizers take this further: they make playing themselves a
constant practice. The boundary between personal and impersonal is
more ﬂuid, then, when it comes to the uses of mimicry in everyday life
than in the established storytelling arts.
7
The reader will have noticed that I have not offered an analysis of
ﬁctionality as such—what it is, how it is achieved. That is deliberate.
I have taken for granted the storyteller’s ability to bring about and the
audience’s ability to appreciate the ﬁctionality of our ﬁlms, our novels,
and the rest. When I have used terms like ‘obvious pretence’ and
‘inventedness’ to describe this quality, I have done so without theoretical
pretension. This has been because my concern is rather with the com-
municative relation between storyteller and audience. I am engaged in
locating this relation at the appropriate position on the communicative
scale. And since storytelling, not ﬁctionality, is my focus, this analysis can
cheerfully accommodate examples that embarrass attempts to deﬁne an
audience-response that would be a response only to ﬁction: I mean the
kind of vividly presented historical, (auto)biographical, or journalistic
narrative that aims at dramatic conviction in much the way that a
ﬁctional story would. (Truman Capote’s In Cold Blood is an excellent
and much-cited case.)15
15 Stacie Friend in her ‘Fiction as a genre’ does a good job of pressing home the cases that
embarrass attempts to deﬁne an audience-response that would be a response only to ﬁction.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

But although dramatic plausibility is not unique to ﬁction, it does
seem to ﬁnd its most comfortable home there. When memoir, history,
and journalism are presented with dramatic ﬂair, they look to be bor-
rowing from ﬁction’s wardrobe. (Much the same could be said of the self-
dramatizers from the previous section.) There is a superﬁcial reason for
this: all ﬁction, just to be ﬁction, must aim at dramatic conviction,
whereas memoir, history, and journalism can dispense with it and still
be memoir, history, and journalism. But there is a deeper reason too. It is
a reason that we can better appreciate now that we have seen how
ﬁctional storytelling has the same intimative structure as does the trans-
action between Nero and Blanka.
When transactions of the Nero–Blanka type are personal, they typic-
ally occur in contexts where the Nero-equivalent wants to get something
across to the Blanka-equivalent but at the same time avoid the risk of a
confrontation that could be embarrassing or offensive or otherwise
damaging to either party. Nero wants not to have to own up to his
message, even though he does want it recognized as a message. He wants
Blanka to take sole responsibility for the recognition. This she will do if
she takes herself to have penetrated the ruse that, had it been successful,
would have made the event seem no message-sending at all but an
accident. This, then, is the belief that Nero works to induce in her. By
its means, he gets across what he intends to get across, but is protected
from unwelcome consequences that might arise from its transmission.
As often with intimation, plausible deniability, at a pinch, would be
available to him.
The work of storytelling, too, takes advantage of the freedom and the
indemnity that a transaction of the Nero–Blanka type affords its parti-
cipants. Just as Nero’s convincing-looking pretence insulates him from
assuming overt responsibility for his intimation, so a story’s dramatic
plausibility, which makes it dramatically convincing to an audience,
insulates the storyteller from assuming overt responsibility for the audi-
ence’s understanding. By being convincing enough to seem in many
respects as if it were no pretence at all, Nero’s ruse becomes Blanka’s
to penetrate; by being convincing enough to be treated in many respects
as if it were actual, the story’s ﬁctional action becomes the audience’s to
piece together and respond to.
It is not a personal confrontation that the author is being spared, for
the author has no personal relation to the audience—at least, not beyond
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


what may be created by joint attention to the story. What authors are
spared is overt ownership of the views expressed by their characters, or
having to take a public stance on the actions and events depicted in the
story. (This is not something that the memoirists, historians, or journal-
ists expect to be spared, even when they strive for a vivid narrative.) As a
result, authors are indemniﬁed against challenges; at the very least, they
have a defence to mount against them.
In an interview of the author Bret Easton Ellis conducted by host Terry
Gross on her radio show Fresh Air shortly after the publication of Ellis’
controversial novel American Psycho (1991), Gross challenged Ellis to
take ownership of the sadistic misogyny displayed by the novel’s serial
killer protagonist. Ellis insisted in his defence that he was only using the
freedom that any writer of ﬁction has: the freedom to explore in depth
how the world seems from inside someone else’s head, however deplor-
able that point of view may be, and however different from the author’s
own. Gross’ point, if I recall it correctly—a point that she brought home
by reading from a lovingly detailed description of the torture and
mutilation of a female victim—was to the effect that Ellis’ claim to the
ﬁction-writer’s prerogative seemed a mere cover for the enjoyment he
took in entertaining such fantasies for himself. The serial-killer seemed
less his protagonist than his surrogate. It was not simply that the detail of
the description Gross read out was lurid, but that it was lurid to the point
of self-indulgence—meretricious. The passage did not seem dramatically
motivated by the story from which it emerged.16
Regardless of who was right, Gross or Ellis, the key point of their
debate for my purpose is that it was an artistic debate, not just a moral
one. Gross was attacking Ellis for an artistic failure, which she then took
as evidence of a moral failing in him. This implies that when done right,
when properly motivated within the story, any episode, no matter how
shocking or lurid, could ﬁnd its place. (An example, one might argue,
16 Since the on-line archive for the show goes back only to 1993 and I have been unable
to secure a reproduction of the interview in any other format, I am relying on memory here.
The example works either way—as the memory I take it to be or as the plausible ﬁction that
it might otherwise be. Incidentally, Gross’ criticism would not lose its potential grip on Ellis
simply because the protagonist of his novel may well be an unreliable narrator, whose
murders happen only in his head. The criticism would merely attach at a deeper level within
the nested structure of the narrative. The description remains as lurid as ever, and therefore,
possibly, as meretricious, even if it describes only the imaginings of the internal narrator.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

would be the equally horriﬁc scene in Haruki Murakami’s The Wind-Up
Bird Chronicle, the scene in which a Japanese prisoner is ﬂayed alive on
the Mongolian steppes.)
When it comes to the transaction between storyteller and audience,
however, it would be a mistake to accentuate the negative. Certainly, Nero–
Blanka transactions at the personal end of the spectrum do tend to be self-
protective on the part of the Nero-ﬁgure. Their quality is indirect; they
belong to the same genus as tact and politeness. When it comes to personal
association, a major purpose of indirectness is to avoid an unwelcome
reaction in the other party. But storytellers do not (or should not) compose
their stories with the possible indignation of an interviewer primarily in
mind. Most of the time, storytellers are indemnifying not themselves, but
their art. Rather than being experienced as defensive, storytelling is experi-
enced as a liberation, both for storyteller and audience.
Now, Blanka too is able to appreciate the freedom that Nero’s manner
of intimation affords her; she is allowed to take up for herself the evidence
that Nero supplies. But this positive aspect of the interaction is not its
dominant note; it is rather its grace note. Nero remains in control. And his
purpose is, as it were, to say what needs to be said, but without really
saying it. By not really saying it he gets it across anyway, but protects
himself from the potential embarrassment of having done so.
Between storyteller and audience the interaction is not personal, at least
not in the same way. This eliminates as a factor the risk of direct confron-
tation, and brings the positive aspect to the fore: the aspect of saying what
needs to be said but is difﬁcult to say or hard to get away with. Storytellers
can present contestable issues without implicating either themselves or
their audience in an espousal of any particular claim that the issue
raises—or at least they believe they can. Storytellers can be adventurous,
can take risks, reveal all. They can kick over the rock to uncover the
crawling things, broaching topics too outrageous to be discussed more
directly. They can dare to imagine other worlds. They can engage us in a
kind of collective wish-fulﬁlment, possibly of wishes that we would be
ashamed to indulge for ourselves.17 More modestly, yet still riskily, they
can resolve loose ends with a neatness rarely encountered in real life. But it
17 This last is Freud’s position, more or less, in his 1908 essay ‘Creative writers and day
dreaming’. He overplays his hand, however, by generalizing the point to apply to all creative
writing.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


is in the story that they do so, where to do so is safe. For it is not they but the
story that is showing these things—the story that comes together in the
cooperative understanding of the audience. And in safety lies opportunity.
Adventurousness of this kind is perfectly compatible with decorum.
Storytelling does not have to shock in order to show what is risky to show
(though that is certainly one way of doing the job). Their decorum does
not hinder the novels of Jane Austen from dissecting the motives and the
mores of the British gentry. Indeed, the cool, unsparing quality of that
dissection is hard to imagine without the decorum. A sentence such as
the one that opens Pride and Prejudice—‘It is a truth universally acknow-
ledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want
of a wife’—seems the more devastatingly unassailable for keeping its
satire deadpan.
Nor, on the other hand, need this account avert its face from the
banning of ﬁctional works and the persecution of storytellers that has
always gone on, sometimes more, sometimes less. The indemniﬁcation of
the storyteller is a matter of principle, not a constant of practice. The
storyteller wears no cloak of invisibility. Blanka might, after all, have
found nothing to appreciate in Nero’s tactics and chosen to call him on
them. Gross seems to have done something similar to Ellis when she
called him on his assumption of authorial indemnity. More sweepingly,
Blanka’s behaviour (on this hypothesis) would match that of the town
councils, school boards, and others in political authority who insist on
the storyteller’s direct ownership of content deemed offensive. For such
authorities, storytelling is personal.
In general, however, the interaction between storyteller and audience
is less self-protective than that between Nero and Blanka. The imper-
sonality of the relationship typically provides such protection as the
author requires. But let us again put this trait more positively: compared
to the interaction between Nero and Blanka, the interaction between
storyteller and audience is more collaborative.
If by ‘collaboration’ I meant only that each of the parties contributed
something to the ﬁnal result, then Blanka and Nero could also be said to
have collaborated. But since what is at issue here is the social effect on
each of the parties of the manner in which the contact is made, we must
not examine the transaction from the outside, in terms of its moments
and outcome, but consider instead what sense each party is left with of
the other as a result of their dealings.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

It is clear that Blanka and Nero do not see each other as collaborators.
On the contrary, each thinks he or she is one-up on the other. Socially
speaking, Nero has shown a special deviousness in a context where
greater openness would have been the norm, since his seat in the
neighbouring carrel permitted face-to-face engagement and full-strength
communication. However difﬁdent or vague that communication might
have been, Nero would thereby have been putting his fate in Blanka’s
hands more directly than he chose to do.
But this is not the sort of context in which authors and audiences
operate. The special deviousness of authors is in fact what audiences pay
to have plied upon them. Socially speaking, they are, and feel themselves
to be, collaborators with the author in their own deception.18 And the
reason this is a social possibility is that, unlike with Nero and Blanka, the
deception has its own delight. In order to experience that delight,
audiences collaborate with authors in maintaining just the right social
distance between them.
Nero’s deviousness occurs in a context where greater openness would
have been the norm: what stands out in his action is therefore the social
distance he sought, manipulatively, to maintain between himself and
Blanka. The fact that he relied on Blanka to catch the ball he had thrown
features only as a further component in his manipulation; it does not
contribute to an atmosphere of collusion. With storytellers and audiences
it is the opposite. The deviousness is the same but occurs in a social context
where it is expected. That it can still succeed is due to the fact that, between
storytellers and their audiences, collusion is the name of the game.
Author and audience are like people who meet anonymously on-line
in order to challenge each other to a game familiar to both. The fact that
in most cases the audience will know more about the individual author
than the author knows about individual members of the audience does
not affect the comparison. All that the audience really needs to know in
order to appreciate the author’s work is of the same kind as the author’s
18 Already in the ﬁfth century BC Gorgias of Leontini was claiming that theatrical
performance (speciﬁcally, tragedy) involves a deception ‘in which the deceiver is more
honest than the non-deceiver and the deceived is wiser than the non-deceived’. (Cited from
the translation of Kathleen Freeman in her Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers, Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1948, p. 138.)
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


knowledge of them. Both sides need only be conﬁdent that the other
knows what game they are in.
Biographies of the author or collections of the author’s private docu-
ments will ﬁnd an eager public, of course. Partly, the interest is prurient;
but not necessarily. What we learn by such avenues can enrich our
understanding of the author’s aims and achievement. This, however, would
be an enrichment that we gain as critics rather than as audience. And that
gain, we have seen, comes with a corresponding loss of engagement in the
story’s magic.
As for the prurience: our account of the kind of intimation in which
authors engage with their audiences can explain why it is so natural a
feeling for audiences to have. (Here I fulﬁl my promise to say more about
the origin of the curiosity we feel about authors as persons.) When an
intimation of this type occurs between parties who are known to each
other or in personal contact with each other, it is well adapted to situ-
ations where the parties are feeling each other out, while protecting
themselves from the risks of more direct engagement. (That is why ﬂirting
is a good example.) The instigator reaches out but, as it were, does not
actually touch the other. This makes the other want to reach back and try
to touch him. Between authors and audiences, however, the same kind of
device that is used in situations where known parties are feeling each
other out is put to work establishing contact between parties who run no
risk of direct engagement, since direct engagement between them is either
impossible or at least inappropriate in the context that brings them
together—telling and being told a story. (Once again, it is stand-up
comedy that tests the limits of this generalization.) Nevertheless, the
device seems to retain enough of the force it has between known parties
to make audiences feel as if direct engagement were a realistic option that
the author had chosen to avoid (though this was not in fact what the
author did). The absent author tantalizes us. (He may even seem to be
ﬂirting with us.) We reach back and try to touch him. Failing in this, as we
must and ought, we compensate by digging into his personal letters.
I had better add a codicil to this discussion of collaboration between
author and audience. Nothing in my account excludes the possibility
that, as audience, we are reading things into the author’s work that the
author did not intend, nor, indeed, that the author may want it to be this
way. Authors may look forward to having their work opened up for them
by the audience in ways they did not anticipate; this, for them, may be a

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

reason why they created the work in the ﬁrst place. (As Umberto Eco
once put it, renouncing an attempt to defend his work against an
interpretation he never intended it to bear: ‘the text is there’.)19 And
this, too, could be called a collaboration, although different from the
collaboration so far considered. It amounts, indeed, almost to joint
authorship. Almost, but not quite. The audience does not become an
alternative author on this scenario; rather, the audience allows the author
to appreciate the alternative author he might have been—might even
have preferred to be. It is as if Blanka took Nero’s diary for a romance
novel, assumed he wanted her opinion of his talents as a novelist but was
too shy to ask directly, and proceeded to offer him her considered
criticism. And it is as if Nero then juggled the alternatives in his mind,
thought better of his romantic overture, and began instead to think of
himself as a budding ﬁction-writer.
Rather than relying on the audience to show them the alternatives they
might have pursued, authors may go ahead and adopt that role for
themselves. At a screening of a number of short, experimental ﬁlms that
I once attended, the writer-director, who was also present in the audience,
stood up afterwards to take questions. He was asked how he went about
creating the ﬁlms. How much of the script did he map out in advance, and
how much got made as he went along? He answered: If I knew what I was
going to say in advance, I wouldn’t bother to make the ﬁlm.
This is an approach you hear quite a lot among storytellers. Authors
will explain to their interviewers how their story changed shape, or only
began to take shape, in the very process of composition. Perhaps they
had a ﬁrm idea how the story would end and a basic idea of how it would
19 The case I refer to was presented by Eco in his 1996 lecture at the Italian Academy for
Advanced Studies in America, ‘The author and his interpreters’, which has been revised and
published as chapter two of his Confessions of a Young Novelist. A critic had made much of
the fact that the names of four key characters in Foucault’s Pendulum begin, respectively,
with the letters A, B, C, and D. Eco confessed that he had changed the name of the
computer-character to ‘Abulaﬁa’ at the last-minute. Before that—indeed, throughout the
process of composition—the name had been different and had begun with a different letter.
Nothing to do with the series A, B, C, and D had featured in his intentions for the work (nor
did it motivate the change of name, at least not consciously). Nevertheless, the literary
theorist in Eco saw this as no reason to discount the signiﬁcance of the series A, B, C, and
D in his novel. He summed up his approach with the slogan: ‘The text is there.’ That is to
say: the text is there; let readers do their best with it. Admittedly, Eco at ﬁrst objects to the
A, B, C, D reading on the grounds that it would upset the coherence of his text; but he does
so only to throw up his hands at the futility of any attempt at self-defence.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED


build to its climax. But where to begin? That was the problem. And even
after it had left the gate, the story taxied for some time before at last
taking off. From that point onward, however, its energy was sure; and
before long, the thing was ﬂying itself. Or perhaps (to change the
metaphor) their ﬁrm idea was only how the story would begin and
everything else grew from that seed, as if naturally.
In my terms, storytellers who work in this fashion play Blanka to their
own Nero. They are their own audience. Storytellers who play Blanka to
their own Nero feel the story taking shape in ways that they could not have
anticipated; in ways that, as they arise, come with a sense of achievement—
the self-congratulation of a Blanka. The sense is of having penetrated the
plans of another creature, another person. Why so? Because the unantici-
pated ways in which the story develops seem to have their own logic or
pattern. If the story is going right, they will seem natural—but natural by
way of carrying dramatic conviction, not by way of being events in nature.
(The author is making discoveries, but not as a scientist does.) For this kind
of author, as for the audience, the feeling is that human behaviour is being
staged for him. It is staged for him in his imagination, where the scene
develops in ways he does not completely control.
At the same time, the author knows that it is he, after all, and no other,
who is making this story. The intelligence animating the story is his own.
Yet to the extent that he doesn’t so much ﬁgure out how the story
should go as, it seems to him, discover how it should go, the intelligence
animating his story feels like the intelligence of another. And this intel-
ligence, whose workings are hidden from him in his role as discoverer—
that is, as Blanka—he knows, nevertheless, to be his own. He knows
himself to be Nero as well as Blanka. Therefore, unlike the actual Blanka,
he can look at the author-as-Blanka from a higher vantage point. But he
does not know, as he works, quite what the author-as-Nero has in mind.
A thousand clichés of the authorial process testify to this benign
schizophrenia. The song, once I started writing it, just seemed to sing
itself, as if it came from outside of me; the characters took on a life
of their own, they spoke to me, I found myself responding to their
demands. The Muse who sings the author’s song for or in or to or
through him, the Muse who knows all, while we mortals know only the
report, is as old as Homer.20
20 Homer, Iliad 2.31.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL PRESENTED
www.ebook3000.com

4
Storytelling as Intimation
The Model Defended and Reﬁned
1
The reader may have been wondering for some time now whether
modelling a storyteller’s relation to the audience requires so convoluted
an intention as Nero’s in the ﬁrst place. Might not a simpler, conversa-
tional model sufﬁce? On this model, the activity of grasping an author’s
intended meaning would not differ fundamentally from that of grasping
the intended meaning of a person with whom we are in conversation.
Proponents of the model acknowledge that the ‘conversation’ between
author and audience does differ somewhat, of course: ﬁrst, in that it is
one-sided, and then in that the author’s meaning typically takes more
puzzling out than does the average conversational exchange. But it does
not differ in kind. What the author engages in with the audience would
on such an account be full-strength communication.
Gregory Currie’s way of embedding ﬁction-making within a Gricean
account of communication in The Nature of Fiction is probably the most
inﬂuential presentation of the conversational model.1 Before Currie,
Mary Louise Pratt made a pioneering attempt to apply Grice’s principles
of conversation directly to the utterances made by storytellers. Her ideas
were countered by Marilyn Cooper, who argues that to the extent that
audiences apply Grice’s maxims and principles to their understanding of
narrative, it is only to understand the utterances of ﬁctional characters
within the story, while in order to understand the story they must apply
something quite different, their knowledge of literary and cultural
1 See esp. p. 29.

conventions.2 Cooper nevertheless continues to use Grice’s recursive
analysis of meaning to capture the fundamental communicative intent
of authors vis-à-vis their audiences. On the basis of the happenings and
conversations within their stories, authors intend their audiences to
believe something, and further intend the audience to recognize that
the author intended them to do so.3 Currie, too, in The Nature of Fiction,
adapts Grice’s recursive pattern to the analysis of ﬁctive communication,
via the author’s intention that we recognize his intention that we make-
believe the text.4 From my perspective, however, any recursive analysis
misses what is crucial, which is that the communicative intent of authors
vis-à-vis the audience keeps itself from full recursivity by its mixing of
the overt with the covert.5
The objection that a conversational model would sufﬁce to account for
storytelling bears comparison with a doubt I raised in chapter two: the
doubt which prompted me to argue that intimation was not just another
word for nebulous, suggestive communication, and that the difference
between intimation and communication was a difference in kind, not in
degree. In that chapter I imagined someone insisting that when clothes
send a message they are indeed communicating the message, but usually
communicate it in an amorphous and ambiguous way, so as to leave a
thick trail of implications. And would it not be very natural to say the
same of what comes across through stories?
It would; but recall what the example of Mary’s suggestive sniff by the
seaside served to demonstrate in response to the earlier doubt. We
considered two possibilities in that second chapter: Mary could choose
either to intimate or to communicate her feelings about the seaside to
Peter by this means, and the content would in both cases be equally
imprecise. Her message-sending relationship to Peter would differ, how-
ever, and differ in kind. If she is intimating, her sniff is a way of getting
Peter to notice the grandeur of the ocean; if she is communicating, her
sniff gets him to notice that she wanted her sniff to be noticed in order to
2 Cooper, pp. 113–14, 131–end.
3 Cooper, pp. 45, 112.
4 See his p. 30.
5 Noël Carroll’s use of the conversational model, incidentally, is for a different purpose: to
explain the kind of connection that audiences should seek to make with authors through their
works and to reject the one-sided pursuit of a maximal aesthetic satisfaction, to which the
author would be irrelevant. This use of the model is compatible with my own approach,
provided the connection is properly speciﬁed—properly located on the communicative scale.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

get him to notice the grandeur of the ocean. The communication is more
insistent, has more of herself in it; the intimation, by comparison, is
hands off. Mary would not mind if Peter took her sniff for a private
meditation, provided he is directed to the window as a result. In chapter
three we complicated things by having Mary intimate her thoughts to
Peter in a manner equivalent to Nero’s intimation with Blanka. This
made for an intimation somewhat less hands-off than before, but, still,
hands-off. Mary’s relation to Peter, even on this construal, would still be
manipulative.
If the relationship between author and audience is to be understood on
the general model of that between Nero and Blanka, as I have contended
that it is, then the problem with the simpler conversational model will be
that it fails to capture the author’s standofﬁshness and the resulting
autonomy of the audience. To treat the author as a communicator, no
matter how vague, suggestive, or puzzling his communication may be, is
to make the author too insistent with his audience. It fails to square with
familiar facts about the sociology of authorship. Nothing so pointed as
Terry Gross’ grilling of Bret Easton Ellis, after all, is needed to make
authors squirm in an interview. Any line of questioning that threatens to
reduce the story to a message or attempts to connect it with the author’s
personal life will do. At this point, authors will often fall back on pieties
to the effect that their story is a property shared with its audience—a
creation that, once made public, has escaped their control. This is not to
say that even an author who believes, with Umberto Eco, that ‘the text is
there’ wouldn’t have plenty to tell us about how he wished his story to be
received and understood. It is rather that the author feels awkward about
being asked. The question is rude. If the author has succeeded, his story
should be able to do its work without his intervention.
The conversational model fails to explain why any author would be
inclined to say ‘the text is there’, relinquishing control of how his work is
interpreted as it circulates rather than leaping in to correct misappre-
hensions. Authors do sometimes attempt to correct misapprehensions,
of course. But then they are acting like a member of their own audience—
albeit an exceptionally well-informed member of their audience. Or
perhaps they are acting as their own critic. In any case, they are not
repeating themselves, only this time saying more clearly what they meant
to say before, as they would be doing were storytelling like a conversa-
tion. The activity in which they engage, should they choose to correct
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


misapprehensions, is of a different order from the activity of storytelling.
That is why, when J.K. Rowling opined at an interview that she had
always thought of the wizard Dumbledore as being gay (although his
supposed homosexuality plays no explicit part in the Harry Potter novels
in which he is a character), her correction of the record was one that
many of her readers simply refused to accept.6
By treating the relationship between author and audience as intim-
ation rather than communication, we give due respect to the distance
between the two parties. But we must be careful not to extend that
distance too far. As I began to explain in the previous chapter, storytell-
ing is more complex in its structure than the kind of intimation pre-
sented in chapters one and two. In this chapter, the time has come to
complete the explanation.
In the case where Mary is intimating at the half-on position rather
than communicating, for example, she wants Peter to take her sniff to be
appreciative—not a sniff to clear the nose; rather, a sniff that is directed
at the ocean—but is indifferent as to whether Peter takes her sniff to be
directed also at him. Authors, however, are not similarly indifferent
about how much their audiences notice of their intentions. Nero actively
desired to have Blanka notice that he had left his diary behind on
purpose and that his act was directed at her. He was not in the least
indifferent about this outcome. So too, authors actively desire to unfold
their stories in such a way that the audience will recognize the unfolding
as directed at them by the author. At a second remove, however, Nero
wanted to cover his tracks. He wanted Blanka to think he had meant the
whole thing to seem accidental to her and that he acted in this way in
order to spare himself and her the risks of an open gesture. That is, Nero
wanted Blanka not to notice that he in fact intended her to see through
the apparent accident all along. So too, an author wants his audience to
feel that they are uncovering for themselves the various indicators he has
planted of how the story hangs together and makes sense of its charac-
ters’ behaviour. Nor is this feeling in the audience a ‘mere’ feeling. They
are ﬁguring out for themselves how the story hangs together. It is just
that the author worked hard to make this achievement of theirs possible.
6 The interview took place on October 19, 2007 at Carnegie Hall. The claim about
Dumbledore was then picked up in the press and in heated on-line discussion. I thank
David Crane for bringing the incident to my attention.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

A joint achievement of author and audience is taking place. The author
supplies the conditions for the audience’s success by making his story
dramatically convincing, which has the result that they remain absorbed
in the ﬁctional action even as they track the touches of the author’s hand.
It should by now have become clear that the relation between author
and audience will need to occupy a special position on the communica-
tive scale. I have been treating this as a switch with three positions: off,
half-on (intimation), fully on (communication proper). The storyteller,
as we have seen, does not communicate outright with his audience. But
nor does he intimate in the manner of those who occupy the half-on
position, for they are indifferent to having their intention noticed and he
is not. His action aims more directly than theirs on getting his intention
recognized, but less directly than does the communicator’s. He wants the
dramatically engaged audience to feel he is using the story to get some-
thing of his across to them (namely, his understanding of his own story),
yet not cease to be dramatically engaged. (Even those authors most intent
on collaborating with their audiences are likely to want their own
understanding of their work to make at least some contribution to the
understanding that results in the audience.) The fact that his intention to
get something of his across to them by means of the story is apparent to
them—that fact—is itself apparent both to him and to them. What is not
apparent to them—what they (or their situation) do not allow to become
apparent—is this: that the fact that his intention to get something of his
across to them by means of the story is apparent to them—that fact—is
itself also apparent to him.
The relation between the parties lacks, then, the complete overtness
necessary for communication, the position in which the switch is fully
on. What comes across in the transmission does indeed come across by
recognition of the intention of the transmitting party; but the recognition
is incomplete. Still, the relation between the parties is, in its peculiar way,
more overt than intimation at the half-on position, if only because it
requires, as intimation at the half-on position does not, that what comes
across in the transmission should come across by recognition (however
partial) of the intention of the transmitting party. In order to accommo-
date it, then, we should add a position to our scale: what we might call
intimation at the ‘three-quarters-on’ position.
Earlier, when it came to storytelling, I captured the intermediate status
of the three-quarters-on position in this way: the audience attends only
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


to the traces of the author’s hand, not to their traceability. Now, there are
others who ﬁll that breach: the academics or professional critics who
provide analysis of the author’s work. And in this transaction, differently
from the transaction between Blanka and Nero, critics and authors are
on at least equal terms—if, indeed, the critics do not consider themselves
the superiors here. Nevertheless, the critics surrender something in order
to gain their equality or superiority. They cannot remain absorbed in the
story while they analyse it—that is, they cannot remain absorbed in
the way that an audience is. Their situation is that of a Blanka who
sees through both levels of Nero’s staging, not just the ﬁrst.
Let us imagine that situation for a moment. Blanka has penetrated the
second level of Nero’s staging as well as the ﬁrst. She sees his entire game.
She now thinks to herself: not only did Nero want me to think, wrongly,
that he had left the diary behind by mistake, he also wanted me to
understand that this, all along, had been his strategy. There was I,
applauding myself for having detected his staging, but I see, now, that
it was a staging he meant me to detect. Imagine that Blanka sees all this.
She is now on at least equal terms with Nero, as she was not before. In
fact, she may now think of herself as having gotten the better of him. She
has foiled his plan to conceal himself from her at a second remove.
Notice that Blanka’s new insight does not convert Nero’s intimation
into a communication. It simply foils his intention to intimate in the way
he would have chosen. At no point are the two parties acting openly with
each other, each aware of what is clear to the other and aware also of that
very awareness, as communication requires. In fact we could extend the
game further, with each party striving to stay one move ahead of the
other. We could imagine a Nero who intended Blanka to penetrate his
cover not just at the ﬁrst but also at the second remove, while failing to
penetrate it at the third; a Blanka who succeeds in penetrating it at the
third, the fourth, the ﬁfth . . . It seems that nothing need halt this ping-
pong of intentions and detections but the sheer limits of human ingenu-
ity and the social pointlessness of the exercise. (And there are contexts in
which it might be far from pointless: in international espionage, perhaps,
or in playing the stock market, where its deviousness would be more
at home.)7
7 For those who wish to see Gricean ping-pong played out through ever more artiﬁcial
cases, the locus classicus is Schiffer’s Meaning.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

In the case of storytelling, however, a special factor would intervene to
stymie the ping-pong game: the inherent value that audiences place on
being captivated by a dramatically plausible story and that authors, for
their part, place on captivating them. For Blanka, by contrast, the con-
vincingness of Nero’s pretence (which, recall, is what corresponds to the
dramatic plausibility of the author’s story) has little inherent value. She
might perhaps spare some admiration for Nero’s acting aplomb, but this
is not the focus of her interest. What she is interested in is the informa-
tion Nero is bringing to her attention by his pretence—both the fact that
he has feelings for her and his reasons for conveying that fact in so
indirect a manner. The same goes, vice-versa, for Nero. Hence we can
imagine their game taking off toward inﬁnity. Since the original pretence
was never the focus of interest, the parties would have no difﬁculty
letting it recede as they mentally joust in anticipated move and corres-
ponding countermove.
Not so with storytellers and their audience. The critic, we saw, has
already made a sacriﬁce just by attending to the author’s intention at the
second remove; he has sacriﬁced being involved with the story as its
audience is. The storyteller, for his part, is (or ought to be) working to
captivate the audience, and only secondarily to impress the critic. There
is every social reason, then, even if there is no logical reason, for the ping-
pong to end at that point.
2
A new position has been added to the communicative scale: the three-
quarters-on position. And it has an element of covertness to it. Near the
end of chapter one, on pp. 10–11, we brieﬂy considered another covert
intimation: that of the nurse who wants to intimate to patients her
efﬁciency and concern for them. There is a difference between the
covertness of a three-quarters-on intimation and the covertness with
which this nurse behaves. It is a difference worth developing, even
though it will temporarily deﬂect us from the topic of storytelling. It is
worth developing because, by this means, our appreciation of how the
communicative scale works across its entire length will be deepened, and
because, within that scale, an additional artform will ﬁnd its niche.
The nurse from chapter one engages in a lot of nurse-like behaviour
that she knows to be otiose in medical terms but which she has selected
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


for its visibility to the patients. She deliberately hides from her patients
the fact that the behaviour is medically otiose, since if they knew this,
they would no longer feel assured of her efﬁciency. But since the most
effective medical interventions may also happen to be the least conspicu-
ous, a nurse who wishes to assure patients of her medical effectiveness, as
our nurse does, will in that case be compelled to take measures which,
while ineffective as medicine, are highly effective as intimation.
In chapter one, where the only intimations in scope were half-on
intimations, I duly put the nurse’s intimation at the half-on position of
the communicative scale, and captured its covertness by saying that, for
her patients, the communicative switch was fully off. This brought out
how her intimation contrasts with the half-on intimation deployed by
the barista we considered in that same chapter. His intimation, being
overt, is likely to be appreciated as half-on; at any rate, the barista makes
no attempt to conceal the degree to which he is stylizing his movements.
My barista moves as he does in order to draw my attention to his
movements; provided I do so attend, he does not particularly care
whether I also notice that this was the result he wanted to achieve. Nor
am I required to notice this just in order to attend to his movements. His
moves alone sufﬁce to draw my attention. (Mary at the window, per-
forming a half-on intimation for Peter, is similarly indifferent to having
Peter notice that her behaviour is directed at him, provided he notices
what she wants him to notice, which in her case is not something about
herself, as it is with the barista, but something about the environment she
shares with Peter.)
But now that we have added a new position, the three-quarters-on
position, to the communicative scale, it is open to us to capture the
covertness of the nurse’s intimation in a more accurate way. We can add
one further position: let us call it the ‘quarter-on’ position. Rather than
saying that the nurse’s communicative switch is half-on while her audi-
ence’s is off, we can say instead that she intimates to her audience at the
quarter-on position. Her intimation is indeed an intimation; it is directed
at an audience; her communicative switch is not off. But although she is
deliberately letting her patients know something, she is not openly doing
so. This places her intimation at a lower level on the communicative scale
than the barista’s. The progression of steps up the scale to full-on
communication could then be put as follows. Quarter-on: The nurse
wants her patients to know she is efﬁcient and concerned for their

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

welfare, but also wants them not to know she wants them to know this.
Half-on: The barista wants customers to know he is skilful, but is
indifferent as to whether customers know he wants them to know this.
He neither wants nor does not want them to know he wants them to
know this. Three-quarters-on: Nero wants Blanka to know he is in love
with her, but also wants her to know he does not want her to know he
wants her to know this. Quarter-on intimations are covert; half-on
intimations are overt; three-quarters-on intimations, if I may phrase it
this way, are covertly overt.
Progression up the communicative scale, then, is determined by the
extent to which what comes across in the transmission is required to
come across by recognition of the intention of the transmitting party. At
a quarter-on, it is required not to; at half-on, it is neither required to nor
required not to; at three-quarters-on, it is required to, but only partially
(recognition of the intention of the transmitting party is deliberately kept
incomplete); at full-on, it is required to, and the recognition is complete.
(And when the switch is off, there is no intention of a transmitting party
in the ﬁrst place.) This way of putting it should make clear what might
otherwise seem counter-intuitive: how an intimation with some element
of covertness, the three-quarters-on intimation, can come closer to full-
on communication than does the half-on intimation, which has no
covertness about it at all. A half-on intimation is an overt performance,
but still lacks the explicitness of full-on communication, in the sense that
it does not make completely explicit, as full communication does, that a
transmission is going on in the ﬁrst place (however nebulous the content
of that transmission might be). This is both the great advantage of a half-
on intimation, should plausible deniability or the like be needed, and a
possible hazard, since the intimation may be entirely missed. A three-
quarters-on intimation comes closer to the explicitness of communica-
tion in this sense. It is more clearly directed at an audience than is the
half-on intimation.
All this fractional talk, by the way, is metaphorical. To describe an
intimation as three-quarters-on is only to convey that it comes closer to
full communication than does a half-on intimation, which in its turn
comes closer to full communication than does a quarter-on intimation,
in the manner explained. I am not claiming that the communicative scale
can be measured into mathematically precise proportions. I might per-
haps have spoken instead of position one, position two, position three,
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


and so on, except that the fractional metaphor better captures the
movement of the scale from partial to full communication. Another
fact the metaphor is intended to convey is that there is a ﬁnite number
of discrete positions to which the switch can be turned. It is a switch, not
a dial. The distinctness of its positions is not a matter of degree. (This was
explained in chapter two, on pp. 53–5.)
The nurse who intimates at the quarter-on position is deliberately
magnifying in her patients the impression they receive of her skills; at the
same time, she is concealing the effort she makes to do so. Her tactic
bears an interesting relation to that employed by another quarter-on
intimation: the kind to which we generally refer by using the Italian word
sprezzatura. The word was coined by Baldesar Castiglione in the six-
teenth century in his dialogue The Book of the Courtier.8 The courtier
who practises sprezzatura is using the art that conceals art. Sprezzatura
is, in one way, the opposite of affectation: it is a studied ease, which
refuses to announce the labour that went into achieving its task. What
others are allowed to admire instead is not that labour but rather the
facility with which the task is performed. Knowing how difﬁcult the skill
actually is, they ﬁnd their admiration for its exercise magniﬁed by their
sense of how easy the courtier has made it look.
If not carefully gauged, however, sprezzatura can become affectation
at a second remove. Instead of just admiring how easy the courtier has
made things look, his audience may feel they have been called upon to
admire his achievement in making difﬁcult things look easy. Those who
work hard at seeming not to work hard may be taken as putting on airs,
as if they were boasting to the world: ‘See how easy I can make it look!’.
They would then be taken to be delivering an intimation not at the
quarter-on but at the three-quarters-on position of the communicative
scale. They would be taken to want their concealment appreciated for the
concealment it is—although not openly appreciated.9
8 Castiglione’s fullest discussion of this concept in The Book of the Courtier comes in
Book 1, sections 25–8.
9 Castiglione himself brings up this point about the possibility of sprezzatura being taken
for affectation after all: Book 1, section 27. Harry Berger, Jr., however, goes further: he seems
to take all sprezzatura as being, from the get-go, what in my terms would be an intimation
at the three-quarters-on position. He writes: ‘What [Castiglione] describes under that term
is an art that hides art, the cultivated ability to display artful artlessness, to perform any act
or gesture with an insouciant or careless mastery that delivers either or both of two messages:
“Look how artfully I appear to be natural”; “Look how naturally I appear to be artful” (italics

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

The nurse, too, is concealing her efforts to magnify her skills, genuine
though they are, in the eyes of her patients; she is not, however, trying to
make her work look easy. Indeed, she is trying to make it look even
harder than it is, so that her patients cannot help but notice her efﬁ-
ciency. It is only the effort to make her work look hard that she conceals.
If she did not, her patients might worry that the effort to make her work
look hard was in fact the only genuine effort she was making. If that were
actually the case, then our nurse would be like the Soviet factory hands in
the old joke: ‘So long as they keep pretending to pay us, we’ll keep
pretending to work.’
The sprezzatura of Castiglione’s courtier is different from either of
these cases. The courtier performs no actions whose sole purpose is to
render his skills apparent. And not only that: he strenuously avoids
performing any such actions, fearing to be accused of affectation if he
does. Yet by this active avoidance, he is, in effect, taking pains to exercise
his genuine skills in a way that will make them seem effortless. Now, the
performance of a professional athlete, too, might well seem effortlessly
graceful to spectators (however strenuous his activity); still, the athlete’s
focus lies elsewhere: on performing with perfect technique, and on
winning. Castiglione’s courtier, by contrast, doesn’t just happen to
make his skill look easy in the way that any genuinely skilful person
might—that is, simply by exercising the skill. The courtier also thinks
about making that look of effortlessness come across to others.
Each of these performances is an intimation at the quarter-on position
of the communicative scale. Each, despite the different quality of its
covertness, is susceptible of the analysis: I want you to know (that is, at
least think) x, but also want you not to know I want you to know x. There
is the outright deception of the nurse who only pretends to work; there is
Castiglione’s courtier, who does real work but conceals its difﬁculty; and
there is the nurse who does real work but conceals the fact that she is
throwing in some activities designed to show that she is doing real work.
(I arrange the three cases from most to least deceptive.)
mine) (p. 9). Against Berger it should be pointed out that this is not what observers are
described as responding to when they admire the courtier’s ease of manner (section 26);
rather, it is a ‘message’ they receive only if they take his sprezzatura for affectation, at which
point they are assumed to react adversely (section 27).
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


In chapter three, analysis of intimation at what we are now calling the
three-quarters-on position began with instances taken from social inter-
action in everyday life and moved on from there to the formal storytell-
ing arts, which, I argued, practise an equivalent kind of intimation. Is this
move available for the quarter-on position? Are there artistic practices
that intimate at this position of the scale? I believe there are.
Among the three cases of quarter-on intimation already considered, it
is the practice of Castiglione’s courtier that comes closest to what we
might deem an art. We could imagine a courtier who makes self-styling
through sprezzatura his ultimate ambition, treating it as a self-contained
artform, rather than as a stepping-stone to the fulﬁlment of his political
ambitions at court. Castiglione himself draws parallels between sprezza-
tura at court and the avoidance of affectation in established arts: music,
dance, singing, painting.10 The affectation he is thinking of, however, is
only an affectation of technique; art is the more impressive, he proposes,
for not showing the labour that went into its production. But we can
draw the parallel in a different way.
Consider poetry: not the kind of poetry that tells a story, as epic poetry
does, or as poetic drama or dramatized monologue also do. Consider
poetry like that of Philip Larkin or of Elizabeth Bishop: poetry that,
although it may present a vignette that could appear as part of a story
(e.g. Bishop’s poem The Fish), is nevertheless experienced not as telling a
story but as describing, pondering, urging, yearning, maybe ranting; the
poetry for which we use the catch-all and inadequate term ‘lyric’.
When analysing in the previous chapter the kind of intimation practised
by storytellers, we found it necessary to take for granted the obvious,
institutional pretence involved in a story’s ﬁctional presentation, seeing
it as society’s way of priming us for the pretence that storytellers actually
have to work at achieving: the pretence that their plot is not directed at us;
the pretence that results in dramatic conviction. Nero, by contrast, who
had no institutional conventions backing him up, was compelled to work
at getting his pretence recognized as a pretence in the ﬁrst place. And the
same would apply to any of the one-off intimations of the Nero–Blanka
type that populate our everyday lives.
10 Book 1, section 28.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

Storytelling, as we have now come to see, is intimation at the three-
quarters-on position of the communicative scale; but a similar dynamic
is also at work at the other covert position of the scale, the quarter-on
position, in the correspondence between lyric poetry and everyday
intimations. The institutional factor in this case is not the obvious
pretence of ﬁctionality but the obvious artiﬁciality of poetic language.
In some lyric poems, although not all, a further institutional factor is the
extravagance of the claims the poet is allowed to make. Lyric poets over
the ages have addressed abstractions; they have been visited by gods; they
have conversed with animals, plants, and rocks. Or they have seemed to.
This is poetry’s version of the magical thinking that we found to operate
in the appreciation of stories.
The storyteller does not have to work at priming us for being pre-
sented with a ﬁctional world, since the conventions of the genre do that
for him. So too, lyric poets do not have to work at priming us for
impressive speech or extravagant claims; the technical factors that dis-
tinguish poetry from prose do the job for them. (It is no surprise that
much the same could be said of the technical devices that mark rhetorical
prose off from colloquial speech; lyric poetry has a lot in common, even if
not everything in common, with rhetoric.) What the storyteller has to
work at instead is making us believe in the ﬁctional world that the
conventions have primed us for; he has to make his story dramatically
convincing. And what lyric poets have to work at is making their artiﬁcial
language seem natural and unforced, as if it were native to them. If their
poem has magical pretensions, they must also work at making the magic
seem a natural complement to their extraordinary status as speakers.
Success with these tasks will lend their poems the appearance of
authority—this, rather than the dramatic plausibility that characterizes
a successful plot. The appearance of authority will be deserved; the
authority itself may not be. (This, too, is a quality that lyric poetry has
in common with rhetoric.) Failure will leave their poems in some way
unconvincing: frigid, stiff, ﬂat, bombastic, or just plain ridiculous.
Without the backing of institutional conventions, Nero had to put
effort into making his pretence seem a pretence at all, in order then to
give the impression that he did not want the pretence detected. He builds
an impression of pretence only to dismantle it. Storytellers do the same,
but the pretence they both construct and, to some extent, undercut, the
pretence that makes for dramatic conviction, takes place within the
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


overarching institutional pretence that is their story’s ﬁctionality. Now
consider the correspondence between the behaviour of Castiglione’s
courtier and the art of the lyric poet. The courtier has to take care that
his facility with the demeanour, activities, and skills that gain recognition
at court does not come across as merely facile; otherwise, it will fail to
impress in the ﬁrst place. On any particular occasion, his audience have
to be able to recognize how difﬁcult it is to do what the courtier has just
done, if they are to be further impressed by his facility. The courtier has to
be sure that what he does will look difﬁcult before he can think about
making it look easy. Institutional conventions do not give him this assur-
ance; only the work he has put into developing his skills can do so, together
with his audience’s awareness of their difﬁculty. Lyric poets, however, do
not have to work at making their language look difﬁcult; poetic conven-
tions do that job for them. Poetic language wears its technicality on its face.
The conventions exonerate the poet in advance, as it were, from the charge
of ‘faking it’—as the courtier might be accused of doing, should he attempt
an impression of ease with a skill that no one believes could be exercised so
casually. We take for granted that composing poetry is difﬁcult and that
poetic language is technical; what we are interested in is whether poets can
make their language seem ‘easy’—not in the sense of seeming rudimen-
tary, of course, but in the sense of seeming natural.
Now, the verbal construct that is a lyric poem will contain what look to
be communications: descriptions, appeals, questions, arguments, declar-
ations, threats, invitations, complaints, and so on. Or the poem may look
to be classiﬁable in its entirety as such a communication. And when I say
that a lyric poem will contain what ‘look to be’ communications, I do not
mean that the poet is only pretending to communicate; I do not mean
that the poet’s voice should be treated like that of a character within a
ﬁction—for all that this has become a standard way of approaching lyric
poems. I mean instead that the poet uses those communications to
intimate to us, his audience, at the quarter-on position. It is as with the
couple who ﬂirt together at a party: their conversation, in itself an act of
communication, is directed toward intimating their interest in each
other, an intimation that in chapter three (p. 95) I analysed as an
intimation of the Nero–Blanka type—that is, as three-quarters-on.
Lyric poets are doing something similar, except that the communications
with which they ﬁll their poems are overlaid by and directed toward a
quarter-on rather than a three-quarters-on intimation.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

How does this work? Well, think of how the examples of everyday
social intimation at the quarter-on position work. Our nurses and
Castiglione’s courtier are not just performing some action, they are
also directing that action at an audience, seeking by that action to
make the audience entertain certain thoughts (in their case, favourable
thoughts about that action), while at the same time concealing from the
audience that audience-direction is what they have in mind when they
act. The corresponding actions that lyric poets direct at us, their audi-
ence, are acts of communication. Not that they are communicating with
us, however: rather, if I can put it like this, they ‘perform skilful talk’ for
us, and perform it in such a way that we do not feel that this is what they
are doing. That is what fascinates us about the performance.
If a poem argues that life is but a dream, or complains to a lady in the
voice of her lover, or announces, as in the opening lines of Larkin’s
‘Annus Mirabilis’, that sexual intercourse did not get going until nine-
teen sixty-three, we who read the poem or hear it recited will feel as if this
argument or this announcement are things we have, as it were, stumbled
upon, or as if that complaint to a third party is a complaint we are getting
to overhear. (The idea that lyric poetry strikes us as something ‘over-
heard’ is at least as old as John Stuart Mill’s 1833 essay ‘Thoughts on
poetry and its varieties’.) Of course we know that the poem is directed at
us: the poet had it published, after all, or has come to the podium to recite
it. But we know this in the way we know that a ﬁctional story is a
pretence; we are aware of the fact, and then we discount it. We discount
that the story is a pretence, in order that we can become gripped by its
dramatic plausibility; we discount that the poem is a performance dir-
ected at us, in order that we can become gripped by its voice. We want
the poem to come alive for us.
If the poem does come alive for us, in what way does this make it a
quarter-on intimation? And what is being intimated?
Begin with the second question. What is being intimated is the same
sort of thing as is intimated by a story: a connected understanding of
the poem’s elements. But those elements are not (as they are in a story)
the mutual engagements of agents within a plot, presented to an audi-
ence through mimicry, whether direct or derivative. The elements of a
lyric poem are communicative speech acts arranged in various technical
ways, as determined by the poem’s ﬂexible relation with the conventions
of its period and genre.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


Mimicry is not employed to present these elements to the audience—
at least, not as the activity fundamental to the presentation, as it is with
stories. A lyric poem may include direct discourse, perhaps quoting the
words of a visiting goddess (Sappho 1), or a dialogue between tenant and
landlord (Larkin’s ‘Mr. Bleaney’), or what the little Marvel stove and the
almanac had to say for themselves (Bishop’s ‘Sestina’). But direct dis-
course is only the mimicry we all use on occasion when communicating.
Or again, a ﬁrst-person poem may be presented, in its entirety, as the
complaint of a lover to his mistress (examples too numerous to men-
tion); but such poems too do not make mimicry their basis. Rather, the
poet is writing as a lover: not taking on the ‘persona’ of a lover, not acting
the part of a lover, but writing ‘as’ a lover in the same sense in which
I could speak to my son as his father, perhaps prefacing my advice with
the words, ‘speaking as your father’. It does not matter whether the poet
actually has a mistress when he writes. (I don’t actually have a son.)
Anyone can speak in hypotheticals.11
Now to the ﬁrst question: if a poem comes alive for us, in what sense
does this make it a quarter-on intimation? One who intimates at the
quarter-on position intends an audience to entertain certain thoughts as
a result of the intimation, while having that intention hidden from them.
Lyric poets likewise intend the artfully arranged speech acts that make up
their poems to come together in the connected understanding of their
audience, without the audience feeling that it has been addressed. That is
what I mean when I write that we seem to ‘stumble across’ announcements
or ‘overhear’ complaints. So our interaction with lyric poems turns out
to be no closer to a conversation than is our interaction with stories.12
This point holds regardless of whether the poem has an internal
addressee—a mountain, say, or a mistress (perhaps a mistress with a
name). Even when it comes to such poems, we could still have our
attention drawn to what the poet is saying to us by presenting this address
11 In his Theory of the Lyric, Jonathan Culler offers spirited resistance to the indiscrim-
inate application of ‘persona-theory’ to lyric poems—the tendency of modern critics to treat
all lyric poetry as, in effect, dramatic monologue, in which the poet’s voice is interpreted as
that of a ﬁctional character. (See esp. pp. 2, 107–19.) I will mount a corresponding argument
against persona-theory in the context of the novel when I give an account of Fielding’s Tom
Jones later in this chapter (pp. 155–9).
12 At section’s end I will qualify this generalization. Some kinds of lyric poetry are
rhetoric through and through. To them, the conversational model could apply.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

to another, just as we can with a poem that presents its arguments and
declarations outright. Our attention could be drawn because we are
puzzled over what the poet is saying to us, or are rendered indignant by
what we take the poet to be saying to us, or are simply bored by it. For
whichever reason our attention is drawn, it can be drawn by poems of
either kind—those with and those without internal addressees. If it is so
drawn, and if we cannot ever get over its being so drawn, then, for us at
least, the poem is botched. Or rather, we ought to ﬁnd it botched; and if we
do not (perhaps because we think it is the poet’s job to say something to
us), we are missing what counts about lyric poetry.13
When the poem is working on us as it should, we experience it with an
ear that waits for rhyme (if the poem is rhymed) as if rhyme were the
ear’s best friend; we feel the rhythm, sense the count of syllables, note the
shape of stanzas, as if what is being said could not be better said less
musically; extravagant metaphors make their own sense; extravagant
claims are cheerily entertained (so sexual intercourse began in nineteen
sixty-three? Really!); obscurities are welcomed for the depths they seem
to conceal. This last is something that Castiglione noted in the impres-
sion, possibly false, that his courtier makes: one who can perform so well
with so easy a grace, the audience thinks, could perform even better if he
took more pains.14 So poets, we may feel, know more than they decide to
say. (Perhaps we are wrong; but poets who take advantage of that
impression need not be trying to look wiser than they are. They could
be writing in the hope that their audience will be able to understand
more than the poet can make graspable; they could be granting us the
opportunity of grasping for ourselves what they take themselves already
to have grasped; they could be avoiding confrontation; they could be
ashamed of speaking outright. Possible motivations abound.)
13 There are doubtless many reasons why so many lyric poems should have internal
addressees, including the fact that prayer has an important place in the ancestry of lyric
poetry. But one reason is likely to be that a poem directed at an internal addressee—at least,
if that addressee is not the subject of the poem’s historical occasion—will the more readily
seem not to be directed at its audience, thereby succeeding as a poem. The same motivation,
from the perspective of the critic now rather than that of the poet, would help explain the
appeal of persona-theory in modern times; for whereas poets might seem to be directing
their announcements, arguments, and complaints at us outright, their personas surely will
not. (My account shares the aim of keeping the audience out of the direct line of address;
but it does not appeal to the concept of ‘persona’ in order to do so.)
14 Book 1, section 28.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


The crucial point is that there is a sense in which we do not question or
challenge any of the variety of extravagances, musical or rhetorical or
logical, that the poet puts before us, as we surely would if we felt that we
were being directly addressed. (The point applies also to poets who
address their audience as ‘you’, or go so far as to shake them by their
imagined lapels, as Whitman does.) We accept these extravagances for
what they are and try to bind them together—in our own understanding,
but in their own terms.
All this about our experience of the authoritative poetic voice is
familiar enough. I rehearse it not out of piety but in order to locate the
transaction at its appropriate position on the communicative scale. Nor
does the claim that the audience should not feel that it has been
addressed imply that it has no business analysing poems. The claim is
not intended as an encouragement to wallow in the poetic performance.
It is only to say that there is a difference between noting, to take a very
easy case, the ring-composition in Larkin’s ‘Annus Mirabilis’, on the one
hand, and experiencing it with a sense of ﬁnality, on the other—the
ﬁnality we sense when it turns out at poem’s end that nineteen sixty-
three came, alas, too late for our poet to proﬁt from the sexual revolution.
In the same way that research can bolster our involvement in a story (as
when it helps us care what happens to Aeneas), so it helps the poem
come alive if what we experience with a sense of ﬁnality is not just a
repetition of words at beginning and end but, technically and tradition-
ally speaking, a ring-composition. Still, the ultimate experience we are
after is that sense of ﬁnality, however enhanced (or even enabled) by the
awareness of ring-composition.
It should also be conceded that some kinds of lyric poem, among
them the most venerable, address a historically particular audience and
may in addition have a historical ﬁgure as internal addressee. I am
thinking of the victory odes, the encomia, the funeral elegies, the jubilee
poems. These, it seems to me, are not communications co-opted for
quarter-on intimation (although their published afterlife may co-opt
them for quarter-on intimation, or something like it, as far as later
audiences are concerned); they are rhetorical productions, and have
their equivalents in established genres of public speaking (e.g. the eulogy
at a funeral). The rhetorical strategies they employ may be complex;
they may incorporate stretches of story within their overall span; but
they are outright communications, aimed at convincing a deﬁnite

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

audience. In no sense does that audience feel it is overhearing an
argument not intended for it.15
A ﬁnal suggestion: it may be that visual art has its own range of
quarter-on intimations. If ﬁgurative art intimates at the three-quarters-
on position (as I proposed in chapter three, on p. 87), then we might do
best to locate abstract painting and sculpture, along with installation-
art, at the quarter-on position. Unlike ﬁgurative art, these arts do not
aim to achieve pictorial conviction. So too, we saw, lyric poetry does not
aim to achieve dramatic conviction. And as with lyric poetry, these arts
are obviously artiﬁcial and yet, at the same time, seek to come across as
somehow natural. Pictorial conviction they have no need for; what they
search out instead is a convincing visual style. They have every inten-
tion to generate inferences in their viewers, and every intention to
conceal that intention. How so? By seeming to stand before us as the
justiﬁcation for their own visual existence; by being in that sense
‘convincing’.
As before, however, I choose to leave undeveloped the question of how
the ideas in this book might apply to the visual arts. Now that lyric poetry
has found a place on the communicative scale at the quarter-on position,
it is time to return to the three-quarters-on position and the main topic
of this chapter: storytelling.16
15 A further comparison with sprezzatura can clarify the difference between rhetoric and
lyric poetry of the Larkin–Bishop variety. Sprezzatura appears in rhetoric only as a quality
of its language, not as the practice’s ultimate purpose. Rhetorical language succeeds, much
as the language of lyric succeeds, when its ﬁgures and formalisms steer clear of woodenness
or bombast and achieve a natural-sounding ﬂuency. (This is true of all rhetoric, not just of
the particular kind of rhetoric that Castiglione himself mentions in Book 1, section 26—the
kind that aims for an appearance of naivety.) But such success is only instrumental to its
larger purpose. By contrast, lyric poetry of the Larkin–Bishop sort corresponds, in the
manner just explained, to sprezzatura practised as a self-contained artform.
16 I might never have investigated a quarter-on position of the communicative scale had
it not been for the thoughtful stimulus of Eileen John. (She is not responsible, however, for
the manner in which I have chosen to describe that position, nor for its application to lyric
poetry.) You may be wondering, incidentally, whether these two new positions on the
communicative scale should be retrospectively applied to the account in chapter two of
intimation through clothes, where only the half-on intimation was yet in scope. Certainly,
clothing could be used to perform either a quarter-on or a three-quarters-on intimation.
We have in fact already seen an example of a three-quarters-on intimation using clothes:
the case of the scantily clad spouse in chapter three, described at the outset of section 2.
A quarter-on intimation is equally easy to imagine. Castiglione himself mentions bodily
posture as an instrument of sprezzatura (Book 1, section 26); it seems, then, that a courtier
might wear his clothes, too, with a semblance of nonchalant grace. The reason that further
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


3
By considering how the conversational model of the author–audience
interaction falls short, we have been led to assign storytelling its position
on the communicative scale. One way in which the conversational model
falls short, we have seen, is that it puts too little communicative distance
between the two parties. Here is another way—which will tell us some-
thing more that we need to know about the three-quarters-on position of
the scale.
The conversational model takes for granted that authors are able to
sweep us into the environments conjured by their stories, convincing us to
care about how things will turn out in them. The dramatically plausible
tale is treated as if it were a single complex utterance, whose meaning, both
as a whole and in its constituent moments, can be asked after. The model
applies to an authorial artefact, but how that artefact got made is not the
model’s concern. Its concern is rather this: with what intentions was the
artefact so made? This is the question that puts audience in conversation
with author. As for the making, this element of the overall process is either
not addressed at all in arguments for the conversational model, or
accounted for by an independent theory, typically based on such psycho-
logical mechanisms as imagination or make-believe.17
Here the intimative model of storytelling has an advantage. It incorp-
orates dramatic plausibility as an essential part of itself. That is because it
is an essential feature of all interactions of the Nero–Blanka type that
what might look as if it were not directed at an audience turns out to be
so directed, and is seen by that audience as so directed. It is an essential
feature of such interactions that the pretence detected by the audience
should not be an obvious pretence but instead a convincing one.
This is the moment to reveal for all what will doubtless have been
clear for some time to those familiar with the philosophic literature on
retrospective elaboration is unnecessary, however, is that it remains the case that the half-on
intimation is the position where what we do with our clothes mostly belongs, at least in day
to day to activity.
17 For an application of the conversational model that leaves unaddressed the issue of
how the authorial artefact got made, see Carroll. For an application that addresses the issue
by appeal to make-believe, see Currie, The Nature of Fiction, pp. 18–21. Lamarque and
Olsen also treat ﬁctive utterance as a communication between author and reader (p. 34),
and make extensive appeal to make-believe and imagination in order to explain that
transaction (summed up on p. 77).

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

Gricean pragmatics: that my intention in devising the case of Nero and
Blanka was to put ﬂesh on the bones of a skeletal schema of human
interaction imagined by P. F. Strawson in a classic article published in
1964. Here is what he wrote:18
S intends by a certain action to induce in A the belief that p . . . He arranges
convincing-looking ‘evidence’ that p, in a place where A is bound to see it. He
does this, knowing that A is watching him at work, but knowing also that A does
not know that S knows that A is watching him at work. He realizes that A will not
take the arranged ‘evidence’ as genuine or natural evidence that p, but realizes,
and indeed intends, that A will take his arranging of it as grounds for thinking
that he, S, intends to induce in A the belief that p . . . He knows that A has general
grounds for thinking that S would not wish to make him, A, think that p unless it
were known to S to be the case that p; and hence that A’s recognition of his (S’s)
intention to induce in A the belief that p will in fact seem to A a sufﬁcient reason
for believing that p. And he intends that A’s recognition of his intention should
function in just this way.
Of this interaction, Strawson goes on to say:
. . . this is clearly not a case of attempted communication . . . A will indeed take S
to be trying to bring it about that A is aware of some fact; but he will not take S as
trying, in the colloquial sense, to ‘let him know’ something (or to ‘tell’ him
something).
Strawson came up with this schema in order to pose a challenge to
Grice’s original analysis of communication, for it is a schema that fully
conforms to the conditions that Grice originally laid out. In response to
Strawson’s challenge, subsequent theorists have seen that communication,
to be communication, must be overt, and have analysed this overtness as a
kind of mutual awareness. The awareness comes at different technical
strengths, depending on the theorist.19 What matters for my purposes is
not this but rather the particular kind of action to which Strawson
had recourse when imagining S’s not fully overt method of conveying
p to A: a staging designed to be penetrated but sufﬁciently convincing to
seem as if it were not so designed.
This feature is preserved in the various scenarios that philosophers
before me have invented to put ﬂesh on the Strawsonian bones. There
18 The quotations come from pp. 446–7 of the original article.
19 For Schiffer it is mutual knowledge; for Bach and Harnish, mutual belief; for Sperber
and Wilson, mutual manifestness.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


seems to be no other way to achieve the correct mix of overt and covert in
the interaction. Dan Sperber and Deirdre Wilson, for example, give us
the case of ‘Mary and the hair-drier’:
. . . Mary wants Peter to mend her broken hair-drier, but does not want to ask
him openly. What she does is begin to take her hair-drier to pieces and leave the
pieces lying around as if she were in the process of mending it. She does not
expect Peter to be taken in by this staging; in fact, if he really believed that she was
in the process of mending her hair-drier herself, he would probably not interfere.
She does expect him to be clever enough to work out that this is a staging
intended to inform him of the fact that she needs some help with her hair-
drier. However, she does not expect him to be clever enough to work out that she
expected him to reason along just those lines. Since she is not really asking, if
Peter fails to help, it will not really count as a refusal either.
‘Intuitively,’ say Sperber and Wilson, what Mary does is ‘not quite com-
municate’. Just so: for as we have seen, her action sits at the three-quarters-
on position rather than the fully on position of the communicative scale.20
The storyteller who constructs a dramatically plausible story occupies
the same three-quarters-on position. The story is convincing enough that
we do not feel the author openly showing his hand, yet sufﬁciently artful
that we detect its traces, and believe that we were meant to.
It is an attractive feature of the conversational model that it draws a
connection between the kind of transmission engaged in by storytelling
ﬁction-makers, on the one hand, and the message-sending that goes on
all around us, on the other. This feature is preserved in the Nero–Blanka
model, which, as we have seen, embraces a surprisingly well populated
area of everyday human interaction. At the same time, interactions of the
Nero–Blanka type occur in social circumstances more distinctive and
limited than those of conversation in general. They occur in circum-
stances where message-senders seek to spare themselves the risks attend-
ant on overtness—such as giving offence, getting rejected, causing
embarrassment or being oneself embarrassed, or, it may be, taking full
responsibility for one’s message. This limitation, however, so far from
being a disadvantage of the model, is in fact an argument in its favour. It
is a limitation well suited to the hands-off social dynamic between
storytellers and their audiences.
20 The description of the case appears on page 30 of Sperber and Wilson, Relevance; their
subsequent comment on the case is cited from p. 61.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

The intimative model of storytelling incorporates dramatic plausibility
as an essential part of itself; the conversational model does not. This
I have ﬂagged as an advantage of the intimative model. But I have so far
taken dramatic plausibility for granted, along with the dramatic convic-
tion that it generates. Can the resources of the intimative model now be
tapped to provide, in addition, an analysis of dramatic plausibility? The
task, we saw, is either left unaddressed by the conversational model or
else undertaken with the help of a psychological theory independent of
the model—a theory based on make-believe or imagination. Can the
intimative model analyse dramatic plausibility into its factors without
recourse to a theory independent of the model and likely to import
problems of its own? It seems to me that it can.
4
‘Make-believe’ is a funny word. It looks somehow incomplete. It invites
the question: make who believe? Take a look at the Oxford English
Dictionary and you will ﬁnd that the verb ‘to make believe’ was originally
used in the context of making others believe something to be the case that
the make-believer knows is not the case. (It was modelled on the French
faire croire, which is a causative construction. See the entry for the verb
‘make’, IV.52.3). To make believe, in this usage, is to engage in a
deceptive pretence. It is not until the nineteenth century that we ﬁnd
the term being used for play-acting, children’s games, and the exercise of
the imagination more generally. This is the usage most familiar today.
But a nimbus of deceptiveness continues to cling to the word. It shows
up, for example, in popular song. Harold Arlen’s ‘It’s only a paper moon’
offers the conceit that genuine love could turn a moon made of paper
sailing over its cardboard sea into more than just ‘phony’ make-believe.
Or take the Conway Twitty/Jack Nance song: people around them see a
happy and devoted couple, but the appearance is a sham and the singer
knows the loveless truth, that ‘It’s only make-believe.’
Philosophers who appeal to make-believe in their theories of ﬁction
tend to think of make-believe as something that audiences do. The term
is then either interchangeable with ‘imagination’ or very closely related
to it. In that case, the answer to the question ‘make who believe?’
becomes, in effect, ‘oneself’. Not that the audience makes itself actually
believe in the ﬁction but that, in order to become dramatically convinced
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


when presented with a ﬁction, in order to care about the characters and
about what happens, the audience would be operating on itself. It is
convincing itself.21
If instead we do not lose sight of the original, causative sense of the
term, we open ourselves to treating make-believe as an operation per-
formed by the makers of ﬁction on their audiences—much as deceptions
are practised by the deceiver on others, and only derivatively on oneself.
So understood, make-believe requires no special analysis or theoretical
apparatus to be subsumed by the intimative model of storytelling. More
importantly, it will turn out to be a concept we can dispense with, along
with imagination—at least when it comes to analysing the audience’s
involvement in ﬁction.
When a deceptive pretence is in play, the make-believer (in the
causative sense) attempts to make the victim believe something actually
to be the case that the make-believer is aware is not in fact the case. The
con-man at the old lady’s door is hoping that his stolen uniform will
make her believe he is indeed the utility worker he appears to be, so that
she will admit him into her house. Now compare, using the same terms,
the pretence that Nero perpetrates on Blanka. We would have to say that
Nero allows himself to be seen attempting to make Blanka believe that he
has left his diary behind by accident. He deliberately undermines his own
con. But he does so in such a way that Blanka does not know he knows he
is being seen attempting to con her. That is, Nero’s aim is to be seen as
being seen attempting to make Blanka believe that he has left his diary
behind by accident. This is the actual con that is taking place.
For Nero’s con to succeed, Blanka must ﬁnd his pretence convincing-
looking, despite not being convinced by it. Otherwise she would not
suppose he intended the pretence to escape her notice. Precisely because
she appreciates that Nero is indeed putting on an act, she is also in a
21 Currie in The Nature of Fiction speaks of the attitude of ‘“imaginative involvement”
or (better) “make believe”’ that authors intend their audiences to adopt (p. 18). For Walton
(as sketched in his ﬁrst chapter), make-believe is an exercise of the imagination that
audiences engage in, a game in which props provided by the author or artist are used to
generate ﬁctional truths. Lamarque and Olsen describe the ‘ﬁctive stance’ as something
adopted by an audience when attending to sentences generated by an author. The audience
is to ‘make-believe (imagine or pretend)’ that standard speech-act commitments are
operative even while knowing they are not. To adopt such a stance is to treat the sentences
as ‘ﬁctive utterances’ (p. 43).

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

position to believe that he is trying to make it look as if he is not. She
thinks Nero is trying to make his actions not seem directed at her—not
seem devised to have an effect on her. This is what it is for her to ﬁnd his
act ‘convincing-looking’.
The interaction between Nero and Blanka, as we know, corresponds
to that between storyteller and audience. So it should come as no
surprise that we can describe the storyteller’s action in the same
terms as those we have used to describe the con that Nero perpetrates
on Blanka. Because the pretence perpetrated by storytellers, with due
exception made for tellers of true tales and raconteurs, is an open and
obvious pretence, one thing we cannot say of most storytellers, as we
just said of Nero, is that they allow themselves to be seen as attempting
to make the audience believe that something—in this case, what is
going on in the story—is actually going on when in fact it is not. When
the institutional pretence is obvious, storyteller and audience have a
mutual understanding that what is going on is only a story. We have
repeatedly seen, however, that the pretence to which Nero’s strategic
deception corresponds is not the obvious institutional pretence involved
in storytelling but the process by which authors captivate their audiences
so as to produce dramatic conviction—a process that applies equally to
tellers of true tales and raconteurs. So we should express the corres-
pondence this way: just as Nero allows himself to be seen as attempting
to make Blanka believe that his actions are not directed at her, so
authors allow themselves to be seen as attempting to make the audi-
ence believe that the story is not directed at them—was not devised to
have an effect on them.
How did Nero bring the trick off? By making his actions seem to
hold together in their own terms, independently of Blanka. That is to
say, his actions can be motivated and explained without recourse to the
assumption that they have been staged for Blanka’s sake. At the same
time, Nero must perform those actions in such a way that Blanka does
not in fact dispense with this recourse, even though she could have. She
must see his actions as a pretence. Otherwise, his performance will not
achieve what he wants it to achieve. Blanka will not appreciate his
intimation—indeed, will not appreciate that any intimation is even
taking place. It is only because Blanka appreciates that Nero is putting
on an act that she is also in a position to believe that he is trying to
make it look as if he is not.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


And how do storytellers bring their trick off? In the same way: by
making their actions seem to hold together independently of the audi-
ence, while at the same time ensuring the audience recognizes that this is
only an appearance. What actions? Take ﬁrst a very basic kind of
storytelling, one that tells its story in just the way that Nero presents
his little act. Nero is, in effect, a solo actor playing a role of his own
devising. He is both the storyteller and a character in his story. The
actions of his that can apparently be motivated without recourse to their
having been staged for Blanka’s beneﬁt are actions that he is performing,
as it were, in character. Marcel Marceau, performing on stage and in
white-face a solo mime conceived by himself, is in the same position. The
difference is that we cannot mistake his ﬁction for reality, whereas
Blanka could simply fail to see that Nero is putting on a little act for
her beneﬁt. Nevertheless, both Nero and Marcel Marceau are striving to
motivate in their own terms, independently of an audience, the actions
that they perform as characters in their own story. Why did Nero gasp?
Because he had suddenly realized he was late for class. Why did he leave
his diary behind? Because he was in such a hurry that he forgot to pack it.
At least, that is how he makes it all seem. The same actions, with the
same apparent motivations, could have connected a sequence performed
by Marceau (even if the gasp would have remained inaudible). Nor is
mime the only established form of storytelling in which the storyteller is
an actor in his own story: the members of an improv troupe are story-
tellers of this type. In this type of storytelling, the actions that storytellers
strive to motivate in their own terms, the actions that, as a result of the
storytellers’ efforts, appear to hold together independently of the audi-
ence, are the storytellers’ actions as actors in the story—actions per-
formed in character.
Most stories take forms more complex than that of mime or improv,
of course. Playwrights and moviemakers do not themselves perform in
character but use multiple proxy mimics, their actors, to present the
story. Novelists, in turn, can be thought of as conceiving the action of
such a drama, one performed by proxy mimics; but rather than arrange
for its presentation by actors they present it themselves, sometimes
mimicking it directly through dialogue, sometimes reporting it in nar-
rative. None of this complexity alters the fundamental sense in which any
storyteller strives to make the audience believe that the story is not
directed at them. The actions of the storyteller that receive motivation

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

independently of the audience are those that he causes to be performed
in character, whether by performing them himself or via proxies or by
mimicking and describing the actions of proxies while maintaining the
pretence that the motivations of those proxies are their own.
To say that Nero is ‘in effect’ a solo actor playing a role of his own
devising and that his actions are performed ‘in character’ is not to
smuggle make-believe and imagination in through the back-door, nor
is it to take for granted the very object that I am supposed to be
investigating—dramatic plausibility and the conviction it generates.
The naturalness of the comparison between Nero and a solo actor
derives from something deeper, which is common to Nero’s and to the
storyteller’s mode of intimating. In both cases, actions are performed
before an audience in such a way that they do not seem to have been
gauged with an eye to their effect on that audience, yet also in such a
way that the audience can recognize that those actions were after all
calculated with them in mind. This is what makes both of them cases
of intimation at the three-quarters-on position of the communicative
scale. And if I am asked how it is possible for an audience to take an
action to be performed ‘in character’ without using its powers of
make-believe or imagination, I answer: it does so simply by penetrat-
ing the manipulation involved. (More accurately: by penetrating its
ﬁrst layer.)
Blanka does not make-believe that Nero has forgotten his diary; she
believes that he was pretending to have forgotten it, and pretending so for
her beneﬁt. Things are no different, in principle, with storytelling. Cer-
tainly, the actions do more to earn their moniker of being performed ‘in
character’. The manipulation that we penetrate is generally contained
within what institutional conventions ensure we already know to be a
pretence. The pretence of not being directed at an audience is rather a
quality of the properly motivated plot, and this is the pretence that we
penetrate. The pretence that is the story itself requires no penetration;
that it is directed at an audience is obvious. The point of its being obvious
is to prepare us for an activity in which pretence is, so to speak, the name
of the game. That is why we are inclined to call Nero’s actions
‘convincing-looking’ and to reserve the term ‘dramatically plausible’ for
a proper drama. But these differences—here is the crucial point—are
institutional, social, instrumental differences, not differences of prin-
ciple. And pretence, not make-believe or imagination, is the concept
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


with which we must begin if we are to explain what is going on. For my
purposes in this book, it is a concept I am willing to take as primitive.22
It is worth spelling out how the same process applies to the tellers of
true tales and to raconteurs. However odd this claim may sound at ﬁrst,
they too are mimicking and describing the actions of proxies who
perform in character. The difference is that those proxies actually existed,
and (let us suppose) really did have the motivations attributed to them.
Certainly, the actions of those proxies at the time of their original
performance were not directed at the audience that hears of them now.
But now consider those actions in the re-telling. It is as true to say that
the actions recounted in some stirring personal memoir or vivid tale of
historic derring-do only seem to hold together independently of an
audience as it would be to say this of a ﬁctional story. That is because,
we may assume, those actions have been selectively plotted and arranged
with an audience in mind. Characters who actually lived through the
events described perform ‘in character’ within the story. They become
proxies for themselves, in the sense that their behaviour, as narrated, is
gauged to seem dramatically convincing to an audience. Already Aris-
totle got this right in the ninth chapter of his Poetics. There he argues that
even if a storyteller happens to be dealing with events that actually took
place, he is no less a storyteller for that. The reason, he explains, is that
nothing prevents an actual sequence of events from having the same kind
of plausibility that characterizes the plot of a good story. In other words,
real life sometimes gives a storyteller great material; but it is not because
those events actually happened that they make for a good story.
When actions performed in character seem to have their own motiv-
ation rather than being gauged with an eye to their effect on the audi-
ence, and those actions occur in a story, we call them dramatically
plausible. By so seeming, those actions do in fact have an effect on the
audience: they achieve dramatic conviction. But the term ‘plausible’
implies a ‘despite’. It is a defensive term. (A plausible conjecture is one
that admits of doubt; a plausible claim may be merely specious.) With
stories, the defensiveness of the term emerges if we are alert to how
dramatic plausibility is achieved in the teeth of a story’s ‘story-ness’. It is
22 Many questions could be raised about the cognitive architecture required for success-
ful pretence. (For a sample, see chapter two of Nichols and Stich.) But I am concerned here
with the structure of communication, not with the architecture of the mind.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

a plausibility an audience only appreciates because it is engaged in
piecing together a plot that it is aware the author is building on the
audience’s behalf, using as his building-blocks the plausibly motivated
engagements of his characters. (This corresponds to Blanka’s only appre-
ciating that Nero is trying not to seem to be putting on an act because she
is aware that he is putting on an act.) An audience convinced by a
dramatically plausible story, then, is convinced both because of and, in
a way, despite its attention to how the story is constructed.
Sophocles’ Oedipus the King offers a classic example of what I mean.
The messenger from Corinth who comes to give Oedipus the news of
King Polybus’ death—Polybus, whom Oedipus wrongly believes to be his
father—turns out to be the very servant who brought the then-infant
Oedipus to be adopted by Polybus. As a result of this coincidence a scene
that begins with the hero’s apparent salvation ends in his ruin. This, we
know, is the kind of thing that tends to happen in stories. For all its
‘story-ness’, however, the peripety in this scene is achieved by means of a
sequence of very plausibly motivated behaviour. If Oedipus believes
himself to be Polybus’ son, it is inevitable that he will take the news of
his ‘father’s’ death to have released him from one component of the
doom imposed on him by the oracle, namely that he would kill his own
father and marry his own mother. It is only natural that sadness over his
father’s passing should be swamped in him by joyous relief; only natural
that he should consider a return to Corinth, but be deterred by the fear of
going to where his mother still lives; only natural, then, that the mes-
senger, hoping for the further reward that a second piece of welcome
news might generate and ﬁnding himself in the lucky position of being
the very man to be privy to it, should not hesitate to dispell Oedipus’ fear
by informing him (disastrously) that Polybus and his wife were not
Oedipus’ real parents—something he knows for a fact, since he was the
one who presented Polybus with the infant Oedipus at the time.
It is from the interplay between these two aspects of the scene (the
story-like and the plausible) that its effectiveness derives. We in the
audience, aware that we are watching a tragedy by Sophocles, know
that messenger scenes tend to be pivotal and rarely bring good news.
We know we should be questioning the smoothly motivated sequence of
action unfolding before our eyes. It is through this questioning, in fact,
that we appreciate the action’s smoothness. It all goes so naturally, so
inevitably, we feel; but it is a feeling of inevitability that grips us rather
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


than soothes us. We want to know where this interchange between
Oedipus and the messenger will lead, and how it will get there. We are
made to care about the characters’ motivations for behaving as they do;
but the ultimate ground of our interest in those motivations is our
interest in how a story will emerge from them. (Likewise, the ultimate
ground of Blanka’s interest in the convincing look of Nero’s little per-
formance is her interest in what he is getting at by putting it on.) And this
same basic pattern of interest would apply to stories that are less plot-
driven than Oedipus the King and centre rather on the presentation of a
compelling character (e.g. Euripides’ Medea; Woolf ’s Mrs. Dalloway). In
such works dramatic plausibility resides less in a sequence of motivated
actions and more in the vividness and believability of the character; the
story-like aspect is then a matter of what such a character might achieve
(or might fail to achieve).
I have just claimed that the audience for Oedipus the King know they
should be questioning the smoothly motivated sequence of action
unfolding before their eyes, and that this is how they appreciate the
action’s smoothness. But perhaps they do not know this. Perhaps they
are, after all, soothed rather than gripped by the sequence. Perhaps
they are lulled by its naturalness. In that case, it seems to me, they are
failing to appreciate the action’s smoothness. Instead, it is their own
understanding of the action that gets smoothed over. This audience is
missing something. They are the equivalent of a Blanka who takes Nero’s
act for reality, failing to appreciate the intimation involved, or even that it
is an intimation. (Stories are unlike lyric poems in this respect, then.
These we should ﬁnd ‘natural’; their smoothness, in that sense, is some-
thing we should not seek to question—even if we should not merely
wallow in it. That is because lyric poems, as we have seen, are intimations
at a different point of the communicative scale than stories are.)
The contrast I have drawn between the story-like and the plausible
bears some comparison with the contrast between what theorists of
narrative have called the external and the internal perspectives that we
may take on stories.23 The internal perspective is presented in this theory
as an imaginative involvement in the story, the external perspective as an
23 I am thinking here of work by Peter Lamarque and its development by Gregory
Currie. See Lamarque’s Fictional Points of View (esp. pp. 14, 146–7) and Currie’s Narratives
and Narrators (esp. pp. 49–52).

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

awareness of authorial artiﬁce. The theory urges us to understand stories
in both ways, internally and externally, if we are to appreciate them fully.
This would be true both as a general point about narrativity and as a
point about the proper mode of engagement with any particular story.
Notice, ﬁrst, that my own theory gets at the interaction between its two
contrasting elements not through considerations of how stories work,
taken as the special thing they are, nor through considerations of how
best to engage with stories, but rather through considering a certain type
of intimation—intimation at the three-quarters-on position of the com-
municative scale—and demonstrating that stories are a sub-type of this
type, taking their place alongside other intimations at the same position
of the scale.
But the distinction between the two theories is not merely a matter of
the path taken to arrive at them. Talk of adopting twin ‘perspectives’
implies that audiences would need to switch between the two, or at least
that they respond to the author’s manipulations on two different tracks,
even if simultaneously.24 To take storytelling to be a three-quarters-on
intimation, however, is to ﬁnd the mutual reinforcement of the story-like
and the dramatically plausible more seamless than its equivalent in a
theory based on twin perspectives. We saw this in chapter three when
considering, on pp. 82–6, how plot-tracking and dramatic conviction
mutually and concurrently enhance each other. And the seamlessness is
a consequence of the form that a three-quarters-on intimation takes, in
which a staging must look convincing to its audience if it is even to be
taken as a staging, and, conversely, will not look convincing—though it
may still convince—unless it is taken as a staging. What distinguishes the
properly appreciative audience of Oedipus the King from the audience
that allows itself to be lulled is not, then, that the appreciative audience is
taking two perspectives (external and internal) on the same smoothly
motivated sequence of action on which the duller audience takes only
one (the internal). The two audiences are in fact watching two different
things. The appreciative audience is watching a staged intimation; the
other is watching only staged action. (Compare the child who keeps
24 ‘By getting us to adjust the resources we allocate to the two different perspectives,
narratives manipulate our expectations, affect our sense of what is probable, and shape our
willingness to grant plausibility to events within the story’ (Currie, Narratives and Narra-
tors, p. 48).
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


count when watching the persimmons and the kabocha perform vs. the
child who simply watches what comes next.) That is why the appreciative
audience is not merely absorbed: it is absorbed by dread.
Looking back on my account of the grip that stories exert over
audiences, we can see that it makes no appeal to make-believe as an
activity in which audiences must engage if they are to play the game to
which the storyteller invites them. Its only use of the term ‘to make
believe’ has been as a causal verb that can be applied to the activity of
storytellers, if so desired. It has appealed to the imagination only in order
to distinguish the storytelling activity of novelists and their equivalents
from that of mimes or of moviemakers. And even then the appeal was only
implicit: novelists, it seems, must exercise imagination, or something like
it, in order to have material to mimic and describe in their novels. (In the
next section, on pp. 146–7, I shall have a more precise proposal to make
about how the imagination of the novelist works. It will still not amount,
however, to a proposal about how imagination works in general.)
This account can be thought of as an unashamed return to an earlier
time. In many respects, it contents itself with the kind of analysis to be
found in Aristotle’s Poetics. Aristotle just takes it for granted that the
pretence in which storytellers, in their different ways, engage—a pretence
for which he uses the general term mimēsis—can cause the audience to
become emotionally involved with the characters, to care about what
happens to those characters in the story. This is especially striking
because his theory of mind boasts a full account of a faculty of imagin-
ation. But he makes no use of it in his theory of storytelling.25 His
concern is to investigate the kind of story that will best elicit in the
audience the emotional involvement appropriate to the genre, not with
how it is even possible for the audience to become emotionally involved
in the ﬁrst place.
Aristotle, I should explain, does not actually gloss mimēsis as a kind of
pretence; in fact he does not gloss mimēsis at all, but takes for granted
that his readers will understand the general meaning of the term. Perhaps
25 Aristotle’s technical term for the faculty of imagination, phantasia, appears nowhere
in the Poetics. Also, the nearest appeal he makes in that work to what sounds like the activity
of the imagination comes with reference not to what an audience should do but to what a
storyteller should do: chapter 17 opens with the advice that a playwright should compose
while keeping his story ‘before his eyes’ so far as possible, as if he were himself present
among the actions.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

the best evidence that he has pretence in mind, however, is the conjunc-
tion of the following two claims that he makes in the Poetics: in chapter 3
he speaks of Homer ‘becoming someone else’ when he allows a character
to speak directly;26 then in chapter 24 he praises Homer for speaking
relatively seldom as himself (i.e. when narrating in the third person),
instead bringing in characters to speak, since by this means he is doing
par excellence what a poet ought to do, namely engage in mimēsis.27 Also
relevant is the likely etymology of mimēsis. It seems to derive from the
term mimos, meaning either ‘mummer’ (in the sense of an actor of skits
from common life) or ‘mummers’ play. To engage in mimēsis, then,
would be ‘to do as a mummer does’.28 It thus makes basic the artform
in which mimicry is paramount, at least by comparison with narratives
or lyrics in the third person. It is a pattern much like the one I have
followed in my own derivation of what novelists do from what mimes and
dramatic actors do.29
Like Aristotle, I take for granted that a dramatically plausible story has
the power to engage our emotions; like him, I do not inquire into our
psychological capacity for being so engaged. My inquiry (to this extent
differing from Aristotle’s) has taken aim rather at the special kind of
pretence that any successful story is—its intimative structure, along the
lines of the transaction between Nero and Blanka. Dramatic plausibility
then yields to analysis as one component of this structure.
5
Storytellers who operate with audiences on the model of Nero with
Blanka are at pains to keep just the right distance from them—neither
too near, nor too far. They intimate rather than communicate with their
audiences. Yet some storytellers seem willing to address the audience
26 1448a22.
27 1460a5–11.
28 See Sörbom, p. 38.
29 The fact that Aristotle treats instrumental music too as a kind of mimēsis (chapter 1,
1447a24–8) is no objection, by the way, to his having pretence in mind. Aristotle holds, in
common with his culture, that music is a mimēsis of the varieties of character and emotion
(see his discussion of its educational value in Politics 8.5). Martial music, for example,
evokes bravery and the excitement of danger, and by so doing it sounds like war even
though there is no actual war going on. In this sense, it could be said to pretend to be
something it is not. (But as with anything in the study of the Poetics, the matters discussed
here are uncertain and much disputed.)
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


directly. Can the model accommodate this behaviour? Are there story-
tellers who operate with audiences on a different model?
The practice I have in mind is that of an author such as Henry Fielding
in Tom Jones. Not only does Fielding keep up a running, one-sided
dialogue with the person he addresses as ‘reader’—alerting or advising
or admonishing him, assuring him of his author’s bona ﬁdes, anticipating
his reactions, gauging his status and experience of the world; not only
does he comment on his own manner of writing and prepare the reader
for what is still to come; but he also prefaces each of the novel’s eighteen
books with disquisitions, often of a quite theoretical nature. Their topics
range across literary matters in general to include the literary qualities of
this work in particular, although in certain prologues Fielding instead
holds forth philosophically on abstractions germane to the plot, such as
virtue or love. Can the indirectness of a Nero have anything in common
with such behaviour?
In order to answer this question, it will help to recall how
I characterized the kind of pretence involved in novels and other such
narratives, as opposed to dramas. (Here I fulﬁl the promise made in
chapter three to expand upon this derivation.) In writing a novel,
I proposed, the author operates as if he were describing and at times
mimicking for us the action of a play or a ﬁlm that he has seen and we
have not. And when I say it is ‘as if’ the author were doing this, I do not
mean that he is only pretending to describe and mimic the action; I mean
that the play or ﬁlm that he is actually describing or mimicking (as he
moves between indirect and direct discourse)30 does not in fact exist.
There is no such play. Instead, there is dramatic action unfolding in the
author’s mind, which, were it to unfold outside of his mind as it does
inside it, would be a play or a movie or anyway a drama. It would not,
notice, unfold as a sequence of actual events. (Actual events have no need
to be dramatically plausible; dramatic action does.) That is the difference
in this case, I take it, between hypothesizing and imagining. When we
hypothesize, we consider how things would be if such and such were
actually to take place. The imagination of the storyteller, by contrast,
I am treating as, in effect, the internalization of mimicry—where by
‘mimicry’ I mean what actors do when they perform. For the audience
30 For an account of direct discourse as a kind of mimicry, see Clark and Gerrig.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

are not the only ones the storyteller must dramatically convince; he must
convince himself too. He must believe in his characters, be compelled by
the situation he is creating, or there will be no life to his story. One who is
merely constructing hypotheticals bears no such burden of internal
conviction. (Compare what was said in the closing pages of chapter
three, about how authors who feel that the story has come alive for
them are playing Blanka to their own Nero.)
In short, there is a movie running in the novelist’s head. That is where
the pretence lies. The novelist does not pretend to tell things as they are; he
describes and mimics a pretence, the movie running in his head—describes
and mimics it for real.31 As in the previous section, then, where I treated
‘make-believe’ as something that storytellers do to audiences (i.e. as ‘making
believe’) rather than an activity in which audiences engage, so now I am
treating dramatic conviction as something that begins at home, with the
storyteller, before it is extended abroad, to the audience.
Notice, too, how treating the novelist’s act of imagination as the
internalization of mimicry differs from treating it as an act of make-
believe (in the modern sense) on the storyteller’s part. Novelists (and
other such narrators) who supposedly construct dramatic character
and action by making-believe that a person of a certain sort is doing
such and such would, in my terms, be hypothesizing rather than imagin-
ing. They are considering how things would be if such and such were to
happen. Narrators who internalize mimicry are instead considering how
things would look if such and such were to happen. (I use ‘look’ collo-
quially here, not conﬁning it to the visual. It is short for ‘how things
would appear to those who encounter such and such’.) Convincing an
audience is therefore built in to their act of imagination; it is not an
achievement they bring off as a result of a prior act of imagination. It is
that too, since a narrator who has convinced himself can then extend that
conviction to his audience; but it is not essentially that. And of course, a
story may not even begin to convince its author before he has been
putting it to paper for some time. Authors who are working things out ‘in
their heads’ are unlikely to succeed without some prop, be it paper or
another platform.
31 Here I take implicit issue with the often proposed (and as often challenged) idea that
authors of ﬁction pretend to perform illocutionary acts which they are not in fact perform-
ing. See Lamarque, pp. 27–8, for a quick survey of the topic.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


Now consider the following case. Two brothers are walking to school.
The place is London; the year, 1964. One brother is sixteen years old—
old enough to be admitted to see movies that his ten-year-old brother
cannot. The older is holding the younger spellbound with the story of X:
The Man With The X-Ray Eyes, the new movie starring Ray Milland,
which he saw the night before. The older brother begins by attributing to
Milland’s Dr. Xavier a worthy motive—courageous self-experimentation
in the cause of science—before proceeding through the character’s sorry
catalogue of degeneration as his x-ray vision becomes more powerful and
his connection to the normally visible world increasingly tenuous and
disoriented. When his story gets to the scene in which Xavier’s awful,
goggling, black-and-gold eyes are revealed to a horriﬁed crowd, soon
followed by the climax in the desert, in the revival tent where Xavier,
urged on by a frenzied congregation, plucks out his own eyes in order to
protect himself from the holy terror of seeing through to the all-seeing
eye that sits in the centre of the universe, the narrating brother, warming
to his task, thunders in concert with the chanting worshippers (‘if thine
eye offend thee, pluck it out! pluck it out! pluck it out!’), and delivers the
campy gore as only a sixteen-year-old knows how.
Yet he also takes the time to explain unfamiliar details to his brother—
what a revival tent is, for example. He warns him when he is skimming
parts or skipping them entirely. He answers his younger brother’s ques-
tions (‘Why does he keep taking more of the x-ray-vision drug?’ ‘Well,
the changes are coming too gradually for him to understand what he’s
doing to himself; and in any case, he wants to see deeper and deeper.’)
He anticipates changes of pace (‘And now things really start to get
exciting . . . ’). And at the end, he indicates why the horror in this ﬁlm was
more compelling than in a typical potboiler from Hammer productions—
then the staple of teenaged British ﬁlmgoers.
With due allowance made for the gulf in complexity, ambition, saga-
city, and sophistication, what my brother was doing when he told me
that movie covers more or less the full range of what Fielding does in
Tom Jones. My brother too kept up a running dialogue with his audience,
answering questions and coping with objections. Since his interlocutor
was present, the questions and objections were not merely anticipated
but actually delivered: that does not strike me as an important difference.
He too passed comments on the choices he was making in order to tell
the story, and prepared his audience for what was about to happen. And

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

he too included a disquisition (only one, in his case) on the genre and the
conventions by which that story should be judged.
Fielding, of course, was writing his own story, using the drama that
ran in his head. The ﬁlm adaptation of Tom Jones came much, much
later. My brother, by contrast, was adapting into story another’s pre-
existing ﬁlm. The movie running in his head was a memory; it had
already unfolded outside his mind. But if what we are after is only to
explain the operations of stories told by narrators as opposed to stories
presented by actors, this is another difference that we can disregard.
Now, there is a marked difference between, on the one hand, the ques-
tions I interjected as the Milland movie was being told and my brother’s
directive comments as teller, and, on the other hand, the discourse on the
movie’s merits that capped the telling. Neither my questions nor my
brother’s responses disrupted our mutual, collusive engagement in the
ongoing story; on the contrary, they were a sign of the continued sway
that the dramatically convincing story held over us both, albeit in our
different roles. We both had Dr. Xavier’s interests at heart; that is what
prompted the questions and enriched the answers. Likewise with the
announcements about events to be skimmed or skipped, and the warn-
ings of a change of pace: this too is information that has most value for
an audience already primed with expectation and ready to focus on what
is important—primed and ready because the audience truly cares about
the protagonist’s fate. Only at the end did my brother turn critic and
I become the audience to a lecture. The spell had been broken. Thus,
although at ﬁrst blush the interjections and directions might seem to
belong on the side of the critical commentary and be similarly opposed
to the actual telling of the story, in fact they belong on the side of the
storytelling and are to be opposed to the critical commentary.
Much the same applies to Fielding’s practice in Tom Jones, although
the distinction there may be less easy to grasp. (That is why I began with
a simpler case.) What makes it less easy to grasp is that by addressing his
one-sided dialogue to ‘the Reader’, Fielding may seem to be interrupting
his story to view it from the outside, in the world where he as profes-
sional author and we as cultural consumers are active—which is the
perspective he adopts, for the most part, in his prologues. In order to
keep things properly ﬁctional, recourse may then be had to the idea that
‘the Author’ is not Fielding but a persona devised by him, while ‘the
Reader’ is not you and I but an ideal constructed by the ongoing story.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


But a closer look will show that this appearance is deceptive and the
recourse unnecessary.32
The crucial question, just as in the simpler case, is whether dramatic
conviction is being kept up. And right from the start—that is, from the
start of the story proper, in the ﬁrst sentence of the second chapter of
Book 1—Fielding strikes a pose that will help him pursue his dialogue
with the reader without ceasing to convince us dramatically:
In that Part of the western Division of this Kingdom, which is commonly called
Somersetshire, there lately lived (and perhaps lives still) a Gentleman whose name
was Allworthy . . .
‘And perhaps lives still’—as if Fielding, in writing what he always calls his
‘history’, were writing what we nowadays mean by a history. (The term,
in his day, could apply also to a ﬁctional tale.) Fielding begins his story by
letting his readers know that dramatic conviction is a condition he shares
with them. The dramatic conviction that this opening sentence estab-
lishes in readers—their interest in Allworthy—would be no different if
the phrase ‘and perhaps lives still’ was absent. The phrase is there to mark
Fielding’s position as one who cares for his characters at least as much
as they; it is he, not they, who shows an interest in where Allworthy might
be now.
Notice that Fielding’s pose of curiosity about Allworthy’s whereabouts
is no counterexample to an analysis that construes novelists as describing
and mimicking a movie that they have seen and we have not. It is simply
that Fielding treats the movie he is recounting as a true story (though of
course, he knows it is not). Compare the ﬁlm ‘Hula Girls’, which presents
the true story of a young dance teacher from Tokyo who is on the run
from debt collectors and ends up in a small mining town in the far north
of Japan. The mine seems likely to close. The teacher rescues the town’s
economy by teaching its young girls to hula dance in spectacular fashion
and establishing a ‘Little Hawaii’ in the bleak surroundings, which then
becomes a tourist attraction. As the credits run, we are informed that the
teacher never returned to Tokyo. Now an elderly woman, she continues
to teach dance in the former mining town to the present day. Fielding’s
32 I am indebted here to the important attack on persona-theory in Wolterstorff,
pp. 170–9.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

speculation about Allworthy’s whereabouts, I propose, is that of an
author recounting a biographical ﬁlm that never supplied this sort of
information in the credits.
(Why would it not sufﬁce to say that Fielding here strikes the pose
of a historian—rather than of someone recounting a historical drama?
Because, as Aristotle long ago explained, history has no obligation to be
dramatically convincing—see chapter 9 of his Poetics. Yet that is the
obligation to which Fielding submits. In the prologue to Book 2, he
abjures the plodding procedure of the writer of annals, comparing his
own ‘history’ rather to that of a historian of revolutionary times, who
homes in on what is pivotal, and whose historical material, we are to
understand, blesses him with the natural makings of a good story. In
effect, the pose Fielding strikes here is that of a teller of true tales or a
raconteur, along the lines analysed in the preceding section.)
Later in the chapter, the squire’s unmarried and no longer youthful
sister is introduced. Fielding ﬁrst satirizes the vigour and sanctimony of
her contempt for that beauty in other women that she herself does not
possess; next remarks that she nevertheless exercised all the self-
protective caution with regard to men that a more attractive woman
might; then offers the following generalization:
Indeed, I have observed (tho’ it may seem unaccountable to the Reader) that this
Guard of Prudence, like the Trained Bands [i.e. like a citizen militia], is always
readiest to go on Duty where there is the least Danger. It often basely and
cowardly deserts those Paragons for whom the Men are all wishing, sighing,
dying, and spreading every Net in their Power; and constantly attends at the
Heels of that higher Order of Women, for whom the other Sex have a more
distant and awful Respect, and whom (from Despair, I suppose, of Success) they
never venture to attack.
Immediately, he adds a comment on what, by offering this generaliza-
tion, he has just done:
Reader, I think proper, before we proceed any farther together, to acquaint thee,
that I intend to digress, through this whole History, as often as I see Occasion: Of
which I am myself a better Judge than any pitiful Critic whatever; and here I must
desire all those Critics to mind their own Business, and not to intermeddle with
Affairs, or Works, which no ways concern them: For, till they produce the
Authority by which they are constituted Judges, I shall plead to their Jurisdiction.
And with that, the chapter closes.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


By maintaining the ﬁction that he is recounting a tale of characters
who actually lived, even while tipping his hand as novelist to the extent of
addressing the reader directly on their score and using them as paradigm
cases, Fielding is able to indulge in digressions of this sort without
damage to dramatic conviction. The observation about prudence in
women is a digression stirred up in the author and drawn from his
memory by the act of considering Bridget Allworthy. (I mean, this is
how Fielding presents it—never mind what actually happened in the
process of writing.) Bridget Allworthy is no cipher on which to mount a
foregone conclusion. Rather, having brought her to life, our ironic author
pretends to be unable to account for the prudence with which he has just
endowed her, in much the way that he pretends to think that what keeps
men from pursuing women of her type is ‘Despair . . . of Success’. Having
made it quite clear in the character sketch he gives of her that Bridget
Allworthy adopts a punctilious sexual prudence out of her own ‘despair
of success’ at rivalry with beauties rather than out of contempt for them,
he now acts as if the best he can do to explain her superﬁcially puzzling
combination of qualities is to observe that he has encountered it often.
Let it be the case that Fielding did indeed have such encounters; let it
be the case that he thought the pattern worth recording in its own right.
I am quite ready to assume that both things are true. Nevertheless, he
presents the pattern as one which Bridget Allworthy—a creature born of
the ﬁrst ﬁve sentences of the paragraph in which the pattern is
described—satisﬁes as fully as the women of ﬂesh and blood belonging
to his past. In the context of this chapter, it is a pattern made worthy of
record by his and our interest in his ﬁctional character, and not the other
way round. Dramatic conviction is maintained. (And given the import-
ance to the plot of the one sexual escapade that Bridget Allworthy did
have at an earlier age, and which we will not learn of until near the end,
Fielding’s irony at her expense also serves as a diversionary tactic in
relation to the dramatically convinced reader.)
The same can be said of Fielding’s warning to readers that he intends
in what follows to digress as often as he sees ﬁt. It resembles my brother’s
alerting me to changes of pace in the movie he was recounting.
A comment like ‘and now things get really exciting’ makes no secret of
the fact that these ‘things’ exist only in a story; but what it draws
attention to is not their non-existence but their potential to excite. And
by falling on the willing ears of a dramatically convinced audience, it

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

contributes to the excitement. So with Fielding’s warning: it amounts to a
promise that the characters to which he intends to introduce us will have
sufﬁcient solidity to support expatiation on the qualities they exemplify.
We settle in our seats, ready to join the author in his leisurely social
explorations.
Nor need even the jab at the critics jolt us out of dramatic conviction.
Our ‘Author’ is an actual author, we know that. Being made aware of that
fact is not, by itself, going to weaken our conviction. Provided only that
in the run of the chapter the jibe seems to be occasioned by the warmth
of the author’s interest in his characters and in the ﬁctional action rather
than in himself as a writer, conviction will be preserved. Bridget All-
worthy intrigues and amuses both Fielding and us for having social
virtues that are also, in a way, failings. Those qualities are interesting
enough to inspire a general observation. The reader can expect the
author to be similarly stimulated and engaged by characters and inci-
dents to come. And let no critic attempt to stymie their joint interest!
Quite different is the approach to critics taken, for example, in the
prologue to Book 10. Here it is indeed Fielding’s interest in himself as a
writer that seems to drive the discussion. Its sole topic is how to read, and
its catechism is conveyed through admonishments about how not to read
Fielding’s book. By the device of separating out in his imagination the
least competent members of his readership, Fielding’s dialogue with the
reader is temporarily dropped in favour of dialogue with the critic (‘my
good Reptile’). For the space of this prologue we readers are no longer
interested in the fate of characters within the story but in the fate of the
story at the hands of its benighted critics. When characters are brought
up, it is in order to illustrate a principle of good writing, not in order to
engage us. The digression inspired by the portrait of Bridget Allworthy
was presented in the second chapter of Book 1 as a part of the story,
cropping up within its limits: ‘Reader, I think proper . . . to acquaint thee,
that I intend to digress, through this whole history, as often as I see
Occasion.’ The prologue addressed to critics in Book 10, on the other
hand, takes place outside of the story and requires a return to it at the
end: ‘And now, my Friend, having given you these few Admonitions, we
will, if you please, once more set forward with our History.’
So it is with the prologues in general. Fielding explicitly distinguishes
them as a group from the story itself, describing them in the prologue to
Book 5 as ‘those initial Essays which we have preﬁxed to the historical
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


Matter contained in every Book’. ‘Essays’ is right. Many of them, with the
omission of one or two inessential sentences linking them to the work in
which they appear, could indeed be excerpted from the book and sit
handsomely on the shelf alongside such collections of essays as those of
Fielding’s contemporary, the philosopher David Hume. (I am thinking,
for example, of the prologues on love, on plagiarism, on the marvellous,
or on the knowledge required of an author.)
Even within the prologues, it is true, Fielding likes sometimes to blur
the line he himself drew between these as a group and the story proper.
He will make some small remark that brieﬂy and mischievously returns
us, or hints at returning us, to the condition of dramatic conviction that
we have temporarily quit. The prologue to Book 17 is notable for such
remarks. Its theoretical point is that a book of this kind should eschew
supernatural means to rescue its protagonist from crisis. But in the
course of making it, Fielding has fun tantalizing his reader about the
crisis to come. At ﬁrst, ﬁttingly enough for a prologue, he does so as a
working writer who pretends not to know quite yet the fate of his
ﬁctional characters:
In regard to poor Sophia it is more than probable, that we shall somewhere or
other provide a good Husband for her in the End, either Bliﬁl, or my Lord, or
Somebody else . . .
Then, for the space of a parenthesis, he returns to the perspective from
which these characters are not ﬁctional but historical, declaring, as he
abjures any supernatural rescue for Tom Jones, that
we will do no Violence to the Truth and Dignity of History for his Sake; for we
had rather relate that he was hanged at Tyburn (which may very probably be the
case) than forfeit our Integrity, or shock the Faith of our Reader.
And at the end, he deliciously combines the two stances:
. . . let us try therefore what by these Means may be done for poor Jones; though
to confess the Truth, something whispers me in the Ear, that he doth not yet
know the worst of his Fortune; and that a more shocking Piece of News than any
he hath yet heard remains for him in the unopened Leaves of Fate.
But these and other such ﬂashes of fun leave the fundamental distinction
between the prologues and the story undisturbed. They keep us primed
for a return to the story, but do no more than that.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

What this analysis of Fielding has aimed to make clear is that wherever
dramatic conviction remains the evident goal, there the model of Nero
working on Blanka holds good. Fielding can speak directly to the reader
and still leave the reader with the feeling that, although this staging was
designed to be penetrated, it is convincing enough to seem as if it were
not so designed. We share our author’s involvement with his characters
and concern for their fate; our simultaneous interest in the pattern of
their fate as a product of authorial design does not diminish this involve-
ment and concern; and that is how Fielding wanted it. Only in the
prologues does the Nero–Blanka model cease to apply—a feature of
theirs that is explicitly marked. They stand outside the telling of the
story.33
The analysis has also aimed to make clear why recourse to the notion
that ‘the Author’ in this book is not Fielding but an authorial persona
constructed for the purposes of this book is unnecessary. (Compare the
reservations expressed about persona-theory in the context of lyric
poetry on pp. 126–9.) Dramatic conviction is not destroyed for readers
who take the authorial ‘I’ in Tom Jones to be the writer Henry Fielding,
Esq., provided they can feel that Henry Fielding is as involved with his
characters as his readers are. Whether Henry Fielding was as ﬁne a
person in life as his book makes him seem is irrelevant. It is his book
that we care about. Most of us, most of the time, strive to put on our best
face when we are in public. That striving alone does not make us
hypocrites, nor our best face a mere mask. Why should it be different
with authors?
Similarly, we do not need to posit an authorial persona just to be able
to make the kind of comment I myself made in the course of this analysis
when, describing the memory stirred in Fielding by the ﬁgure of Bridget
Allworthy, I added this parenthesis: ‘I mean, this is how Fielding presents
it—never mind what actually happened in the process of writing.’ Field-
ing presents it this way because it is important to him to treat Bridget
Allworthy, in some respects at least, as he would treat the living, breath-
ing women of his acquaintance. He and we both know that she is a
33 I ﬁnd myself at odds, then, with these judgements from Ian Watt’s seminal The Rise of
the Novel: ‘[Fielding's] authorial intrusion, of course, tends to diminish the authenticity of
his narrative. . . . ’ (p. 285); ‘Fielding’s diverting asides . . . undoubtedly derogate from the
reality of the narrative.’
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


ﬁction. Not only does this not turn Fielding into a liar; it also does not
make him a character in his own novel. It merely makes him a writer of
ﬁction. (The same can be said of the ‘pose’ he strikes, from time to time,
as a teller of true tales or a raconteur.)
In matters of authorial biography, in addition to matters of dramatic
conviction, things are once again different in the prologues by compari-
son with the storytelling chapters. Some, however, think otherwise,
putting the prologues and the author’s addresses to the reader in the
storytelling chapters on a par. Wayne Booth, for example, in his classic
work The Rhetoric of Fiction gives a stirring account of the warmth the
reader of Tom Jones feels toward the narrator and describes its pattern of
development as a ‘gradually increasing familiarity and intimacy leading
to farewell’ (pp. 216–17). He ﬁles this relationship, however, under the
rubric ‘reliable narrators as dramatized spokesmen for the implied
author’ (p. 211), and describes its development as a ‘subplot’ (p. 216).34
Now, for one thing, it seems to me that everything Booth successfully
captures about this relationship by construing the ‘I’ in Tom Jones as a
character (albeit a reliable one) in a subplot invented by Fielding can
instead be captured by construing that ‘I’ as the writer Henry Fielding,
who is intent on maintaining joint dramatic conviction with his reader.
For another thing, where dramatic conviction is dropped, as in the
prologues, then our expectations of biographical veracity from the
author are only increased.
Constrained by the theoretical omnipresence of the ‘implied author’ as
he is, however, Booth cannot do justice to this distinction. Describing
Fielding’s farewell to the reader in the prologue to Book 18, Booth begins
with the following, marvellously accurate lines:
When he draws to the end of his farewell, then, at a time when we know we are to
lose him, and uses terms which inevitably move us across the barrier to death
itself, we ﬁnd, lying beneath our amusement at his playful mode of farewell,
something of the same feeling we have when we lose a close friend, a friend who
has given us a gift which we can never repay. The gift he leaves—his book—is
himself, precisely himself.
34 Watt, too, puts the prologues and what he calls the ‘diverting asides’ on a par,
although in just the opposite way: he treats both equally as ‘breaking the spell of the
imaginary world represented in the novel,’ as if Fielding were at all times a ‘genial raconteur’
(and not just posing from time to time as such), who is ‘almost as attentive to his audience
as to his characters’ (p. 285).

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

But then things start to go awry:
The author has created this self as he has written the book. The book and the
friend are one.
Therefore, when the ‘friend’ writes in this ﬁnal prologue:
‘For however short the period may be of my own performances, they will most
probably outlive their own inﬁrm author, and the weakly productions of his
abusive contemporaries.’
Booth can comment as follows:
Was Fielding literally inﬁrm as he wrote that sentence? It matters not in the least.
It is not Fielding we care about, but the narrator created to speak in his name.
(p. 218)
With the ﬁrst part of this sentence I am happy to agree: It is not Fielding
we care about. But nor is what we care about a narrator created to speak
in his name. Rather, what we care about is the book that he, Henry
Fielding, wrote, and wrote in his own name. When in this ﬁnal prologue
he speaks to me, then, as the writer with whom I have collaborated in
the work of achieving dramatic conviction across those many pages
(although for these pages of his prologue what I rather do is to accept
an invitation to look back on our long collaboration), when he addresses
me in this manner and I come to his declaration of inﬁrmity, I am in fact
far from indifferent as to the state of Fielding’s health. The reason is not
that I care about Fielding the man, but that I care about Fielding the
writer of this book. If literal inﬁrmity (by which I mean not a chill caught
on the day of writing but a general condition of ill health) brings home to
him his mortality by comparison with the life of his book, sharpening
thereby the poignancy of his workman’s pride, and if he chooses to share
that information with me, then I would feel cheated if I discovered later
that those words were written while their author was in the pink of
youth. Alternatively (though less poignantly), I might suppose that
Fielding was not in fact suffering from a general condition of ill health
when he wrote, but deprecating himself in the courteous way that people
do when in conversation. His point would be to bring out the strength of
his writing by comparison—this, and the weakness of the productions of
his critics. But on either interpretation it is Henry Fielding I am making
my suppositions about, not some narrative construct of his.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


By insisting that the person with whom I take myself to be forming a
connection when I read Fielding’s work is the real Henry Fielding, Esq.,
but insisting too that this person is not Henry Fielding the man, with all
his biographical quirks, but only Henry Fielding the writer of the book in
question, I avoid the classic pitfalls that have long been thought to lurk
for those supposedly naive readers who fail to attribute the utterances of
the book to an imagined persona rather than to a historical person. These
pitfalls are nicely summarized in Bruce Vermazen’s defence of persona-
theory, ‘Expression as expression’. A work may express an emotion that
an artist never had, or that he had, but did not have at the moment of
creation; an artist may recognize the expression only after being done
with the piece, or may misread his own creation altogether; interpreters
typically lack a rich enough base of evidence to be making inferences
about the mental economy of the historical artist; during the long period
of writing, an author’s mental economy will not correspond at any
particular moment to the impression we get of the persona who purports
to utter the work in the time we take to read it; the artist’s mental
economy is in any case ﬁxed, while interpretations vary from interpreter
to interpreter and from age to age.35
Everything that the introduction of an imagined persona does to
resolve these problems, it seems to me, can also be done by narrowing
our view of the historical creator of the work to a focus on his or her
activity in creating it. If Henri Rousseau (to use Vermazen’s own
example) failed utterly to achieve his ambition to paint in the academic
style of his time, but in pursuit of that failed ambition did, nevertheless,
produce works that possess a special expressive character, why should we
conclude, with Vermazen, that ‘ﬁnding that expressive character (if the
story is true) is not ﬁnding out something about Henri Rousseau, but
something that, if it is about anyone, is about an imaginary someone’
(p. 211)? Why not, instead, say that it is to ﬁnd out something about
what Henri Rousseau the painter inadvertently achieved in his paintings?
At the other extreme, artists who self-consciously produce work that
expresses emotions they never had or attitudes they never shared—I
mean, that gives us this impression of the producer of the work—are
not creating ‘personas’ but doing what any person does who, in public,
35 Vermazen makes these points on pp. 201–2 of his article.

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

tries on an emotion or an attitude for size. So too, Fielding does not
create a persona who believes that Squire Allworthy is real; rather, he
makes us feel that he, Henry Fielding, is dramatically convinced by the
characters he himself has created. But an author who is dramatically
convinced by his own characters no more believes in the reality of those
characters than does his dramatically convinced audience.
When I insist on limiting our activity as dramatically convinced
readers of Tom Jones to a focus on Henry Fielding the writer of that
book, rather than extending it to the entire man, am I just using other
words to describe what a persona-theorist does who insists that, in this
work by the historical author Henry Fielding, the voice we hear is that of
the ‘narrator’ that Fielding created for the purposes of the work? No:
there is more than terminology at stake. At a minimum, if the appeal to
personas is otiose and the issues can be handled without adding this
theoretical animal to the critical inventory, then we are better off without
it. But if the appeal to personas has a further reach, stimulating the
inclination to treat social life as, in its essence, so much disguise and
masquerade, as I think it may do, then resistance is doubly worthwhile.
(The reader should compare my resistance to treating dress as so much
masquerade in chapter two, on pp. 57–61.)
None of this is to suggest, however, that the authorial ‘I’ in a ﬁrst-
person narrative can never be a persona constructed by the author for the
purpose of exploring a character quite different from his own. That is a
perfectly ﬁne way to compose a ﬁction. (A persona of this type was what
Bret Easton Ellis claimed to have constructed in American Psycho when
defending himself against Terry Gross—see pp. 106–7.) But then this
persona becomes one more character for the author to care about and
render dramatically convincing.
I have discussed Fielding at some length because Tom Jones is an
extreme case. Fielding’s engagement with his reader in that work is as
direct and persistent as could well be imagined in any author of ﬁction.
Once we have set the limits to show how far the Nero–Blanka model does
or does not apply to this case, we should readily be able to judge any
others that come our way.
For example, we will recognize in the Old Comedy of ﬁfth-century BC
Athens an equivalent in drama of the distinction we have seen between
the prologues and the storytelling in Tom Jones. In the plays of Aris-
tophanes that adhere to the conventions of this genre there comes a point
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


near the middle of each play where the leader of the chorus steps out
of the character he has been playing and addresses the audience directly
on the dramatist’s behalf. This section of the play is in fact called in
Greek the ‘stepping-out’ (parabasis). The parabasis of the Acharnians is
typical. There ‘our poet’, as the chorus-leader calls him, defends his
record as a fearless champion of free speech, decries the criticism that
has come his way, urges his fellow-citizens not to be bamboozled by
visiting foreign dignitaries, promises to continue speaking truth to
power, and ends with a jab at a political enemy of his. Comic exaggeration
does not cease (our poet sees his growing reputation as the main reason
foreigners are interested in Athens in the ﬁrst place); but the dramatist’s
communication with his audience (even if not expressed in the ﬁrst person)
is essentially as direct as that which we ﬁnd in Fielding’s prologues.
On the other hand, just as an author can treat the authorial ‘I’ as one
more character to be explored, so he can incorporate within his story
what look to be equivalents of a prologue or a parabasis but instead are
further ﬁctions. Nabokov’s Lolita begins with a foreword purporting to
be written by one John Ray, Jr., Ph.D., a psychologist as ﬁctional as is the
novel’s protagonist, Humbert Humbert, from whom he claims to have
received, via an intermediary, the pages that follow. Experimental
American ﬁction of the 1960s and 1970s became a happy playground
for this sort of thing. John Barth’s Giles Goat-Boy sports a nine-page
‘publisher’s disclaimer’ written in the voices of ﬁve different editors,
followed by a twenty-ﬁve page ‘cover letter to the editors and publisher’,
in which the author recounts how the manuscript of this novel came into
his hands, delivered and (he supposes) written by a mysterious visitor.
Such devices are simply grist to the mill of the Nero–Blanka model.
Nor, ﬁnally, should we assume that devices intended to alert the
audience to the ﬁctional status of the work to which they are attending
must of necessity break with dramatic conviction. On the contrary, to
these cases too the Nero–Blanka model can apply; for this model of
storytelling is no more tied to a realistic manner of storytelling than
pictorial conviction is tied to a realistic manner of picturing.
Bertolt Brecht, for example, set his face against plays that encouraged
in their bourgeois audiences a comfortable recognition of the dramatic
goings-on, and in his own plays often introduced devices intended to
diminish the hypnotic effect of the fourth wall. Take The Caucasian
Chalk Circle, in which a harrowing tale of child-abandonment in time

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

of war is partly acted out directly on stage, partly narrated by a village
singer who is also on stage. The effect of this is to allow into a drama the
kind of commentary that is typically found in novels. Directness of
dramatic presentation is indeed reduced; dramatic conviction is not.
Our interest in the fate of the abandoned child does not become theor-
etical; we want to know how the story will end.
Or take Pirandello’s Six Characters in Search of an Author. In this
play, rehearsal of a play by Pirandello is interrupted by the entry of non-
living, ﬁctional ‘characters’, characters who know and present themselves
as nothing more than characters in a play, but who have broken loose
from their ﬁctional moorings and now ﬁnd themselves in search of an
author and a stage on which to perform. The governing paradox of this
unrealistic drama, however, is that these six ﬁctional characters are in
some sense truer, more genuine ﬁgures, even if less real, than the actors
among whom they ﬁnd themselves. Because they were purpose-built to
be dramatically convincing and nothing but, it is they who sustain the
most moving and highly coloured moments—and there are plenty of
them—in the action that then unfolds. This is a play, then, that contrives
to incorporate commentary on dramatic conviction within a vehicle that
is itself dramatically convincing.
6
Let us take stock. Together, chapters three and four have argued that
storytelling—and, in all likelihood, ﬁction-making more broadly—
occupies a particular position on the communicative scale: intimation
at the three-quarters-on position. It is a position occupied also by the
kinds of social interaction in which we engage when protecting ourselves
from confrontation or otherwise evading too direct an encounter, while
nevertheless getting across to an audience what we want to get across.
Storytelling shares with such interactions a distinctive combination of
the overt and the covert, which I have summed up as a kind of double-
staging: a staging designed to be penetrated but sufﬁciently convincing to
seem as if it were not so designed. In the social interactions that I used
for comparison, this double staging is brought off with a pretence, a piece
of play-acting devised for the occasion and inserted into the ﬂow of
unstaged behaviour; in storytelling or ﬁction-making, the double staging
exploits a particular aspect of the institutionally obvious pretence that all
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


ﬁctions are: their dramatic or pictorial plausibility. The storyteller strikes
a careful balance between absorbing us in the action of the story, on the
one hand, and keeping us appreciative of its qualities as an artefact, on
the other.
This analysis, I claimed, captures both the standofﬁshness of story-
tellers and the freedom of their audiences, while also explaining the
peculiar intimacy between them—an intimacy born of the audience’s
willingness to collaborate in their own deception. Intimation at the three-
quarters-on position puts the interaction between storyteller and audi-
ence at the right distance: neither too near, nor too far. It does a better job
of this than does the conversational model of ﬁction. And it can accom-
modate the full gamut of storytelling forms, including those in which an
author intervenes in the action to address the audience directly or
otherwise makes explicit within the story the fact that it is indeed a
story—provided the author does not in the process sacriﬁce our dramatic
conviction.
Along the way, we took note of one further position on the commu-
nicative scale, the quarter-on position, together with its instantiations in
the established arts: lyric poetry and, perhaps, non-ﬁgurative visual art.
We saw in particular how the covertness of the quarter-on intimation is
realized in lyric poetry, at least when lyric poetry is successful: lyric poets
make their language and their pretensions, despite the obvious extrava-
gance of both, come across as somehow natural and unforced. What
grips the audience for a story is the story’s dramatic plausibility; what
grips the audience for a lyric poem is the poem’s voice, which we seem to
overhear rather than ﬁnd ourselves addressed by. Although such poetry,
unlike storytelling, uses no pretence, it is no less intent than storytelling
on maintaining the correct distance between poet and audience. Its
intimation is covert.
Storytelling shares its position on the communicative scale, then, with
other social interactions. Nevertheless, there are institutional factors that
set it apart from them. Storytelling tends to come in established forms
(novels, movies, comics, jokes . . . ) and to follow conventions that make
its status clear from the get-go. Nor are institutional markers all that set it
apart. My account of storytelling so far has maintained a focus on the
communicative relation between storyteller and audience, a relation that
matches it with other social interactions at the same notch of the com-
municative scale. But let us acknowledge, as our account of storytelling

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

draws to an end, that in most of its established forms storytelling belongs
to the aesthetic realm, where it is directed by beauty. The reliable
connection of storytelling with beauty further distinguishes storytelling
from intimations other than storytelling at the same position of the scale.
To invoke the beauty of stories, however, in order to distinguish them
from intimations that share their position on the communicative scale is,
in the ﬁnal analysis, no more than to restate in a new mode a distinction
made in chapter three. The content of the storyteller’s intimation, we
saw, is just the story itself. The connected understanding of the story’s
elements that the author seeks to induce in us is enough for us to ponder,
whatever further effects may result from the pondering. It has a value of
its own, even if it is not the only value that we look for in stories.
Let me rehearse my earlier formulation of how the performance that is
a story can have a value of its own, using the same example as before. To
understand how the elements of Virgil’s Aeneid hang together is not
simply to follow the story’s progress but to appreciate what makes it
special. We do not merely learn what befalls Aeneas but why we should
care what befalls him, why what befalls him deserves our consideration.
Now, this is a way of formulating the Aeneid’s beauty. The beauty of a
story, as with the beauty of any work of art, is what makes it special,
irreplaceable. The world has many foundation stories to show for itself,
but only one Aeneid. That is a truth at once banal (of course there is only
one Aeneid!) and as profound as one could wish—since explaining, really
explaining, what makes the Aeneid the work that it is poses an endless
interpretive challenge.36
36 Alexander Nehamas (p. 123) comes up with a paragraph—it is a tour de force—to
show how specifying a novel’s plot can be seen either as description or interpretation, at
almost any level of analysis. Jaws, The Old Man And The Sea, and Moby Dick all being, as he
puts it, a tale of ‘man hunts ﬁsh,’ to say further that Moby Dick is the story of Captain
Ahab’s hunt for a whale would already be an interpretation, even though it is little more
than an elementary speciﬁcation of the plot . . . and so on up through any number of levels
of complexity. In general, by identifying the beauty of a work of art with what makes it
irreplaceable as the artwork that it is I take myself to be following in the footsteps of
Nehamas (esp. pp. 92–3) and, before him, Mary Mothersill (esp. chapters nine and eleven).
The key move is to refuse to account for beauty by appeal to general criteria. Everything we
say about the beauty of the artwork, even when we are comparing its features to features
found elsewhere, we say with application only to the particular beauty of this particular
thing. (In ‘The meaninglessness of gardens’ I develop this thought in relation to the art of
gardening.)
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


Social interactions of the Nero–Blanka sort tend to work differently.
They tend to operate as delivery-systems for a message. True, the deli-
cacy of the system inﬂects the message; but this is only to say that by its
delicacy the performance guides a message toward the production of a
particular effect in the intended target. (Blanka, Nero hopes, will receive
his message of love more graciously if it is intimated rather than
declared.)
Certainly, there are exceptions. We considered one in chapter three: a
ﬂirtatious encounter which, by being self-contained, would become its
own point. In such an encounter the participants are less intent on
conveying their sexual or romantic interest in each other than in savour-
ing the game of innuendo generated by that interest. The game itself is
what counts for them. After all, it is a lovely thing; and besides, they have
no real desire to go further. Much the same can happen with the display
of ﬁne manners: among members of an aristocracy with little else to
occupy their time but to style their behaviour impeccably, behaving with
perfect manners may become an end in itself.
There are exceptions, too, among types of stories. There are stories
intended to serve above all as illustrative examples—the kind that might
crop up in a lecture or a sermon, say. There are didactic allegories like
Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. There are the fables of Aesop and of his
imitators. There are Victorian tales for young people that in their entirety
read like thinly disguised sermons; and there is Soviet realist storytelling
whose power of conviction collapses beneath the weight of its own
propaganda. Some of these are successful types of storytelling, some
are failures; but all are cases in which stories operate as delivery systems
for a message rather than as creations directed by beauty. (Similarly,
though at their different level of the communicative scale, there are lyric
poems that serve the utilitarian purpose of mnemonics.)
To note that these exceptions exist does not dislodge the claim that
storytelling differs from other intimations at the same position of the
communicative scale not just institutionally but by virtue of being
directed by beauty; it is only to concede that we are speaking of tenden-
cies rather than absolutes.
Admittedly, we are not in the habit of calling stories ‘beautiful’. We
tend to praise them in other terms, more speciﬁc to narrative success. In
principle, the concept of beauty applies as much to stories as to other
works of art; in practice, beauty comes up for consideration more readily

STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED
www.ebook3000.com

in the visual or aural than the narrative arts, or at any rate in arts with an
important visual or aural component. (Thus we are more likely to call
lyric poems beautiful than we are to apply the term to a story, due to the
sheer musicality of their poetic language.) Beautiful human ﬁgures pass
us in the street as well as standing in marble on plinths; the world is full
of beautiful, unmanufactured sights and sounds, not just beautiful paint-
ings and music. It is not, however, full of beautiful stories. Even the most
open-ended of stories will have fewer dangling threads than life invariably
contains. So the term ‘beautiful’ comes more easily to the lips when
engaging with the visual arts and music than when engaging with stories.37
The world may not be full of beautiful stories, but it is full of beautiful
ironies. As it turns out, our account of storytelling and of its position on
the communicative scale can throw light on how these ironies work, and
they in turn can throw light on why the world never becomes more
intimative than when it is the ‘world’ of a story. With the topic of irony in
the world, then, this book will round itself to a conclusion.
37 Compare Nehamas, who notes that ‘most theoretical discussions of aesthetic qualities
centre on painting, where vision is central, and are embarrassed by literature’ (p. 100). He
explains that focus by appeal to the ‘you had to be there’ quality of aesthetic judgement,
which approximates perceptual experience. This may be correct as an account of the focus
of aesthetic theory; but the way we use the term ‘beautiful’ has, I think, the simpler
explanation given in the text.
STORYTELLING AS INTIMATION: THE MODEL DEFENDED AND REFINED


5
Situational Irony
The World Made Intimative
Jesus, as Judee Sill’s old song has it, was a crossmaker. A ﬁre that
destroyed eighty houses in Santa Barbara in 2009 was started by a
spark from a power tool that someone was using to clear brush from
around his house—to protect it against ﬁre. A Hispanic actor playing a
gang-member in a drama about gangs and streetlife was sitting at the
back of a local bus, in costume, on his way to acting class to practise his
part. Real-life Norteño gang members got on the bus. Not knowing he
was an actor, they beat him up for wearing the wrong-coloured sneakers.
A young man with thinning hair, wanting to look trendy, shaved his
head completely bald for three years in a row. Fashions change, and he
decided to grow his hair back—only to discover that in the interim
he had actually gone bald. The Japanese poet writes: ‘Off to work, the
burglar to his wife: “Lock up tight when you go to bed!”’1 And Aristotle
in the Poetics offers us a classic case, which has recently returned to
vogue in philosophic discussion. The statue of the murder-victim Mitys
fell upon a man who was gazing up at it—or, on an alternative transla-
tion, upon a man who happened to be attending a festival where the
statue was set up. The man was killed. That man was none other than
Mitys’ murderer.2
1 Anonymous, from an eighteenth century collection of comic haiku or ‘senryuu’
entitled Additional Gatherings from the Willow Barrel. My immediate source for the
poem is Haruo Shirane, ed., Early Modern Japanese Literature, An Anthology 1600–1900
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2002), p. 523; the translation is Burton Watson’s.
The burglar, I assume, is meant to be speaking seriously; it is the situation that is ironic.
2 The example (from Aristotle, Poetics 1452a6–11) is made much of by J. David Velle-
mann, pp. 190–2, whose position is resisted by Currie, Narratives and Narrators, pp. 29–32.
I discuss Vellemann’s position later in this chapter.
www.ebook3000.com

These are all cases of what we know as ‘irony of fate’ or, equivalently,
‘situational irony’. Most of them are actual cases. Nevertheless, if at a
dinner party I were to retell the case, say, of the young man who went
bald, it would be very natural for me to insist on its truth with the words:
‘True story!’ Why? Because a case like this seems almost too good to
be true; it exhibits the neat twist of a tightly plotted story, not the
messiness of life.
That is one way in which situational ironies resemble a story. Another
is that the situation seems to be directed at an audience. It is as if it were
designed to be appreciated. The audience may extend no further than the
target of the irony; alternatively, it may also embrace onlookers or those
who get to hear about the case. (Mitys’ murderer, unusually, is the target
of the irony without being any part of its audience, since he never gets to
know what happened or see it coming.) Or the target may be ﬁctional
and the situation a toy of its inventor, who is also its only audience—at
least, he will be its only audience unless he decides to circulate the result,
perhaps as a fully-developed story. The target of the irony tends also to
be its rueful victim, but not always: some ironies are winning situations.
The case of the Japanese housebreaker is an example. The ironic beneﬁt
to the burglar of his expertise at breaking into others’ houses is that he
keeps his own house safe. He is still the target of the irony, but not its
victim. (That is, he is not its victim in the sense of suffering as a
consequence of the ironic situation, although he is its victim in another
sense, as target of the criticism that the irony implicitly directs at his
behaviour.) Other winning situations, common in melodrama or farce,
may be narrow escapes. The target looks to be in a tight scrape—a victim,
then—but in an ironic twist ends up a winner.
Situational ironies resemble stories; they can readily be put to use in
the plots of stories;3 but situational ironies are not stories. In fact they
seem to reverse the polarity by which stories work. Stories are intim-
ations. As intimations go, they are obvious pretences, which by the
wizardry of dramatic conviction come to seem, if not quite real, then
tantamount in several respects to reality. Situational ironies are the
opposite. They are cases in which reality (or a hypothesized reality)
3 Compare Currie, ‘Why irony is pretence’, p. 129, on how situational irony ‘covers real
circumstances that mirror those of dramatic irony, except that there need be no onlooker
aware of the disparity at the time’.
SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE


comes to seem intimative. The situation seems to have something to ‘tell’
us, to get across to us.
That the situation seems to have something to tell us is presumably
why it has been traditional to think of ironic situations as cases in which
life imitates art.4 The thought is a natural one, despite the fact that stories
work contrariwise to situational ironies. Even though situational ironies
are not stories, they may feel like stories (better, moments in a story), at
least to the victim who sees himself as a pawn in the diabolic or, in
winning scenarios, playful machinations of some higher power.5 The
higher power seems a kind of divine novelist or scriptwriter; the victim
seems a character in the divine novelist’s story. Since the victim tends
also to be conscious of the story-like quality of the situation—unlike, say,
Mitys—the victim is typically a character who ends up joining the story’s
audience. And as with stories in general, what the situation looks to be
getting across to us may be no more than the equivalent of the story itself:
the exquisite shapeliness of the irony. Or the situation may be taken to
hold a moral, as didactic stories do.
This approach to situational irony, for all its promise, does run up
against the fact that a large class of situations that strike people as ironic
are simple incongruities, with no apparent connection to how stories
work.6 Standard cases include the humble shoemaker who has no shoes,
the impoverished banker, the hovels nestled against the palace wall, the
labouring children who can see men at play. Our irony about the
Japanese housebreaker likewise involves a plain incongruity. (‘Of all
the people to have no shoes—a shoemaker!’ ‘Of all the people to be
protecting himself against housebreakers—a housebreaker!’) These situ-
ations are as eloquent in their way as the ironies that resemble a narrative
4 Shelley, p. 776, criticizes theories of literary irony for making the assumption that
‘literary irony is the paradigm case and that situational irony is a special case of life
imitating art.’ Muecke, p. 220 ff., collects a variety of classic statements of the thought
that God is a dramatist.
5 In his study of the ﬁlm The Usual Suspects, Joshua Landy derives the deeply satisfying
shapeliness of the plot from an argument that its protagonist is none other than the Devil.
At the end, Landy connects this thought with the pleasure we take in situational irony: ‘We
are endlessly delighted when things go not just wrong, but spectacularly wrong . . . Since all
irony implies an author, here too we may be basking not in the shadow of God but in that of
the Devil’ (‘The Devil, the master-criminal, and the re-enchantment of the world’,
pp. 48–9).
6 The label ‘ironic situations of simple incongruity’ is Muecke’s (see his p. 100).

SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE
www.ebook3000.com

(such as that of the young man who goes bald); I see no reason not to call
them ironic. In the literature on situational irony, however, such cases
prompt the worry that unless we anchor the category to the dramatic
irony characteristic of stories it will grow so overladen as to include
anything incongruous, unexpected, or unfair. In the other camp are
theorists who derive situational irony from highly elaborated versions
of just such concepts, while treating the use of situational ironies in
storytelling as at most a secondary issue.7
The approach that regards our nose for situational irony as one with
our nose for a good story has an intuitive simplicity that I am reluctant to
forgo. Situations that strike us as ironic have about them something that
is characteristic of situations in stories. Let us continue to take this idea
for our guide. But what that characteristic is remains to be discerned. We
are looking for a feature that can hold ironies of simple incongruity
alongside ironies of plot-twist or ‘peripety’ in a single embrace.
Consider again the case from Aristotle’s Poetics, on the fate that met
the murderer of Mitys. Aristotle calls this a chance event that looks as if
it had come about by design and attributes to this quality the event’s
capacity to amaze. In other words, it seems too good to be true; it seems,
in fact, just like a story—in which case a designer would indeed have
been at work. That is why we might be inclined to call the outcome
providential. For the story to satisfy, however, the hypothesis of an actual
designer (a retributive deity, say) is not essential. The philosopher
J. David Vellemann, in his discussion of the Mitys affair, is correct
to insist that it is still a good story if we take the murderer’s death for
an accident. Velleman thinks the reason for this is simply that, when a
murderer gets his comeuppance, we feel gratiﬁed. An ‘emotional
cadence’ is brought to completion.8
But I think something more than this must be in play.9 The gratiﬁca-
tion we feel over the Mitys affair is not just that a murderer has gotten his
comeuppance; it is not even that a murderer has gotten his comeuppance
7 The worry that I report from the ﬁrst camp is Currie’s in ‘Why irony is pretence’,
pp. 128–9; the second camp is represented by Lucariello and by Shelley.
8 See Velleman, pp. 190–2.
9 Currie thinks so too, but wants the something more to be a matter of dependencies
between events, which need not be strictly causal but are at least embedded in a causal
context (Narratives and Narrators, pp. 30–2, 38). Both Currie and Velleman, it bears
noting, bring up the Mitys affair in order to discuss narrativity, not situational irony.
SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE


by exquisitely appropriate means (Velleman calls it a ‘ﬁtting comeup-
pance’); it is rather that this exquisite event is also, in its way, quite
mundane.
People are regularly killed by falling objects, whether or not by falling
statues. People regularly travel to festivals; they regularly approach
statues for a closer look. (Mitys’ murderer was doing one or the other,
perhaps both.) Statues, for their part, are not guaranteed to remain
stable. If a man in a public place gets killed by a falling statue, the story
might make a headline in the local news; but it is no anecdote for the
ages. What makes the Mitys affair just such an anecdote is that the statue
was of Mitys and the man was his murderer. A relatively mundane
incident is thereby rendered spectacular. Of all the people to be standing
there when Mitys’ statue fell—his killer! Of all the statues to be the one to
fall on Mitys’ killer: the statue of Mitys!
The mundaneness here is, as it were, a snapshot taken from a sequence
of plausibly motivated actions and events, of the kind we studied in
chapter four when considering how the horrible revelation was engin-
eered by Sophocles for King Oedipus. A story could be ﬂeshed out for the
murderer of Mitys, with many a fateful coincidence ferrying him from
murderous deed to ﬁnal encounter. It would be one kind of story if, say,
he was going to the festival in order to gloat over the statue of his victim;
another if he went to the festival and was shocked to ﬁnd the statue there;
yet another if he knew nothing of the statue and was sitting with his back
to it when it fell. It would be no great task to come up with reasons for the
statue to be on site and the murderer to be at the festival—reasons
unconnected with the statue’s fall except in so far as they contribute to
the storyteller’s overall design. As things stand, we are given only the
scene that, were this a fully worked out story, would form the story’s
denouement. But its combination of the mundane and the amazing
play off each other in the same way that, as we saw, a story’s dramatic
plausibility will play off its ‘story-ness’.
This resemblance is presumably what brings Aristotle to compare
the demise of Mitys’ murderer to a suspenseful, surprising story in
which events play out, as he puts it, ‘against expectation because of one
another’. That they play out because of one another gives the story its
mundane plausibility; that an unexpected result emerges from this causal
nexus gives the story its impact. Both sides of the equation are required
for the story to add up.

SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE
www.ebook3000.com

Aristotle was interested in the particular kind of surprise generated by
such a story. It does not spring from nowhere, like a come-from-behind
cry of ‘boo!’ We savour this surprise not just for its shock-value or (as in
the Mitys affair) its wholly unexpected appropriateness. Rather, it is only
if we muse on how the extraordinary surprise emerged, by accident, from
an underlying causal sequence of ordinary events that we savour its irony
to the full. Vellemann, by contrast, seems uninterested in the special
quality of this surprise; for him, the ﬁttingness of the comeuppance is
what matters, whether or not it comes about by accident. Vellemann,
then, is intent on showing how the Mitys affair does not cease to satisfy
as a story even if the comeuppance is regarded as an accident, whereas
Aristotle, whose focus I share, is intent on showing how the Mitys affair
satisﬁes as a story not despite the fact that its comeuppance is an accident
but because it is—more exactly, because it is an accident of a certain kind,
the kind that can seem providential.10
Now, this same play of the mundane against the surprising is as
characteristic of situational ironies of simple incongruity as it is of the
ironies of peripety such as the Mitys affair. Take the case of the cobbler
who has no shoes. In the third-world situation envisaged by this irony, it
makes perfect sense that a humble cobbler does not make enough money
and cannot spare the leather to make shoes for himself as well as for
his customers. That he has no shoes is a mundane consequence of his
poverty. And yet, of all the people not to have a pair of shoes to his
name—a shoemaker! (Water, water everywhere, nor any drop to drink.)
The same applies to our Japanese housebreaker. Why ever should he not
be careful of his own home-security? Why, in fact, should he not be
especially careful of it, given his professional awareness of the dangers?
This too makes perfect, mundane sense. And yet . . . Or take the labour-
ing children who can see men at play, or the hovels that hug the palace
wall. Bring the examples into the ﬁrst world, and consider the homeless
who panhandle outside the luxury stores or the fancy eateries. Why
shouldn’t those be precisely the places they would choose for panhand-
ling? Should they panhandle instead where the money isn’t? It all makes
a gloomy kind of sense; yet still, the contrast jars.
10 I have studied Aristotle’s treatment of the Mitys affair at greater length and in more
scholarly detail in my ‘Aristotle’s literary aesthetics’, pp. 191–3.
SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE


But it is not just the incongruity that makes for the irony, nor even the
fact that the incongruity is strong enough to jar. It is by locating the
surprise in the mundane that we appreciate the irony of a situation. To
see this, consider a Mother Teresa-ﬁgure who observes the emaciated
children conveying Calcutta’s tourists by pedicab to their next entertain-
ment, the mansions that rise next door to the city’s tenements, and so on.
Does she ﬁnd the scene ironic? She does not, despite the fact that she
ﬁnds it all jarringly incongruous. Her feeling, we may suppose, is a burning
indignation. She is witnessing an injustice, not an irony. Child-labour, for
her, is not ironic; it is wrong. Alternatively, her primary feeling may be
the pity that evokes the love of God for unfortunates and brings forth
charity. Either way, she feels she must help. Either way, she has no room
in her heart to savour an irony.
What makes the difference here is that our Mother Teresa-ﬁgure is
struck only by the incongruity; she does not dwell on its mundaneness—
except, perhaps, to insist that nothing so outrageous should pass for the
social norm, or, alternatively, to accept God’s will for His creation and
offer charity where reform is impossible. She cannot ﬁnd the situation in
any way exquisite; she either ﬁnds it just ugly, or else thinks it the way of
all ﬂesh. That so jarring an incongruity should have emerged from a
mundane background of economic and social factors, none of which
attract much notice in the culture, is not a thought that crosses her mind.
While she can recognize both the incongruity and its mundane social
background, she appreciates these factors separately. What she cannot
appreciate is the play of these two factors against each other; but it is
from just this play that the sense of irony arises. It is this play that renders
the situation eloquent, as if it were being brought to our attention by
some scriptwriter-in-the-sky. For Mother Teresa, by contrast, the situ-
ation is not intimative; she has no sense that she resembles a character in
a story, or an audience to one; she is simply passing judgement on a
situation and reacting accordingly.
It is also possible, however, to imagine a Mother Teresa who does
indeed have the sense that the situation is intimative, that it holds a
message for her. Let us suppose she does not just feel the urge to help;
rather, she feels called upon to help. She believes God wanted her to know
what her mission should be and to that end sent the situation her way.
Notice, nevertheless, the difference between the kind of intimation this is
and the kind that a situational irony transmits. Our Mother Teresa is

SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE
www.ebook3000.com

most likely taking the situation as an intimation at the half-on position of
the communicative scale. What would put it there rather than at the full-
on position (where it would become a communication) is this: it is not by
recognizing God’s intention for her that she recognizes her mission to
help the poor; rather, she recognizes her mission to help the poor as a
direct result of her confrontation with their plight, while thinking also
that their plight is something God surely intended to confront her with.
God wanted her to know her mission thereby. Alternatively, she might
perhaps take her ﬁrst encounter with the destitute of Calcutta as a full-
strength communication, a sign or command from the Lord. That is, she
supposes that God brought her to witness these urchins at this particular
street corner for no other purpose than to make apparent to her His
intention that she devote her life to the care of the Indian poor. God
wanted her to know that He wanted her to know her mission lay in India.
(Generally speaking, however, to count as a sign from the Lord the
experience would doubtless need to be more startling and miraculous
than this.)
But what Mother Teresa is still not doing, whether she takes the case as
a half-on intimation or as full-on communication, is to consider it ironic.
To do that would be to make herself an audience for the kind of intim-
ation that storytellers use—intimation at the three-quarters-on position.
Storytellers, recall, mix the covert with the overt in their intimations; they
want us to know that they do not want us to know that they want us to
know whatever it may be. We are to congratulate ourselves on uncovering
their machinations, even as we consent to be machinated against. Situ-
ational irony has just this piebald quality. We are startled by, or at least
taken by, the overt ironic result—the incongruity, the neat turn of
events—but only because we can also appreciate the covert means by
which the result was achieved: the mundane factors or sequence of action
that had us tagging along as this outcome was being prepared. By her
indignation, by her faith, by the immediacy of her involvement, however,
our Mother Teresa is blocked from achieving this kind of appreciation.
Situational ironies seem to have something to ‘tell’ us. By thinking
through the possible reactions of a Mother Teresa to a situation that
others might ﬁnd ironic, we have been able to assign what that some-
thing might be to its proper position on the communicative scale. And it
is a position where ironies of simple incongruity can take their place
alongside ironies of peripety.
SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE


It might seem, however, that ironies of simple incongruity and ironies
of peripety can be united by appeal to a different characteristic of stories
than the play of the mundane against the surprising, of dramatic plausi-
bility against a story’s ‘story-ness’. That characteristic would be the
inadvertence or ignorance that afﬂicts the victims of dramatic irony as
much as it does the victims of situational irony. If Oedipus had known
who his real mother was, he never would have married Jocasta; if Mitys
had known the statue would fall, he would have moved out of harm’s
way. We who know better appreciate the ironies involved. So far, so
convincing. But where is the aspect of inadvertence, you might well
wonder, in ironies of incongruity such as that of the shoemaker who
has no shoes, or of the tenement abutting the mansion? Surely the
shoemaker knows his situation as well as anyone? D.C. Muecke counters
this by proposing that the imperception lies with society, which ‘since it
permits the juxtaposition’—for example of luxury with poverty—‘is
evidently unaware of the ironic incongruity’.11 The irony is discernible,
however, to those who look on with a more critical eye.
To see why that proposal does not work, consider our Mother Teresa
ﬁgure once more. She is fully aware of the inadvertence of society to the
situation of the poor, yet ﬁnds that situation no more ironic than society
does. Nor is there irony in the fact that she fails to ﬁnd the situation
ironic (lest this be thought to be an imperception equivalent to the
inadvertence of society). Failing to ﬁnd the situation ironic is exactly
what she should be doing. The situation is what it is; the potential for
irony that it contains is to be tapped only by those who see it from the
distance at which an audience stands from a story. No situation is
inherently ironic. The irony in the situation is produced by the attitude
of the observer.12
That the attitude of the observer is crucial to the production of irony is
no less true of ironies of peripety than it is of ironies of simple incon-
gruity. Imagine the following case. To accommodate and protect their
growing family, two young parents save hard to buy a larger and sturdier
car. They choose a full-size sports utility vehicle; the kind that, before the
advent of rear-view cameras, imposed dangerous restrictions on visibility
when the driver was reversing. Backing out of the driveway one morning,
11 Muecke, p. 100.
12 This is something Muecke himself sees: ‘irony is in the eye of the beholder’ (p. 100).

SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE
www.ebook3000.com

the father fails to notice that his own toddler, the one whose arrival
prompted the purchase of the SUV in the ﬁrst place, is playing on the
concrete apron. He collides with the child, killing it. If entertained as a
hypothesis, the situation is ironic—bitterly ironic, but still ironic. (That
children die through encounters with moving vehicles is an all too
common occurrence; but that a father should kill his own child in such
a collision! in their own home! with the car he saved so hard to buy, so
that he could keep that child comfortable and safe!) For the father,
however, for the family, for any close observers, it is not irony, not
even tragic irony, but a genuine tragedy—a tragic disaster.
What both these cases serve to bring out is the distancing quality, even
the trivializing quality, of situational irony—qualities that are character-
istic of it in general. To see a situation as ironic, however much it may
engage your emotions, you must be able to view it from the distance at
which an audience stands to a story. At the same time, you are aware that
it is no story, but reality. But to treat reality as if it were a story is, at a
minimum, to hold that reality at a distance; it may also be to trivialize it.
If you are yourself the victim of the irony, one way to ﬁnd the situation
ironic would be to laugh it off (as we could imagine the young man doing
who discovers that he has gone bald, but discovers this only after he has
ceased to shave himself bald). This would amount to joining the audience
for your own victimhood. Another way would be to pity yourself. Were
the SUV-driving dad to begin mouthing for himself the phrases I used to
express the bitter irony of his situation, this would be a sign that he has
moved from a ﬁrst phase of pure suffering to a more meditative, self-
pitying phase, in which he joins the audience of his own tragedy. Or take
the hovels abutting the palace, a standard case of ironic incongruity. This
one seems to have been around since the nineteenth century, when
Théophile Gautier wrote in one of his novels ‘quelle ironie sanglante
qu’un palais en face d’une cabane!’ (‘how cruel is the irony when a
palace stands opposite a hovel!’).13 Yes, the speaker ﬁnds the irony
‘cruel’, but not as our Mother Teresa ﬁnds the situation of Calcutta’s
poor cruel (assuming this is what she does). To speak of cruel irony in
such a case is already to speak histrionically. The sentence is a piece of
accomplished rhetoric.
13 The novel is Mademoiselle de Maupin.
SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE


The sense of irony trivializes a situation, then, or at least puts it at a
distance, by virtue of its kinship with how we appreciate stories. The
kinship is both general and particular. It is general, because to appreciate
the irony in a situation is to stand to that situation as an audience stands
to a story. But it is also particular, because the quality that situational
ironies share with stories belongs to stories of a special kind—those that
depend on a surprise that springs from the mundane to give the plot an
exquisite twist. (Aristotle’s story-pattern of events that come about
‘against expectation because of one another’, which is the story-pattern
I have in mind here, is the pattern of a particular kind of story, one he
calls ‘complex’ as opposed to ‘simple’.)14 These will be stories with a
strong element of suspense, in which magically convenient coincidence is
prominent. They contrast with more straightforward tales (the ‘simple’
tales, in Aristotle’s sense) in which, for example, hero and villain receive
their just deserts by non-‘magical’ means that would satisfy us also in real
life. Such suspense as the more straightforward tale might contain would
come rather from the obstacles that the author arranges to put in the
hero’s path en route to the satisfying outcome. We wonder, perhaps, how
the hero will get out of his scrape; but we are not looking for a coinci-
dence to save him. We are not looking for our author to resolve things by
tinkering with the machinery of the mundane. (The less mundane the
means of salvation, in fact, the better—for then we will not have been
able to see it coming.)
So when we hear of the Mitys-affair, which is fodder for a complex
rather than a simple tale in Aristotle’s terms, we are not bothered that the
murderer received his comeuppance by a magical-seeming coincidence.
Not only are we not bothered by it, we are delighted by it. This is real life
resembling a story, and it grips us accordingly. We would, however, be
bothered if in real life Mitys’ murderer were brought into court and only
received the sentence he deserved by some coincidence: say, if he were
unlucky enough to be arraigned and condemned by crooked authorities
who believe him not to be the murderer but ﬁnd him a suitable target for
extracting what they believe is a false confession. Interestingly, this would
again make for a pretty good story of the complex rather than simple
kind. It might slake our thirst for ‘poetic’ justice; it would not, however,
14 Aristotle, Poetics 1451b33–1452a33. (The passage extends across chapters 9, 10,
and 11.)

SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE
www.ebook3000.com

satisfy our sense of justice in the world. That sense demands not merely a
comeuppance, but a comeuppance that justice has worked to attain.
Simple stories can deliver both; complex stories provide a different
kind of happiness, one that requires the magic only stories can exercise.
For that reason complex stories are more likely to seem trivial than the
simple are. Detective stories can feel like a parlour-game; tales of sus-
pense can feel shallow; the coincidences that resolve Sophocles’ King
Oedipus can seem to sit uncomfortably with the profundities about the
human condition that critics have extracted from the play. And it is
with the complex stories, not the simple, that situational irony bears
closest comparison.
In the course of this book we have considered how artefacts in the
world, practices in the world, patterns of demeanour in the world can
become intimative or not, communicative or not; and now, with situ-
ational irony, it seems we are considering how the world as such, the
entirety of the environment in which we happen to ﬁnd ourselves, can
become intimative. Yet situational ironies—ironically!—could not strike
us as ironic in the ﬁrst place if the world in which they crop up did not
also seem its mundane self, innocent of messages. ‘Of all the X to be
Y . . . ’, we say, ‘Of all the X to do, have done, be about to do Y . . . Z!’ And
with the phrase ‘all the X’ we invoke the mundane background against
which Z becomes salient by virtue of its connection to Y. In truth, these
are saliences that we notice because we have a nose for good stories,
not saliences that ﬁll the world with good stories—still less that turn
the whole world into one good story. It seems, then, that the nearest we
ever come to the feeling that the whole world, with no remainder, is
one good story, is when we are ourselves immersed, not in the world, but
in a story.
SITUATIONAL IRONY: THE WORLD MADE INTIMATIVE


www.ebook3000.com

Bibliography
Aaker, David A., Building Strong Brands (New York: The Free Press, 1996).
Bach, Kent and Robert M. Harnish, Linguistic Communication and Speech Acts
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1979).
Barthes, Roland, Système de la Mode (Paris: Seuil, 1967) [trans. The Fashion
System (New York: Hill and Wang, 1983)].
Berger, Jr., Harry, The Absence of Grace: Sprezzatura and Suspicion in Two
Renaissance Courtesy Books (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000).
Bieber, Margarete, Entwicklungsgeschichte der Griechischen Tracht (2nd ed.
Berlin: Mann, 1967).
Booth, Wayne C., The Rhetoric of Fiction (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1961).
Brown, Penelope and Stephen C. Levinson, Politeness: Some Universals in Lan-
guage Usage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978 [revised ed.
1987]).
Buck, Wayne, Language as a Model for Social Life: A Critique (Doctoral Disser-
tation, Yale University, 1987).
Carroll, Noël, ‘Art, intention, and conversation’: 97–131 in Gary Iseminger, ed.,
Intention and Interpretation (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1992)
[repr. in Noël Carroll, Beyond Aesthetics: Philosophical Essays (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2001), pp. 157–80].
Clark, Herbert H. and R.J. Gerrig, ‘Quotations as demonstrations’, Language 66
(1990): 764–805.
Coleridge, Nicholas, The Fashion Conspiracy: A Remarkable Journey through the
Empires of Fashion (London: Heinemann, 1988).
Connerton, Paul, How Societies Remember (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1989).
Cooper, Marilyn Marie, Implicatures in Dramatic Conversations (Doctoral Dis-
sertation, University of Minnesota, 1980).
Craik, Jennifer, Fashion: The Key Concepts (Oxford: Berg, 2009).
Crane, Diana, Fashion and its Social Agendas: Class, Gender, and Identity in
Clothing (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).
Culler, Jonathan, Theory of the Lyric (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
2015).
Currie, Gregory, The Nature of Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1990).

Currie, Gregory, ‘Narrative representation of causes’, Journal of Aesthetics and
Art Criticism 64.3 (2006): 309–16.
Currie, Gregory, ‘Why irony is pretence’: 111–33 in Shaun Nichols, ed.,
The Architecture of the Imagination (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2006).
Currie, Gregory, Narratives and Narrators: A Philosophy of Stories (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2010).
Currie, Gregory, ‘The master of the Masek beds: handaxes, art, and the minds of
early humans’: 9–31 in Elisabeth Schellekens and Peter Goldie, eds., The
Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2011).
Davis, Fred, Fashion, Culture, and Identity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992).
Descamps, Marc-Alain, Psychosociologie de la Mode (Paris: Presses Universitaires
de France, 1979).
Eco, Umberto, Confessions of a Young Novelist (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2011).
Ferrari, G.R.F., ‘Aristotle’s literary aesthetics’, Phronesis 44.3 (1999): 181–98.
Ferrari, G.R.F., ‘Socratic irony as pretence’, Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy
34 (2008): 1–33.
Ferrari, G.R.F., ‘The meaninglessness of gardens’, Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 68.1 (2010): 33–45.
Fischer-Mirkin, Toby, Dress Code: Understanding the Hidden Meanings of
Women’s Clothes (New York: Clarkson Potter, 1995).
Freud, Sigmund, ‘Creative writers and day-dreaming’: 141–53 in James Strachey,
gen. ed., trans., The Standard Edition of the Psychological Works of Sigmund
Freud, vol. 9 (London: The Hogarth Press, 1906–1908).
Friend, Stacie, ‘Fiction as a genre’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 112
(2012): 179–209.
Geddes, A.G., ‘Rags and riches: The costume of Athenian men in the ﬁfth
century’, Classical Quarterly 37 (1987): 307–31.
Giorcelli, Cristina and Paula Rabinowitz, eds., Accessorizing the Body [Habits of
Being, vol. 1] (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011).
Goffman, Erving, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (Garden City, NY:
Doubleday Anchor, 1959).
Goffman, Erving, Relations in Public (New York: Basic Books, 1971).
Grice, H. Paul, ‘Meaning’, Philosophical Review 66 (1957): 377–88 [repr. in Paul
Grice, Studies in the Way of Words (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1989), pp. 213–23].
Hollander, Anne, Seeing Through Clothes (New York: Viking Penguin, 1978).
Hollander, Anne, Sex and Suits (New York: Knopf, 1994).

BIBLIOGRAPHY
www.ebook3000.com

Joseph, Nathan, Uniforms and Nonuniforms: Communication through Clothing
(New York: Greenwood Press, 1986).
Kaiser, Susan, The Social Psychology of Clothing: Symbolic Appearances in Con-
text (2nd ed. New York: Macmillan, 1990).
Lamarque, Peter, Fictional Points of View (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1996).
Lamarque, Peter and Stein Haugom Olsen, Truth, Fiction and Literature:
A Philosophical Perspective (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994).
Landy, Joshua, ‘The Devil, the master-criminal, and the re-enchantment of the
world’, Philosophy and Literature 36.1 (2012): 37–57.
Landy, Joshua, How To Do Things With Fictions (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2012).
Lewis, David, Convention: A Philosophical Study (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1969).
Losfeld, Georges, Essai sur le Costume Grec (Paris: Boccard, 1991).
Lucariello, Joan, ‘Situational irony: a concept of events gone awry’, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 123.2 (1994): 129–45.
Lurie, Alison, The Language of Clothes (New York: Random House, 1981).
McCracken, Grant, ‘Clothing as language: An object lesson in the study of the
expressive properties of material culture’: 103–28 in Barrie Reynolds and
Margaret A. Stott, eds., Material Anthropology: Contemporary Approaches to
Material Culture (Lanham: University Press of America, 1987) [repr. as
chapter 4 of Grant McCracken, Culture and Consumption: New Approaches
to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1988)].
McCracken, Grant, Culture and Consumption II: Markets, Meaning, and Brand
Management (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005).
Mill, John Stuart, ‘Thoughts on poetry and its varieties’: 341–66 in John M. Robson
and Jack Stillinger, eds., Autobiography and Literary Essays [Collected Works of
John Stuart Mill] (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1981).
Millman, Debbie, Brand Thinking and Other Noble Pursuits (New York: Allworth
Press, 2011).
Mothersill, Mary, Beauty Restored (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
Muecke, D.C., The Compass of Irony (London: Methuen, 1969).
Nehamas, Alexander, Only a Promise of Happiness: The Place of Beauty in a
World of Art (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007).
Nichols, Shaun and Stephen P. Stich, Mindreading: An Integrated Account of
Pretence, Self-Awareness, and Understanding Other Minds (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2003).
Pollitt, J.J., Art and Experience in Classical Greece (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1972).
BIBLIOGRAPHY


Postrel, Virginia, The Substance of Style: How the Rise of Aesthetic Value is
Remaking Commerce, Culture, and Consciousness (New York: Harper Collins,
2003).
Pratt, Mary Louise, Toward a Speech Act Theory of Literary Discourse (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1977).
Ridgeway, Brunhilde S., The Severe Style in Greek Sculpture (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1970).
Sahlins, Marshall, Culture and Practical Reason (Chicago: Chicago University
Press, 1976).
Schiffer, Stephen R., Meaning (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972).
Scott-Phillips, Thomas C., Speaking Our Minds: Why Human Communication is
Different, and how Language Evolved to Make it Special (Basingstoke:
Palgrave-Macmillan, 2015).
Searle, John R., Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1969).
Sewell, William H., Jr., ‘The concept(s) of culture’: 35–61 in Victoria E. Bonnell
and Lynn Hunt, eds., Beyond the Cultural Turn: New Directions in the Study of
Society and Culture (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999).
Shelley, Cameron, ‘The bicoherence theory of situational irony’, Cognitive Science
25 (2001): 775–818.
Sörbom, Göran, Mimesis and Art (Uppsala: Appelbergs, 1966).
Sperber, Dan and Deirdre Wilson, Relevance: Communication and Cognition
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988).
Stewart, Andrew, Classical Greece and the Birth of Western Art (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2008).
Stewart, Andrew, ‘The Persian and Carthaginian invasions of 480 B.C.E. and the
beginning of the classical style: Part 2’, American Journal of Archeology 112.4
(2008): 581–615.
Strawson, P.F., ‘Intention and convention in speech acts’, The Philosophical
Review 73.4 (1964): 439–60 [repr. in John Searle, ed., The Philosophy of
Language (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971), pp. 23–38; Peter
F. Strawson, Logico-linguistic Papers (London: Methuen, 1971), pp. 149–69].
Svendsen, Lars, Fashion: A Philosophy (London: Reaktion Books, 2006).
Tseëlon, Efrat, Communicating via Clothes (Doctoral Dissertation, Oxford Uni-
versity, 1989).
Tseëlon, Efrat, ‘Self presentation through appearance: A manipulative vs. a
dramaturgical approach’, Symbolic Interaction 15 (1992): 501–14.
Tseëlon, Efrat, The Masque of Femininity: The Presentation of Woman in Every-
day Life (London: Sage, 1995).
Velleman, J. David, How We Get Along (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2009).

BIBLIOGRAPHY
www.ebook3000.com

Vermazen, Bruce, ‘Expression as expression’, Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 67
(1986): 196–224.
Walton, Kendall, Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the Foundations of the Represen-
tational Arts (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990).
Watt, Ian, The Rise of the Novel: Studies in Defoe, Richardson and Fielding
(London: Chatto and Windus, 1957).
Wilson, Deirdre and Dan Sperber, Meaning and Relevance (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2012).
Wilson, Elizabeth, Adorned in Dreams: Fashion and Modernity (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1985).
Wolterstorff, Nicholas, Works and Worlds of Art (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1980).
BIBLIOGRAPHY


www.ebook3000.com

Index
(Footnote numbers are speciﬁed in the entries only when multiple footnotes appear on
the page to which reference is made.)
Aaker, David A. 29n22, 31n
Adams, Sean 28n
addressee, internal, in lyric poetry 128–9
Aeneid, see Virgil
American president, case of the 6, 8–9,
10, 32, 36
Aristophanes 159–60
Aristotle
Poetics 140, 144–5, 151, 166, 169–71,
176–7
Politics 145n29
Armani, Giorgio 25–6
armband wearers, cases of the 38–9
Athenians, imaginary, cases of
the 13–19, 32, 32–7, 47–8
audience
collaboration of, with author 108–11,
116–17, 157, 162
direct address to, by author 145–61
target, contrasted with 49–50, 89, 164,
see also irony, target of
uptake by 2n, 3, 39, 40–1, 50–1, 94
Austen, Jane 108
authenticity 9–10, 28–9, 51
author
curiosity about (as person) 91, 110
implied 156–7
Bach, Kent and Robert M. Harnish 2n,
8n, 37n, 44n, 61n46, 74–5,
133n19
barista, case of the 8, 10–12, 32, 37, 49,
55, 70, 120–1
Barth, John, Giles Goat Boy 160
Barthes, Roland 22
beauty, see clothing, beauty of; lyric
poetry, beauty of; storytelling,
beauty in
Berger, Harry, Jr. 122n9
Bieber, Margarete 13n, 14n4
Bishop, Elizabeth 124, 128, 131n15
Blanka and Nero, case of, see Nero and
Blanka, case of
blue ﬂu, case of the 72–3, 94
body gloss 10
Booth, Wayne 156–7
botta e risposta 95
branding
applied to cultures 29–32, 34
street-gangs and 45
uniforms and 42n
Brecht, Bertolt 160–1
British prime minister, case of the 7,
8–9, 55
Brown, Penelope and Stephen
C. Levinson 71n
Buck, Wayne 45n35
Butler, David 45n34
California drought, case of the 7
Carroll, Noël 114n5, 132n17
Capote, Truman, In Cold Blood 104
Castiglione, Baldesar, The Book of the
Courtier 122–4, 126–7, 129,
131n15
Chinese cook, case of the 96–7
Christie, Agatha 93–4
Clark, Herbert H. and R.J. Gerrig 146n
clothing
ancient Athenian 13–19
communicative scale applied
to 32–6, 47–8
development of, compared to that
between Archaic and Classical
Greek art 16–17
development of, compared to that
of the business suit 15–16
Laconizing style in 34 (with note)
aspirational 58–9
beauty of, dressing for 63–4
communication through, rarity of vii,
31, 34, 47–8

clothing (cont.)
cosplay and 61–3, 64
cultural ‘meaning’ of 17–32
as brand 29–32
not expressible as semiotic
code 21–4
disguising oneself through 57–61, 159
dramaturgical metaphor for 24–6,
57–63
eliciting inferences with (vs. making
audience feel a certain way
with) 48–50
fashion designers and 24–6
French, 19th century 19–20, 26–7
group styles of 27–9, 35–9
multiple audiences for, problem
of 55–6
offering sample of oneself through 34,
43, 50–3, 56, 57, 58, 64
play-acting with 59–63, 74
positions of communicative scale
occupied by vii, 47–8, 51, 131n16
social oppression through 26–7
unconsciousness in the wearing
of 18–19, 22–5, 28–9
uniforms uncommunicative as 39–47
women interviewed about their 51–3
Coleridge, Nicholas 24n16, 25nn17,18
communication
communicative scale or switch vii–viii,
5–6,34–7,47–8, 60,117–18,119–22
applied to ancient Athenian
clothing 32–6, 47–8
in fully on position
(‘communication’ proper) vii, 5,
11–12, 34, 41–2, 44, 59, 67, 73n,
77, 98, 113, 121, 130–1, 172–3
in half-on position
(‘intimation’) vii–viii, 5–6,
10–12, 35–6, 43, 47–8, 49, 55, 98,
100–1, 116, 117, 120–1, 131n16,
172–3, chapter 2 passim
in quarter-on position
(‘intimation’) vii–viii, 119–31,
162
in three-quarters-on position
(‘intimation’) vii–viii, 66–8, 98,
117–18, 119, 121, 161, 173,
chapters 3 and 4 passim
in off position vii–viii, 5, 7–8, 9–10,
12, 28, 35, 37, 50, 51, 55, 120, 121
positions of, distinct in kind
rather than degree 12, 53–5,
114–15, 122
use of fractional metaphor in 122–3
language not required for 1–2
recursivity of intentionality in 2–3,
5–6, 47, 114
role of code vs. role of inference
in 1–3, 5n, 21–4, 28n, 45n35
verbal vs. non-verbal exchange in 71n
Connerton, Paul 22n12
convention
following (vs. intimating or
communicating) 7–8, 20–3, 33,
39, 44, 46
institutional (as factor in literary
intimation) 79, 89, 91, 100, 114,
124, 125–6, 127, 139, 162
conversational model
of lyric poetry 128
of storytelling, see storytelling,
conversational model of
Cooper, Marilyn 113–14
cosplay, see clothing, cosplay and
costume, see clothing
covertness vii–viii, 10, 68, 70, 72–3, 76,
97, 114, 119–21, 123, 125, 133–4,
161–2, 173, see also overtness
combined with overtness in the three-
quarters-on intimation viii, 68,
76, 105, 114, 121, 133–4, 161, 173
Craik, Jennifer 25n16
Crane, Diana 19–21 (with notes),
22nn13, 14, 58 (with n44)
criticism, literary 110–11, 115–16,
117–19, 149, 153–4
Culler, Jonathan 128n11
Currie, Gregory xi, 81, 100–1, 113–14,
132n17, 136n, 142–4 (with notes),
166n2, 167n, 169nn7, 9
curiosity, see author, curiosity about
(as person)
dandies, sixth form, case of the 43
Davis, Fred 22nn12, 13, 14, 25n16
demeanour 1, 8–12, 126, 177
Descamps, Marc-Alain 22n12
Dickens, Charles, Little Dorrit 100
dinner-party host, case of the 71–2
disguise, see clothing, disguising oneself
through

INDEX
www.ebook3000.com

dogs, case of the three 3–6
double staging 66–8, 76, 80, 92, 97,
98–9, 118, 133–4, 155, 161
dramaturgical metaphor, see clothing,
dramaturgical metaphor for;
self-presentation, dramaturgical
metaphor for
dress, see clothing
drought, case of the California, see
California drought, case of the
Eco, Umberto 111, 115
Ellis, Bret Easton 106–7, 115, 159
Euripides, Medea 142
fashion, see clothing
Ferrari, G.R.F. 63n48, 73n, 163n, 171n
ﬁctionality 104–9
Fielding, Henry, Tom Jones 145–59
ﬁrst-person narrative 159
Fischer-Mirkin, Toby 59
ﬂirting couple, case of the 95–6, 104,
110, 126, 164
Freud, Sigmund 107n
Friend, Stacie 104n
gang-clothing 37–8, 43–5, 166
Gautier, Théophile 175
Geddes, A.G. 13n, 17–19
Gerrig, R.J., see Clark, Herbert H. and
R.J. Gerrig
Giorcelli, Cristina 57n
Goffman, Erving 9, 10, 41n, 57–8, 71n
Gorgias of Leontini 109n
graduate student at interview, case of
the 59
Grice, H. Paul viii, xi, 2, 11n, 45n35,
54n, 71n, 113–14, 118n, 132–3
Groom, Amelia 58n42
Gross, Terry 106–7, 108, 115, 159
handkerchief codes in gay bars, case of
the 41–2
Harnish, Robert M., see Bach, Kent and
Robert M. Harnish
haute couture, see clothing, fashion
designers and
Hollander, Anne 16, 24n16, 61n47
Homer 84–6, 112, 145
Hula Girls 150–1
Hume, David 154
ideology 28–9
illocution (vs. perlocution) 48n37, 91n
imagination 87, 112, 132, 135–6,
139–40, 144
imagining vs. hypothesizing 146–7
implicature 11n
impression-management vii, 1, 8–9, 12,
53–7, 95, 122, 125–6, 129, 158–9,
chapters 1 and 2 passim
improvised performance 99, 102, 138
informative intention 2, 54n
inspiration 111–12
intimation vii–viii, 4–6, chapter 1
passim
advantages of, over full-strength
communication 6–7, 12, 52–5
at different positions of the
communicative scale, see under
communication
disadvantages of, by comparison with
full-strength communication 5,
7, 49, 55, 56
distinguished from suggestive
(though full-strength)
communication 53–5, 114–15
irony
as pretence 73n, 167n
dramatic 167n, 169, 174, 175 (tragic)
situational viii, 165, chapter 5 passim
as three-quarters-on
intimation 173
target of 73n, 167–8
Japanese politician, case of the 36, 50
jeans-wearing professor, case of the
49, 55
John, Eileen xi–xii, 131n16
joint attention 100–2, 106
Joseph, Nathan 35n, 38nn27, 28, 39n,
43n32
kabocha, see persimmons, stop-
animated, case of the
Kaiser, Susan 51n
kendo instructor, case of the 69–70
Lamarque, Peter 142n, 147n
Lamarque, Peter and Stein Haugom
Olsen 132n17, 136n
Landy, Joshua xii, 90n, 168n5
Larkin, Philip 124, 127, 128, 130
INDEX


Levinson, Stephen C., see Brown,
Penelope and Stephen C. Levinson
Lewis, David 23
linguistic metaphors
for clothing 21–2, 26, 29
for ethnographic analysis 19
for impression-management 1
Losfeld, Georges 13n
Lucariello, Joan 169n7
Lurie, Alison 22n12
lyric poetry 124–31, 162, 164, 165
as quarter-on intimation 124–7,
128, 162
beauty of 165
McCracken, Grant 22n13, 53, 56
make-believe 132, 135, 135–45, 147
Man With The X-Ray Eyes, The 148–9
Marceau, Marcel 138
Mary and Peter, cases of
and the hair-drier 134
at the seaside window 54–5, 97–101,
114–16, 120
masquerade 58n42, 155, 159, see also
clothing, disguising oneself
through; clothing, dramaturgical
metaphor for
mime 12, 62, 103–4, 138, 144
mimēsis 144–5
mimicry, see storytelling, mimicry
fundamental to
Mitys’ murderer, case of 166, 167, 168,
169–71, 174, 176–7
Mother Teresa, case of 172–4
Mothersill, Mary 163n
Muecke, D.C. 168nn4, 6, 174
Murakami, Haruki 107
Muse, the 112, see also inspiration
mutual belief 8, 35, 44, 133n19
mutual knowledge 133n19
mutual manifestness 54n, 101, 133n19
Nabokov, Vladimir, Lolita 160
narrative, see storytelling
narrator
reliable 156
unreliable 106n
see also persona, authorial
NATO ﬂyover, case of the 6–7
Neale, Stephen xi
Nehamas, Alexander 163n, 165n
Nero and Blanka, case of 65–8,
chapters 3 and 4, passim
as analogue for storytelling,
see storytelling, case of Nero
and Blanka as analogue for
Nichols, Shaun and Stephen P. Stich,
140n
nurse, cases of the 10–11, 119–20,
122–3, 127
Olins, Wally 29nn21, 22, 42n
Olsen, Stein Haugom, see Lamarque,
Peter and Stein Haugom Olsen
overtness 10–11, 37, 40, 68, 70, 73, 76,
97, 105–6, 114, 117, 118, 120–3,
133–4, 161, 173, see also
covertness
combined with covertness in the
three-quarters-on intimation
viii, 68, 76, 105, 114, 121, 133–4,
161, 173
performative speech-acts (as analogue
for wearing of uniforms) 40
perlocution (vs. illocution) 48n37, 91n
persimmons, stop-animated, case of
the 82–4, 92–3, 144
persona, authorial
as unnecessary concept in analysis of
lyric poetry 126–8, 129n13
as unnecessary concept in analysis of
storytelling 102, 149–50, 155–9
Peter and Mary, cases of, see Mary and
Peter, cases of
picket lines, case of the 38
pictorial conviction 87–8, 131
Pirandello, Luigi, Six Characters in
Search of an Author 161
plausible deniability (as characteristic of
intimation) 6, 7, 55, 105, 121
poetic justice 176–7
Pollitt, J.J. 17n6
Postrel, Virginia 27n, 59n, 63n49
pragmatics viii, 133
Pratt, Mary Louise 113
President, case of the American, see
American president, case of the
pretence 57–60, 73n, 76–80, 80–2, 89,
97, 99, 101, 104–5, 119, 122–7,
132, 135–40, 144–5, 146–7,
152, 154, 161–2, 167–8, 169n7,
see also storytelling, pretence in,
obviousness of
Prime minister, case of the British, see
British prime minister, case of the

INDEX
www.ebook3000.com

Rashid, Karim 29n22
relevance theory, see Sperber, Dan and
Deirdre Wilson
renga verse 96
revolving door, case of the 73
rhetoric (in relation to lyric poetry) 125,
128n12, 130–1
Ridgeway, Brunhilde S. 17n6
Rowling, J.K. 116
Sahlins, Marshall 22n12
Sappho 128
Saturday Night Fever, see Tony Manero,
case of
Schiffer, Stephen R. 118n, 133n19
Scott-Phillips, Thomas C. 5n
Searle, John R. 2n
self-dramatization 104
self-presentation 8–12, 64
dramaturgical metaphor for 9
semiotics, see communication, role of
code vs. role of inference in;
clothing, cultural ‘meaning’ of,
not expressible as semiotic code
Sewell, William H., Jr. 22n13
Shelley, Cameron 168n4, 169n7
signs, signiﬁers, see communication, role
of code vs. role of inference in;
clothing, cultural ‘meaning’ of,
not expressible as semiotic code
Sophocles, Oedipus the King 141–2,
170, 177
Sörbom, Göran 145 (with note 28)
speech acts (speech-act theory) viii, 36n,
40, 48n37, 74n3, 91n, 127, 136n
Sperber, Dan and Deirdre Wilson 1–2
(with notes), 5n, 54–5 (with
note), 71n, 100n, 133n19, 134
spouse, case of the alluring, see wife, case
of the alluring
sprezzatura 122–4, 131nn15, 16
stand-up comedy 102–3, 110
Stewart, Andrew 17n6
Stich, Stephen P., see Nichols, Shaun and
Stephen P. Stich
storytelling viii, 73–5
as three-quarters-on intimation 117,
161–2, chapters 3 and 4 passim,
see also storytelling, case of Nero
and Blanka as analogue for
authorial persona as unnecessary
concept in analysis of, see
persona, authorial
author’s intentions, role of in 75, 92,
110–11, 113–14, 115–16
beauty in 162–5
case of Nero and Blanka as analogue
for 65–8, 73–4, 75–81, 88–92,
94, 99–100, 105–12, 115–16,
117–19, 125, 132–5, 136–42,
145–6, 155, 159, 160, 164
collaboration between author and
audience in, see audience,
collaboration of, with author
communicative component of 75, 77
confessional 102–3
content of intimation in 89, 92–4
conversational model of, why
inadequate 113–16, 128n12
(applied to lyric poetry),
132–5, 162
didactic 164
dramatic conviction and dramatic
plausibility, how related in 105,
135–45
dramatic conviction, role of in 77–81,
82–7, 92–4, 104–5, 106, 112, 117,
124–7 (by contrast with lyric
poetry), 135–45, 147, 149–59
(case of Fielding’s Tom Jones),
160–1, 162, 167 (in relation to
situational irony)
dramatic plausibility, role of in 78, 87,
101, 105, 106, 119, 124–7 (by
contrast with lyric poetry), 132–5
(vs. conversational model),
135–45, 146–7, 162, 170–4 (in
relation to situational irony)
external vs. internal perspectives
in 142–4
ﬁctional vs. non-ﬁctional 104–6,
see also storytelling, true tales
as type of
impersonality of 88–91, 94–104,
106–12
indemniﬁcation of author in 105–8
intertextuality in 83–6
liberating potential of 107–8
magical thinking, role of in 81–2, 110,
125, 176–7
mimicry fundamental to 76, 99–100,
103–4, 127–8 (contrast with lyric
poetry), 138–9, 140 (applied to
true tales), 144–5, 146–7, 150–1
play-acting with clothes, contrasted
with 60–1, 74
INDEX


storytelling (cont.)
plot-tracking as factor in 78–9, 82–6,
92–4, 143–4
pretence in, obviousness of 76–7, 80,
99, 101, 104, 125 (contrast with
lyric poetry), 133, 137–40, 161–2,
167–8
purposes of 90–1, 101, 107–8, 162–5,
176–7
third-party directedness of 99–102
true tales as type of 104–5, 137, 140,
151, 156
Strawson, Peter F. 132–4
style 8–9, 11–12, 14–29, 32, 52–3,
58n43, 59, 131, 164
suspense 170–1, 176–7
SUV driving father, case of the 174–5
Svendsen, Lars 22n12
tableau vivant 62
theatrical metaphor, see clothing,
dramaturgical metaphor for;
masquerade; self-presentation,
dramaturgical metaphor for
Theocritus 95
Tony Manero, case of 9–10, 11, 12,
20–1, 28–9, 37, 49, 50–1, 55–6, 60
Travolta, John, see Tony Manero,
case of
true tales, see storytelling, true tales as
type of
Tseëlon, Efrat 51, 53, 58n43
uniforms, see clothing, uniforms
uncommunicative as
uptake, see audience, uptake by
Vellemann, J. David 58n43, 166n2,
169–71
Vermazen, Bruce 158–9
Virgil, Aeneid 84–6, 92, 163
visual arts 16–17, 61, 62, 87–8, 131, 160,
162, 164–5
Walton, Kendall 136n
watch, glancing at, case of 70–1
Watt, Ian 155n, 156n
Whitman, Walt 130
wife, case of the alluring 69
Wilson, Deirdre, see Sperber, Dan and
Deirdre Wilson
Wilson, Elizabeth 14n3
Wolterstorff, Nicholas 87, 150n
Woolf, Virginia, Mrs. Dalloway 142

INDEX
www.ebook3000.com

