
THE POCKET
UNIVERSAL METHODS OF DESIGN
100 Ways to Research Complex Problems, Develop Innovative Ideas, and
Design Effective Solutions
Bella Martin   Bruce Hanington

Contents
001 A/B Testing
002 AEIOU
003 Affinity Diagramming
004 Artifact Analysis
005 Automated Remote Research
006 Behavioral Mapping
007 Bodystorming
008 Brainstorm Graphic Organizers
009 Business Origami
010 Card Sorting
011 Case Studies
012 Cognitive Mapping
013 Cognitive Walkthrough
014 Collage
015 Competitive Testing
016 Concept Mapping
017 Content Analysis
018 Content Inventory & Audit
019 Contextual Design
020 Contextual Inquiry
021 Creative Toolkits
022 Critical Incident Technique
023 Crowdsourcing
024 Cultural Probes
025 Customer Experience Audit
026 Design Charette
027 Design Ethnography
028 Design Workshops
029 Desirability Testing
030 Diary Studies
031 Directed Storytelling
032 Elito Method
033 Ergonomic Analysis
034 Evaluative Research
035 Evidence-Based Design
036 Experience Prototyping
037 Experience Sampling Method
038 Experiments
039 Exploratory Research
040 Eyetracking
041 Flexible Modeling

042 Fly-on-the-Wall Observation
043 Focus Groups
044 Generative Research
045 Graffiti Walls
046 Heuristic Evaluation
047 Image Boards
048 Interviews
049 KJ Technique
050 Kano Analysis
051 Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
052 Laddering
053 Literature Reviews
054 The Love Letter & the Breakup Letter
055 Mental Model Diagrams
056 Mind Mapping
057 Observation
058 Parallel Prototyping
059 Participant Observation
060 Participatory Action Research (PAR)
061 Participatory Design
062 Personal Inventories
063 Personas
064 Photo Studies
065 Picture Cards
066 Prototyping
067 Questionnaires
068 Rapid Iterative Testing & Evaluation (RITE)
069 Remote Moderated Research
070 Research Through Design
071 Role-Playing
072 Scenario Description Swimlanes
073 Scenarios
074 Secondary Research
075 Semantic Differential
076 Shadowing
077 Simulation Exercises
078 Site Search Analytics
079 Speed Dating
080 Stakeholder Maps
081 Stakeholder Walkthrough
082 Storyboards
083 Surveys
084 Task Analysis

085 Territory Maps
086 Thematic Networks
087 Think-Aloud Protocol
088 Time-Aware Research
089 Touchstone Tours
090 Triading
091 Triangulation
092 Unobtrusive Measures
093 Usability Report
094 Usability Testing
095 User Journey Maps
096 Value Opportunity Analysis
097 Web Analytics
098 Weighted Matrix
099 Wizard of Oz
100 Word Clouds
References

001 A/B Testing
Comparing two versions of a design to see which performs better against a
predetermined goal
• A/B testing is an optimization technique that allows you to compare two
different versions of a design to see which one gets you closer to a business
objective.
• Tests are run by randomly assigning different people down two paths—the “A”
test and the “B” test—until a statistically relevant sample size is reached.
• Testing can assess design aspects such as different treatments of text copy
(tone, length, and font size); form elements (how many, layout, and which are
required); and different treatments of the button or call to action (page
placement, size, color, and labeling).
• A/B testing won’t help you understand why the design was preferred over the
alternate, so pair it with qualitative methods to gain a deeper understanding of
customer trust, desires, attitudes, and needs.
See also Experiments • Key Performance Indicators • Web Analytics

Courtesy of Robin Chiang, eBay, Inc.
An eBay study comparing image size determined that users were more engaged with larger
images, even though it sacrificed the amount of information contained to one page, contradicting
research expectations.

002 AEIOU
A framework for structuring field observations
• This can be used to guide any ethnographic or observational method,
corresponding to five interrelated elements:
– Activities are goal-directed sets of actions or the pathways that people take
toward the things they want to accomplish.
– Environments include the context in which activities take place, including
the atmosphere and function of individual and shared spaces.
– Interactions are the routine and special exchanges between people and
between people and objects in the environment.
– Objects are the key elements of the environment, sometimes put to complex
or even unintended uses.
– Users are the people whose behaviors, preferences, and needs are being
observed, including their roles and relationships.
See also Contextual Inquiry • Fly-on-the-Wall Observation • Observation
Fieldwork observations of Activities, Environments, Interactions, Objects, and Users are
converged onto a team worksheet for synthesis and analysis by the design team.

003 Affinity Diagramming
The visible clustering of observations and insights into meaningful categories
and relationships • Designers capture research insights, observations, concerns,
or requirements on individual sticky notes.
• Rather than grouping notes into predefined categories, specific details are
clustered, which then give rise to named category themes based on shared
affinity of similar intent, issues, or problems.
• Making tacit knowledge or information buried in transcripts visible facilitates
research synthesis.
• Affinity diagramming from contextual inquiry is based on interviews and
observations of users in the field, synthesizing human stories.
• Affinity diagramming from usability testing documents observations and
quotes of participant task performance to determine priority issues to be fixed.
• Color-coded sticky notes can help to efficiently parse information by user, task,
or issue.
See also Contextual Design • KJ Technique • Content Analysis

Courtesy of Citrix Online
Observations from multiple usability tests at Citrix are color-coded by participant, prioritizing
issues to be revised and retested.

004 Artifact Analysis
A systematic examination of the material, aesthetic, and interactive qualities of
objects
• It asks what objects say about people and their culture, time, and place rather
than focusing on what people say about the products and systems they use.
• Material analysis addresses the quantity, material composition, physical and
digital components, durability, wear patterns, and disposability of objects.
• Aesthetic analysis includes subjective assessment of form, color, texture,
references to particular eras, time, or place, and emotional significance.
• Interactive aspects of the analysis address the characteristics of operational use
and behaviors that the artifact affords: for example, function and complexity.
• Contextual aspects include where objects are stored or carried, if they are part
of a larger whole, and if they are owned, shared, public, or private property.
• Identifying object misuse or adapted use can suggest design opportunities.
See also Personal Inventories • Touchstone Tours • Unobtrusive Measures

Artifact analysis is a systematic examination of the material, aesthetic, and interactive qualities of
objects in context.

005 Automated Remote Research
Using web-based tools to reveal statistically relevant data for usability
enhancements
• Enables design teams to leverage web-based tools to collect statistically
significant information about what people are doing on your website or web
application.
• Focus is on planning the appropriate strategy for the study, accurately selecting
the right automated remote research tools, and configuring the logistics.
• Automated research tools can help researchers understand usability issues such
as length of time and performance on task, common click paths, and trouble
spots.
• It should be used with qualitative research methods that provide insight into
why site visitors behave the way they do.
• Quantitative data can be triangulated with observed behavioral data to decide
which usability enhancements to make.
• There a growing number of web-based research tools available that are both
quantitative and qualitative.
See also Crowdsourcing • Experiments • Remote Moderated Research

Courtesy of Nate Bolt, CEO, Bolt | Peters User Experience
This is a framework of different types of remote research tools and applications. Automated
remote methods are shown towards the bottom half of the diagram.

006 Behavioral Mapping
Systematic visual documentation of location-based human activity
• This is used to document observable human activities and personal
characteristics, interactions, time spent at fixed locations or in transit, and
details of environmental context.
• A sketch map or architectural floor plan is used as the underlay for recording
observations.
• Place-centered mapping is based on observations of all people and their
interactions at a specific location.
• Individual-centered mapping follows the travel and activities of specific
individuals over time and location, documenting their social behaviors and
interactions.
• While typically completed in real time, mapping can involve time-lapse
photography or video.
• Interviews or debriefing conversations with participants help to understand
more about mapped behaviors.
• In retrospective mapping, individuals chart their own paths and behaviors on a
floor plan or map, revealing their motivations for actions.
See also Fly-on-the-Wall Observation • Shadowing • Unobtrusive Measures

Courtesy of Sarah Calandro © 2011
Behavioral mapping of consumer routes in a grocery store are combined with shadowing
observations and conversation to establish a picture of shopping patterns.

007 Bodystorming
Brainstorming and spontaneous prototyping through dynamic physical
experience and role-play
• Designers immerse themselves in user situations through simulated contexts
while paying close attention to decisions, interactive experiences, and
emotional responses.
• Concept ideas can be integrated and tested in play, and the active situation can
inspire the spontaneous creation of new product and service concepts.
• Bodystorming prototypes use simple constructions and props at hand: for
example, cardboard, boxes, existing objects, furniture, and lighting
manipulations.
• While scenarios may be partially scripted from observations, the bodystorm
encourages improvisation to capture real-world experiences.
• The method may be contained within design teams but can also engage a wider
audience of peers or clients, inviting response and dialogue.
See also Experience Prototyping • Role-Playing • Simulation Exercises

Designers bodystorm an alarm system with personal bubbles of sound space controlled by mobile
devices, awakening one person while a roommate continues to sleep.




008 Brainstorm Graphic Organizers
Visual structures of new ideas and concepts
• Brainstorming creates a judgment-free zone to express creative ideas and
explore new concepts.
• Widely accepted rules include, “quantity over quality,” “withhold judgment
and criticism,” “build on each other’s ideas,” and “welcome oddity.”
• Graphic organizers, or visual representations of knowledge, are sense-making
frameworks that facilitate teams as they brainstorm unconventional alternatives
within a domain.
• Brainstorming Webs help develop a central concept or question, identifying
its characteristics, supporting facts, and related ideas.
• Tree Diagrams communicate hierarchy, a classification system, or
relationships between main and supporting ideas.
• Flow Diagrams document a sequence of events, represent the actions or
processes of different actors in a system, or show cause and effect of
interrelated elements.
See also Cognitive Mapping • Concept Mapping • Mind Mapping

Webs, Trees, and Flow Diagrams provide sense-making frameworks for facilitating and visualizing
brainstorming, disrupting and challenging old patterns of thinking.

009 Business Origami
Paper-prototyping interactions and value exchanges among people, artifacts, and
environments
• Business origami is a service design activity where stakeholders build a
physical representation of a system and then prototype future or alternative
states.
• Paper tokens represent actors, artifacts, environments, and technologies on a
horizontal whiteboard “stage” where interactions play out to tell a story.
• Lines and arrows labeled on the whiteboard represent the interactions between
tokens, articulating what value people get out of the exchange.
• The method gives all participants an equal voice in the prototyping activity,
bridging different perspectives by providing a common reference for further
discussion.
• The experience of physical modeling is critical, making the value exchange
explicit within a scenario.
See also Creative Toolkits • Design Workshops • User Journey Maps
Courtesy of Jess McMullin, Centre for Citizen Experience

Paper pop-up “origami” tokens represent people, locations, artifacts, technology, transportation,
channels, third parties, social media, and proprietary tools, with lines and arrows illustrating
relationships.

010 Card Sorting
Participant sorting of concepts, terms, or features into meaningful categories and
relationships using printed cards • Used to explore how participants group items
into categories and relate concepts to one another, whether for digital interface
design or a table of contents.
• It can be used to identify terminology that is vague, misunderstood, or has
multiple meanings associated with it.
• Card sorting can also be used to generate options for structuring information,
identifying different schemas for organizing navigation, menus, and
taxonomies.
• It validates that the categories in your product or service actually reflect the
mental model of your audience.
• Including blank cards and markers allows participants to add their own items
where needed.
• If no consistent patterns emerge after several card sorts, consider renaming the
cards or reconsider the categories.
See also Automated Remote Research • Content Inventory & Audit •
Desirability Testing

Card sorting can help you understand how people group information, perceive and describe
different groups of information, and generate ideas for navigation categories.

011 Case Studies
In-depth investigation of single instances to gain detailed knowledge using
multiple sources
• This is useful for understanding existing phenomena for comparison or
inspiration and to study the effects of change, new programs, or innovations.
• Instances, or cases, may be of individuals, events, organizations, entire
communities, or processes.
• Details of cases emerge during data collection and analysis, which typically
include the following features: – Selection of a case or small set of cases
– Study of the case in its social and physical context
– Collection of information using multiple, triangulated methods such as
interviews, observations, unobtrusive trace measures, and document analysis
• This method welcomes extraordinary cases and outliers rather than looking
for representative instances.
• Similar to the design process, case studies require the researcher to determine a
problem, make hypotheses, conduct research, revise theory, and tell a story.
See also Evidence-Based Design • Research Through Design • Secondary
Research

When well composed and designed, case studies can result in compelling human narratives, with
vivid details that make the case more memorable.

012 Cognitive Mapping
A visualization technique that reveals how people process and make sense of
their experience • Cognitive maps are most effective when used to structure
complex problems.
• It’s designed specifically as a decision-making tool that can inform strategic
direction.
• Unlike concept maps or mind maps, the format and structure require no central
focus of visualization.
• Nodes of a cognitive map are made up of the exact words and phrases spoken
by participants.
• Each node can have as many incoming and outgoing associations as necessary
and are read as causal pathways: for example, node x may imply node y.
• Cognitive mapping can facilitate the note-taking process during interviews and
when transcribing text-based qualitative data.
See also Content Analysis • Concept Mapping • Mind Mapping

Cognitive Map courtesy of Luiz Flávio Autran Monteiro Gomes, Luís Alberto Duncan Rangel, and Rogério
Lúcio Jerônimo
Cognitive maps reveal people’s underlying agendas and decision-making criteria. This map is
based on a questionnaire for employees considering leaving a company headquarters.

013 Cognitive Walkthrough
Evaluating whether the order of prompts in a system reflects the way people
cognitively process tasks • This is a usability inspection method that evaluates a
system’s anticipated ease-of-use without instruction, coaching, or training.
• Each step of the interaction with the system can be assessed as a step that
either moves the individual closer to or further from their goal.
• Evaluators ask four questions for each step in the sequence:
1. Will users want to produce whatever effect the action has?
2. Will users see the control (button, menu, label, etc.) for the action?
3. Will users recognize that the control will produce the effect that they want?
4. Will users understand feedback they get, so they can confidently continue on
to the next action?
• It should be used with usability testing to uncover different classes of design
issues and problems.
See also Heuristic Evaluation • Think-Aloud Protocol • Wizard of Oz

Cognitive walkthroughs are used to evaluate whether an interface is understandable and easy to
learn based on the user’s problem-solving mental operations.

014 Collage
The visual expression of thoughts, feelings, desires, and other aspects of life
using images and words • It can help mitigate the limitations of traditional verbal
means in gathering innermost thoughts.
• The paper canvas may be blank, or it may have lines to suggest placement such
as past, present, and ideal future.
• Collage kits should have images and words ambiguous enough to avoid bias,
yet specific enough to be relevant.
• Blank frames or stickers and markers should be included for participants to add
their own material.
• A single person usually completes a collage, but sessions are generally
conducted in small groups.
• Participants present their collages to the group, providing insight about choices
for analysis.
• Qualitative analysis is used to look for patterns and themes within and across
several collages, such as use or non-use of elements, placement, and
relationship.
See also Creative Toolkits • Generative Research • Participatory Design

Collage allows participants to project their thoughts, feelings, and desires onto a visual artifact,
providing insight and inspiration for design teams.

015 Competitive Testing
Research to evaluate the usability and learnability of your competitors’ products
• This complements traditional marketing strategies and business audits by
considering the social, economic, and technical context.
• It allows design teams to assess a competitor’s products from the end user’s
point of view.
• Teams inspect how usable and learnable competitors’ digital applications are
by conducting usability tests on competitive products, as well as on their own.
• In contrast to attitudinal surveys, competitive testing focuses on end-user
behavior as people attempt to accomplish tasks that exist across products.
• By understanding key similarities and differences between competitors, gaps
can be identified for further market differentiation or specialization.
• Results from competitive tests should be ongoing, tracked, and compared over
time.
See also Kano Analysis • Think-Aloud Protocol • Value Opportunity Analysis

Courtesy of Ruqian Zhou, Kelly Nash, Theyab Al-Tamimi, Matthew Deutsch, Aesha Shah
Before designing a shopping assistant for a retail warehouse environment, a design team
conducted competitive research of existing, in-store help kiosks.


016 Concept Mapping
A visual framework connecting a large number of ideas, objects, and events as
they relate to a certain domain • This provides scaffolding that can help visualize
the complexities of a system to make new meaning.
• Concept maps consist of individual concepts (a well-understood idea, object,
or event; usually nouns connected by linking words (usually verbs).
• Linking words that connect two or more concepts form a proposition that
creates a meaningful statement.
• Articulating the correct focus question is a key step that will provide context
and structure to the map.
• After a focus question is generated, a list of fifteen to twenty-five concepts
should be identified and ranked from general to very specific.
• A preliminary map is constructed and then revised until a final map emerges to
adequately answer the focus questions.
• Maps should help design teams gain new knowledge and find new meanings in
an information space.
See also Brainstorm Graphic Organizers • Cognitive Mapping • Mind Mapping

Courtesy of Joseph D. Novak and Alberto J. Cañas, http://cmap.ihmc.us
Concept maps are organized in a downward hierarchy, with the focus question at the top of the
map and the most general concepts below it.

017 Content Analysis
The systematic description of form and content of written, spoken, or visual
materials expressed in themes, patterns, and counts • Content analysis provides
an established and systematic technique for dealing with qualitative data.
• In inductive content analysis, the categories or codes are derived from a
systematic reading of a sample set of the materials to be analyzed.
• In deductive content analysis, codes or categories are derived beforehand,
often based on a theoretical framework.
• Content analysis can identify themes and patterns in the data, including how
dominantly they are represented.
• Outcomes can be quantitative, counting occurrences of the words, phrases,
images, or concepts.
• The method also examines form and structure of communication: for example,
scale and location of images or the font and type size of text.
• For smaller sample sets, content analysis can be done manually; for larger sets,
software is available.
See also Affinity Diagramming • Thematic Networks • Word Clouds
Published with permission from QSR International

Content analysis helps you extract themes and make meaning out of unstructured information,
often with the help of software. Shown: Word tree from NVivo 9.

018 Content Inventory & Audit
A content inventory tells you what your content is; an audit recommends what it
should be • Everything a customer can read, watch, interact with, or listen to can
be considered content.
• Perform an inventory and audit:
– When beginning a website redesign
– When merging multiple sites or splitting up into smaller, niche sites – When
preparing content for multichannel distribution or a Content Management
System (CMS) • A content inventory organizes assets into a spreadsheet of
content items and attributes.
• A quantitative content audit assesses the attributes of “Governance,” including
ownership, copyright, and creative details.
• The qualitative content audit rates “Content Quality” criteria such as
credibility, originality, accuracy, and relevance to identify unifying themes and
patterns across content sources.
See also Card Sorting • Key Performance Indicators • Site Search Analytics

Reporting methodology courtesy of Content Science
Content inventories and audits can provide quantitative and qualitative visualizations to help
stakeholders understand where content stands and where it needs to be.

019 Contextual Design
A customer-centered process that makes designer workflow concrete, explicit,
and sharable • Designers intuitively understand the leap from customer-centered
data to a sound design direction, but to non-designers this process can seem
“fuzzy” or “magic.”
• Recommended steps to make design work more predictable and inclusive of
non-designers include: – Contextual Inquiry to understand the customer
– Interpretation Sessions for each customer interview
– Work Models and Affinity Diagrams to represent the complex systems of
work – Visioning and Storyboarding to generate concepts to support the
customer’s work – User Environment Design to document natural flow of
the customer’s work
– Paper Mock-ups to get feedback from customers before coding and
implementation • The process can reduce the time it takes to move through
customer-centered design challenges.
See also Affinity Diagramming • Contextual Inquiry • Storyboards

Courtesy of InContext Design
Contextual design is a customer-centered process that begins with data from contextual inquiry,
intended to help with transitions between common steps of the design process.

020 Contextual Inquiry
An immersive, contextual way to observe and interview that reveals underlying
work structure
• Four principles define the contextual inquiry method:
1. Context: To understand the ongoing experience and tacit knowledge of the
worker, it is critical that the researcher observe details in context.
2. Partnership: This is similar to a master/apprentice model, watching, asking
questions, and seeking to understand how the data more reliably reflects
reality.
3. Interpretation: What researchers see and hear must be interpreted for
meaning and double-checked with participants on-site.
4. Focus: The researcher must learn to expand beyond personal focus to see
more in the participant’s world, picking up on idiosyncrasies and
contradictions.
• This is used to understand communication flows, sequence of tasks, artifacts,
tools, and the influence of culture and the physical environment on work.
• Interview multiple people in different user segments before synthesizing
contextual inquiry findings.
See also Affinity Diagramming • Contextual Design • Interviews

Courtesy of InContext Design
Contextual Inquiry provides a way to structure interviews with people that reveal specific details
about how they work and helps expose underlying work structure.

021 Creative Toolkits
Collections of physical elements organized for participatory modeling,
visualization, or creative play
• Facilitated participatory exercises can provide people with a tangible artifact
on which to project thoughts, feelings, desires, and emotions.
• Flexible or Velcro modeling kits contain a range of three-dimensional forms,
buttons, and ambiguous design elements that can be easily configured.
• Interface kits can contain paper or card elements representing design features
for flexible arrangement, suggesting mock or ideal web or device interactions.
• Collage kits can contain an inventory of images and words or shape and
symbol elements for open interpretation and use relevant to the design inquiry.
• Drawing kits will contain various papers, cards, and writing tools
accommodating a range of potential exercises.
• Depending on the intent of the exercise, kits can be built from original
materials or from existing parts, toys, or games.
See also Design Workshops • Generative Research • Participatory Design

Courtesy of Liz Sanders, MakeTools, LLC
Here is a typical Velcro modeling kit with form and element variations designed for physical
manipulation and configuration by participants.

022 Critical Incident Technique
Understanding how users experience your product at critical moments to
optimize future designs • Ask individuals to describe a situation with your
product or service.
• Collect positive and negative experiences through directed storytelling,
interviews, or diary studies to identify: – The incident cause: What were the
events leading up to the critical incident?
– User actions: What were the behaviors that took place during the incident?
– User sentiment: How did the user feel during the incident and afterward?
– Incident outcome: Did the user change how he or she behaved after the
incident?
– Ideal outcome: What are possible future outcomes?
• Representative scenarios cover possible explanations and recommendations.
• Prioritize and triangulate with other research to gain a better understanding of
situations that have a profound impact on user behavior.
See also Diary Studies • Directed Storytelling • Interviews

The Critical Incident Technique focuses on how people solve problems, with the goal of optimizing
and recreating successful results and eliminating the negative, counterproductive ones.

023 Crowdsourcing
Voluntary completion of tasks or micro-projects by an undefined, large group of
people
• This brings together users and testers to evaluate prototypes and submit
potential solutions to problems.
• Micro-tasks are accessed via a common platform that can be completed by
volunteers within seconds or minutes.
• Participants receive monetary (a micropayment) or nonmonetary (reputation
points) compensation.
• Design straightforward, uncomplicated tasks to get the most volunteers to
participate.
• Include questions that have a bona-fide answer as part of the task to prevent
volunteers from “gaming” the system by entering nonsense responses.
• Devise tasks so that completing them correctly and in good faith requires as
much or even less work than entering random, invalid responses.
• Consider triangulation with other methods to increase confidence of research
outcomes.
See also Automated Remote Research • Photo Studies • Triangulation

Courtesy of frog design, frogmob.frogdesign.com
Using crowdsourcing, frog design’s frogMob invites people from all over the world to upload their
photographs of interesting trends to inform and inspire designers.

024 Cultural Probes
Provocative instruments to inspire new forms of self-understanding and
communication
• Use materials such as postcards, journals, cameras, text, and imagery to gather
personal insights from participants.
• Provocations are designed to inspire people to thoughtfully consider personal
context and circumstance and respond in unique, creative ways.
• Materials should be varied and imaginative to elicit responses that are relevant
to the design inquiry.
• Probes are flexible, open-ended, and intentionally subjective, collecting
inspirational data to stimulate design imagination.
• Design probes support empathic understanding through information gathering
over a prolonged period, where the researcher cannot be present.
• Probe kits are combined with other research methods such as observations, site
visits, and interviews.
• Probes should be thoughtful in aesthetic craft, message, and delivery and be
created to inspire delight and respect, response, and return.
See also Diary Studies • Experience Sampling Method • Photo Studies

Courtesy of Kate Herd
A study on mass-customization of products collected personal stories of participants using a
cultural probe kit of digital voice recorders, cameras, postcards, diaries, and stickers.

025 Customer Experience Audit
Capturing the day-to-day context in which people engage with your product or
service
• This captures what customers do, think, and use as they set out to achieve a
goal that involves your product or service.
• It provides a framework that design teams can use to isolate specific moments
of delight, apathy, or frustration before, during, and after an experience.
• Individual moments can be transformed into sources of design team
inspiration, from which opportunities for innovation can be identified.
• Qualitative data from interviews and directed storytelling reflects people’s
social, environmental, and financial realities, underlying beliefs, values, and
desires.
• Experience audits can help researchers isolate the areas where they may need
to conduct more research as well as any gaps in the service or product offering.
• To keep up with changing social, economic, and technical factors, the audit
should be repeated to assess experience with your product over time.
See also Diary Studies • Directed Storytelling • Experience Sampling Method

Courtesy of Cecilia Weckstrom, The LEGO Group
As part of every experience design project at the LEGO Group, audits help designers assess
whether intended experiences live up to user perceptions and expectations.



026 Design Charette
A workshop-style technique providing sequential rounds of collaboration and
cross-pollination of design ideas • Designers and non-designers—including
project stakeholders, engineers, and users—can participate.
• Participants rapidly generate ideas and rotate through small groups to bring
forward the best ideas and move toward superior design concepts.
• This can be used to explore ideas for large-scale design challenges or generate
possibilities regarding a very specific interface.
• A moderator should communicate that each round of designs builds off the
preferred components identified in the prior cycle.
• The sessions should be low-tech, using basic tools, paper templates, pencils,
erasers, and color markers.
• Clarity can be achieved through the active comparison and contrast of many
ideas.
See also Design Workshops • Parallel Prototyping • Participatory Design

Designers, stakeholders, and developers rapidly generate ideas, rotating through small groups to
bring forward and cross-pollinate the best ideas and move toward superior design concepts.

027 Design Ethnography
Deep immersive experience and understanding of a user’s world for design
empathy and insight
• This is characterized by descriptive accounts of people in their natural settings,
typically using qualitative methods.
• It is focused on a highly contextual, comprehensive, and empathic
understanding of users, their lives, their language, their artifacts, and their
behaviors.
• In contrast to anthropologist ethnographers who immerse themselves in a
culture over extensive periods of time, designers aim to sample behaviors.
• Common methods include experience sampling, diary and photo studies,
cultural probes, contextual inquiry, conversational interviews, touchstone tours,
and observations.
• Analysis is based on deciphering patterns and themes articulated in a set of
design implications in preparation for generative research.
See also Cultural Probes • Exploratory Research • Participant Observation
Courtesy of Gretchen Mendoza. Photos by Ivette Spradlin

Design ethnography is performed on the mechanic’s garage, from a study of understanding how
technical knowledge and preventative car care might be supported through design.


028 Design Workshops
Creative work sessions with participants organized around codesign methods
• Gain the creative trust and input of stakeholders and secure buy-in from team
members and clients.
• Workshops can consist of projective techniques such as collage, mapping, or
diagramming, to gain an understanding of the user’s world.
• There are common in generative research, with participants contributing to
ideation through codesign.
• In evaluative sessions, participants collectively review concepts, offer
feedback, and contribute insights for design iteration and refinement.
• Workshops may include hands-on training of simple design tools, enabling
participants to create mock-ups, sketches, or storyboards, or role-play
interactions.
• Plan carefully for a balance of design team facilitators relative to the number of
participants, with clearly defined roles.
• These workshops are increasingly used to train interested non-design audiences
in the common methods of design research, ideation, thinking, and processes.
See also Creative Toolkits • Generative Research • Participatory Design

Design workshops engage participants, often non-designers, in intense creative activity centered
on assigned problems, as in this workshop on design thinking for business executives.

029 Desirability Testing
Gauging first-impression emotional responses to product and service designs
• This explores the affective response that different designs elicit from people
based on first impressions.
• Using index cards with positive, neutral, and negative adjectives written on
them, participants pick those that describe how they feel about a design or
prototype.
• It can focus attention on responses from end users, instead of on personal
opinions that often leave teams at an impasse.
• When the process is applied repeatedly, the team can begin to compare and
cluster the words that are most frequently chosen and visualize the results.
• The method helps focus the design team efforts on shaping the exact emotional
response they want people to have while using their products.
• It Can be conducted using low-fidelity prototypes or on products already in the
public domain as a baseline before the team embarks on a redesign.
See also Triangulation • Usability Testing • Value Opportunity Analysis

Courtesy of Carol M. Barnum and Laura A. Palmer
Microsoft Product Reaction Cards are a powerful tool for gathering emotional feedback.

030 Diary Studies
Guiding journals for convenient expression of personal details about daily life
and events • They are ideal for collecting thoughts, feelings, or behaviors from
participants at key moments across time.
• They are designed for portability and ease of use, with an overview of the topic
instructions and a sample entry.
• Participants may be requested to document each time they engage in a
particular behavior, encounter a product or situation, or have specific
interactions.
• Creative page formats can be used to invite text entries, sketches, drawings,
photographs, or stickers and multiple-choice responses.
• In rare cases, diaries may be used for usability studies or evaluation, as a
means of collecting feedback from users testing products in context over time.
• Using digital diaries, participants record entries on mobile devices or via email
or web-based uploads.
See also Cultural Probes • Experience Sampling Method • Photo Studies
Diary design by Aya Horiguchi

Traditional diary study on skincare regimens conducted using pen-and-paper journals.
Courtesy of dscout.com / Gravity Tank
Digital diary with user photo and text entries describing Christmas shopping experiences.

031 Directed Storytelling
Gathering rich stories of lived experiences using narrative conversational
prompts
• This is rooted in narrative inquiry, whereby researchers understand people and
document their experiences from personal stories.
• It starts with a prompt by the researcher to the storyteller: “Tell me a story
about the last time you …”
• Additional guiding questions are posed in terms of who, what, when, where,
and how, to keep the storyteller in a comfortable narrative flow.
• Ideas emerging from stories can be clustered using affinity diagramming,
looking for consistent patterns and themes within and across experiences.
• Themes that characterize experiences can be modeled into a tangible
framework, with maps or diagrams of what is most significant about
participant experiences.
• The method may provide subtle reinforcement and validation of existing
design directions or identify the need for additional research.
See also Interviews • Critical Incident Technique • Picture Cards

Guiding questions for directed storytelling might include the following: When and with whom did
you interact? What aspects of the environment affected your experience? How did you feel?

032 Elito Method
A method used to ground design arguments in research observations and
business directives • This is a rigorous synthesis method designed to help teams
bridge the “analysis-synthesis” gap between research and design ideas in a
business context.
• Elito brings the multidisciplinary team together after primary and/or secondary
research has been conducted.
• Using a spreadsheet and a projector, the team captures its work and thinking in
five “Elito entities,” which together create “logic line” design arguments: –
Observation: “What did you see, read, or hear?”
– Judgment: “What is your opinion about that observation?”
– Value: “What values are ultimately at work?”
– Concept/Sketch: “What can the design team do to solve this problem?”
– Key Metaphor: “What is the hook or tagline?”
• The spreadsheet captures the team’s random, nonlinear thinking to connect
arguments, further refine ideas, and organize arguments into observation-based
themes.
See also Cultural Probes • Design Ethnography • Touchstone Tours

Courtesy of Trysh Wahlig. Recreated with permission.
After building an Elito spreadsheet based on research observations, each “logic line” is sorted,
clustered, and commented upon to analyze, evaluate, and share the work.

033 Ergonomic Analysis
An assessment of tools, devices, or environments to optimize fit, safety, and
comfort • Performed to suggest redesign improvements or establish ergonomic
criteria for new design.
• The five interrelated criteria commonly used are:
1. Size: Anthropometry is the systematic measurement of people to assess and
design tools and systems.
2. Strength: Manual force encompasses finger/hand strength for triggering and
gripping and body strength for lifting.
3. Reach: Assesses safe access to operator controls or environmental features
and is typically based on fifth percentile females to accommodate most
users.
4. Clearance: Assesses effective space within and around machinery and for
avoiding environmental obstacles and is commonly based on the 95th
percentile male.
5. Posture: Tool and system design should avoid excessive hand deviation or
flexion and the reduction of bending and stooping to avoid discomfort,
fatigue, and long-term injury.
See also Evaluative Research • Task Analysis • Usability Testing

Courtesy of Rob Tannen, Bresslergroup
An ergonomic analysis of a crimping device hand tool for Thomas & Betts.

034 Evaluative Research
Testing of prototypes, products, or interfaces by users of a system in design
development
• This gauges human expectations against a designed artifact, determining
whether something is useful, usable, and desirable.
• Testing should collect performance measures such as task speed and accuracy
and preference measures such as aesthetic and emotional response.
• Research of existing and competing products may be useful in early stage
design research, to inform new product development.
• Testing may be conducted in a lab setting or by people using products or
prototypes in a real-world context.
• New crowdsourcing opportunities afford online testing by volunteers to assess
how users are engaging with prototype interface designs and wireframes.
• Some forms of evaluation research such as cognitive walkthrough and heuristic
evaluation use expert evaluators to assess products and interfaces.
See also A/B Testing • Heuristic Evaluation • Think-Aloud Protocol

Evaluation research can be formal or informal. In this example, evaluations were invited through a
public display of prototypes for a proposed new signage program.

035 Evidence-Based Design
Effective design decisions based on credible research and assessed outcomes
• Evidence-Based Design (EBD) and Evidence-Based Research connect
evidence and application, or the applied use of known theories validated by
research.
• EBD is applicable across the spectrum of design disciplines for improving
service and product touch-points within any environment.
• The primary tenets of EBD are to enter the problem unbiased, employing
traditional research methods and factual evidence to influence design decision-
making.
• Methods include credible literature reviews and comparative analyses, case
studies, and documented post-use evaluations of existing design.
• EBD should also include documented site visits, surveys, interviews, and other
means of collecting information.
• Design decisions should be linked to measurable outcomes to justify return on
investment, such as reduced infection rates or decreased staff injuries.
See also Case Studies • Literature Reviews • Secondary Research
Figure 1. An existing surgical suite control desk and schedule board.

Figure 2. Three dimensional sketch of new control desk and schedule board. New floor plan of same. Black
circles are control desk workers: white circles are information seekers.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-
0325047. Courtesy of Peter Scupelli
An Evidence-Based Design of a surgical suite requires that research informs design decisions,
hypotheses are linked to outcomes, design is evaluated, and results are published.

036 Experience Prototyping
Active participation in design through subjective engagement with a prototype
system or service, product, or place • Similar to role-playing and bodystorming,
low-fidelity prototypes or props are used to help create a realistic scenario of use
and activate felt experiences.
• For exploring and evaluating ideas, design teams can use this method
internally and with clients and users.
• Prototypes may include simple props and role-playing or physical and digital
prototypes with some level of functionality tested in realistic situations.
• Experience prototyping is effective for persuading key audiences of the values
inherent in design concepts, through direct and active engagement.
• A level of functionality allows realistic engagement, yet with a caution that the
prototype represents a work in progress and not the final design artifact.
• Advantages are a low cost and addressing situations that will prevent real-life
experiences because of inherent risks and dangers or complicating logistics.
See also Bodystorming • Role-Playing • Wizard of Oz

Courtesy of Scott Davidoff
Experience prototypes surround a prototype product or service with a simulated context of use.
Here, a user schedules an appointment using a mobile device prototype.

037 Experience Sampling Method
Behaviors, interactions, thoughts, or feelings self-reported in real time when
signaled
• Experience sampling requires participants to document something specific
when signaled by a device alarm.
• Before smartphones, participants were signaled by pagers, hence the common
nickname of “beeper study.”
• Behaviors, interactions, thoughts, or feelings are guided by clear instructions
and entered into a pre-established form, often with photos in a diary or journal.
• Technology allows for documenting and sending photos, text, or audio entries
through smartphones.
• This is a form of design ethnography, collecting strategic samples of life in
place of in-person immersion by researchers.
• Samples can give the designer a comprehensive picture across time or
individuals for any particular design study.
• The method is useful in exploratory and generative phases of design research.
See also Design Ethnography • Diary Studies • Photo Studies

Courtesy of www.mappiness.org.uk
The “Mappiness” project uses experience sampling to invite respondents to indicate their current
feelings and situation when paged, mapping how the environment affects people’s happiness.


038 Experiments
Measuring the effect that an action has on a situation, demonstrating a causal
relationship
• Cause and effect criteria are met by the cause occurring before the effect of
two observable and measurable actions or events and elimination of all other
possible causes.
• Through random assignment, experimental group participants are exposed to
manipulations of an independent variable, while the control group is not.
• All other conditions are held exactly the same for both groups to rule out the
influence of extraneous variables.
• The dependent variable is measured to see if there is a significant difference
for those exposed to the manipulation.
• An operational definition defines exactly how the dependent variable is being
measured: for example, performance speed or assessment of comfort.
• Quasi-experiments occur when the researcher cannot control the assignment of
participants to conditions: for example, comparing pre-existing groups.
See also A/B Testing • Evaluative Research • Eyetracking
Courtesy of Lester Loschky and Adam Larson, images reproduced with permission from Journal of Vision,
© ARVO
In a vision experiment, people were equally good at categorizing the gist of briefly glimpsed
scenes using peripheral vision as when seeing the entire image.

039 Exploratory Research
User and product studies intended to forge an empathic knowledge base
• Conducted in the early stages of the design process and set by the planning,
scoping, and definition phase.
• The focus is on gaining a solid knowledge base of the design territory and
existing artifacts and forging an empathic sense of the people targeted by the
design.
• A variety of diverse yet complementary methods might include contextual
inquiry, touchstone tours, surveys, observation, experience sampling, and
cultural probes.
• Research is purposefully flexible, encouraging divergence from planned
protocols and the inclusion of data from spontaneous interactions and
observations.
• Synthesis is critical, but targeted toward inspiration rather than the formal
analysis of concrete data.
• Exploratory research culminates in a set of tangible design implications,
preparing the groundwork for generative research and concept development.
See also Cultural Probes • Design Ethnography • Observation

Exploratory research for a service design project on meat purchasing behaviors included surveys,
farm visits, observations, and conversations at meat counters with butchers and consumers.

040 Eyetracking
Technical information documenting where and f or how long people are looking
when using an interface or interacting with products
• Eye movements tracked during reading or image-gaze tasks are identified for
moments of fixation and rapid movements from point to point between
fixations.
• Technology traces and documents patterns, generating data for interface and
design usability studies.
• Optical methods are used to capture corneal reflections of infrared light on
video using sophisticated cameras. Small sensing electrodes precisely detect
movements.
• It can help examine printed text and visual materials, engaging with products
or product assembly tasks, and navigating environments.
• Data is used to generate heat maps, aggregating data from several participants
for a visual analysis of scan patterns and distributed attention.
• Eyetracking should be triangulated with other research methods to understand
user motivations, information processing, or comprehension.
See also Automated Remote Research • Experiments • Evaluative Research


Courtesy of eBay Inc.
Eyetracking and heat maps are used by eBay to understand where ads could be most effective
and useful, helping to shape an advertising strategy.

041 Flexible Modeling
Product or interface configurations generated by users from a component kit of
parts
• In industrial design, Velcro modeling presents physical product forms and
features sets such as buttons and controls covered in fabric and fasteners for
quick configurations.
• In interaction design, interface elements may be presented on paper, card, or in
digital form for the users to arrange in a way that makes sense to them.
• For environmental design and space planning, scale model parts or paper
templates can be arranged.
• Ambiguous elements may be configured to represent either realistic or ideal
“fantasy” artifacts for participants to overlay their own expressions, needs, and
desires.
• For analysis, configured artifacts can be sorted by similar characteristics,
common user choices, or themes.
• Resulting models can be visually translated into refined designs, using the
information provided by participants as guiding inspiration for the designer.
See also Creative Toolkits • Generative Research • Participatory Design

Courtesy of Luke Hagan
Flexible modeling presents the participant with a kit of ambiguous parts, in this case components
of a backpack, to be configured into preferred arrangements.

042 Fly-on-the-Wall Observation
Unobtrusive observation of people or behaviors, without direct participation or
interference
• This method attempts to minimize potential bias or behavioral influences that
might result from engagement with users.
• It is appropriate when observing public behaviors or work processes that may
be unduly influenced if interrupted or inconvenienced.
• It may reduce the researcher’s ability to connect empathically with people and
probe further into motivations behind participant behaviors.
• It is generally conducted flexibly, although worksheets or other guiding
frameworks may usefully inform observations.
• Secret outsiders are distant observers, with a vantage point that removes them
from participants to minimize any influence on behaviors.
• Recognized outsiders have the nature of their research and role as observer
made known to participants, but position themselves in a natural and
unobtrusive way.
See also Observation • Shadowing • Unobtrusive Measures

Fly-on-the-Wall Observation is an ideal method for studying public places and activities.

043 Focus Groups
Gauging opinions, feelings, and attitudes about a product, service, marketing
campaign, or brand • The dynamic created by a small group of carefully
recruited people, when guided by a skilled moderator, can provide insight into
themes, patterns, and trends.
• Allows participants to openly share experiences, perceptions, wants/needs, and
fantasies.
• Design-related inquiries may include:
– Reviewing processes that take place over time
– Explanations of what is not desirable about the current state
– Uncovering the underlying emotions while going through a given process –
Work-arounds and hacks to improve the process
– Learning how members establish social capital
– Understanding constructs and mental models shared by group members •
Pay attention to the logic behind conclusions, stories, metaphors, and
analogies, as well as how participants describe their experiences,
preferences, and memories.
See also Directed Storytelling • Laddering • Surveys

A skilled moderator guides a focus group. Sessions are commonly recorded, or stakeholders may
observe the session through one-way glass or on screen.

044 Generative Research
Engaging users in creative activities to provide rich information for concept
development
• Participatory methods include codesign activities as a collaborative process
between user and designer.
• Methods may include creative tool kits, design workshops, card sorting,
collages, cognitive mapping, diagramming, drawing, and flexible modeling.
• The creation of an artifact around which a participant may talk will act as a
trigger for engaged conversation.
• Early phase expressive exercises such as collage enable participants to
articulate feelings and desires.
• Later phase exercises consist of constructive methods such as flexible
modeling, manipulating design elements oriented toward concept generation.
• Participatory exercises are combined with verbal discussions of work in
progress and presentations of creative artifacts emerging from research
sessions.
• Focus is on the generation of design concepts and early prototype iterations,
ultimately preparing for evaluation, refinement, and production.
See also Creative Toolkits • Flexible Modeling • Participatory Design

Flexible modeling kits are used by participants in constructive generative research. Here, they are
being used to propose desired elements for smartphone apps.

045 Graffiti Walls
An open canvas inviting comments about an environment or system in the
context of use
• Large-format paper is temporarily adhered to a wall, with markers readily
available for posting open-ended comments.
• The paper may be blank, or a guiding question may be posed to maintain a
particular theme.
• The method is useful in environments or situations where it is challenging to
collect information through traditional methods such as interview or
observation.
• Photos of each graffiti wall should be taken at daily intervals, as the paper may
deteriorate or be removed.
• The graffiti wall can be analyzed as a research artifact, for inspiration,
comparison, consolidation with walls collected from other locations, and
content analysis.
• One limitation is the lack of control and knowledge about who contributed to
the information and why.
See also Exploratory Research • Observation • Unobtrusive Measures

Image based on work from Purin Phanichphant
Graffiti walls are ideal for capturing informal opinions about an environment in the context of use,
seen here for research on attitudes about public bathrooms.

046 Heuristic Evaluation
An agreed-upon set of usability best practices used to evaluate an interface •
This is a usability inspection method that asks evaluators to assess an interface
against a set of agreed-upon best practices or usability “rules of thumb.”
• Unlike usability tests with actual users, these evaluations enlist team members
to inspect and fix baseline usability problems before user testing.
• When heuristics are applied repeatedly during an iterative design process, the
principles will become more intuitive and usability problems easier to detect.
• Novices trained on heuristics and evaluators familiar with the subject and
usability practices conduct evaluations.
• The method can help detect critical but missing dialogue elements early in the
design process, as well as heuristics that are working well.
• When used in the middle phases of the design process, even with low-fidelity
prototypes, evaluations can make later usability tests more effective.
See also Cognitive Walkthrough • Evaluative Research • Prototyping

Aesthetic and minimalist design

Flexibility and efficiency of use

Error prevention
Heuristics adapted for the iPhone based on work of Suzanne Ginsburg
A sample of Molich and Nielsen’s original ten heuristics, adapted and applied to iPhone apps.

047 Image Boards
A collage of pictures, illustrations, or brand imagery to visually communicate
aspects of design intent
• They are used to visually convey an essential description of design aesthetics,
style, audience, or context.
• Images convey the particular styles, colors, products, brands, and environments
associated with the designer’s interpretation of a given aesthetic.
• A user-based image board portrays a target audience, conveyed through their
clothing, preferred brands, environments, transportation, and social interests.
• An environment-based image board visually shows sample interiors, furniture,
lighting, fixtures, and conveys color palettes and atmospheric tone.
• The creation of image boards can serve internally as a consensus artifact for
design teams, representing an agreed-upon version of a design aesthetic or
context.
• Externally, image boards are powerful tools for communicating design intent to
clients, clarifying an aesthetic direction or targeted audience.
See also Mind Mapping • Stakeholder Maps • Territory Maps

Image boards created by Rebecca Bortman and Michael Sui, courtesy of Kristin Hughes
Image boards helped a design team understand the culture and spirit of teenage girls, informing
the visual and verbal language for a role-playing game.

048 Interviews
Conversation to collect first-hand accounts of experience, opinions, attitudes,
and perceptions
• They are best conducted in person to include nuances of personal expression
and body language, but may also be conducted by phone or social media.
• They may follow a script of questions or simply have a guiding topic, which
allows for flexible detours in conversational form.
• Stakeholder interviews focus on information from specific roles or people who
may have a vested interest in the particular inquiry.
• Key informant interviews concentrate on people who have specialized or
expert knowledge to contribute.
• Interviews of couples or groups should be moderated so conversations are not
dominated by one person.
• Interviews can be more productive when based around artifacts, the inspiration
behind methods, personal inventories, and picture cards.
See also Contextual Inquiry • Questionnaires • Surveys

Interviews are a common research method, often used to verify and humanize data collected
using complementary methods such as questionnaires and observations.

049 KJ Technique
A silent sort method to help teams work through a problem space and prioritize
focus • The KJ Technique is a consensus-building exercise that helps teams
externalize a complicated range of ideas and information.
• It focuses the team on one question and sets everyone to work on the same task
at the same time.
• Everyone in the group writes as many problems, data, insights, or opinions as
they can think of, in silence.
• Sticky notes are posted simultaneously, opening up the opportunity for a
holistic assessment of the problem space rather than competing opinions.
• By providing a framework where everyone silently works together, decisions
are made democratically, with little or no opportunities for coercion.
• Working efficiently, a team can organize their notes into an affinity diagram.
See also Affinity Diagramming • Value Opportunity Analysis • Weighted Matrix

Everyone writes all of their concerns…
…then, notes are sorted in silence…

Using the KJ Technique, team members independently identify their respective concerns and
project requirements on sticky notes and then silently cluster similar concerns and challenges.

050 Kano Analysis
Helps determine and prioritize which product attributes are most important to the
customer
• By assigning each product attribute to one of five categories, customer values
regarding satisfaction can be revealed.
• Required (atari mae or “quality element”) are the baseline features that must
be included, such as privacy, safety, and security.
• Desired (ichi gen teki or “one-dimensional quality element”) are attributes that
when included, increase the perceived value of the product.
• Exciter/Delighter (mi ryoku teki or “attractive quality element”) are a source
of surprise based on latent customer needs, improving measures of satisfaction.
• Neutral (mu kan shin or “indifferent quality element”) represent features that
customers don’t have strong feelings for either way.
• Anti-feature (gyaku or “reverse quality element”) attributes provide insight
into what you should leave out of a product.
See also Desirability Testing • Surveys • Value Opportunity Analysis

Question 1: If product attribute is present, the customer feels…

Question 2: If product attribute is absent, the customer feels…
The Kano Analysis can help you make informed decisions about which product features to
improve first or in what order to add features.

051 Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
Measurements of how well you are doing against quantifiable, widely accepted
business goals • KPIs measure where you were yesterday and where you are
today, in relationship to where you are trying to go in terms of some predefined
business objective.
• Each KPI is a measurement derived from an individual’s interaction with your
product or service.
• KPIs are great for quantifying behavior or value metrics (e.g., the ratio of
people who abandon their shopping cart versus those who complete the sale).
• As an action-oriented measure, KPIs can help:
– Recognize, prioritize, and react as issues occur
– Meaningfully summarize and compare data and use it to your advantage –
Document a business case for change
– Foster an ongoing organizational understanding of how people respond to
your product or service • The KPI reporting process needs to be ongoing and
frequent enough so that fluctuations can be immediately course-corrected.
See also Site Search Analytics • Web Analytics

This shows the recommended KPIs for four popular business models and which internal team
should monitor them.

052 Laddering
An interviewing technique that reveals connections between a product’s
characteristics and personal values • It builds on Means–End Theory, which
posits that people make purchasing decisions based on consequences afforded by
using the product.
• Connects a product’s obvious physical characteristics to values by repeatedly
asking “Why” questions.
• As the conversation builds on itself to reveal what a person values, the
“ladder” is constructed that connects product attributes to the consequences
and to the individual’s values.
• Consequences are the benefit or the impact that the product has on a person
and reveal another layer about what is important.
• Values expose the root cause behind why a product resonates profoundly with
a person.
• Seven values are often the motivation behind purchasing behavior: self-esteem,
accomplishment, belonging, self-fulfillment, family, satisfaction, and security.
See also Interviews • Triading • Value Opportunity Analysis
Laddering is used to reveal the connection between a product’s obvious physical characteristics
and the deeper personal values that it reinforces in a customer’s life.

053 Literature Reviews
The written collection and synthesis of research on a given topic
• These are intended to distill information from published sources, capturing the
essence of previous research or projects to inform the current project.
• Strategies for organizing may be categorical, chronological, thematic, or
methodological.
• Internet resources have expedited searches but judgment is needed to ensure
relevance and credibility of sources.
• May include books, chapters, journal and magazine articles, theses and
dissertations, corporate and academic websites and blogs, and past design
projects.
• The guiding factor in selecting literature should be relevance, clearly
suggesting how it informed the design investigation.
• Literature reviews should be accurately referenced using a consistent
bibliographic style.
See also Evidence-Based Design • Secondary Research • Unobtrusive Measures

Extracting salient information from precedent research and projects through comprehensive
literature reviews is a critical step in laying the foundation and contextualizing the design inquiry.

054 The Love Letter & The Breakup Letter
Writing to express sentiments to a personified product or service
• The Love Letter conveys what people feel during moments of connection with
a product, including delight, infatuation, and loyalty.
• The Breakup Letter provides insight about how, when, and where a
relationship with a product turned sour, to understand why people abandon a
product.
• Both exercises are great techniques to use in a group dynamic, including
design workshops, group interviews, and icebreaker sessions.
• Ask participants to spend no more than ten minutes on a letter and then
volunteers can read theirs aloud.
• The physical letters are important research artifacts, while video can capture
participant expressions and voices.
• Methods like the Love Letter and the Breakup Letter build our empathic
knowledge base of how people experience and personify designs.
See also Design Workshops • Desirability Testing • Value Opportunity Analysis

Method courtesy of Smart Design
The Love Letter and Breakup Letter allow participants to express their love or disappointment to a
product or service with a handwritten letter.

055 Mental Model Diagrams
A framework aligning task behaviors, beliefs, and emotions with product and
service features
• Can help you articulate root causes behind behaviors and develop solutions
that deeply resonate with people.
• Diverse groups identified for study are called task-based audience segments,
each usually comprised of at least four people.
• Diagrams are built from the bottom up, using singularly focused behaviors,
beliefs, and emotions derived from interviews or diary studies.
• The top half of the diagram represents the behaviors, beliefs, and emotions
people have as they set out to accomplish a task.
• The bottom half of the diagram represents the features, product, and service
offering.
• The goal is to help teams make appropriate product development strategies that
align with how people already approach problem solving in their daily lives.
See also Diary Studies • Interviews • Task Analysis

Courtesy of Indi Young
The top half of the diagram represents behaviors, beliefs, or emotions. The bottom half represents
the features, services, or products available in your current offering.

056 Mind Mapping
A visual thinking tool to organize and understand the complexities of a problem
space • It can help generate ideas and develop concepts using the following
steps: 1. Identify a themed focus question to draw in the center.
2. Label extensions with simple verb-noun pairs or noun clusters.
3. Connect primary and secondary connections with lines to create meaning.
4. Continue free associations until all relevant information is represented.
5. Before declaring the map complete, reflect for a while.
• The map provides a nonlinear means of externalizing the information in our
heads so that we can interpret, consolidate, communicate, store, and retrieve it.
• The map allows us to summarize and test assumptions, make and break
connections, and consider alternatives while we shape data into themes and
patterns.
See also Brainstorm Graphic Organizers • Collage • Concept Mapping

Mind mapping allows us to simultaneously identify the subject of the map, relationships between
the components, and understand the relative importance of the information represented.

057 Observation
Attentive looking and systematic recording of people, artifacts, environments,
events, behaviors, and interactions • Semi-structured observation typically
describes ethnographic methods in the exploratory phase of design.
• Ethnographic observations should be flexible, yet systematic, careful, and well
documented with notes, sketches, photographs, or video.
• Semi-structured observations are typically synthesized for guiding design
inspiration, but content analysis may be performed to uncover themes or
patterns.
• Structured, or systematic observation, is formalized by pre-structure utilizing
worksheets to track time intervals, behavioral categories, or counted successes
and errors.
• If sample sizes are large enough, results can be quantified for analysis
otherwise, it is common to look for patterns or trends across observations.
• Observations should differentiate between factual behaviors witnessed and
inferences, speculating the meaning and motivations behind actions.
See also AEIOU • Fly-on-the-Wall Observation • Participant Observation

Courtesy of MAYA Design
Documented contextual observations from a customer-centered study of the library experience to
inform redesign.

058 Parallel Prototyping
Simultaneously exploring multiple design ideas before selecting one approach
• This can help teams from fixating on a design direction too early, improve the
nature of design critiques, and lead to more effective design results.
• Designers quickly and independently create a divergent range of low-fidelity
prototypes and then submit designs to testing by end users or to heuristic
evaluation by experts.
• Evaluations help designers to thoughtfully consider how people react to
individual elements of the design and which accomplish the project’s intended
goals.
• The method shifts focus from the designer onto the design, promoting a safe
environment where critiques are more engaging, less personal, and less
stressful.
• The method promotes team collaboration and builds rapport, as designers will
often merge and refine others’ concepts into their subsequent designs.
See also Design Charette • Prototyping • Research Through Design

By simultaneously designing and testing multiple approaches, there is a better chance that the
final design will represent the best qualities of all design options.

059 Participant Observation
Immersive membership in an activity, context, culture, or subculture
• A participant observation (PO) researcher forms deep connections and empathy
by experiencing events in the same way as the people they are studying.
• PO is a foundational method of anthropology, adapted for design use through
time-limited engagements.
• Systematic observation and recording are critical to document physical aspects
of the environment, behaviors, interactions, language, motivations, and
perceptions of the participants.
• Marginal participants blend into an environment as natural observers of an
activity or event.
• Full participants take on a membership role or may already occupy a role that
allows for full participation.
• Participant observers need to stay vigilant to retain some measure of
objectivity and to avoid undue influence on member behaviors.
See also Design Ethnography • Fly-on-the-Wall Observation • Observation

Courtesy of Amy Lew
Marginal participant observation of transit riders for a service design project on “commutenity,”
promoting community and reinforcing positive behaviors among bus riders.

060 Participatory Action Research (PAR)
A cyclical, collaborative process that seeks to intentionally change members of
the inquiry
• The mission is to change the community, or policies under study, differentiated
from objective methods that seek only to describe, understand, and explain.
• With an overtone of empowerment, emancipation, and activism, the approach
has been popular in education, feminist research, and social justice.
• The process is dynamic and cyclical in its sequence of planning, taking action,
observing, evaluating, and critical reflection.
• Specific research methods tend to be flexible, qualitative, and ethnographic,
including traditional observations, participant observation, and interviews.
• New movements in social design suggest a natural affiliation with participatory
methods, including collaborative design workshops and creative tool kits.
• It is a powerful process when aligned with issues identified by a community,
inspiring action to be applied directly to problems.
See also Case Studies • Participatory Design

Courtesy of Kristin Hughes
In research designing a health literacy game, participants described undergoing improved self-
image, better physical and psychological well-being, and positive reinforcement from friends and
family.

061 Participatory Design
A human-centered approach advocating codesign engagement with users and
stakeholders
• Participatory design has its roots in Scandinavia in the 1970s, where computer
professionals worked with unions to integrate new technology into the
workplace.
• Participatory design encompasses several methods, unified by face-to-face
contact in activity-based codesign engagements.
• Methods include cultural probes, diary studies, photo studies, collage, flexible
modeling, role-playing, creative tool kits, and design workshops.
• Participatory design respects the creative insight of participants to inspire and
help guide the design process and to respond to design outcomes.
• A framework of participatory design describes the form of method or technique
(making, telling, and enacting) and purpose.
• Purposes are probing participants for self-discovery, priming for further
participation, understanding current experience, and generation of future
scenarios and concepts.
See also Creative Toolkits • Design Workshops


In this participatory design project on appliance design for the aging population, participants use
creative toolkits for design input and offer feedback on prototypes.

062 Personal Inventories
Representative collections of artifacts selected by the participant for the
designer-researcher
• This allows the designer to see and understand the relevance of objects in a
user’s life in order to inspire design themes and insight.
• It is most commonly solicited through paired methods such as guided tours,
contextual interviews, and photo and diary studies.
• As a component of touchstone tours, participants talk about the things they
own as they walk the researcher through their home or other environment.
• As an element of photo studies, participants document the objects of meaning,
often with companion notations.
• Interviews probe for object meaning, the role in a participant’s life, acquisition,
use, placement, and how they might feel if the object were lost or damaged.
• Personal inventories may focus on certain types of objects, but are more
commonly driven by the participant, who identifies items of significance.
See also Artifact Analysis • Diary Studies • Touchstone Tours

Courtesy of Will Odom
Personal inventories can reveal the significance of objects, but may rely on the designer to extract
insight about the user and context for design inquiry.

063 Personas
Representative human profiles based on archetypal descriptions of users from
research
• Crafted from information collected from real users through sound field
research and captures common behaviors in meaningful and relatable profiles.
• They are useful in humanizing design focus, testing scenarios, and aiding in
design communication.
• Human descriptions facilitate easy empathy and communication, while
distinctions create useful targets for responsible design.
• Affinity diagramming or other methods can be used to cluster similarities
across users to form archetypes.
• Personas are typically page-length descriptions, with a name, a photo, and a
story describing key aspects of life, goals, and behaviors.
• Personas are used as a lasting human reference by teams throughout all phases
of the project.
• Provide a persuasive human reference when communicating research
summaries and scenarios to clients.
See also Scenario Description Swimlanes • Scenarios • User Journey Maps

Courtesy of Todd Zaki Warfel, Principal Designer, messagefirst | design studio
This is a persona of a college student. The majority of information about the persona is visually
illustrated to reflect her knowledge, activities and interests, influencers, and backstory.

064 Photo Studies
Self-documentation of a participant’s life and interactions
• Common in exploratory research as a method for understanding the world of
users, particularly when engaging in territory unfamiliar to the designer.
• To initiate a photo study, participants are provided with a camera or instructed
how their own cameras are to be used for the purposes of the research.
• Participants are given general instructions on what to document, or they may
be instructed to take images at certain times or when feeling a particular way.
• Photo studies are most often used as a complement to other methods: for
example, diary studies or the experience sampling method.
• The designer may rely solely on the photographs and participant notes for
synthesis or have the participant explain or sort their photos.
• Patterns and themes might emerge within several photos from multiple
participants.
See also Cultural Probes • Diary Studies • Experience Sampling Method

Courtesy of frog design, frogmob.frogdesign.com
Collected photos from a crowdsourced photo study on energy use reveal a diverse range of
interpretations on the subject matter for design consideration.

065 Picture Cards
Cards with images and words help people think about and share true experiences
• In a session, participants recall an experience, using the cards to support
memories and evoke conversation.
• Picture cards stem from activity theory, which asserts, “the human mind is the
product of our interaction with people and artifacts in the context of everyday
activity.”
• Cards are created with images and caption text relevant to the research inquiry,
but connected to the personal accounts of participant lives.
• Card sets should account for current and future product and service
experiences and include blank cards for details that might emerge during
sessions.
• The method should be used flexibly, adding, subtracting, and editing picture
cards in pretesting prior to field use and even between research sessions.
• The cards can be used for sorting current products and services used and
“sketching” future scenarios, which are laid out as a story unfolds.
See also Directed Storytelling • Interviews • Touchstone Tours

Courtesy of Adaptive Path
In a picture card session, cards are sorted by participants and used to guide storytelling of past
experiences and the sketching of future scenarios.

066 Prototyping
The tangible creation of artifacts, at various levels of resolution, for development
and testing of ideas
• Prototypes are essential for early and iterative concept testing by the design
team, clients, and potential users.
• Low-fidelity prototyping is common throughout early ideation processes in all
design disciplines, appearing as concept sketches, storyboards, or sketch
models.
• A common method of low-fidelity prototyping in interface and software design
is paper prototyping, with printed pages representing interface screens.
• In graphic design, the “comp” serves as a low-fidelity prototype, presenting a
mocked-up version of a proposed printed piece, usually for client review.
• In industrial design, low-fidelity prototypes may be sketch models intended for
iterative design review or as proof of concept models to test form and scale.
• High-fidelity prototypes represent the appearance of the final product in look
and feel and basic functionality, through interactive computer or physical
models.
See also Experience Prototyping • Research Through Design • Storyboards

Courtesy of POP
Low-fidelity prototypes of interface behaviors are used to build consensus and understanding
among project team members and clients.

067 Questionnaires
Self-reported information about thoughts, feelings, perceptions, behaviors, or
attitudes • One of the primary tools used to collect survey information, the other
being interviews.
• They are simple to produce and administer, but careful attention should be paid
to question wording and response options, sequencing, and length.
• Factors in securing a good response rate in both print and digital questionnaires
include appearance, clarity, instructions, arrangement, design, and layout.
• Open-ended questions provide opportunity for depth of response, whereas
closed-ended questions are easier to numerically analyze and communicate.
• To maintain question neutrality while also gaining an indication of strength of
response, Likert scale questions are highly recommended.
• They are commonly triangulated with other methods, such as observation, to
supplement the data with personal insights and verify self-reported behaviors.
See also Interviews • Semantic Differential • Surveys

Questionnaire design by Sung Joong Kang
Questionnaires can be used as a component of various forms of research: for example, as part of
a diary study or an element of product evaluation.

068 Rapid Iterative Testing & Evaluation
(RITE)
A powerful formative usability inspection method that identifies early interface
problems
• This is rigorous method used to evaluate and identify interface problems,
quickly fix them, and then empirically verify the efficacy of the fixes.
• RITE explores user behavior insights relative to design direction as opposed to
summative goals, which measure usability issues.
• Prototypes are changed as soon as problems are identified and the team agrees
to a solution, and the fix is then retested with more participants.
• Scheduled tests continue after each design change until there is a string of
successes with no failures.
• Domain knowledge can help observers prioritize fixes based on their judgment
of true problems versus what is an artifact of a particular participant.
• RITE begins when you have a low-fidelity prototype to test, in order to fix
issues before time and resources are spent producing a high-fidelity prototype.
See also Prototyping • Think-Aloud Protocol • Usability Testing

An example test cycle using the RITE Method.

069 Remote Moderated Research
Remotely observing users completing tasks on their own devices in context
• A participant completes tasks while thinking out loud while software allows a
remote researcher and observers to review behaviors and ask questions.
• Remote Moderated Research can reveal deep insights into contexts of use that
cannot be replicated in a controlled lab environment.
• The method exposes rich, qualitative data about a participant’s native computer
and possibly his or her physical environment.
• With “live recruiting,” participants can be intercepted when they begin a
process, and research can be initiated immediately upon their consent.
• Live recruiting allows the research team to observe behavior in a task that the
participant has selected as important and relevant as opposed to one assigned.
See also Stakeholder Walkthrough • Time-Aware Research • Usability Testing

As a participant completes tasks while thinking out loud, screen-sharing software allows a remote
researcher and observers to review behaviors and ask questions.

070 Research Through Design
Utilizing the design process as a reflective research activity to enhance design
practices
• This examines the tools and processes of design thinking and making within
the design project, bridging theory and building knowledge.
• It is constituted by the design process itself, including the critical act of
recording and communicating the steps, experiments, and iterations of design.
• Designers utilize their work, including sketches, drawings, models, and
prototypes to interrogate ideas, test hypotheses, and pose new questions.
• As an approach to interaction design, this method integrates models and
theories with technical knowledge in the design process.
• Designers who conduct their research through creative, critically reflective
practice may at once be responding to a design brief and a set of larger
questions.
• Documentation is critical to contextualize and communicate design action,
advance scholarship, and enhance the inventory of design resources.
See also Case Studies • Evidence-Based Design • Prototyping

Courtesy of Mark Baskinger © 2011
These form studies embody an inquiry into materials, surfaces, volumes, and edges, informing
research and teaching in the experimentation and generation of form.

071 Role-Playing
Acting the role of the user in realistic scenarios to present empathic design
opportunities
• Role-playing is usually guided by describing a general situation or suggestions
for actions to be performed, tasks to be accomplished, or goals to be reached.
• Members of the design team have to be willing to play and improvise, yet be
cautious to avoid exchanges that can lead to hurtful or upsetting words or
actions.
• Debriefing after role-playing is critical to make sense of what occurred and to
assess genuine feelings that may have resulted from the session.
• Role-playing is difficult to document by the actors involved, so it is useful to
have other team members record the sessions using photos and notes or video.
• Role-playing is useful when direct observation is not feasible or ethical: for
example, for personally sensitive situations or where access to the users is
restricted.
See also Bodystorming • Experience Prototyping • Simulation Exercises

Courtesy of Elizabeth Gerber
Members of design teams engaged in role-playing have to be willing and realistic participants.
Here, designers are enthusiastically role-playing services for parents with young children.

072 Scenario Description Swimlanes
A holistic visualization of the activities of multiple actors in a flow of events
• It can benefit any project where several processes or actors have to come
together to shape the outcome of the same flow of events.
• Multiple scenario description swimlanes should be created from user research,
each focused on its own specific story with the following elements: –
Storyboard lane: Captures the events in a user story using comics,
photographs, illustrations, or sketches.
– User Experience lane: This is a flowchart depicting the story with more
detail and insight into the process of the user experience.
– Business Process lane: This is the business logic providing the required
processes that facilitates the steps of the user experience.
– Tools and Systems lane: Back-end technology that is involved to support
user actions and business goals.
• The method visually connects an overarching user story with problems being
solved at both a macro perspective and detailed micro view.
See also Personas • Scenarios • Stakeholder Maps

Courtesy of nForm User Experience Consulting, Inc.
The visual nature of swimlanes provides a bird’s-eye view of the moving parts within a story,
helping to get everyone on the same page.

073 Scenarios
A narrative exploring the future use of a product from a user’s point of view
• A scenario is a believable narrative, usually set in the future, of a person’s
experience as he or she engages with a product or a service.
• By making design ideas explicit and concrete, the design team can
empathetically envision the future ways in which a product is likely to be used.
• The scenario should focus efforts on building culturally meaningful artifacts
that augment actual human activity, rather than designing toward technical
requirements.
• Scenarios bring personas to life. Both deliverables therefore reinforce the value
of the other.
• Scenarios should range from baseline, status quo to high-stress situations with
less-than-optimal conditions.
• Scenarios can be written to follow a traditional story arc, with a trigger event,
scene, and preconditions, and task resolution with technology that assists and
delights.
See also Business Origami • Personas • Speed Dating

Courtesy of MAYA Design
A goal-oriented scenario with a customer persona, showing key interactions and barriers to a
successful library experience.

074 Secondary Research
Information collected and synthesized from existing data and sources
• Secondary research establishes what has been done and what hasn’t,
identifying opportunity gaps to help suggest a research direction and methods.
• It is sometimes referred to as desk research, in contrast to primary research
conducted as fieldwork or empirical research.
• Sources may include books, research papers, journal articles, and conference
papers, records and statistics, or any number of other archives.
• In design, research might include precedent projects, products or documented
case studies, photographs, maps, diagrams, and other visual support records.
• It is traditionally summarized in systematic reviews or literature reviews, with
full citations of sources.
• In design, secondary research can also be collected into visual summaries or
blogs, for shared viewing, sorting, synthesis, and the crafting of narratives.
See also Case Studies • Literature Reviews • Unobtrusive Measures

© 2011 OCLC Online Computer Library Center, Inc. Used with permission. Firstsearch and WorldCat are
registered trademarks/service marks of OCLC.
The WorldCat database allows users to search the collections and services of more than 10,000
libraries worldwide, including the option to select specific media types.

075 Semantic Differential
A linguistic tool designed to measure people’s attitudes toward a topic, event,
object, or activity • The semantic differential asks respondents to indicate where
on a continuum of antonyms a concept is best described (e.g., pleasant—
unpleasant).
• The three dimensions to classify concepts are evaluation (e.g., valuable–
worthless), potency (e.g., strong–weak), and activity (e.g., active–passive).
• Concepts should be chosen based on research objectives and should be
meaningful to respondents.
• Poles should be randomized so that negative and positive connotations don’t
always fall on the same side.
• A seven-point scale is preferred because it provides a neutral midpoint, which
could indicate apathy, indecisiveness, or social relevance.
• How various concepts are mapped in a semantic space reflect their differences
in connotative meaning.
See also Laddering • Questionnaires • Surveys

Courtesy of Christoph Bartneck
Eight semantic differential scales were used to investigate the degree to which a person’s cultural
background influences one’s perception of a robot’s anthropomorphism and likeability.


076 Shadowing
An observational method tracking someone closely through his or her daily
routines
• Provides key insight into a participant’s activities and decision patterns,
collecting insights through the detailed nuance of firsthand, real-time exposure.
• Observations should be well documented, with photographs, detailed notes and
sketches, or audio.
• Ideally, several team members will complete shadowing exercises across
representative users, to begin crafting a general picture of patterns.
• Cooperation is necessary and a respectful distance should be maintained to
avoid interruption to natural routines or behavior change as a result of being
observed.
• Typically, interactions with the person being shadowed are kept to a minimum,
asking pertinent questions about behaviors after the shadowing session.
• Subtle covert shadowing may be utilized to observe public behaviors: for
example, following students on campus to determine common pathways.
See also Behavioral Mapping • Fly-on-the-Wall Observation • Touchstone Tours

Courtesy of Sarah Calandro © 2011
In a study of the relationship between food providers and consumers in creating sustainable food
communities, grocery shoppers were shadowed, asked about their decisions, and photographed.

077 Simulation Exercises
Deep approximations of human or environmental conditions
• Effective simulations forge a tangible, immersive sense of real-life user
experience to influence design sensitivity and decisions.
• Simulated real-world conditions can provide empathic emotional experiences
or test functional interactions like response time and decision-making.
• These exercises have been used in military, aircraft and NASA training, driving
simulators, and virtual worlds.
• In design, exercises might approximate the limitations experienced by people
with physical disabilities, brain injuries, or age-related sense and cognition
deficits.
• Low-tech simulations can utilize wheelchairs, manipulated glasses lenses, or
blindfolds to empathically experience restricted mobility or visual impairment.
• Designers are involved in the creation of simulated environments such as video
games, virtual or augmented reality, physical spaces, and artifacts.
See also Bodystorming • Experience Prototyping • Role-Playing

Courtesy of Nathan Fried-Lipski / MIT AgeLab
Researchers perform tasks wearing the “Age Gain Now Empathy System” (AGNES), developed in
the MIT AgeLab to simulate the dexterity, mobility, strength, and balance of a 74-year-old.

078 Site Search Analytics
Reporting and analyzing user queries submitted as search criteria on a site
• Analyzing words and phrases entered into a search provides insight into what
people are looking for in order to evaluate how well content meets those needs.
• Site Search Analytics can bolster customer retention, satisfaction, and
conversion rates, aligning user-centered activity to measurable business goals.
• For qualitative research, understanding user intent and the information people
want from your site can help you evaluate and improve the quality of the
search results.
• For quantitative data, a Zipf distribution represents the statistical majority of
search terms within a given time frame, pinpointing which should be
optimized.
• If you are in launch & monitor phase, relate site search performance metrics to
your organization’s existing Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).
• The data revealed by Site Search Analytics can help you monitor and improve
your application’s overall performance.
See also Content Inventory & Audit • Key Performance Indicators • Web
Analytics

Courtesy of Josh Cothran, Georgia Tech Research Institute
Here is an example of a typical Site Search Analytics Zipf distribution, where a small number of
search terms represent the most popular searches.

079 Speed Dating
The rapid review of multiple design concepts by multiple users in quick
succession
• Exposes people to design ideas via storyboards and simulated environments
before expensive technical prototypes are built, using the following process: –
Conduct contextual field research via methods such as interviews, role-playing,
artifact analysis, directed storytelling, diary studies, and cultural probes.
– Create storyboards to elicit an emotional, empathic reaction to relatable
characters in convincing scenarios, based on the needs uncovered by
research.
– Speed date storyboards to a group of people followed by focus questions to
help design teams understand what is in the users’ minds.
– Articulate misunderstandings, refine scenarios, and consider new design
opportunities based on user rankings of needs and effectiveness.
– Construct a simulated environment to allow people to act out a role from the
revised scenarios, observing how users deal with specific problems in
context.
See also Experience Prototyping • Scenarios • Storyboards

Courtesy of Will Odom
Speed dating allows for structured engagements across multiple scenarios, creating new
understanding about potential design opportunities to consider and problem areas that should be
avoided.


080 Stakeholder Maps
A visual representation of key constituents of a design project
• Stakeholder maps provide a visual reference point for the design team, setting
the stage for user-centered research and design development.
• Include people who will benefit from the project, those who hold power, those
who may be adversely affected, and even those who may sabotage designed
outcomes.
• Stakeholders can be identified by general roles (e.g., nurses), specific roles
(e.g., chief of surgery), or by actual people (e.g., Linda, resident physician).
• From an initial sketch or list using whiteboards, cards, or paper, the map
evolves into a structure with hierarchy and key relationships between roles or
people.
• Stakeholder maps can take on a variety of forms, with a mix of text, photos,
and graphics and use of scale, line, and proximity to express relationships.
See also Stakeholder Walkthrough • Territory Maps
Courtesy of Kim Dowd, Norman Lau, Gretchen Mendoza, and Hyori Suri Park
This is a stakeholder map consolidating key players and roles for the design of a social
networking application for teenage immigrants during cultural transition to the United States.

081 Stakeholder Walkthrough
Early prototype evaluations by a team of end users, stakeholders, and designers
• This brings multiple stakeholders together to step through and evaluate a task-
based scenario from the end user’s perspective.
• As a group usability inspection method, it requires a diverse range of skills and
perspectives to identify and consider problems early in the prototyping process.
• Attendees should be told that they will be asked to take the end user’s
perspective as opposed to defending a system or design/development view.
• The whole team works together, focusing on usability problem detection and
brainstorming solutions.
• Team walkthroughs can be more costly than individual techniques, but they
have proven to be more effective.
• Recurring attendance in stakeholder walkthroughs will sharpen the team’s
empathic response to their end user’s frustrations, challenges, and perspectives.
See also Design Charette • Stakeholder Maps • Usability Testing

Scheduling stakeholder walkthroughs early in the design process combines perspectives of
representative end users, stakeholders, developers, and members of the design and research
team.

082 Storyboards
A visual narrative that generates empathy and communicates the context for
proposed design solutions • Five design practices common to visual storytelling:
1. Refine drawings so that they show enough context, but not so much that
details begin to distract from the purpose of the storyboard.
2. Use text to supplement the visuals in a storyboard when it would otherwise
take too much effort to illustrate a concept or idea.
3. Emphasize people, products, or both, depending on whether you want to
elicit an emotional impact or get technical or evaluative feedback on the
concept.
4. Use three to six panels to communicate an idea, with each storyboard
focused on one salient concept.
5. To show time lapses, use design elements such as clocks, calendars, or the
movement of the sun.
See also Personas • Role-Playing • Speed Dating
Do you ever wish you had someone of a similar culture/background to talk with about type 2
diabetes?

Do you ever wish you had someone to help your spouse/family to understand what you are
dealing with and how best to support you?
Courtesy of Lauren Chapman
Storyboards shape social, environmental, and temporal factors into a compelling narrative and
help design teams to carefully consider how products and services could improve lives.

083 Surveys
Collection of self-reported information about thoughts, feelings, perceptions,
behaviors, or attitudes • This is an efficient tool for collecting a lot of versatile
data in a short time frame, with results that can be analyzed statistically.
• Survey questionnaires can be either self-completed or read to participants and
completed by the researcher.
• Interviews can be conducted in person, by phone, or through various
communication technologies.
• Like any self-reporting, surveys may not accurately reflect true thoughts,
feelings, perceptions, or behaviors.
• Surveys should therefore be carefully designed and administered and paired
with complementary methods such as observations or contextual inquiry.
• There are various types of questions: closed/open, general/specific, factual,
hypothetical, judgmental, and comparative.
• Questions should avoid leading to an answer or blaming the participant as
wrong or at fault.
See also Interviews • Questionnaires

Courtesy of Sarah Calandro © 2011
The “Produce Proposal Wall” used a survey method allowing customers to communicate what
they want in the grocery store, while fostering dialogue and building community.

084 Task Analysis
Workflow analysis, including user actions, system response, and environmental
context
• Task encompasses any physical actions and mental processes as activities used
to achieve goals and any information flows within the system environment.
• Designers typically incorporate a blend of qualitative and quantitative
approaches to gain insight into user and task processes.
• The method targets user options, tools, decision points, common mistakes,
corrections, inputs/outputs, frequency and importance of tasks, and risks of
failure.
• Actions in task decomposition can be organized by categories, such as purpose,
cues, objects, method, and options.
• A Hierarchical Task Analysis (HTA) typically results in tree diagrams or
flowcharts, which can be verified by walk-through tests.
• Task analysis is useful for all design disciplines, ranging from navigation of
software to wayfinding in the built environment.
See also Contextual Inquiry • Ergonomic Analysis • Observation
Courtesy of Todd Zaki Warfel, Principal Designer, messagefirst | design studio

A task analysis grid visualizes stakeholder scenarios and prioritized tasks. Each column describes
a scenario, a task, and the subtasks necessary to complete the task.

085 Territory Maps
A visual representation of shared content focus to set research and design
activities • The creation process draws on the preconceptions and knowledge of
design team members, contributed in a shared vision.
• The simplicity of the diagram is deceptively powerful, representing individual
perspectives in a consensus artifact to foster design focus.
• The territory map serves a critical role in building team dynamic and
cohesiveness for collaborative work.
• A speculative vision of the future is combined, including the key people who
may be involved in the design landscape to be explored.
• Constructed early in the design process, during planning, scoping, and
definition, the map drives ideas for research and design.
• Territory maps may be drafted in a collaborative effort, or each member can
consider their contributions first and then bring them to the group.
See also Stakeholder Maps

Courtesy of Christina Payne Earle and Dave Passavant
This is a territory map of the landscape of healthcare to determine how design solutions can
streamline efficiencies.

086 Thematic Networks
A step-by-step process to identify, organize, and connect common themes in
qualitative data
• Systematically breaking down texts into patterns, themes, and relationships
helps to synthesize qualitative information into actionable design insight.
• Three classes of themes summarize and organize information into a web-like
illustration to communicate findings with stakeholders: 1. Basic themes come
directly from textual data, considered within the context of other basic themes
to flesh out a fuller story.
2. Organizing themes separate basic themes into clusters of similar issues,
collectively forming a higher order premise as an argument, position, or
assertion.
3. Global themes distill the overarching point of the text into a single
statement, articulating the deeper meaning and complexity of the data.
• Thematic networks help make sense of rich, textual data collected from
methods such as diary studies, directed storytelling, or interviews.
See also Affinity Diagramming • Content Analysis • Exploratory Research

Thematic network analysis provides a methodology that can help researchers work through the
challenges of analyzing textual data using a formulaic, step-by-step methodology.

087 Think-Aloud Protocol
Participants verbalize what they are doing and thinking as they complete a task
• This is among the most common evaluative methods in the usability
community, revealing aspects of an interface that delight, confuse, or frustrate.
• It asks people to articulate what they are doing, thinking, or feeling as they
complete a set of tasks that align with their realistic day-to-day goals.
• Concurrent think-aloud is most common, asking the participant to work
through tasks while articulating what he or she is doing, thinking, and feeling.
• Retrospective think-aloud asks participants to complete a task in silence and
then comment on their processes as they watch a recorded replay of their
experience. This can provide additional insight into participant reasoning,
intentions, and strategy.
• The method can be used on low- or high-fidelity prototypes, physical artifacts
that require assembly, devices to be synchronized, or customized products.
See also Desirability Testing • Prototyping • Usability Testing

In a think-aloud protocol, participants verbalize anything that they think, feel, do, or look at while
processing a prototype or interface to complete tasks.

088 Time-Aware Research
A moderated, remote testing method engaging a real person in real time, just as
he or she is about to complete a task
• In contrast to traditional usability testing where tasks are preselected by
researchers, time-aware research happens “just in time” to observe a task of
interest.
• Live recruiting intercepts participants at the precise moment that they set out to
complete a self-directed task, providing insight into how they accomplish
goals.
• Using screen-sharing software, this method enables the usability test to occur
within the context of an individual’s native environment or “technological
ecosystem.”
• This is a more realistic process than lab testing, as participants can access
information on websites, by email, or on their calendar.
• Around 1.5% to 2% of visitors who see the screener will complete it; slightly
more than 50% will agree to be contacted; of those, around 65% will be able to
participate.
See also Experience Sampling Method • Usability Testing • Remote Moderated
Research

In “live recruiting” for time-aware research, end users are intercepted by a prompt to participate in
a study immediately as they begin a self-directed task.

089 Touchstone Tours
Using artifacts and the environment as touchstones for insightful conversation
• This guided tour is a contextual, empathic method to understand how people
organize information and systems using space and cognitive artifacts.
• The exploratory method allows designers to establish familiarity with a
territory in early-phase research.
• The participant is asked to guide the researcher through an environment and
objects, specific to themes or subjects being explored by the designer.
• Tours can be guided through homes, workspaces or individual rooms, micro or
mobile environments such as backpacks and purses, or digital devices and
computer desktops.
• Conversation should be guided yet flexible, allowing fluid departures based on
highlights selected by the tour guide and attentive observations by the
researcher.
• Thoroughly document tours with video, photos, or sketches and a transcript of
the conversation.
See also Artifact Analysis • Contextual Inquiry • Personal Inventories

Courtesy of Max Snyder
A touchstone tour in a prototyping lab highlights specialized tools and processes for a design
project investigating master-apprentice relationships.




090 Triading
An interviewing technique whereby participants compare sets of three brands,
products, or services • Triading is a powerful interviewing technique that helps
to understand how products and services fit into people’s existing personal
constructs of the world.
• Triading reveals deep-seated attitudes, perceptions, and feelings toward brands,
products, and services.
• Either the researcher or the participant selects six to ten familiar and related
brands, products, or services representative of a particular domain.
• The participant picks three of the examples (a triad) for discussion and then
explains the ways in which they feel two of the three examples differ from the
third.
• This process can be repeated with new triads to elicit multiple constructs about
the domain.
• When repeated with many participants, a wealth of data emerges, with varied
constructs and ratings identified from person to person.
See also Interviews • Laddering • Semantic Differential

Triading asks: “How do two of these examples differ from the third?”

091 Triangulation
The convergence of multiple methods on the same research question to
corroborate evidence from several different angles • It ensures accuracy of
information by combining sources and mitigating the weaknesses of any single
method or source.
• The most common occurrence of triangulation is to combine behavioral
observation methods with self-report methods such as questionnaires or
interviews.
• Self-reported behaviors or attitudes aligned with social norms or research
expectations may be contradicted by actual behaviors observed.
• Triangulation may compare physiological data such as heart rate or pupil
dilation with self-reported information or observations of visible behaviors.
• Anecdotal information collected through qualitative means can enrich and
humanize the abstraction of quantitative results collected through survey data.
• In usability studies, recordings are triangulated across keystroke/mouse inputs,
facial expressions, and actions verbalized in think-aloud protocol.

1. Observation data: Video capture
2. Behavioral data: Recorded TV interactions
3. Self-report data: Interviews

Courtesy of Mike Darnell, Microsoft Corp.
In a Microsoft study of television watching, observations and television interactions were used
during interviews to correlate behaviors with TV content and events in the environment.

092 Unobtrusive Measures
Physical evidence, archival records, and nonintrusive observations used for
design insight • This method is used to acquire information without direct
participant contact.
• Examples of physical trace erosion measures include wear patterns in floors or
grass indicating preferred pedestrian traffic.
• Examples of accretion measures include litter, graffiti, temporary signage,
product modifications, or fingerprints to indicate patterns of use.
• Archives are considered unobtrusive measures because they may be accessed
without direct contact with participants.
• Observation can be an unobtrusive measure when those being observed do not
know it and the researcher has had no input in the situation structure.
• Digital footprints provide indicators of technology use and qualities of social
interaction and communication.
• A limitation may be a lack of details about who has contributed to the data
being collected and why.
See also Artifact Analysis • Observation • Secondary Research
Courtesy of Ana Paula Alencar Rocha / yayaomo.tumblr

Photo by Cheryl L. G. Riedel, courtesy of Miso Kim
Trace erosion measures are wear-patterns, such as these preferred pathways or “desire lines.”
Trace accretion measures include additive deposits such as graffiti and litter.

093 Usability Report
Empirical evidence outlining which parts of a user interface should be fixed or
improved
• Helps teams decide whether a product is usable enough to release or needs
revision and further testing, through the following features: – Executive
summary, describing the most salient and serious usability problems first, with
sections tailored to the concerns of any specific groups – Total number of
problems, including the frequency, impact, and persistence of usability
problems, evidenced by screenshots, or participant quotes – A list of the most
severe and persistent problems.
– Positive findings that counterbalance problems with a similar number of
observed interactions demonstrating good usability – Detailed task and
scenario descriptions that are robust and representative enough to effectively
get at a range of usability error types See also Remote Moderated Research •
Think-Aloud Protocol • Usability Report

Courtesy of User Insight
The proprietary platform of User Insight called “Voice” aggregates research documents,
discussion guides, participant information, research calendars, and testing artifacts into a secure
online repository.

094 Usability Testing
An evaluative method to observe a user’s task-based experience with a digital
applications • Identifies frustrating and confusing parts of an interface so that
they can be fixed and retested prior to launch.
• Typically employs Think-Aloud Protocol, detecting problems by observing
instances where the user: 1. Understands the task but can’t complete it within a
reasonable amount of time 2. Understands the goal, but has to try different
approaches to complete the task 3. Gives up or resigns from the process
4. Completes a task, but not the specified task
5. Expresses surprise or delight
6. Expresses frustration, confusion, or blames themselves for not being able to
complete the task 7. Asserts that something is wrong or doesn’t make sense
8. Makes a suggestion for the interface or the flow of events See also
Evaluative Research • Stakeholder Walkthrough • Think-Aloud Protocol
Courtesy of John Welsh

Usability tests with few participants can isolate enough problems to help teams confidently decide
whether an interface needs to be revised or is ready for release.

095 User Journey Maps
A visualization of human interactions with a multi-channel product or service
• The journey map tells a visual story about an individual’s actions, feelings,
perceptions, and mindset as they interact with a product or service.
• It should be an honest representation of an experience, including moments of
indecision, confusion, frustration, delight, and closure.
• The journey map allows each moment of an interactive experience to be
evaluated and improved by design.
• Multiple maps are usually created alongside personas and scenarios, each
heavily informed by direct contact with customers who use the product or
service.
• The journey map can shift an organization’s focus from an operational, system-
centered view to the larger, real-world context in which products and services
are used.
• The map should be a living document, with reviews by the design team
offering questions, ideas, and suggested improvements.
See also Customer Experience Audit • Personas • Scenarios

Courtesy of Symetra Financial
Interviews by digital agency POP resulted in six personas and journeys of Symetra Financial
users, ultimately resulting in greater workflow efficiencies through a refreshed website design.

096 Value Opportunity Analysis (VOA)
Mapping the extent to which a product or service’s aspirational qualities connect
to an audience • A (VOA) provides an opportunity for a team to work together
from a place of deep empathy, grounded firmly in research for what the user
values and desires.
• There are seven value opportunities:
1. Emotion: adventure, independence, confidence, and power
2. Aesthetics: visual, auditory, tactile, olfactory, and taste
3. Identity: point in time, sense of place, and personality
4. Impact: social and environmental
5. Ergonomics: comfort, safety, and ease of use
6. Core Technology: reliable and enabling
7. Quality: craftsmanship and durability
• The VOA can be used to help the team consider competitive review, market
analysis, and multiple personas.
See also Competitive Testing • Desirability Testing • The Love Letter & the
Breakup Letter

In a VOA, each value opportunity and its attributes are listed in a column and rated on a
subjective scale of low, medium, and high.

097 Web Analytics
The collection and analysis of Internet data to understand and optimize web
usage
• This process provides a gateway for your organization to become invested in
what your customers are doing online and why.
• The first step requires articulating what you want out of the data, expressing
your goals and intent for what you want to measure.
• Knowing where you want to go can help you structure your content, analyze
campaigns, segment your visitors, and measure your commerce and process
tools.
• Translate all of the data into a short report people will want to read, avoiding
analytics jargon and visualizing as much data as you can.
• Regularly share reports to internal stakeholders.
• Implement and act on the knowledge, focusing on small course corrections that
can have a big impact.
See also A/B Testing • Key Performance Indicators • Site Search Analytics

Courtesy of Carnegie Mellon University School of Design
Web analysts will understand your business and the web in equal measure and use tools such as
Google Analytics to make recommendations for corrective actions.

098 Weighted Matrix
Identify and prioritize the most promising opportunities from multiple design
concepts
• It creates a forum for conversation and shared decision-making and can help
overcome the common biases on multidisciplinary teams.
• The underlying concept is simple but powerful: the matrix ranks potential
design opportunities against key success criteria.
• The “criteria” represents the primary measures of product success rated on a
scale, as defined by the product team and organizational stakeholders.
• A listing of “opportunities” represents the design ideas that elicit the most
serious interest from the team.
• Once there is an agreed upon recommended list, another creative “deep dive”
can now refocus on newly agreed-upon design ideas.
• The method provides a structured process for team conversations, shifting
decision-making to a process grounded in success criteria, not personal
opinions.
See also Design Charette • KJ Technique • Parallel Prototyping

A weighted matrix provides a way to manage potential design options by evaluating each design
opportunity against business criteria as opposed to personal preferences.

099 Wizard of Oz
Simulated control and response by a researcher behind the scenes, while a
participant engages with a system • Participants are led to believe they are
interacting with a working prototype, but in reality, a researcher is acting as a
proxy from behind the scenes.
• The “wizard” can intercept and shape the interaction between the participant
and the system.
• The goal is to allow a user to realistically experience a product or interface
before prototypes are built.
• For an appropriate, timely system response, the researcher must observe
participant activity: for example, through video or screen-sharing software.
• The believability of the simulations hinge on the wizard’s consistency with
respect to timing, patterns, and system logic.
• This is useful when designing applications that do not already have established
design patterns (for example, augmented reality or ubiquitous computing).
See also Experience Prototyping • Speed Dating • Rapid Iterative Testing &
Evaluation


Photos by Peter Stepniewicz, courtesy of Interbots, LLC
Thousands of people have had compelling interactions with the animatronic character Quasi the
Robot without knowing that behind the scenes, a human actor controls the robot.

100 Word Clouds
Information visualization that organizes text-based content into interesting
arrangements
• Text collages that show the most frequently used words in just about any text-
based document.
• Words are assigned different font sizes; usually, the bigger the word, the more
frequently it occurs.
• Clouds are made engaging through various dimensions such as typeface, font
size, colors, and number of words, word proximity, and word orientation.
• Qualify where word cloud data came from, collection methods, what the fonts,
colors, sizes, etc. mean, and disclosure of any data scrubbing or segmenting.
• When archiving transcripts, the visual markers of each cloud create a gestalt
unique to each transcript that can facilitate recall.
• Word clouds can be a lighthearted way to engage stakeholders in discussion
about the gist of transcripts before delving into more rigorous analysis
techniques.
See also Content Analysis • Exploratory Research • Interviews
Here is a word cloud generated from interviews with parents of picky eaters. When segmented
based on meaningful criteria, word clouds can reveal potentially insightful and surprising themes.

References & Notes
05 Automated Remote Research
Bolt, N., and T. Tulathimutte. Remote Research: Real Users, Real Time, Real Research.
Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media, 2010.
06 Behavioral Mapping
Sommer, R., and B. Baker Sommer. A Practical Guide to Behavioral Research: Tools
and Techniques. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2002.
07 Bodystorming
Burns, C., et al. “Actors, Hairdos & Videotape—Informance Design: Using Performance
Techniques in Multidisciplinary, Observation-based Design.” In CHI 94 Conference
Companion, 1994: 119–120.
08 Brainstorm Graphic Organizers
Hyerle, D. Visual Tools for Constructing Knowledge. Alexandria, VA: ASCD, 1996.
11 Case Studies
Robson, C. Real World Research: A Resource for Social Scientists and Practitioner-
Researchers, 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2002.
12 Cognitive Mapping
Ackermann, F., et al. “Getting Started with Cognitive Mapping” in The Young OR
Conference, University of Warwick, 1992: 65–82.
13 Cognitive Walkthrough
Wharton, C., et al. “The Cognitive Walkthrough: A Practitioner’s Guide” in Usability
Inspection Methods. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons, 1994.
19 Contextual Design
Holtzblatt, K., et al. Rapid Contextual Design: A How-To Guide to Key Techniques for
User-Centered Design. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.
20 Contextual Inquiry
Holtzblatt, K., and H. Beyer. Contextual Design: A Customer-Centered Approach to
Systems Design. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1998.
23 Crowdsourcing
Kittur, A., et al., Palo Alto Research Center. “Crowdsourcing for Usability: Using Micro-
Task Markets for Rapid, Remote, and Low-Cost User Measurements,” 2007,
www.parc.com/content/attachments/crowdsourcing_user_studies_6280_parc.pdf
24 Cultural Probes
Gaver, B., T. Dunne, and E. Pacenti. “Cultural Probes.” Interactions, January-February
1999, pp. 21–29.
29 Desirability Testing
Barnum, C. M., and L. A. Palmer. “More Than a Feeling: Understanding the Desirability
Factor in User Experience.” in Proceedings of CHI 2010 (2010): 4703–4715.
31 Directed Storytelling
Evenson, S. “Directed Storytelling: Interpreting Experience for Design” in Design
Studies: Theory and Research in Graphic Design, A Reader. New York, NY: Princeton
Architectural Press, 2006: 231–240.

32 Elito Method
Ulrich, E. “Inclusive Iterations: How a Design Team Builds Shared Insights.” UX Week
Podcast, 2007.
33 Ergonomic Analysis
Tannen, R. “Crimping Tools: An Ergonomic Review of the State-of-the-Art.” White
paper for Thomas & Betts, June 2009.
35 Evidence-based Design
Scupelli, P., et al. “Architecture and Information Technology as Factors in Surgical Suite
Information Sharing and Coordination.” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM International
Health Informatics Symposium, 2010: 265–274.
36 Experience Prototyping
Buchenau, M., and J. F. Suri. “Experience Prototyping” in Proceedings of Designing
Interactive Systems (DIS). ACM, 2000: 424–433.
38 Experiments
Larson, A. M., and L. C. Loschky. “The Contributions of Central Versus Peripheral Vision
to Scene Gist Recognition.” Journal of Vision 9, no. 10 (2009): 1-16.
42 Fly-on-the-Wall Observation
Zeisel, J. Inquiry by Design: Environment/Behavior/Neuroscience in Architecture,
Interiors, Landscape, and Planning. New York, NY: Norton, 2006.
46 Heuristic Evaluation
Ginsburg, S. Designing the iPhone User Experience. Boston, MA: Addison Wesley, 2010.
Nielsen, J. Usability Engineering. Boston, MA: Academic Press, 1993.
49 KJ Technique
Kawakita, J. The Original KJ Method. Tokyo: Kawakita Research Institute, 1982.
Spool, J. “The KJ-Technique: A Group Process for Establishing Priorities,” 2004,
www.uie.com
50 Kano Analysis
Kano, N., et al. “Attractive Quality and Must-be Quality.” Journal of the Japanese
Society for Quality Control 14, no. 2 (1984): 39–48.
Zultner, R. E., and G. H. Mazur. “The Kano Model: Recent Developments.” in The
Eighteenth Symposium on Quality Function Deployment, 2006: 109-116.
51 Key Performance Indicators
Peterson, E. The Big Book of Key Performance Indicators, 2006,
www.webanalyticsdemystified.com
52 Laddering
Reynolds, T. J., and J. Gutman. “Laddering Theory, Method, Analysis, and
Interpretation.” Journal of Advertising Research 28 (1988): 11–31.
Wansink, B., and N. Chan. “Using Laddering to Understand and Leverage a Brand’s
Equity.” Qualitative Market Research—An International Journal 6, no.2 (2003).
54 The Love Letter & The Breakup Letter
https://vimeo.com/11854531
55 Mental Model Diagrams

Young, I. Mental Models: Aligning Design Strategy with Human Behavior. Brooklyn, NY:
Rosenfeld Media, 2008.
56 Mind Mapping
Hyerle, D. Visual Tools for Constructing Knowledge. Alexandria, VA: ASCD, 1996.
58 Parallel Prototyping
Dow, S. P., et al. “Parallel Prototyping Leads to Better Design Results, More
Divergence, and Increased Self-Efficacy.” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction 17, no. 4 (2010).
59 Participant Observation
Zeisel, J. Inquiry by Design: Environment/Behavior/Neuroscience in Architecture,
Interiors, Landscape, and Planning. New York: Norton, 2006.
60 Participatory Action Research (PAR)
McNiff, J. Action Research for Professional Development, 2002,
www.jeanmcniff.com/ar-booklet.asp
61 Participatory Design
Kuhn, S., and T. Winograd. “Participatory Design” in Bringing Design to Software, New
York: Addison-Wesley, 1996.
Sanders, E. B.-N., et al. “A Framework for Organizing the Tools and Techniques of
Participatory Design” in Participatory Design Conference (PDC) Proceedings, 2010:
195-198.
62 Personal Inventories
Blevis, E., and E. Stolterman. “Ensoulment and Sustainable Interaction Design” in
Proceedings of International Association of Design Research Societies Conference
IASDR 2007. Hong Kong: HKPT, 2007.
63 Personas
Cooper, A. The Inmates Are Running the Asylum: Why High-Tech Products Drive Us
Crazy and How to Restore the Sanity. Indianapolis, IN: Sams–Pearson Education, 2004.
65 Picture Cards
The Picture Cards method was developed by Adaptive Path, www.adaptivepath.com
Kaptelinin, V., and B. A. Nardi. Acting with Technology: Activity Theory and Interaction
Design. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2006.
68 Rapid Iterative Testing & Evaluation
Medlock, M. C., et al. “Using the RITE Method to Improve Products: A Definition and a
Case Study” in UPA Conference Proceedings, 2002.
69 Remote Moderated Research
Bolt, N., and T. Tulathimutte. Remote Research: Real Users, Real Time, Real Research.
San Francisco, CA: Rosenfeld Media, 2010.
70 Research Through Design
Burdick, A. “Design (as) Research” in Design Research: Methods and Perspectives,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003: 82.
Zimmerman, J., et al. “Research Through Design as a Method for Interaction Design
Research in HCI.” In Proceedings of CHI, ACM, 2007: 493-502.
72 Scenario Description Swimlanes

Yvonne Shek at nForm adapted swimlanes as an activity diagram of the Unified
Modeling Language (UML) in 2007.
75 Semantic Differential
Osgood, C., et al. The Measurement of Meaning. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press,
1957.
78 Site Search Analytics
Rosenfeld, L. Search Analytics for Your Site: Conversations With Your Customers.
Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media, 2011.
79 Speed Dating
Davidoff, S., et al. “Rapidly Exploring Application Design Through Speed Dating.” in
Proceedings of 9th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing UbiComp ’07,
2007: 429-446.
81 Stakeholder Walkthrough
Karat, C.-M., et al. “Comparison of Empirical Testing and Walkthrough Methods in User
Interface Evaluation.” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, 1992: 397-404.
82 Storyboards
Truong, K. N., et al. “Storyboarding: An Empirical Determination of Best Practices and
Effective Guidelines.” in Proceedings of DIS 2006, 2006: 12-21
84 Task Analysis
Kirwan, B., and L. K. Ainsworth. A Guide to Task Analysis. London; Washington D.C.:
Taylor and Francis, 1992: 397-404
Kuniavsky, M. Observing the User Experience: A Practitioner’s Guide to User Research.
San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
86 Thematic Networks
Attride-Stirling, J. “Thematic Networks: An Analytic Tool for Qualitative Research.”
Qualitative Research 1, no. 3 (2001): 385–405.
87 Think-aloud Protocol
Guan, Z., et al. “The Validity of Stimulated Retrospective Think-Aloud Method as
Measured by Eye Tracking.” in CHI 2006 Conference Proceedings, 2006: 1253-1262.
88 Time-aware Research
Bolt, N., and T. Tulathimutte. Remote Research: Real Users, Real Time, Real Research.
Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media, 2010.
92 Unobtrusive Measures
Webb, E. J., et al. Unobtrusive Measures: Nonreactive Research in the Social Sciences.
Chicago: Rand McNally, 1966. Revised edition, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
2000.
94 Usability Testing
Jacobsen, N. E., et al. “The Evaluator Effect in Usability Studies: Problem Detection and
Severity Judgments.” in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
42nd Annual Meeting, 1998: 1336-1340
96 Value Opportunity Analysis
Cagan, J., and C. Vogel. Creating Breakthrough Products: Innovation from Product
Planning to Program Approval. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002.

97 Web Analytics
Peterson, E. Web Analytics Demystified, 2004, www.webanalyticsdemystified.com
Burby, J. Three Reasons Analytics Fail Companies, 2004, www.clickz.com
98 Weighted Matrix
Cagan, J., and C. Vogel. Creating Breakthrough Products: Innovation from Product
Planning to Program Approval. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002.
99 Wizard of Oz
Kelly, J. F. “An Iterative Design Methodology for User-Friendly Natural Language Office
Information Applications.” ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems 2, no. 1
(1984): 26–41.

© 2018 Quarto Publishing Group USA Inc.
Text © 2018 Bruce Harrington and Bella Martin First Published in 2018 by Rockport Publishers, an imprint
of The Quarto Group, 100 Cummings Center, Suite 265-D, Beverly, MA 01915, USA.
T (978) 282-9590 F (978) 283-2742 QuartoKnows.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without written permission of the
copyright owners. All images in this book have been reproduced with the knowledge and prior consent of
the artists concerned, and no responsibility is accepted by producer, publisher, or printer for any
infringement of copyright or otherwise, arising from the contents of this publication. Every effort has been
made to ensure that credits accurately comply with information supplied. We apologize for any inaccuracies
that may have occurred and will resolve inaccurate or missing information in a subsequent reprinting of the
book.
Rockport Publishers titles are also available at discount for retail, wholesale, promotional, and bulk
purchase. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager by email at specialsales@quarto.com or by mail at
The Quarto Group, Attn: Special Sales Manager, 401 Second Avenue North, Suite 310, Minneapolis, MN
55401, USA.
Digital edition: 978-1-63159-534-9
Softcover edition: 978-1-63159-374-1
Cover: Coa Design
Page Layout: Tabula Rasa Graphic Design
Getty Images: Method 90
Shutterstock.com: Methods 4, 11, 39, 42, 48, 54, 62, and 94

