www.ebook3000.com

THE PROBLEM OF EXISTENCE 
This book explores the question of why there is something instead of nothing. Several 
responses to this question are possible, but only some of them address the question 
seriously, respecting its emotional aspects as well as its cognitive dimension. The 
author carefully distinguishes those answers that are truly satisfactory, in both respects, 
from those that are inadequate. It can be argued that the existence of the world has no 
explanation at all, or that there is a necessary being whose existence is self-explanatory, 
or that the world exists because it has value. Each kind of response is defensible to 
some degree, and it is argued that where they are defensible, they have a common 
content. Incorporating aspects of both the 'analytical' and 'continental' traditions, 
this book also responds to several historical philosophers concerned with these 
questions, including Plato, Leibniz, Kant and Nietzsche. 

ASHGATE NEW CRITICAL THINKING 
IN PHILOSOPHY 
The Ashgate New Critical Thinking in Philosophy series aims to bring high quality 
research monograph publishing back into focus for authors, the international library 
market, and student, academic and research readers. Headed by an international 
editorial advisory board of acclaimed scholars from across the philosophical spectrum, 
this new monograph series presents cutting-edge research from established as well as 
exciting new authors in the field; spans the breadth of philosophy and related 
disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives; and takes contemporary philosophical 
research into new directions and debate. 
Series Editorial Board: 
David Cooper, University of Durham, UK 
Peter Lipton, University of Cambridge, UK 
Sean Sayers, University of Kent at Canterbury, UK 
Simon Critchley, University of Essex, UK 
Simon Glendinning, University of Reading, UK 
Paul Helm, King's College London, UK 
David Lamb, University of Birmingham, UK 
John Post, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA 
Alan Goldman, University of Miami, Florida, USA 
Joseph Friggieri, University of Malta, Malta 
Graham Priest, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 
Moira Gatens, University of Sydney, Australia 
Alan Musgrave, University of Otago, New Zealand 
www.ebook3000.com

The Problem of Existence 
ARTHUR WITHERALL 
Australian National University, Australia 
Routledge 
Taylor & Francis Group 
LONDON AND NEW YORK 

First published 2002 by Ashgate Publishing 
Published 2016 by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
711 Third A venue, New York, NY 10017, USA 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an iriforma business 
Copyright ©Arthur Witherall 2002 
Arthur Witherall has asserted his moral right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents 
Act 1998 to be identified as the author of this work. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised 
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
Notice: 
Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Witherall, Arthur 
The problem of existence. - (Ashgate new critical thinking 
in philosophy) 
!.Ontology 
I. Title 
111.1 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Witherall, Arthur, 1966-
The problem of existence I Arthur Witherall. 
p. em. -- (Ashgate new critical thinking in philosophy) 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 0-7546-0858-1 
1. Ontology. I. Title. II. Series. 
BD331 .W58 2002 
111'.1--dc21 
ISBN 13: 978-0-7546-0858-5 (hbk) 
2002103822 
www.ebook3000.com

Contents 
The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
2 
The Deflationary Response 
19 
3 
Necessitarian Answers 
53 
4 
Ultimate Values 
89 
5 
The Gift of Being 
121 
Index 
157 

ForSasha, 
with love 
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 1 
The Fundamental Question of 
Metaphysics 
In this book I shall investigate the question: 'Why is there something instead of 
nothing?' It is an extraordinary question, rarely asked and rarely answered. It does 
not easily arise in conversation, for it cannot be openly and cheerfully debated. Instead 
it appears as a kind of phantom, shrouded in mist and darkness. The question itself, 
even in the context of a philosophy classroom, has a strange and disquieting 
atmosphere. It seems to come from the void, and it depends upon the dreadful contrast 
between being and nothingness, raising the possibility of knowing both. In asking us 
to reflect upon this contrast, this question lies at the extreme end of philosophical 
inquiry, and it deserves to be recognized as such. Transcending all of the normal 
conceptual structures and standards, asking for an explanation beyond any explanatory 
framework, it seems both inescapable and incalculable. 
Yet I will provide an answer to it of a certain kind, through a gradual process 
involving an investigation of many possible responses. The final result of this process 
will be represented not as a simple proposition with a distinct information content, 
but as a general schema which may be instantiated by a variety of explanatory 
propositions. As such, my answer will not entirely form a closure of the inquiry that 
is opened up, but I believe that it forms a coherent and complete response, in at least 
the sense that the investigation has a distinct conclusion. 
Dimensions of the Question 
My attempt to provide an answer draws upon both the intellectual and emotional 
aspects ofhuman thought. I will assume that any response to a philosophical question, 
whether it proves to be intelligible or not, is generated within a particular context, 
and normally has both a conceptual background and an emotional environment. Most 
simple questions, arising in science and ordinary life, do not have any serious 
connection with emotions. This is because the context in which they are asked provides 
a conceptual background that determines the method of investigation and the content 
of the possible answers. However, in constructive philosophy, because we deal with 
extremities such as the basis of moral value, the existence of God, and the nature of 
reality as a whole, the context is normally far too open-ended to provide such details. 
Thus it is often the case that we cannot understand our answers to philosophical 
questions in their entirety without understanding the motives and feelings that have 
occasioned them. This does not mean that rationality is or ought to be excluded from 
philosophy. It means only that our responses to philosophical questions are often 
without a background method which supplies a unique answer through a determinate 
process, and we must therefore draw upon the resources of human nature as a whole. 

2 
The Problem of Existence 
Since human nature encompasses much more than reason, many philosophical 
investigations have an emotional basis. 
The range of feelings that may be appropriately occasioned by sincerely asking 
why anything exists is relatively narrow. If the question is interpreted properly, then 
it is clearly concerned with the fact of existence. This is the fact that there exists 
something rather than nothing, and the feelings we have about this fact are prompted 
in part by the nature of our 'encounter with (possible) nothingness'. Such an encounter 
can be dark and harrowing, or it can be light, creative, and humorous. But whether or 
not it is uplifting, a confrontation with Nothingness, or with Being itself, inevitably 
evokes extreme reactions because they represent the extreme limits of thought. As 
such, the feelings upon which responses may be based will mostly lie in the region of 
such passions as awe, astonishment, amazement, gratitude, joy, and exultation. These 
feelings may be called 'positive appreciations' because they are responses to a positive 
encounter with the fact of existence. We feel these ways when we rise up to meet this 
fact in some way, rather than shrinking from it or regarding it as oppressive. 
The question of existence may also excite fear, anxiety, despair and frustration, 
which may correspondingly be called 'negative appreciations'. In such cases, we feel 
the intense difficulty of the question as something too great to handle, and we stagger 
back from it in some way. These feelings are significant because they help to illustrate 
where we have lost our way, and may urge us onward to a more complete view of the 
matter. In many cases, both positive and negative appreciations may lead us to formulate 
particular responses to the question, and sometimes a negative feeling may spur us 
on to construct a more complete resolution. However, there are limits to the emotional 
basis for this inquiry. I consider it unlikely that any serious responses can be formulated 
on the basis of feelings such as contempt, lust, revenge, pride, anger, or pity. The vast 
realm of the moral emotions is largely irrelevant in this context, for it is a strictly 
metaphysical question. Some religious feelings may be relevant, (for example 
gratitude, joy and exultation may be interpreted as such), but it is highly unlikely that 
feelings such as piety, holiness, and humility can form the basis of a relevant response. 
This has been called the 'fundamental question' of metaphysics.1 If this is a good 
name for it, we might expect it to lie at the centre of a great theoretical controversy, 
but it does not. Relatively few philosophers in this century have given it any serious 
thought, and fewer still have actually constructed an answer. This is not because they 
disagree with such a characterization. On the contrary, there are good reasons for 
thinking that it is at least one of the fundamental questions of metaphysics. It addresses 
the existence of the world, which is the basic metaphysical fact, and thus appears to 
be fundamental to our understanding of reality. 
The main reason that philosophers have paid so little attention to this question is 
fear. There is a tendency to fear the unknown, and this applies to things which we 
suspect cannot be known or cannot be explained. The fundamental question appears 
to present us with a situation in which we are capable of understanding what is at 
stake, but incapable of providing an immediate answer. An important aspect of this 
situation is that there is no natural method, nor any general form of explanation, 
which easily applies to the inquiry. Hence professional philosophers are generally 
unwilling to tackle it. They fear that we can have no theory where there is no method 
of constructing a theory. This makes it an extremely difficult matter. We are dealing 
with a question without a natural context and without any obvious answer. And yet 
www.ebook3000.com

The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
3 
superficially, it looks like a very simple matter. It can be expressed in a reasonably 
simple English sentence, without using any jargon and without any reference to 
complex theories. 
Many of those who have tackled the fundamental question, even for a brief period, 
have reported strange experiences. Insofar as they have felt its depth, they have 
responded with expressions of awe, anxiety, and bewilderment, and often a sense of 
being lost in the world. Sometimes, in finding an answer, these feelings can be 
transformed into a sense of spiritual depth, or otherwise into a sense of absurdity. 
That is, depending upon the answers that we fmd, if we are able to find any at all, we 
may feel that existence is ultimately meaningless, or that it has an immense and 
indescribable meaning. The conclusion that the world is an absurdity, however, does 
not make the feeling of awed incomprehension less powerful or more benign. Rarely 
has the question been tackled without some kind of emotional turmoil, even if this is 
left implicit in the results that a philosopher produces. Furthermore, when it is treated 
as if it were a normal problem with a normal solution, the results often seem inadequate 
to the problem, and inappropriate to the odd feelings that it provokes. 
Most people, whether they know anything about philosophy or not, are arrested by 
the fundamental question when they first encounter it, and most people find it 
impossible to think of anything that might count as an adequate answer. It is the sort 
of thing which gives you a sudden shock. If you don't already have a prepared theory 
to explain why the world exists, you will immediately feel odd when the question is 
asked. You will realize that you have been living in a world for many years whose 
very existence is inexplicable to you. In severe cases, this experience is not just an 
'intellectual intuition' of oddness, it is a like a transportation from one world to another. 
It is as if, simply by putting existence itself to the question, you have made it separate 
from yourself. This makes the world appear in a different light, and it can even make 
the world lighter, less serious, or more ridiculous in its apparent contingency. 
The fundamental question of metaphysics can be interpreted as a technical problem, 
and to a certain extent traditional analytical and logical tools can be used to deal with 
it. However, most of these tools are ultimately too blunt to be very useful. Furthermore, 
this interpretation does not make it easier to grasp the responses that arise from 
employing analytical methods. Nor does it offer us an easy escape from the unnerving 
sense that the question simply won't be answered. In certain contexts, it can be seen 
as an invitation to a sort of parlour game, and it may lead to a witty exchange of 
critique and counter-critique. But this is not the way it appears to those who ask it 
sincerely. For those who are genuinely troubled by the inquiry, it is more likely to 
lead to insomnia, to endless nights of thinking about it this way, then that, and coming 
up with nothing. 
Unlike the problems of politics, religion, and science, the question of existence 
seems to come from nowhere, without any context or method. It is like an apparition 
from the void, and it puts everything, even the void, into question. We face not just 
the problem of why anything exists, but the problem of why there is no obvious 
explanation-space for this question. It is not a scientific question, nor a truly theoretical 
question, nor a problem of interpretation, nor a logic puzzle. Although it can be treated 
as falling into some of these categories, it fits none of them properly. It is a metaphysical 
question, and because it is fundamental it has no natural explanatory setting. We do 
not immediately see how we ought to investigate it. This is disturbing, to say the least. 

4 
The Problem of Existence 
Given that the question does provoke distinctive emotional responses in those who 
approach it with sincerity, we ought to ask whether an answer, if there are any legitimate 
answers at all, helps to alleviate these feelings, and whether we need to say anything 
about the origins of such emotions. Normally, finding the answer to a deep or difficult 
problem will at least help to eliminate the puzzlement it has occasioned. If we are 
still feeling odd or uneasy about a question after we have accepted a successful answer, 
this seems inappropriate. It may be because we are still thinking through its 
consequences, but if we have truly accepted that a problem is resolved, then it seems 
we are no longer entitled to feel any wonder, as we might feel in contemplating a 
great mystery. In the case of the fundamental question, however, it seems possible to 
continue feeling overwhelmed with awe and wonder, even when one has finished 
with the problem on an intellectual level. This makes it a peculiar sort of question. 
Although we can respond intelligently, it is essentially disturbing, even when 
satisfactory answers are available. There is thus a sense in which even my own 
construction is necessarily inadequate, for it will not entirely remove nagging, aching 
feelings of incompleteness. It may, however, meet with other successes, in that it 
remains true to the general sense of a satisfactory resolution, in both its cognitive and 
emotive dimensions. 
The fundamental question seems to threaten the mind with dissolution, and thus it 
provokes desperation and fear. Unlike scientific and religious questions, it is difficult 
to absorb the inquiry into any of the contexts of ordinary life, for it asks about 
something beyond, or outside of, our everyday experience. It has a tendency to be 
forgotten or discarded as illegitimate. It also has a tendency to provoke a sense of 
depth or oddness. It can lead to surprising answers, independently of the dispositions 
of those who believe that they have a response. 
All of this is relevant to a deepened philosophical understanding of the fundamental 
question. The fact that almost everyone feels odd in some way about the question 
reveals something about what it is, just as the fact that some philosophers are intolerant 
of the question reveals something about their dispositions and emotions. The fact that 
we are often unsure of how to describe the odd feelings that it provokes is also of 
importance, since it reveals the way that we think about the question. We are also 
unsure of how to alleviate these feelings (should they be thought undesirable) or deal 
with the question in a way that would reduce them. 
Psychotherapy is useless because the question is an intellectual one, and 
philosophical analysis rarely treats feelings of any kind, so it too is almost useless. It 
seems that what we ultimately need is an actual answer, and one that is satisfactory at 
all of the levels at which we can approach the question. For this we need more than 
analysis, we also have to employ synthetic methods. We must be able to unite our 
different approaches to existence, and express these in a revealing explanatory schema. 
If successful, this will absorb and reflect the total significance of the inquiry, and we 
may rest. The expression that I will ultimately endorse addresses both the fact of 
existence itself, and our felt responses to this fact, and it does so regardless of whether 
we believe that the question can be answered. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
5 
Dismissing the Question 
In the face of an extraordinary question, it is possible to develop such a headache that 
one may wish to dispense with it once and for all. This can result in attempts to stop 
thinking about it, to forget the question, or even to get it off the philosophical agenda 
entirely. There is a great difference, however, between discarding the fundamental 
question as something we should not think about, and addressing it seriously by 
providing reasons to believe that no answer will be forthcoming. The latter, for one 
thing, may involve a considerable amount of thought, and an investigation into the 
limits of rationality. The former response, on the other hand, is normally the product 
of fear, frustration, or anxiety. The following remark by Carl Jung illustrates the 
radically dismissive response rather well: 
If there is something we cannot know, we must necessarily abandon it as an intellectual 
problem. For example, I do not know for what reason the universe has come into being, and 
shall never know. Therefore I must drop this question as a scientific or intellectual problem. 2 
Jung's view appears to be that there is a reason for the universe, but we shall never 
know what it is. This is remarkable. He dismisses the question as a topic for 
investigation, but appears to suppose that there could be an answer. It may be said in 
response that it is a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy to claim that one will never know 
why the universe exists, and on that basis decide not to pursue it. Jung has supplied 
no reason to think that he shall never know the answer. He simply dismisses the 
question. For him, it is not an intellectual problem. 
To dismiss a profound philosophical question in this way is not merely to set a 
limit on human thought, it is to accept that we should not even try to think beyond 
such a limit. There are a number of examples in the history of science which illustrate 
that this is an unacceptable approach to impossible problems. Consider the long history 
of attempts to square the circle, one of the great mathematical problems of the Middle 
Ages. It exercised hundreds of great minds, and produced many noble efforts and 
magnificent thoughts. Yet, in the end, it was found that it is impossible to square the 
circle. Does this mean that nobody should have even tried to do so? Of course not, 
because if nobody had tried, we would not have known exactly why it was impossible, 
and we would not have acquired the benefits of the mathematical understanding 
associated with such knowledge. We would have no knowledge of transcendentals, 
the properties of pi, and so on. 
Another famous example comes from the history of physics. For some time scientists 
had dreams of inventing a 'perpetual motion machine'. This would have been a 
magnificent device, one that would never run out of energy and would never stop 
supplying its products. There were several attempts, ingenious and intricate devices 
that seemed to come close to the ideal. In the end it was found that the perpetual 
motion machine is physically impossible, but the process of trying to invent it led to 
the discovery of the laws of thermodynamics. If nobody had made the effort, we 
would not know why the device is impossible. We may conclude in general that 
impossible tasks are not to be shunned or dismissed. The attempt to reach beyond our 
limitations may not succeed, but it can produce greater understanding. It can lead to 
significant achievements as well as failures. 

6 
The Problem of Existence 
And in any case, as Kipling said, we should treat both triumph and disaster as 
impostors. The very word 'failure' is a pessimist's word. Truly adventurous researchers 
will instead speak of 'learning why it cannot be done'. Even if, in the end, we are 
confronted by limitations on philosophical thought, this does not mean that we should 
be daunted by them, nor that we should not seek, as far as possible, to think beyond 
them. A true philosopher does not cringe in terror and dismiss the most important 
questions from fear of 'the unknown'. On the contrary, courage is one of the essential 
marks of all significant philosophical activity, and the ability to go beyond the supposed 
limitations of thought is itself one of the great virtues of creative thought. 
In any case, although the task is daunting, it is possible to provide coherent responses 
to the fundamental question. Such responses will at least allow that it has a certain 
content and presents a prima facie difficulty which philosophical thought may pursue. 
A response, of course, need not take the form of a direct answer. It may also be a 
constructive argument for the conclusion that we are asking for something that we 
shall never have. Furthermore, not all responses are satisfactory. Some are merely 
flippant, some are based upon faulty theories or inappropriate methods. Some ways 
of responding are better than others at capturing the sense of our emotional attitudes 
towards the fact of existence. 
Inadequate Answers 
Broad rather than narrow criteria should be used for determining whether a particular 
response to this question can be deemed adequate. Because there is no natural starting 
point, almost anything which is clearly directed at the fundamental question, and 
which can be formulated as closing off the inquiry, may be considered as prima 
facie legitimate. A response which does not supply an answer in the strict sense, but 
instead shows that there is a limit to our ability to provide rational explanations, may 
thus be regarded as potentially correct. Such a position at least closes off the inquiry, 
and it seems to capture our intuition that the fact of existence is beyond us. A response 
can be ruled out, however, for a variety of reasons, including those which apply 
generally to explanatory theories, such as logical impossibility or incompatibility 
with known facts. 
In this book I shall also employ an 'intuitive' criterion for determining whether a 
particular respons~ could be counted as truly satisfactory. If it is incompatible with 
the felt significance of the fundamental question, or in some way opposes the 
awesomeness and depth of the inquiry, it should be deemed inadequate. Thus minimally 
a satisfactory response must not only address the content of the fact that something 
exists. It must also help to explain, interpret, or express our sense that we have 
encountered something of great significance, something which acts as a limit to the 
world, or at least the world that we can understand. This criterion significantly narrows 
the field of possible responses, as it rules out several answers to the question which 
might otherwise appear legitimate. It means that we should recognize that we are 
dealing with a matter that is not merely intellectually difficult, but emotionally extreme. 
It may turn out, of course, that no response is fully satisfactory, not even a doctrine 
which entails that existence is a brute fact. If this is the case, then we should seek a 
response which is as satisfying as it can be. It might be that, given the nature of this 
www.ebook3000.com

The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
7 
inquiry, the best that we can hope for is a metaphorical elucidation, rather than a 
categorical, factual explanation. 
In dealing with the fundamental question, it is important to ask what we are really 
seeking, and what kind of response would bring the reward that seems promised in 
the search. If we could truly have an answer, if we could actually spell out the 'why' 
of existence, with full confidence, what would we do with it? What would it mean for 
us, to understand the ultimate explanation for reality itself? Or alternatively, what 
would it mean to know exactly why there can be no such explanation? These are 
questions which cannot be addressed without first determining which alternatives are 
feasible. But it seems clear that, whatever is chosen, we are facing something that is 
powerful and meaningful, rather than something which is simple, obvious, or trivial. 
Some inadequate answers to the question of existence can be considered as steps on 
the way to a more complete and emotionally satisfactory response. Although we may 
begin with fear, and try to dismiss it, as we approach this matter more closely, we may 
uncover a more expansive understanding of the world and the place of reason. On the 
other hand, some inadequate answers seem to lead nowhere. They are inadequate 
because they are based upon a mistake about the nature of the inquiry itself. We are 
not dealing with something superficial, and if we construct a superficial response, we 
have made a mistake. It has been claimed, for example, that of the two possibilities, 
existence is more likely than nonexistence, and that this explains the fact that something 
exists instead of nothing. But this seems ridiculous. Such an explanation does not go 
deep enough, and it may be considered as inadequate on this basis. 
Two examples of the thesis that existence is more likely than non-existence have 
emerged in recent philosophy. The first was presented by Robert Nozick, who 
proposed a series of responses to the fundamental question (none of which is entirely 
successful) in his book Philosophical Explanations.3 One of the possibilities he 
suggested was an 'egalitarian' answer. In this case, the egalitarian assumption is that 
all states are equal in their need for an explanation, so that all possibilities have equal 
weight. It therefore seems that we can employ the principle of indifference from 
probability theory in addressing the question of existence. That is, all states or events 
are regarded as being equally probable as long as we can see no reason why one 
should occur rather than another. Nozick argued that there are an infinite number of 
ways for there to be something, corresponding to the infinite number of possible 
worlds that might be actual, but there is only one way for there to be nothing. It 
follows that the probability of the empty world, wherein nothing exists, is vanishingly 
small. 4 The existence of something rather than nothing can then be explained in terms 
of its greater probability. 
Nozick presents an unconvincing argument for this conclusion. He first claims that 
on some views of statistical explanation, if we can correctly specify a random 
mechanism that yields a very high probability of there being something, then we 
have explained why it is there. He then asserts that we can answer the question 'Why 
is there something instead of nothing?' by stating that this is just what you would 
expect from a random mechanism. But at no point does he actually specify what this 
mechanism is, or how it is supposed to work. Given that this is essential to his argument 
that there can be a statistical explanation, it seems that we can reject it on this basis 
alone. In fact, the very idea of such a mechanism is unintelligible. It would necessarily 
be 'something' itself, and thus it cannot explain why there is something instead of 

8 
The Problem of Existence 
nothing. Even if there is a world-selecting God, who was somehow not a 'something', 
there is no reason to think that his selection of a world would be random. 
The second example of a probabilistic explanation was developed by Peter van 
Inwagen.5 His argument is an adaptation ofNozick's, but it is presented in greater 
detail, and has a slightly different conclusion. Four premisses are defended: 
1 There are some beings; 
2 If there is more than one possible world, there are infinitely many; 
3 There is at most one possible world in which there are no beings; and 
4 For any two possible worlds, the probability of their being actual is equal.6 
There are then two cases to consider. If there is only one possible world, then by 
premiss 1, it is a necessary truth that some things exist, and the probability of there 
being no beings is 0. If there is more than one possible world, then by premiss 2, 
there must be an infinite number, and by premiss 4, the probability of any world 
being actual is 0. It is then claimed that a proposition which is true in at most one 
world must also have a probability ofO, because the probability of each world is 0. 
Hence, van Inwagen concludes, premiss 3 entails that the probability of there being 
nothing is 0.7 This fact is supposed to constitute an explanation for why there is 
something instead of nothing. 
There are several objections to this argument. Interestingly, van Inwagen himself 
admits that he is unhappy with it, because it seems too simple, and in fact this may be 
its most telling defect. At first glance, it looks as if what has been presented is not an 
explanation at all, but a paradox or a riddle. This is because we are not prone to see 
the fundamental question as a matter which can be decided by an application of 
probability theory. Even if the notion of probability can be coherently employed in 
this context, it does not appear to do the right explanatory work. For massively 
improbable events do sometimes occur, and the explanation for their occurrence or 
non-occurrence, if there is an explanation, always makes reference to something other 
than their probability. It seems that when we ask why anything exists, instead of 
nothing, we are asking for a non-probabilistic explanation, if there is one. Neither 
Nozick nor van Inwagen has supplied a reason to think that we must be content with 
a probabilistic account, rather than seeking for a deeper explanatory ground. 
The most contentious premiss of the argument is the fourth, and consequently van 
Inwagen provides a lengthy defence of its truth. He supposes that a possible world 
may be thought of as a maximal state of an isolated system of objects, by which he 
means a system that is not predetermined by another object outside of it. He then 
argues that if an isolated system has several maximal states (that is, assignments of 
properties to all of the objects in the system), then each maximal state of the system 
will have equal probability.8 This is because, in the absence of some external object 
which determines the maximal states of a system, there is no basis for preferring one 
over another. It follows that all possible worlds, as maximal states of an isolated 
system (which van Inwagen calls 'Reality'), will be equally probable. 
Against this, it might be claimed that possible worlds should not be treated as 
states of an isolated system. Perhaps there is an 'external' being, such as God, who 
determines the maximal states of all systems of objects. If this were the case, it seems 
that van Inwagen's conclusion would still follow, but it would be true for a different 
www.ebook3000.com

The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
9 
reason. For if God exists, then there is a necessary being, which exists in all possible 
worlds. This would entail that the probability of there being nothing is again equal to 
0. In this case, however, there is a deeper explanation at play. If the fundamental 
question is answered by the invocation of a necessary being, then it is not answered 
by facts about probabilities (even though a necessary being exactly determines the 
probability of nothingness). 
In any case, even if there is no such being, and possible worlds are maximal states 
of an isolated system, van Inwagen's defence of his fourth premiss is not 
insurmountable. E.J. Lowe has argued that we cannot assume that we have the ability 
to determine a priori that some states of some systems are of equal probability. 9 He 
points out that this assumption has given rise to paradoxes in the past, such as Bertrand's 
paradox. This presents us with a problem situation where there are several different 
and equally plausible ways of describing a supposed set of equiprobable alternatives, 
each of which provides a different resolution of the problem. Lowe further argues 
that van Inwagen can only assume that such problems will not arise in the case of 
possible worlds by assuming that these worlds have well-defined identity conditions. 
It is not clear, however, that this is the case. 10 
Perhaps the greatest difficulty for van Inwagen's argument is that it entails that the 
probability of the actual world, the world in which we are living, is either 1 or 0, 
depending upon whether there is only one world or infinitely many. As Lowe remarked, 
this means that 'if"Spinozism" is false then it is as improbable as anything could be 
that we exist in the world as we actually find it' .11 It can be argued that this is incorrect, 
on the grounds that our world is obviously more probable than others. It seems, for 
example, that our world is more probable than a world in which nothing exists except 
pink elephants floating in custard. But even if it is correct, there are problems for van 
Inwagen. For clearly if the actual world has a probability ofO, then the question of 
why it was actualized becomes just as perplexing as the fundamental question itself. 
It seems that we have just traded one problem for another, of equal difficulty. If it 
turns out that the actual world has a zero probability ofbeing actual, and consequently 
there is no explanation for it, then the probabilistic answer is incorrect. It has not 
faced the question properly. 
All of these objections indicate that the answer is inadequate, but there is another 
kind of objection as well, which employs the intuitive criterion. The probabilistic 
answers provided by Nozick and van Inwagen can be discounted, it seems, on the 
basis that they fail to explain why the fundamental question should ever inspire 
astonishment or deep perplexity. If it has this very simple answer, then we should not 
be terribly surprised or disturbed to find that something exists, rather than nothing. It 
is almost inevitable, after all. And yet we are disturbed by the question, and we do 
find ourselves astonished when confronting the fact that something exists. This fact 
does not seem like the most likely outcome of a random process, nor does it seem to 
be explicable in terms of probability in any way. It appears instead to be something 
inexplicable. At least, this is a natural initial reaction. 
The inadequacy of the probabilistic explanation does not arise from the argument 
itself, which appears to be valid, but from the fact that probabilities cannot explain 
why we feel that existence is so perplexing. Thus the intuition that this resolution is 
too simple, which was expressed by van Inwagen himself, is actually correct. It may 
be intellectually sufficient in some sense, but it is not an ultimately satisfying answer 

10 
The Problem of Existence 
because it fails to explain why we feel that the question has a deeper significance. It 
also fails to explain why the fact of existence appears to be so utterly bizarre. Surely, 
if it is such a massively probable fact, it should appear to us as humdrum, and yet it 
does not. This is an aspect of the problem that we are confronting, and even if we are 
dealing with an illusory appearance, it is nevertheless something which must be 
explained by a completed answer. 
Another kind of inadequate response involves a rejection of one of the 
presuppositions of the question. In asking why there is something instead of nothing, 
we clearly assume that there is something, but we also assume that this is incompatible 
with there being nothing. Some may deny this incompatibility, and respond to the 
question by rejecting it as illegitimate. Nozick formulated a response of this kind, as 
part of his attempt to say what a 'thoroughgoing' egalitarian theory would be like. He 
criticized the probabilistic account because it does not entirely reject inegalitarian 
assumptions. In ~articular, it assumes that the natural state for a possibility is 
'nonrealization', 1 and thus that the actualization of a possibility must be explained 
by special factors (even if they are random ones). Nozick therefore tried to specify 
what a totally egalitarian theory would entail by formulating what he called a principle 
of fecundity, which states that all possibilities are actual, and not just that they all 
have an equal chance of being actualized. 
This response appears to involve a mistaken interpretation of the question. On the 
face of it, the existence of something is flatly incompatible with the existence of nothing. 
Although we often speak as though there are 'pockets of nothingness' in the world, 
saying things like 'There is nothing in the cupboard', and talking about 'empty space', 
this is irrelevant to the fundamental question. For in this case we are asking why 
there is not absolutely nothing. Nozick's principle of fecundity seems to reject this 
interpretation. It entails that there is a set of parallel universes, so there is something, 
but one of these universes is empty, so there is also 'nothing'. But it is not clear that 
this is very different from saying that there is 'nothing' in the sense that some of our 
cupboards are empty. Nozick presents his 'thoroughgoing' egalitarian theory as follows: 
For the most fundamental laws and initial conditions C of the universe, the answer to the 
question 'why C rather than D?' is that both independently exist. We happen to find ourselves 
in a C universe rather than a D universe; perhaps this is no accident for a D universe might 
not produce or support life such as ours. There is no explanation of why C rather than D, for 
there is no fact of C rather than D. All the possibilities exist in independent noninteracting 
realms, in 'parallel universes'. We might call this the fecundity assumption. It appears that 
only such an egalitarian view does not leave any question 'why X rather than Y?' unanswered. 
No brute fact of X rather than Y is left unexplained for no such fact holds.13 
This theory is not really an answer to the question, but a way of rejecting the 
question. It rejects the presupposition that 'something' is opposed to 'nothing', and 
thus it entails that it is wrong to ask a question which depends upon this presupposition. 
But this is an inadequate approach, intellectually and intuitively. It merely leads us to 
a different formulation of the original question. If this theory is adopted, we can still 
ask why there is a set of parallel universes (among which the empty universe is 
included), instead of no universes at all. This is clearly just another version of the 
fundamental question itself, reformulated to apply to a particular case. Hence Nozick's 
response does not succeed in answering it, for it can reappear in a new guise. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
11 
There is a reply to this objection, but it seems to leave us with another brute fact, 
and hence with no real explanation. The reformulated question is equivalent to the 
problem of explaining why the principle of fecundity should be true, and to this there 
may be a resolution. Nozick addressed this problem by considering the principle to 
be self-subsuming, and therefore self-explanatory. Given that it is an ultimate and 
very deep principle, it can provide a deductive explanation for itself: 'It states that all 
possibilities are realised, while it itself is one of those possibilities.' 14 Hence with 
this principle, we have reached rock bottom. It explains itself, and also explains why 
there is both something and nothing as well. 
Nozick discusses various formulations of the principle of fecundity, in order to 
show that it can be accepted as neither a brute fact (for it is self-subsuming) nor 
arbitrary (for it satisfies a deep invariance principle ). 15 But even if this strategy works, 
a self-subsuming principle of this kind must also be self-contradictory. For it entails 
that all possibilities are realized, and this includes the possibility that not all possibilities 
are realized. Hence it is inconsistent. If it were restricted to apply only to first-level 
possibilities, those that neither entail nor exclude the existence of other possibilities, 
then it will not subsume itself. Nozick remarks, in a footnote, that this is so, and 
claims that we can speak of the possibility that not all possibilities are realized as 
obtaining 'in its own separate realm' .16 But this does not resolve the problem. If the 
principle of fecundity concerns all possibilities, then its negation must also concern 
all possibilities. And if it is one of the possibilities, then its negation must also be one 
of the possibilities. It follows that it entails its own negation, and is therefore self-
contradictory. 
It is difficult, in any case, to see how such a principle can be the ultimate explanation 
for everything. Rather than explaining everything, it simply allows everything to be 
the case (or at least, everything that is logically possible). This does not constitute an 
explanation, for it is an attempt to avoid explanation altogether. In denying that it is a 
fact that there is something instead of nothing, Nozick's fecundity proposal effectively 
removes the need for a theory, rather than itself providing a theory. It should therefore 
be deemed inadequate. Something similar can be said for most ofhis other proposals, 
in fact, which rely upon the dubious notion that we can talk about 'natural states' 
which do not require explanation. To claim, for example, that nothingness is a natural 
state, and that there is a 'nothingness force' which acts upon itself to produce 
something, 17 is not to supply an adequate explanation. It is amusing, certainly, and 
appropriately bizarre, but inasmuch as a 'nothingness force' would itselfbe something, 
it does not explain the existence of something. 
Despite the inadequacy ofNozick's proposals, his discussion of the fundamental 
question is actually very interesting and important. He helps to illustrate the kind of 
depth that it demands, and how it defies our expectations about what may count as an 
answer. In addition, his remarks on the philosophical pursuit of ultimate explanations 
are of great value: 
Philosophers push or iterate a question, usually about justification, so far that they cannot 
find any acceptable deeper answer. Attempting to deduce, explain or justify the principle or 
position already reached, they fail, or covertly reintroduce the very result to be gotten. 
Whereupon a crisis for philosophy or for reason is proclaimed: a surd has been reached 
which cannot be justified (or explained) further. Reason has been forced to halt. 

12 
The Problem of Existence 
What did they expect? Either the chain (of explanation or justification) goes on infmitely, 
or it goes in a circle, or it reaches an end-point, either a simple point or a self-subsuming 
loop. What result would not constitute a crisis?18 
This point is particularly relevant to the present inquiry. Given that an infinite chain 
of explanations is unacceptable, and a circular chain tells us nothing, we must be 
satisfied with an end-point of some kind. Perhaps this is a kind of crisis, but it is not 
necessarily the kind of crisis which inevitably defeats us. Reaching an ultimate reason 
can be a real satisfaction, if only it has the right features. A great deal depends upon 
which kind of end-point is finally selected. 
N ozick goes on to argue that we should change our understanding of the goals of 
philosophical explanation. He claims that we ought to actually aim to reach a point 
where we cannot proceed further, where we are effectively stumped, although we 
must not reach this point too quickly. Making this our aim involves changing our 
perspective on explanation as a total enterprise. It means that we must learn to live 
with disturbing results at the very end of the tree-structure of explanation, results 
which would be abominable if they were deduced in the middle. For Nozick, this 
means that we might have to accept self-subsuming explanations. Another possibility 
is that we accept the existence of an ultimate entity, such as God, or an ultimate 
value, which performs the requisite explanatory role. This may be intellectually and 
emotionally satisfying if it is formulated and defended in the right way. Alternatively, 
we may have to accept that some facts simply do not admit of explanation. Under 
certain conditions, I shall argue, this may become a satisfactory end-point. In any 
case, if there is to be an explanation for the fact of existence, it must be an ultimate 
explanation. There cannot literally be anything behind it, for ifthere is, then this will 
be something that is also called into question. 
Oddity 
The fact that something exists instead of nothing is odd. There is no axiomatic theory 
from which this fact can be derived. There are no laws of nature whose operation 
leads to the existence of the world. Logic is useless, for one can demonstrate existence 
only by first assuming it, which is circular. Probability theory is also ineffectual. It 
cannot specify a mechanism which produces something instead of nothing, and does 
not represent a natural explanatory context for the fact of existence. There is no 
background context into which it naturally falls. It just sits there. We know that it is a 
fact, but it is not immediately transparent to us. Instead, we feel that it is odd. 
Our knowledge that something exists is empirical knowledge, but it is not a scientific 
conjecture, still less a postulate. We know that something exists because we know 
that we exist, and we interact with various things in our environment. The Cartesian 
argument 'I think, therefore I am' is a sound deductive argument, but it has a contingent 
premiss, and it is known by participation in the experience of thinking. In general, we 
know the world is 'out there' because we can experience it. This may lead us to the 
view that the existence of something instead of nothing is a contingent fact, which is 
the view of most contemporary philosophers. There is, however, no way of proving 
that existence is wholly contingent, because there may be existent things which we 
www.ebook3000.com

The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
13 
cannot directly experience. The existence of a necessary being, or even a large 
collection of necessary beings, is compatible with the doctrine that we first come to 
know the fact of existence through experience. It is also compatible with the oddity 
of the world. For example, if there is a divine necessary being, it does not follow that 
we possess a theoretical explanation for this being. God may exist even if it is 
impossible for us to comprehend a 'theory of God'. 
If there was no real world- then what? There would be nothing, which appears to 
be an altogether uninteresting possibility, as nothing would flow from nothingness. 
So it sits there, this fact that something exists, lacking a normal explanation-space in 
which to become intelligible. It is a peculiarity, which resists subsumption into a 
general framework. It is like a hunger that will not be satisfied, or a ray of light that 
cannot be reflected. The contrast between something and nothing does not seem to 
allow any conceptual structure to impose itself upon it. We are therefore left with an 
oddity. 
In a sense, this is the oddity of our total situation. This is what we are confronting, 
when we confront the universe, when we stand before the real world in its wholeness. 
Our total situation is the predicament in which we find ourselves placed. We are 
placed in a context where there are various things, a set of existent objects, and we 
use these things in various ways. When we call the existence of the world into question, 
we are asking why there should be anything there for us to use, and why we are here 
to do the things we do. This kind of inquiry shakes us completely, for it calls everything 
that we do into question. It asks for some sort oftotaljustification for our total situation, 
and in the absence of an immediate answer, we are left struggling. We may even have 
the vague feeling that it is all for nothing, and that the universe is entirely meaningless. 
And given that we live meaningful lives, to some extent, within the universe, this 
seems very strange. 
In asking why there is anything at all, we are asking why there is a total situation 
for our lives, why there is a world for us to enjoy and work within. It seems that if 
there is an answer to such a question, it must somehow lie 'beyond' the world, which 
is unthinkable. There are several spiritual and philosophical traditions in which 
discourse about that which transcends the world has developed and flourished, and to 
some extent these may be invoked in our responses to the fundamental question of 
metaphysics. None of them, however, is without deep conceptual difficulties. The 
inconceivability of the transcendent means that if we are to speak of it (or perhaps 
even 'point to it' with words), we must be extremely careful. Indeed, this 
inconceivability may lead us to the intuition that the question cannot have an answer. 
And yet, to draw this conclusion is just as unthinkable, though in a different way. 
In the doctrines of Christianity, which is a relatively well-developed spiritual 
tradition, there is a tension (some would say a confusion) between the insistence that 
God lies beyond us, and the claim that he walked the Earth and now lives within us. 
The deity must somehow be both transcendent and immanent. He must be the creator 
of the universe, and thus outside of it, but he must also be present to us, as a living 
spirit within the universe. 19 A similar tension operates as we consider the fundamental 
question of metaphysics. On the one hand, we feel that the reason for the world, if 
there is a reason, must lie beyond the world. On the other hand, the existence of 
things in the world is something trite and obvious. Everything that we do as we go 
about our lives is governed by the assumption that we are operating in a real world, 

14 
The Problem of Existence 
and that something is actually there upon which we can operate. How can the source 
of this world transcend our conceptual abilities, when the things which exist are so 
clearly agreeable to both practical and cognitive activity? How can the infinity of 
God be squeezed into the life of a flower? 
Heidegger was not the first to address the fundamental question, and given its 
meaning, he can be excused for failing to supply an answer. What he did supply was 
a brief account of the way that this question can affect us, which is significant in 
itself. He had an appreciation of the contexts in which the question has significance, 
and the kind of intuitions we have within these contexts. It is worth ~xamining his 
remarks on this matter: 
And yet each of us is grazed at least once, perhaps more than once, by the hidden power of 
this question, even if he is not aware of what is happening to him. The question looms in 
moments of great despair, when things tend to lose all their weight and all meaning becomes 
obscured. Perhaps it will strike but once like a muffied bell that rings into our life and 
gradually dies away. It is present in moments of rejoicing, when all the things around us are 
transfigured and seem to be there for the first time, as if it might be easier to think they are 
not than to understand that they are and are as they are. The question is upon us in boredom, 
when we are equally removed from despair and joy, and everything about us seems so 
hopelessly commonplace that we no longer care whether anything is or is not - and with 
this the question 'Why are there essents rather than nothing?' is evoked in a particular 
form.20 
What a strange thing this question is. It is something that 'looms' in our despair, 'is 
present' in our joy, and 'is upon us' in our boredom. What kind of meaning must it 
have to enjoy all of these features? Heidegger is not claiming that we explicitly ask 
the question when we are in these moods - it is just the question waiting in the 
background, as were, looming but possibly unspoken. But if such starkly different 
moods are all appropriate occasions for the question, a problem arises. Do the 
incompatibility of these moods illustrate that there is some sort of internal inconsistency 
in the meaning of the inquiry? 
The answer, it seems to me, is no. There is no inconsistency or unintelligibility 
lurking in the fact that the fundamental question is appropriate to contradictory moods 
or opposing modes of thought. This would be problematic, perhaps, if the question 
could only be answered in one way, for example if it had to be answered by something 
optimistic or ideali$tic. But this is not the case. As such, it can be the sort of question 
that 'looms' in radically different states of mind, just as it can inspire different and 
opposing emotional responses. This is partly because there are several direct answers 
to the question, each of which has a degree of plausibility. It is also because joy, 
despair, and boredom, although they are mutually exclusive, are intelligible emotional 
contexts for addressing the same fact. 
It has been suggested that these different emotions are actually different 
appreciations of the world as a whole. In despair, we appreciate the lack of a purpose 
in the world, in joy we feel that it is a fulfilled whole, while in boredom we feel that 
it goes on and on, monotonously. If this is true, then these feelings are not so much 
occasions for asking a question as they are forms of understanding the world itself. 
The question then becomes superfluous: there are just aspects of our total situation 
which we can appreciate. Or perhaps the question is relevant, and appears explicitly 
www.ebook3000.com

The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
15 
in the midst of such moods, only because they each presuppose that it has a particular 
answer, namely that there is no reason for the world. 
If this is correct, ifthere is absolutely no reason for the world to exist, then there is 
a correct response to the fundamental question. We must then say, not that it is an ill-
formed inquiry, but that it ends in a blank, for there is no rational explanation. 
Nevertheless, this kind of response does not diminish the sense that we are confronting 
something peculiar, awesome, and astonishing. If anything, it helps to clarify the 
oddity of our total situation. For some thinkers, this conclusion is so unsettling that it 
is unacceptable. They may therefore pursue a different kind of answer, perhaps one 
that invokes a necessary being, or an ultimate value. These ideas may also offer 
satisfactory resolutions, for people with different dispositions, but at no point will 
they completely dissolve the oddity that we perceive here. If such a dissolution is 
what we seek when asking this question, then I do not believe that we shall have it. 
The Role of Philosophy 
If the fact of existence properly and reasonably produces feelings such as wonder 
and astonishment, a question arises about how to understand the role of philosophy 
in this context. If it has the ability to explain existence, then does it also have the 
ability to reduce or eliminate these feelings? Most scientific explanations, when they 
are successful, immediately dissolve the mystery of the phenomenon which is 
explained. This normally happens because a mechanism is discovered which 
demonstrates that the phenomenon requires no magic, and therefore demonstrates 
that our astonishment is misplaced. In the case of existence, however, there is no 
mechanism of this sort. If we obtain a satisfactory philosophical explanation here, it 
may be that the mystery will remain with us, possibly in a different form. 
There are many who believe that the role of philosophy is like that of science, in 
that it increases our knowledge and understanding of the world by providing solutions 
to theoretical problems. In fact, I also believe that this is an important part of 
philosophical work. I believe that rational explanations should be sought, in many 
cases, simply for the sake of being rational, rather than for any positive practical 
purpose. So I also maintain that part of the role of philosophy in addressing the 
fundamental question is to construct answers and assess them, with the intention of 
finding the truth. Such an assessment must use the same general criteria of rationality 
that are employed in dealing with all intellectual problems. So in this respect at least, 
the fundamental question is like any other. 
However, in addition to this, there is another task, which relates to the emotional 
aspect of the question. I believe that philosophy can also seek to elucidate and 
encourage certain feelings about the situation in which we find ourselves. This is part 
of the general task of clarification, and it ought to be pursued in those cases where we 
are dealing with profound and intense concerns. For this reason, the doctrine which I 
will eventually defend is not formulated in straightforwardly literal terms. It retains 
metaphoric dimensions, and it is expressed in this way in order to elicit a certain kind 
of response. 
Even the best literal explanations do not always satisfy us, and in fact we can 
pursue them with the knowledge that nothing, in the end, will entirely satisfy us. We 

16 
The Problem of Existence 
are rational animals, but we do not necessarily find that reason is comforting. 
Sometimes, reason can lead us to its own limits. Questions may remain with us, and 
retain their enchanting power, forever. And some questions, even though they are 
answered and explained, linger on in our souls because the explanation, simple though 
it may appear, somehow leaves an echo of eternity. 
Philosophy, in my view, is the love of wisdom. It is a way of flourishing within the 
wisdom we can attain, whatever that may be. In a sense, it is pure thought, and we 
engage in such thought, not because it brings pleasures or other rewards, but simply 
because we are thinking beings. Philosophy is not always concerned with resolving 
intellectual problems, even if it must always deal with them in a rational way. And it 
does not always bring satisfactory answers. Unlike the other theoretical disciplines, 
philosophy can fulfil itself in its questions. 
The intellect tends to operate as a grasping mechanism. That is, it seeks to 
comprehend facts and their explanations by fitting them into a pattern. By grasping 
the pattern, the intellect grasps the world. The fact of existence itself, however, seems 
to resist any pattern, and defies any subsumption by the normal structure of explanation. 
It is an unreasonable, chaotic fact. Yet it can absorb the mind, so that instead of 
reaching out for a great necessity, we may find ourselves revelling in absurdity. 
The fact that something exists, even if it can somehow be fitted into an explanatory 
framework, evokes deep feelings. These feelings reveal our fundamental attitudes 
towards existence, and can partly express our relationship with the world. We may 
come to feel that the existence of the world is in some way gratuitous, either because 
there is no reason for it or because it is thought to be an undeserved 'gift' from 
nothingness, or from the transcendent. This is a deep appreciation of the fact of 
existence, and some recognition of its intelligibility is, in my view, part of the answer 
to the fundamental question. 
Notes 
M. Heidegger, An Introduction to Metaphysics, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT 
and London, 1959, p. 1. 
2 
C. G. Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections, Collins and Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 
1963, p. 280. 
3 
R. Nozick, Philosophical Explanations, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1981. 
4 
Ibid., p. 127. 
5 
P. van Inwagen, 'Why is there Anything at all?', Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume, 
70, 1996,pp.95-110. 
6 
Ibid., p. 99. 
7 
Ibid., p. 100. 
8 
Ibid., p. 104. 
9 
E.J. Lowe, 'Why is there Anything at all?', Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume, 
70, 1996, p. 114. 
10 Ibid., p. 120. 
11 Ibid, p. 113. 
12 R. Nozick, op. cit., p. 128. 
13 Ibid., p. 129. 
14 Ibid., p. 131. 
15 Ibid., p. 135. 
www.ebook3000.com

16 Ibid., pp. 131-2. 
17 Ibid., p. 123. 
18 Ibid., p. 137. 
The Fundamental Question of Metaphysics 
17 
19 This tension was present in the great theological controversy between the Arians and the 
Athanasians. 
20 M. Heidegger, op. cit., pp. 1-2. 

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 2 
The Deflationary Response 
The first kind of response to the fundamental question does not provide an explanatory 
answer. Instead it involves responding to the act of putting the question in the first 
place, and leads us to investigate the appropriateness or intelligibility of the asking, 
rather than the subject of existence itself. We may call these responses 'deflationary', 
because they seek to deflate the question from its position as a thematically structured 
exploration of ideas, and transform it into a reflection on the limitations of the (human) 
thinker who asks 'why'. The formulations that fall into this category seek to show 
either that there is no answer to be found, or that the inquiry itself has no cognitive 
meaning, and therefore that there is no basis for the provision of an answer. 
Although deflationary responses may appear to be wholly negative, and sometimes 
to imply that metaphysics itself is ill-conceived, they represent a serious contribution 
to the inquiry. They enact a reflection of the question back upon itself, asking of it 
whether there is any legitimate rational basis for the pursuit of an answer. In so 
reflecting, these responses are negative in two senses. Firstly, they can be based upon 
desperation and fear initiated by the act of asking why anything exists, and are thus 
founded upon negative appreciations. Secondly, they are negative in the sense that 
they do not provide a constructive answer with a positive information content. 
However, some deflationary responses provide a constructive theory to answer the 
question of why there is no explanation for existence. Some philosophers recognize 
that it is possible to give an account of the limitations of reason, and have attempted 
to do so. Such an endeavour is a positive contribution to philosophical theory, and 
effectively provides a systematic and rational response to the question of existence, 
albeit indirectly. 
Desperation is naturally and appropriately occasioned by asking the question. One 
begins a frantic search for an acceptable answer, and almost immediately discovers 
that there is no obvious method for its provision. One then becomes desperate, and 
begins to desire that the matter be closed with a declaration that the question makes 
no sense, or that it is something far beyond our cognitive capacities. The feeling of 
desperation is not itself a deflationary response, but it may be the basis of such a 
response, which may then be elaborated, without any desperation, within a rational 
theoretical structure. It is unlikely that this feeling will be occasioned in somebody 
who is not already satisfied that the existence of something rather than nothing is a 
contingent fact. Without such an assurance, it becomes more likely that one can find 
a way of explaining the fact of existence as a necessary truth. 
Fear can be appropriately occasioned by asking the question if it is suspected that 
a world without a reason to exist is inevitably chaotic. This suspicion may induce a 
vague sense of panic, though it is normally a fleeting emotion quickly calmed by the 
day-to-day business oflife. Panic and fear may also be produced by the intuition that, 
since there is no obvious way of explaining existence, the fact of existence may be 
beyond our grasp. That which cannot be grasped by our intellect is beyond our control, 

20 
The Problem of Existence 
and that which is beyond our control is a potential danger. So fear is a natural response. 
This feeling is also unlikely to occur without a presumption of ultimate contingency, 
and as J.P. Sartre famously suggested, nausea may also result from reflecting upon 
this notion. (In fact it is less clear, to me at least, that nausea is natural or appropriate 
in this context, but it is not impossible.) 
Desperation and fear need not lead to a coherent attempt to answer the question of 
why anything exists. They are just immediate feelings that may be felt upon the 
occasion of asking it, and they may be left unresolved, dissolving quickly as lunchtime 
approaches or lingering for a while in a dull mood of abysmal unquenched desire. In 
other words, they need not actually become the inspiration for a deflationary view of 
the fundamental question. Nevertheless, the formulation of such views can become 
the indirect expression of the terror of the unfathomable, even when they are 
constructed within a relatively cool state of mind. Logical positivism, and the 
supposedly non-positivist position of Paul Edwards, are good examples of how this 
can happen. 
Denying that the Question is Meaningful 
It is arguable that if a question has no meaning, then it can invoke no feelings and it 
can have no intelligible answer. Literally nonsensical questions surely provoke no 
response, beyond an expression of incomprehension, or possibly amusement. There 
are questions, such as 'How long is a piece of string?' and 'How many roads must a 
man walk down before you can call him a man?' which, when asked out of context, 
are so ill-defined that they have no answer, but they are not literally nonsensical. 
There could be an answer to the string inquiry, for example, if it was asked in an 
appropriate context. In many cases, the asking of these silly questions is intended to 
produce an experiential response which is not strictly speaking an answer, though it 
may involve a verbal reply. For example, when a Zen master asks 'What is the sound 
of one hand clapping?' he is trying to induce satori, or instant enlightenment, and he 
may be happy with a verbal response as long as it is an indication that satori has 
happened. 
The question of existence does not appear to involve this sort of 'silliness'. It can 
be asked with sincerity, rather than with the aim of inducing a certain sort of experience. 
Furthermore, there are contexts in which it can be intelligibly answered, as later 
chapters will demonstrate. And since it may be asked by using an ordinary English 
sentence which does not disobey any semantical or grammatical maxims, it seems 
difficult to find fault with its literal sense. Most people understand what it means 
even if they can't give an immediate reply. In order to argue that, despite appearances, 
asking why anything exists is a form of literal nonsense, one must use a criterion of 
meaning which excludes it from literal or cognitive meaning, or a theoretical argument 
which establishes the same conclusion without using a criterion. I will examine both 
of these strategies for denying that this asking is a meaningful asking. The first is that 
of the logical positivists, while the second has been adopted by Paul Edwards and, in 
a very different way, by Ludwig Wittgenstein. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
21 
Fear and Desperation 
The logical positivist movement was opposed to metaphysics in general, and so it 
would seem likely that the most basic metaphysical inquiry would be entirely ruled 
out by the criterion of meaning that it adopted. The measure of meaning endorsed by 
this form of positivism was the verification criterion, which stated that a proposition 
has cognitive significance if and only if it is open to empirical verification, at least in 
principle. A.J. Ayer, one of the most famous proponents of this view, explains the 
intention of the verifiability principle as follows, where he characterizes its effect in 
terms of both indicative and interrogative sentences: 
The criterion which we use to test the genuineness of apparent statements of fact is the 
criterion of verifiability. We say that a sentence is factually significant to any given person, 
if, and only if, he knows how to verify the proposition which it purports to express ... And 
with regard to questions the procedure is the same. We inquire in every case what observations 
would lead us to answer the question, one way or the other; and, if none can be discovered, 
we must conclude that the sentence under consideration does not, as far as we are concerned, 
express a genuine question, however strongly its grammatical appearance may suggest that 
it does. 1 
Given this criterion, it is clear that the fundamental question of metaphysics cannot 
be counted as a 'genuine' question, for there are no observations which, taken by 
themselves, will lead us to an answer. But this is probably the case for almost all of 
the important 'why' questions that we wish to ask, even within the context of empirical 
science. If we consider the question 'Why do physical objects fall to the Earth when 
they are dropped?', it seems that there are no observations which will lead us to an 
answer unless we are to understand them within the context of large-scale theories. 
Ayer 's criterion has so little subtlety that it appears to rule out most of these theoretical 
'why' questions as nonsense. More sophisticated versions may do better with such 
cases, but there are other problems as well. The criterion seems to turn simple, everyday 
'why' questions such as 'Why did you take the highway instead of the main road?' 
and 'Why are you wearing silk today?' into unverifiable nonsense. Unless we can say 
that the observations which would lead us to answer these questions involve just 
attending to the sincere response of the one who is asked, they too become meaningless. 
As such, the criterion appears to be either highly implausible, or palpably false. One 
can therefore easily reply to Ayer's simplistic formulation with a list of counter-
examples, for there are many meaningful 'why' questions which he must count as 
meaningless. 
If the criterion is amended, so that 'observation' is understood widely enough to 
include theory-dependent observations, of the kind that confirmed Einstein's theory 
of gravitation, for example, then it becomes a little more plausible. However, with 
such an amendment, it becomes less clear that the fundamental question of metaphysics 
can be classified as literally nonsensical. Perhaps there is a large-scale theory of the 
world which provides an answer, and which can also be tested experimentally. There 
is no a priori reason to think this is impossible, although at present it seems unlikely.2 
But if there is even a remote possibility that theory-dependent observations can lead 
us to an answer, then the criterion does not decide whether asking why anything 
exists is nonsensical or not. A more serious investigation of the possibilities is needed 

22 
The Problem of Existence 
to say whether we are entitled to ask it. Thus the positivist criterion, even when it is 
sophisticated enough to deal with theoretical 'why' questions, fails to determine that 
the fundamental question is meaningless. 
The verifiability criterion, as Ayer originally stated it, has another odd feature when 
it is applied to the inquiry into existence. For it is clear that the proposition that 
something exists (instead of nothing) passes the test. It is not merely verifiable, it is a 
verified proposition, and in fact it is verified by all of the observations we make. As 
long as we are here to observe anything at all, we are observing things that exist. So 
we may conclude that to say 'something exists' is to say something that has cognitive 
significance, yet if we are to ask 'why' we suddenly leap into the realm of nonsense. 
This in itself is a curiosity. If we were to takeAyer's criterion seriously, it would seem 
appropriate to feel astonished at this turn of events. The fact of existence is perfectly 
sensible, but the very idea that this fact has an explanation is rejected as unintelligible. 
To draw the boundaries of sense in this way is to invite a feeling ofbafllement which 
may be equal to the shock value of the original 'why' question. And if it is, then 
nothing much is gained, in terms of alleviating the trouble of explaining existence, 
by insisting upon the verifiability criterion. 
There are serious conceptual problems with the criterion in any case, perhaps the 
most famous of which is that, because it is unverifiable itself, it turns out to have no 
cognitive significance. Ayer later replied to this point by claiming that it was a 
'stipulative definition', but this was obviously a retraction of his original position, 
and has not been treated as an effective reply. As a positivist, his main concern was to 
demonstrate that theoretical metaphysics of any kind is nonsensical. He did this, not 
in the spirit of a neutral logical investigation into meaning, but with a deep feeling of 
repugnance at the very idea of going beyond the empirical realm. Ayer first considered 
a reply to the metaphysician which claims that nothing 'super-empirical' can be 
deduced from empirical premisses, 3 and this is clearly where he would like to have 
finished the argument. This kind of argument, which assumes that we must begin 
with the evidence of the senses in all of our reasoning, indicates the general tenor of 
positivist philosophy. It is always reluctant to go beyond what is immediately available, 
because any 'going beyond' is a path into the unknown, and maybe even the 
unknowable. This path is a fearful one to tread, but if we are to progress with 
metaphysical inquiry, we must consider it seriously. 
Although there is nothing explicitly indicating fearfulness inAyer's text, he displays 
other emotions which indicate that he is reacting with fear, not only to the 'why' 
questions, but to the idea of transcendence which they inevitably invite. For example, 
he is not satisfied with merely casting metaphysical statements as nonsensical, and 
then moving on. He must also express a certain disgust in the act of the dismissal. He 
argues in some detail that 'the postulation of non-existent entities results from ... 
superstition', 4 and that metaphysics cannot even be redeemed as a kind of poetry. 
With all the acerbity of a sarcastic theatre reviewer, Ayer claims that poetry often 
does involve sentences with a literal meaning, whereas the metaphysician, on the 
other hand: 
does not intend to write nonsense. He lapses into it through being deceived by grammar, or 
through committing errors of reasoning, such as that which leads to the view that the sensible 
world is unreal. But it is not the mark of a poet simply to make mistakes of this sort. There 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
23 
are some, indeed, who would see in the fact that the metaphysician's utterances are senseless 
a reason against the view that they have aesthetic value. And, without going so far as this, 
we may safely say that it does not constitute a reason for it. 5 
The suggestion that metaphysics may be likened to poetry was first made by Rudolf 
Carnap, in a context that was not quite as acrimonious. Ayer, obviously sensing that 
this might be construed as a mark of approval, decided that something stronger must 
be said. Yet this decision says more about his emotional state than it says about his 
logic. It shows, for example, that he could not see any poetry in the metaphysical 
works of Plato, or at least that he could not admit that there was any poetry there, 
unless it be in a vaguely derisive tone. This sort of reaction is naturally motivated by 
desperation and fear, by a feeling that anything 'going beyond' the empirical realm 
must be totally obliterated, to the extent that it is no longer even an object of beauty. 
Fear in this case arises from a confrontation with indeterminacy, from the lack of a 
theoretical framework or method for dealing with 'why', and from the lack of perfect 
control that this brings. Questions for which there are no determinate observation-
based answers can be terrifying to the intellect. Ayer demonstrates this most succinctly 
by the fact that he tries to dismiss metaphysics on the aesthetic level, and not merely 
to classify it. This brings an emotional tone into his otherwise logical argument. 
One need not be a logical positivist to fear the unverifiable 'why' question. Paul 
Edwards, in his Encyclopedia of Philosophy article (entitled 'Why'), constructed a 
more substantial argument against the meaningfulness of the inquiry, 6 which appears 
to be motivated by a similar emotional state. He claimed that there is a logical grammar 
to the word 'why' which has been violated in the case of the fundamental question, 
rendering it meaningless. 7 After a long discussion of different kinds of 'why' questions, 
he argued that when we ask of anything x why it happened or why it is what it is, we 
presuppose that there are antecedent conditions other than x which can explain x. 
This is partly what is meant by using the word 'why', and if there are no such 
conditions, then it loses its normal meaning. In the case ofthe question of why there 
is something rather than nothing, there can be no antecedent conditions of this kind, 
because they too must be included in the 'something' which must be explained. 
Edwards thus concluded that the question has no cognitive meaning, since it violates 
the conditions under which a 'why' question can make sense. 
It can be replied that this conclusion is too strong. Any antecedent conditions that 
are used to explain why there is something are also brought into question, it is true, 
but this does not entail that the question itself is without meaning. There are several 
other possibilities. The question might be answered by an explanation which invokes 
conditions that are themselves self-explanatory, or conditions that are 'natural' in 
some appropriate sense, and hence require no further explanation. Or it might have 
an abnormal answer, invoking an explanation that does not use standard antecedent 
conditions. Another possibility is that the question may be given a teleological 
response, in which case there is no antecedent condition involved in its answer, or at 
least none that amounts to the supposition that there is another thing in existence 
which requires explanation. None of these possibilities are even considered by 
Edwards, which indicates that he was (consciously or not) avoiding anything which 
goes beyond the norms of rational inquiry that he cites. He clearly wanted to stay in 
familiar territory, with normal explanations and normal 'why' questions, rather than 

24 
The Problem of Existence 
imagining anything special or significant or transcendent. And it is likely that he 
wished to stay in familiar territory because of a fear of venturing outside. 
All that Edwards has shown is that the fundamental question violates the normal 
conditions under which 'why' questions can have answers. In fact, even this conclusion 
must be qualified, for he is only dealing with a specific class of 'why' questions, and 
these are treated crudely. Many of our normal answers to everyday 'why' questions 
take a teleological or evaluative form, which he does not consider. For example, 
when asked: 'Why do we drink milk?', it seems normal to reply: 'Because it is good 
for us'. This explains why something happens, but it does not necessarily presuppose 
that there are antecedent conditions which explain why it happens. It presupposes 
only that milk has value, that it is good to drink, and this does all of the necessary 
work of explanation. There are facts which explain why drinking milk is healthy, but 
they do not have to enter into the explanation of why we drink it, which can be 
constructed solely in terms of 'goodness for us'. This shows that he was thinking of 
normal explanations within empirical science, not normal 'why' questions in ordinary 
life, but it is not clear that the fundamental question is best answered within the 
context of empirical science. At least, this is something that would have to be carefully 
defended. 
In any case, even questions which have no answer at all, normal or otherwise, are 
not necessarily meaningless. And those which entice the intellect, which leap out of 
the domain of standard frameworks, do not have to be classified as nonsense. 
Extraordinary puzzles and situations transcend the conditions cited by Edwards, and 
may force us to think about explanation in different terms. So his claim that the 
fundamental 'why' question is unintelligible is not justified by his argument. 
Furthermore, the claim is unlikely to be defensible without the imposition of 
implausible restrictions upon what counts as a legitimate explanation. 
Edwards makes it clear that his rejection of this question is not based upon 'an 
empiricist meaning criterion or on any question-begging assumptions in favour of 
naturalism'. 8 Nevertheless, his dissolution of the problem has one feature in common 
with a logical positivist approach: he has argued, in effect, that it is irrational or 
inappropriate to feel that there is any deep significance or ultimate mystery about the 
existence of something instead of nothing. Since he begins his article by claiming 
that lack of clarity about the use of the word 'why' is responsible for confusion on a 
number of philosophical fronts, it would appear that he regards such feelings as 
confused. Yet even saying this much is an expression ofhis fear of indeterminacy. 
For in the context in which he is writing, it reveals his need to delimit the sense of the 
word 'why' in order to eliminate indeterminacy, and thus confusion, which is exactly 
the strategy he pursues. It can become emotionally necessary, when confronted with 
unsolvable riddles, to evoke whatever means are available in their dissolution. 
Otherwise one may end up in an unpalatable emotional state (such as 'confusion'), 
and this should be avoided if possible. Hence there is a detectable undertone of 
desperation and fear in the response that Edwards proposes. 
In drawing attention to the emotional underpinning of these defective responses to 
the question of existence, it may appear that I am merely rubbing salt into the wounds 
of their respective authors. But this is not the case. On the contrary, I believe that it is 
perfectly appropriate to feel desperation and fear in the face of this question, and to 
look around for an immediate solution which will relieve one's feelings. In fact, it is 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
25 
a little dishonest not to acknowledge that we are disturbed, and that we may tremble, 
when we confront the ultimate 'why' of existence. This is an essential aspect of the 
asking, and an essential prelude to the ultimate answer. Nevertheless these initial 
responses are defective, and their main defect is that they provide a simplistic formula 
for responding, instead of searching more deeply. As such, they can serve to halt the 
inquiry, but only temporarily. A more daring philosophical inquirer will not be daunted. 
Furthermore, the defects in these responses do not indicate that we must avoid what 
I have called a deflationary response. We ought to recognize that we can provide an 
appropriate response to the question of why anything exists by stating, within a more 
developed theory, that it is an unanswerable question. 
In literature and in psychology, it is often recognized that fear is a natural and 
inevitable aspect of human life in general. This is also true of the intellectual life, 
though it rarely appears because intellectuals rarely confront questions that lie on the 
extreme edges of philosophical inquiry. However, fear is a negative emotion and it 
can retard activity if it is not overcome. Exactly how to defeat it is difficult to say, but 
in the context of the fundamental question, we can do so first by admitting that, even 
if we think it nonsensical, it has a certain power over us, and inspires wonder. This is 
the kind of response proposed by Ludwig Wittgenstein. 
Wonder 
Aristotle said that philosophy begins with wonder, which implies that it is the first 
feeling to be confronted, appearing at the origin of our quest for wisdom. For 
Wittgenstein, on the other hand, it seems that wonderment comes much later, after 
the business of language and logic have been settled first. Furthermore, it seems that 
while philosophy can point to that which is wondrous, there is no way of giving it a 
name. In his magisterial early work, the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Wittgenstein 
distinguished between what can be said and what can only be shown. Indeed it is 
arguable that the main purpose of his book was to draw this distinction as clearly and 
fully as possible, so that the realm of the sayable, which depends upon and refers to 
the world of facts, would not be confused with the deeper oceans of non-factual, non-
linguistic significance. That which lies beyond the world, though it is awesome and 
mystical, and therefore has significance, cannot be made intelligible within the 
language of facts and states of affairs. He speaks of the existence of the world, which 
is 'unsayable', in the following passage: 
6.44 It is not how things are in the world that is mystical, but that it exists. 
6.45 To view the world sub specie aetemi is to view it as a whole - a limited whole. 
Feeling the world as a limited whole -it is this that is mystical. 
6.5 
When the answer cannot be put into words, neither can the question be put into 
words. 
The riddle does not exist. 
If a question can be framed at all, it is also possible to answer it. 9 
These propositions imply that the existence of the world is something about which 
we cannot sensibly speak. For it is mystical, and the mystical is beyond our words. It 
is that which lies beyond the world to which we can refer, and to speak of it is, in a 

26 
The Problem of Existence 
strict technical sense, to speak nonsense. The only appropriate way of dealing with it, 
at least as far as philosophy is concerned, is simply to pass over it in silence. 
These propositions also imply that all intelligible questions are circumscribed by 
the possibility of answers. Riddles cannot exist because they are questions without 
answers. Hence it seems that the fundamental why question, the question which asks 
for a reason that explains the very existence of the world, must be considered ill-
formed, or as something that cannot be framed at all, so that it is in some way 
unintelligible. This is because the question deals with the fact that there is a world at 
all, which is characterized in 6.44 as something mystical. Wittgenstein therefore claims 
that we can sense the mystery of existence, but we cannot intelligibly speak of it, not 
even to the point of asking for a resolution of the mystery. We may have a feeling of 
wonder, but it is directed at something nameless, something outside of the world 
which is nevertheless the wholeness of the world. It is to feel the world as a limited 
whole, but at the same time to recognize the idea of the limitless 'beyond' which 
contrasts with this. 
Insofar as it is correct to say that his view is that the question of why anything 
exists has no answer, Wittgenstein clearly elucidates a deflationary response. However, 
his resolution is not based upon the same feelings as the positions of Ayer and Edwards. 
There are two respects in which his perspective is significantly different, and offers 
an advance on a deflationary position that is based upon fear. Firstly, the sense in 
which he claims that the fundamental question is 'nonsense' is not the same. For 
Ayer, nonsense is merely a total lack of sense, and is thus equivalent to 
meaninglessness. But for Wittgenstein, the term does not have this connotation. Instead 
it denotes another kind of meaning, a kind that is not expressed in referential language 
but can be somehow 'shown'. As Barrett says, he might have used the term 
'inexpressible' to better explain his meaning. 10 
Secondly, the emotional response to the fact of existence which he enunciates is 
almost exactly the opposite of that which Ayer and Edwards take to be appropriate. 
For them, one can only look down on the metaphysical project, as one might look 
down on senseless graffiti. But for Wittgenstein, the nonsense to which metaphysics 
aspires is a way oflooking up towards a goal that is higher than language can describe, 
higher than anything which can be theorized. Wonder is the appropriate emotion 
precisely because we are wondering at the wholeness and the inexplicability of that 
which is undeniable and yet inexpressible. 
And yet, Wittgenstein definitely has a deflationary story to tell about the fundamental 
question. He does not dismiss it in the same way, but he does appear to claim that it 
has no answer. It is a 'riddle', and as such it cannot have an answer. This claim is 
based upon his conception oflinguistic meaning. He argued that all meaningful fact-
stating language can be circumscribed by the sense of atomic propositions, which are 
given meaning by referring to basic objects. Although he did not say anything more 
about these objects, it is clear from some ofhis remarks that they would be delineated 
by empirical science. As such, he seems to come awfully close to logical positivism, 
but in the end he maintains that we can see beyond the empirical world, even if we 
cannot say anything about what is out there. Proposition 6.41 explicitly says: 'The 
sense of the world must lie outside the world', which implies that there is a sense 
outside of empirical facts. It is in this context that he speaks of God, and of values, 
both of which deal with something outside of the world. But even though religious 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
27 
and ethical language is technically beyond the realm of significant referential discourse, 
and cannot express anything, 11 it is not wholly ineffective. It means something, but 
what it means we cannot say. 
Recognizing that we may wonder at the fact of existence, even if it must be counted 
as 'nonsense', can be a way of overcoming our fear of the incomprehensible. For it 
replaces a desperate urge to flee from our questioning with a deeper and wider 
appreciation of transcendent meanings. This is what Wittgenstein's philosophy 
suggests, although it is not clear that he is entirely correct in setting the limits of 
factual discourse exactly as he does. For example, it seems that 'something exists' 
should have some place within factual discourse, for it is a fact. I will return to this 
point later. 
Wittgenstein made an explicit connection between his views on metaphysics and 
ethics in his Lecture on Ethics, which was primarily an attempt to elucidate a sense of 
absolute value. The elucidation, however, took the form of a struggle to point to 
something inexpressible, and in the midst of this struggle, there is a discussion of the 
existence of the world. In this paper, he adapts his original position, for it is now 
wondering itself which appears nonsensical to him: 
Ifl say 'I wonder at the existence of the world' I am misusing language. Let me explain 
this: It has a perfectly good and clear sense to say that I wonder at something being the 
case, we all understand what it means to say that I wonder at the size of a dog which is 
bigger than anyone I have ever seen before or at any thing which, in the common sense of 
the word, is extraordinary. In every such case I wonder at something being the case which 
I could conceive not to be the case. I wonder at the size of this dog because I could conceive 
of a dog of another, namely the normal size, at which I would not wonder. To say 'I wonder 
at such and such being the case' has only sense ifl can imagine it not to be the case. In this 
sense one can wonder at the existence of, say, a house when one sees it and has not visited 
it for a long time and has imagined that it had been pulled down in the meantime. But it is 
nonsense to say that I wonder at the existence of the world, because I cannot imagine it not 
existing. I could of course wonder at the world round me being as it is. If for instance I had 
this experience while looking into the blue sky, I could wonder at the sky being blue as 
opposed to the case when it's clouded. But that's not what I mean. I am wondering at the 
sky being whatever it is. One might be tempted to say that what I am wondering at is a 
tautology, namely at the sky beinf blue or not blue. But then it's just nonsense to say that 
one is wondering at a tautology. 1 
Although this argument explicitly concludes that wondering at the existence of the 
world is 'misusing language', it must be balanced against the context in which he 
introduces his reports of this experience. Having distinguished between absolute and 
relative value, he claimed that a complete list of the facts about the world must fail to 
include any absolute ethicaljudgements.13 Ethics has a sort of supernatural meaning, 
and if we are tempted to use expressions such as 'absolute good', we must be expressing 
something that lies outside the world. He concludes, then, that we can try to express 
the meaning of these expressions by locating particular experiences in which we 
confront something absolute, and one of these experiences is the feeling of wondering 
at the world.14 In using this example Wittgenstein preserves a certain kind of sense 
for the feeling, although it is not the kind of sense that appears in factual statements. 
The absolute transcends the language offact. Although he insists that he feels wonder, 
he argues that saying this in words is a kind of nonsense. This does not mean that the 

28 
The Problem of Existence 
feeling itself is without meaning, for it is a response to something (the existence of 
the world) which shows itself but cannot be stated. Still there is something to which 
we are responding, for it is not just a figment of the imagination. 
The main problem with this position is that it apparently denies that there can be 
any appropriate reason for feeling the way we do. It combines the assertion of wonder 
with the denial that there is any basis for it. Wonder in this case is expressible only as 
a kind of nonsense, since it is directed at the truth of a tautology. This appears to 
entail a denial that it is possible to explain why it is appropriate to feel something 
extraordinary about the existence of the world, even when the feeling actually occurs. 
The sense of wonder is clearly significant for Wittgenstein, and he does not deny that 
it is appropriate. Indeed h~ uses it as part of his explanation for the sense of absolute 
ethical judgements, and suggests that it has a much greater significance than factual 
or scientific information. However, he fails to explain how something expressed in 
words, even if it is tautologous, can provoke feelings of wonder which are recognitions 
of the inexpressible. 
The value of Wittgenstein's position in the Lecture on Ethics is that it partially 
illuminates the status of the fundamental question of metaphysics, at least for the 
context of a deflationary response. In this respect it is an improvement on the positivist 
approach, for it acknowledges that there is depth in the asking of the question, while 
denying that it is a properly framed inquiry. Although he does not explicitly discuss 
the question itself, it is consistent with his view that the act of asking it may draw us 
into a confrontation with the absolute nature of existence, which is significant in the 
way that ethical and religious truths are significant. In fact, he admits to having an 
inclination to use the phrase 'how extraordinary that anything should exist', which is 
close to asking the question itself. Just as the propositions of the Tractatus are 
nonsensical in themselves, but may be used as a ladder which brings us to an 
appreciation of the mystical, so the fundamental question may bring us to wonder at 
the existence of the world, even while it remains a kind of verbal nonsense. 
Nevertheless, as Wittgenstein later acknowledged, the Tractarian theory of meaning 
is ultimately inadequate as an account of what language can do, and insofar as his 
position relies upon this theory, it is also inadequate. If the question of why there is 
something instead of nothing is to inspire wonder, then it must have some kind of 
verbally expressive meaning, because an understanding of the words themselves, 
however shaky it may be, is what gives rise to our feelings. It is because we can 
understand the words that Wittgenstein uses that we are able to understand the feeling 
of wonder that he tries to describe. If there were nothing verbal to understand at all, 
then he would not be able to use the example in the way that he does. We may therefore 
conclude that, far from proving that the fundamental question lacks meaning, the 
way that he uses this example illustrates the kind of meaning that it has, which is such 
as to evoke a sense of wonder. But we may also conclude that a satisfactory deflationary 
response cannot be completed with this position. It must become more theoretical. 
Thus the inadequacy of Wittgenstein's 'wondering at the world', when it is 
interpreted as a response to the fundamental question, is that he fails to explain why 
this response is reasonable. He claims that we are responding to nonsense, but he 
does not defend this assertion. In any case the proposition that something exists is not 
a piece of nonsense, even in his technical sense. It is a factual proposition, and it 
states a fact that is universally verified by experience and universally identified as 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
29 
part of our well-framed discourse. Furthermore, the proposition states a fact which 
can be put up for explanation, and the fundamental question asks for it. This is true 
even if ultimately we find that there is no explanation for it. Wittgenstein's only 
reason for thinking that there is something nonsensical about our wondering is that 
he considers 'Something exists' to be a tautologous proposition, which would mean 
that its 'explanation' is strictly formal. But even in this case it is not nonsensical to 
say that something exists, nor to ask why. Furthermore it is not correct to think that 
wondering at a tautology is necessarily nonsensical. He has no argument to show that 
this must be the case, and it does not appear to be the case phenomenologically. 
In fact the proposition does not appear to be a tautology at all, and he needs a 
stronger argument to establish that it is. Merely claiming that he cannot imagine the 
existence of nothing may be a peculiarity of his own mind, and in fact many others 
have made the opposite claim. The proposition that something exists appears to be a 
contingent truth, and its lacking an explanation is precisely what seems to inspire 
strange feelings such as fear, amazement, and wonder. Wittgenstein's thesis fails to 
recognize this, although he is correct in recognizing wondrous and mystical intuitions 
as appropriate in the context of addressing the fact of existence. 
Denying that Existence has a Rational Explanation 
A deflationary response which denies that the fundamental question is meaningful or 
denies that it can be well framed, adopts what is probably the most difficult strategy. 
It is a highly counter-intuitive stance. Asking why anything exists is an intelligible 
linguistic act, and any theory of meaning which denies this must be fighting an uphill 
battle. Language, as Wittgenstein realized in his later philosophy, is used in a vast 
number of contexts and can be significant in many different ways. Referring to the 
empirical world is only one of the ways in which we can mean something in our 
statements and inquiries. However, a deflationary response to the fundamental question 
does not have to be based upon a delineation of meaningful discourse. It can also be 
a response which acknowledges that the question is meaningful, and that the act of 
asking it is an intelligible act to which we can formulate a sane and lucid reply. But 
the deflationary theorist may claim, on the basis of a constructive theory, that the 
existence of the world has no rational explanation. This version of the deflationary 
response has also been called the 'brute fact view' by Derek Parfit.15 
The view that there can be no explanation for the fact of existence is not as simple 
as it might sound. It must be based upon a reason for thinking that no rational 
explanation is constructible, for otherwise it is arbitrary and irrational in itself. A 
defender of this view must argue that there are limits on what can be explained, and 
that the fact of existence lies beyond them. To establish this, one needs a constructive 
theory about the nature of reason, the ways in which rationality can be applied to 
phenomena which require explanation, and the limits of its applicability. 
The development of such a theory is a large-scale enterprise, and involves a number 
of complex considerations regarding the structure of rational explanation and the 
fields of inquiry in which reasoning can be effectively used to answer questions. 
When a general account of the nature of reason has been supplied, we may have 
grounds for concluding that the question of existence asks for something that cannot 

30 
The Problem of Existence 
be given a rational explanation. This will constitute a properly formulated deflationary 
response, but it will not be a formulaic (positivist) response that will deaden our 
feelings of amazement, astonishment, and awe. 
In fact the philosopher who has worked most sincerely to delineate the limitations 
of pure reason, Immanuel Kant, described himself as being 'filled with awe' .16 I will 
argue that this description is relevant to at least that part of his enterprise which 
constitutes the basis of a deflationary view of existence. The view that the existence 
of the world is a brute fact cannot be treated as something which, if it is true, is 
without deep significance. Kant recognized that, even though pure reason leads us to 
transcendental illusions, in that it demands to be extended beyond its proper domain 
of applicability, nevertheless this demand, and this yearning to go beyond, is a 
necessary feature of reason. It is an inescapable feature of our lives as rational beings 
that we should wish to know why, and that we should want to subsume the world as 
a whole. 
In seeking for the complete explanation, the totality of existence, we seek what is 
already implicitly promised by rationality. Although we may come to understand that 
it is impossible to capture the whole of reality, or make the entire series of' conditions' 
intelligible, it is not irrational to try, since we may be directed towards this goal in the 
legitimate, 'regulative' employment of the ideas of pure reason. 17 And even if we are 
ultimately defeated in our quest for completeness, we may be lead to a sense of awe 
in merely apprehending that there is an order within existence. I will argue that this 
kind of feeling is important, not as a side-affect or an irrelevant after-image, but as a 
significant manifestation and proper expression of the brute fact view of the universe. 
In other words, to claim that existence is a brute fact which cannot be given a rational 
explanation is to be awed by the fact. This is the case even if Kant himself did not 
supply a perfectly well-formulated deflationary position. 
Kant presented his philosophy as a critique of metaphysics itself, not just the 
fundamental question. He contended that the metaphysical project is essential as an 
aspiration but impossible as an achievement.18 History has not entirely borne this 
out. Although his impact has been enormous, many philosophers have argued that 
the details ofKant's arguments are flawed. This is particularly important with respect 
to the arguments he calls 'antinomies', since they are designed to illustrate exactly 
where reason runs up against limitations. In some cases the points that he makes have 
been refuted, or rendered questionable, by advances in physical science. In other 
cases, his assumptisms are internally flawed. As such the Kantian critical philosophy 
may not succeed in illustrating precisely how and where rational explanation reaches 
its appropriate limit, although it may indicate the 'rough edges' of pure reason. 
However, the partial success of the Kantian project does not entail that metaphysics 
itself has been refuted. On the contrary, there are many avenues for metaphysical 
thought to take beyond Kant, and some of them are replies to his position on rationality. 
In particular, there is another kind of deflationary response to the fundamental question 
which explicitly relies upon an 'extra-rational' approach to metaphysical thought. 
This is exemplified in the philosophy of Quentin Smith, whose work on the 'felt 
meanings of the world' 19 has deep implications for our understanding and appreciation 
of the fact of existence. The metaphysical system he developed should be counted as 
another version of the brute fact view, and I will argue that it represents a significant 
advance over the Kantian view, at least as regards its explicitness. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
31 
Hence in the remainder of this chapter I will consider two further formulations of 
the deflationary response, which may be summarized as follows: 
Rationality is limited to the realm of possible experience. Any question that asks 
for rational explanations which transcend possible experience asks for something 
inherently unattainable. The existence of the world, if it could be explained, would 
be explained by something that transcends experience. Thus it cannot be explained. 
(This is roughly Kant's view, although he was also a theist.) 
2 The existence of the world cannot be explained because 'the world as a whole' is 
a special entity which has no cause and therefore has no explanation. (This is 
roughly Smith's view, although it has much greater depth and complexity.) 
I will argue that Smith's position is ultimately a superior version of the deflationary 
response to the fundamental question, for two reasons. Firstly, Kant did not even 
address the question. His response must be extracted from his general conclusion 
about the limitations of pure reason. Furthermore, given that he was a theist it is not 
clear that he would actually agree that the existence of something instead of nothing 
is a brute fact. Secondly, the awe that Kant claims to feel at the order of the cosmos is 
better explained and expressed when it is incorporated into a general theory of felt 
meanings. Smith's theory does this, and does so in the context of explaining the 
nature of our other basic responses and feelings concerning the existence of the world. 
Kant's Theory of Pure Reason 
In his first major work, the Critique of Pure Reason (CPR), Kant developed a general 
theory of reason. It is fair to say that this was mostly an elaborate development of 
traditional Aristotelian logic, adapted and amended for application within the context 
of modem science. The theory is developed in two main parts. The first part is the 
constructive part, and it consists of what he calls the Transcendental Aesthetic and 
the Transcendental Analytic. In the former he argues that space and time are a priori 
forms of intuition, which means that they constitute the essential framework within 
which any perceptual experience must arise if it is intelligible at all. In the latter, 
Kant defines a system of categories or concepts, loosely based upon the Aristotelian 
system, which are intended to represent the a priori structure of thought, in the restricted 
sense of thought that arrives at propositional judgements. 20 
In other words, a judgement, which is something that can be true or false, must 
take one of the traditional forms of judgement. It must be universal, particular or 
singular, affirmative, negative or infinite, and so on.21 Each of these forms of 
judgements corresponds to one of the pure concepts of the understanding, listed in 
the system of categories. By compiling his list in this way, Kant has extended the 
Aristotelian logic of judgements to create a logic of representations, which can be 
applied to thought in general. He has thus developed a theory of the way that the 
mind uses pure reason to obtain legitimate synthetic a priori knowledge. 
He next proceeds to argue that the faculty of understanding is justified in using this 
system of categories to make judgements about the empirical world. This argument is 
known as the Transcendental Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding,22 

32 
The Problem of Existence 
and it represents Kantian philosophy at its most rigorous and sophisticated. The 
Transcendental Deduction starts with the basic presupposition of consciousness or 
mindfulness. This is the assumption that there is a series of representations (or ideas, 
or thoughts, or impressions), ordered in time. This is such a minimal assumption that 
even a hyperbolic sceptic of the Cartesian stripe would be forced to accept it. Kant 
then reasons that ifthere is a series of representations, it must be united by being the 
representations of a single mind. He calls this the transcendental unity of 
apperception. 23 He then argues that if there is a transcendental unity of this sort, it 
must presuppose that the representations in the series are themselves synthesized or 
unified prior to being recognized by the unity which apprehends them. This leads 
him to go back further into the various forms of synthesis in terms of intuitions, 
imagination, and concepts,24 each of which contributes something to the form of 
representations prior to their appearance in the understanding. 
After establishing this much, Kant uses this investigation of the presuppositions of 
representations in the understanding to argue that the understanding has the right to 
make use of pure reason, in the form of the Pure Concepts (that is, the categories) to 
make empirical judgements. Its internal form gives it the right to claim certain forms 
of a priori knowledge. The final result of this part of the Kantian argument is that 
pure reason is applicable to the realm of empirical judgement. Mathematics and basic 
physics are not accidentally applicable to the world we experience, for they represent 
the basic structure of intelligible experience, and as such will remain true in any 
coherent world in which representations are synthesized in the understanding (that is, 
in the mind). 
The Antinomies 
The second part of Kant's theory of reason is the critical part, and it is set out in what 
he calls the Transcendental Dialectic. In this section, he argues that there are certain 
limitations in the applicability of the categories, beyond which they fall into internal 
contradiction. From this position it follows that there are essential limits to rational 
explanation itself, due to the nature of pure reason. As such it is the argument of the 
Transcendental Dialectic which is most relevant to the formulation of a deflationary 
response to the fundamental question. Although the question is not itself addressed in 
this section, its claims are general enough to make the Kantian critical philosophy 
applicable. For he concludes that although the categories are applicable to the domain 
of 'possible experience', and thus appear to be applicable beyond the sphere of actual 
events, there are inherent problems in extending them in trying to answer questions 
concerning the nature of the world as a whole. 
Kant's theory of knowledge does not permit him to claim that we can actually 
obtain knowledge of the world as a whole. This is because knowledge requires the 
union of concept and perceptual intuition, so that anything about which we can know 
something must be presented to the senses and represented within the mind. But the 
whole of the world is so large that it cannot be captured in perception, and so all-
inclusive that it cannot be captured in a concept. Human knowledge does not extend 
as far as the whole. It works with parts of reality, and pieces them together step by 
step. Reason, however, appears capable of extending itself beyond the limitations of 
knowledge. Rationality is the normative aspect in making our judgements. It tells us 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
33 
how thought should proceed, but not how it does proceed. It deals with whether it is 
correct to infer one proposition from another, or whether one thing can explain another. 
As such, rationality has a normative force, and requires, in itself, a kind of universality. 
Reason seems to work everywhere, in every intelligible situation. It seems to be 
limitless and absolute, applicable to any possible judgement or question as long as it 
employs an intelligible concept. As such, it seems possible to construct a rational 
explanation for the whole of the world, since this appears to be something we may 
apprehend by using an intelligible concept. Kant is prepared to countenance this 
possibility, but in the end he argues (almost regretfully) that reason must ultimately 
fail in its approach to the whole. Nevertheless, he clearly acknowledges that this 
project, the project of complete explanation, is an essential part of the project of 
rationality itself. It is, he says, one of the demands of reason that there be an absolute 
totality, and the result of this demand is a transcendental idea, which exceeds the 
limits of the empirical: 
Reason does not really generate any concept. The most it can do is to free a concept of 
understanding from the unavoidable limitations of possible experience, and so to endeavour 
to extend it beyond the limits of the empirical, though still, indeed, in terms of its relation to 
the empirical. This is achieved in the following manner. For a given conditioned, reason 
demands on the side of the conditions - to which as the conditions of synthetic unity the 
understanding subjects all appearances - absolute totality, and in doing so converts the 
category into a transcendental idea. For only by carrying the empirical synthesis as far as 
the unconditioned is it enabled to render it absolutely complete; and the unconditioned is 
never to be met with in experience, but only in the idea. Reason makes this demand in 
accordance with the principle that if the conditioned is given, the entire sum of conditions, 
and consequently the absolutely unconditioned (through which alone the conditioned has 
been possible) is also given.25 
This passage effectively explains why it seems appropriate, even rational, to seek a 
rational understanding of the world as a whole. Since we are aware of conditioned 
entities and facts - that is, we are aware of contingencies in the empirical world 
which have a determinate form- we ought to be able to seek an absolute unconditioned 
which will explain why the conditioned things appear as they do. The sum of 
conditions, and the absolutely unconditioned, should be given together with the 
conditioned. Otherwise contingent facts appear as brute facts, which is unacceptable 
for a truly universal reason. However, Kant goes on to argue that a complete rational 
explanation of this kind runs into inherent difficulties. He selects four categories 
which 'necessarily lead to a synthesis of the manifold'26 to express his cosmological 
ideas, which correspond to the four titles of the categories of the understanding. These 
form the basis for the antinomies of reason, and they illustrate that it is completeness 
which reason seeks in its quest for ultimate explanation. 
He makes this explicit in his characterization of the cosmological ideas: there are 
ideas of absolute completeness of the 'Composition' of the given whole of appearances; 
in the 'Division' of a given whole in the field of appearance; in the 'Origination' of an 
appearance; and as regards 'Dependence of Existence' of the alterable in the field of 
appearance. 27 Hence there are four antinomies, dealing with the limits of the world 
in space and time, the composition of substances into simple parts, the problem of 
freedom and causal determination, and the existence of God. The first two antinomies 

34 
The Problem of Existence 
are 'mathematical', in that they deal with infinity, whereas the second two are 
'dynamical' in that they deal with causal dependence. They all have a relatively simple 
structure. Each is composed of a thesis and an antithesis, and both are demonstrated 
to be correct. At various points Kant makes use ofhis own epistemology in constructing 
the 'demonstrations', and in doing so he connects the critical and constructive parts 
of his endeavour. He also succeeds in pointing to substantial difficulties in the project 
of thinking about the limits of the world, even though his arguments are inadequate 
for various technical reasons. 
The first antinomy attempts to establish that the world has a beginning in time and 
limits in space (thesis), and also that there is no beginning to time and no limitations 
on space (antithesis). Each argument proceeds as a reductio ad absurdum. So, in first 
considering the thesis, if we suppose that the world has no beginning in time, then 
prior to the present moment an infinite series of events must have been completed. 
But no infinite series can be completed through successive synthesis, so the world 
must have a beginning in time. Similarly for space. If we suppose that it is unlimited, 
then we must think of successively synthesizing every part of it, which is impossible 
because the synthesis would never be completed. So the very thought of unlimited 
space is impossible, and we must conclude that the world must be spatially limited. 
These arguments establish the thesis. In next considering the antithesis, we suppose 
that the world has a beginning in time, but it then seems that it must have been preceded 
by 'empty time'. This appears to be a natural way of seeing it, but if there were an 
empty time, there would be nothing to give rise to the beginning of the world, so we 
must reject the notion and conclude that the world has no beginning in time. Similarly 
for space. If we are to think that it is finite, then it would be bounded by and related 
to empty space, but this is impossible. It is absurd to speak of being related to empty 
space, since this would be a relation to nothing, which would be no relation at all. 
Thus we must conclude that space is infinite, and has no boundaries. 
There are several problems with these arguments, and Kant's critics have elaborated 
each of them. For example, his proof of the thesis depends upon the premiss that an 
infinite series cannot be completed, which is incorrect. Even within the limitations of 
the mathematics and science of the eighteenth century, it is possible to conceive of an 
infinite series that is incomplete only at one end. So the series of events which is 
completed with the event of the present moment may be thought to be open-ended in 
the other direction, and thus infinite into the past. Another objection is that in his 
proof of the antithesis he fails to realize that space might be finite and yet unbounded, 
because it may be extended back onto itself, as the surface of a sphere is extended. 
This is an excusable fault because the possibility of finite unbounded space largely 
depends upon non-Euclidean geometry, and ultimately Einstein's theory of general 
relativity, for its proper articulation. Kant could know about neither, given his position 
in history. Nevertheless, there are other problems with his assertion that being related 
to empty space would be a relation to nothing, for he provides no ~ood reason for 
thinking that empty space cannot be taken as the term of a relation. 2 
Kant's first antinomy is the most explicit attempt to reveal the way in which pure 
reason encounters irreconcilable contradictions at the limits of the world. His second 
antinomy deals with the nature of corporeal substance, and although it also illustrates 
how reason encounters problems by attempting to go beyond that which can be 
experienced, it does not confront 'the limits of the world' quite as obviously. His 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
35 
resolution ofboth of these (mathematical) antinomies is the same, and in each case it 
is based upon the principles of his transcendental idealism. In essence he claims that 
reason errs in assuming that there is such a thing as 'the world as a whole' which 
exists in itself, independently of the mind. We are prone to the inevitable illusion that 
such a world exists because the mind applies the idea of an absolute totality to that 
which is only an appearance: 
Thus the antinomy of pure reason in its cosmological ideas vanishes when it is shown that 
it is merely dialectical, and that it is a conflict due to an illusion which arises from our 
applying to appearances that exist only in our representations, and therefore, so far as they 
form a series, not otherwise than in a successive regress, that idea of absolute totality which 
holds only as a condition of things in themselves. From this antinomy we can, however, 
obtain, not indeed a dogmatic, but a critical and doctrinal advantage. It affords indirect 
proof of the transcendental ideality of appearances - a proof which ought to convince any 
who may not be satisfied by the direct proof given in the Transcendental Aesthetic. This 
proof would consist in the following dilemma. If the world is a whole existing in itself, it is 
either fmite or infmite. But both alternatives are false (as shown in the proofs of the antithesis 
and thesis respectively). It is therefore also false that the world (the sum of all appearances) 
is a whole existing in itself.29 
If this statement was a complete account of Kant's resolution of all the antinomies, 
then it would be true to say that his position represents a deflationary doctrine. He 
would have argued that there is no rational answer to the fundamental question because 
the totality of the world is not something susceptible to rational explanation. The 
world, as the sum of all appearances, does not exist in itself, and therefore we cannot 
supply an explanation for its existence. This would have been the Kantian position, 
but in fact it is not. His position is considerably more complicated, largely due to the 
fact that he is a theist as well as a transcendental idealist. As a result, his conclusions 
about the mathematical antinomies are significantly different from his conclusions 
about the dynamical antinomies. 
The third antinomy argues on the one hand that there are two kinds of causality, 
one pertaining to the laws of nature and one pertaining to freedom, and on the other 
hand that there is no freedom and that all events are determined by the laws of nature. 
The fourth antinomy argues firstly that there is a necessary being which has caused 
the existence of the world, and secondly that there is no such being. Instead of claiming 
that these antinomies can be resolved by showing that each thesis and antithesis is 
false, all of them purporting to make claims about the world in itself, independently 
of our representations, Kant adopts a different approach. He remains committed to 
transcendental idealism, but claims that in these cases there is a way of representing 
both thesis and antithesis as true. He does this by invoking the distinction between 
phenomena and noumena - the first being the appearances of the world, the second 
being 'things in themselves'. Armed with this distinction, he can argue that if we are 
considering both the sensible world of phenomena and the intelligible world of noumena, 
then there must be two kinds of causality. If we are considering only the sensible 
world, on the other hand, then there is only one form of causality, and the world is 
determined by the laws of nature. Similarly with respect to the idea of a necessary 
existent: if we are dealing with both phenomena and noumena, then there is such a 
being, if we are only considering the phenomenal world, then there is no such being. 

36 
The Problem of Existence 
It is important for Kant's philosophy as a whole that the notion of free will and the 
notion of a necessary existent are preserved from the destructive effects of his theory 
of knowledge. Only thus can he defend the reality of God, freedom, and immortality 
within the context of the Enlightenment and the scientific revolution. By placing the 
cause of the world and the causation involved in free will into the noumenal realm, 
he can explain why they are not known empirically while consistently maintaining 
that they are real. 
However, there are difficulties in this doctrine. Kant claims that causation is one of 
the categories of the understanding, and as such it has application in the phenomenal 
realm, but does not apply to things in themselves. It thus becomes difficult to explain 
how God, as a thing in itself, can be the cause of the world's existence. Likewise if 
free will employs· a form of causation that is noumenal rather than phenomenal, the 
same kind of problem arises. This problem has been discussed at length by various 
commentators, 30 but a discussion of the details is irrelevant. It is enough to say that 
Kant may be saved from inconsistency on this score, though at some cost to clarity. 
Another more pertinent difficulty arises from his treatment of the fourth antinomy. If 
he does not deal with it by denying both thesis and antithesis, as he did in the case of 
the mathematical antinomies, then it would seem that both thesis and antithesis must 
be counted as valid arguments. This would mean that he would endorse the argument 
he presents for the thesis, that there is a necessary being. Yet this argument is clearly 
a version of the cosmological argument for the existence of God, which Kant criticizes 
at length later in CPR. Hence it seems that his doctrine is inconsistent- and worse, 
that pure reason does in fact have a means of obtaining knowledge about that which 
transcends the limits of possible experience. 
There is a reply to this objection, for in a sense it rests upon a misinterpretation of 
the text. Kant avoids the positive assertion that there are noumenal objects, and instead 
of claiming that there are things outside of space and time he talks about allowing the 
possibility that there are. The theses and antitheses of the dynamical antinomies, 
then, are not proven to be both true, but only shown to be compatible with each other, 
since we can interpret them as having a different scope. He says of the fourth antinomy: 
In these remarks we have no intention of proving the unconditionally necessary existence 
of such a being, or even establishing the possibility of a purely intelligible condition of the 
existence of appearances in the sensible world. Just as, on the one hand, we limit reason, 
lest in leaving the guiding-thread of the empirical conditions it should go straying into the 
transcendent, adopting grounds of explanation that are incapable of any representation in 
concreto, so, on the other hand, we limit the law of the purely empirical employment of the 
understanding, lest it should presume to decide as to the possibility of things in general, 
and should declare the intelligible to be impossible, merely on the ground that it is not of 
any use in explaining appearances. Thus all we have shown is that the thoroughgoing 
contingency of all natural things, and of all their empirical conditions, is quite consistent 
with the optional assumption of a necessary, though purely intelligible, condition; and that 
as there is no real contradiction between the two assertions, both may be true.31 
Reason thus leads us in two different directions: in the noumenal realm, to the idea of 
a necessary existent; in the sensible realm, to the idea of 'thoroughgoing contingency' 
in the world. This leads to the antinomy, but it can be resolved by carefully 
distinguishing the different domains. However, given that we limit reason so that it 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
37 
does not postulate a transcendent cause for the world, we must also limit the empirical 
employment of the concepts of the understanding so that it does not assert the 
impossibility of a necessary being. The latter would be a transgression of the 
phenomenal on the noumenal, and the former would imply that a necessary being 
could somehow be an object of experience. Pure reason, therefore, cannot lead us to 
the belief in God (although practical reason may do so), but neither can it obliterate 
the intelligibility of this belief. 
In some ways, Kant's critique of reason is exactly what is needed by a deflationary 
theorist. It shows that there are limitations to rational explanation, and defines these 
limitations in a well-motivated way, while demonstrating that reason does have a 
legitimate application within the sensible world that we know. At least part of his 
philosophy implies that, if the fundamental question looks beyond the realm of possible 
experience, then it asks for a rational explanation where none is available, for pure 
reason falters and ends in antinomies when it strays this far. Thus at least part of his 
theory explains why we should treat the question as unanswerable. However, another 
part of his theory suggests that there may be an intelligible answer to the question, 
although it will not take the form that rational explanation takes in the empirical 
domain. Instead the answer may lie in the postulate that there is a necessary existent. 
If there is a being whose existence is logically necessary, then the answer to the 
fundamental question is relatively simple. There is something instead of nothing 
because there is no possible alternative: it is logically necessary. Kant believed that 
this is the case, and he provided a rational argument for theism, based upon morality 
rather than 'pure reason', in his later works. 32 As a consequence, he cannot be 
considered as a perfect example of a deflationary theorist, for in the end his position 
supplies a necessitarian answer. His treatment of the dynamical antinomies is an 
indication that the critical philosophy embodies a profound incongruity, if not a sheer 
contradiction. On the one hand, he argues that reason is properly limited to the empirical 
domain, but he also claims that there is some sort of rational argument for the existence 
of God, which clearly lies beyond the empirical domain. Kant sought to circumscribe 
reason in order to make room for faith, but in the end he conceded a great deal to 
rationalism. 
KantianAwe 
Despite his retention of theism, it is clear that the inspiration for the critical philosophy 
ofKant lies in the development of the mechanical theory of nature. Whether or not it 
was Hume's scepticism which 'awoke' him, he clearly saw that the Newtonian 
paradigm posed a threat to our treasured ideas of freedom, selfhood, morality, and 
deity. Yet while he was motivated by an attempt to rescue these ideas from scientistic 
obliteration, he was also inspired by the vision of a mechanical cosmos, and the 
enormity of the universe that was being revealed by astronomy. Indeed, Kant was 
actively engaged in scientific astronomy, and formulated a (well-respected and largely 
confirmed) theory of the evolution of the solar system. It is not surprising, then, that 
one of the most quoted and most distinctive sentences that he wrote was: 'Two things 
fill me with awe: the starry skies above and the moral law within.' This appears on 
his epitaph, and some have claimed that it expresses the feeling underlying the whole 
of Kantian philosophy. 

38 
The Problem of Existence 
His sense of awe is relevant because it helps to explain the emotional significance 
of the deflationary perspective on the fundamental question. It does so even if Kant 
was not a perfect example of someone who held such a perspective, but only an 
approximation. For the feeling that we have in contemplating the world as a whole, 
particularly when we understand it as a limited whole, enclosed by reason or causation, 
is reflected in the attitude of a satisfactory deflationary approach. This is because the 
deflationary thesis is that the world is just there, as a brute fact. As such we are led to 
apprehend it (in some way) as a complete entity, and we become impressed with it, 
awed by it, because it stands so starkly before us. It is immense and incredible, and to 
think that it is an inexplicable totality, and that it is a brute fact that the world exists, 
naturally tends to provoke a dazed sense of bewilderment, astonishment, or 
stupefaction. Wittgenstein felt wonder at the existence of the world, even though he 
believed that the riddle of 'why' was nonsensical. Kant felt awe at the magnificence 
of the starry skies, even though he argued that a rational explanation for contingent 
existence was impossible, because the noumenal source of the world lies beyond our 
concepts. The deflationary approach in general, it seems, does not 'deflate' our 
emotions. 
Although Kant partly adopts a deflationary view of the question of existence, 
indicating that it is unanswerable because it exceeds the bounds of possible experience, 
this does not mean that it has become trivial or boring. He is 'filled with awe' at the 
starry skies, which means that he is awed at the thought of the enormity of the universe. 
Indeed it seems that what moves him so is the very closure and completeness of the 
natural world. It is contained within the bounds of reason, but this in itself makes it 
all the more magnificent and immense. The idea of the world as a whole is problematic, 
for this represents something for which we have no intuition; it is a 'cosmological' 
idea that lies beyond rational explanation. Yet this is also what gives rise to the 
extremities of feeling. 
Kant's final position, I have argued, does not represent a fully satisfactory 
deflationary response to the fundamental question. It is partly satisfactory, however, 
and it seems to have emerged, at least in its motivation, from a profound emotional 
state which fits the account that would result from a satisfactory response. Awe is 
fitting because it involves a recognition of the vastness of the question, as indeed it 
recognizes the enormity of the universe which for which we ask 'why'. This enormity 
is what occasions fear and desperation, but unlike these feelings, Kantian awe does 
not shrink back from the world. Instead this feeling involves a sense of standing 
before it and reaching up to it, and finding meaning in the wholeness of being. We 
may take another step in the same direction of feeling by considering a position 
which openly avows that the meaning of the world can be directly felt. Such a position 
can be formulated systematically, and it attains a much greater degree of adequacy by 
entirely rejecting the notion that there is or even could be a rational meaning. 
The Felt Meanings of the World 
The fundamental question of metaphysics asks why anything exists. A well-motivated 
deflationary response to this question refuses to answer it, but instead provides reasons 
for thinking that it cannot be answered. The responses ofWittgenstein, Edwards, and 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
39 
the positivists try to show that the question itself cannot be framed, and therefore that 
it is somehow meaningless or illegitimate. They confront severe difficulties in 
accounting for the manifest significance that it has. Kant's theory of pure reason 
represents only a partial response to the question. He allows that there is a God, 
which would then provide an answer to the question directly on a necessitarian basis, 
for God is a necessary existent. A completed deflationary response must defend the 
claim that everything in the world exists contingently, and therefore that existence is 
a brute fact. This alone will guarantee that there is no rational explanation to be 
found. When this doctrine is combined with an account of the affective responses 
appropriate to such a position, it may be deemed adequate. Without such an account, 
there will always be a residual feeling that there are avenues for pursuing an answer, 
and thus for responding to the question itself, instead of 'deflating' it. 
Quentin Smith has provided the most extensive and solidly argued deflationary 
response to the fundamental question. In his book The Felt Meanings of the World, he 
defends a view of the world as a whole (the 'world-whole') which explains why there 
can be no explanation for its existence, and also explains how this can be appreciated. 
In addition, he defends a novel approach to metaphysical thought in general, which is 
based upon feelings rather than reasons, and outlines the basic felt meanings of the 
world. In what follows I will argue that his view represents an adequate deflationary 
response to the fundamental question. There are three main reasons for thinking that 
this is the case. Firstly, he provides an historical account of the 'metaphysics of reason' 
which explains the deficiencies of rational approaches to the question. In effect, this 
constitutes a theory of reason, but one which specifically addresses the fundamental 
question. He explicitly addresses the problem and elucidates a strong case for the 
view that there is no rational explanation for the existence of something instead of 
nothing. In this endeavour, he also relies upon an account of the way that certain 
appreciations, which are apprehensions of the world-whole, are possible. 
Secondly, he provides a critique of the inadequate deflationary views of the 
positivists, Wittgenstein, and Kant. This critique helps to show that his own view is 
the natural completion of the deflationary response that has been only partially 
developed by these thinkers. Rather than relying upon a 'transcendental dialectic' to 
show that pure reason is confronted with contradictions as it circumnavigates the 
world as a whole, he argues that we can directly apprehend the whole, and elucidates 
intuitions of its fulfillment, contingency, closeness, and supremacy. Thirdly, this 
critique is itself part of a larger picture of the. felt meanings of the world, which 
constitutes a constructive account of our affective responses to existence. This is the 
most important reason for concluding that his response is an adequate one, for within 
this larger picture, he is able to account for a range of responses to different aspects 
of the world-whole, including the negative and pessimistic feelings expressed by 
philosophers such as Arthur Schopenhauer and Jean-Paul Sartre.33 
In arguing for the adequacy of this deflationary view, I am not claiming that it is 
correct. It is important for my ultimate answer to the fundamental question that some 
version of this thesis is viable, but this is not equivalent to an actual endorsement of 
its truth. Smith's position represents an appropriate way of responding to the question 
by avoiding its apparent presupposition that there can be a rational explanation for 
existence. However, his main argument to show that existence is a brute fact is open 
to question, and a necessitarian answer is not entirely excluded. The necessitarian 

40 
The Problem of Existence 
kind of answer is the subject of my third chapter, but it is important to understand 
exactly why it is not ruled out by the argument that Smith employs. His position 
forms only part of the ultimate answer to the question. 
The Metaphysics of Reason and the Metaphysics of Feeling 
Smith begins his book with a characterization of metaphysics itself, and a historical 
account of its development. He states that metaphysics is the study of the meaning of 
the world as a whole,34 and delineates three forms in which this study can be 
undertaken. Firstly, there is the metaphysics of rational meaning. This endeavours to 
provide an answer to the question of why the world exists by supplying a rational 
explanation. Traditionally, the explanation has taken the form of a specification of 
the first and the final reasons for the world. That is, the first reason or cause of the 
world is taken to be God, and the final reason or purpose of the world is understood 
as goodness (the world was created by God for the purpose of realizing goodness).35 
Smith traces this traditional theory back to ancient philosophy, and notes that it was 
developed in various ways by Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Boethius, and many others. 
He claims that Leibniz clarified the theory greatly, as he argued that the first and final 
reasons are connected in a circular manner. This means that the final reason, which is 
man's happiness, consists in knowing the first reason, God, and that God in tum 
causes the world for the sake of man's happiness. 36 Finally he asserts that, after a 
period of scepticism in which the basis of the theory was undermined by David Hume 
and others, the last figure in the philosophical epoch of rational meaning was G.W.F. 
Hegel, who completed its details by deducing everything in the world from the first 
reason, which he characterized as the Absolute.37 
The second form of metaphysics elucidated in Smith's history, which arose after 
the decline of the epoch of rational meaning, is characterized as the metaphysics of 
rational meaninglessness. This constitutes the central tenet of the present epoch, and 
its manifestations are not exclusive to philosophy. Smith argues that various changes 
in culture and science, including the emergence of unrhymed and asymmetrical poetry, 
atonal music, non-representational art, evolutionary theory and indeterministic 
quantum physics, all express a general disbelief in God and teleology. 38 In philosophy, 
the theory of rational meaninglessness is represented by logical positivism, 
phenomenology and atheist existentialism. Most philosophers of the present age are 
atheists in any case, whether or not they belong to these movements, and a variety of 
powerful arguments have been advanced in contemporary times to show that the 
very idea of a necessary existent is incoherent. This is an indication that the metaphysics 
of rational meaninglessness is indeed one of the characteristic doctrines of 
contemporary thought. 
Smith characterizes the basic tenet of this theory as the thesis that 'there is no 
knowable reason that explains why the world exists and has the nature it does'. 39 He 
also says that he does not wish to challenge this thesis, and he accepts the reasoning 
that lead to this conclusion. However, he is concerned to criticize the associated doctrine 
that a meaning of the world can only be a rational meaning. He seeks to construct a 
new form of metaphysical theory on the basis of 'felt' meanings, which are not reasons. 
Before examining the details of this new approach, it should be noted that Smith 
uses a particular example of the argumentation that leads to the conclusion that the 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
41 
notion of a necessary being is incoherent. In fact it seems that this example is a 
crucial part of his own position, for he uses an extended version of the same reasoning 
(later in the book) to establish that the existence of the world-whole is contingent. So 
it is worthwhile to clarify exactly what is being argued. In his introduction, he cites 
P.F. Strawson as the source of this argument, but suggests that it is part of a general 
trend. He says: 
According to Strawson, the concept of a necessary existent analytically includes the concept 
of existence, which is equivalent to saying that the concept of a necessary existent analytically 
entails its own instantiation. But this is an incoherent notion, for a concept can analytically 
entail only another concept, and cannot be related in such a way to its own instance(s).40 
Later in the book, he elaborates on this deduction in relation to the feeling of marvelling 
at the world-whole's miraculousness. Given the truth of its premiss, that concepts 
can analytically entail only other concepts, the argument establishes that the concept 
of a necessary being is incoherent. This appears to demonstrate that the very idea of 
God, as traditionally conceived, is also incoherent. In fact, it is supposed to show that 
there was no way of 'conceiving' of God in the first place, for the concept itself 
makes no sense. Hence, he concludes, the metaphysics of rational meaning rests 
upon a mistake. 
The third form of metaphysical theory that Smith outlines is his own, and it is 
called the metaphysics of feeling. He first argues that the metaphysics of rational 
meaninglessness is mistaken, not because it denies that there is a rational meaning to 
the world but because it cannot see that there are any other forms of meaning. It relies 
upon a rationalist theory of feelings according to which feelings are just 'inferior 
versions of reason', 41 and this is incorrect. He claims that it is possible to understand 
feelings in terms of themselves, rather than in terms of cognitive functions, and this 
allows us to enter into a new perspective on the world as a whole. Indeed, it allows us 
to feel the meanings of the world. While the relation of reasoning to the world is 
explanative, so that the world is regarded as an explanandum, something to be 
explained, the relation of feeling to the world is radically different. It is appreciative. 
The world is understood and appreciated, within the perspective of feelings, as 
something that is important.42 He explicitly claims that an appreciation of the world's 
importance involves a kind of awareness, and this results in a sensuous pleasure or 
pain that redounds from the importance itself. 
Smith claims that the world is full of 'importances'. Every thing that exists is 
important in some way to us, even if it only has a small importance relative to other 
things. These importances are things we can feel, and they can be classified in terms 
of their 'tonalities'. He goes on to argue that 'some feeling-tonalities are felt to flow 
from meanings of the world as a whole. •43 The felt meanings of the world, then, 
emerge from properties of the world-whole. Smith has an extensive list of these felt 
meanings, all of which are responses to the world-whole, as it is apprehended in the 
depths of contemplation. He also has an argument to show that it is possible to 
apprehend the whole of the world, although it seems otherwise because it is so 
immense. The world-whole can be allowed to emerge in contemplation, which is 
distinct from a rational or analytical form of understanding that separates and 
distinguishes specific entities. It emerges from the horizon and 'swells into the 

42 
The Problem of Existence 
foreground', and in doing so it overwhelms all mundane importances. In his own 
words: 
An omnidirectional intuiting displaces the unidirectional intuiting as the centre of my 
experiencing. I open myself primarily to that which is omnipresent. This means neither that 
I am lost in a distinctionless simplicity nor that I am singling out each thing that exists, but 
rather that I am directed to the one omni-apparent whole of which each thing partakes. I am 
singling out a few world-parts, but they are being appreciated primarily in regard to their 
feature of partaking ofthe omnipresent whole.44 
The metaphysics of feelings is developed in great detail. It rejects the supposition 
that there is a reason for existence, especially when it is construed as the idea that 
there is a cause for the world-whole. Since we are able to appreciate the world through 
holistic contemplation, we must appreciate it as a brute fact. Nevertheless, Smith is 
adamant that this does not entail that we must see existence as meaningless. On the 
contrary, he argues that the absence of an ultimate purpose, reason, or value to the 
world-whole is itself one of the ways in which the world-whole is important. In feelings 
such as boredom (at the world-whole's monotonousness) and despair (at the world-
whole's purposelessness) we are aware of the nature of existence. However, he also 
claims that we are more genuinely and directly aware of the fact of existence in 
feelings such as joy, marvelling and awe, which form the basis ofhis theory. 
Smith does not employ a general theory of reason to argue that the fundamental 
question has no rational answer, although to some extent a conception of reason is 
implicit in his work. Rather than relying upon a general theory, he claims that the 
metaphysics of rational meaning, which attempts to answer the question using causes 
and purposes, has failed. He argues that it has failed primarily because it has attempted 
to assert something incoherent, namely that there is a first cause which explains the 
existence of the world. Another reason is that there have been scientific developments 
and events in the general culture which have made belief in a first cause far less 
plausible. This failure strongly suggests that there is no cause, and thus no reason, for 
the world. It just exists, as a brute fact. Most importantly, he claims that we can feel 
that it is a brute fact, and appreciate the importance of this. He also argues that there 
is no purpose to the existence of the world, so the fundamental question cannot be 
answered with a teleological response either. Thus he has provided a complete account 
of why the fundamental question cannot be answered. It asks for an explanation for 
something that cannot be given a rational explanation. In fact, he has argued that it is 
inappropriate to ask for an explanation, although it is appropriate to appreciate the 
fact of existence in specific ways. Thus his exposition appears to represent an adequate 
deflationary account of existence, whether or not his main argument effectively 
establishes its conclusion. 
Smith s Critique of Wittgenstein and Kant 
Another indication of the adequacy of Smith's account is contained in his treatment 
of less adequate deflationary positions. This illustrates the extent to which he has 
completed the deflationary project with respect to its earlier incarnations. In particular, 
his remarks on Wittgenstein are intended to show that there may be a sense to 
wondering at the existence of the world which exceeds the limits of rational meaning. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
43 
Although he does not explicitly deal with the Kantian version of the deflationary 
response, he uses arguments from the Critique of Pure Reason as part of his case 
against the existence of a necessary being, and constructs a more complete theory to 
explain why the question of existence has no rational answer. He also incorporates 
the intuition of 'awe' into his positive theory. Much of his argument depends upon 
treating the idea of the world-whole very seriously, and in this respect he transcends 
Kant's attempt to show that pure reason is limited to the domain of possible experience. 
According to Smith's interpretation, the early philosophy ofWittgenstein is a prime 
example of the metaphysics of rational meaninglessness. The conclusion of the 
Tractatus is that the reason for the existence of something instead of nothing must lie 
outside of the world. The sense of the world is that which makes it nonaccidental, and 
it must lie outside of the world since everything within the world is accidental. Because 
this is so, and because meaningful language necessarily refers to things within the 
world, the ultimate reason for existence is necessarily inexpressible: it is therefore a 
kind of nonsense. Smith argues that Wittgenstein accepted many of the premisses of 
the metaphysics of rational meaning. For example, he accepted that the sense of the 
world must be a reason, and that the reason for the existence of things cannot be 
found in the series of conditions that are within the world. He also accepted that what 
makes the world nonaccidental must be an unconditioned reason which entails the 
existence of the world as a necessary consequence. 45 However, the distinctive element 
ofWittgenstein's early philosophy is the conclusion that the reason or reasons (God 
and value) for existence are absolutely inexpressible. They are therefore cognitively 
unavailable, and utterly unknowable. Although the later Wittgenstein was to qualify 
this claim in certain respects, maintaining instead that religious language makes sense 
to believers, at least, because they share in a certain form of life, the idea that the 
sense of existence cannot be intelligibly spoken is retained. 
Smith's main criticism of this position is that it is half-hearted. Wittgenstein assumes 
that there is a reason for existence, but argues that it cannot be expressed in language. 
It is literally nonsensical, or it lies beyond our linguistic and cognitive resources. 
Why not go all the way, and say that there is no reason at all? This does not necessitate 
a denial that the world has a meaning. It may be that the meaning of existence is 
something that we can feel, and something that we can express in the language of 
feelings, rather than being rational. Smith is not entirely critical of the Wittgensteinian 
position. He acknowledges that there is an expression of appreciative feeling in the 
Lecture on Ethics, where the raising of the question of existence is identified with a 
feeling of wonder. Clearly this is a better approach to the question than outright 
dismissal. But at the same time, it seems that in this lecture, Wittgenstein is concerned 
with the fact that existence is 'extraordinary' only because it can be interpreted as 
pointing beyond the world to an absolute value. He is not concerned with the feeling 
of wonder itself, as an experiential fulfillment or an appreciative comprehension of 
reality. As Smith says: 
Wittgenstein failed to realize that he could, from a different perspective, have interpreted 
the extraordinariness of the world's existence as a felt meaning of the world, and the wonder 
as an appreciation of this meaning. By interpreting them as pointing to a God and Goodness, 
he revealed that he was interested in them only from the viewpoint of a metaphysics of 
reason.46 

44 
The Problem of Existence 
This is an acute criticism. It helps to explain the peculiarity ofWittgenstein 's position. 
To claim that one feels an extraordinary emotion the expression of which is literal 
nonsense is itself a bizarre claim, but if the real concern is the rational rather than the 
felt meaning of existence, this makes more sense. We can see how Wittgenstein was 
struggling to emerge from the metaphysics of rational meaning, and express the 
unknowability of the ultimate. At the same time, it seems that he did not entirely 
succeed in articulating this. Indeed, what he did articulate was a glimpse at a different 
kind of sense. He almost arrived at a satisfactory deflationary view, but in the end this 
was thwarted by a background presumption in favour of reason. It thus becomes 
clear that, in as far as Smith moves on to articulate the sense of wonder at the world, 
and to develop descriptions of other appreciations of felt meanings, he has a more 
complete response to the fundamental question. It is a response which explains why 
there is no rational answer, without denying the magnitude of the fact which is put 
into question. 
It can also be argued that Smith's deflationary view is a completion ofthe Kantian 
approach. At least in the mathematical antinomies, the thesis that the world as a 
whole is beyond rational explanation was approximated. It was not a completed 
doctrine, however, because Kant left room for the idea that a necessary existent, God, 
may be the cause of the world. In Smith's system of felt meanings, there is no room 
for a necessary existent, and in fact he argues that it is possible to directly apprehend 
the contingency of existence. 
The world-whole is the whole of all existents, other than itself. Although the world-
whole exists, it is not a part of itself,47 but it includes within itself all of the world-
parts which exist. Given this understanding of the notion of 'world', it follows that 
God, if he exists, must be only a part of the world. He cannot be the whole, for that 
would mean that there is nothing in the world other than God, which contradicts the 
fact that there are non-divine entities. Yet if God is only a part of the world, then he 
cannot be counted as the greatest existent, the most supreme and all-inclusive being 
that there is. At least one being is greater: the world as a whole, which includes God 
as well as all the other entities. This has a paradoxical flavour to it, which Smith 
exploits at various points in his argument. 
He claims, for example, that God, if he exists, is less important than the unrestricted 
whole that is the world.48 For there are other importances to consider in addition to 
God, and the whole composed of God and these others must be more important than 
either in isolation. If this is correct, it is a strong indication that the very idea of the 
deity is incoherent. Ifwe take StAnselm's conception of God as 'that than which no 
greater can be conceived' seriously, then he is either identical with the world-whole, 
or we can conceive of something greater than God, which means that the very idea of 
the deity is inconsistent. If he is identical with the world-whole, then he cannot be the 
cause of the existence of the world-whole, for that would mean that he is self-caused, 
as Spinoza believed. This would eliminate the notion of contingency, and in any case 
it is incoherent in itself. As Smith says: 'ln order for God to receive His existence 
form Himself, He must not possess existence apart from the existence He receives. 
But He does possess existence apart from the existence He receives, viz., He possess 
existence in respect of His act of giving Himself existence. •49 In either case, the 
traditional notion of God as the creator of the world and as the greatest conceivable 
being, must be abandoned. If there is any being which fits the description 'that than 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
45 
which no greater can be conceived', then it cannot be an existent thing, for any such 
thing must form only a part of the greater world-whole. As such, theism must either 
abandon this description of God, or abandon the idea that God is a 'thing' (many 
theists opt for the latter). 
In rejecting the existence of God, Smith embraces the ultimate contingency of the 
world. At the same time, his position helps to show that Kant was right to be filled 
with awe at 'the starry skies above' rather than the deity. For this really means that he 
was in awe at the immanent whole of existing things, at the vastness of the universe 
rather than any transcendent being. As the whole is larger and greater than any of its 
parts, and as the world-whole is the most immense, most all-inclusive whole that 
exists, we ought to feel that it is more awesome than any divine thing which it contains. 
In fact Smith regards it as not merely significant and appropriate to feel awe, he also 
argues that this feeling is a direct intuitive appreciation of one of the features of the 
world. Awe is a recognition of the immensity of the world-whole, and he describes 
this feeling-sensation as a 'shuddering back from and below' at apprehending the 
most immense existent that there is. 50 The flow of this feeling correlates to the tonal 
flow of the world, which appears as 'towering above and swelling over me'. 
Global awe is a feeling which appreciates the immensity of the whole world, whereas 
mundane feelings of awe are appreciations of world-parts which are immense relative 
to our earthly perspective. It has a different character because its object is the greatest 
object that there is, something whose extension can barely be imagined. And yet, the 
feeling ofbeing globally awestruck must emerge out of a process of imagining and 
appreciating wholes that lie within the world. Smith claims that it originates in a 
perceiving-feeling of an immense whole such as a mountain range, an ocean, or a 
star-spangled sky, something which 'constitutes the whole of my hued environment'. 51 
Thus it begins with the Kantian emotion, the feeling of standing before the night sky 
and appreciating that all of this magnificence is just part of the whole universe. It is 
'but a part of an expanding hierarchy of greater and greater wholes that ultimately 
terminate in an absolutely immense whole' .52 The imagination then strives to leap 
beyond this viewpoint, and incorporate the larger and more immense wholes, always 
keeping each part intact. Eventually, the imagination is overwhelmed, and can go no 
further, at which point the absolute immensity of the world-whole is directly intuitively 
felt. 
This description ofhow we may come to feel the immensity of the world is part of 
Smith's epistemology of felt meanings. It is designed to allow the reader to come to 
the appreciation that it describes, by using words which express the sense of being 
captivated. We must be captivated by the all-inclusive character of the whole if we 
are to appreciate it by feeling global awe. However, Smith argues that awe is an 
impure appreciation of the existence of the world. This means that it is a derivative 
feeling, for it depends upon a more fundamental appreciation, that of joy. He says 
that the importance of absolute immensity is comprised of two features, the world's 
all-inclusive greatness, and its happening, which is equivalent to its existing. If these 
two features were not present in our apprehension - for example, if we fantasized 
about some nonexistent all-inclusive whole or if we were not aware of the all-
inclusiveness of the whole, then we would not feel global awe. 53 
His system is constructed on a basic felt meaning, which he characterizes as joy at 
the fulfillment of the world. This is the basic meaning because it is a direct apprehension 

46 
The Problem of Existence 
of the existence of the world, the being-there of something. In feeling joy in this way, 
we apprehend that something truly exists, but we do not thereby comprehend it as 
something with a rational meaning, or with an ultimate explanation. On the contrary, 
according to Smith we can also appreciate the world as miraculous, a feature which 
entails that its existence is contingent, and thus rationally inexplicable. His exposition 
of these two features, fulfilment and miraculousness, constitutes the essence of his 
deflationary answer to the fundamental question. 
Joy and Marvelling as Felt Meanings 
The fact that something exists, that there is a world instead of nothing, is something 
that we appreciate before we truly understand it. It enters our awareness, and suddenly 
we stand before the world. We form an intuitive feeling about the world before we 
come to ask the question of 'why', and this feeling may shape the structure of our 
inquiry, if we ever come to it. Smith argues, in fact, that our basic appreciation of the 
world itself contains the seeds of the answer. He claims that we can come to understand 
that the 'why' has no answer, that there is no reason at all for the world, by analysing 
our intuitive feelings about the world. But how can we describe our basic appreciation 
of the fact of existence? With what words can we relate this sense of confronting the 
world as a whole, in respect of its being existent? We must call forth our original 
attending to the fact, and give voice to the sense of fulfilment that it brings. For 
example: 
I am sitting on a veranda on a summer afternoon, watching the trees as they sway gently in 
the sunlight. My awareness gradually broadens and deepens, and soon a joy begins to arise 
in me, a rejoicing in the fulfillment of the very world that is composed of myself, these 
swaying trees, this blue sky, and the indistinctly manifest 'everything else' that extends 
beyond all that I am perceiving. In this rejoicing I am experiencing a captivated intuition of 
the determinately appearing importance of global fulfillment. 54 
Smith uses the term 'fulfilment' to describe that feature of the world which is its 
existence. This is not intended to be a neutral description. It is supposed to present 
the fact that there is a world here and now as a fact with which we can become 
captivated, and towards which we ought to feel a joyful appreciation. He claims that 
the global importance of fulfilment is indeterminately revealed in the mood of euphoria, 
but determinatelyrevealed in the global affect of rejoicing. This reveals the happening 
of the world to be the constitution of fulfilment. 
A number of characteristics of global rejoicing are listed in the text to clarify what 
is intended. Firstly, the global affect of joy is essentially a feeling of fulfilment, which 
apprehends the world as something which has what it needs to be fulfilled, to be 
something rather than nothing, full rather than empty. This is what global joy rejoices 
in: the fact that something is there, that there is not nothing but instead a fulfilled 
something, a world. As Smith says, 'The world-whole is intuitively felt to be a plenum, 
a fullness, a positivity.'55 He is clearly asserting that at the most basic level, our 
comprehension of the fact of existence is not a neutral act of merely noticing that 
something is the case. It is rather a recognition of a positive fact, for which joy is 
called. Even if we think of existence in the most abstract terms, for example as a non-
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
47 
empty set, this is appreciated as something fulfilled as a whole, and thus it is an 
occasion for rejoicing. It is especially so because the non-emptiness of the world-
whole includes ourselves. 
Further features are added to this characterization. The joy in existence is a feeling 
that the fulfilment is 'possessed completely and all at once', as opposed to being 
possessed in stages or being gradually acquired. The world is there before us, as a 
fulfilled whole, without needing anything in addition to what it already has. A third 
characteristic of the feeling of global joy is that in feeling it, we are able to live fully 
in the present, and thus to feel the fullness of the moment as it happens. Normally we 
strive to achieve things that await us in the future, but with global joy, we have the 
sense that existence is an achievement now, needing nothing more, complete and 
perfect in its present state. This experience is not unknown to mystics, who also 
speak of the 'eternal present'. In fact it is a familiar feeling in the lives of many who 
have come to appreciate existence as it is, without wishing for a greater tomorrow. In 
such a state, we are relaxed and 'at one with the world', for we are no longer striving, 
we are just existing. Smith sums up the feeling of global joy as 'an intuitive feeling of 
the world-whole completely and all at once possessing the fulfillment of being 
present'. 56 
It is important to understand the significance of this description as a whole, for 
there are several aspects worthy of note. Firstly, Smith is a realist about feelings. He 
believes that they veridically reveal actual features of the world-whole, and are not to 
be dismissed as merely subjective reactions. Feeling-sensations are forms of direct 
awareness, and in the case of global joy, he claims that we are aware of the 'fulfilled 
global interior' of the world itself. Appreciation is a form ofknowledge, and he even 
argues that there is a method of metaph~sical knowing which is based upon our ability 
to directly sense a meaningful whole. 7 
Secondly, fulfilment, on this view, is the meaning of existing. Smith claims that it 
is both the referent of the term 'existing' and the felt meaning, the significance or 
importance that existing has. This is partly elucidated through the notion ofhappening 
- to exist is to happen - and partly through the notion of 'positivity'. He says that the 
word 'fulfillment' is an evocative expression for which 'happening' or 'existing' is a 
more exact expression. 58 The reason that he consistently uses evocative language to 
describe the felt meanings of the world is that this is an accurate expression of what 
is felt. Neutral or technical terms are inadequate to capture the felt significance of 
existing, but they can be used to elucidate these meanings in order to make them 
conceptually explicit. Because existence is a positivity, a fullness rather than an 
emptiness, we appreciate it with a sense of global joy: 'It can be truly said in an 
evocative manner that existing is the fullness of which nonexisting is the privation; 
existinf is the positivity of being, of the Is, that is lacked by nonbeing or the Is 
Not. '5 In this intuition, the plenitude of existing is felt, and it is a pure appreciation 
of the fact of existence. The term 'pure' is intended literally. It means that only 
fulfilment is felt in this case: no other feature of the world is intuited by global rejoicing. 
Other feelings are impure appreciations of fulfilment, because they presuppose the 
appreciation of joy. 
One of the impure appreciations of existence is the feeling he calls 'global 
marvelling'. This is an apprehension of the miraculousness of the world-whole, which 
is the feature of existing contingently. It is a feeling-sensation which has a feeling-

48 
The Problem of Existence 
flow of being intensely impelled backwards (taken aback) and 'held in an astonished 
suspense' .60 In global marvelling, I stand before the world dazzled and stunned. I am 
confronted and captivated by the fact that even though the world could not exist, it 
does exist, and it continues to exist at each moment. It is logically possible, on this 
view, for the world to suddenly disappear in the next instant, but miraculously, it does 
not. Comprehending that this is so is an occasion for astonishment or marvelling. 
Everything might cease to exist, but it does not. The nonnecessary existence of the 
world is then directly appreciated in our feelings, and it is described in evocative 
terms as a miracle. 
Global marvelling is an impure appreciation of the world which presupposes global 
joy, although not in a psychological sense. This is relatively clear because, as Smith 
says, happening is an aspect ofhafipening nonnecessarily, but happening nonnecessarily 
is not an aspect of happening. 1 He has a conceptually explicit argument for the 
contingency of existence, which is complicated but not incoherent. The central claim 
is that existing cannot be a part of the conceptual content of the world-whole, or 
anything else, including the concept of God. He follows Kant here (in the critique of 
the ontological argument), and elucidates the view that we cannot determine whether 
a concept has an actual reference without looking at the empirical world: 
If happening or existing necessarily inhered in the world-whole, it would be an analytic 
part of the content of the concept of the world-whole; it would be analytically true that 'the 
world-whole exists' ... But it is evident that existing cannot be a part of the conceptual 
content of the world-whole ... For assume that existing were such a part; the concept of 
'existing' would be a part of the concept of the world-whole, it would be a real predicate of 
the world-whole. But this 'existing' qua real predicate of the world-whole must be different 
from the world-whole's existing itself, which is not a real predicate. For I could ask ofthis 
concept of which 'existing' qua real predicate is a part: Does it have a reference, does it 
refer to something that is existing? I am here asking in part if the 'existing' that belongs to 
the conceptual content refers to an existing beyond the concept, or if the conceptual content 
has no referent. This signifies that if 'existing' is a part of the world-whole's concept, this 
does not entail that the world-whole exists, for the entire concept of which 'existing' is a 
part could fail of reference. A concept cannot entail its own reference, for a concept includes 
or entails only the real predicates that comprise its content; and since reference is not a part 
of the conceptual content, but a nonreal predicate of it, reference cannot be entailed by the 
content.62 
Despite its complexity, this argument is a powerful one, and the doctrine that existence 
is not a 'real predicate' which adds to the descriptive content of a concept is very 
plausible. If the argument works, it demonstrates that the existence of the world-
whole is not a logical necessity. Indeed, if it is successful, it demonstrates that no 
being exists as a matter of its internal conceptual content. However, this result does 
not immediately establish the truth of the deflationary position, for it does not, by 
itself, show that the world is a brute fact. In order to show that there is no rational 
explanation for the existence of something instead of nothing, Smith also argues that 
there is no teleological explanation available. Once again, he proceeds by describing 
a feature ofthe world-whole which we can feel. In this case it is the purposelessness 
or futility of existence. He argues, in effect, that we can directly intuit that there is no 
purpose for the happening of the world: 'Happenings slide by unceasingly, one after 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
49 
the other, but the whole appears to continue onward and onward through these 
happenings for no goal and in order to realize no end. >63 When the world reveals 
itself in this manner, we feel a sense of global despair. 
The conceptually explicit argument to show that there is no purpose behind the 
existence of the world is quite simple. If there were such a purpose, this would imply 
that there is some intelligent being, such as God, that caused the world-whole to 
happen in order to realize this purpose. But this is impossible, because if we take the 
notion seriously, God is only a part of the world-whole, and can only cause the 
happening of part of the world, the created part. 64 Thus the feeling of global despair 
is veridical. We can intuit the true and absolute futility of the world. Smith admits 
that feeling this way is the opposite to feeling joy, but this does not mean that his 
position is inconsistent. 
He claims that despair is an impure appreciation. The truth of despair presupposes 
the truth of joy, but not vice versa. If the world-whole happens purposelessly, then it 
must happen, but 'the intuitive appearance of the world-whole's happening does not 
presuppose the intuitive appearance of the world-whole's happening for no purpose. '65 
This conclusion is very significant. He uses it as part of his argument that the 
metaphysics of rational meaninglessness, which naturally leads to a certain kind of 
despair, can be refuted and transcended. He claims instead that this feeling is 
outweighed in its importance by the broader feeling of global despair, and ultimately 
by the even broader feeling of global joy. In the end, this means that the joy we feel in 
the brute fact of existence is more important than the despair we feel at its lack of 
purpose. This means that we can avoid nihilism, and showing that this is so, Smith 
writes, is the main point of his treatise. 66 
Conclusion 
Taken as a whole, The Felt Meanings of the World constitutes an impressive system 
of metaphysics. It appears to be the finest and most complete expression of the 
deflationary project. Smith consistently adopts an anti-rationalist stance, and the 
cumulative effect of his argument is that we can directly intuit that the world is a 
brute fact. At the same time, he does present an explanatory system, and provides a 
rational account of why a rational explanation cannot be found for the fact of existence. 
The account is partly historical, partly conceptual, and partly relies upon a well-
developed theory of intuitive understanding. It should be counted as adequate, not 
merely because it systematically deflates the fundamental question, and thus provides 
a response that satisfies the intellect, but because it also takes emotions into account. 
According to Smith, we respond emotionally to the fact of existence by responding 
to specific features of the world-whole, and we know that they are features because 
we appreciate them in specific ways. The rational inexplicability (contingency, or 
bruteness) of the world is felt in marvelling, while existence itself, as a fulfilment, is 
appreciated in joy. The brute fact view, then, is rationally defensible on the basis of a 
metaphysics of felt meanings, and in addition, it can help to meet our emotional need 
to find meaning in the world. 
As I said earlier, the adequacy of the deflationary position does not entail its truth. 
There are several points in his argument which can be questioned, in particular his 

50 
The Problem of Existence 
claims about necessary existence. For example, even if nothing exists as a matter of 
logical or conceptual necessity, it is arguable that there may be a notion of metaphysical 
necessity which can be employed to answer the fundamental question. Perhaps all 
metaphysically possible worlds are non-empty, not because a particular being exists 
in every world, but for theoretical reasons connected to the notion of a world. Or 
perhaps there is a being which exists in all worlds, but it evades conceptual 
specification, so that its conceptual content does not include existence. These 
alternatives will be discussed in the following chapter. 
Even after the deflationary view has been fully developed, and defended on 
systematic and intuitive grounds, it is not entirely convincing. While we may evade 
nihilism by feeling the joy of existing, we may encounter a different disturbing feeling 
in the midst of reflecting on the fundamental question. Even if existence is a brute 
fact, it may appear to many as a frustrating fact. It is possible to feel that reason 
demands an answer to the puzzle, even if it is an answer which we cannot easily or 
entirely comprehend. Without an answer, it may seem that we must deny our nature 
as rational animals. If this is felt to be impossible, emotionally or intellectually, then 
we may tum to a necessitarian doctrine, and consider what is entailed by a systematic 
rejection of brute facts. 
Notes 
1 
A.J. Ayer, Language, Truth and Logic, Penguin Books, 1972, p. 48. 
2 
John Leslie's theory of existence, which he calls 'axiarchism', may be a candidate. He 
employs a wide variety of observations, and a number of results from physical science, to 
defend his view that ethical value explains why the world exists. This thesis is examined 
in greater detail in Chapter 4. 
3 
A.J. Ayer, op. cit., p. 46. 
4 
Ibid., p. 59. 
5 
Ibid., pp. 60-61. 
6 
P. Edwards, 'Why', in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. P. Edwards, Macmillan, New 
York, 1967, vol. 8, pp. 300-301. 
7 
Ibid., p. 301. 
8 
Ibid., p. 302. 
9 
L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. D.F. Pears and B.F. McGuiness, 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1961, p. 73. 
10 C. Barrett, Wittgenstein on Ethics and Religious Belief, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1991, 
p. 26. 
11 Ibid., p. 25. 
12 L. Wittgenstein, 'A Lecture on Ethics', in Philosophical Review, ed. Rush Rhees, 1965, 
vol. 74, pp. 8-9. 
13 Ibid., p. 6. 
14 Ibid., pp. 7-8. 
15 D. Parfit, 'The Puzzle of Reality: Why Does the Universe Exist?', in Metaphysics: The 
Big Questions, ed. Peter van Inwagen and Dean W. Zimmerman, Blackwell Publishers, 
Oxford, 1998, p. 425. 
16 I. Kant, Critique of Practical Reason, trans. L.W. Beck, Bobbs-Merril, IN, 1956, p. 166. 
17 See I. Kant, The Critique of Pure Reason, trans. N. Kemp Smith, Macmillan Press, London 
and Basingstoke, 1982, A643/B67 (p. 532), for an elucidation of the idea of 'regulative' 
www.ebook3000.com

The Deflationary Response 
51 
employment. Kemp Smith's admirable translation of Kant's first Critique contains both 
the First and Second editions, which are marked in the text using the letters 'A' and 'B' 
respectively. Citations of this work will henceforth refer to these marks, instead of page 
numbers. 
18 See R.E. Wood, A Path Into Metaphysics, State University of New York Press, Albany, 
1990, pp. 237-62, where this interpretation is elucidated in detail. 
19 Q. Smith, The Felt Meanings of the World, Purdue University Press, West Lafayette, IN, 
1986. 
20 I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A 77/B 102. 
21 Ibid.,A70/B95. 
22 Ibid., B130. 
23 Ibid., Al08. 
24 Ibid., A98-All5. 
25 Ibid., A409/B436. 
26 Ibid., A415/B442. 
27 Ibid., B443. 
28 See T.E. Wilkerson, Kant s Critique of Pure Reason: A Commentary for Students, Oxford 
University Press, London, 1976, p. 121. 
29 Critique of Pure Reason, A506/B534. 
30 SeeN. Rescher, The Primacy of Practice: Essays Towards a Pragmatically Kantian Theory 
of Empirical Knowledge, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1973, Chapter 4. 
31 I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A562/B590. 
32 These arguments can be found in I. Kant, Critique of Practical Reason, pp. 128fT, and in 
Kant's Critique of Judgement, trans. J.C. Meredith, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1952, pp. 
108-22. 
33 Q. Smith, op. cit., pp. 176--80. 
34 Ibid., p. 1. 
35 Ibid., p. 2. 
36 Ibid., p. 4. 
37 Ibid., p. 5. 
38 Ibid., p. 6. 
39 Ibid., p. 12. 
40 Ibid., p. 9. 
41 Ibid., p. 18. 
42 Ibid., p. 20. 
43 Ibid., p. 57. 
44 Ibid., p. 119. 
45 Ibid., p. 12. 
46 Ibid., p. 23. 
47 Ibid., p. 192. 
48 Ibid., p. 188. 
49 Ibid., p. 186. 
50 Ibid., p. 189. 
51 Ibid., p. 189. 
52 Ibid., p. 189. 
53 Ibid., p. 190. 
54 Ibid., p. 151. 
55 Ibid., p. 152. 
56 Ibid., p. 152. 
57 Ibid., pp. 24-9. 
58 Ibid., p. 161. 
59 Ibid., p. 161. 

52 
60 Ibid., p. 181. 
61 Ibid., p. 184. 
62 Ibid., p. 182. 
63 Ibid., p. 185. 
64 Ibid., pp. 185-6. 
65 Ibid., p. 185. 
66 Ibid., p. 188. 
The Problem of Existence 
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 3 
Necessitarian Answers 
A positive response to the question of why anything exists is one that treats it as a 
serious and legitimate inquiry for which some kind of systematic explanation can 
and ought to be constructed. This contrasts with the deflationary response in that it 
refuses to treat existence as a brute fact and instead claims that it is an intelligible fact 
which demands an intelligible explanation. However, although this approach to the 
question takes a more directly explanatory path on the intellectual level, it does not 
tend to leave the mind in a condition of complete satisfaction. The emotions that arise 
from the endeavour to answer the question are no less intense and profound than 
those which leave it unanswered. 
In attempting to supply an account of the fact of existence, it is natural to feel an 
intellectual disturbance of a radical kind. There is a kind of frustration, a deepening 
disquiet, as we make our approach. This may be partially alleviated by following 
through with the task, and by going beyond the trivial necessitarian accounts. 
Nevertheless, one does not necessarily arrive at a point of rest. Instead what may 
occur is a transformation of the initial disquiet, and a sense of awe which is different 
in kind to that delimited by deflationary responses. 
Necessitarian Answers 
The origin of the initial frustration involved in seeking a positive response is a specific 
and almost inevitable interpretation of the nature of the fundamental question. It is 
treated as a problem, and as such the primary approach to it seeks to fit the problem 
into an explanatory framework. When the framework cannot be found, and various 
attempts appear to fail, frustration inevitably results. (Possibly also a sense of anxiety, 
and possibly insomnia.) A good model for understanding this sort of feeling is the 
image of a child trying to fit a square peg into a series of holes which do not have a 
square shape. The child tries again and again, and each time there is no fit, no correct 
framework. Although it is possible to force the peg into a circular hole, or into a 
triangular hole, this does not resolve the problem correctly. It always looks odd, and 
the attempt to solve the problem is frustrated. 
Eventually it is understood that the squareness of the peg is unique, and cannot be 
explicated by any of the available options. Similarly, a straightforward definition or 
theory cannot resolve the problem presented by existence, so the fundamental question 
can only be answered by interpreting it differently. It is then no longer seen as a 
problem, although it remains a well-formed question, with a well-formed answer. 
The explanatory framework, at this point, is discovered paradoxically in the act of 
releasing oneself from all frameworks, from all theoretical structures. This occurs 
when the initial frustration of 'tackling a problem' is overcome within a perspective 
which allows a transcendence of theories and concepts. The result is the postulation 

54 
The Problem of Existence 
of a unique transcendent being, whose existence is logically necessary. The 
intelligibility of such a being can explain the ultimate intelligibility of the world. For 
such a being, it is appropriate to feel a sense of awe, not merely at its magnitude but 
at its ultimacy, at the fact that in contemplating such a thing (or 'non-thing'), we have 
truly reached the end-point of reflection on the world. Nothing lies beneath this being, 
and nothing lies beyond it. A new form of understanding may then unfold, one that is 
does not rely upon the efficacy of concepts. 
There are two main reasons why attempts to find an explanatory framework for the 
question of existence tend to produce unsatisfactory results. The first is that we are 
asking for something far too general to fit into any specific conceptual scheme or 
structure. In asking why anything exists, we cannot rely upon the characteristics of a 
specific class of things which may explain the fact of existence. Absolutely everything 
is under question. We cannot begin with an assumption or a determination that certain 
things have particular features, because the existence of these things is also under 
question. Causal explanations are ruled out. We are not asking why planets exist, or 
why universes exist, or why there are laws of nature which entail that there is a 
universe. The question precedes all of these questions. All of the standard theoretical 
postulates within which a framework for explanation may be constructed are 
unavailable, because they all begin with some form of existence assumption, and this 
too must be explained or the question will remain unanswered. 
The second reason is that the concept of existence itself is not a normal category-
specifying concept. The grammatical predicate 'x exists' is not a descriptive predicate 
like 'xis blue'. To say that something exists does not tell us what it is like or what 
categories it falls into. It does not tell us what an object is, but it does tell us that it is 
there in the first place. As G.E. Moore argued, there is a great difference between the 
proposition 'Tame tigers growl' and the proposition 'Tame tigers exist' .1 Even if 
both of them are saying something about tame tigers, the second one does not describe 
or characterize such things, whereas the first one does. Some philosophers have 
expressed this doctrine by saying that existence is not a predicate at all, but this is too 
extreme. We do mean something by claiming that a particular thing exists, but we do 
not mean to say anything about what sort of thing it is. All that is intended is that it is 
something in the world, something real. This means that the fact that something exists 
is just the fact that there is something in the world. By itself, this fact does not entail 
that the world has any particular character. It just means that it is non-empty. As a 
result of this lack of character-specification, there is no obvious conceptual framework 
within which to explain the fact of existence. It appears initially to be an insoluble 
problem (which is why the deflationary approach is so 'natural'). 
Nevertheless, appearances can be deceptive, and a complete examination of the 
frustration that arises from tackling existence as a theoretical problem must begin by 
looking at the apparent possibilities for explanation. There is an initial predicament 
into which we are thrown when we encounter the problem, which may be described 
as the absence of a conceptual framework. None of our concepts and theories appears 
to be suited to the question. However, even if we accept this predicament, we may 
seek to provide a theory by means of a definition or analysis of the fact of existence. 
This results in a necessitarian answer, which seeks to explain why there is something 
instead of nothing by showing that it cannot be otherwise. As we shall see, there are 
significant difficulties with such an approach. I will argue that merely reciting a simple 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
55 
definition, or a simple deductive structure, fails to relieve our feelings of frustration. 
It leaves the problem unsolved. 
The Analytic-Truth Approach 
Necessitarian doctrines take several forms. In general, a necessitarian doctrine states 
that certain propositions are necessarily true, either because they are analytic, and 
therefore true in virtue of their meaning, or because they are theorems of some true 
formal system, or because they state some truth about an object or set of objects 
which necessarily exist. It is also possible to formulate a doctrine of relative necessity, 
which claims that certain propositions are necessarily true relative to a particular 
conceptual scheme (for example, Kant's claim that space and time are essential for 
the intelligibility of perceptual intuitions is such a doctrine). In the present context, 
the attempt to answer the question of existence in terms of a necessitarian doctrine 
can take two significant forms. 
The first form simply supplies a definition of some kind to show that the proposition 
'something exists' is analytic. This may be achieved by defining the term 'exists' in a 
certain way, but it can also be achieved by defining a specific concept of possibility. 
In either case, this kind of doctrine entails that all possible worlds are existential 
worlds, but it does not entail that there is a specific thing which exists in each world. 
The second form is more complex, for it involves defending the view that there is an 
object (or a set of objects) which exists in every possible world. This is a more complex 
doctrine because it does not rest upon a definition, but must appeal to different intuitions 
about necessity and rationality. As this second form may emerge from the frustrations 
involved in considering the first form, it will be considered after we have dealt with 
the analytic-truth approach. 
An attempt to conceive of 'the existence of something' in theoretical terms leads us 
to view 'objecthood' or 'existence' as a definable property. Since an explanatory 
framework requires a structure, we must be able to define what is meant by a claim 
that a thing exists. However, this cannot be a descriptive property, for existence 
statements do not describe any thing. One way of bypassing this problem is to think 
of it as a formal property, to be defined in formal logic. Existence, or the property of 
'being an object', can be circumscribed as a legitimate concept on the condition that 
it does not differentiate any specific class of things but instead provides a structural 
interpretation of what it is to be. For example, W.V. Quine's famous formula 'to be is 
to be the value of a bound variable'2 may serve to define what it is to 'be something' 
without employing any descriptive concepts. In this manner, it is possible to approach 
the question of existence within logical theory, and thus avoid the predicament that 
no ordinary theory, which employs ordinary concepts, is general enough to account 
for the fact of existence. For logic is not an ordinary theory, it is the theory of formal 
systems which determine the entailment structure of ordinary theories. 
This analytic-truth approach accepts that existence is not a descriptive predicate, 
but it employs a non-descriptive or structural definition as part of its explanation. 
This can then result in a formal proof that 'nothing exists' is impossible or that 
'something exists' is a logical truth, which provides an answer to the fundamental 
question. Since existence becomes a trivial property which everything must possess 
(for, as John Searle3 and others claim, it is taken as axiomatic that a thing cannot have 

56 
The Problem of Existence 
features unless it exists), there must be something in the world if there are to be any 
truths about the world at all. 
It is now common, due to the popularity of the Quinean account of being, to look 
for the 'ontological commitments' of a theory by looking at the quantificational 
statements of the theory. Thus many analytical philosophers hold that existence is 
expressed by the existential quantifier.4 It follows from this that when we look at a 
singular proposition, such as 'Socrates exists', it too will be interpreted in terms of 
quantification. If the existential quantifier is used to represent singular existence 
statements, then the schema 'a exists' can be analysed as follows: 
'a exists' if and only if (3x)(x = a) 
The formula on the right hand side means, in ordinary English, 'There is at least one 
thing which is identical to a'. It follows immediately that the proposition 'a does not 
exist' must be analysed as: 
- (3x)(x =a) 
If this is true, then the proposition 'nothing exists' must be analysed as: 
(Vy) - (3x)(x = y) 
There is then a simple argument to show that it is an analytic truth that something 
exists. The proof is by reductio ad absurdum, which goes as follows: 
1 (Vy)-(3x)(x = y) 
2 (Vy)(Vx)- (x =y) 
3 (Vx)- (x =a) 
4 -(a=a) 
5 a=a 
Assumption: Nothing exists 
1, Quantifier Negation 
2, Universal Instantiation 
3, Universal Instantiation 
Axiom of Identity 
6 (a= a) and- (a= a) 
7 - (Vy)- (3x)(x = y) 
4, 5, Conjunction Introduction 
1-6, Negation Introduction (reductio) 
This proof depends upon the use of an Axiom of Identity, the principle that for all x, 
x = x. It is not a controversial axiom, and appears to be a paradigm example of a 
necessary truth. A simpler proof, which directly relies upon this principle, can be 
constructed if we simply apply existential generalization directly to the Axiom of 
Identity. It goes as follows: 
1 (Vx)(x = x) 
2 a=a 
3 (3x)(x =a) 
4 (3y)(3x)(x = y) 
Axiom of Identity 
1, Universal Instantiation 
2, Existential Generalization 
3, Existential Generalization 
Given that the Axiom ofldentity is a necessary truth, it seems that the conclusion of 
this proof must also be a necessary truth. Furthermore, given the definition of 'a 
exists' cited above, the conclusion states that 'something exists'. So we have a proof 
that something exists, and a proof that the existence of nothing is self-contradictory. 
Both of them depend upon the definition given. Both of them provide an answer the 
fundamental question by showing that the fact that there is something instead of 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
57 
nothing is not a 'mere fact' but an analytic truth. 
These arguments, however, cannot be regarded as fully satisfactory. It is evident 
that they can be used either to answer the fundamental question or to illustrate that 
there is something wrong with the definition upon which they depend. For the 
definition of 'a exists' can be challenged directly on the basis that it leads to the 
implausible result that it is impossible for there to be nothing. Alternatively, these 
proofs may be challenged on the basis that the inferential rule of Universal 
Instantiation, which is employed in both arguments, is invalid. Some logicians have 
argued that this rule is only applicable in a context where it is already assumed that 
something exists, 5 or that the domain of discourse is non-empty. In fact, this appears 
to be the real problem with the proof. It is supposed to show that 'something exists' is 
a necessary truth, but it employs an inferential rule whose universal validity 
presupposes that something exists, given the cited defmition of existence. In systems 
of free logic, this presupposition is removed, and neither of these proofs are available. 6 
They can therefore be interpreted as circular arguments, presupposing their conclusion, 
or simply as invalid arguments, for the empty world is a model in which they fail. 
Reasoning this way, and employing a system of free logic (which is 'free' of 
existential assumptions) to show that these purported proofs fail, is only cogent if it 
is thought that the empty world is a real possibility. There may be grounds for thinking 
that it is not so, and this is apparently where we must employ oui 'logical intuitions'. 
Those who believe that the empty world is impossible, however, do not need to use 
the formal proofs. They are already convinced, by intuition or by some other reasoning, 
that 'something exists' is a necessary truth. So these proofs are ultimately redundant. 
They do not actually decide the question of the logical necessity of existence. 
Therefore, if we try to use them to alleviate the frustrations involved in tackling the 
fundamental question, they will fail. 
There is another, deeper reason for thinking that merely citing a definition, and 
combining it with principles from (classical) predicate calculus, fails to overcome 
frustration in this context. It seems that the method of logical proof uses some 
'theoretical machinery', in the sense that it employs standard assumptions about the 
semantics of quantification (for example, that we must assume a non-empty domain 
of discourse), and that it resolves the problem by employing a widely accepted theory 
of correct reasoning. So, in a sense, it provides a theory to 'explain' why there is 
something instead of nothing. But this is clearly not enough. In a deep sense, these 
arguments are totally inadequate. They are not serious explanations. They rely upon 
a purely formal definition, and as such they cannot supply us, emotionally or 
intellectually, with the requisite satisfaction that a truly completed explanation would 
provide. To say this is just to note that our reaction to these arguments helps to display 
their inadequacy. It does not refute the claim that 'something exists' is in fact a logical 
truth. It is possible, in a strained and restricted sense, to be 'satisfied' with either of 
these proofs, and walk away from the problem. However, this kind of reaction is 
more likely to result from a delusion than a serious conviction that the matter has 
been resolved. The delusion is that a simple definition and a sequence of symbols 
will relieve us of the mystery ofbeing. 
So frustration remains. One of the apparently possible ways of fitting the square 
peg into its correct hole has been found impossible. Or rather, it was forced into a 
hole by a presupposition which destroyed the force of the deduction. In effect, a 

58 
The Problem of Existence 
necessitarian response which is based upon this definition of 'a exists' supplies a 
legitimate answer to the fundamental question, but it fails to supply an explanation. 
There is no explanatory story behind it, no deep insight into the meaning of being 
which finally illuminates our interminable 'why'. 
There are other arguments for the impossibility of the empty world which use the 
analytic-truth approach, but they tend to have the same effect. It is useful to examine 
one or two, as they help to show how frustration becomes virtually inevitable as long 
as it is our goal to establish that 'something exists' is analytic. One might attempt to 
show that a certain kind of proposition is true in virtue of its meaning by providing an 
interpretation of a particular kind. For example, the proposition 'The world exists' 
may be thought to be analytic because its subject term, 'the world' should be interpreted 
as referring the world in which the proposition is uttered or contemplated. However, 
if the proposition is uttered or contemplated in that world, then it must be true in that 
world, for otherwise there would be nobody there to utter it or contemplate it. So 
insofar as this proposition can be uttered or contemplated at all, it must be true. 
This does not lead to the analyticity of 'the world exists' for several reasons, the 
main one being that it commits an error in its very formulation. If necessary truth is 
truth in all possible worlds, then we cannot say that a proposition can be necessarily 
true in exactly one world, the world in which it is uttered or contemplated. We would 
have to examine its truth value in the whole set of accessible worlds in order to make 
this determination. And clearly the reference of the subject term 'the world' might be 
empty. If it refers to the set of all existent objects, this could be identical with the null 
set. At least, nothing in the above argument demonstrates that 'the world' must denote 
a non-empty set of things. 
This argument is a good example of the kind of frustration that inevitably besets us 
upon regarding the question of existence as a problem of necessary truth or analytical 
explication. On the one hand it seems pragmatically necessary that something exists, 
in the sense that no one could intelligibly deny this fact. On the other hand, there 
appears to be no internal reason to suppose that the set of existent objects could not 
have been empty. So we are left in a state of confusion regarding the significance of 
the existence of the world in relation to our own existence. 
The fact that there is a pragmatic necessity involved in the claim that something 
exists may lead to a more sophisticated argument, along the lines suggested by Jaakko 
Hintikka in his article on the 'performative' interpretation of Descartes's cogito 
argument 'I think, therefore I am'. He claimed that the statement 'I do not exist' can 
be treated as a sort of 'performative contradiction', because if someone were to state 
it, the very act of stating it would constitute a refutation. 7 Surely the same can be said 
of the statement 'nothing exists', which may lead us to reason as follows: 
1 To say 'nothing exists' is to utter a performative inconsistency. 
2 That which involves a performative inconsistency is necessarily false. 
3 Therefore, 'nothing exists' is necessarily false. 
The obvious problem with this argument is that there seems to be no reason to 
think that the second premiss is true. It does not follow from the standard definition 
of 'necessary truth', and there seems to be no way of going from performative 
inconsistency to inconsistency per se. The most irritating feature of the situation is 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
59 
that an absurdity of this kind is false whenever it is uttered. This is what it means to 
be a performative inconsistency. We are instinctively linguistic creatures, and we 
tend to think that if a sentence is false whenever it is uttered, it is always or inevitably 
false, which tends to make us think that it is necessarily false. But we are stopped 
short in this reasoning by the inevitable realization that, in the world where nothing 
exists, there are no people to make any utterances. A performative inconsistency will 
not be uttered in this world, and therefore will not contradict itself in this world. Thus 
we have no real basis for thinking that it is an impossible world, at least not on the 
basis of the pragmatics of the situation. 
Our intuitions about existence lead us to frustration, which is itself an intuition, in 
the sense that it is a feeling. This feeling is almost inescapable, given that there is a 
tension between the pragmatics of saying that nothing exists, which appears as 
something self-refuting, and the semantics of necessary truth, which does not appear 
to entail that 'nothing exists' is impossible. In addition, there is a serious problem 
with necessitarian answers to the question of existence that fail to supply a theoretical 
structure but instead rely upon definitions. This indicates that frustration is inevitable, 
at least as part of the initial approach to the problem. However, there are more complex 
considerations which lead to a necessitarian thesis and may bring greater satisfaction. 
For example, we can construct a metaphysical theory or a conceptual analysis of 
possibility which excludes the empty world. To the extent that such a theory is based 
upon more than a simple definition, it can appear as a more adequate response, and 
deserves consideration. Furthermore, although this is a controversial matter, such a 
theory may be counted as providing an explanatory answer to the question. However, 
I shall argue that in the end it does not truly alleviate our frustration. 
Theories of Possible Worlds 
The term 'possible world' was first introduced into philosophy by Gottfried Leibniz, 
who claimed that the actual world is the best of all possible worlds. As it was employed 
in his system, the term designated a holistic collection of possible particulars which 
can be selected by God for actualization. It was used to explain the nature of logical 
and mathematical truths, and why the actual world is the way that it is. Leibniz claimed 
that God is a necessary being, and therefore exists in all possible worlds, and that he 
alone has the power to bring other things into being. Since he is a benevolent deity, 
the actual world must be the optimal choice for realization. It is the world which 
realizes maximal diversity of phenomena combined with maximal simplicity in 
underlying laws.8 This thesis is part of a rationalist metaphysical theory. Leibniz's 
philosophy was a combination of idealism, theism, and logical determinism,9 and its 
full expression entails a rejection of the empiricist theory ofknowledge, a point made 
explicitly in his critique of John Locke. 
By contrast, contemporary philosophy has largely rejected rationalism, and has all 
but rejected metaphysics itself. In the English-speaking world, philosophy is dominated 
by the empiricist perspective, which is hostile to a priori knowledge and prefers to 
adopt a more scientific view of the world. It is therefore somewhat ironic that the 
concept of a possible world should be so prominent and important to contemporary 
philosophers. For no philosophical notion is more obviously and explicitly 'other-
worldly' than this one. To speak of possible worlds realistically, that is, to speak of 

60 
The Problem of Existence 
them as real things (over which we may quantify) is inevitably to speak of that which 
lies beyond our own world. 
It is not surprising, then, that one of the most significant questions about possible 
worlds is taken to be the question of whether we can consistently avoid speaking of 
them realistically, while continuing to employ them in analyses of modality and related 
concepts. In order to answer this question, a theory of possible worlds is required. 
Several theories of this kind have been developed in recent years, and some of them 
endorse principles which lead to the thesis that 'something exists' is necessarily true. 
They do this by claiming that the nature of a possible world is such that no world can 
be 'empty'. 
One of the most straightforward theories has been called 'modal realism', and its 
main defender is David Lewis. This theory claims that possible worlds are things of 
the same sort as our own actual world. In fact, they are just different ways that our 
world could have been.10 A counterfactual conditional such as 'If kangaroos had no 
tails, they would topple over' is analysed by Lewis as 'in any possible state of affairs 
in which kangaroos have no tails, and which resembles our actual state of affairs as 
much as kangaroos having no tails permits it to, the kangaroos topple over'. 11 Thus 
claims about what would happen given that certain conditions were met are interpreted 
as claims about the relatively similarity between certain classes of worlds. Lewis 
admits that to some extent, these possible worlds are only vaguely specified, partly 
by such things as 'temporary contextual influences that indicate what sorts of 
departures would be especially gratuitous' .12 He has also developed an indexical 
theory of actuality, which entails that every possible world is actual at itself. To refer 
to actual objects is to refer to things which exist in the world in which one is speaking. 
And to speak of 'the actual world' is simply to refer to 'this world', the world of 
oneself and one's worldmates, which is determined by the context of the utterance. 13 
The basis of Lewis's argument for a plurality of worlds is pragmatic. He claims 
that we should believe that there are such worlds because it is a serviceable hypothesis, 
and this is a reason to think that it is true. 14 The assumption that there are unactualized 
possibilities is made in a variety of contexts, including those involving causal reasoning 
and scientific conjecture. It is also useful in analysing significant philosophical 
concepts such as supervenience, 15 doxastic and epistemic modalities, 16 and the nature 
of properties. Lewis admits that the price of accepting analyses which involve possible 
worlds is a larger ontology, but he maintains that the price is right. This argument, 
however, has little weight among those who suppose that a plurality of worlds entails 
a rejection of (what they understand to be) a commonsense point of view. For example, 
philosophers with a broadly empiricist outlook have difficulty accepting the existence 
of worlds other than our own. It appears to some that making this addition involves a 
rejection of the empiricist perspective itself, and this could make the price too high. 
To some extent this problem can be overcome by Lewis's theory, for he endorses a 
conception of possible worlds which is close to the scientific view of our actual 
world. They are very much like isolated spatiotemporal systems, and it is this doctrine 
which leads to the necessitarian thesis with which we are concerned. He arwes that a 
world is a maximal mereological sum of spatiotemporally related things. 7 In other 
words, it is the aggregate sum of all the individuals within it, which are worldmates 
of each other, and it is a maximal sum: anything which is a worldmate of any part of 
it is itself a part. Thus a world is like a kind of physical object, which is bounded by 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
61 
space and time, although there may be non-physical things which are contained therein. 
Spirits and their doings are possible entities, but they are located in time (if not space) 
and hence may be worldmates in some worlds with physical things. In general, objects 
are worldmates if and only if they are spatiotemporally related to each other, but this 
relationship can be quite loose in some worlds. 18 Lewis then argues that, since 
mereology does not permit empty sums, there can be no empty world. He says: 
If a world is a maximal mereological sum of spatiotemporally interrelated things, that makes 
no provision for an absolutely empty world. A world is not like a bottle that might hold no 
beer. The world is the totality ofthings it contains, so even if there's no beer, there's still the 
bottle. And ifthere isn't even the bottle, there's nothing there at all. And nothing isn't a very 
minimal something. Minimal worlds there can indeed be. There can be nothing much: just 
some homogenous unoccupied spacetime, or maybe only one single point of it. But nothing 
much is still something, and there isn't any world where there's nothing at all. That makes 
it necessary that there is something.I9 
This doctrine does not seem to follow from modal realism per se, for one might 
believe that worlds are sui generis real things in their own right, and so have properties 
independently of the spatiotemporal relationships between their parts. But it does 
follow from Lewis's theory, which identifies worlds with mereological sums. He 
accepts that the impossibility of the empty world is an unwelcome consequence of 
the theory, but he also tries to show that it is not as bad as one might think. His view 
is that the worst aspect of this doctrine might be the fear that it constitutes an 
explanation for why there something rather than nothing, so he attempts to show that 
it does not constitute an explanation. To this end he argues that an explanation is an 
account of etiology, and therefore tells us how particular events are caused, or how 
events of a certain kind are caused, or how several events jointly make a certain 
existential fact true. 20 This means that nothing could count as an explanation for why 
there is something instead of nothing, including the statement that there is no empty 
world. (Technically, therefore, his response to the question is a deflationary one, 
rather than a necessitarian one. At least, this is his interpretation of his position.) 
To this claim, it can be replied that Lewis's concept of explanation is too narrow. 
There is a more generous concept according to which the entailments of theoretical 
premisses constitute explanations by virtue of the entailment relation itself. Thus a 
theory T which entails the truth of a proposition P also explains the truth of P. Since 
Lewis' theory entails that 'Something exists' is a necessary truth, it will also explain 
why it is a truth, under this more generous notion of explanation. And in any case, 
even if it is incorrect to say that this is a real explanation for why there is something 
instead of nothing, nevertheless it does constitute a way of providing an answer to the 
fundamental question. Existence can be explained, or at least a determinate answer to 
the question of existence may be forthcoming, not by an account of etiology, but by 
the necessitarian doctrine that 'something exists' is a logical necessity. The fact of 
existence may then be explained by the modal fact that there is no possible alternative 
to existence. 
Lewis is not the only philosopher to argue that the empty world is impossible using 
the premisses of a theory of possible worlds. David Armstrong, whose position is 
very different from that of Lewis, also contends that the situation where nothing 
exists is impossible, but for a different reason. He has several criticisms of modal 

62 
The Problem of Existence 
realism, and proposes an alternative in which our reference to unactualized possible 
worlds is taken to be a case of 'fictional reference'. That is, merely possible states of 
affairs do not exist, but we can make ostensible reference to them. Each possible 
world is a different fictional story about the way that the world is, and these stories 
are useful because certain constraints have been put on these fictions.21 For example, 
every possible world, according to Armstrong, has the general form of states of affairs, 
and every world must be built up from certain kinds of components. He adopts a 
combinatorial theory of possibility which limits possible worlds to those constructed 
from given elements (actual individuals, properties, and relations). 
When it comes to the question of the empty world, Armstrong defends the conclusion 
that it is impossible. He claims that this conclusion tends to fall out of a 'worked-out' 
theory of possibility, which shows that the proposition that the existence of nothing is 
a logical possibility should be understood as a relatively superficial hypothesis.22 
Furthermore, he claims that his own theory supplies a reason for thinking that it is 
untrue. The empty world is (supposedly) not constructed from combinations of actual 
elements, because it has no elements and in fact no structure at all. Thus it is not a 
possible world. Hence the theory entails that there is no empty world, and the 
proposition that something exists becomes a necessary truth. 
It is not difficult to reply to the argument that a 'worked-out' theory tends to lead to 
this conclusion. Since Armstrong is a fictionalist about worlds, his own theory, worked 
out in a slightly different way, may give support to the possibility of the empty world. 
If worlds are combinations of actual elements, then we may consider the null 
combination as a limit case. That is, we can consider the de-combining of all actual 
elements as a possibility in its own right. And this is how we may think of the empty 
world, as a world where all of the concrete things are removed, thus yielding a void 
of a certain kind (that is, a void of concreteness). Armstrong claims that in his theory, 
'Combination is to be understood widely. It includes the notions of expansion ... and 
also contraction.'23 Yet if this is true, then there seems to be no reason to think that 
contraction cannot be applied to all of the things in a given world, as long as their 
existence is contingent. This would be a way of constructing the world where nothing 
exists, in a sense, or at least nothing that is contingent (abstract necessary beings, if 
there are any, are a different case). If Armstrong's theory itself will not yield this as a 
possible world, it is not difficult to see that a slightly modified theory, which embraces 
the same general principles, can do so. Hence it is not always true that a worked-out 
theory of possibilicy excludes (all versions of) the empty world. 
It should be noted that Lewis and Armstrong have not supplied any reasons for 
thinking that the proposition 'nothing exists' is incoherent or inconsistent per se. If 
we accept one of their theories, then it is logically impossible, but in itself it is a 
consistent proposition. But their theories are just the elucidations of specific 
conceptions of possible worlds, and these conceptions may be challenged or rejected. 
Furthermore, it is easy to tum their modus ponens into a modus to/lens: given that the 
theories of Lewis and Armstrong lead to the impossibility of the empty world, we can 
use this as a reason for believing these theories to be mistaken. This response can be 
developed further if we have a powerful independent argument for claiming that 
some interpretation of the proposition that 'nothing exists' is a logical possibility. 
There is such an argument, in fact, but it does not show that the existence of nothing 
at all is possible, only that there could be a complete absence of concrete objects. 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
63 
Even this result, however, is enough to throw doubt on the kind of necessitarian 
thesis which is based upon a theory of possibility. 
The Subtraction Argument 
Thomas Baldwin has presented a semi-formal argument to show that there is a possible 
world where nothing concrete exists. In doing so he makes use of a different notion 
of worlds to that of Lewis and Armstrong, one which is minimalist and abstract. His 
argument is based upon the idea that it is always possible to 'subtract' a concrete 
object from a given possible world and thus to find another possible world, accessible 
from the first world, which has exactly one less object in it. He begins with the 
following premisses: 
• (Al) There might be a world with a fmite domain of 'concrete' objects. 
• (A2) These concrete objects are, each of them, things which might not exist. 
• (A3) The non-existence of any one of these things does not necessitate the 
existence of any other such thing. 
He then shows that there is an iterative procedure for 'subtracting' objects from worlds. 
That is, if we begin with a possible world wi with a finite number of concrete objects, 
as postulated by (A 1 ), then we can pick an object xI from the domain of this world 
and, by (A2) there is a world w2 accessible from wi which is just like wi except that 
it lacks xi. It follows by (A3) that the domain of w2 does not contain things which fail 
to exist in wi, and thus its domain is smaller by at least one object. Thus we can 
subtract concrete objects from a given possible world, and obtain another possible 
world. The end result of this process of subtraction, given that we start with a finite 
number of things, is that there is a possible world where all concrete objects have 
been subtracted. This is the empty world.24 
Baldwin notes that the notion of a 'concrete' object needs to be defined in a certain 
way if this argument is to succeed. He takes it that concreteness is primarily marked 
by the failure to satisfy the identity of indiscemibles. This explains why location in 
space and time can also be used as a criterion, because space-time provides a way of 
distinguishing exactly similar objects.25 With this understanding of concreteness, 
Baldwin argues that the premiss that there might be a finite number of concrete objects 
is reasonable. To deny it, one cannot simply point to space-time regions, as examples 
of 'infinite divisibility', for these regions do not count as concrete things. Rejecting 
this premiss means asserting that there is an infinite number of concrete objects in all 
possible worlds, which appears 'clearly unreasonable'.26 Baldwin's position also 
entails that possible worlds must be distinguished from their object-domains. We 
may say that what makes something a world is that there are propositions which are 
true of that world's domain, but not that the world is identical with its domain. This 
conception of a world, which is implicit in the argument, is a more abstract 
characterization, but it is at least as plausible as the 'substantivalist' theories (that is, 
those ofLewis and Armstrong). 
The subtraction argument, as Baldwin calls it, probably represents the most natural 
way of thinking about the possibility that nothing concrete exists. It is the limit case 
of a series of worlds which contain fewer and fewer objects, and it is accessible to us 

64 
The Problem of Existence 
in that we can think of the limit case of such a series. If we must consider abstract 
objects as well as concrete objects, then the subtraction argument as it stands will not 
suffice. However, a similar argument may be constructed for this case, and it would 
work for at least an Aristotelian realist position on universals, since this position 
states that universals exist only when their concrete instantiations exist. 
This presents a problem for Lewis and Armstrong. If they are to avoid the conclusion 
of this argument, they must state which of the three premisses is false. But it seems 
that they would endorse all of them. Lewis, for example, is bound to accept (Al), for 
he acknowledges that worlds can be very minimal indeed. He admits that there is a 
possible world which consists of exactly one point of unoccupied spacetime,27 and 
therefore must admit that there could be exactly one concrete object. But if this is 
true, then why not accept that there is another world, exactly like this one and accessible 
from it, without this concrete object? Lewis may contend that (A3) is false, because 
in the case of the single object, its nonexistence would necessitate the existence of 
something else, but there seems to be no basis for this. Considered by itself, the 
object's existence is contingent, for it is a concrete being, not a necessary being. It 
therefore seems that he has no basis for rejecting the possibility of its nonexistence, 
even from the standpoint of the world in which it is the only existent. 
On the other hand, Lewis might adopt a different stance, for technically he does 
not have to dispute· the conclusion of the subtraction argument. Given that he concedes 
that there is a possible world in which the only existent is a single point of unoccupied 
spacetime, he may agree that such a world is devoid of concrete things. But there is 
no reason to think that we cannot extend the subtraction argument to apply to this 
case. We may ask: 'What prevents us from considering a possible world in which this 
single point is subtracted?' It seems that the only reason for refusing to acknowledge 
this possibility is the definition of possibility itself, which therefore appears arbitrary. 
Armstrong's theory fares no better in this respect. Since he endorses the idea that a 
possible world can be a 'contraction' from another world, he has no basis for rejecting 
the conclusion of the subtraction argument. 
It is not difficult to say what holds true at the empty world. There are a large number 
of propositions, both general and particular, which state that concrete things do not 
exist, and all of these will hold. Furthermore, all of the necessary truths will hold at 
this world. This entails either that the domain of the empty world is populated only 
with non-concrete things, such as numbers or spacetime, or that the domain is truly and 
totally empty and there is some other way of accounting for mathematical and logical 
truths. Or, with Hartry Field and others, we may say that mathematics is systematically 
false, and adopt the fictionalist approach to mathematical truth.28 In any case, the 
empty world is truly empty of all finitely extended, contingent, concrete objects such 
as people and planets. We can talk about such a world because we can describe the 
propositions which hold true at it. However, there must be such propositions. There is 
no world at which nothing whatsoever holds true, for this would no longer be a world 
at all. So it seems that a possible world is indeed analogous to a bottle which may 
contain no beer. It may lack concrete things in its domain, but it must have a domain. 
The theories of possibility developed by Lewis and Armstrong have many features 
which make them attractive. They are not entirely unsatisfactory, and in many ways 
they help to explain modal discourse of various kinds. They can easily be reformulated 
to allow the empty world as a possibility. However, taken as they stand, and in the 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
65 
context of an attempt to formulate an answer to the fundamental question, they are 
inadequate. This is mainly because the kind of answer that is formulated lacks the 
right features. They are both intellectually ineffective in answering the question, and 
they are both affectively neutral. In fact, these theories are not even intended to address 
the question of existence seriously. Rather than demonstrating that the empty world 
is impossible, they demonstrate only that if we think of worlds as isolated 
spatiotemporal systems, none of them will be empty. But this is as useful as saying 
that if all worlds are extended things, then none of them are unextended. While this 
may be true, it does not explain why there are non-empty things, worlds or not, instead 
of just nothing at all. Lewis himself said that the logical impossibility of 'Nothing 
exists' does not function as an explanation for the fact of existence. It fails to do this, 
not just because it does not supply an etiology, but because it has no depth. 
In fact, the necessitarian answer provided by these theories of possibility resembles 
the answer which was established by defining 'a exists' as '(3x)(x= a)'. Both of them 
involve reductio ad absurdum arguments, both employ questionable definitions, and 
both fail to explain 'why' in a serious way. This is partly why both of these necessitarian 
answers are so frustrating. They do supply an answer, even a well-grounded answer, 
but there is a clear sense in which they do not supply a real explanation. That is, a 
definition, by itself or in conjunction with other premisses, does not constitute an 
explanatory story. The irritation involved in seeking a serious necessitarian answer 
remains unresolved, and may even be exacerbated, by these theories. 
Necessary Existence and Transcendent Awe 
It may be that the frustration and anxiety produced by our attempts to formulate a 
positive answer will remain with us forever. The question of existence, when treated 
as a problem to be resolved, sometimes appears to have an aspect of absolute 
indeterminacy. We can try to see, but perhaps our vision is inevitably impaired. Perhaps 
the world is literally a puzzle without an answer, and we must learn to live within the 
puzzle. Or perhaps existence is a brute fact, as the deflationary view implies. If we 
are to pursue the question beyond this position, however, and if we are to seek a 
development of the necessitarian view, we must continue along a particular trajectory. 
We must consider, at least for the purposes of exposing the full range of positive 
answers, a different formulation of the necessitarian answer. This formulation will 
result in a transcendence of the concrete, and it is associated with a sense that there is 
(literally) something underlying the fact of existence. 
To explain existence by postulating a transcendent necessary being is to claim that 
there is some specific thing or set of things which exists in every possible world, and 
also that the existence of this thing or set of things constitutes a transcendence of 
concrete empirical beings. There are difficulties with this kind of answer which are 
just as intense as those faced by the analytic-truth approach and the invocation of a 
theory of possible worlds. In fact, it seems that the main difficulty with a transcendent 
approach lies in the question of whether an explanation is provided at all. However, 
my primary claim is that a necessitarian formulation of this answer succeeds in at 
least removing or overcoming the frustration that besets us as we embark upon a 
treatment of the question ofbeing as an intellectual problem. 

66 
The Problem of Existence 
It can achieve this because, when it is correctly formulated, the doctrine that there 
is a transcendental necessary being carries the intellect beyond the situation wherein 
it confronts a problem. Instead, we end up confronting an unlimited object, which is 
ultimately ungraspable. It is therefore, in a specific sense, beyond all of our intellectual 
problems. The appropriate reaction to this confrontation is not frustration but awe. 
We may therefore refer to this feeling as 'transcendent awe' to distinguish it from the 
feeling ofimmanent awe at confronting the whole of the world, which was elucidated 
in the previous chapter. In the case of transcendent awe, we contemplate the whole of 
the world, and we also transcend the world. We are faced, not only with the fact of 
existence, but with nothingness, which lies beyond the world-whole. 
A necessitarian answer that invokes a transcendent being has a specific form, and it 
is important to say precisely what this is. For it can be objected that the postulation of 
abstract objects, if it is thought that these things exist in every possible world, is not 
an appropriate answer to the fundamental question. A realist in the philosophy of 
mathematics believes that numbers exist, but the form of such a doctrine does not 
allow us to adequately answer the question of why there is something instead of 
nothing. It becomes a trivial answer, and reveals nothing of significance. In effect, it 
fails to entirely transcend concrete empirical things, because it invokes the same 
form of intelligibility that is employed in our understanding of concrete situations 
and the instantiation of abstract properties. Peter van Inwagen has made this objection 
in his paper on the question of existence. He argues as follows: 
I do not think that the question that people have actually intended to ask when they ask why 
anything at all should exist could be answered by pointing out- I will take this statement to 
be true for the sake of the illustration; I certainly think it's true- that the number 510 would 
exist no matter what. If the notion of an abstract object makes sense at all, it seems evident 
that if everything were an abstract object, if the only objects were abstract objects, there is 
an obvious and perfectly good sense in which there would be nothing at all, for there would 
be no physical things, no stuffs, no events, no space, no time, no Cartesian egos, no God 
.... When people want to know why there is anything at all, they want to know what that 
bleak state of affairs does not obtain. 29 
This is partly correct and partly dubious, given what he goes on to say. It is correct 
in asserting that the fact (if it is a fact) that numbers exist in all possible worlds will 
not answer the question. This kind of response is unsatisfactory and is clearly not 
intended to count as an answer by someone who asks the question sincerely. However, 
it is not the case that all postulations of necessary beings will fail to provide a 
satisfactory answer. Van Inwagen recognizes this, and goes on to discuss a different 
argument for a necessary existent which he claims would answer the question if it 
were valid and sound (on his view, it is not sound). He appears to think that this 
argument would establish the necessary existence of a concrete object, as opposed to 
something 'merely abstract', but this is a strange assertion to make. In effect, it is the 
assertion that if God exists, then he is a concrete entity, which appears to contradict 
most religious traditions. Furthermore, it is not actually warranted by the argument, 
as I shall explain in the next section. 
In any case, it seems clear that 'ordinary' abstract objects, such as numbers or 
(empirical) universals like 'redness', even if they exist in all possible worlds, will not 
provide a satisfactory answer to the fundamental question. One of the main reasons 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
67 
for this is that, although they will show that in some sense it is impossible for 
'absolutely nothing' to be, they do not explain why this is so. Mathematical theory by 
itself is not self-explanatory, and neither is the postulation of universals, because this 
postulation can only be made plausible if it is part of a larger explanatory theory. 
What is needed is an account of the necessity of the larger theory, not a mere postulation 
by itself. Furthermore, the existence of these abstract objects does not explain why 
there are contingent concrete things, although it may help to explain what they are. 
Van Inwagen is correct in thinking that this is an essential part of the question, and a 
fully explanatory theory must deal with this as well. 
Finally, and most importantly, the existence of these 'ordinary' abstract objects 
does not relieve the frustration involved in the necessitarian project, as I have elucidated 
it. An 'extraordinary' abstract object, of an entirely different kind, is required to 
complete this project and bring us out of our torment. The object concerned must be 
transcendent, which means that surpasses all empirical things and all immanent 
concepts and forms of understanding, so that it may therefore become the object of 
awe. Only the contemplation of a transcendent necessary being will bring us out of 
the state of excruciating, irritating, miasma which infects the intellect in its journey 
to the end of reason and the limits ofbeing. 
The Leibnizian Argument for a Transcendent Necessary Being 
There is a relatively simple argument for the existence of a transcendent necessary 
being which proceeds directly from a consideration of the fundamental question. It 
was ori~inally presented by Leibniz in his short paper The Principles of Grace and of 
Nature. 0 He presented it in the context of a general discussion of the Principle of 
Sufficient Reason and its metaphysical implications, and thus as part of his overall 
system of thought. Although Leibniz sought to demonstrate that there is a necessary 
being of a certain kind, namely the kind which is postulated by theism, his argument 
need not be construed as establishing this conclusion. It is a version of the cosmological 
argument for the existence of God, but it can be employed more generally. Even if it 
is a sound demonstration that there must be a particular thing existent in every possible 
world, it can be formulated so that it need not entail the existence of the deity. This is 
relatively clear from the text itself, if the final sentence is omitted: 
7. Up till now we have spoken as physicists merely; now we must rise to metaphysics, 
making use of the great principle, commonly but little employed, which holds that nothing 
takes place without sufficient reason, that is to say that nothing happens without its being 
possible for one who has enough knowledge of things to give a sufficient reason to determine 
why it is thus and not otherwise. This principle having been laid down, the first question we 
are entitled to ask will be: Why is there something instead of nothing? For 'nothing' is 
simpler and easier than 'something'. Further, supposing that things must exist, it must be 
possible to give a reason why they must exist just as they do and not otherwise. 
8. Now this sufficient reason for the existence of the universe cannot be found in the 
series of contingent things, that is to say, ofbodies and of their representations in souls. For 
since matter is in itself indifferent to motion or to rest, and to one motion rather than another, 
it cannot itself contain the reason of motion, still less of a particular motion. And although 
the present motion which is in matter arises from the one before it, and this in turn from the 
one before that, we are no further on however far we go; for the same question always 
remains. Thus the sufficient reason, which needs no further reason, must be outside the 

68 
The Problem of Existence 
series of contingent things, and must lie in a substance which is the cause of this series, or 
which is a necessary being, bearing the reason of its existence within itself; otherwise we 
should still not have a sufficient reason, with which we could stop. And this final reason of 
things is called God. 31 
The argument is based upon the Principle of Sufficient Reason, which was 
formulated in a particular way in this context. Several philosophers have objected to 
this principle, on various grounds. It has been argued that it is itself insufficiently 
clear, especially in the present context,32 and thus it should be rejected. But in fact it 
is very clear what the principle states in this context, especially if we have a clear 
idea of what is being denied. The principle states that there can be no 'brute facts' 
which are utterly inexplicable and which must simply be accepted. In this context, it 
claims that the existence of something instead of nothing is not a brute fact, and that 
there must be some form of explanation for it, even if we are not fully capable of 
understanding the explanation ourselves. 
Others have objected to the principle on the grounds that quantum mechanics has 
falsified it. 33 According to quantum mechanics, there are particular events which 
have no causal explanation, and thus no 'sufficient reason' for their occurrence at a 
particular time. For example, there is no cause for the decay of a radium atom. It 
happens at an 'unpredictable' moment, although it does not disobey any of the laws 
of physics. Many believe that this indicates that nature is ultimately indeterministic, 
which contradicts the idea that every event is causally determined. However, this is a 
relatively superficial criticism given that the principle is not equivalent to the law of 
universal causation, and it can be reformulated to avoid such a refutation. Furthermore, 
this reformulation does little to change its significance in the present context. In 
particular, if the Principle of Sufficient Reason is expressed as the view that every 
fact fits into some explanatory theory, or has some form of explanation, or that there 
are no absolutely 'brute' facts, then the objection from quantum mechanics falls down. 
The quantum theory itself, expressed by the Schrodinger equation, provides a certain 
kind of explanation for radium decay, even if it is a probabilistic explanation instead 
of a strictly causal explanation. 
Thus if we are convinced that brute facts cannot be permitted, we must assert some 
version of the Principle of Sufficient Reason. If that is the case, we can use it in 
providing an answer to the fundamental question. The Leibnizian argument, however, 
should be reformulated to recognize that the principle cannot be so specific as to 
entail that literally everything that happens has a sufficient reason. Quantum events 
do not have a sufficient reason, but they are not absolutely inexplicable. The argument 
should also contain another premiss, to make it clear that a specific form of 
necessitarian doctrine is at issue. As it stands, the argument does not explicitly consider 
the necessitarian doctrines of the previous section, where a simple definition was 
employed to 'explain' why there is something instead of nothing. An explicit 
recognition that such definitions do not serve as real explanations would further clarify 
the present position. So we can reformulate the Leibnizian argument as follows: 
1 Every fact has some form of explanation. 
2 Definitions, by themselves, do not constitute explanations. 
3 The fact that there is something instead of nothing cannot be explained by the 
series of contingent beings (that is, 'bodies and their representations in souls'). 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
69 
4 Therefore, the explanation for the existence of 'something' must lie outside of the 
series of contingent beings, in a being that exists necessarily. 
This argument first claims that there must be an explanation for the fact of existence, 
and then claims that it cannot be found in a definition, nor in the contingent world. It 
follows that the only form of explanation available for this fact lies in a thing which 
exists necessarily, in every possible world. There must therefore be at least one 
necessary being, and it is through this necessary being, or through a set of necessary 
beings, that we are to find an explanation for the existence of something instead of 
nothing. 
The Significance of the Principle of Sufficient Reason 
There are two serious objections to this argument which deserve consideration at this 
point. The first is that of van Inwagen, who argues that the Principle of Sufficient 
Reason is false because it entails that all propositions are necessarily true, which is 
something that, as he says 'most people would have a very hard time accepting' .34 
His argument is summarized in a broad outline as follows: 
ifthere are any contingent propositions (that is, contingently true propositions), then there 
is a set of all contingent propositions; but an explanation of any set of contingent propositions 
must appeal to some contingent proposition outside of that set; hence, the whole set of 
contingent propositions can have no explanation; hence, if every set of true propositions is 
such that there is an explanation for the fact that it contains only truths (as the Principle 
implies), there can only be necessary truths.35 
This argument fails in the present context. It depends upon the premiss that an 
explanation of any set of contingent propositions must appeal to another contingent 
proposition, but there is no basis for thinking that this is so. This premiss immediately 
entails the negation of the conclusion of the Leibnizian argument, which is that we 
can only explain why there is something contingent rather than nothing by going 
outside of the series of contingent beings. In the present context, this also means 
going beyond the set of contingent truths. 
It is not difficult to say how the set of contingent truths could be explained by a 
necessary truth. Van Inwagen appears to assume that necessary truths can only explain 
other truths through relations of entailment, but this is not the case. There is also a 
form of 'voluntaristic' explanation available, given that we can countenance the 
existence of a transcendent necessary being. Leibniz's own metaphysical position 
provides a clear example. He characterizes the contingent world as the world which 
is selected by God according to the 'Principle of Fitness'; that is, it is the best of all 
possible worlds. Regardless of whether this is the correct account, it is an example of 
a possible explanation for the set of contingent truths which employs necessary truths. 
The propositions that God exists, that he is omnipotent, that he is beneficent, and 
that he has free will are all supposed to be necessary truths. This is the way that 
Leibniz understood them, and he used them to explain why there is a contingent 
world, and why it has the features it has. As such, these propositions were used to 
explain the set of contingent facts. Given that God is omnipotent, he can create a 
world; given that he is beneficent, he would most likely create the best of all possible 

70 
The Problem of Existence 
worlds; but given that he has free will, it is not necessarily true that he creates anything 
at all. The existence of the contingent world is thus explained by the free decision of 
a necessary being, and not by a strict entailment from necessary truths. Yet insofar as 
this does constitute an explanation for the set of contingent truths, it explains this set 
by invoking necessary truths. Therefore van Inwagen's premiss is incorrect. Even if 
he denies that this Leibnizian explanation is ultimately successful, he cannot deny 
that it is an explanation. 
A second objection to the Leibnizian argument is based upon the thesis expounded 
by Quentin Smith, who claimed that the very idea of a necessary being is unintelligible. 
His argument was introduced in the previous chapter, and formed the conceptual 
basis for the feeling of marvelling at the contingency of the world-whole. It is based 
upon a theory of concepts which entails that no concept, in itself, can analytically 
entail its own instantiation. No concept, according to this theory, can entail its own 
reference, since any concept includes only the 'real' descriptive predicates which 
comprise its content. But reference, or existence, is not part of the conceptual content 
of any predicate. It is a non-real or non-descriptive predicate of a concept, which 
adds nothing to its meaning but instead entails that it is instantiated in the real world. 
It follows that 'existing' cannot be part of the concept of any object, and therefore, 
according to Smith, that the idea of a necessary being is unintelligible. 
There is a reply to this objection, and it does not need to reject the doctrine that 
existence is never part of the conceptual content of a thing. As it stands the objection 
does not even apply to the Leibnizian argument, for the Leibnizian argument does not 
assume anything about the conceptual content of any necessary being. Its conclusion 
is that there must be a necessary being, a thing that exists in all possible worlds and 
thereby explains why there is something instead of nothing. But it says nothing about 
whether we have any concept of this being, nor whether there is any such concept, 
nor what is contained in this concept ifthere is one. If we simply postulate that there 
is such a being, but we do not specify that it has a conceptual content, or if we explicitly 
specify that 'existing' is not included in it, the objection falls down. 
Smith's argument is based upon a doctrine about existence which is very plausible 
indeed. It is therefore important to be very clear in constructing a reply. His objection 
depends upon considerations about concepts, or predicates. It does not establish that 
there are no necessary beings per se. It only establishes that, in any particular case of 
a purported necessary being, if we examine its concept, it cannot contain 'real' 
existence, for this would automatically entail that the concept has a reference. No 
such concept is intelligible because no concept can specify that it has a reference. 
This much can be granted, but it does not imply that the idea of a necessary being is 
unintelligible as such. This idea is a consistent one, which can be demonstrated by 
constructing a consistent possible-worlds model-structure in which there is a specific 
object that exists in every world. As long as this object does not have 'existence' as a 
part of its conceptual content, however, there is no problem with respect to its 
intelligibility. Thus the concept of such an object, ifthere is a concept, must be specified 
without including the fact that it exists, let alone that it exists in all possible worlds. 
As with all other objects, this is not something determined by its internal conceptual 
content. 
The Leibnizian argument for a being that exists in all possible worlds is based 
upon the premiss that there are no brute facts, and the premiss that there is no other 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
71 
way of answering the question of existence. It is not implied that we can inspect the 
concept of something and determine that, in virtue of the content of this concept, it 
necessarily has a reference. This would be an example of an ontological argument, 
for which Smith's objection is a perfectly legitimate response. But the Leibnizian 
argument does not take this form. It merely examines the alternatives for answering 
the question, and on the assumption that an answer must be given, supposes that it 
must lie beyond the contingent world. Thus a necessary being must be postulated, 
although it is not claimed that we can know anything about this being, or that we 
have any adequate concept of this being. The argument says nothing at all about the 
concept of any being, and leaves the nature of this being as an open question. Although 
Leibniz himself stated that the necessary being must have 'the reason of its existence 
within itself', this is misleading, and it is not part of the reformulated argument. 
There is a significant question about the onus of proof in this context. Leibniz does 
not provide any positive reasons for thinking that the Principle of Sufficient Reason 
is true. In fact, it is not clear that any reasons can be given for accepting it. For it 
appears that the Principle is either self-justifying, or it has no ground at all. As such, 
it is always possible to resist the argument by claiming that we have no reason for 
thinking that absolutely everything must have some form of explanation. By the same 
token, it seems that we have no reason for thinking that there are brute facts either. It 
is surely possible there are explanations for what appear to be brute facts, which we 
have no capacity to understand. It is also possible that our descendants will construct 
explanations which are presently unimaginable. So the issue seems impossible to 
decide. 
It may be claimed, with some plausibility, that we instinctively seek explanations 
for all of the facts of which we are aware. This does not show that we will always find 
them, nor that they are always there to be found, but it makes it more plausible to 
adopt the Principle of Sufficient Reason as a 'working hypothesis' or in Kantian 
terms, a 'regulative ideal'. This may indicate that the burden ofprooflies with those 
who reject the Principle rather than those who adopt it, but the question of its truth 
remains undecided. 
For my purposes, however, it does not matter whether it is true or not. I am not 
arguing for the truth of any necessitarian explanation. All that I seek to show is that 
such an approach is possible, that it is plausible to some degree, and that a certain 
kind of necessitarian answer to the fundamental question will help us to overcome 
our sense of frustration. In this specific context, wherein we are asking why there is 
anything at all, the Principle is an expression of faith in finality. It can be invoked, not 
in the Leibnizian form, as part of a complete explanation which offers proof that 
there is a God, but as a resolution to go on. It then becomes an expression of our 
determination to see the question out, to find its completion. It is in this spirit that we 
should understand the Leibnizian argument as a whole, in fact, for it clearly fails to 
establish its intended conclusion. Rather than showing that God exists, it demonstrates 
something much weaker (if it is sound). It demonstrates that if we are determined to 
construct a positive answer to the fundamental question, we must conclude that there 
is a transcendent being whose existence is necessary. No reason has been given to 
think that this being must be identified with God. So in fact, Leibniz does not establish 
the conclusion that he sought to establish, although he does prepare the ground for a 
certain kind of theism. 

72 
The Problem of Existence 
The Leibnizian argument is only the first step to a correctly formulated necessitarian 
answer, but it is an important step. Its first premiss need not be accepted as true in 
order to proceed with the answer, but it must be respected for what it is. I therefore 
propose an emotional interpretation of the Principle of Sufficient Reason. It does not, 
in my view, state a fact, still less a fact that we can all comprehend and identify. In the 
context of the fundamental question, it expresses a deepening vexation, an abhorrence 
at the very idea of an inexplicable fact. This results from the frustration we feel as we 
tackle the 'problem' of existence. The Leibnizian argument as a whole can be treated 
as the culmination of an anxious concern to produce a positive answer, and the 
consequent desire, frustrated again and again, to rid oneself of the question by 
producing a determinate answer. Consider the argument, not in terms of its content or 
its logical form, but as a series of irritations. 
Imagine somebody becoming increasingly more angry and more frustrated with 
the problem. This person starts to list the alternatives, and finds none of them 
satisfactory, so at last comes to the conclusion that the answer MUST be there, and it 
MUST be found in a necessary being. A series of exclamations results: there are no 
brute facts!; definitions cannot explain existence!; a theory of possible worlds cannot 
explain it either!; contingent truths fail also!; hence there MUST be a necessary being, 
and this MUST be the answer! This is the emotional tone of the argument. It need not 
be interpreted as something uttered in a quiet moment by someone with a calm 
meditative disposition. It can be seen as being presented with a sense of desperation. 
Those who have felt that this is a problem, believe that all problems must have a 
resolution, and have become intensely frustrated with the normal forms of explanatory 
resolutions, can aflast find some consolation in what is offered by a necessitarian 
answer. In the end; it comes as a relief. However, the conclusion of this argument 
must be supplemented by a more developed account of the necessary being. As it 
stands, it says that the problem has a particular resolution, but it does not say anything 
about how a necessary being can provide a non-trivial answer. 
The Theory of Forms 
I have claimed that the Leibnizian argument is only the first step towards a positive 
answer to the question of existence. To illustrate that the doctrine of theism is not the 
only way of taking the next step, I shall consider a positive answer which is formulated 
in terms of the Platonist theory of transcendent Forms. There are good reasons for 
dealing with this answer before considering the theist position. It includes an elucidation 
of the notion of a transcendent being, which clarifies the sense in which this can 
provide a non-trivial resolution. It also satisfies the condition that a transcendent 
necessary object be a non-concrete thing. In addition, the position I shall sketch avoids 
the objection that ordinary abstract objects such as numbers or empirical properties 
are too trivial and too much a part of our immanent understanding to count as part of 
a genuine answer to the fundamental question. Furthermore, there is a clear sense in 
which the Platonist resolution of the problem will relieve our frustration at the problem. 
Finally, the Platonist theory that I shall consider has features which help to elucidate 
the way in which theism may also be formulated as a genuine answer. 
Platonism generally has a poor reputation. No other philosophical thesis has been 
disputed quite as often (but then, few are quite as old), and yet it seems to return 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
73 
again and again, sometimes in richer and more developed versions. In this context, 
however, I am not concerned with the truth of the theory ofForms, nor with formulating 
it accurately and using it to explain predication, identity, knowledge, and the nature 
of reality. I am only concerned with an argument that is based upon the theory of 
Forms and which leads to the postulation of a transcendent necessary being. It is 
traditionally thought that all of the Forms are 'transcendent'. Indeed this is often held 
to be the distinguishing feature of Plato's theory, and is used to contrast his account 
with that of Aristotle. In the present context, however, there is a particular Form 
which succeeds, more than any of the others, in supplying a necessitarian resolution, 
and I will focus on this one. 
The theory of Forms was first presented as the resolution of a large number of 
problems in epistemology, semantics, moral theory, metaphysics, and logic. It asserts 
that for every collection of objects that may be coherently grouped together and 
understood as belonging to the same category, there is an abstract object, a Form, 
which they instantiate. This Form is the ground of their membership in the group, 
and it makes the categorization intelligible. For example, if we can coherently 
characterize several things under the general term 'horse', then there is a Form of the 
Horse. Every particular animal we correctly call a 'horse' participates in this Form, 
or imitates it, and in this relationship to the abstract object, it is made intelligible as 
the thing that it is. 36 
This was Plato's original theory, and although it can be modified in various ways, 
and is susceptible to several significant criticisms, it can still be presented as an 
intuitively plausible thesis. Insofar as we are prepared to say that there is something 
common to all horses, it seems natural to say that there is an objective feature of 
'horseness'. This must be an abstract object, because it is instantiated in many 
particulars. Plato believed that this abstract object is transcendent, in the sense that it 
exists outside of the 'concrete' world of space and time. As such, he also believed 
that it exists eternally and necessarily, so that if the entire physical universe disappeared 
tomorrow, the Form of the Horse, and indeed all of the Forms, would remain existent. 
Their existence is independent of the existence of particulars, and they explain the 
nature of particulars. Thus in a specific sense they are 'transcendent' objects. 
Let us suppose that this theory is correct. It follows that there are a variety of 
abstract objects, such as the Form of the Horse, the Form of the Good, the Form of 
Triangularity, and so on, which exist in every possible world, regardless of whether 
these worlds also contain concrete particular objects. Thus there is an immediate 
resolution to the fundamental question, for it can be truly said that it is impossible for 
there to be absolutely nothing. I have argued that this resolution is unsatisfactory 
when considered in isolation. It does not explain why, it merely rests with a postulation. 
However, the principles of the theory can be applied to this postulation to provide a 
deeper and more highly developed resolution of the problem. In fact, there is evidence 
that Plato himself at least considered such a development, though it is uncertain how 
far he investigated it.37 The principles to which I am referring are the 'principle of 
abstraction', according to which there is a Form for every coherent collection of 
objects, and the 'principle of intelligibility', according to which Forms give 
intelligibility to their instances, through a relation such as participation, imitation, or 
instantiation. The detailed differences between these relations are irrelevant to the 
present argument. 

74 
The Problem of Existence 
Consider first the proposition that there are abstract objects which give intelligibility 
to their instantiations. If this is true, then we may apply it to cases in which a Form is 
itself an instance of a Form. If the Form of the Horse is an instance of the Form of the 
Animal, then it must be an instance of this Form, and derive its intelligibility from it. 
Thus there is a hierarchy of abstract objects, and those on the top of the hierarchy 
make the others below them intelligible by the relation of instantiation. Similarly, if 
there is a Form corresponding to every coherent collection of objects, then we can 
apply this to abstract objects as well. As long as there is something common to each 
abstract Form in a coherent collection, then there will be another Form, a 'higher 
order' Form, corresponding to it. That there is something common to each is implied 
by stating that they are a 'coherent' collection. 
There is thus a great system of intelligible Forms, and each of them is made 
intelligible by another Form higher up in the hierarchy. Plato appears to have believed 
that there is a realm ofBeing, which he called 'the intelligible world', which illuminates 
all of the things we can understand. This was contrasted with the world of Becoming, 
which contains the particular objects that are instances of Forms. He used the analogy 
of the Sun to ex~lain how things are made intelligible by their relationship with 
abstract objects.3 The Sun was intended to represent the Form of the Good, which 
gives intelligibility to all things and yet may not be comprehended in itself, just as we 
cannot look at the Sun without being blinded by its light. Given the principles of 
abstraction and intelligibility, there is a relatively simple argument to show that this 
view, or something very close to it, is entailed by Plato's theory. In fact the argument 
deals with the Form which lies on the top of the hierarchy, and thus makes all other 
things intelligible, without implying that it is 'the Good'. It runs as follows: 
1 There are abstract objects, Forms, which give intelligibility to their instantiations. 
2 For every coherent collection of facts or objects (that is, every group of things 
with a common feature), there is a Form. 
3 Therefore, the collection of all Forms constitutes a coherent collection, since they 
share the common feature of giving intelligibility to their instantiations. [from 1 
and2] 
4 Therefore, there is a Form ofFormhood. [from 2 and 3] 
Given this conclusion, we may deduce various other features of the Form ofFormhood, 
by extending the argument and employing an additional premiss, that is: 
5 All Forms are intelligible. 
6 The Form of Formhood gives intelligibility to all of its instantiations, and thus 
gives intelligibility to all of the Forms. [from 1 and 4] 
7 The Form ofFormhood is itself intelligible. [from 5 and 4] 
8 The Form ofFormhood gives intelligibility to itself. [from 6 and 7] 
9 The Form ofFormhood is an instance of itself. [this is obvious by its definition; it 
also follows from 4, 6 and 8] 
The doctrine that results from these arguments does not necessarily represent the 
views of Plato. In particular, it does not necessarily give expression to the idea that 
the Form of the Good lies at the top of the hierarchy of Forms, as the ultimate source 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
75 
of intelligibility. There is some textual evidence indicating that it is a good 
representation of his view, but his style of writing dialogues, which employed 
mythological tales as well as explicit arguments, makes it difficult to say exactly 
what he thought. 39 In any case, it is irrelevant whether Plato arrived at these conclusions 
or not. The point of elucidating them is to reveal certain aspects of a certain kind of 
transcendental being, one which explains the intelligibility of all other things and is 
also intelligible in virtue of itself. This is significant because it puts an end to our 
frustrations in asking why there is something instead of nothing. In fact, it puts an 
end to everything. It halts thought. 
These arguments are not beyond criticism. Each deduction can be blocked by 
denying one of the premisses, or by claiming that there is some further truth which 
prevents the deduction. For example, it can be argued that Forms are never instances 
ofthemselves,40 or that intelligibility can be conferred upon things in some way that 
does not involve the instantiation of a Form. However, in a context wherein we are 
not necessarily seeking a watertight metaphysical doctrine, but merely wish to 
contemplate a transcendent necessary being, we do not need to become too troubled 
with these objections. Let us concede that Platonism might be false. The question is: 
'What kind of answer does it give to the question of existence?' 
Given that they are sound and valid, these arguments establish that there is a 
transcendent being which gives intelligibility to everything that exists. What is most 
significant, however, is that we can be led to contemplate a certain kind of transcendent 
being by following certain (apparent) implications of the theory of Forms. While the 
arguments do not show that this transcendent being is also a necessary being, it is 
clear that if all Forms are necessary beings, the Form ofF ormhood must also be one. 
But it is much more than that. Not only does it exist in every possible world, it gives 
intelligibility to every possible world, and to everything contained within the possible 
worlds, including all of the other necessary beings, such as the Forms. This means 
that the Form ofFormhood is a most remarkable entity. It is the ultimate Form, the 
final explanation for the fact of existence and for the content of everything that exists. 
Furthermore, it does not explain existence merely by existing necessarily, but by 
occupying the highest place in the hierarchy of explanations. 
The final proposition, that the Form ofFormhood is an instance of itself, illustrates 
that it is a self-explanatory thing, since instantiation is an explanatory relation. 
According to the theory of Forms, we explain why something is what it is by citing a 
Form which it instantiates. Thus the Form ofFormhood explains itself by being an 
instance of itself. Even in the possible world where there are no concrete particulars 
(the 'empty' world), the Form ofFormhood has an explanatory role, for it will explain 
why there are other Forms. Thus it overcomes the difficulty that besets ordinary 
abstract objects, whose existence is necessary but fails to provide a deep explanation 
for why there is something instead of nothing. Its existence is not only logically 
necessary, but conceptually necessary as well, for it lies at the foundation of all 
instantiations and all explanations. 
We may therefore conclude that, according to the theory of Forms, the intelligibility 
of any particular object is explained by its instantiation of a Form, and the intelligibility 
ofF orms is explained by their instantiation of the Form ofF ormhood. Thus the Form 
ofFormhood is the Form oflntelligibility in itself. It explains why there is anything 
at all, under the assumption that if there is something, then it must be an intelligible 

76 
The Problem of Existence 
thing. In other words, it is only by participating in the Fonn oflntelligibility that any 
other Fonn can be intelligible. But the Fonn oflntelligibility is itself unintelligible 
unless it participates in itself, and in this case its intelligibility is not 'explained' 
except by way of self-reference. The Fonn oflntelligibility can have no other ground 
except itself, and thus it is either self-grounding, which makes it 'self-transcendent', 
or it is ungrounded. If it is ungrounded, it would be a 'brute fact', but brute facts have 
already been rejected by the Leibnizian argument, which remains the background (in 
the present context) for the assertion that there is a necessary being. Thus the only 
way of consistently interpreting the Fonn ofFormhood (that is, Intelligibility) in the 
present context is to make it into a self-grounding object. 
This conclusion represents a point of rest. The frustrations of the necessitarian 
answer are finally" removed when it is seen that there is a Fonn ofFormhood, and that 
this explains itself as well as all other things, and that it does not explain things in a 
trivial way but through a general theory of intelligibility, the theory of Fonns. And 
when the frustrations are removed, the problem of existence has been resolved. Perhaps 
it remains difficult to see how we can contemplate the Fonn of Formhood. It is a 
grand and mysterious abstract object. But it is not difficult to see that, if we can 
contemplate it at all, it has all of tl).e right properties. It is self-grounding, and also 
grounds all of the other F onns, which themselves explain the nature of particulars. 
Thus in contemplating this ultimate Fonn, we have reached a point where thinking 
must cease. In this cessation of thought, we have found the necessary being which 
will answer the fundamental question. 
There has been a progressive intensification of feelings as we have progressed in 
fonnulating necessitarian answers. An initial sense of frustration and anxiety presents 
itself when we decide that the question must be treated as a problem to be resolved, 
but there seems no way of giving an answer. This is then intensified if we consider 
the analytic-truth approach, and then theories of possibility, both of which fail to 
provide a satisfactory answer. Finally, if we accept the subtraction argument, and we 
agree that the empty world is logically possible, we have reached a point where the 
problem seems irresolvable, and the initial frustration may give way to stronger feelings 
of the same kind, such as utter bewildennent, total confusion, or a deep perplexity. 
There is a way of overcoming this situation by retreating to the deflationary view, 
and accepting that existence is a brute fact. But what happens if we refuse this option, 
and refuse all brute facts? Then we are led to the conclusion that there is a necessary 
being, but the initial frustration remains unresolved if the necessary being is a lowly 
and trivial abstract object, such as the number 510. Hence we may be led to contemplate 
a more significant, more awe-inspiring abstract object, that which gives intelligibility 
to all things, abstract and concrete. In this contemplation, finally we may be rid of the 
problem. Finally we may rest, for there is nothing beyond this object which gives it 
intelligibility. It is an ultimate. 
It is appropriate to be awed by the ultimate. This feeling is a recognition of mystery, 
but it is a mystery which is itself a part of our sense that things can be understood. 
Since we are contemplating the ultimate basis ofintelligibility, we are contemplating 
that which is common to everything which makes sense to us. This is the Fonn of 
Formhood, and it makes sense by itself. It is what we presuppose in coherent thinking 
of any kind, and whenever we depend upon the orderliness of reality. Yet it is also, in 
a sense, beyond us, for it is an ultimate, self-absorbing, self-explanatory being, which 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
77 
is difficult or impossible for us to conceive. Our feeling of awe is as much a recognition 
that the nature of 'something' or 'thinghood' lies beyond our grasp as it is an 
acknowledgement that we need to suppose that there is an ultimate basis for 
intelligibility in order to explain existence. 
A feeling of 'transcendent awe' follows from our developed reaction to the treatment 
of the fundamental question as a problem, rather than from our initial reaction to 
putting the question. It is distinguished from what Smith calls the feeling of 'global 
awe' by its object, which is not the whole of the world but the transcendent ground of 
all coherent worlds, in fact the ground of all that is intelligible. This kind of awe, 
because it emerges from the contemplation of a necessary being, is not a response to 
the immensity of a contingent world. It is rather a response to the ultimacy and all-
inclusiveness of the Form ofFormhood. Those who have come to an appreciation of 
this ultimacy may have such a feeling, and it may have the effect of overcoming the 
original frustration. For transcendent awe is a way of advancing beyond the problem. 
It allows us to focus on a specific object, which transcends the totality of the world, 
and to it as the fmal and self-explanatory source of all intelligible beings. 
We need not accept that the Platonist theory is correct. It is only one way of reaching 
a point of rest, and if it is thought unacceptable, another may be sought. One might 
believe that a being which is self-explanatory actually provides no explanation at all. 
I think that this is a legitimate objection to the Form ofFormhood, although it is not 
a decisive one. For in reply, one may ask how else we can formulate an answer to the 
problem except in a being which lies at the very end of our explanations, and therefore 
explains itself. The only alternative, other than returning to the deflationary view that 
existence is inexplicable, appears to lie in some other necessary being, such as God. 
If we returned to the deflationary view, however, it may be difficult to lose the sense 
that this is a defeat, an admission of cognitive failure. And if we do not lose this 
sense, we are unlikely to achieve any victory over our initial frustration. Hence if we 
are to go any further with the present line of approach, we must consider theism. 
A Theistic-Necessitarian Answer 
There are severe historical and conceptual problems with the notion of deity, and 
using the word 'God' is especially problematic in the present context. For the word is 
normally used to denote a person or object which is worshipped and revered by those 
belonging to a particular kind of organized religion. The act of worship normally 
derives its significance from a particular tradition, and it has social, moral, and personal 
dimensions. However, this feature of the deity, that he or she or it is an object of 
worship, as well as all of the traditional trappings of worship, such as rituals, 
sacraments, creeds, and holy books, are almost entirely irrelevant to the fundamental 
question of metaphysics. If we are to consider this question purely as a philosophical 
question, for which we seek an answer, then the only features of God that really 
matter are his transcendence and his necessary existence. 
The notion of transcendence is important here because it helps to overcome some 
of the conceptual problems involved with an appeal to a deity. There are at least three 
significant issues to be considered, and they are all related to the question of how we 
are to think about God, given that the divine nature is thinkable at all. To some extent, 

78 
The Problem of Existence 
each problem is derived from the points made by Smith and Baldwin that have already 
been discussed. The first is the question of specifying the concept of God, and it is 
related to the problem of whether we can specify an adequate concept of perfection or 
supremacy which will not automatically entail the existence of the deity. If the concept 
of God is existence-entailing, then Smith's argument will be effective against theism. 
The second problem arises from the doctrine that God is a particular being rather 
than an abstract object. If we are to retain this doctrine, and also hold that Baldwin's 
subtraction argument is successful, then we must be able to think of God as something 
which is not a concrete object, and cannot be subtracted from any world. The problem 
is that of how this is to be achieved. Finally, there is a question about whether God 
can be considered as one part of the world, or as the all-inclusive being which 
encompasses all that there is. It seems that if we are to say that God is just one part of 
the world, then we will have an inadequate conception. Part of the traditional concept 
ofthe Supreme Being is that of the greatest possible, that which cannot be surpassed 
by anything we can conceive. Yet if God is what Smith calls a 'world-part', then 
there is something greater than him, namely the whole which includes both God and 
the rest of the world. 
Each of these problems arises from the assumption that we can think of the deity as 
a 'something' in the same way that we think of other somethings, by employing 
determinate concepts, mutually exclusive dichotomies and distinctions, and by 
including him as a 'part' of the world, an element in the set of worldly things. If this 
assumption is rejected, then we may avoid all of them, and approach divinity from a 
non-conceptual standpoint. However, if we end up by categorically denying that God 
is truly a 'something', then we must also deny that he can provide a resolution to the 
question of why there is 'something' instead of nothing. It is therefore important to 
be very careful in formulating a resolution for these problems. It is very easy to slip 
into paradox, and also to mislead by the implications of paradox. 
Concepts and predicates function as classificatory devices. Each concept which is 
represented by a predicate in a language divides the world into two classes: those 
things which instantiate the concept fall into one class, and those things which fail to 
exemplify it fall into the other (the complement). To say this is merely to repeat what 
is said in most elementary texts in logic and philosophy. It follows from this 
characterization that there is no concept of 'absolutely everything whatsoever'. For 
if this were a concept, it would be represented by a predicate which would have as its 
extension the whole universe of discourse, and since it would exclude nothing, it 
could not function to classify objects. And this appears to be correct. We do not have 
a concept of absolutely everything, and we cannot classify the whole universe of 
discourse as belonging to some subset of itself. It follows that if the deity is all-
inclusive, and must therefore encompass absolutely everything, then we can have no 
adequate concept of the deity. And again, this appears to be correct. Mystical 
'descriptions' of God explicitly state that he is beyond description, and that no concept 
is adequate for discourse about the divine. 41 At the same time, paradoxically, mystical 
writers make the claim that God is one, and that he is a particular being. 
The problem for mystical theists, then, is that they are trying to point to a being 
which is the greatest and most all-inclusive whole that there is, but in doing so, they 
inevitably run outside of the range of what can be captured by concepts. As a result, 
what they say is inevitably paradoxical. It can only be thought coherent if we are able 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
79 
to arrest our normal sense of revulsion at paradox, and try to grasp that there may be 
a non-conceptual pointing, and that this may be achieved partly within language. 
God is transcendent, not only in that he transcends conceptual delineation, but also in 
that he transcends the world of things. As such, it is true to say that he is not a thing, 
but also to say that he is a particular being. He is a greater whole than the world, and 
yet he is also a being that exists within the world. This is paradoxical, but the idea of 
an ultimate transcendent whole is intelligible nonetheless. 
The Transcendence of God 
We may approach the transcendence of the deity by considering a process of 
characterizing greater and greater wholes. Given that we are talking about things 
which are wholes, we must be thinking of particular beings (if we are thinking of 
anything at all). But at the same time, if we go far enough along the route of greater 
and greater inclusiveness, we will arrive at a whole which transcends 'thinghood'. It 
cannot be categorized as a thing, indeed it cannot be categorized at all, and as such it 
is a 'non-thing'. Yet it is also a particular thing because it is the ultimate whole. This, 
it seems, is a way to approach God, although it is not the only possible approach. 
There are various mundane things which are wholes in the sense that they incorporate 
or include many particulars. The planet Earth includes all of the people, all of the 
land and all of the oceans that exist within it. It is a whole comprised of a vast number 
of material beings. The solar system is a greater whole because it includes all of these 
things, and all of the other planets, and the sun. The milky way galaxy is an even 
greater whole because it includes this solar system and millions of others in a gigantic 
system. We can go on to consider greater wholes than this as well, proceeding in the 
same way by adding more and more particulars. The physical universe is an greater 
whole than all of the galaxies because it includes them as well as all of the extragalactic 
matter, and the totality of spacetime. Although many philosophers believe that this is 
the greatest whole that there is, we can conceive of greater wholes. 
The idea of the world-whole, as Smith has employed it, is not equivalent to the 
idea of the physical universe. It represents a greater whole than all of physical existence, 
because it includes everything physical as well as non-~hysical things such as mental 
wholes, universals, relations, and ethical obligations.4 In fact, he claims that it also 
includes those things about which we have no knowledge, if there are any (such as 
spatial wholes which are not parts of the spatial whole of our physical universe). For 
this reason, he claims that the world-whole is 'the maximally great whole that 
happens'. 43 On his view, no existent whole is greater or more inclusive than this one. 
We can imagine wholes which are greater, but they will be nonexistent wholes 
(incorporating things which do not happen, such as fictional objects or merely possible 
worlds), and consequently they will not have the same importance for us. 
Let us then go further than the world-whole, and beyond Smith's system of 
metaphysics. We are seeking the greatest whole per se, rather than the greatest whole 
that happens, and as such we can consider adding more on to the totality of all that 
exists. Moving along this path may appear to be self-defeating, for if we are trying to 
point to a necessary being, then we must point to an existent, something which 
'happens'. Yet the deity is more than just an existent, and what he includes is larger 
than the world-whole itself. In a sense, it is misleading to state plainly and simply 

80 
The Problem of Existence 
that God exists. For saying this appears to place a limitation upon him, by confining 
him to a specific domain or within a specific class. For the same reason, of course, it 
is equally misleading to say that God fails to exist. Both of these propositions, if they 
are interpreted as treating God as a substantial thing, presuppose something incorrect, 
and this is why they can both be rejected by rejecting the presupposition. Ancient 
mystical theologians, as well as modem existentialist thinkers such as Paul Tillich, 
have recognized this.44 
According to Smith, the world-whole is the greatest whole that happens, and it 
includes everything which happens except itself. It seems that we can imagine a 
greater whole than this by considering the whole of everything that happens together 
with the world-whole itself. We may call this object the world-wholle, using a slightly 
different spelling to represent a slightly more inclusive being. Smith may claim that 
this is a whole which does not happen, which fails to exist, but it is difficult to see 
how he could deny that it is a greater, more all-inclusive totality. It may be an imaginary 
object, but it is truly the whole of all that exists. For the world-whole exists, but it 
does not include itself, whereas the world-wholle includes all of the things which 
exist, not only the mundane things but the totality of mundane things as well. 
If the whole of all that exists is not itself an existent, then it does not include itself. 
Consequently we can imagine a greater totality which does include this whole. And 
of course, by iteration of the same procedure, we can obtain a greater whole than this, 
and so on indefinitely. However, none of these even greater aggregates can be called 
'the whole of all that exists', for they will include wholes which do not exist. We 
have reached a limit, then, in considering the world-wholle. Anything which transcends 
this object, in the ·sense of going beyond it and including it, must include things 
which are non-existent, and in that case it can only be something we can imagine, 
rather than something that could be real. Yet there are thinkable wholes which transcend 
the world-wholle. 
Consider, for example, the whole which includes all of that which exists, and all of 
the infinite number of wholes that can be constructed by iteration of the procedure 
whereby the world-wholle was constructed. This is an immense assemblage of things, 
but it seems that its conceptual content is not different from that of the world-wholle 
itself. To arrive at an even greater, more inclusive being, we may add all of the contents 
of merely possible worlds. All of the things which are merely imaginary, but never 
become actual, may be considered together, and then combined with the whole of all 
that exists, together with all of the wholes that may be derived from it. What we have, 
as a result, is the entirety of 'logical space'. It appears, when first we describe it to 
ourselves, that this is as far as we can get. When all that is actual and all that is possible 
is combined in one object of thought, it seems that there is nothing left to consider. 
At this point, we can ask whether we have pointed to a whole that is great enough 
to capture all that is included in the sense of the term 'God'. If the deity is all-inclusive, 
then surely he must be the sum total of all things, existent and nonexistent, and this is 
what has been specified. It therefore seems that we have specified the wholeness of 
the Supreme Being. In fact, however, this is far from being the case. There are still 
further and deeper dimensions to the transcendence of the deity. If God was nothing 
more than 'the space of all possibilities', including those which are actual, then he 
would still lack something. For example, if this were true then we could not think of 
the deity as personal, or creative, or loving, or worthy of worship. But more importantly, 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
81 
the summation oflogical space lacks ultimate transcendence. It remains in the realm 
ofthe conceivable, and submits to conceptualization. The wholeness of the deity thus 
remains incomplete, even after we have considered the most monumental completeness 
of all that is possible in thought. 
When we have mentally amalgamated all of the possible things that are thinkable 
into a single unit, we may continue to progress beyond this. We may ask 'What lies 
beyond this totality?' and we may find an intelligible answer. For surely the answer is 
that nothing lies beyond it. Nothingness is somehow there at the end, beyond all 
somethings. Call this the Void, the state in which nothing exists, the state of total 
emptiness, bereft of substantial things of any kind. Now, if we are to progress further 
on the path of transcendence, then we may consider a totality which combines the Void 
with the totality of all possible things. God is not reducible to the realm of the thinkable, 
the substantively possible, for he also includes the nothingness which lies beyond it, 
the unfathomable Void beyond thinghood. This is ultimate transcendence. This is infinity, 
the wholeness which is encompassed by the deity. And yet, it is not identical with God. 
It is only the wholeness which God encompasses. It is his extension, but not himself. 
Can we really think of something which includes the whole of all possible things 
and the nothingness which lies 'beyond' the world? Well, in a sense we cannot think 
of it, for it is too large to be encompassed within a concept. Since nothing would be 
excluded by 'the whole of everything and nothing, all together', this cannot be 
represented by a concept. And yet, oddly, the description thus formulated does appear 
to be intelligible - in the same way as we can say that we can grasp the concept of 
'the ungraspable'. In a sense, we cannot grasp it, but in another sense, it describes 
something, and as such we can grasp it. There is a kind of paradox here, but it does 
not lead us to incoherence. Instead, it leads us beyond conceptual understanding, but 
does so by employing concepts, by taking us through a route that considers gradually 
more all-encompassing totalities. The whole which is constituted by all things together 
with nothingness is beyond our ability to conceive. We cannot say that it is a substantial 
unity because it includes the non-substantial. As such, we cannot say what it is. Because 
this represents the extension of God, we cannot say what God is either. And yet, 
strangely, we may continue to speak. 
To what extent is this account of the transcendence of God in accord with traditional 
religious understanding? This is a difficult question to answer, primarily because 
there are several traditions and several possible explanations of transcendence. The 
formulation presented above is much more in keeping with the fundamental ideas of 
mysticism than anything else in traditional religion. And because mysticism is a 
universal trend, appearing in all of the major religions, much of this account is 
independent of any specific cultural preconception. Indeed, since the deity transcends 
all conceptions, it does not seem to matter how this 'going beyond' is elucidated. 
Whether it is expressed as the claim that 'The Tao which can be named is not the true 
Tao' or as the claim that God is the ultimate mystery of Being, the idea is the same. 
The ultimate is unthinkable precisely because it is ultimate. In some religious texts, 
this sense of inconceivability is combined with a sense of awe in the depiction of the 
deity. These texts are sincere and humble admissions of cognitive failure, and they 
can powerfully indicate that, for the religious disciple, God transcends both being 
and nothingness, and therefore lies beyond what we may conceive without paradox. 
Consider, for example, this passage from the Rig Veda (X. 129): 

82 
The Problem of Existence 
There was neither death nor immortality then. No signs were there of night or day. The 
ONE was breathing by its own power, in infinite peace. Only the ONE was: there was 
nothing beyond. 
Darkness was hidden in darkness. The all was fluid and formless. Therein, in the void, 
by the fire of fervour arose the ONE. 
And in the ONE there arose love: Love the first seed of the soul. The truth of this the 
sages found in their hearts: seeking in their hearts with wisdom, the sages found that bond 
of union between Being and non-being. 
Who knows the truth? Who can tell whence and how arose this universe? The gods are 
later than its beginning: who knows therefore whence comes this creation? 
Only that god who sees in highest heaven: he only knows whence came this universe, 
and whether it was made or uncreated. He only knows, or perhaps he knows not.45 
The last line of the text is most striking. If it is possible that the god who sees in 
highest heaven does not know from whence came our world, then what chance have 
we mortals of attaining such an understanding? If this question is so far above all 
questions that it transcends the all-knowing gods, then we can do nothing. It is truly 
beyond us. And yet, there is some hope of a kind of understanding in a previous 
paragraph. For if the sages may find the bond of union between Being and non-being, 
and if they can find this by seeking in their hearts, then there is a path leading towards 
the light. 
Divine Necessity 
An account of the transcendence of God is only a preliminary part of the theistic-
necessitarian answer to the fundamental question. It indicates how far God is extended, 
and shows that ultimate transcendence stretches so far that it goes beyond our ability 
to conceive, but in itself this does not explain why there is something instead of nothing. 
A necessitarian answer, if it is to be fully satisfactory, must entail that 'something 
exists' is a necessary truth. Given that the deity encompasses the totality of all things 
and also nothingness, we may ask how he can be counted as a necessary existent. 
Even if a person is able to follow the path which considers greater and greater 
wholes, and is able to make the final leap of considering the infinite whole of 'all and 
nothing', this does not mean that he will thereby become a religious believer. Merely 
following such a path, merely formulating a way of pointing to the deity, does not 
automatically produce belief in the existence of the deity. Just as an argument which 
proceeds from the 'concept' of God to the reality of God is invalid, so a way of 
pointing which does not specify any concept will not necessarily point to a reality. 
In fact, even if we believe that there is the totality of 'every thing and nothing 
together', we do not necessarily believe in theism. For this totality is merely a domain, 
it is just the imagined extension of an all-inclusive whole. It does not necessarily have 
life, spirit, or personality. God encompasses this whole, but he is not identical with it. 
He is more than this, and must be so if he is to be the focus of spiritual concern. He is 
a person, and he has the spontaneity and creativity of a person. God manifests himself 
to us, or at least to those of us who are believers, in person. He does this by leaping 
out of the whole that he encompasses, so that he may appear before us. In this way he 
can be a 'something' for us, not the infinite totality which includes nothingness, but a 
being which necessarily exists, a creative deity. In so leaping out ofhimself, however, 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
83 
he does not lose anything. He does hot become less than his total extension by creating, 
for the creation itself is within the totality that he includes. 
Ultimate transcendence implies the capacity to transcend oneself. God has the ability, 
which no finite creature has, to be himself and also to be another, to be separate from 
himself. This is how we can understand his creativity. It is a leap out of the transcendent 
totality and into a structured world of things. It is an act of self-limitation which does 
not alter the unlimited extension of the divine. God can be finite as well as infinite, 
for he can 'go beyond' his own infinite extension. Thus he may choose to give himself 
up to finitude in the act of creation. This is a free choice, and it does not follow from 
any essence or any concept. Neither does it follow from the proposition that God is a 
free spontaneous being, for he may have chosen not to create, and he would still have 
been God. 
We are now in a position to formulate responses to the conceptual problems 
confronting a theistic-necessitarian answer to the question of existence. The first 
problem was that of specifying an adequate concept of the deity. This is resolved very 
simply by denying that we have such a concept. Furthermore, the necessary existence 
of God does not follow from any essence or any concept. It cannot follow in this way, 
not only because concepts cannot determine their own instantiations, but also because 
there is no adequate, fully delineated concept of the deity. The infinite transcends all 
of our ideas. Instead of possessing a concept of God, we may have a non-conceptual 
means of pointing to that which God includes, which is the totality consisting of all 
possible things and also 'nothingness'. This pointing does not necessarily lead to any 
religious conviction, and it does not parallel any ontological argument. Following 
the (reformulated) Leibnizian argument, we may postulate the existence of God as a 
necessary being which will provide a satisfactory answer to the fundamental question, 
but this argument does not presuppose that we have any concept of God. 
The second problem presents a more serious difficulty for the theistic-necessitarian 
hypothesis. Given that God is a particular rather than an abstract being, it is difficult 
to see how he can be a necessary existent. If Baldwin's subtraction argument is 
successful, then there is a possible world which contains no concrete particulars. 
Thus if the deity is a necessary existent, we cannot think ofhim as a concrete particular. 
There need not be any problem with this because we can simply say that he is not 
concrete because he includes more than that which is concrete. God includes abstract 
objects such as universals, even though he is himself a particular being. The problem 
is, however, that we can approach the vast totality which he encompasses by 
considering greater and more transcendent wholes, until we arrive at the ultimate 
whole, and ultimate transcendence. Why can we not simply 'subtract' this ultimate 
whole, in thought, from a given possible world? If we can conceivably subtract the 
whole which God includes, then it seems we can just as easily subtract God himself. 
And if this is possible, then there is a possible world with no deity, and therefore he 
cannot be a necessary being. Thus Baldwin's argument presents us with a real difficulty. 
There is a way for theists to reply to this objection. Given that God is a person with 
free will, who is infinite but may choose to become manifest in finite beings, we may 
formulate an interpretation of possibility in which it is true to say that God exists in 
all possible worlds. In fact, on this interpretation, God exists as a condition of there 
being any possible worlds in the first place, and this entails his necessary existence. 
Although the deity transcends all possibilities, and all finite things, and lies beyond 

84 
The Problem of Existence 
all possible worlds in his ultimate completeness, he is also a free personal being who 
may freely choose to be finite. He may choose to limit himself to a particular world in 
order to appear within a comprehensible context. In making such a choice, God does 
not become less than the unrestricted whole that he encompasses. On the contrary, he 
retains all that he is and also becomes incarnated as a fmite being. This is part of the 
essence of a theistic-necessitarian answer to the fundamental question. 
The simplest way of responding to this second problem is to say that, for a theist, if 
you 'subtracted' God from any world, the result would no longer be a possible world 
(although it could be a whole of some other kind). This is because possible worlds 
are not independent entities in their own right. Like all other finite things, they are 
within the ultimate transcendent being, and they would not have the status of being 
'possible' if they were separated from this being. Such a separation would imply a 
separation from the totality of all totalities, a total non-inclusion in the set of existents 
as well as the set ofnonexistents (if there are any), which means that we could say 
nothing at all about them. There are no truths outside of truth itself, and for theism, 
God is truth itself. Possible worlds are just ways in which the infinite deity may 
choose to transcend himself, and make himself finite. As such, each world must retain 
God, for each one is just a manifest~tion of God within a particular structure. If there 
was a world without the deity, this world would not be a choice that God could make 
for the purpose of manifesting himself. Therefore such a world is not a possible 
world, given a theistic interpretation of possibility. It might be thought to be a totality 
of some kind, and perhaps it could be called an 'impossible world' but it is not a real 
possibility. 
This does not imply, however, that every possible world 'retains' the deity in the 
sense that he is an element in· the set of entities in the world. In fact, if God were no 
more than another 'thing' in the set of things which exist, then Baldwin's subtraction 
argument would demonstrate the falsity of theism. Theism asserts that one of God's 
possible choices is to create nothing. That is, he may choose to manifest himself as 
Nothingness, the totality which is the empty world. He may do this, in fact, because 
he is not identifiable as a 'mere thing' and he includes 'the Nothing'. This is how the 
transcendence of the deity avoids the subtraction argument. When we have subtracted 
all of the concrete things from the world, we are still left with something, namely the 
state of affairs in which nothing concrete exists. This state of affairs is itself a possible 
manifestation of God, so it remains true, even in the empty world, that God exists. It 
was argued that the subtraction argument presupposes a conception of possibility 
which allows us to identify a possible world by the propositions which are true at that 
world rather than the things which exist in it. Thus if the empty world is possible, 
there are propositions which are true at the empty world, such as 'no concrete object 
exists' and 'the earth does not exist' and so on. According to theism, the 'truth-maker' 
for these propositions is God himself, for they are true, at that world, because God 
exists in that world and has chosen a particular way of being himself. 
There is no doubt that this is a strange and perplexing doctrine. It results from the 
all-inclusiveness of the deity, however, which is a part of traditional theism. It also 
results from the idea that God is a person who may choose to realize himself within 
the world, even while extending beyond it. Given that this bizarre combination is 
intelligible, there is a way of responding to the third problem which besets a theistic-
necessitarian answer. This was the question of whether to count God as a part of the 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
85 
world or as the whole. The answer is that we can say that he is both, but in different 
guises. 
In respect of being the all-inclusive reality which has ultimate transcendence, he 
clearly includes the whole of the world, the totality of all that exists, and even more. 
However, at the same time, God may choose to manifest himself as a particular part 
of the world, or within a particular state of affairs in the world. Thus we can truly say 
that he is a part of the world, and even that, in certain contexts, it extends beyond 
him. But although the world may be physically larger than a particular manifestation 
of God, it can never exceed him in greatness or excellence. For example, according 
to Christianity, God has appeared most fully to us in the life and death of a particular 
man, although this man is only a part of the world and not the whole. Yet believers 
are led to feel that the significance of the whole may be found in the being and the 
actions of this one part, and this underlies the belief that he is indeed a manifestation 
of the divine. 
The Adequacy of Theism 
Philosophical theology has experienced enormous changes in the modem secular 
era. Thinkers in the Middle Ages believed that they could produce proofs that God 
necessarily exists, and that this was the appropriate point of origin for their study. 
The critical reaction to these arguments by Hume, Kant, and many others, together 
with a closer scrutiny of the nature and limitations of the notion of proof in formal 
logic, has lead to the abandonment of the rationalist project. It may be that there is no 
way of conclusively showing that any object exists necessarily. In fact, it may be that 
the only way of attaining religious belief is through some form of religious experience. 
The essence of mystical theism is the feeling that, as William Blake said, we can 
see a world in a grain of sand, and heaven in a wild flower. It is a direct intuition that 
the infinite has been realized here and now within fmite things. This intuition is not 
universal, and the paradox involved in its expression, that the whole may transcend 
itself, may lead us to unbelief through incomprehension. Yet this sense of 
incomprehension has two sides to it. For where the atheist finds a plain contradiction, 
the believer recognizes the mystery of divine love. 
Many believe that theism is a failed explanation, almost inevitably. If it is employed 
to answer any question at all, it seems to explain a mystery by invoking another 
mystery. For many philosophers, this does not represent an advance in understanding. 
However, the point about speaking of God in this context is similar to the point of 
talk about the Form ofFormhood, which (according to Platonism) is the final source 
of intelligibility. If the deity is a mystery, he is an ultimate mystery, and this is precisely 
what is needed to answer the fundamental question. If any postulation can provide an 
answer, it must be the postulation of something ultimate, beyond which our 
explanations and thoughts can reach no further. 
There are reasons to think that a theistic-necessitarian answer is adequate, despite 
the fact that it has features which many find repugnant. For theists, the answer matches 
our intuition that the fundamental question 'lies beyond us' with a characterization of 
an entity which lies beyond us. This point can be grasped even by an atheist, for what 
is claimed here is only that the fundamental question is odd, portentous, confronting, 
and disturbing, and so too is the answer, if the answer is to be found in divine necessity. 

86 
The Problem of Existence 
This does not mean that theism is factually correct, but it indicates that if it were 
factually correct, it would also be 'emotionally correct'. It adequately responds to 
our inquiry because it reveals, in a particular way, that we were right to feel awed in 
asking the question. 
Another reason to think that theism is an adequate answer is that it is capable of 
overcoming our sense of frustration. God cannot be fully conceptualized, and so in a 
sense, the answer provided by theism cannot be fully conceptualized. This seems to 
show that it is intellectually inadequate. But on the other hand, we are given 'material 
for contemplation' by pointing to the deity. In fact, we are led to contemplate that 
which is magnificently all-inclusive, and even self-transcendent. As we meditate on 
this, if we believe in God, we may also recognize that divine necessity provides an 
answer to the fundamental question which no longer frustrates us. Instead of irritation 
and anxiety, we are left with transcendent awe, a feeling of standing before and reeling 
back from the ultimate wholeness. The deity represents a wholeness which must be, 
for even ifhe chooses to be wholly empty, nevertheless he is incarnated as nothingness. 
The infinite totality of 'all and nothing', the totality which transcends all others, is 
truly awesome. And this awe may, if only we can share the vision and the experience 
that is theism, eradicate the frustrations of our inquiry. Theism releases us from the 
conceptual constraints of the problem by releasing us from our focus on concepts. 
A final point concerns the way that theism deals with the idea that some things 
exist contingently. According to both mysticism and traditional theology, God is the 
creator of the concrete universe. He has brought about the existence of the domain of 
immanent things which surrounds us and in which we live our finite lives, and he 
also sustains the continued existence of this domain. God's act of creation may be 
understood as a gift, and it is a gift of his own self, for he is Being in itself, the 
Supreme Being from whom all limited beings proceed. As such, theism fulfils the 
function of explaining, not only why there is something, but also why there is 
something contingent. God makes a particular choice, and a particular world comes 
to exist. The fact that this is a choice means that it is contingent. This kind of explanation 
is implicit in the form of the cosmological argument itself, and if it is the correct 
explanation, there is another reason to think that theism represents a satisfactory 
answer to the fundamental question. 
Needless to say, none of these reasons is conclusive. In fact, it is possible to remain 
unsatisfied by all of the necessitarian answers to the question, on the grounds that 
they do not provideihe right sort of explanation at all. I have argued that the postulation 
of a necessary being, such as an ultimate Form or an ultimate deity, may result in a 
relief from frustration, primarily because it is a substantive and non-trivial necessitarian 
doctrine. Talking about a necessary being at least allows our minds to fix upon a 
particular, a something which cannot be an absolute nothing (even if it can allow for 
an absence of concrete things). This may have a calming affect, and it may lead us to 
feel awe at the transcendence of the necessary being. As such, this kind of answer has 
the potential, at least, to serve as a escape from the problem. Saying this much, however, 
does not entail that it is the only way of obtaining a release, or that either of these 
answers is uniquely correct. We may feel that we must go beyond all forms of 
necessitarian doctrine, and seek an entirely different form of explanation. One 
significant possibility is the use of value as an explanation for existence. 
www.ebook3000.com

Necessitarian Answers 
87 
Notes 
G.E. Moore, 'Is Existence a Predicate?', Philosophical Papers, Allen & Unwin, London, 
1959. 
2 
W. V. Quine, 'On What There Is', From A Logical Point of View, Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 1961. 
3 
J. Searle, Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1969, p. 77. 
4 
See C.J.F. Williams, What is Existence, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1981. 
5 
See K. Lambert and B. van Fraassen, Derivation and Counterexample: an Introduction to 
Philosophical Logic, Dickenson, Encino, CA, 1972. 
-
6 
Ibid., also see references cited therein, p. 178, pp. 200ff. 
7 
J. Hintikka, 'Cogito, Ergo, Sum: Inference or Performance?', Philosophical Review, 71, 
1962, pp. 3-32. 
8 
G. Leibniz, 'Monadology', in G.H.R. Parkinson, Philosophical Writings, J.M. Dent & 
Sons, London, 1973,pp. 179-94. 
9 
See R.M. Adams, Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist, Oxford University Press, New 
York, 1994. The title of this work itself reveals much about Leibnizian metaphysics. 
10 D. Lewis, Counterfactuals, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1973, p. 84. 
11 Ibid., p. 1. 
12 D. Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1986, p. 21. 
13 Ibid., p. 93. 
14 lbid.,p.3. 
15 Ibid., p. 15. 
16 Ibid., p. 27. 
17 Ibid., p. 69. 
18 Ibid., p. 73. 
19 Ibid., p. 73. 
20 Ibid., p. 73. 
21 D.M. Armstrong, A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1989, p. 50. 
22 Ibid., p. 24. 
23 Ibid., p. 37. 
24 T. Baldwin, 'There Might Be Nothing', Analysis, 56:4, 1996, p. 232. 
25 Ibid., p. 233. 
26 Ibid., p. 234. 
27 D. Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds, p. 73. 
28 See H. Field, Science Without Numbers: A Defence ofNominalism, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 
1980, and H. Field, Realism, Mathematics and Modality, Blackwell, Oxford, 1989. 
29 P. van Inwagen, 'Why is there Anything at All?', Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume, 
70, 1996, pp. 95-6. 
30 G. Leibniz, 'Principles ofNature and Grace', in G.H.R. Parkinson, op. cit., pp. 195-204. 
31 Ibid., p. 199. 
32 N. Fleming, 'Why is There Something Rather that Nothing?', Analysis, 48:1, 1988, p. 35. 
33 See G. Priest, Beyond the Limits of Thought, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
1995, pp. 40-41. 
34 P. van Inwagen, Metaphysics, Westview Press, Boulder, CO, 1993, p. 104. 
35 Ibid., p. 104. 
36 For further details concerning these notions, Plato's dialogue Parmenides is the primary 
source. A good scholarly account of the theory of Forms is contained in J.N. Findlay, 
Plato: the Written and Unwritten Doctrines, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1974. 

88 
The Problem of Existence 
37 Findlay argues that Plato identified the Form of the Good with the 'Principle of Unity' 
which stands above all of the ordinary Forms, and accounts for their natures in terms of 
patterns of numbers and proportions. That is, the ultimate Unity which pervades all of 
reality and explains what it is to be real, is explicated as what it is to be a Form. Hence it is 
the Form ofFormhood itself. This is admittedly an unpopular interpretation of Plato, but it 
is has much to recommend it. See J.N. Findlay, op. cit., pp. 184-5. 
38 Plato, Republic, trans. H.D.P. Lee, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 1955, pp. 265-72. 
39 Ibid., p. 273. Also see J.N. Findlay, op. cit., pp. 29-80, for further elaboration of the theory 
of Forms. 
40 D.M. Armstrong, Nominalism and Realism, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1978, 
pp. 71-3. 
41 See F. C. Happold, Mysticism: A Study and an Anthology, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 
1964. 
42 Q. Smith, op. cit., p. 255. 
43 Ibid., p. 256. 
44 See J. Hick, Philosophy of Religion, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1983, pp. 7-8. 
45 Quoted in the introduction to The Upanishads, trans. Juan Mascaro, Penguin Books, 
Harmondsworth, 1965, p. 10. 
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter4 
Ultimate Values 
Regardless of whether we can comprehend the fact of existence within a theoretical 
structure, it is clearly something impressive. The exact form of the impression that it 
makes may vary according to the context in which it is appreciated, and perhaps the 
disposition we have at the time. Heidegger claims that the fundamental question may 
be asked in contexts of anxiety and boredom, while Smith claims that our basic 
appreciation of the world involves a feeling of joy. In fact there are several appropriate 
reactions, and the different ways in which we can apprehend the fact of existence 
help to determine which kinds of response are fitting. 
However, insofar as a significant impression is made by this fact, and significant 
emotions are aroused, it seems that we can use this in formulating a response to the 
'why' question. The reaction itself may provide clues about the explanation. For 
example, although we may not be able to fully describe the content of the fact of 
existence, we tend to feel that it is amazing, awesome, or wondrous. It is also clearly 
intelligible to say that it is good that something exists. There is a certain value realized 
in the world, and the realization of this value may explain why there is a world. It 
therefore appears to be intelligible to say that the reason why something exists instead 
of nothing is because existence has greater value than nonexistence. 
This notion of goodness, the goodness of being itself, does not appear to be a 
descriptive or theoretical category. To say that existence is good may even seem to be 
more like an exclamation than a theory, and some theories of value would claim that 
this is all that it is. Indeed, it is arguable that I am glad that there is something in the 
world partly because I am in the world, and the goodness of existence in general 
therefore affects me. But this does not necessarily lead to 'prescriptivism', nor does it 
mean that all invocations of value are merely emotional outbursts. 
We may avoid such accounts by insisting that the value achieved by the existence 
of things is an absolute value. Something would be better than nothing even if nobody 
recognized this, and even if there were no persons to comprehend the value of 
existence. Given that evaluations are not descriptions, or at least not ordinary factual 
descriptions, the problems that beset factual explanations of existence need not arise 
if the 'why' question is answered with an evaluation. We must therefore ask to what 
extent an evaluation constitutes a legitimate response to the fundamental question. 
Can we provide a reasonable explanation by saying that something exists because it 
is valuable to have something instead of nothing? 
Teleological and evaluative responses have distinctive features, and involve specific 
feelings. In a way, they are self-explanatory or self-subsuming, but the notion of 
'explanation' used in this context differs from that normally employed in science and 
philosophy. We can sometimes legitimately explain a fact by employing a value or a 
purpose, in the minimal sense of providing a coherent response to a 'why' question. 
For example, if asked why I decided to walk to work instead of driving, it is correct 
for me to say that this is because the sight of the trees in the park is valuable to me. 

90 
The Problem of Existence 
This answer delineates a specific purpose that I had in making the decision, so it is 
teleological. It also specifies something that I find valuable, so it is evaluative. It 
appears to provide an adequate (if incomplete) explanation of my decision. Hence 
there are occasions in which answers of this sort are appropriate and correct. 
It may be objected that this example is not an explanation at all, but a justification. 
It can be argued that I have justified my decision on the basis of a value, but this does 
not explain what happened. Some would claim that a correct explanation should cite 
causes rather than reasons, so that teleology is automatically inadmissible. But in the 
case of the question of existence, teleological and evaluative explanations can be 
appropriate. They can reflect an intelligible, perhaps an essential understanding of 
the world, and they can say what a causal explanation cannot say. 
In this chapter I will not consider teleological explanations in general. This is not 
because they are unintelligible, but because in the present context they can be 
interpreted as expressions of evaluative responses. It may be correct to say that, if 
something exists because it is ethically or aesthetically better than nothing, then 
something exists in order to instantiate value. This is a teleological assertion, and it 
may well be an acceptable expression of a relatively plausible answer to the 
fundamental question. But in my view, it is the notion of value, rather than the notion 
of purpose, which does most of the explanatory work. There are many purposes that 
one could cite to explain the existence of something instead of nothing, because this 
state of affairs can serve almost any purpose that one can imagine. But for that reason, 
it is better to think in terms of values, which are simpler and provide a more direct 
explanation. 
In the case of evaluative responses to the question, there is no development of 
feelings. We directly confront the goodness of existence and are we are grateful for it. 
We are glad to have a standing within the world, and specifically, we are glad that 
there is a world. Or alternatively, we directly appreciate the beauty of existence, and 
we are pleased, uplifted, and transformed by it. There may be variations on these 
emotions, but it does not seem that there is any necessary passage from one to another. 
The directness of our intuition precludes such a passage. It simply strikes the soul. 
There is a real world, and I am living here within it, situated as I am. This is magnificent, 
marvellous, extraordinary. But where must I go with the feeling? It is already a 
satisfaction, a disclosure which is complete in itself, and I may rest content with it. 
There is no problem to confront and overcome with some transformation of intellectual 
formulation or emotional reaction. 
The Metaphysics of Ultimate Value 
Values are necessarily ordered within a hierarchy, even though there are occasions 
when they may come into conflict with each other. It is clear that some things are 
more valuable than others. For example, it is more valuable to make money than to 
spend every day getting drunk. But happiness is more valuable than money, and 
occasional drunkenness may be an element in somebody's happiness. Moving on 
further, it can be argued that moral integrity has greater value than happiness. And 
there may be things that are even more precious than integrity, such as love or 
spirituality. Thus when we consider what has value, we can move upwards or 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
91 
downwards on a scale, towards greater and more inclusive visions oflife, or towards 
that which is less significant. We may therefore consider the question of ultimate 
value. The word 'ultimate' means 'final', and the question of ultimate value is the 
question of the final word, the most general and all-inclusive principle or idea or 
experience, governing all of our evaluations. This would be given the highest rank in 
the hierarchy of values, if it can be expressed at all. 
A person can hold an ideal for themself which will act as their ultimate value, and 
in this case they will try to act in accordance with this ideal, and apply it whenever 
possible to their relations to others. For example, one may think that kindness or 
benevolence is the highest principle, and always keep this in mind when dealing with 
others. In fact, this may become one of the principles of an entire moral philosophy. 
Utilitarianism can be interpreted as generalized benevolence, although it is also more 
specific than this, in recommending a maximizing principle of happiness. Moral 
theories need not use a unique ultimate value, however, and some of the plausible 
views hold that a variety of virtues must be taken into account. As well as general 
theories, an individual may adopt an ultimate value with respect to a particular aspect 
of their life. For example, a judge may believe that disinterestedness is the supreme 
or defining value for his profession while conceding that it is impossible to be 
disinterested in every matter. 
In such cases ultimate values are adopted for the practical purposes ofliving. Moral 
theories recommend certain principles of action, and professional codes specify the 
ethical values which guide their respective professions. Neither deals with the sense 
of ultimate value which is relevant to metaphysics. The value to which we aspire to 
in our lives is not the value which we appreciate in approaching the fact of existence. 
Indeed, this can be seen easily enough by reflecting on the fact that we aspire to the 
one and appreciate the other. The first is action-guiding and must be unfolded within 
the span of life, if only by approximations and with varying degrees of success. The 
second is given to us in the very fact that the world exists, and we do nothing in order 
to attain it because it is already there. All that we need to do to see values as they are 
already present is carefully attend to the world as it is presented. If we are to seek an 
understanding of ultimate value in this way, we must do so by adopting a certain 
vision of reality, rather than through the use of practical reasoning, however general 
it may be. 
Nevertheless, there is a relationship between the ultimate values we may choose as 
a way oflife and the ultimate values we fmd already exemplified in reality. This may 
become clearer as we consider the possibilities for an evaluative conception of the 
world's existence. Somebody who believes that the ultimate metaphysical value is 
ethical goodness will tend to live their life by ethical norms and understand themself 
in terms of ethical concepts. This can be developed in various ways, and to a large 
degree it is a personal matter. However, adopting a metaphysical vision of this kind 
makes it appropriate to react to the existence of the world with feelings of gratitude, 
and this will affect the kind of life that one pursues. By contrast, somebody who 
believes that the ultimate value is aesthetic, so that the world is understood as 
continuously creative, or as something beautiful, spectacular, and tragic, may pursue 
a very different kind of life, and need not be concerned as much about morality. 
Adopting such a vision makes it appropriate to be impressed by the existence of the 
world in various ways, and there are several feelings associated with it. 

92 
The Problem of Existence 
Ethical Value 
Some believe that the ultimate value, the highest and most significant value with 
which we assess and appreciate the world, is ethical. This does not entail a reduction 
of value to personal preference, nor does it mean that the content of ethics is exhausted 
by virtuous action. Ethical value can be understood as goodness in itself, as opposed 
to morality, or beauty, or truth, or instrumental value, or any other form of desirability. 
It may be conceived as that which underlies all of these other values, as the supreme 
and final form of affirmation. If this is the case, ethical goodness cannot be 'analysed' 
as anything other than itself, for it is excellence per se. It is what it is, an absolute and 
irreducible value which gives intelligibility to all of our subsidiary attributions of 
value. Ethics as ilie study of right action derives its significance, on such a view, from 
the nature of ethical value, which may be instantiated in a virtuous life, but may also 
be found in the non-human world. Animals, plants, planets, and stars may be perceived 
to be good, and thus they may share in the ultimate ethical value which is goodness in 
itself. The world as a whole may be said to be good. 
Those who believe in ethical goodness must also believe that it requires instantiation. 
This conception of ultimate value. may therefore underpin an explanation for the 
existence of something instead of nothing. The proposal is that the world exists because 
it ought to exist, or because it is the answer to an ethical need for a good world, or 
because the Form of the Good is self-justifying, and thus contains an explanation for 
its own instantiation in itself. Existence is in some sense demanded by the nature of 
value. 
To hold such a view is to be almost automatically committed to a feeling of deep 
gratitude for the existence of the world. It is good, ethically good, that something 
exists. For ifthere were nothing, there would be nothing of value. There would be no 
virtues, no persons, no freedom, no material substances. We should therefore be 
grateful that there are entities rather than nothing. Of course we should be grateful 
that the world has taken the form that it has, with all of the valued items it contains, 
but this presupposes that we are grateful that it is there in the first place. Furthermore, 
if we believe that the world exists because it is ethically valuable that the world 
exists, then we should expect a great fulfilment of ethical value, and this gives us 
another powerful reason to be grateful. We can expect that there is a real reason to 
exist, and to continue to exist. This is because the reason for existence itself is that 
there should be goodness, which justifies the continuation of the ethical life. 
For we may consider a logically possible alternative. There might have been a 
world in which there are beings which can live virtuously and happily to some extent, 
but in which the overall result is a victory for evil. In this kind of world, good beings 
exist only as cannon-fodder, so to speak, and have no hope of an enduring and 
successful life. Such a world may be conceived as the invention of an 'evil deity', 
whose goal was to create a situation as ethically wrong as it could be. This deity must 
concede that, in order to achieve this end some good beings must also be created, but 
only for the fun ()f torturing and destroying them. Good beings would then exist 
solely for the purpose of being shot down by the evil agents of the world, and the 
overall summation of value would be in favour of malice and destructiveness. 
If our world were like this, we would be justified in feeling a sense of ultimate 
despair. Life would not be worth living, and anything of value would be a temporary 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
93 
respite from the final demise of all value. If we believe that the reason that the world 
exists is because it is ethically good for something to exist, then we have a basis for 
thinking that this logical possibility is not actual. We have a reason to be grateful for 
all of the things that the world has to offer, and a reason to think that our practical and 
intellectual pursuits are worthy of completion. If the ultimate truth about the universe 
is based upon the ultimate value of the universe, then we can place value on truth, 
and upon a life that is lived in the light of truth. Otherwise, it may easily appear that 
suicide is a valid and even a desirable option. 
The theory that the world exists because it is ethically good can be developed in a 
number of different ways. In what follows I will focus upon only two of the thematic 
elaborations that it allows. The first is the original and most direct expression of the 
idea, and is based upon the philosophy of Plato. Numerous authors in the tradition of 
Neoplatonism have elaborated this kind of thesis. Although this tradition has been 
seriously neglected in contemporary thought, it is not entirely defunct, and elements 
of the Platonist view of goodness can be reformulated and accommodated within the 
perspective of modem philosophy and modem science. The second elaboration on 
the theme of ultimate ethical value that I shall discuss, Leslie's theory of'axiarchism', 
provides a good example of how this reconciliation is possible. 
The Form of the Good 
The Platonist theory of Forms was presented earlier in the context of a necessitarian 
answer to the fundamental question of metaphysics. It can also be considered as part 
of an evaluative response, but this interpretation draws upon different features of the 
theory. For Plato uses the Forms to explain ethical concepts, and he also claims that 
the evaluative Forms are the most important, indeed that they are the ultimate source 
of knowledge and meaning. In the early dialogues, he suggests that knowledge is 
identical to virtue. In the later dialogues, particularly the Republic, the theory is made 
more detailed and the notion of an ultimate value is introduced to deal with a variety 
of questions concerning reality, ethics, and politics. The Form ofFormhood may be 
understood in terms of its feature of giving intelligibility to things, but it can also be 
understood in terms of its ethical dimension, as the ultimate value in terms of which 
existence is grounded. In this guise Plato refers to it as the Form of the Good. 
As I am not principally concerned with providing a scholarly account of Plato's 
actual arguments, it will be sufficient to show that he characterized the Good as the 
ultimate value, and to illustrate the nature of this value as he saw it. Apart from this, 
there is a separate argument, which is not explicit (as far as I know) in the dialogues, 
which can be used as an evaluative response to the fundamental question. 
Plato was an objectivist in ethics. He held that there are objective truths about good 
and evil, and that they could be known to be true through reason. He also held that 
Goodness is the order of the universe, and it is thus instantiated by the structure of the 
city-state and in the soul of the disciplined, moral person. Thus his objectivism in 
ethics stems from a view about the objective nature of reality as a whole, and the 
overall pattern which it displays. In the dialogue called Gorgias, Socrates argues 
with Callicles about the question of whether it is better to do evil or suffer evil. Part 
of his argument is that an orderly, disciplined soul is required for virtue. In reply to 
Callicles on this point he invokes the idea of cosmological 'geometry', knowledge of 

94 
The Problem of Existence 
which is necessary for just action, and a correct understanding of oneself in relation 
to the cosmos: 
We are told on good authority, Callicles, that heaven and earth and their respective inhabitants 
are held together by the bonds of society and love and order and discipline and righteousness, 
and that is why the universe is called an ordered whole or cosmos and not a state of disorder 
and licence. You, I think, have failed to grasp the truth; you have not observed how great a 
part geometric equality plays in heaven and earth, and because you neglect the study of 
geometry you preach the doctrine of unfair shares. 1 
The virtues of an individual are hence connected with the order of the universe itself, 
and its wholeness is an indication of the wholeness of the virtuous soul. 
Since order is a prerequisite for intelligibility, it is no surprise to learn that when 
Plato considers the ultimate value, the Form of the Good, this is interpreted as the 
ultimate source of intelligibility. It encompasses both the serene impersonal values 
we seek in our theories, such as harmony, unity, simplicity, and orderliness, and the 
personal virtues which we seek in ourselves and our friends, such as courage and 
justice. At the same time, the ultimate Form is so all-encompassing that it cannot be 
properly described in words. We must rely upon similes and metaphors to understand 
what it is, and it is in this context that Plato's philosophy appears to many as mystical. 
In the Republic, Socrates states that he cannot speak directly of the Good, but can 
only describe its 'child',2 He also claims that the Good is the source of both the 
intelligibility and the reality of all things, although in itself it beyond being: 
The Good therefore may be said to be the source not only of the intelligibility of the objects 
ofknowledge, but also of their existence and reality; yet it is not itself identical with reality, 
but is beyond reality, and superior to it in dignity and power. 3 
Exactly what he meant by this remark is difficult to determine. It seems to indicate 
that we are correct in taking the Form of the Good as identical with the Form of 
F ormhood, but it also suggests that there is a kind of 'unreality' about it. If it surpasses 
existence and reality, can it be said to exist in itself? 
The Good is the source of the existence of the objects ofknowledge, but it cannot be 
the efficient cause of these objects. That seems impossible, given that Plato's Forms 
are transcendent entities, and therefore do not appear in the immanent world of events 
which cause other-events. But it might be that the notion of 'source' here can be 
interpreted in terms of the intelligible explanation, or the ultimate value which explains 
the nature of reality. His remark that the Good lies 'beyond reality' is difficult t() interpret. 
It need not imply that the Good is unreal, but it suggests that goodness, in the form of 
ultimate value, has a particular role as a self-standing, self-subsuming object of thought. 
It might then lie beyond reality in the sense that we can use it to 'explain' why there 
is anything at all. This would mean that, as the ultimate principle, it is related to the 
whole of reality as its ground, and thus lies beyond it (or underneath it, ifwe take the 
metaphor of 'ground' seriously) but this does not entail that it cannot participate in 
reality, or that it is wholly nonexistent. In its explanatory role, the idea of Goodness 
precedes that which is explained and goes beyond it, but as a Form it exists in the 
same way as any other Form exists. Whether this will be a truly satisfactory explanation 
depends upon the extent to which values are capable of accounting for facts. 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
95 
We need only assume that the idea of objective, absolute goodness makes sense in 
order to construct an evaluative response to the fundamental question. The existence 
of the Form of the Good is an essential part of the account, but it is a separate issue 
from the question of whether it makes sense as an idea. The Platonist response argues, 
in my view, that the existence of ultimate value must be taken to be self-explanatory. 
In other words, absolute goodness, the Form of the Good in itself, exists because it is 
good. Thus the self-predication of evaluative Forms is essential to this version of 
Platonism. This is only part of the account, however, because the main point is not to 
explain why an abstract Form exists, but why there is something concrete. The Platonist 
response must be directed at the fact of existence as it appears to us in the concrete 
world of our actual lives, for otherwise it will be utterly disconnected with values in 
action. Hence the account that I shall present, though only loosely based upon Plato's 
actual theory, is completed only with an account of why the existence of ultimate 
value demands a concrete world within which individuals may act. 
Let us begin with the idea of the Form of the Good. That is, we will begin by 
considering its content, not by assuming that it must exist. As a pure unqualified 
ultimate value, Goodness is untainted by imperfection. As a consequence, it is almost 
impossible to describe or classify. It is beyond measures and calculations, for it is 
good in itself and not for any other purpose. Nothing is wholly good except the Good 
itself, and things only have value if they are instantiations of the Good. Even so, an 
instantiation which is not identical to the Form itself will not be wholly good, for it 
will contain some degree of imperfection. Now if we consider two possible worlds, 
one where there is absolutely nothing at all, and one where the Form of the Good is 
instantiated (if only by itself), then it is clear that the latter is a better world than the 
former. This is true by definition. It is better that the ultimate value is instantiated, for 
things are only valuable if they are instantiations of the Good. Thus the existence of 
something instead of absolutely nothing is explained by the nature of the Good, for 
the very idea of the Good supplies a reason for thinking that it is better for there to be 
something than nothing. 
However, the Good may have been instantiated only by other abstract objects, by 
Forms such as Unity and Intelligibility. These are valuable, but they have no ethical 
implications for particular beings. In a world where there is nothing concrete, there 
cannot be any ethical conduct, for this requires particular beings with the capacity to 
act on each other. Furthermore, in such a world abstract Forms such as Courage, 
Justice, or Wisdom may exist, for they are instantiations of Goodness, but they do not 
necessarily have any instances. If we are considering a possible world in which there 
are only abstract objects, then we must consider the strange possibility that Justice, 
for example, exists without there being any just actions or just persons. Although it is 
logically possible for a Form of virtue to exist without having any instantiations, it is 
clear that it is less valuable in such a case. Only a particular being, which has life and 
consciousness and makes ethical choices can 'complete' the internal content of value. 
This is because the Form of the Good has an ethical dimension. It includes abstract 
Order, Unity and Intelligibility among its instances, but it must also include the virtues. 
Without the ethical Forms, it is only imperfectly Good because an essential ingredient 
is missing. 
Hence the explanation of existence in terms of Goodness is incomplete unless it 
entails that there are concrete beings of a certain sort. This is a requirement on 

96 
The Problem of Existence 
the ethical sense of the Good, which demands moral agency. If it were a purely 
abstract, purely impersonal Form of value, it would be deficient in value. It may 
still be good to have a world with Unity and Intelligibility by comparison with 
absolute nothingness, but it is much better to have a world where moral values are 
instantiated. 
It is therefore better that Goodness is instantiated by something concrete. This 
makes ethical life possible. Thus the existence of concrete things is explained by the 
nature of the Good, when this is fully revealed and explicated as the ethical Good. 
Hence it is this nature, this characteristic of positive ethical value, which has the 
ultimate explanatory role. It is arguable that a world in which there are some concrete 
things but no persons is better than one in which there is nothing but abstract Forms, 
for this can have a variety of valuable features. As Socrates says in the quotation 
above, the heavens and the earth are bound together with bonds of love, and the 
universe itself is an ordered cosmos. Thus if there were only an ordered concrete 
universe, but no people in it, this would be a realization of Goodness. But clearly it is 
even better to have a world where ethical life, in the full-blooded sense where virtuous 
actions are present and the Forms of virtue are instantiation, actually exists. Therefore 
such a world is a better and more complete expression of the wholeness of the ultimate 
Form, and this explains why such a world is actual. 
Nevertheless, the Platonist response to the fundamental question differs from the 
Leibnizian answer in that it does not require that perfection be realized in the concrete 
world. Platonists do not have to assume that there is a unique world that is the best of 
all possible worlds. All that is required is that the existence of concrete beings with 
some virtuous featUres is better than the existence of only abstract things and better 
than the existence of nothing whatsoever. Plato is satisfied with a merely adequate 
world, one which is good but not necessarily superlative, whereas Leibniz demands 
the best. The notion of the Good is a metaphysical principle, but Leibniz employs a 
causal principle, since he believes that it is the beneficence of God which leads to the 
creation of the world. 
This completes the Platonist response to the question of existence. It is not explicit 
in the works ofPlato, but it can be called 'Platonist' in virtue ofthe fact that it employs 
the Form of the Good. If it is to be considered an explanation, then it is clearly an 
evaluative one. The notion of value is crucial to the account, for it is the idea that the 
Form of the Good deserves to be instantiated which is intended to explain the fact 
that it is instantiated. Furthermore it is the ethical content of this Form which explains 
the fact that there are concrete objects in addition to abstract objects. As such it is 
clear that this response is distinct from a necessitarian answer to the fundamental 
question. It does not claim that it is logically or metaphysically necessary that 
something exists, only that it is better than nothing. 
One can ask whether this is sufficient to count as an explanation in the first place. 
I have called it a 'response', and I have suggested that it might be counted as an 
explanatory response, but there is a real question about its adequacy as an explanation. 
It can be objected that the realization of a particular state of affairs is not normally 
explained by the fact that it is better than another state of affairs. Something more 
than this must normally be added if we are to have an explanation: for example, we 
must usually say that some agent in the world has the power and the desire to realize 
better states of affairs. But this is not stated in the argument, and it does not form part 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
97 
of the evaluative response per se. I will return to this point later, but to some extent 
this objection can be answered by modifying the theory. 
It is interesting to compare the Platonist response with that of Nicholas Rescher in 
his book The Riddle of Existence. Rescher employs a teleological explanation for the 
existence of the world which does not make use of ethical values and virtues, but 
instead focuses entirely upon the 'cosmic values' which form only a part of Plato's 
conception of value. He claims that there may be laws of nature which explain the 
existence of the physical world and also maximize impersonal values, such as 
simplicity, harmony, systemic elegance, uniformity, and economy.4 If it is asked why 
laws should maximize such values, his response is that this is self-explanatory, and 
that in citing an axiological principle, we have reached the end of our understanding 
of why the world exists. Rescher's thesis is clearly motivated (at least in part) by his 
Leibnizian inclinations, and thus he speaks of'maximizing' values rather than asserting 
that existence is just better than non-existence. However, in his final account, he 
expresses an evaluative response to the fundamental question, because he relies upon 
a notion of value as something self-explanatory. This is also the essential element in 
the Platonist view, and it seems that Rescher provides a modern expression of 
Platonism, at least in part: 
It is the great advantage of a principle of axiology to be in the position to provide materials 
of its own explanation. Principles of economy, simplicity, etc., are literally self-explanatory 
by virtue of being optimal on their own footing ... A value principle . . . must validate 
itself.5 
Thus there need be no infinite regress of laws and necessities, for the ultimate 
explanation is axiological, and value validates itself. It may be simplistic to say that 
there is a world because the condition of there being a world is maximally valuable, 
but this is precisely what Rescher's theory says. 
The evaluative doctrine endorsed by Platonism simply asserts that it is better that 
there is something instead of nothing. The argument is based solely upon a comparison 
of the different possibilities, and it depends on the idea that the Form of Goodness 
has a content which entails that a world with concrete beings is better than no beings 
at all, or a world with only abstract objects. A different evaluative view can be 
developed by asserting that ethical value can explain existence only when it is 
combined with the notion of causation. It may be thought that Goodness is too abstract 
to do any real work, and that the universe must have some kind of causal ground if its 
existence is to be properly explained. Such a thought leads naturally to axiarchism. 
Axiarchism 
The basic theses of axiarchism, as expounded in John Leslie's book Value and 
Existence, 6 parallel those of Platonism with respect to the question of existence. In 
particular, axiarchism asserts that ethical value is self-justifying, which entails that it 
can perform the explanatory function required to address the fundamental question. 
Perhaps the main difference is that Leslie's theory avoids the invocation of transcendent 
universals. Instead, he argues that the idea that value explains existence is compatible 
with a basically materialist ontology and with the results of modern science. 

98 
The Problem of Existence 
Nevertheless, he is committed to a theory of absolute ethical value, and to the idea 
that the existence of something valuable, instead of nothing, is self-explanatory in 
some sense. Leslie's axiarchism may be summarized as follows: 
The world exists because it is the product of a 'directly active ethical requirement', 7 
which as a matter of fact, not logic, has proven sufficient to make things exist. 
2 Ethical requirements can conflict, but the need for freedom, exercised in a world 
governed by causal laws, may overrule the need for an absence of great evils such 
as famines and wars. 
3 Ethical requirements must be real. That is, it cannot be the case that they are 
reducible to expressions of emotion or 'prescriptions for action'; they must 'map' 
realities. Thus ethical goodness must be an absolute. It cannot be relative to the 
preferences of human beings. For this reason, the foundation of all goodness must 
be intrinsic goodness, which is a matter of being self-justifying. Things that have 
intrinsic goodness, then, are constituted in a certain way which means that it is 
better that they exist than that they do not exist. It follows that ethical grounds for 
existence 'extend beyond grounds for acting'. Questions of value are not restricted 
to questions of what we ought to do. 
4 The need for good situations does not depend upon whether there are people with 
ethical obligations. Indeed, it does not depend upon the existence of anything, 
since in some sense there would be a need for goodness even in a void. As Leslie 
says: 'Given an eternal absence of all things, living and non-living, nobody would 
be pained that The Need For A Good World was unsatisfied, but that would not 
abolish it. So it might be worth considering whether ethical needs, requirements, 
grounds for the existence of thinfs, could create something from nothing when 
combining to form such a Need.' 
5 Ethical requirements may have practically productive effects. While it is not the 
case that an ethical requirement, considered simply as such, creates anything, there 
is no reason to think that an ethical reason cannot have creative effectiveness. 
Leslie defends this view with an analogy: 'Ethical needs, as such, therefore have 
no creative power .... But similarly no judge as such ever suffers from dyspepsia 
since that is not a judge's role .... Likewise no cow as such is ever brown because 
brownness transcends mere cowness. Contrast how a cow, simply as such, is 
female.'9 
6 The existence of a world which obeys laws that lead to the existence oflife suggests 
that the reason for existence itself is its ethical 'requiredness'. 
The strategy that Leslie employs in arguing for his version of axiarchism has two 
components. He first argues that the theory is conceptually coherent, and that it has 
no serious logical defects. He then claims that there are good reasons for believing 
that it is the only serious explanation for the existence of the world. Although admitting 
that the theory is metaphysics, and cannot become a certainty however many empirical 
facts are uncovered, he claims that certain features of the empirical world, particularly 
the nature of time, 10 causal regularity, 11 the unity of the world, 12 and the presence of 
life, 13 make it highly probable. For example, he argues that the empirical world has 
causal orderliness, which is readily explained under the hypothesis of axiarchism, 
but not otherwise. There is an ethical need for a world which has a certain regularity 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
99 
in it, since this allows for significant ethical choices. The mere fact that our world 
does have causal regularity, where there are so many possible worlds which are merely 
chaotic, suggests that this ethical need has been satisfied, given that the explanation 
for regularity in terms of the natures and powers of existent objects fails. 14 Similarly 
the very existence oflife, given that its evolution requires immense fine-tuning in the 
physical laws of the universe, suggests that our world exists because it satisfied an 
ethical need. 
One of the central components of Leslie's theory is its commitment to a specific 
theory of time. This is interesting because it introduces a question about the use of 
causal notions in an evaluative explanation. He argues that axiarchism precludes any 
conception of time which entails that the past does not exist. This is because such a 
conception would detract from the evaluative basis of the account of existence. If 
things begin to exist because an ethical need has been satisfied, but then immediately 
cease to exist as time 'moves on', then it seems that their value has been wasted. If a 
world comes into being only to disappear, then one can wonder why it should have 
been at all. On the other hand, if past, present and future are relational properties, as 
the 'B-theory' asserts, 15 then there is no 'disappearance of value', and no dismal end 
to existence. According to the B-theory, time does not 'flow' at all, it and an event 
happens 'now' in the same sense as they happen 'here'; that is, relative to some 
speech-act. The idea of the flow of time is rejected, then, and along with it the idea 
that things in the past are non-existent. Events flow, but only in the sense that a curve 
can flow across an artist's canvas. 16 
Leslie claims that the existence of past (and future) events is an essential part of the 
axiarchist's defence against the problem posed by the existence of evil. He also claims 
that it helps to resolve the problems we may have in facing death: 
The B-theory can seem much the better ofthe two for axiarchism's purposes. D. C. Williams 
notes the dismay filling so many when they think of A-theory time, 'the flood on which the 
oldster wakes in the night to shudder as it cascades him into the abyss'. The B-theory does 
not deny our limited life-span, yet it throws doubt on the reasoning behind 'the sad anxiety 
to keep going futurewards'. It may be unfortunate that we cannot live at all clock times; but 
why look on this as disastrously different from not being able to live at every point in 
space? If, as on the B-theory, position in time is as relative as position in space, then death 
is much like the spatial boundary to your visual field. The dying B-theorist is not tortured 
by a wish to have his life all over again, just as before. In his view his future absence will no 
more involve him in absolute inexistence than does his present absence from another room. 
He will not be then but neither is he there or on Mars or Jupiter. 17 
This argument is a curious one, for it supposes that the fact that the existential status 
of time is on a par with the existential status of space may also affect the emotional 
significance of time. This is a dubious assumption. Surely it is wrong to think that, if 
I am happy to live in a smaller spatial extension, by having a smaller body, I should 
also be happy to have my life cut short in its temporal extension. This does not follow 
because we do invest (or discover) greater significance in life-time than in life-space. 
In fact it is not true, in general, that those who believe in the B-theory are better 
reconciled with death (even if, as rational beings, they should be). However, Leslie's 
general point, that the B-theory allows axiarchism a reply to the objection that whatever 
value exists in the world is quickly dissolved by the passing of time, appears to be 

100 
The Problem of Existence 
correct. If it were true that only what exists in the present moment can be distinguished 
as real, the value of existence would be considerably compromised. Indeed it could 
even be argued, as Schopenhauer claimed, that if this were the case, there would be a 
reason for preferring the nonexistence of the world to its existence. 
Leslie's answer to the fundamental question makes use of ethical values in explaining 
why things exist. He uses expressions, such as 'productively effective ethical 
requirement', which many would find difficult to understand except as confusions of 
some sort, or as puns (something he denies is intended). The answer he proposes is 
that ethical needs or requirements may be creatively responsible for the existence of 
things, by which he means that the ethical value of the world is a sufficient condition 
for its existence. As he puts it: 'A thing's value is a matter of there being a reason for 
that thing to exist..Now the universe may have value. Its ethically desirable character 
then supplies a reason of some sort for its being there.' 18 
This reason, he claims, is an ethical reason, but he combines this with notions of 
causality, claiming that the ethical need for existence is 'creatively successful'. Unlike 
Platonism, his position clearly invokes causal ideas such as production or creation, 
and thus it seems that the reason for existence is more than just ethical. Leslie is 
adamant that ethical requirements ~ such do not create anything, and he even includes 
a proof that this is the case.19 On the other hand, he explicitly compares ethical 
requirements to causal requirements in that 'they are a call for the actual presence of 
something', and that they set authoritative limits to the actions open to us.20 His 
argument therefore has the appearance of both asserting and denying that ethical 
requirements have a causal-explanatory import. 
This criticism is only tentative, however, since Leslie's official position is that 
even though ethical desirability is not in itself a causal factor, it could become one in 
the case of the existence of the world. This is not a conflation of the two notions, but 
a claim that it is possible to predicate causal efficacy to ethical goodness, in at least 
one case -that of the whole world. A more significant criticism may be that there is 
no need to invoke causation in the first place. If we were to follow Platonism, then all 
that we need assume is that Goodness has an intrinsic evaluative content, and that 
this content makes it self-explanatory. It can then be argued that the existence of 
something is better than the existence of nothing, and that this in itself is the reason 
that there is a world. There seems to be no need for a causal factor in addition to the 
evaluative factor. 
Leslie, however, claims that there is an ethical need for a good world which is 
causally effective. He follows Platonism in asserting that existence is better than 
nothingness, but appears to believe that this will not be enough to bring it about, and 
therefore adds this additional tenet. One may therefore wonder how this kind of 
causality is supposed to work, and in particular whether this form of causality follows 
the standard rule of the temporal priority of causes over effects. Is it that there is first 
a void, and then an abstract object, 'the need for a good world' acts to make a world, 
complete with its spatiotemporal framework? This would mean that it would act 
outside the time frame of the world, in which case we would have to assume that there 
is a 'super-time' in which, for example, at timet= 0 there is a void, and then at t = n 
there is a world. This seems both preposterous and onto logically extravagant. 
In fact Leslie himself claims that the need for a good world is too abstract to be 
counted as an existent thing,21 though he immediately adds that this does not mean 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
101 
that it cannot be a candidate for creative power. It is difficult to understand how an 
abstract object can cause the existence of a concrete object. It is also difficult to 
understand how something which is not an existing thing can bring about, through its 
creative sufficiency, the existence of a world. For these reasons, it may be better to 
formulate axiarchist explanation purely in terms of ethical value, rather than in terms 
of value and causation. This would make it more clearly aligned to Platonism, but it 
would not necessitate the existence of abstract objects. Axiarchism could be formulated 
as the claim that the ethical need for a good world, which would continue to be 
needful even in a void, provides the explanatory ground, but not the efficient cause, 
for the existence of a world. This thesis would still be supported by the facts which 
Leslie enlists for his case, but it would avoid talk of the cause of the world, except 
perhaps as a shorthand for (evaluative) 'explanation'. 
Given that we can interpret this position consistently, whether or not it is 
reformulated, it is an extraordinary claim. In most cases, perhaps in all cases other 
than the universe itself, ethical goodness does not have any existential consequences. 
The goodness of world peace does not have the power to bring world peace into 
being. If it did have this power, then we would be justified in mostly refraining from 
the pursuit of world peace, on the grounds that it will happen of itself, due to its own 
goodness. This would be a wonderful situation, and certainly an appropriate occasion 
for astonishment and gratitude. In fact, Leslie's answer to the fundamental question 
should provoke the same feelings for the same reason. To think that the world exists 
because of its goodness is to think that it is a remarkable exception to an otherwise 
onerous rule of morality, that we must work for good results. According to Leslie's 
theory, the universe is a sort of 'free lunch', and we may marvel not only at its being 
exceptional in its causality, but at its stark contrast with the rule of ordinary life, in 
which we rarely obtain something good unless we work for it. 
This thesis is not the kind of explanation that explains away, or obliterates our 
feelings of awe at the world. In this case, we feel awed by the fact of existence 
because of its exceptional status. The feeling is appropriately combined with a feeling 
of gratitude for the goodness of reality, for it remains true that there might have been 
nothing. It is not surprising to find that for Leslie, the word 'God' means one of two 
things. God 'may be identified as the world's creative ethical requiredness ... 
Alternatively (God may be identified) as an existing person, a person creatively 
responsible for every other existence, who owed his existence to his ethical 
requiredness. '22 Leslie is therefore a kind of theist, although his position is clearly 
distinguishable from a necessitarian answer to the fundamental question. 
Clearly axiarchism derives much from evaluative Platonism. In fact it may be a 
less attractive theory in some ways, for it is ambiguous on questions of ontology. 
Leslie does not wish to be committed to the existence of abstract objects, and yet he 
claims that there is sense to be found in the idea of absolute value. Perhaps this is a 
consistent position, but it is less simple than straightforward realism about universals. 
Leslie is not committed to theism, unless God is a principle of goodness, but this 
means that God cannot choose to actualize a particular possible world. It is therefore 
dubious whether such a God can be used to explain contingency. In some respects, 
then, axiarchism is less satisfactory than Platonism. However, since it shares the 
basic insights that a good world is better than nothing at all, and that this can serve as 
an explanation, it also shares in whatever truth these ideas have. 

102 
The Problem of Existence 
The Aesthetic Justification of the World 
Intuitions that the world is beautiful are common. They are usually temporary feelings 
associated with specific experiences, and rarely constitute serious explanatory 
hypotheses. We stand before a magnificent sunset, something we know to be 
spontaneous, gratuitous and superficial, and yet it seems that the spectacle comes 
from the very soul of nature. We call it beautiful, and we are so inspired that we feel 
the whole world which gives us this spectacle must itself be beautiful. Or perhaps we 
are looking at a greater portion of the whole, as we direct our gaze upwards to the 
stars. Here we find a billion blazing suns, a spectacle which becomes all the more 
staggering as we learn more about what they are and where they came from. A tiny 
fragment of our present knowledge and experience of the stars is enough to justify 
the claim that they are beautiful. And if the stars are beautiful, then the universe 
itself, which is even greater than the stars, should also be deemed to be so. 
As deep, non-cognitive appreciations of a world with which we find ourselves in 
harmony, these intuitions ofbeauty are not explanatory theories. They are just feelings. 
But it may be possible to explicitly formulate an explanation for existence that is 
based upon the idea of beauty. Epistemologically such a theory is on shaky ground, 
for it will be claimed that the aesthetic features of the world are not manifest to 
everyone. Furthermore, the meaning ofthe term 'beauty' itself is unclear. Yet we can 
say that many people, perhaps most of us, are stricken at some time by a world-
swallowing intuition which we are inclined to express in aesthetic terms. This is 
evidence that the proposition that the world is beautiful does make sense, even if we 
are unsure about exactly how to explicate it. 
Given that the proposition makes sense, but also that it is normally based upon a 
non-cognitive intuition, how can it be used as an explanation? Can we say that 
something exists instead of nothingness because this allows aesthetic properties to 
emerge? Clearly if there was nothing at all, there would be no colour, no dynamic 
natural forms, no music, and no creativity. So if these are aesthetically desirable, then 
there should be a world in which they can emerge and find expression. It can be also 
argued that nothingness is dull and monotonous, and thus an aesthetically unattractive 
possibility. But is this enough to explain why there is something instead of nothing? 
There are several possible aesthetic responses to existence, but there appears to be 
only one kind of irreducibly aesthetic explanation. By this I mean an account which 
explicitly relies upon a metaphysics of art and claims to provide a reason or justification 
based upon the 'artistry' of the universe. The others, it seems, can all be reduced to 
other forms of explanation. For example, one kind of aesthetic response claims that 
there is no explanation for existence, and that it is precisely this fact which makes it 
so beautiful. Some are impressed by the aesthetics of unreasonableness, or vice versa, 
which means that an irrational universe may be deemed more beautiful than a perfectly 
planned and totally explicable universe. But clearly this response is reducible to the 
deflationary view, and does not provide any other form of explanation. Another kind 
of aesthetic response is the claim that there is a divine creator, who made the world in 
order to make something beautiful. But this seems immediately reducible to the theistic 
version of the necessitarian answer to the question. It may be that the creator's existence 
is to be explained aesthetically as well, but unless something more is added to the 
form of this explanation, it will lead to an infinite regress. For the creator will be 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
103 
explained by being the aesthetic product of another creator, and this creator will in 
tum be explained by another, and so on indefinitely. 
A third kind of response is to say that there is an explanation for existence, but it 
lies beyond our cognition in the same way as 'beauty' is a non-cognitive, non-natural 
property of things. Thus we may suppose that by saying that the world is beautiful we 
are indirectly pointing to the unknowable (non-cognitive) explanation for its being. 
This is interesting but does not in itself constitute an explanation. It serves only to 
express the feeling that we may have that there is something 'beyond'. 
The most satisfactory kind of aesthetic explanation invokes a complete metaphysical 
hypothesis, and thus explains existence by formulating a view of the nature of reality 
as a whole. This is best exemplified by certain features of the philosophy ofFriedrich 
Nietzsche. He claimed that the world is a work of art which gives birth to itself. This 
view effectively eliminates the creator, leaving only the intrinsic value of art itself as 
the explanatory postulate. That is, the purpose and meaning of the world, considered 
as art, or as an aesthetic whole of some kind, is not something imposed upon it from 
outside, but is self-generated, and self-consummated. In the case ofNietzsche 's overall 
theory, the artist is identical with the art object, and the creator is also the creation. 
This truly aesthetic kind of theory is the only one that offers a genuine aesthetic 
explanation, as opposed to a deflationary or necessitarian one. The others are capable 
of inspiring different sorts of feelings, but the particular feeling of being 'part of a 
self-created work of art', with all the intense emotional connotations this has, is possible 
only with the Nietzschean thesis. Nietzsche himself was iconoclastic about traditional 
meanings and explanations. He is recognized as one of the most passionate and 
insightful critics of morality, Christianity, philosophy, and European culture in general, 
which suggests that he was critical of most available sources for ultimate meaning. 
Nevertheless, though he seems to come close to nihilism, it is difficult to read Nietzsche 
seriously without feeling that his thought is itself uplifting, even in the midst of the 
most dreadful passages. 
Prelude to Nietzsche: Schopenhauer s Pessimism 
There are indications that Nietzsche's aesthetic response to existence was deeply 
connected to his reflections on nihilism and pessimism, and in particular his 
appreciation of the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer. It seems that he found 
Schopenhauer's views initially attractive but ultimately unacceptable, and as a 
consequence formulated a response to pessimism which found a release from despair 
through tragedy. While this movement of thought appears natural in many ways, 
given the extremity of its origin, it is significant to note that the focus of the pessimism 
to which Nietzsche is responding is not a temporary feeling of depression or boredom. 
It is an entire cosmology, a metaphysical view of the emptiness of existence. In fact 
this was the theme of the essay by Schopenhauer which most clearly indicates that 
his position condemns the whole of existence as empty, valueless, and negative.23 
His position is based upon an argument which considers the nature of time, and it is 
defended as such. 
Schopenhauer thought that time destroys everything, so that ultimately all values 
are negated and all of our strivings are left unsatisfied. He held a metaphysical view 
of time which contemporary philosophers have called 'presentism'. This view entails 

104 
The Problem of Existence 
that only the present moment has real existence, and that everything from the past 
simply vanishes into nothingness. Indeed, Schopenhauer claims that so complete is 
the negation of the past that it may as well have never been: 
That which has been no longer is; it as little exists as does that which has never been. But 
everything that is in the next moment has been. Thus the most insignificant present has 
over the most significant past the advantage of actuality, which means that the former bears 
to the latter the relation of something to nothing. 24 
He is not entirely decided on the emptiness of existence. There are points in his essay 
when he suggests that our hearts cannot accept this ultimate negation, and that we are 
'secretly conscious in the profoundest depths of our being that we share in the 
inexhaustible well of eternity' .25 Yet there is always a return to emptiness: for while 
we might think it wisdom to enjoy the present, we may also describe it as folly, for 
that which vanishes in a moment cannot be worthwhile. Living in the present, then, 
will not resolve the despair of ultimate nonexistence. 
A significant part of Schopenhauer's argument concerns the futility of our striving 
after goals, which when achieved only to give rise to new tasks, leading to nothing but 
more dissatisfaction and emptiness. He claims that human life is a sort of mistake, for 
it is a compound of needs that are hard to satisfy, and when they are satisfied, we are 
left with naught but boredom. He then argues that this boredom is a 'direct proof' that 
existence is valueless, for it is nothing but the sensation of the emptiness and vanity 
of existence.26 His metaphysical system was partly based upon a theory of the Will, 
which he interpreted as the 'will to live' and regarded as a profound mistake. We have 
a will to go on living, but this is pointless because life must end. Thus the Will strives 
in vain, and all of its striving leads to annihilation. Schopenhauer claimed that if there 
were something valuable in itself, something that truly and unconditionally ought to 
exist, it would not have non-being for its goal. Yet this is palpably the goal of life, 
which leads inexorably to death. It follows that our existence is utterly without value. 
The structure of this argument, however, condemns not merely human life, but the 
entire world, to dissolution and nullity. It is based upon the nature of time, which is 
the very form of existence, and also upon the contingency and relativity of all things 
that exist in time. Schopenhauer begins his essay with the assertion that the vanity of 
existence is revealed in the whole form existence assumes. This applies to all things 
which have this form, and thus to all contingent finite beings. While his focus is the 
will to live, his argument applies more generally, insofar as it draws upon his 
'presentism'. He makes this explicit from the beginning: 
Tzme and that perishability of all things existing in time that time itself brings about is 
simply the form under which the will to live, which as thing in itself is imperishable, reveals 
to itself the vanity of its striving. Time is that b1 virtue of which everything becomes 
nothingness in our hands and loses all real value. 2 
If all things in time must lose their value as they must cease to exist, then the entire 
world is reduced to emptiness. Schopenhauer's text reads almost like a modem secular 
version of Ecclesiastes, sounding out the woeful cry that 'all is vanity' while also 
suggesting (quietly) that, somewhere in the background, there is an enduring realm 
of things in themselves to which this pessimism need not apply. 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
105 
Nietzsche, in any case, was unhappy with these conclusions. He could not believe 
that there are things in themselves, nor that there is a god, nor a Kingdom of Heaven 
in which we may find real value. But at the same time he was profoundly moved by 
Schopenhauer's argument, and by the invocation of time. His response to this version 
of pessimism was developed over many years, and involved repudiating several points. 
Nietzsche argued that the Will is more accurately described as the 'will to power' 
than the urge to survive. This means that it can attain a measure of success in the 
world of temporal becoming which need not be diminished by its final demise. He 
also argued that time itself may be better characterized by the idea of an eternal 
return, which again avoids the implication of ultimate nonexistence while repudiating 
theism and related forms of transcendent value. 
Perhaps his most earnest and direct reply to Schopenhauer was propounded in his 
first book, the Birth ofTragedy.28 In this work he effectively argued that even if time 
destroys all things, and everything good in the world must eventually come to nothing, 
there is an escape from despair to be found in the aesthetic realm. If we can come to 
identity ourselves with art, both as creators and as created beings, then we can achieve 
a glorious release from the world's ongoing self-destruction. The joy of this event is 
a kind of tragic emotion, and Nietzsche claimed that the Greeks had already found 
this in their dramatic tradition. To fully explain this joyful release from despair, he 
constructed a complete ontology of art, and even though he later considered this 
aspect of his theory as inessential,29 it remains an important aspect of his earlier 
view. It is through an aesthetic identification with the creativity of the world as a 
whole that we may glimpse, if only for a moment, the final meaning of existence. It 
is therefore as an aesthetic phenomenon that the existence of the world is given an 
explanation and a justification. 
The Birth of Tragedy 
Schopenhauer's pessimism entails that there is no reason for existence, and even that 
there is a good reason for nothing to exist, at least as far as temporal being is concerned. 
Nietzsche implicitly uses this as his starting position, in the sense that it is a plausible 
position to take, and also has a basis in feeling. But ultimately it is unsatisfactory. 
Nietzsche progresses from this position to the claim that there is an aesthetic reason 
for existence, although the total experience of beauty and tragedy which underlies 
this position may only be available to those who are gifted with the vision of an 
artistic genius. 
The first few pages of the Birth of Tragedy constitute the basis for his aesthetic 
view of the world, but his ideas are presented in a lush cryptic style which makes this 
view difficult to detect. He first claims that aesthetics might be enriched by a direct 
apprehension (which is different from a mere 'ascertaining') that the evolution of art 
owes its evolution to the duality between Apollonian and Dionysiac forms. He then 
characterizes these forms as creative tendencies which developed alongside each other, 
the first being embodied in plastic arts which employ explicit visual representations, 
the second in the non-visual art ofmusic.30 Another characterization of the duality is 
immediately presented when Nietzsche asks his reader to view them 'as the separate 
art realms of dream and intoxication, two physiological phenomena standing toward 
one another in much the same relation as the Apollonian and Dionysiac' .31 He clearly 

106 
The Problem of Existence 
implies that, on his view, the realms of art are much greater in extension than is 
normally thought. Since they include physiological and mental phenomena, they 
extend to the whole realm of the mind and the body, and into our interpretation of 
reality. As such, it seems clear from the beginning that Nietzsche is developing a 
theory of art so broad that it has metaphysical implications. His aesthetics thus becomes 
a way of understanding the world as a whole. 
The next point that he makes further clarifies his aim, which is to make art a universal 
aspect of human experience and interpretation. Every man is an artist, he says, to the 
extent that he is a dreamer. Dreams are a precondition of the plastic arts and of much 
poetry, and they provide us with an immediate apprehension of form. 32 Those who 
are responsive to art, he says, behave towards their dreams as philosophers behave 
towards real existence; they are observed and enjoyed exactly, as dream images are 
used to interpret life. This is true of pleasant as well as unpleasant dreams, and in fact 
even the most perilous may be deeply delightful, so much that we may wish them to 
continue, recognizing that they are dreams. In this remark there is a first hint that the 
horror of life can be interpreted aesthetically, and that as such it can be enjoyed even 
while it is recognized as horrific. For Nietzsche claims that 'our innermost being' 
finds delight in dreams, and that this delight is a common characteristic of humanity. 
There is another remark here which reveals the way in which he is attempting to 
make a reply to Schopenhauerian pessimism. He says that Apollo is the god of plastic 
powers and the soothsaying god, and also the god of light. Though he reigns in our 
illusions and dreams, the perfection of his appearance therein contrasts with the 
imperfection of our comprehension of waking life, and this 'furnishes a symbolic 
analogue to the soothsayin~ faculty and quite generally to the arts, which make life 
possible and worth living'. 3 The point of this remark, convoluted though it may be, 
is that art itself is the source of the meaning oflife.lt is that which makes life possible, 
for without Apollo, we would have no clarity ofform; and also makes it worth living, 
for in dreams we find the delightfulness of real life, presented under the guise of an 
illusion. And as he says, even if it is an unpleasant illusion, we may find it delightful 
when it is seen as a dream, and thus as a form of art. This is in direct contrast to 
Schopenhauer's view, which was that nothing can have value if it is a transitory 
appearance. While Nietzsche does little to argue for this point beyond an appeal to 
our experiences of dreaming, he clearly indicates that we can interpret a transitory 
condition as possessing value in the context of aesthetics even if this is difficult or 
impossible in the context of moral evaluation. 
Nietzsche goes on to argue that the Apollonian form of art, which is first revealed 
in our dreams, represents the principium individuationis. This is the principle of 
individuality, by which a person is certain of himself as a distinct character, and 
thereby has a clear and distinct place in the world. 34 Such an understanding is then 
contrasted with the Dionysiac form of art, which is revealed in the realm of intoxication. 
As such it involves a shattering of the individual and the cognitive modes of experience, 
as is suggested by the sense of causation we obtain when intoxicated. Dionysiac 
stirrings, he says, arise from narcotic potions or directly from nature, as when spring 
penetrates all things with its joy. A Dionysiac celebration involves a mystical union 
with nature wherein the individual loses himself and participates in a magical rite 
which liberates the world, brings all men together in a 'universal harmony', and 
allows man to see and to become what he truly is, apart from his sense of individuality. 35 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
107 
It is highly significant that in describing this grand mystical vision, Nietzsche explicitly 
refers to the discovery, and the experience, of being a work of art. It is in this way, 
when we are not only artists in our dreaming but also works of art in our intoxication, 
that the ultimate value of existence is revealed: 
Man now expresses himself through song and dance as the member of a higher community; 
he has forgotten how to walk, how to speak, and is on the brink of taking wing as he dances. 
Each of his gestures betokens enchantment; through him sounds a supernatural power, the 
same power which makes the animals speak and the earth render up milk and honey. He 
feels himself godlike and strides with the same elation and ecstasy as the gods he has seen 
in his dreams. No longer the artist, he has himself become a work of art: the productive 
power of the whole universe is now manifest in his transport, to the glorious satisfaction of 
the primordial One. 36 
Nietzsche's ontology here turns out to be a version of mystical monism. He speaks of 
the 'primordial One', the great unity of the universe, which figures as both the origin 
and the meaning of life. This is associated with Dionysus, because the consequence 
of our direct, participatory experience of the One is that our individual existence is 
lost in the all-surpassing, all-inclusive reality of mystical wholeness. Such an 
experience may arise from Dionysian celebrations, where the all-inclusive reality is 
played out as a dance, or a piece of music. In short, the nature of existence is revealed 
by that form of art which is experienced as immediate, non-cognitive immersion in 
nature. This is the reality in which we directly participate, and thus it is the deepest 
revelation of ultimate value. However, it is impossible to capture in words, concepts 
or theories, and it involves becoming as much as being. 
What does it mean for an individual to realize that he is a work of art? It is clearly 
a disclosure of great significance, for Nietzsche claims that the 'productive power of 
the whole universe' is thereby manifested. However, such a realization does not arise 
as another ordinary belief, nor does it have the status of an ordinary cognitive state. I 
cannot reach this understanding through deduction, and it is not like the understanding 
that I am a rational animal, or a collection of chemicals. It is not a neutral fact that I 
am a work of art, it is an evaluation, and as such it is compatible with neutral 
characterizations of myself. The claim is best understood as part ofNietzsche's attempt 
to say 'yes' to life, and thus to counter Schopenhauer 's pessimism. Aesthetic meaning 
of this kind is something that we must feel, and not merely believe to be the case. It 
concerns the meaning of life as a whole. 
There are nevertheless certain implications of this realization of aesthetic meaning. 
If we understand ourselves as works of art, we are committed to a certain interpretation, 
which affects our total view of the world. To say that I am a work of art is not to say 
that I do not exist at all, as ifl was a fictional character. On the other hand, there is a 
sense in which I realize that my own transitory reality is subordinate to the greater 
aesthetic oflife. In the midst of the Dionysian celebration, the identity of the individual 
is wiped out, for it becomes absorbed in the movement of the whole. The primordial 
One is the only true existent, and everything else is just a part of its creative activity. 
I can celebrate my appearance as a work of art because I am lost within the creativity 
of the whole, and my vision is thus expanded. If this be so, then other realizations are 
immediately forthcoming, almost as logical deductions. For if I am a work of art, 
then the world as a whole must also be seen as an art-world, or as a context for the 

108 
The Problem of Existence 
play of aesthetic meanings. Again, this is perfectly compatible with our neutral 
scientific characterizations of the world. It may be that the world is a gigantic 
spatiotemporal structure built up from fundamental physical particles and forces. 
This does not entail that it cannot have an aesthetic meaning, nor that it cannot be 
correctly understood as a gigantic work of art. Something must be used as the material 
for a work of art, and it may as well be physical particles. 
Most importantly, ifl am a work of art, and I am living within a greater work of art, 
then the existence of the world must be explicable in terms of aesthetic meaning and 
value. This is clearly an implication of Nietzsche's thesis, and it is explicitly drawn 
out in certain parts of the text. It is this idea which supplies an evaluative answer to the 
fundamental question, although the answer is obscured slightly by fact that the overall 
intention of the Birth of Tragedy is to construct a theory of Greek drama, rather than 
a metaphysical system. However, even those who see Nietzsche as an anti-metaphysical, 
anti-systematic philosopher should recognize this point. There are clear indications 
that he was addressing the question of existence, even if this was not the main purpose 
of his book. Firstly, it is clear that he was responding to Schopenhauer, and it is very 
likely that he was proposing an antidote to pessimism.37 As was argued in the previous 
section, Schopenhauer held that th~re is no reason for anything to exist, and that it 
would be better for there to be nothing at all. It follows that Nietzsche must have been 
arguing that there is a reason for something to exist, and this means that he must have 
been arguing for a view of existence which, if it is not an systematic explanation, at 
least provides a response to the question of why there is something instead of nothing. 
Given what is stated in the main body of the text, it seems reasonable to suppose that 
his response is that there is an aesthetic reason, or justification, for existence. 
There are nevertheless certain problems with this interpretation. Perhaps the most 
significant problem is that there is an opposing interpretation of his work, according 
to which his point is not to refute Schopenhauer but to explain how the ancient Greeks 
were able to overcome pessimism by inventing an aesthetic meaning for the world. 
This would imply that the 'aesthetic justification' for existence is actually a kind of 
necessary illusion. It is required so that life may continue, but it does not represent 
the way that things are in reality. It would then be an antidote to the wisdom of 
Silenus, which is the view that the best thing for man is never to have been born, and 
the second best thing is a quick death.38 But this antidote would not be a realization 
of something true, only an illusion of ultimate value which is useful. 
Various aspects of Nietzsche's theory of tragedy support this interpretation, but 
there are also aspects which tell against it. This is partly because his theory supposes 
that Apollonian and Dionysian 'forces' eventually acted together in tragic art, rather 
than being opposite tendencies. The redemptive images of art and beauty are 
necessarily connected to the reality of suffering. There are consequently formations 
of illusion, in the shape of dreams, which are modified by the intrusion of reality, and 
each has a part to play. For example, his view of the Olympian gods was that they 
were invented as a response to suffering. At some point the Greeks interpreted the 
wisdom ofSilenus as the final truth, and thus conceived ofhuman life purely in terms 
of horrific suffering, as something that should not be. The gods were then devised to 
stand between humans and the horror of life, for they depicted an idealized form of 
life which would affirm life rather than deny it. 39 This explains why they were 
anthropomorphic deities, for they were supposed to be exemplifications of the way 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
109 
that humans could live through suffering. In the end, however, the gods are just 
illusions, and their function is to 'veil' the fate ofhumanity behind Apollonian dreams 
of greatness. When Dionysus appeared, the Greeks first rejected him as an alien, 
barbarian god, because he served to remind them that their gods were just dreams, 
and that they were specifically invented as a response to suffering.40 
The appearance of Dionysus then brought about a new view of human existence, 
one which embraces suffering as an essential part oflife. Apollo could not live without 
Dionysus because recognizing the horror of existence creates the need for illusion, 
and thus these two 'modes of being' are dependent upon each other. If this reading is 
correct, then it seems we cannot be truly uplifted by the aesthetic meaning of the 
cosmos without falling under the spell of an illusion. One commentator on the Birth 
of Tragedy has argued that Dionysian art insists upon the formula 'Forget thyself' as 
against the Apollonian dictum 'know thyself', and this forgetting is the dissolution of 
the individual within the collective consciousness, or the primordial One in the excesses 
of intoxication.41 Such an interpretation appears to entail that art, and the aesthetic 
view of oneself which originates from Dionysian excess, has a redemptive power 
only by virtue of its turning away from the truth of reality, not by way of a realization. 
Art succeeds in masking our experiences of suffering in a cloud of illusions, and 
therefore, arguably, does not represent the ultimate truth or the ultimate value that 
justifies existence. Reality thus remains the Schopenhauerian world of pointless 
suffering, and Nietzsche's response cannot provide an evaluative justification for 
existence. 
This, however, is only part of the story. Nietzsche's theory of tragedy is presented 
as a historical account of ancient drama as well as a philosophical account of aesthetic 
meaning in general, and it is important to incorporate both of these aspects into the 
overall interpretation of the text. He goes on to argue that the appearance of Dionysus 
in the Greek consciousness leads to a new form of art, as this god is mythically 
merged into the older Homeric tradition. It is arguable that this new form of art, the 
tragedy, is a better representation of the aesthetic significance ofboth human life and 
reality in general than any of the earlier forms. If this is the case, then we may be 
obliged to give up the interpretation ofNietzsche as a mere follower ofSchopenhauer. 
When we recognize the intrinsic connection between the two fundamental forms of 
art, we can see that suffering exists for the sake of art just as art exists to redeem 
suffering. The development of his aesthetic theory suggests that this is the case, and 
even though it is presented as a sketch rather than as part of a theoretical argument, it 
indicates that a serious answer to the fundamental question has been worked out. 
Following the lead ofhis mystical monism, and to some extent the ideas of Coleridge 
and Hegel, Nietzsche argues against the categories of'subjective' and 'objective' art. 
He begins section 5 with the remark that he is now approaching the central concern 
of his inquiry, which aims to understand the Dionysiac-Apollonian spirit. He then 
claims that the seed of tragedy lies in the union of Homer and Archilochus, the 
originators of Greek poetry, and that, at least for modem aesthetics, these figures 
represent the objective and subjective artist respectively. However, this view is rejected 
because it is based upon an illegitimate dichotomy. Art must be objective in the sense 
that it must embody disinterested contemplation, for otherwise it is merely bad art.42 
But Archilochus, the lyric poet, should not be seen as a subjective artist in this way, 
and neither should any true poet, even though they can use the word 'I' to express 

110 
The Problem of Existence 
their insights. In order to comprehend the origin of tragedy, we must transcend the 
distinction between subjective and objective, and see it in the light of a new metaphysic, 
wherein the world as a whole is an aesthetic product, created for celebration and for 
redemption. 
Nietzsche sees Archilochus as a Dionysian artist, and this presents a problem for 
his aesthetic theory. How is it possible for a Dionysian poet to use the word 'I' at all, 
given that the aim of Dionysus is to further the destruction of the individual? The 
answer that Nietzsche gives is that his use of this word expresses universal passions, 
feelings that are not merely subjective because they transcend individuality: 'When 
Archilochus . . . hurls both his frantic love and his contempt at the daughters of 
Lycambes, it is not his own passion that we see dancing before us in an orgiastic 
frenzy: we see Dionysus and maenads, we see the drunken reveler Archilochus, sunk 
down in sleep' .43 Thus there is no merely subjective art, there is only a subject which 
can speak, not of its specific self but of the cosmic self, and the universal emotions 
that emerge in the flowering oflife, which includes all of the suffering oflife. Nietzsche 
goes on to speak of the Dionysiac musician undergoing a 'mystical process of un-
selving',44 out ofwhich a world of images arises. But these are not images peculiar 
to his own subjectivity, they come from the ground of being itself, from the inner 
aesthetic of the universe. This artist then 'becomes' his images, rather than merely 
enjoying them, and he may thus speak in the first person, as the centre of a world of 
images. In doing so, however, this 'I' is not the person of the actual waking man, 'but 
the "I" dwelling, truly and eternally, in the ground ofbeing'.45 
It has been suggested that Nietzsche's aim here is to transcend the distinction between 
subjective and objective, and in doing so, he moves in a Hegelian direction, towards 
a view of the total unity of subject and object, self and world.46 If this is an accurate 
claim about his purpose, then it must be conceded that he does not develop the point 
as a serious metaphysical position. Instead, he makes suggestive remarks, and 
condenses his view into a tight description of the aesthetic universe, without 
constructing an argument for it. As such, Nietzsche's point is more obscure than it 
should be, and it cannot be used to show that there are good reasons for thinking that 
the fundamental question should be given an aesthetic answer. However, it can be 
used as an example ofhow such an answer can be formulated. At the end of section 5, 
he expresses his opposition to the subjective-objective distinction by first introducing 
a long quote from Schopenhauer, which he claims indicates only that the subjective 
form of art, or lyric poetry, is an incomplete art, which ultimately fails, and then 
replying to this with his own view. He claims that the subject, if he is a 'striving 
individual bent on furthering his egoistic purposes' is not an artist at all. However, 
this does not mean that subjectivity is altogether omitted from aesthetics, for it is 
possible to identify a 'True Subject' which ultimately grounds the aesthetic world: 
But to the extent that the subject is an artist he is already delivered from individual will and 
has become a medium through which the True Subject celebrates His redemption in illusion. 
For better or worse, one thing should be quite obvious to all of us: the entire comedy of art 
is not played for our own sakes- for our betterment or education, say- nor can we consider 
ourselves the true originators of that art realm; while on the other had we have every right 
to view ourselves as aesthetic projections of the veritable creator and derive such dignity as 
we possess from our status as art works. Only as an aesthetic product can the world be 
justified to all eternity- although our consciousness of our own significance does scarcely 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
111 
exceed the consciousness a painted soldier might have of the battle in which he takes part. 
Thus our whole knowledge of art is at bottom illusory, seeing that as mere knowers we can 
never be fused with that essential spirit, at the same time creator and spectator, who has 
prepared the comedy of art for his own edification. Only as the genius in the act of creation 
merges with the primal architect of the cosmos can he truly know something of the eternal 
essence of art. For in that condition he resembles the uncanny fairy tale image which is able 
to see itselfby turning its eyes. He is at once subject and object, poet, actor, and audience.47 
This passage, difficult and dense though it is, contains the essence of Nietzsche's 
aesthetic answer to the question of existence. The reality of suffering is not denied, 
but Schopenhauer's view of life as pointless suffering is transcended. Art redeems 
life, and justifies existence because it brings delightful illusions, in the form of 
Apollonian dreams. But at the same time, tragic art is more than an illusion, for 
tragedy is the song of Dionysus as well as the imagery of Apollo.48 It involves the 
recognition that suffering exists for the sake of art, and this gives it meaning. If we 
were to consider our dreams in isolation, then drama and art and poetry would be 
naught but a veil, a turning-away from the nature of reality. But when we realize that 
our dreams are not merely a response to the horror of life but also an essential 
consequence of creative art itself, the creativity of the True Subject, we may approach 
a vision of reality which truly justifies our sufferings, and explains why there is an 
aesthetic world instead of nothingness. 
Nietzsche claims that existence is justified only as an aesthetic phenomenon. This 
suggests that the existence of the world would be pointless, and would lack a reason, 
if it was not an aesthetic phenomenon. Schopenhauer's view is partly correct, but 
ultimately mistaken in failing to understand the nature of the True Subject, whose art 
is our own world, and whose redemption is celebrated through the medium of our 
finite lives. The True Subject represents Nietzsche's view of the absolute. It makes 
no sense to ask why this Subject exists, for it is the final reason, the ultimate aesthetic 
value which demands expression. It is the whole of existence, both subject and object, 
actor and audience. As such it explains the appearance of finite beings, as the illusions 
created in its celebration, but it cannot be explained itself. 
The existence of the world, the being of something rather than nothing, is here 
explained by its ultimate value, which is aesthetic rather than moral value. Nietzsche 
makes it clear that the entire spectacle of art, which is the world itself, is not there for 
our sake, or for our moral improvement. It is there because there must be a celebration 
ofbeauty, a completed ultimate value. His view may thus be represented as the position 
that the world exists because it is beautiful. However, to be truly beautiful, the world 
must exemplify both the Dionysiac and the Apollonian forms of beauty. While 
Apollonian illusions are a response to suffering, we need not despair when we come 
to understand them as such. For we can also see, if we adopt the perspective of the 
artist and become merged with the 'primal architect of the cosmos', that suffering is 
necessary to create illusions. Then reality is revealed as a whole, wherein both the 
agonies and the joys of life are combined, and necessarily combined, in beauty. 
Nietzsche effectively claims that there is an aesthetic need for a world, and that this 
is a creatively successful need. There is a need for art, and the essential component of 
this need is pain, for art would not exist without this stimulus. In this claim, he supplies 
an explanation for existence, as well as a justification. Thus he has provided an 
evaluative answer to the fundamental question. While it is true that he does not supply 

112 
The Problem of Existence 
a detailed argument for thinking that this answer is the correct one, he implies that 
such an argument is unnecessary. If we achieve the right vision, we can directly 
experience the world as an aesthetic phenomenon, through Dionysiac revelry, and 
we can apprehend ourselves as works of art. His view is therefore in agreement with 
Quentin Smith's view that the meaning of the world is not rational, for it is a felt 
meaning. 
The Will to Power 
It is interesting that Nietzsche, in his first book at least, is explicitly committed to the 
existence of a divine being. This is the True Subject which lies at the ground ofbeing, 
and acts as the primal architect of the cosmos. Although he did not believe in Greek 
mythology, his view of art and reality as a single unified production or 'comedy' 
clearly entails that there is a great cosmic artist, or a primordial One in which we can 
find ourselves enmeshed. Like the Judeo-Christian idea of God, this cosmic artist is 
a creator, and lies at the origin of the universe. However, Nietzsche's deity has a very 
different purpose in creation, for he seeks to express an aesthetic meaning, rather 
than looking upon the world as morally good. He creates for the sake of his own 
edification and redemption, not for the sake of other beings. Yet it is also suggested 
that it is possible for creatures such as ourselves, finite beings with fmite perspectives, 
to obtain a greater view of the art-world which is reality. 
As his philosophy developed, Nietzsche finally repudiated the idea of a cosmic 
artist, and became more seriously opposed to theism in general. But he retained the 
notion that the world has an aesthetic meaning, and if it is true to say that he had a 
philosophical system of any kind, then this idea became an aspect of his system. 
Nietzsche's thought went through various transformations, and the aesthetic 
significance of existence is only one of the themes upon which he built. It is an 
important theme, however, and it returns in that stream of his thought which is 
most often recognized as distinctly metaphysical. This is the theory of the Will to 
Power. 
The details of the Will to Power thesis are mostly tangential to the question of 
existence, since they deal with an account of what exists, rather than an account of 
why anything exists. However, in some points at least, it is clear that Nietzsche wanted 
to argue that the world can be interpreted aesthetically, and that the greatest flourishing 
of entities arises with respect to the development of creative powers. Thus rather than 
speaking of the justification of existence, he speaks of the nature of existence as Will 
to Power, and rather than speaking of the True Subject as a cosmic artist, he claims 
that the world is a work of art which gives birth to itself.49 Although his theory is 
presented sketchily, there is a kind of system involved. The basic entities in Nietzsche's 
ontology are drives, rather than fully developed wills or persons, for these are the 
simplest units which manifest the characteristic of the Will to Power. 50 Each drive is 
a pattern of activity which aims at its own network of ends, so that teleology is present 
at the most basic level of reality. For example, the sex drive aims at seduction or 
coupling or orgasm, whereas the drive to eat has a different network of ends.51 
Nietzsche also argues that the fundamental forces discovered in physics are actually 
drives, although the concept of force must be completed by ascribing an 'inner will' 
to it, which is the Will to Power, 'an insatiable desire to manifest power'.52 Thus 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
113 
even the most primitive physical objects are guided by a drive, and exhibit the universal 
organizing feature of seeking power. 
The notion of 'power' used in this theory is much more complex and subtle than 
the ordinary idea of political power. Indeed it must be ifNietzsche is to use it as he 
does, in explaining the nature of such diverse phenomena. In some contexts, it might 
be translated as merely 'order' or 'organization', except that this would be too passive 
a characterization. It is clear that for Nietzsche, the order of the world is a product of 
interacting drives, and does not appear from outside of the world, or by divine decree. 
He is opposed to the Platonist doctrine that there is an ultimate Form oflntelligibility 
or Order, and to the idea that there is a God who has set down the laws of nature. 
Instead, the patterns of coherence that exist in the world are due to the subordination 
of some drives under others, which is an exemplification of the Will to Power. 
This can be explicated as the urge to expand the network of activities which 
constitutes a drive. It 'wills power' by trying to develop and grow in its activity, and 
in doing so, it must bring other drives under its sway, so that they will be directed 
towards its ends. This is not a matter of making a moral choice. It is just a fact that 
entities cannot continue to exist unless some drives actively subsume others. An 
individual being, such as a living organism, which is a collection of drives, may have 
greater complexity. But in the most primitive conditions, it must either dominate 
others or be dominated. It must either eat or be eaten. As Nietzsche says: 'It is part of 
the concept of the living that it must frow - that it must extend its power and 
consequently incorporate alien forces. •5 
The Will to Power is a universal principle. It characterizes reality as a whole, and is 
manifested in each thing that is real. The desire to grow and to develop powers and 
activities is to be found in all creatures and all physical interactions. It is expressed in 
primitive forms in the animal world, through predators and prey, and in more 
sophisticated forms in the inventions of morality, science, and human affairs. Nietzsche's 
writings contain many arguments for this notion of the Will to Power (some are better 
than others), and many examples of its operation in various contexts. For example, 
his study of morality in The Genealogy of Morals is devoted to an explanation of how 
a strong and vigorous 'master morality', according to which the greatest virtues are 
those of personal achievement and power, can be defeated by a 'slave morality' which 
endorses charity, meekness, and humility. Although it is clear that the former is a 
better representation of the nature of life as Will to Power, the latter can attain more 
power for itself by arousing pity, and through an organized reaction. 
The slave morality claims that helping others has greater value than joy in one's 
own talents and powers, and it appeals to weaker individuals because it gives them 
more power, as a group, in a world where otherwise they would be crushed. This 
morality eventually wins out because the weak are greater in numbers, not because it 
has greater truth. As a consequence, Christianity has attained supremacy even though 
it is based upon a negation of power as a value. Yet clearly, even this result is an 
expression of the Will to Power, because the weak use the slave morality to gain 
strength. This is roughly Nietzsche's explanation of the history of ethics and religion, 
and it helps to overcome an otherwise powerful objection to his theory. 
At other points he explicitly relates moral ideas to the development of drives, and 
demonstrates how his theory can account for feelings and ideas which appear to be at 
odds with his interpretation of existence as Will to Power. For example: 

114 
The Problem of Existence 
All virtues physiological conditions: particularly the principal organic functions considered 
as necessary, as good. All virtues are really refined passions and enhanced states. 
Pity and love of mankind as development of the sexual drive. Justice as development of 
the drive to revenge. Virtue as pleasure in resistance, will to power. Honour as recognition 
of the similar and equal-in-power. 54 
He also applies his theory to mental phenomena, to ideas such as consciousness, self, 
and subjectivity. In this case he argues that in reality there is no such thing as a 
distinct subject of awareness, and no causal nexus for thought. There are only drives 
which aim at enhanced power, and it is these drives which bring about the belief in a 
unified subject. They do so because greater power can be obtained by simplifying 
phenomena, even if this results in an false and artificial conception of self. 
Some drives may enlist others as subordinates to be used for specific ends, but at 
bottom there is no self, no unified thing which stands in opposition to the 'external 
world'. Nietzsche argues that this illusion lies at the heart of our notion of causality. 55 
He also claims that the human drive to discover the truth, and to use logic and science, 
are merely expressions of the Will to Power, and in this case it is the enhancement of 
our mastery of nature which drives us onward. The multiplicity of sensations is more 
easily controlled by the brain when it is equipped with the appropriate categories, but 
this does not mean that they are 'true' categories, only that they assist us to increase 
our powers: 
The fictitious world of subject, substance, 'reason', etc., is needed-: there is in us a power 
to order, simplify, falsify, artificially distinguish. 'Truth' is the will to be master over the 
multiplicity of sensations:- to classify phenomena into definite categories. In this we start 
from a belief in the 'in-itself' of things (we take phenomena as real). 56 
In making such claims, Nietzsche comes close to philosophers of science who have 
endorsed a pragmatic or instrumentalist view of knowledge. But his own philosophy 
is different in that it is motivated by a background ontology, and is systematically 
related to his views on morality and art, and even the destiny of mankind. 
The notion of the Will to Power is applied to so many phenomena that it may be 
thought trivial. All things can be seen as instances of a drive to enhance power, it may 
be claimed, only because the notion of power itself is interpreted so widely that it fits 
everything. It may even be thought that in the end, Nietzsche is merely expounding 
the truism that 'things develop'. But this is not exactly fair, for his claim is that things 
develop in a certain direction, and his explanation for this is that the world itself is 
composed of drives which are impelled onwards by the Will to Power. Furthermore, 
his thesis is not trivial in the sense that it embraces all explanations and all propositions. 
If Nietzsche is correct, then some worldviews, perspectives and interpretations must 
be deficient. For example, it seems that ifhis view is adopted, Christian theism must 
be rejected as false, as he says explicitly in The Antichrist. 51 His position therefore 
entails that the existence of the world, characterized as Will to Power, cannot be 
explained by the activity of a divine creator. Indeed this is made most explicit in his 
formulation of the doctrine of the Eternal Return of the same, which is the view that 
the entire world repeats itself, again and again, forever, so that all of the events that 
happen will happen again exactly as they are happening now. If this is the case, then 
there need be no 'first' event, and there cannot be a 'creation'. 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
115 
Given that this is so, the question arises: if the world is Will to Power 'and nothing 
else besides', then why is it this, and not nothing? Why does the Will to Power exist 
at all? It is arguable that Nietzsche, in his mature philosophy, does allow a formulation 
of the aesthetic evaluation of existence which he expressed in his first book, but he 
no longer allows a formulation of this in terms of a cosmic artist. Instead he claims 
that the world is a work of art which gives birth to itself. It is interesting to examine 
the context in which this claim is made, for it appears to be closely connected with 
his conception of the Will to Power, especially as he considers this view in relation to 
the notion that art may arise even when there is no unified subject, and thus no artist. 
Consider the following passages: 
796 (1885-1886) 
The work of art where it appears without an artist, eg. as body, as organization (Prussian 
officer corps, Jesuit order). To what extent the artist is only a preliminary stage. 
The world as a work of art that gives birth to itself. 
797 (1885-1886) 
The phenomenon 'artist' is still the most transparent:- to see through it to the basic instincts 
of power, nature, etc.! Also those of religion and morality! 
'Play,' the useless - as the ideal of him who is overfull of strength, as 'childlike.' The 
'childlikeness' of God, pais paizon ... 
800 (March-June 1888) 
The feeling of intoxication, in fact corresponding to an increase in strength; strongest in the 
mating season: new organs, new accomplishments, colors, forms; 'becoming more beautiful' 
is a consequence of enhanced strength. Becoming more beautiful as the expression of a 
victorious will, of increased co-ordination, of a harmonizing of all the strong desires, of an 
infallibly perpendicular stress. Logical and geometrical simplification is a consequence of 
enhancement of strength: conversely the apprehension of such a simplification again 
enhances the feeling of strength ... 58 
There is clearly a connection between the early ideas of The Birth of Tragedy and the 
development of the idea of the Will to Power. Although some commentators have 
suggested that Nietzsche's attempt at an aesthetic validation of the world was actually 
intended as a 'joyful alternative' to the world as Will to Power (and thus a 
'redemption'), 59 this presupposes a sour, politicized view of power. In fact his aesthetic 
justification of the world may be seen as continuous with its being a world of drives 
that will power. The third paragraph above strongly suggests that this was his view, 
as it clearly claims that beauty results from enhanced strength, and that the aesthetic 
qualities oflogical and geometrical simplification also result from the expression of 
the Will-to-Power in a particular context. 
The other paragraphs, in fact, also indicate that there is a continuity in his aesthetic 
philosophy, and they are more directly relevant to the fundamental question of 
metaphysics. Nietzsche claims that the artist is 'transparent' because it is more striking 
and obvious that artists are exemplifications of the basic instincts of power. Creative 
art is one of the prime examples of the Will to Power, for it is an enhancement of 

116 
The Problem of Existence 
powers per se, without any hint of the subjectivity involved in political ambition, 
morality, or scientific research. Nietzsche makes this all the more clear in claiming 
that the 'artist' is a phenomenon, not a subject, and in providing examples of art 
which do not involve artists, such as organizations. 
This appears puzzling to us because we are so used to the artist as a 'celebrity', and 
to the celebration of individual geniuses. But there is a wider notion of beauty, and 
creativity, which Nietzsche employs in his discussions of art, and which he applies to 
the existence of the world as a whole. It is self-generating art, and this is its 
'justification' and its explanation. Consequently, the idea of the Will to Power is 
itself an aesthetic idea, and is employed, at least on some occasions, to answer the 
riddle of existence with an 'internal' answer. Once again, in this atheistic context, 
Nietzsche exclaims that the world exists because it is beautiful, and here he also 
means that it exists because it is an enhancement of strength, or because it is 'overfull 
of strength'. 
The meaning of this second remark in paragraph 797 is particularly worthy of 
comment. For it seems initially that he has returned to speaking of God, in claiming 
that God is pais paizon, a child playing. This is clearly a reference to Heraclitus, one 
of the few philosophers Nietzsche actually praised. Heraclitus said that 'Time is a 
child moving counters in a game'. 60 He suggests, here and in other fragments, that all 
of existence, throughout all of time, is a play, a dance, a fire which burns out. It is a 
short step from such an idea to the claim that the reason for existence, the answer to 
the fundamental question, is ultimately aesthetic. To suggest, as Nietzsche does, that 
God is a child at play, and that the universe is ultimately useless because it is the 
plaything of God, is neither a denunciation of the universe nor a literal invocation of 
deity. It means rather that the fact of existence can be explained by its aesthetic value, 
not its utilitarian or moral value. Reality is ultimately playful, and if we were to have 
the perspective of a god, we would enjoy the spectacle of the world for what it is- a 
superficial show, a dance, and a dream which has no meaning beyond its immediate 
appearance. And ultimately, the aesthetic value of existence cannot be comprehended 
without participation. An intellectual view of it brings too much distance between the 
spectacle and the spectator. 
It is also noteworthy that in this second remark of paragraph 797 Nietzsche claims 
that playfulness is the ideal of 'him who is overfull of strength'. This expresses the 
connection between the aesthetic view of existence and the theory of the Will to 
Power, for it states the ideal which lies behind this eternally repeating universe of 
drives and will-powers. If the Will to Power is an elucidation ofthe nature of reality, 
then the fact of its existence is explicable in terms of the ideal which it exemplifies. 
The world exists because Will to Power is overfull, it simply creates and creates for 
the sake of itself, because it is playful, because it is artistic, because it just is what it 
is. Nothingness is rejected here only because it would not allow anything within 
which to frolic and revel, not because there need be any 'goodness' but only because 
there must be joviality, comedy and tragedy. In short, because there must be beauty. 
Nietzsche wrote of the Will to Power in terms which suggest a powerful affirmation 
of existence, and life, and the overcoming of self in aesthetic terms. It is significant 
that, long after the Birth of Tragedy, he continued to associate Dionysus with his 
vision of the ultimate value and with the world as Will to Power: 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
117 
And do you know what 'the world' is to me? Shall I show it to you in my mirror? This 
world: a monster of energy, without beginning, without end; a firm, iron magnitude of 
force that does not grow bigger or smaller, that does not expend itself but only transforms 
itself; as a whole, of unalterable size, a household without expenses or losses, but likewise 
without increase or income; enclosed by 'nothingness' as by a boundary; not something 
blurry or wasted, not something endlessly extended, but set in a definite space as a definite 
force, and not a space that might be 'empty' here or there, but rather as force throughout, as 
a play of forces and waves of forces, at the same time one and many, increasing here and at 
the same time decreasing there; a sea of forces flowing and rushing together, eternally 
changing, eternally flooding back, with tremendous years of recurrence, ... blessing itself 
as that which must return eternally, as a becoming that knows no satiety, no disgust, no 
weariness: this my Dionysian world of the eternally self-creating, the eternally self-
destroying, this mystery world of the twofold voluptuous delight, my 'beyond good and 
evil', without goal, unless the joy of the circle is itself a goal; without will, unless a ring 
feels good will toward itself- do you want a name for this world? A solution for all its 
riddles? ... This world is the Will to Power- and nothing besides! And you yourselves are 
also this will to power- and nothing besides! 61 
In this most ebullient passage Nietzsche clearly provides an answer to the riddle of 
existence, and his answer is a 'mystery world of twofold voluptuous delight'. It is 
voluptuous because the sensual nature of art brings forth the pleasures of existence, 
and in these pleasures, themselves affirmations and increases of power, the reason 
for being is to be found. It is mysterious because the riddle is not solved by citing 
some fact, nor by pursuing a course of reasoning, but by direct apprehension, by 
immersion in the ocean ofbeauty that is real life, and by accepting it as it is, delightfully 
absurd and yet joyous and wonderful. 
Value as a Form of Explanation 
In a way, evaluative explanations are very easy to understand, for we use them all the 
time to explain and justify our own actions. Modem philosophers, however, have 
difficulty in understanding how values can be used to explain facts, which are supposed 
to be 'neutral'. The much heralded 'gap' between fact and value is still taken seriously 
by many analytical thinkers, who would presumably find fault in both Platonist and 
Nietzschean views on existence. One way of replying to this kind of objection is to 
point out that the fact of existence is not a normal fact. It is not obviously susceptible 
to scientific explanation, which generally draws upon predetermined causal and 
ontological resources, and it is not an everyday fact which can be treated casually. 
Insofar as the fact-value gap is based upon the neutrality of science, or the neutrality 
of facts which can be given a scientific treatment, it may not be applicable to the fact 
that there is something instead of nothing. Hence an evaluative response to existence 
may be feasible and appropriate. Furthermore, given that this form of response relies 
upon ultimate values, such as goodness or beauty, which cannot be explicated as 
instrumental, it will not take the same form as our ordinary explanations of human 
actions. In this case, the ultimacy of the postulate in itself makes it a candidate for 
explaining the fact of existence. We can take our final values as self-explanatory 
without paradox, for by definition they cannot be adopted on the basis of some other 
value. 

118 
The Problem of Existence 
The question of the extent to which any evaluative explanation is actually correct 
will be left for the next chapter, where a comprehensive scheme will be introduced. 
The question of whether this way of answering the fundamental question can result 
in a real satisfaction is a different matter, and it can be addressed directly. In order to 
represent a genuinely satisfactory response, an evaluative answer must address our 
emotional and intellectual needs. It must answer the question in a way that is non-
trivial, relies upon some kind of explanatory or deductive structure, and includes 
within itself the sense of awe and the form of inspiration that we feel when we approach 
the question of existence. A satisfactory answer must parallel the wonderment we 
feel when we think about the fact of existence itself, or it will be irrelevant. It cannot 
simply dismiss our emotional reactions as 'beside the point', for part of the point is 
that the question is so striking, so intense and bewildering, that we lie beneath it in 
awe. 
It is reasonably clear that the evaluative accounts of existence that I have presented 
exemplify non-trivial answers, and that each employs its own deductive and 
explanatory structure (whether or not they are convincing). Platonism starts with the 
postulate that there is a Form of the Good, and that this represents the ultimate value, 
from which we derive all other conceptions of value. It asserts that this Form has a 
self-justifying content, and that this explains why it is exemplified. This is its immediate 
answer to the fundamental question. In addition to this answer, Platonism goes on to 
explain the existence of a concrete world where moral virtues can be exercised, and 
this explanation remains true to its original conception. The deductive structure of 
Leslie's version of axiarchism is similar, in that he too relies upon the idea that the 
existence of something is better than the existence of nothing, and may therefore be 
interpreted as answering an ethical need for a good world. Leslie also provides an 
extensive list of reasons for believing in his form of explanation. The world that 
science has revealed to us is a world of causal regularity, spread out in a four-
dimensional spacetime in which living creatures have evolved and flourished. These 
features of the world are difficult to explain, according to Leslie, without the resources 
of axiarchism. 
If it is thought that the world contains too much evil to be explicable in terms of 
ethical value, one may turn to aesthetics. This uses a form of evaluation which may 
avoid ethical concepts altogether. Arguably, the world could be beautiful, and its 
existence could be justified as such, even if it was filled with gratuitous suffering. 
Various aspects of the philosophy ofNietzsche contribute to a reasonable and well-
developed account of the world as a work of art whose existence is explained by its 
artistic merit. Although he was not a truly systematic thinker, it is clear that his theory 
of the Will to Power has a rational structure. Nietzsche employs his conception of 
reality as a field of drives, expanding themselves creatively and stretching their 
capacities to the limit, in an astonishing number of divergent contexts. He uses it to 
explain the physical world of forces and reactions, the nature and nonexistence of the 
self, the historical basis of morality, the evolution of science, culture and politics, and 
most significantly, the nature of art and artists. He sees the activity of the Will to 
Power operating everywhere, which may make it seem trivial, but to some extent this 
is what we should expect from a truly universal metaphysical hypothesis. And clearly, 
his view excludes hypotheses which are based upon what he characterizes as 
'resentment', such as those of Platonism and religion. 
www.ebook3000.com

Ultimate Values 
119 
Both forms of evaluative explanation, the Platonist conception of ethical value and 
the aesthetic conception of reality as creative art, have a rational structure. Both can 
explain existence, within their different postulates, and can to some extent satisfy the 
intellect. It also seems that both of these postulates inspire emotions. Wonder, 
fascination, and participatory ecstasy are appropriate reactions to an aesthetic 
understanding of the world. A profound sense of gratitude and awe is appropriate if 
one believes that the world is an ethically good world, and that it exists because it is 
so. These feelings are satisfactory in the sense that they adequately match the depth 
and intensity of the fact which has been subsumed within the relevant evaluative 
explanation. They represent an extreme and powerful reaction to the situation in which 
we find ourselves, given that we appreciate and believe the account that is given. 
To live in a world whose final value is its reason for existing is indeed an occasion 
for gratitude and joy. In fact, it may be that the words that we use to express the 
feelings which follow upon such thoughts are inadequate, and it may be that they 
need not always follow an explicit act of cogitation. This does nothing to impugn the 
adequacy of the evaluative explanations I have discussed. They may be counted as 
satisfactory precisely because they tend to encourage our feelings and inspirations 
rather than dampening them. For we ought to acknowledge that if we are truly 
impressed with the fact of existence then its explanation, if it is to be explained at all, 
must be something of the same order. It too must incorporate the same kind of 
magnificence, and appear just as dazzling as the question itself. It may be reasonably 
concluded, then, that the ultimate fact of existence can be satisfactorily explained by 
an ultimate value. 
Notes 
Plato, Gorgias, trans. William Hamilton, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 1960, 
pp. 117-18. 
2 
Plato, Republic, trans. H.D.P. Lee, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 1955, p. 270. 
3 
Ibid., p. 273. 
4 
N. Rescher, The Riddle of Existence: An Essay in Idealistic Metaphysics, University Press 
of America, Lanham, MD, 1984, pp. 49-53. 
5 
Ibid., p. 53. 
6 
J. Leslie, Value and Existence, American Philosophical Quarterly Monographs, Basil 
Blackwell, Oxford, 1979. 
7 
Ibid., p. 6. 
8 
Ibid., p. 2. 
9 
Ibid., pp. 19-20. 
10 Ibid., Chapter 9, pp. 135-51. 
11 Ibid., Chapter 6, pp. 101-16. 
12 Ibid., Chapter 11, pp. 168-86. 
13 Ibid., Chapter 7, pp. 117-28. 
14 Ibid., p. 115. 
15 Ibid., p. 136. 
16 Ibid., p. 136. 
17 Ibid., p. 138. 
18 Ibid., p. 2. 
19 Ibid., p. 19. 

120 
20 Ibid., p. 7. 
21 Ibid., p. 129. 
The Problem of Existence 
22 J. Leslie, 'Efforts to Explain All Existence', Mind, 87, 1978, p. 93. 
23 A. Schopenhauer, 'The Vanity of Existence', in Essays and Aphorisms, trans. R.J. 
Hollingdale, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 1970, pp. 51-4. 
24 Ibid., p. 51. 
25 Ibid., p. 52. 
26 Ibid., p. 53. 
27 Ibid., p. 51. 
28 F. Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, trans. Francis Golffing, Doubleday, New York, 1956. 
29 Ibid., from the Preface, 'A Critical Backward Glance', p. 10. 
30 Ibid., p. 19. 
31 Ibid., p. 19. 
32 Ibid., p. 20. 
33 Ibid., p. 21. 
34 Ibid., p. 22. 
35 Ibid., p. 23. 
36 Ibid., p. 24. 
3 7 Nietzsche later accused Schopenhauer of being an insincere pessimist, on the grounds that 
he played the flute. See F. Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, trans. W. Kaufmann, Random 
House, New York, p. 99. 
38 F. Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, p. 29. 
39 D. Lenson, The Birth ofTragedy: A Commentary, Twayne Publishers, Boston, MA, 1987, 
p. 45. 
40 Ibid., p. 48. 
41 Ibid., p. 48. 
42 F. Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, p. 37. 
43 Ibid., p. 38. 
44 Ibid., p. 39. 
45 Ibid., p. 39. 
46 D. Lenson, op. cit., p. 53. 
47 F. Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, pp. 41-2. 
48 The Greek word tragus, from which we get 'tragedy', means 'goat-song', according to 
Lenson. See op. cit., p. 56. 
49 F. Nietzsche, The Will to Power, trans. W. Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale, Random House, 
New York, 1967, para. 796. 
50 J. Richardson, Nietzsche s System, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1996, p. 20. 
51 Ibid., p. 21. 
52 F. Nietzsche, The Will to Power, para. 619. 
53 Ibid., para. 728. 
54. Ibid., para. 255. 
55 Ibid., para. 551. 
56 lbid.,para.517. 
57 F. Nietzsche, The Antichrist, trans. R.J. Hollingdale, Penguin Books, London, 1968 
58 F. Nietzsche, The Will to Power, paras 796, 797, and 800. 
59 J.P. Stem, Nietzsche, Fontana Modem Masters, William Collins Sons & Co., Glasgow, 
1978, p. 127. 
60 See Heraclitus, 'The Cosmic Fragments', in J. Needleman and D. Appelbaum (eds), 
Real Philosophy: An Anthology of the Universal Search for Meaning, Arkana, London, 
1990, p. 173. 
61 F. Nietzsche, The Will to Power, para. 1067. 
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 5 
The Gift of Being 
In confronting the fact that something exists instead of nothing, we confront something 
odd. It remains odd after we have dealt with it intellectually and emotionally, even 
after we have obtained a satisfactory explanation. No matter how we approach it, this 
is the kind of fact which lies at the limits of our understanding. Rather than adding 
anything to our technical mastery, it sits there, incongruous and obstinate. It is, in a 
sense, an alien fact. It is inhuman, for it does not submit to human comprehension as 
an ordinary fact would. Instead it serves us only as an object of contemplation. The 
world does not exist for the sake of humanity. Rather we exist as outpourings of it. 
I have presented a number of possible responses to the fundamental question of 
metaphysics, the question which confronts existence directly. In each case, with the 
exception of evaluative responses, I have outlined a kind of transformation of attitudes 
which appears to me to follow naturally from an initial thought, a first approximation 
to satisfaction. But ultimate satisfaction is difficult to achieve in this case. It is not a 
simple matter of finding closure for our inquiry by selecting a particular framework 
or explanatory system. For the question is properly addressed only when we take 
account of our emotional responses as well as our intellectual constructions. 
The fundamental question is not a dry academic problem. It is not a question we 
can honestly treat as if it had no connection to our emotions and demanded nothing 
more of us than intellectual curiosity. It asks for the reason for existence, which is 
like asking for the absolute. It seeks for something which lies beyond our normal 
concepts and theories, and as such, it evokes absolute emotions. At the same time, it 
is not a human question. It does not directly address the nature of human life, nor will 
its answer necessarily reveal a way to salvation, nor a means of overcoming grief, 
anxiety, or guilt. This is relatively clear from my sketch of possible answers, some 
which may lead us to recognize a transcendent Being, but none of which immediately 
relate this Being to the condition of being a finite human being. Yet there is a kind of 
intimation here that, if there is an ultimately satisfactory response to the question, it 
must have a certain 'expansiveness' to it. We tend to feel that there is an ebullient 
infinity hidden beneath our inquiry. Even those who embrace a deflationary response 
may yield to a sense of 'global joy' at the fulfilment ofthe world. 
Some of the answers I have discussed so far are satisfactory in themselves, although 
I have argued that each must be given a certain form if they are to bring closure to the 
particular emotional condition which inspires their origins. A deflationary response 
is unsatisfying if it does not overcome fear with wonder, and ultimately with a certain 
kind of' immanent awe'. A necessitarian response will do little to alleviate the frustration 
of the problem unless it arrives at some apprehension of a transcendent being, for 
which 'transcendent awe' is the appropriate emotional reaction. The evaluative 
responses are themselves expressions of marvellous gratitude or deep aesthetic feeling, 
or they are at least continuous with such expressions. In each case, however, there is 
little hope of obtaining conviction from those who are not already believers. One's 

122 
The Problem of Existence 
mind is either attracted to the form of the response, or repelled. It is clear that to a 
large extent most philosophers are capable of endorsing one or other of these approaches 
only because they have already adopted a certain framework of thought, or because 
they already have a certain basic disposition. Deflationary theorists tend to have an 
empiricist outlook, while necessitarians tend to be rationalists, and evaluative theorists 
are likely to be either Platonists, believing in a transcendent realm of Forms, or 
Nietzscheans, eschewing all but the grandiose transformations of the Will to Power. 
With these differing and largely incompatible basic dispositions at play, it is 
impossible to arrive at a final answer, an ultimately satisfactory position, with which 
to close the question entirely and take leave of it. What I shall offer instead of this is 
an elucidation of the common ground, or at least the possibility of common ground, 
from which further contemplation may proceed. Even in this endeavour clarity is 
difficult to achieve. The final result of my ruminations in what follows will not take 
the form of a reconciliation between basic philosophical positions, although it may 
seem that this is the aim. In fact what I shall achieve, if I am successful, is the 
formulation of a separate position from those that have been outlined in the preceding 
chapters. But this position will be defended on the basis that it is capable of subsuming 
the most significant theses asserted by the forgoing authors and positions. As a 
consequence, it will derive some of its explanatory power from the strength of the 
positions discussed in previous chapters. Nevertheless, I do not pretend to have a 
knock-down argument against any of the other responses, and they can each stand on 
their own as perfectly legitimate and perfectly satisfactory. All that I can add to them 
is a unified doctrine ofbeing, a thesis concerning what it means to exist (which is not 
an exhaustive analysis). My intuition is that this doctrine is deeply embedded in our 
attempts to address the fundamental question. 
The formulation of this view, my ultimate answer, will depend upon a metaphorical 
interpretation of existence. I do not believe that this is an inadequate formulation 
which should eventually be supplanted by a more accurate literal expression of my 
meaning. It is a perfectly legitimate phenomenological description as it stands. 
Furthermore, it makes the fact of existence digestible to us in relatively familiar terms 
without diminishing the vivacity of our emotional reactions. In fact one of its virtues 
is that it explains the significance of our emotional attitudes with respect to the fact 
that there is something instead of nothing. In any case, it is doubtful that there is any 
literal or technical vocabulary which could perform the same function as the metaphor 
I shall employ, and it does not disturb the ordinary sense of 'exist' in which it is true 
that there are various 'mere things' (cabbages, kings, ships and sealing wax) which 
simply happen to be. 
Exposition of the Gift Metaphor 
The basic thought that I wish to express is the thought that the existence of something 
instead of nothing is a gift. Being is given to us, and it must be evaluated as such 
when we try to understand it. The existence of things, or the existence ofthe world as 
a whole is given gratuitously. It is a bestowal of power and intelligibility, which is 
both free and unnecessary. This gift cannot be understood within a framework or 
economy of justification and reward, nor within the standard explanatory frameworks 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
123 
of reasons and causes, for it is asymmetrical. There is nothing 'beyond Being' which 
is not already involved in the transaction. Indeed, we may appropriately express the 
idea of the gift of Being by saying, not that there is some transcendent entity which 
acts or creates, but rather that it is Being which gives itself to beings. If we are to 
speak of anything which transcends the contingent world of finite entities, then it 
must be both that which gives and that which is given, somehow at the same time. 
Hence the question 'Why is there something instead of nothing?' is answered by 
the proposition that Being gives itself to beings. That is, Being gives Being (itself) to 
beings such as ourselves, the things around us, and everything else which exists. 
Hence Being gives itself to the world as a whole. This proposition is opaque as it 
stands, and requires a thorough exposition. As I shall use the term, the capitalized 
word 'Being' denotes the transcendent source of the gift of existence, hence the origin 
of all finite beings. The uncapitalized word 'beings' means 'immanent entities'. That 
is, things which exist within the bounds of the finite, concrete framework of the 
common world, whatever they might be. If space and time exist, then they are beings. 
If finite spirits and Cartesian minds exist, then they are beings as well. If abstract 
objects exist, and they are realized within the concrete world, then they too are beings. 
If there is a transcendent source for all things which exist, however, it is not a 'being'. 
It must be counted as Being itself. If there is no transcendent source of beings, then 
Being is identical with Nothingness, or with the absence of an ultimate. Yet, I shall 
argue, even in this case it remains true that Being gives itself to beings. 
How does this proposition explain why there is something rather than just nothing? 
The explanation is intended to work in at least two ways. Firstly it is a metaphoric-
metaphysical restatement of the fact of existence itself. As such it is intended to 
'unpack' the sense of this fact in a way that makes it intelligible in relational terms, 
and thus in terms of a relation which has a correlate in human affairs. We know what 
it is to give something, to give up oneself, and to give oneself to something. Thus by 
comprehending an analogous relationship of giving, we can attain knowledge of what 
it is for Being to give itself to beings. This is then a way of comprehending the fact 
that there is something instead of nothing. 
The second way in which the explanation is intended to work is in its role as a 
schematic representation of the general form of explanation which has been employed 
throughout this essay. That is, it can explain why our answers to the fundamental 
question succeed, when they succeed, in producing satisfaction. I have argued that 
the deflationary and necessitarian responses to the question are significant only when 
they are such as to make feelings of awe appropriate. I have also claimed that evaluative 
answers are significant in part because they directly invite feelings of gratitude or 
aesthetic appreciation which allow us to comprehend a meaning in the fact of existence 
itself. 
These feelings are not merely internal stirrings of the soul, they are directed outwards 
towards the immanent world, or at the transcendent source of immanent beings. We 
feel that existence is significant and meaningful, but not simply and solely because it 
moves us. Rather we feel that we are confronting something vast and indigestible, 
and the mere thought of being within this immense wholeness, this infinity of 
apprehension, is powerful. It turns us outwards, towards the universe, rather than 
making us self-reflective or self-conscious. This kind of feeling is intelligible ifwe 
think of existence itself as a gift. For in receiving a gift, we are also directed outwards, 

124 
The Problem of Existence 
at that which has given and that which is given. We are no longer trapped inside our 
selves, and we may come alive with joy and self-overcoming. 
If it is to act as a general schema for explanatory responses to the fundamental 
question, the proposition that Being gives itself to beings must be applicable to each 
of the satisfactory responses I have examined. These applications must be spelt out in 
detail in order to provide a complete answer to the fundamental question. Before this 
is attempted, however, a prior understanding of the content of this proposition, that 
Being gives itself to beings, must be attained. It is important to recognize that the 
relation of giving has deep evaluative significance and great explanatory power. 
Although it is difficult to weigh this against various other explanatory relations, such 
as creating or grounding or necessitating, the account that I shall offer is not dependent 
upon counting one relation as better than another. Rather I shall argue that if existence 
is to be subsumed under any of the alternatives already discussed, then it can be 
subsumed under the umbrella relation of gift-giving. This is due to the nature of the 
relation, which is at once personal, evaluative, mundane and transcendent. 
The Notion of a Gift 
The verb 'to give' has a wide range of interconnected uses, some of them highly 
abstract. In its mundane ordinary sense, it expresses a triadic relationship between 
two people and at least one object. Person A gives a separate object X, which was one 
ofhis possessions, to person B, and thereby makes it the possession of person B. This 
mundane transaction necessarily takes place in time, for what was at one time the 
possession of A becomes the possession of B. In some cases, there is a teleological 
aspect to the transaction, which may introduce a fourth term to the relation. One may 
give something to another for the sake of friendship, in return for a previous gift, or 
in order to show one's appreciation. Even in these cases, however, a true gift is a 
gratuitous bestowal of something. It is not a measured exchange of objects with 
commensurate value, but something free and unnecessary, something which is given 
and received without any expectation of a return. All that is expected of one who 
receives a gift is that he truly accept it as his own, and appreciate it. It is possible, of 
course, to exchange gifts, but this is not a necessary feature of the relationship, and it 
must be done freely if it is to retain its meaning. 
Even with respect to ordinary gift-giving, there is an aspect of intimacy involved 
which makes it significant. One gives in good faith, and hopes that this will be 
appreciated. This is partly illustrated by the fact that gift-giving can be corrupted in 
various ways. For example, the institution of the birthday gift has become so 
commonplace and automatic that it can easily become not merely mundane but 
positively sour. There are standard gifts and impersonal gifts, which fail to touch the 
recipient intimately, and there are objects one buys at a gift shop, which often fail in 
the same way. The complimentary soap one receives in a hotel room rarely appears 
as a true gift, but rather a standard courtesy. And if it becomes obvious that something 
was given only because a return was expected, then the transaction has been reduced 
to an economic exchange, and it is therefore divested of its meaning. If these are 
good examples of when gift-giving can become corrupted, then it follows that there 
is a significance to the act which can be lost in cases where either nothing serious was 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
125 
relinquished or something was expected in return. From this it follows that a truly 
gratuitous bestowal has a personal or intimate significance, deriving perhaps from 
the fact that he who gives must lose something personal or intimate. 
In addition to the case of something given by one person to another, there are 
various other uses of the verb 'to give' which, though more abstract, have an analogous 
sense. There is no reason to avoid or exclude these other senses within the present 
metaphysical context, apart from a mere prejudice in favour of the mundane. 
Furthermore, it seems that many of the more complex and abstract uses of 'give' 
which appear in ordinary discourse are directly relevant to the ontological meaning 
which it must ultimately have if the statement that Being gives itself is to have the 
kind of significance it needs to have. For example, we speak of a woman 'giving 
birth' to a child. This is not a triadic relation but a dyadic one, yet it has a similar 
sense. It is not a case of giving some object which the woman possesses to another 
person who already exists. Rather the mother gives life to the child, a life it could not 
possess independently of the act of giving birth. 
Clearly the relationship here is very different from those already considered. But 
the features which make it important and meaningful are similar. Giving birth is a 
gratuitous bestowal of life. It initiates a deep personal relationship. Indeed, it is 
appropriate to feel grateful to one's mother for giving the gift of one's life. There is a 
sense in which something the mother possesses is given to the child. Some of her 
flesh, at least, is taken from her and given to another being. It remains true also that 
the mother does not expect any return from her child. Giving birth is not normally 
seen as an investment which ought to yield dividends, and when it becomes this, it 
has been most seriously travestied. Finally, the value of the gift oflife is immensely 
significant. It is normally felt as a gift not to be taken lightly, not to be thrown away 
at a whim. To take one's life in suicide is, in a way, to dishonour one's parents. 
Giving birth is already a kind of ontological relationship. It means bringing about 
the existence of somebody. When used in metaphorical ways, it means bringing about 
the existence of non-persons as well. It is not very surprising, for example, that many 
of the oldest cosmogonies, cast in the form of mythological stories, understand the 
origins of the universe in terms of the concept ofbirth. It is not surprising that Nietzsche 
speaks of the world 'giving birth to itself' either. One may view this as no more than 
a decorative way of talking about the origins of things, but one cannot deny that 
doing so invests a certain kind of significance into the event, one which need not be 
expressed by the use of more neutral words. Perhaps it is appropriate to imbue this 
kind of sense to the origin and explanation of the existence of the world. It can be 
argued that, unless we speak in some such way, we will miss an essential aspect of 
the event. The origin of the world - this is not an everyday happening. It is the 
happening of all happenings, and it leads to everything, to all beings. It is not really 
credible to mistake this event for something mundane, for another 'thing' in the 
humdrum world of ordinary things. 
Not all of the uses of 'give' are as intimate or vital as 'giving birth'. We sometimes 
speak of giving up, giving ground, and giving way. In these cases, the notion of yielding 
something that one possesses remains, but these uses of the word are less significant 
to ontology. In fact, they tend to suggest the presence of a conflict, which is actually 
the opposite of the ontological sense of a gift. To give up or to give ground presupposes 
that one is struggling with a foe, and consequently relinquishes something under duress. 

126 
The Problem of Existence 
The idea of the gift of Being is emphatically not the idea of something renounced 
unwillingly, during a battle. Existence is freely given, and freely presented to us. If 
this were not so, then it would be impossible to interpret existence as a gift oflove. 
Giving birth is a better approximation of the ontological sense of'give' than giving 
ground. It is an incomplete metaphor, but it is closer in meaning to the gratuitous 
bestowal of Being because giving birth involves giving up part of oneself, part of 
one's flesh at least. There are various other uses of 'give' which appear to have an 
ontological dimension, but are too abstract or too impersonal to serve as good 
representations. We may say that the right kind of knowledge gives us the power to 
act appropriately, which seems to be a bestowal of causal power, and thus a sort of 
existential giving-forth. Ordinary causation, however, is mostly irrelevant in this 
context. It is a matter of bringing about certain mundane states of affairs from other 
mundane states of affairs, and as such it will not capture the sense in which the fact 
that there is any existential state of affairs at all is given. For this fact is not a mundane 
fact. Similarly we may say that legality gives authority, but this is too abstract to 
represent the gift of Being to beings. Although there is a distant echo of the ontological 
meaning, for it is true to say that we live within the law, just as we live within the 
world of beings, this will not capture the concreteness of the ontological situation. 
For the law does not truly relinquish authority, it merely specifies a rule for the exercise 
and distribution of authority, which is an abstract quality and not a concrete situation. 
The proposition which we are to interpret is that Being gives itself to beings. There 
are expressions of this relation which may capture its sense more completely than 
mundane giving relations in which objects or powers are transferred from one person 
to another. It is possible to give oneself to something. One may give oneself to a 
cause, or to another person, or to a project. In general, one may give oneself 
devotionally to another being, and in doing so, enhance or create a meaning for one's 
life. This entails 'spending oneself' entirely on the other being. It means treating the 
other being as a significant other, perhaps to the extent of dying for them. 
We may approach the metaphysical relation of Being to beings by approximations. 
Consider as a first approximation the relationship of a patriotic soldier to the cause 
for which he is fighting. If we think of this soldier as having no other commitments 
except the cause, and as being totally devoted to it, to the extent that he has no time 
for any other activity, then it seems that we have an approximate form of ontological 
giving. We can say that such a person has given himself to the cause. He may even 
give his life for the cause, if his devotion is complete. There is in this person a total 
giving-forth, so that all of his energy and all of his time is used up in the fight. Such 
a person must believe in the rightness of the fight very strongly if his activity is to 
really be an analogue of ontological giving. But even in the ideal case, when there is 
total commitment and a real rightness to be fought for, this can only be an 
approximation. For under normal conditions, such a total gift of one's life is both 
undesirable and unacceptable. One must, to some extent, be forced into a situation 
where this becomes a necessity. 
Consider next the relation of marriage. Ideally, a married couple freely choose 
each other, consistently love each other, and remain committed to each other for the 
rest of their lives. There is a clear sense in which they have given themselves to each 
other. They have given their time, their attention, their energy, their very lives. This is 
not a complete giving-over, for even in the best marriages there may be periods of 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
127 
absence and inattention, and times when energy must be spent on making a living. 
And ontologically, a married couple have not given every aspect and every part of 
their existence to each other. They remain physically separate entities, even if they 
are spiritually united. So marriage is only an approximation to what is meant by the 
relation of Being to beings. It is arguably a better approximation than the case of the 
soldier-patriot because it is based upon love, rather than the political situation of the 
moment. However, just as in the previous case, it may lead to one person giving up 
their life for another. 
Consider next a person who we would correctly describe as giving himself to a 
religious life. To satisfy such a description, it is not enough merely to have faith and 
regularly perform one's religious duties. One must be a monk, or a martyr, and truly 
devote the whole of one's being to God, or to some other religious object. For such a 
person, every deed is done as prayer, every step taken and every word uttered is done 
for the sake of the religious mission. Arguably such commitment is extremely rare or 
non-existent, for inattention and sin of some kind is virtually inevitable at some point. 
But considered as an ideal, this sort ofloving, personal relationship with the absolute 
(however it is conceived) is a better approximation to ontological giving than marriage. 
For in this case, there are no slips, no diversions of one's mind or spirit. The devotee, 
at least in the ideal case, entirely gives himself, without remainder. Yet this is still an 
approximation, for each person is finite, and cannot therefore become infinite. There 
is still a gap between this gift and the gift of Being itself. 
Finally we may consider what has been called 'God's gift of creation'. Properly 
conceived, this is not merely an approximation to ontological giving, it is the real 
thing, or at least an example of the real thing. For 'God' is one of the names ofBeing, 
and 'creation' is just the totality of beings. In the idea of the gift of creation we have 
an instance of a complete emptying. God divests himself of his own Being, and gives 
it to beings, to the world. And yet, paradoxically, God remains what he always was. 
It may be difficult or impossible to imagine how the deity can act as the causal 
origin of the universe. Most philosophical accounts of causation entail that for one 
thing to cause another, both must be contained within the same spatio-temporal system. 
God lies outside of space and time, and therefore cannot act as a causal agent for 
anything within space and time. So at least it seems.1 In order to avoid this kind of 
problem, it is possible to formulate the theistic doctrine of creation without employing 
the standard, mundane concept of causation. One way of doing this is to speak of 
God's giving himself to the world, by making himself finite. In other words, in the 
act of creation, the deity does not act on something outside of himself (which is 
impossible, given that he is all-inclusive). He acts on himself and hence, in a way, he 
'becomes' finite. Although some theists would object to such a formulation, on the 
grounds that it seems to lead to pantheism, or to the idea that God is (exhaustively) a 
finite being, this is a mistake. Mystical theism asserts that God remains infinite even 
while becoming finite. 
This is a form of expression which is available to theists, but it does not suit 
everybody. It is also possible to express the sense of our proposition in terms acceptable 
to an atheist. One way of doing so is simply to use the religiously neutral words I 
have already employed: 'Being gives itself to beings'. But ifwe say that, we must 
understand 'Being' as signifying that which is extramundane. It may be, as Smith 
says, the 'world-whole', or it may be Heidegger's sense of 'Being', but it cannot be 

128 
The Problem of Existence 
understood as something which exists in the finite or immanent world. And likewise, 
the giving relation is not like a mundane birthday gift or even a giving of a finite 
person to a cause or another person. 
In the end, it may be impossible to be totally clear and explicit about the sense of 
this form of giving. I have introduced a series of significations for 'give' which gradually 
approximate the sense of the gift ofBeing, and in doing so I have indicated the direction 
in which we must traverse in our thinking. But this is not a Cartesian 'clear and 
distinct idea'. Ontological giving is a total involvement, and it is the absolute giving 
of oneself to another. Beyond this, it is difficult to say anything further. I have indicated 
only that there are connections between this sense and the other senses of' give' with 
which we are more familiar. To this extent, I have supplied an explication of giving. 
Features of the Gift of Being 
For fmite creatures, to give oneself is to relinquish or commit one's entire being to 
another being, or to a project or to a religious object. This is analogous to a gift of 
'existence', for it is a way of giving the whole of oneself (which is equivalent to 
giving one's existence). But while this may help us to imagine the relationship 
involved, it does not specify the whole sense of proposition that Being gives itself to 
beings. There are other significant features of transcendent Being, considered as a 
gift. These must also be specified if the proposed explanation-schema for 'something 
instead of nothing' is to succeed. 
Metaphysical Necessity 
Ifthere is a genuinely explanatory statement which satisfies our inquiry into the 'why' 
of existence, then it must truly function as an explanation. It cannot be reducible to an 
empty tautology, so it must exclude something. We must be able to say that something 
exists because Being gives itself to beings. This entails that we must at least exclude 
the possibility that speaking of 'Being' is unintelligible. Thus we must be able to 
speak of transcendent Being. The fundamental question itself presupposes that there 
is 'something' in virtue of which things exist. This something is Being, and it is 
transcendent. It is not reducible to the status of an immanent object within the contingent 
world. In claiming that Being gives itself to beings, and using this as an explanation-
schema for understanding the fact of existence, we are excluding the possibility that 
the presupposition fails. We are asserting that there is a legitimate answer to the question, 
even if the answer lies in an identification of(transcendent) Being with Nothing. As 
I will argue, even in this case, the schema may be intelligibly employed. That Nothing 
lies at the heart of things, that there is a 'creative' Nothingness which makes beings 
be, is an occasion for marvelling, and it is neither verbal trickery nor gibberish. 
It is true that one can misinterpret the proposition as a tautology. This can be done 
if one simply ignores its relational form, and thereby denies that there is a transcendent 
Being which can be related to immanent things. For if we interpret the gift of Being 
as no more than the predication or instantiation of the property of 'existence', then 
the proposition that Being gives itself to beings becomes tautologous. It says that 
things which exist have existence. But this interpretation is not forced, and it is in any 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
129 
case a misreading. Being must give itself to that which is genuinely other to itself, to 
that which is immanent, or it will not be a real gift, for it will not involve the relation 
of giving. Thus as long as we retain the relational form of the proposition, and insist 
upon it, tautology is avoided. 
Although it is true that the explanatory proposition should not be seen as a tautology, 
it does not immediately follow that it must be contingent. The simple positivist 
dichotomy between tautologous necessity and empirical contingency does not hold. 
In fact there is little sense here in speaking of either logical necessity or contingency, 
since the proposition with which we are dealing is a schematic one. It is intended to 
be interpreted as expressing the general form of a satisfactory answer to the 
fundamental question, rather than a statement which admits of empirical testing, 
refutation or confirmation of any kind. We might say that it has 'metaphysical' 
necessity, but not a logical necessity. This should be understood as asserting that the 
proposition that Being gives itself to being is 'necessary' given that there is a fully 
satisfactory answer at all. There might be no such answer, and if not, then it is either 
false or nonsensical to say that Being gives itself to beings. What is meant by the 
phrase 'fully satisfactory' in this context, however, is more than merely 'intelligible 
and explanatory'. It also implies that the answer is satisfactory on an emotional level, 
as a partial explication of how or why we have awed and wondrous reactions to the 
very asking of the question. This is an essential aspect of a satisfactory account. 
The necessity of the gift of Being can be partially elucidated by considering the 
question of the nature of beings, the immanent existent objects which surround us 
and make up the world of which we are directly aware. It is implied by the explanation 
schema that these things exist by virtue of their relationship with transcendent Being. 
The relationship is that of giving, and so it seems natural to say that existence is given 
to certain things, but (possibly) not to others. One might then ask what would happen 
to an existent thing, an immanent being, if it were not to be so related to Being- that 
is, if it were not in the situation ofhaving received Being. Clearly if the explanation 
schema (together with its instances) provides a correct account of existence, then we 
must say that when Being is not given to something, it does not exist. If it is to be 
considered as a thing at all, then it must be a merely possible thing, a potential being 
which is not actualized because it does not have the right relationship with transcendent 
Being. 
This appears to be an appropriate and intelligible answer, given that we have a 
context for discussing the nature of a specific being. Then we can say that if a particular 
thing was not given Being, then it would not exist and would be a metaphysically 
possible thing but not an actual immanent being. But it is not metaphysically possible 
for there to be absolutely no beings at all. Under the present interpretation, this would 
be equivalent to saying that it is possible for the gift of Being to be permanently and 
universally withheld, so that no possible thing was actualized at all. This may be 
considered a bare logical possibility, but nothing more. Within the scope of the 
metaphysical possibilities allowed under the assumption that there is a satisfactory 
answer to the question of existence, there is no room for a situation in which there is 
a transcendent Being whose role is to explain why anything exists at all, and yet this 
role is contingently not performed. Such a supposition is self-defeating. 
At most, we might be able to say that the transcendent Being is equivalent to Nothing, 
and that this equivalence helps to explain why the world exists as a logically contingent 

130 
The Problem of Existence 
fact. This entails that the world's existence is a contingent fact, and thus satisfies the 
intuitions of the brute fact view, but even in this case we cannot say that the world is 
an absolutely brute fact. To say this would be to say that it is not merely logically 
contingent but also that it is utterly unintelligible, and thus to make a satisfactory 
response impossible. Serious advocates of the brute fact view do not make such a 
claim. 
We can of course consider the possibility that no truly satisfactory answer can be 
given to the question, not even the answer provided by the brute fact view, that there 
is no reason for something instead of nothing. This appears to be a logical possibility, 
since there is nothing self-contradictory about it. If it were to be so, then we would 
not be entitled to claim that Being gives itself to beings. Such a proposition would be 
false since it would entail that there is an intelligible explanation where none is to be 
found. It could be argued, in fact, that rather than being false the proposition would 
be entirely meaningless, for it presupposes that there is an intelligible and satisfactory 
explanation available to us. In either case it is clear that we cannot seriously consider 
the idea (which may be thought to be a logical but not a metaphysical possibility) that 
Being withholds the gift of itself, that Being ultimately fails to give itselfto anything. 
If this were to be so, then we would simply cease to speak of the gift metaphor in the 
first place, rather than talking about 'withholding'. If this is clear, then it is also clear 
that the explanation schema, which is expressed by the gift metaphor, has a certain 
kind of necessity. This kind of metaphysical necessity will make more sense if the 
notion of transcendent Being is taken to be genuinely significant, and not merely a 
metaphorical or mythological concept. 
Transcendence 
In addition to metaphysical necessity, Being must possess other features if it is to 
serve the role that it must have in the proposed explanation schema. Firstly it must be 
transcendent, which means that it cannot be conceived as a concrete contingent thing 
amongst other things. It falls under no category, and it is dependent upon nothing 
outside of itself. Being is infinite, ungraspable, and ineffable. For if we are to grasp a 
thing, we must do so by circumscribing it or putting it into a category, which is 
impossible for the source of all beings. Hence it lies beyond our powers of 
comprehension, although there are ways in which we can 'point' to it. For example, 
just coming to realize that there is a limit to our concepts can be a way of seeing 
beyond this limit. 
In theological terms, God is Being itself. He simply and unqualifiedly is, without a 
beginning or an end and without depending upon anything else for existence or for 
any other characteristic. There are difficulties in understanding the very idea of that 
which cannot be grasped. In addition to the fact that we must somehow continue to 
speak of Being, without knowing exactly and categorically what is meant, we are 
also confronted with the problem of situating this in the context of gift-giving. For 
the explanation schema entails that transcendent Being gives itself to immanent beings, 
which seems to imply that immanent things are given transcendence, and are therefore 
not immanent after all. In fact this cannot be the case. In theological terms, it would 
mean that God would have to create other transcendent gods rather than finite creatures, 
which is incorrect. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
131 
What we must say instead is that Being transcends itself, or 'goes beyond' itself, 
and thus gives itself or releases itself into immanence. The infinite, if it is to be truly 
unlimited, must not be entirely self-enclosed. It must therefore be capable oflimiting 
itself as well as being unlimited. Thus Being must be capable of being itself and also 
others. And these others, since they are not transcendent, must be finite, immanent 
beings. Only thus can they be genuine others. It is impossible to imagine how Being 
can be itself and also be others. The only way that we can make sense of this is by 
insisting that the standard concept of identity is inapplicable to transcendent Being.2 
However strange it may be to think in this way, we must do so if we are to speak of 
the gift of Being. For this must be an intimate gift of self to other, which means that 
Being, which gives itself, must be itself and also be others. Alan Watts has expressed 
this idea in his exposition of mystical theism: 
In a peculiar and profound sense God is all-inclusive; there is nothing 'outside' him, for 
had he any 'outside' he would have limitations and would not be infinite. It may be shown, 
then, that God has a power which no creature, as such, possesses -the power to be what he 
is not, to 'other' himself. 
If this can be shown, it will, on the one hand, entirely fulfil the mystic's intuition that 
God is 'all in all' and that the universe is one with him. On the other hand, it will also 
account for the other aspect of his intuition, which is that individual things are not lost and 
obliterated in the unity of God but transfigured, seen as more perfectly and uniquely 
themselves. For if the unity of God is truly all-inclusive and non-dual, it must include 
diversity and distinction as well as one-ness; otherwise the principle of diversity would 
stand over against God as something opposite to and outside him ... 
. . . This 'othering' of himself is the free gift of his Being to creatures who otherwise 
might not have existed. And these creatures are in reality other than God; if they were not, 
God could not be said to give his Being to others, and would not be free to include real 
diversity in his unity. Thus non-duality means that God is entirely free from the essential 
limitations of finite existence, which is that a creature cannot at once be itself and another. 
More than ever, the creature may thank God for the free gift of life and being, not only 
because it might not have been given, but also because the gift is God.3 
In giving itself, Being gives its own transcendence up into immanence. This means 
that immanent beings have an aspect of transcendence. Not only do they appear in 
the immediate contexts of apprehension, they also transcend these contexts: they go 
beyond mere appearance, and extend themselves across the field of reality, within 
space and time. Thus they are reidentifiable and relocatable in space and time, and 
they are indefinitely connected with all other beings. Mystics claim that God, or 
Being, is everywhere, and can be apprehended in each fmite thing. Blake implied 
that we could see the world in a grain of sand. These statements are not intended to be 
grasped, nor are they capable of' analysis'. They are simply expressions, in different 
contexts, of the idea that each finite thing has an aspect of infinity, as long as it exists, 
for its existence means that it is a gift of transcendent Being. 
Intelligibility 
Despite being ungraspable, Being is intelligible in itself, and gives intelligibility to 
beings. It is so, but not because we can fully describe it or conceptualize it, nor 
because we have a theory about it, nor because we can manipulate it. On the contrary, 

132 
The Problem of Existence 
we can do none of these things. We understand the transcendent, not by grasping 
what it is, but in our ability to recognize an end-point for all of our descriptions and 
explanations, indeed a limit for the world itself. We understand that Being is intelligible, 
not because we have a definition or analysis which illustrates the internal content of 
Being, but because we understand beings, which are intelligible to us via concepts, 
theories, and practical involvements. In fact, we may suppose that beings are intelligible 
precisely because they are given Being, precisely because they are illuminated by 
that which is infinite and ungraspable. Being is the ultimate source of the intelligibility 
of immanent entities, and it is intelligible because the world ofbeings is intelligible. 
That is part of the gift. 
By giving itself, Being gives intelligibility to beings. It does this by giving a certain 
order to the world of beings, which allows them to participate in the structure of a 
whole. It gives them a world in which they are related to each other, in which they 
have determinate properties, and thus fall into determinate categories. Immanent things, 
finite beings, are not intelligible in themselves, only in relation to others, and ultimately 
in relation to their origin, which is intelligible in itself. 
If it is thought that there is no transcendent Being, then this absence is itself the 
source of order and meaning in the world. The world as a whole must somehow 
reveal itself to us as inherently lacking any transcendent source, and yet, miraculously, 
as something whose structure can be understood. In the context of science and secular 
thought, there seems to be no reason that the world should be as knowable and 
meaningful as it is. And yet, amazingly, it is so, and in fact we can understand some 
of the most minute details. The gift of intelligibility may then be understood (in 
secular contexts) as the basic fact that the universe, which exists contingently and 
purposelessly, is gratuitously lucid. It makes itself available to description and 
explanation, and does so without any particular reason, and without having any 
transcendent source. 
If it is thought that Being is the Form ofFormhood, then there is such a source. For 
then Being is identical with intelligibility in itself, and it has instances which are 
intelligible in relation to it. The gift of Being may then be identified as the relation of 
instantiation, which brings particulars together into a unity and gives them a pattern, 
a form or shape or content in relation to other particulars. If Being is conceived as 
God, then intelligibility is given in the form of the act of creation. For theists, the 
deity is the source for the laws of nature and morality, by which all things are ordered. 
IfBeing is conceived as ultimate value, then intelligibility takes the form of evaluative 
significance, which structures all events and gives us the pattern of our lives. This 
may be understood in aesthetic or in moral terms, but in either case there is an order 
and proportion in things which makes the world intelligible. 
Intimate Involvement 
Finally, if we are to make sense of the gift metaphor in framing our answers to the 
'why' of existence, then we must think of Being as intimately involved with beings. 
The gift is not a mutual exchange, and neither is it the gift of some distinct object 
which passes between things. It is the kind of gift which signifies a union between 
giver and receiver. It is a reaching out of one into another, with the aim of enhancing 
and increasing the bond of intimacy. Indeed it is a marvel in itself. That we are given 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
133 
Being, that there is a universe instead of nothing at all, touches us deeply, because it 
is the primary fact of our lives, without which nothing would be meaningful because 
all things would appear as 'unreal' in some way. Being gives itself, and as such it is 
intimately involved with the other, the recipient of the gift. So in this gift, it allows 
beings to find themselves within a world, and thus to become involved in that world. 
It allows us to find meaning in the stable, intelligible and manipulable order of things. 
Perhaps the involvement of Being with beings is best expressed in theological 
terms, where we can say that God gives himself to the world as an act oflove. But it 
also makes sense for Nietzscheans and other non-believers. Atheists such as Quentin 
Smith may express this in the claim that the world-whole has a kind of closeness to 
which we may respond with intimate affection. Nietzsche may say that we have artistic 
creativity as our very essence, for we are fundamentally expressions of the Will to 
Power, and are given existence through it. However it is expressed, the intimacy of 
the gift ofBeing can only appear as wholly unintelligible to those who have felt nothing 
marvellous in the fact of existence, and therefore feel detached from it. Such people, 
however, are rare. One may fail to feel the intimacy of Being if one is yet to awaken 
to the wonder occasioned by the fundamental question of metaphysics, or one has not 
yet found a voice for it, or one is consciously avoiding it for fear of what it may mean. 
But at some level, most people have experienced the oddity of the fact of existence, 
and most people have been moved in some way by it. Many of us continue to wonder. 
To a significant extent, the intimacy of the gift of Being can be appreciated directly, 
in the feeling that the real world is 'my world'. This is not an assertion of metaphysical 
idealism, and it can be coherently combined with the feeling that I am just one part of 
the world. For example, it is clear that I can talk about my family without denying 
that I am just one part of this family. In fact, the intimate relationship which is my 
belonging to a family is similar to the extramundane relationship which is my belonging 
to the world. My personal attributes, and indeed my very self, are conditioned by the 
particular context of my existence, and thus conditioned by the nature of the world in 
which I exist. It follows that if the world of beings is a gift of transcendent Being, then 
this gift has an intimacy for myself as well as all other beings. The gift is given to me, 
and yet the gift is my own life, and the existence of my world. Nobody chooses to 
exist, but we may choose to receive this existence as a gift, and appreciate it as such. 
We are thrown into the world, and we have some comprehension of the world's 
wholeness. I can indistinctly refer to the totality of the world by directly referring to 
things in my environment. The world is the totality of myself, these beings around 
me, and everything else which extends beyond them. But to say this, to successfully 
refer to the whole in this way, presupposes that I am totally immersed and intimately 
involved with beings, and thus also with Being. Hence if the gift of Being is to be 
taken as a serious metaphor, it must be seen as an intimate gift. 
Applications of the Explanation-Schema 
Although it is possible to say that there is something instead of nothing because 
Being gives itself to beings, and to say this without uttering a tautology, it is an 
incomplete explanation. By itself, it provides only the schema for understanding, and 
it needs to filled out if it is to acquire the status of a full-blooded answer to the 

134 
The Problem of Existence 
question of existence. It is very much like saying that the physical world is what it is 
because it is governed by laws. Such a statement may be correct, but it is incomplete 
without a specification of the laws which actually govern the universe. Thus the 
metaphor of gift-giving transcendent Being will remain schematic without an 
elucidation of its applications. 
In the following sections I will outline the most significant ways in which the 
explanation schema can be filled out, but I will not argue that these applications are 
exhaustive. There may be ways of applying the schema that I have not yet imagined. 
In fact, there may be satisfactory ways of responding to the fundamental question 
which are not applications of the schema, and if this is so, it may constitute a defect 
in the metaphor itself. For it would then fail to account for the whole of the phenomenon 
that confronts us. However, to claim that there is a real defect, one must show that 
there are truly satisfactory responses that remain outside the scope of the schema. 
This means that they are responses that are not merely well-constructed intellectual 
answers to the 'problem', but are also emotionally adequate. If we are to have a 
completely satisfying response, we must have a response which makes sense of our 
wonderment, our astonishment, our gratitude, and our feelings of awesome depth as 
we confront the fact that there is something real, instead of nothing. This means that 
many of the responses to the 'why' question will not qualify as satisfactory, and the 
schema need not apply to them at all. 
The applications which I shall examine, when they are taken together, constitute a 
system of explanation. Individually, they are incompatible with each other, but each 
invokes a specific interpretation of' giving' as 'gratuitous bestowal', and as such they 
can be coherently combined under the general proposition that Being gives itself to 
beings. Even then, however, the coherence that is achieved is shaken to some extent 
by the fact that they are motivated by opposing attitudes which, rather than being 
reconciled in a grand synthesis, tend towards 'tension'. It is a creative tension, however, 
and upon it rests the project of our existence as personal beings. My conclusion is 
that the gift of Being should be appreciated by those beings which have the capacity 
for appreciation. In short, the meaning that we ascribe to the existence of something 
instead of nothing, if it is to have the kind of emotional significance that truly satisfies 
us in our philosophical inquiries, must also be related to the ways in which we conduct 
our lives. Metaphysics must be applied to personal existence in some way, or it may 
easily degenerate into a purely technical discourse, a parlour game or an amusement, 
which is inadequate as a serious project for contemplative beings. 
There are at least five applications of the gift metaphor which can be seriously 
characterized as satisfactory, and possibly many more which have yet to be formulated. 
Each application either adopts one element of the relation between Being and beings, 
and takes this as its explanatory focus, or otherwise it interprets the relationship as a 
whole in a particular manner. So we can categorize them according to the side which 
they take. 
The application which focuses on beings refuses to allow that there is a contentful 
transcendent Being, so that existence becomes truly gratuitous, even to the point 
where it is 'inexplicable', in the sense of having no rational explanation. Those 
applications that focus on Being take it as self-sufficient, and must postulate a 
gratuitous gift in order to render immanent beings explicable in terms of transcendence. 
Those applications which encompass the whole relationship share specific attitudes 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
135 
with the other two forms, depending upon how they are constructed. In the end there 
are only two satisfactory forms of explanation. Existence can be interpreted in terms 
of contingent beings or in terms of necessary transcendent Being. In both cases the 
gift metaphor is applicable, but in very different ways. These two interpretations are 
in tension with each other, but each one is reasonable on its own grounds. 
In outlining these applications, we shall review the arguments of previous chapters. 
We will begin with the deflationary form of response, which has both satisfactory 
and unsatisfactory forms. In a sense, all of the non-evaluative responses to the question 
of existence are deflationary, for each of them tries to show that in some way 'there is 
nothing to explain'. Yet because the necessitarian explanations employ a more 
expanded ontology, they must be given a separate treatment. 
Immanence (the Brute Fact View) 
A perspective of immanence is any perspective generated from our experiences within 
the world ofbeings, that is the world containing all and only existent objects. Exactly 
what this world contains is a matter of continuing philosophical debate. Its contents 
can be roughly delineated by considering the class of objects of 'everyday 
acquaintance', those infamous middle-sized dry goods with which we interact on a 
daily basis, and then extrapolating a larger class of objects which must be postulated 
if we are to coherently believe in the things with which we are acquainted. 
It can be argued that the world of beings includes physical objects, events, and 
processes which we cannot directly perceive but which explain why ordinary objects 
behave in the ways that they do. Likewise it can be argued that the world of beings 
includes conscious minds, as they must be postulated to explain the coherence of our 
experience. The world of beings may also contain abstract objects such as numbers 
or universals, although it must be shown that they are needed in our total explanation 
of worldly things, or their existence becomes superfluous. It seems more plausible to 
include only those universals which are actually instantiated by beings in the world, 
as Aristotelian realism holds. 
Ideal objects, such as perfect Justice, Wisdom and Goodness, are dubiously included 
in the perspective of immanence, for if they are instantiated at all, it is only to a 
limited extent, and not qua ideals. But it is still arguable that they are beings in the 
world. The reason that there is some doubt about exactly what is included in the 
immanent world is that the ideas of immanence and transcendence are to some extent 
relative ideas. For example, the invisible and intangible objects postulated by scientific 
theory, which include the fundamental particles and forces of nature, as well as space-
time itself, are 'transcendent' in the sense that they transcend our ordinary perceptions 
and commonsense ontological beliefs. But if they are thought to exist because they 
are needed to explain properties of objects which are already part of everyday 
acquaintance, then they can be said to be 'immanent'. 
What is clearly and explicitly excluded from the world of immanent beings is Being 
itself. This means that any object which explains why there are beings at all, or any 
'thing' which can give beings (considered as a totality) their existence, cannot be 
included as an immanent being. This is explicitly ruled out because it must, by 
definition, go beyond the immanent world in its role as the explanation for the fact of 
existence. Furthermore, if we begin with objects of everyday acquaintance, it is clear 

136 
The Problem of Existence 
that nothing within this realm provides the explanation of existence itself. No 
extrapolation from experience which leads us to postulate invisible causes or intangible 
things, nor any abstraction from experience which leads us to postulate existent 
universals will lead us to an explanation of the fact of existence. The immanent world 
leaves traces of many things, including its own causal origins, but it gives us nothing 
which will answer the 'why' question. Thus any perspective that is generated from 
our experience within the immanent world will fail to provide an explanatory response 
to the fundamental question. Instead, such a perspective will naturally lead to the 
idea that existence is a brute fact, that it has no causal explanation, and no ultimate 
purpose or value. That is, it will lead to what I have called a deflationary response to 
the question. 
A deflationary response can take several forms. It can be a simplistic denial that 
the question of existence makes sense. It can also be an assertion that reason has 
intrinsic limits, and cannot be called upon to explain the fact that anything exists. 
Clearly not all of these forms exemplify the gift-giving schema. But it was argued in 
Chapter 2 that not all deflationary responses can be counted as adequate or fully 
satisfactory, and therefore we should not expect the schema to be exemplified in all 
of them. Two conditions must be met if a deflationary response is to be adequately 
formulated. Firstly it must explain why there is no ultimate explanation for existence. 
Without this it is nothing but a groundless assertion, and fails to satisfy the intellect. 
Secondly, it must recognize and account for our feelings of wonder and awe at 
confronting the question in the first place. That is, a deflationary thesis cannot be 
entirely deflationary, for it must not deflate our felt reactions to the situation of being 
in the world. These reactions are real phenomena, and to deny that they are significant 
is unacceptable. Only those accounts which recognize the profound emotional 
significance of absolutely contingent existence, and respond appropriately to a world 
without a reason, can be seen as satisfactory deflationary views. 
Quentin Smith's formulation of the metaphysics of felt meanings should be 
recognized as a satisfactory deflationary response, for it satisfies both of these 
conditions. His thesis is based upon a rejection of transcendent Being. It is a form of 
a priori atheism which claims that there cannot be any cause or reason for the existence 
of the world, and that the very idea of God is incoherent. It may thus appear that his 
view cannot be an exemplification of the gift-giving schema. In denying transcendent 
Being, he effectively denies one of the relata in the gift-giving relation, and thus for 
him, it is just unintelligible to say that Being gives itself to beings. Yet this is only an 
appearance. In fact his position can be reconciled with the schema when it is formulated 
as adopting the hypothesis that transcendent Being is identical with Nothing. It can 
then be interpreted as recognizing the appearance of an empty place in the gift-giving 
relation. 
There are several features of Smith's metaphysical system which demonstrate that 
it is an application of the schema. Firstly, it clearly depends upon the non-existence 
of God. It does not merely leave this as an indeterminate possibility, but relies upon 
the incoherence of there being a causal or teleological explanation for the world-
whole. Some perspectives of immanence, such as Hume's scepticism, are expressions 
of agnosticism, and claim only that we do not know whether there is a transcendent 
Being or not. Smith's view, by contrast, requires that there be nothing transcending 
the world, for it is the whole of all existents, and is therefore all-inclusive. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
137 
His position may thus be described as first recognizing that there is a place for 
transcendent Being, and then insisting that it is an empty place. Indeed, if it were not 
an empty place, if Being were not Nothing, then he would not have formulated a 
deflationary response in the first place. For it is only on the basis of the incoherence 
of God, indeed the ultimate incoherence of all causes and reasons for the fact of 
existence, that he is able to say why it is that no explanation is possible. Furthermore, 
as will become clear, only if the place of transcendent Being is empty can we truly be 
said to respond emotionally to this emptiness. On Smith's view, the absence of an 
ultimate reason for the world is the basis for some of the felt meanings of the world. 
In fact, he claims at one point that we can directly intuit the non-existence of a nature-
transcendent first cause in the affect of 'godless desolation': 
One such seeming intuition is the affect of Godless desolation. In this desolate affect, I 
seem to intuit the absence of a divine part of the world that causes myself and other world-
parts. I seem to intuit a nothingness beyond the empirical and natural chain of causes and 
effects. My intuitive penetration beyond the natural order is met by an absolute emptiness, 
a darkness and silence devoid of God. 
It seems obvious to me in my desolation that it is not the case that I am merely unable to 
find God; instead, it seems that I am intuitively discovering that there is no God, and that 
the people who believed they intuited God were deluded. I seem to be directly beholding 
the nonbeing of God.4 
Smith claims here that we can intuit the absence of a divine world-part. Yet if there is 
an absence to which we can respond, then we must have implicitly recognized that 
there is a 'place' in our conceptual scheme which is empty. This is indicated to some 
extent by the fact that Smith implies that it is possible to have some intuitive penetration 
beyond the natural order, even though this is met by emptiness. Hence there is a 
(cognitive and emotive) 'place' for transcendent Being, although this place is 
unoccupied. Notice also that Smith uses the term 'desolation', with its negative and 
despairing connotations, to describe the feeling that emerges in this context. He is 
clearly aware that the absence of God is an appropriate occasion for passion, as it is 
the absence of a certain kind of ultimate meaning. 
The second feature of Smith's account which illustrates that it is an application of 
the gift-giving relationship follows immediately from the first. For in denying that 
there is a transcendent Being which explains existence, he thereby makes it clear that 
existence is gratuitous. It is given to us for no reason, and without any cause. It is 
therefore truly a gift, and it is truly bestowed miraculously upon beings. In Smith's 
view, this gratuitousness is a feature of the world-whole, and it does not come from 
elsewhere, from a transcendent other outside of the world. But nevertheless it must 
be recognized as a real feature, not a mere appearance, for we respond to it. Indeed, it 
is one of the felt meanings of the world, as he states explicitly in his account of 
miraculousness. 5 In this context it becomes clear that, according to Smith, we really 
do respond to the absence of transcendent Being, to the fact that there is no reason for 
the world's existence. We respond with a feeling of global marvelling: 
The world-whole is miraculous in that at each moment it realizes one of two possibilities, 
even though it is not necessary for it to realize this possibility rather than the other one. At 
each moment the world could either happen or not happen, and I marvel that the world 

138 
The Problem of Existence 
happens, and continues to happen, and avoids the possibility of not happening. At each 
moment, the world-whole stands before the abyss of nothingness, but it does not vanish 
into this abyss; it continues, and in so continuing it overcomes again and again the possibility 
of nonexisting. It is miraculous that the other possibility, the possibility of plunging into 
nothingness, is not realized, for this is equally as possible as the possibility that it is realized. 
There is no feature of the world-whole that shows why one of these possibilities rather than 
the other should be realized; the nature of the world-whole does not necessitate either its 
happening or its nonhappening, but is compatible with both possibilities.6 
The fact that Smith uses metaphorical language to express the captivated appreciation 
of global marvelling does not detract from his explication of the feeling. On the 
contrary, it actually assists us to understand what he is saying. When he claims that 
the world-whole 'stands before the abyss of nothingness' at each moment, he expresses 
an understanding distinctly available in contemplation. It is logically possible for the 
world to cease existing, but lo, it does not. Each moment, then, is a gift. And what is 
given? The world itself is given. In a sense, Being gives itself so completely that it is 
exhausted, and has thereby emptied itself into beings. Hence transcendent Being is 
Nothing. 
Whether the feeling he describes is best called 'marvelling' or not is irrelevant, and 
whether we choose a different metaphor, and speak of the gift of Being, is equally 
irrelevant. In either case, we are impressed with the gratuitousness (miraculousness) 
of existence. The world is there, hanging on the edge of the abyss. It avoids the abyss 
at each moment, so that in a sense the abyss (Nothingness) can be said to 'relinquish 
itself', and in so doing it gives us the world. This is therefore a clear exemplification 
of the gift-giving schema. We can only recognize the gratuitous nature of the world's 
existence by recognizing that there is an abyss ofNothingness which is a real possibility. 
Thus, rather than absolutely denying the gift of Being, Smith gives expression to it. 
Finally, the metaphysics of felt meanings incorporates each of the features of the 
gift of Being listed in the previous section. Although it denies that there is a 
transcendent Being, this does not amount to a total rejection of transcendence itself. 
Smith's insistence that the notion of God is incoherent can be understood as a way of 
insisting upon the transcendence of Being, although it is expressed from within a 
perspective of immanence. Being is here taken to be so far beyond the immanent 
world of beings that it is inconceivable, and thus incoherent. With respect to the 
intelligibility of things, Smith invites us to consider feelings as ways of understanding. 
Thus Being is intelligible, on his view, because we are able to comprehend the felt 
meanings ofthe world. This is how the wholeness of the world is accessible, through 
our attending to its importance. His system, as I said earlier, begins with the postulate 
that the world is a world of importances, and comes to us primarily under these guises. 
As for the question of the intimacy of the gift of Being, Smith has an entire chapter 
devoted to explaining what he calls the 'closeness' of the world. His main argument 
is intended to show that it is possible to have a sensuous appreciation of the world-
whole in respect of its 'apparential closeness'. This appreciation is what he calls 
'global loving', and it is characterized as an impure appreciation of happening which 
is directly based upon global joy_? Smith makes it clear that he is not claiming that the 
world-whole is a person who directs a conscious act of loving towards anybody, 8 for 
it is he, and not the world-whole, which feels the feeling-tonality of the world 'flowing 
towards me lovingly'. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
139 
He argues that sometimes, when we have become tied down by mundane concerns, 
we may long for a direct experience of the world-whole. We long to be able to intuit 
the whole in an affective captivation, and thus to be immediately aware of it. When 
we fmally have this intuition of the whole, we receive a global revelation, an immediate 
appearance of the world-whole which is not separated from us by an image or a 
thought. 9 Thus in such a revelation, the world is no longer apparentially distant from 
us, as it was when we were absorbed in mundane tasks. The world-whole therefore 
has apparential closeness, and we respond to this closeness with a loving feeling of 
closeness. 
Smith engages in a long discussion of the meaning of apparential closeness, which 
is connected to the idea that the world-whole is centred. This means that it appears as 
something extending out from a centre, and thus it contains a centre, in fact many 
centres with differin§ perspectives, each of which is intuitively aware of all the parts 
as encircling itself.1 In arguing that the world-whole is centred, he can reply to the 
objection that it is impossible to intuit the world-whole because we cannot single out 
in our intuition everything that exists. The details of this argument are not relevant to 
my purpose, but it is important to note that apparential closeness is interpreted as a 
kind of intimacy. It is an intimate closeness, which binds the person who has the 
intuition with the world-whole in a gentle and loving manner. Smith recognizes this 
in his descriptions of global loving, and also through his assertion that, in being 
captivated by the world-whole's feature ofbeing immediately apparent, global loving 
is a 'semireflexive' intuition. He claims that this intuition is not wholly about myself, 
but partly turns back to myself, in that 'it is an awareness of the world-whole qua 
related to myself' .11 Thus the apparential closeness of the world-whole is a form of 
intimate involvement with the world-whole. 
Necessitarian Applications: the Form of Formhood 
Our experience within the immanent world is a common framework. It provides us 
with a stable and coherent network of concepts and facts which we use daily to navigate 
our way through life. To speak of a thing which transcends the immanent world is 
difficult, because it also transcends our ordinary framework of understanding. As such, 
discourse about Being itself, or about God, is always problematic. It is not the same as 
discourse about tiny invisible things such as atoms, for these have a clear and empirically 
testable connection with ordinary experience, mediated by scientific theory. It is not 
the same as discourse about abstract objects such as redness or triangularity, for these 
are at least instantiated by immanent beings which we can see, and therefore have an 
empirical content. If we are going to persist in serious discourse about transcendent 
Being, rather than taking it to be an empty place in our conceptual framework where 
an ultimate reason for the world's existence would otherwise fit, we must be very 
cautious. In some way, such discourse must retain an element of metaphor and mystery, 
or it will descend into ordinary talk, which results in metaphysical confusion. At the 
same time, it must be truly meaningful discourse, as opposed to babbling. 
For this reason, it is inappropriate to speak of a 'perspective of transcendence'. 
There is no such perspective as such, for transcendent Being does not provide us with 
a conceptual framework for understanding the world. Instead it provides a sense of 
meaning which cannot be obtained within our mundane discourse about beings. It 

140 
The Problem of Existence 
provides an expression of the idea that there is a 'beyond' to which we may point, 
even if we cannot state exactly what it is, nor find an immanent category under which 
it can fall. The reasons that philosophers have advanced for a belief in some kind of 
transcendent Being are not usually related to the fundamental question of metaphysics. 
More often they are related to questions about the significance of human life, or 
about causal origination, consciousness, guilt, and death. It is with respect to such 
spiritual concerns about meaning that we tend to speak of transcendent meaning, and 
it is in such a context that we may expect to find an application of the gift-giving 
schema. However, if we are to conclude that there is such an application, we must be 
able to adopt a conception of transcendent Being as a way of answering the 
fundamental question. As such, we must investigate necessitarian answers to the 
question, which are the most obvious candidates. 
It was argued in Chapter 3 that only a certain type of necessitarian resolution was 
ultimately satisfactory. The question tends to create a sense of tension or frustration 
when it is treated as a problem which must be solved, and many of the potential 
answers do nothing to relieve this frustration. This is because, while it is relatively 
simple to define 'exists' or 'possible world' in such a way that the existence of 
something instead of nothing becomes a logically necessity, these are merely 
definitions. They do not overcome the problem as such, but remove it by stipulation. 
Nothing illuminating comes forth, and our sense of frustration remains. Furthermore, 
in light of Baldwin's subtraction argument, it seems that there is good reason to think 
that the nonexistence of all concrete objects, at least, is a logical possibility. This 
imposes a limitation on the kind of necessitarian answer that we can seriously construct. 
We must suppose that there is a non-concrete necessary existent, and yet the standard 
examples of such things, including mathematical objects and ordinary Platonic forms 
such as Redness, are just as unsatisfactory as an attempt to answer the question with 
a stipulation. They too are unilluminating, for while they may postulate entities that 
exist in every possible world, they do not provide a real resolution. They are basically 
immanent beings, and as such they do not function as ultimate explanatory postulates. 
The necessitarian answers which fail to illuminate existence also fail to exemplify 
the gift-giving schema. None of them can be coherently interpreted as assertions that 
Being gives itself to beings. This is not surprising, if my view is correct, because the 
schema only applies to formulations that are intellectually and emotionally satisfactory. 
They must both answer the question intelligibly and account for the emotions we feel 
in the face of the question. It would be surprising, however, if the satisfactory answers 
that I discussed in Chapter 3 could not be interpreted as exemplifications of the schema. 
This would constitute a threat to my previous argument, or to the idea that Being 
gives itself to beings. For this idea is intended to be the summation or the general 
form of satisfactory ultimate explanations. It must therefore apply to those answers 
which are genuine resolutions, or it is inadequate. 
Two possibilities were discussed in Chapter 3. The first was based upon the Platonist 
theory of Forms, and the second was a formulation of theism. Both ofthem succeed 
in satisfying the intellect, given that they can be accepted intellectually, for they both 
explain the fact of existence, through postulating a transcendent necessary being. 
Neither of these answers rules out the contingent existence of concrete things, which 
means that they do not contradict the conclusion of the subtraction argument. These 
answers therefore allow us to say that concrete things are in some sense gratuitous. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
141 
Furthermore, both of them successfully account for our feelings of awe at the fact of 
existence, for in contemplating the transcendent entities which they postulate, we are 
naturally lead to such feelings. 
Let us begin with the first hypothesis, that there is a Form ofFormhood, which is a 
necessary existent. This Form is postulated to account for the common feature shared 
by all Forms, and since Forms explain how their instances are coherently grouped 
together, it may be said that they explain how things are intelligible. Thus the common 
feature is that Forms give things intelligibility. As such the Form ofFormhood itself 
is the ultimate Form oflntelligibility, and its instances, the class of Forms, also exist 
necessarily. (Such a postulate may appear to violate Occam's Razor, in that it greatly 
increases the number of necessary beings. But it does so as part of an explanation for 
the intelligibility of our experience of the immanent world, and as such it need not be 
construed as being overly profligate.) 
If we are given only the postulate that there are necessary existents such as Forms, 
it remains logically possible that nothing else exists. There is thus a non-actual world 
which contains only abstract things, and this is the 'empty world', for it is empty of 
concrete immanent beings. The ultimate Form of Intelligibility does not provide a 
necessitarian explanation for the fact that the empty world is non-actual. Thus in 
terms of what is entailed by the existence of this Form, concrete beings are contingent 
and superfluous. If it makes sense to say that intelligibility is bestowed upon them, 
then it is bestowed gratuitously. 
Is it also possible to say that the Form of Formhood is an expression or an 
interpretation of 'Being', and that it gratuitously gives itself to beings? Clearly if this 
interpretation is to be sustained, the gift must be an indirect one. For the Form of 
Formhood gives itself, by instantiating itself, only to Forms, and they in turn give 
intelligibility to their concrete instances. But an indirect giving relation may still be a 
case of giving. The Platonist view postulates a hierarchy of universals, some of which 
are more comprehensive than others, but each one derives its character, and its set of 
possible instances, from the highest and most all-embracing universal property, which 
is Bein~ in itself. {In the Republic, Plato actually states that the Good is greater than 
Being, 
but this remark must be taken as a departure from his formulation of the 
necessitarian answer. It is relevant to the evaluative view, but can be discounted 
otherwise.) 
The Form of Formhood also gives intelligibility to itself because it instantiates 
itself, and this is an indication of its status as an absolute. It has total independence 
and self-sufficiency. The fact that this Form instantiates itself demonstrates that with 
transcendent Being, we have reached the final cessation of explanation, for it is a 
self-explanatory postulate. This helps to show that the Platonist interpretation of Being 
truly exemplifies the gift-giving schema. For its gift of itself is inexplicable, and 
gratuitous, and similarly its own nature as the ultimate source of all intelligible beings 
is also inexplicable. It gives itself, and thereby gives intelligibility to the world, and 
thereby gives us the framework of categories that we use in comprehending the world. 
But it does not fall under a category itself, other than the most universal and all-
embracing category, which cannot be conceptualized because it admits of no 
contrasting opposite. 
While it is clear that the Platonist view of transcendent Being entails that it gives 
intelligibility and order to the world of beings, there is also a sense in which we can 

142 
The Problem of Existence 
say that its gift is an intimate one, signifying an involvement with beings. One of the 
metaphors that Plato used to explain instantiation was the notion of participation. 
Taken literally, this means that Forms are present within their instances, participating 
in what they are. The Form of Formhood, then, is present within all Forms, and it 
participates through the Forms in all things and all events. Anything which is 
intelligible has some kind of involvement with Intelligibility in itself. Wherever there 
is a universal instantiated by a particular, this is an exemplification of the ultimate 
Form, and a gift that it gives. This represents a kind of intimate involvement with 
beings, even if it is value-neutral. It may be thought that this neutrality is unacceptable 
in an object of worship, but the Form ofFormhood is not an object of worship. It is an 
abstract object, and the intimacy that it confers in its gift of Being is not the intimacy 
of a loving personal involvement. 
Necessitarian Applications: Theism 
The second example of a necessary existent that may be satisfactorily employed as 
an answer to the fundamental question is God. In this case it is important to understand 
that a truly transcendent deity is required, rather than an idol. We must be able to 
speak of the Supreme Being as having the status of an absolute, though it is also an 
individual person. The deity is an ultimate explanatory postulate. He cannot be 
explained in terms of anything else, and his existence is necessary. In fact, God is 
Being itself, which means that he is self-existent (dependent upon nothing else) and, 
in a sense, his existence is self-explanatory. Insofar as it makes sense to say that God 
exists, his existence is unlimited and unqualified. Thus he is Being itself, and has the 
same content as Being, which is to say that he has no conceptual content. If the deity 
is to be considered an application of the schema, then he must have a specific kind of 
relationship with immanent beings. While it is correct to say that God has created the 
world, this must be understood in terms of giving Being to the world. And this means 
that God must give himself to beings. 
According to theism, this relationship is not exhausted by the initial act of creation. 
There is a continuation of the gift of Being throughout the immanent world, as the 
life of the creator is passed on to his creatures. Only in this way does it make sense to 
worship God, for if Being was exhausted by the original creative act, there would be 
no reason to be thankful for existence now. If the religious life is to be a continuing 
endeavour, then it must be possible to live one's whole life under God, and thus to 
comprehend that Being is given to the world at each moment. There are thus two 
parallel incarnations of the gift. It is firstly the act of creation, a spontaneous free 
bestowal of Being upon beings which is the very origin of the world. But it is also the 
continuation of this bestowal throughout all of time, so that God sustains the world 
by giving himself to it. He is the living spirit in all things, the spirit that gives life to 
the world. For this reason, theists claim that God is everywhere and exists in everything. 
It is this second incarnation which makes a religious response intelligible, and parallels 
what Smith has called the 'felt meaning of miraculousness', the feeling that the 
continuation of the world (its failure to disappear at each moment) is a kind of miracle. 
Whether or not he exists, it is a conceptual truth that God is unsurpassable, or 
infinite. Such a characterization is true 'by definition', for if we mean anything by 
the term, we mean it to denote the infinite. God is absolutely unlimited, and therefore 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
143 
transcends all of the limitations of immanent beings. He is neither limited by space 
and time, nor by the laws of nature, nor by separate causal powers, nor by any other 
being. He has no beginning and no end, and is dependent upon no other being for his 
existence. The divine Being transcends all other beings, and even transcends our 
concepts. Thus there is neither a limiting conceptual framework, nor a complete 
definition of God, nor a complete definition of any other object of a transcendent 
religion. The Tao which can be named (and thus limited) is not the true Tao. 
The names that we use to denote transcendent Being are themselves bereft of 
conceptual content, and serve only to point to that which lies beyond, rather than to 
define it. This pointing can be achieved using the idea of the infinite, which is itself a 
signification of transcendence rather than a positive concept. The infinite does not 
represent a category into which various things fall; it is rather a negation of finitude. 
Only one Being can be truly infinite, truly unlimited. If there were more than one, 
they would constitute limits on each other. To the extent that it is possible to think of 
God at all, it is necessary to think of him as infinite. Given that we have some notion 
of God, it is a conceptual truth that he is absolutely unsurpassable. And yet 
paradoxically, he transcends all of our concepts. As Meister Eckhart once said: 'If I 
had a God that I could understand, I would not regard him as God.' 13 
Such a reflection on the idea of the infinite may be used negatively by the sceptic, 
to show that we have no intelligible concept of God. But if we are to seriously consider 
theism, it must also be possible to use the apparently paradoxical inconceivability of 
transcendent Being positively, as an approach to the divine. It can then be employed 
to illustrate exactly how the gift-giving schema is applied to the doctrines that God 
created the world, and that he sustains the existence of the world at each moment. 
Consider immanent beings, with which Being is to be contrasted. Each immanent 
being is self-enclosed. It exists within a particular span of space and time, and it 
cannot exceed these boundaries. It has a specific quantity of mass-energy, and it is 
limited in its ability to transform itself. In particular, it is limited by the laws of 
nature. No immanent being can be anything outside of itself. By contrast, the 
transcendent Being that is God has no such limitations. Since God is not self-enclosed, 
he has the ability to be himself, and also be that which is other to himself, and thus to 
be immanent. Unlimited by any spatial or temporal measures or powers, the infinite 
God can manifest himself as a finite being. This is how we may understand the idea 
that Being gives itself to beings in a theistic context. 
It is not true that God gives himself to the world as a matter of logical necessity. 
There is a free spontaneous decision to become finite, and thus to creatively incarnate 
Being within the limits of immanence, within space and time. Because it is a non-
necessary decision, we can legitimately speak of contingency, and thus we can say 
that there is truly a gratuitous bestowal, a genuine gift. This account of creation might 
be confused with a version of pantheism, but in fact it says something quite different. 
It is claimed that God becomes finite, or gives himself to the world of beings, which 
seems to suggest that there is only one existent, which is internally related to itself. 
But the pantheist doctrine is mistaken in at least two ways. It insists upon the necessity 
of God becoming finite, and therefore cannot account for contingency at all, for all is 
contained within the necessary being. Baruch Spinoza explicitly argued for this 
doctrine, and as a result he could not countenance the traditional doctrine of creation. 14 
God, in this case, is not the origin of the world because he is wholly identical with the 

144 
The Problem of Existence 
world. Pantheism thus fails to recognize that creation is truly a matter of giving Being 
to things that are genuinely other, truly limited things rather than the unlimited deity. 
In stating that God created the world, theism must insist that there is a real distinction 
between creator and created. It must therefore reject Spinoza's monism, and all of the 
other versions of pantheism. But at the same time, if God is to be taken as truly 
unlimited, he must be able to be both himself and other to himself. This appears to be 
self-contradictory, but it need not be. The standard concept of identity, which entirely 
precludes this possibility, should be understood as applying only to finite immanent 
things, and not to God. If the notion of identity is restricted in this way, the appearance 
of paradox may be avoided. For then theists can say that while it is impossible for any 
thing to be itself and also be another thing, it is not impossible for God because God 
is not a thing. He transcends thinghood, and may be truly said to be a non-thing. At 
the same time, he is Being itself, and gives Being to things. 
Traditional theology claims that God created the world ex nihilo - that is, from 
nothing at all. This is because he cannot have created the world from materials external 
to himself, which would imply that he was not the creator of all things, and he cannot 
create the world from his own substance, which would imply pantheism. Thus the 
only alternative is to say that God created the world out of nothing at all. Clearly this 
does not explain how the creation event happened, for we have no idea of how to get 
something from nothing. It is therefore an expression of what must have happened, 
given that we accept traditional theism in the first place. The doctrine is perfectly 
compatible with the idea that God gives himself to beings. For it means that the 
creation takes place from nothing, and 'nothing' is simply the 'non-thing,' which is 
God. That which lies beyond our framework of understanding, as transcendent Being 
does, must appear to us as a nothing, a non-thing, or an emptiness. Thus while 
pantheism is incorrect in asserting that the world is identical to the substance of God, 
still it is correct to say that God is the nothingness from which the world originates. It 
is even possible for God to incarnate himself as nothingness. 
In making these claims, the theist appears to echo the deflationary position which 
claims that there is no transcendent Being. For if God appears to us as nothing, an 
emptiness or an absence, then theism parallels the metaphysics of felt meaning, which 
also responds to the absence of an ultimate reason for existence. But in fact there are 
serious doctrinal differences. Theism entails that there is a transcendent Being, in 
fact that is its central assertion. At the same time, it can recognize that our concept of 
this Being is negative, so that it may appear to us as an emptiness, a non-thing. This 
is a consequence of our own limited perspectives. In fact, if God gives himself to 
beings, then he must be both transcendent and immanent. So he must be outside of 
the world, and yet be within it at the same time. As the unsurpassable Being, he 
cannot be limited by the boundary between finitude and infinity. This is a way of 
responding to Smith's argument that God cannot exist because he does not appear as 
a separable finite object within the world-whole. In a sense, this is correct, but it is 
not a refutation of theism. Some theologians have also recognized that the assertion 
'God exists' is incorrect, if it is understood as stating a limitation on what God is. 
The central difference between Smith's deflationary position and the theistic-
necessitarian position is that while Smith rejects the idea that there can be an answer 
to the fundamental question, theism asserts that there cannot be any brute facts, so 
there must be a necessary existent. Even though theism must also assert that God is 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
145 
inconceivable, apart from our negative characterization of the 'infinite' or the 'non-
immanent, non-thing', it holds that there is something there, and that it is necessarily 
there. It is not an empty place in the schema, however much it may appear to be 
empty. Another important difference is that theism permits worship, whereas Smith's 
position makes this kind of relationship with transcendent Being impossible. Worship 
can be characterized in many ways, but the most significant form it takes, at least in 
the present context, is that of thankfulness. It is a way of expressing gratitude to God 
for what he has given to us. It is a way ofloving God, and thus, in a way, feeling love 
for the entire cosmos. 
The gift of Being is spontaneous and gratuitous. It is not the kind of gift for which 
a return is expected, and there is no justification or purpose for it. God gives himself 
because God is loving, and to love is to give oneself freely and entirely to the beloved. 
This is therefore an intimate relationship ofloving devotion, and it is best understood 
as analogous to the person who 'gives his life' to his beloved, as an absolute 
commitment. Indeed the Christian tradition explicitly speaks of Jesus as giving his 
life out of his love for the world. God is so totally committed to the creation that he 
'empties' himself into it. The gift of Being, interpreted within a theistic context, is a 
gift oflove. It is a paradigm of what the Christian tradition knows as 'agape' .15 This 
kind of gift is almost irresistible, just as life itself is irresistible, and it is for this 
reason that religious believers often feel the impulse to give their own love in return, 
back to the origin of the world. Such an impulse can then be expressed in formal or 
personal acts of worship, which are distinguished from acts ofloving immanent objects 
and people by their focus on the holiness and transcendence ofhe who is worshipped. 
A completely philosophical theism, which is formulated only to answer the 
fundamental question of metaphysics, cannot address the question ofhow anybody 
should worship God, or whether it would be better to be a Buddhist or a Taoist, a 
Muslim or a Christian. But it can recognize at least that some form of worship is 
appropriate, given that a theist necessitarian answer is correct. This distinguishes the 
position from both the deflationary stance and the Platonist necessitarian answer. 
God's gift of himself involves a kind of participation, although this is different 
from the relation of instantiation which connects universals to particulars. God 
participates directly in the life of creatures. He lives within them, as the spiritual life 
which gives meaning and structure. His relationship with immanent beings may be 
said to include the 'giving of order' implicit in the Platonist conception, but it has 
greater content. God does not stand apart from the world, commanding it from on 
high. Rather the kind of order that he supplies is internal, like the organic order of a 
living being. We can say that God lives within us, or that his life is ours, for his gift of 
Being is the gift of himself. 
Evaluative Applications: Moral Value 
A satisfactory deflationary response entails the non-existence of transcendent Being. 
It thereby instantiates the gift-giving schema by recognizing an absence in the place 
of such a Being, and responding to this absence appropriately. Some necessitarian 
resolutions acknowledge that we may speak of Being itself, but their answers to the 
fundamental question do not require the existence of anything contingent. Thus in a 
sense they do not need to acknowledge the place of beings in the schema. Only if we 

146 
The Problem of Existence 
demand a truly satisfactory answer will this place be filled. By contrast, evaluative 
answers to the fundamental question may be interpreted as employing the value of 
the gift of existence itself as the focus of their explanation. Being has absolute value, 
or it is absolute value, and this is given to the world of beings. Thus value itself 
explains why there is something instead of nothing. 
Evaluative responses do not need to employ the idea of gift-giving. They can be 
interpreted as applications of the schema only because they entail that a certain response 
to the situation of existence is desirable or necessary. This response may be described 
as gratitude or as some other form of appreciation, but it naturally evokes the idea of 
a valuable endowment, or in other words, a gift. Furthermore, the evaluative responses 
introduced in Chapter 4 allow that the existence of immanent concrete things is 
logically contingent. The evaluative strand of Plato's system entails that a world where 
nothing exists except abstract objects is a logically possible world, and it is explicable 
given that these abstract objects are instantiations of the Form of the Good. It also 
entails that a world where concrete things also exist is even better, because it allows 
for a more complete expression of value. Plato's doctrine may be interpreted as 
explaining the existence of immanent things on the basis of their intljinsic value, but 
it does not entail that a world containing concrete things is logically 'necessary. 
Axiarchism also entails that the existence of concrete things is contingent, but 
explicable under the hypothesis that there is a 'creatively successful ethical need' for 
concrete beings. Although Leslie argues that there is a kind of necessity involved in 
the ethical requirement for existence, it is not logical or metaphysical necessity. 
Nietzsche's metaphysics of art also entails that existence is contingent and gratuitous, 
although the form of his explanation is very different. He claims that we can make 
sense of the world by regarding it from the perspective of the artist, and coming to the 
realization that finite creatures such as ourselves are merely splashes on the canvas. 
Yet his view of existence also entails that the art which is Being is given gratuitously, 
albeit with a different source. The beauty of the cosmos does not exist for our moral 
betterment, but only for itself, as a gigantic piece of self-expression. 
It is clear that in formulating these interpretations, one must travel a considerable 
distance beyond the actual words these authors wrote. Neither Plato nor Nietzsche 
explicitly addressed the fundamental question of metaphysics, and neither spoke of 
'the gift of Being'. However, if we can make a leap from text to interpretation, then 
we may appreciate the kind of answer that each was formulating indirectly, and marvel 
at its implicit directness. For in these two cases, evaluative explanation succeeds in 
expressing the schematic notion that Being gives itself to beings in perhaps its purest 
and most complete manner. It does so by directly expressing a response to the gift, 
which immediately confirms that it is a gift. A truly satisfactory response to the question 
is a response which comes from the whole of life, incorporating its emotional peaks 
as well as its intellectual contortions. 
In recognizing the ultimacy of an evaluative answer, we also recognize the relevance 
of the question to life itself. We may choose to live a life in response to the gratuitous 
gift of Being, and we may choose to do this in ethical or aesthetic terms. The mystery 
which is hidden in the fact that there is something instead of nothing cannot be totally 
resolved, not even by a fully developed system of explanation. Instead of being 
resolved by an answer, the mystery is unfolded by a metaphor, and the metaphor 
becomes a pattern of meaning into which we may fit ourselves. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
147 
At first glance, it may seem that the necessitarian strand of Plato's metaphysics fits 
the gift-giving schema more directly and easily than his evaluative response. For in 
speaking of the Form of Formhood, we can say that it gives itself, by giving 
intelligibility, to other Forms, and ultimately to concrete things. But in a way, this is 
too superficial. The fact that we use the word 'give' to describe the relationship of 
universal to particular does not mean that this relation more smoothly or more 
reasonably fits the schema. It can just as well be argued that the evaluative view 
employs a more clear-cut exemplification of gift-giving because it is not as abstract 
and impersonal. In fact neither of these arguments illuminate anything of significance 
in this context, for it is irrelevant to consider which form of answer to the fundamental 
question is 'the best fit', just as it is irrelevant to consider which is 'most true'. Each 
of the responses I have discussed, insofar as they are satisfactory, fits into the schema 
in someway. 
The evaluative explanation based upon Plato's Form of the Good is technically 
inconsistent with the necessitarian account. It starts with the premiss that this Form, 
at least, is self-explanatory, or self-justifying. While it is logically possible that there 
be absolutely nothing at all, not even abstract Forms, this state of affairs has less 
value than a world where there is an instance of the Form of the Good, even if its only 
instance is itself. Hence the Form of the Good exists because it is good. In this way, 
it explains itself. The explanation presupposes that 'absolute nothingness' is logically 
possible, so it is clearly different from a necessitarian view. Even so, it invokes a kind 
of absolute object whose reason for being lies within itself. The Form of the Good 
thus takes on the role of transcendent Being. 
In addition to the possibility that there be nothing at all, evaluative Platonism also 
holds that it is logically possible that only abstract things exist. The Good may be 
instantiated only by itself, or only by other Forms of value such as Order and Harmony, 
which would exist without having any expression in concrete objects. But this would 
render the instantiation of the Good incomplete. If we think of ultimate value in 
moral terms as well as in terms of abstract impersonal values, then the Good must be 
a complex property, involving many different but related aspects. In order that it be 
completely and fully instantiated, in all of its aspects, there would have to be a world 
of concrete beings which contains moral agents. For without such beings, moral value 
in the strict sense would fail to exist. There would be values, but no persons in which 
they could be embodied. Thus if the Form of the Good explains why there is something 
instead of nothing, then it will also explain why there are immanent beings, and 
ultimately why there are living creatures with complex states of consciousness, bound 
by ties oflove and honour. We can expect such a world to exist if existence itself has 
an evaluative explanation, because it is a better expression of the moral aspect of the 
Form of the Good, which necessarily includes the virtues. 
Although it sounds odd, this kind of explanation is perfectly consistent with modem 
science, and even with evolutionary theories which explain the existence of human 
beings in terms of random mutations in the gene pool. Since we are dealing with 
ultimate explanation, the instantiation of the Good may determine the ultimate form 
of the laws of nature, whose operations bring about the entire evolutionary process. 
So while evolution can explain why rational animals exist, it must then be explained 
by the laws of nature, and these laws are not self-explanatory. They can be explained 
by an ultimate principle of value, and such an explanation contradicts nothing in the 

148 
The Problem of Existence 
physical sciences. In order to answer the fundamental question, all that the Platonist 
needs to claim is that the Form of the Good explains why it is instantiated itself, and 
thus why there is something instead of nothing. However, if the ultimate value can 
also explain why there is a concrete world with certain features, this adds to the 
plausibility of the evaluative thesis. 
Thus we have transcendent Being, in the form of the Good, and we have a world of 
immanent beings. But it may seem that the evaluative version of Platonism does not 
explicitly entail that there is also a relation of gift-giving. If it is to count as an 
exemplification of the schema, it must do so because there is some implicit invocation 
of this kind of relation. As indicated earlier, this is not very difficult to reveal. We 
need only consider the kind of emotional reaction which is harmonious with the truth 
of this explanation. If we were to believe that it is correct, and that existence is 
explained by a form of ultimate value which has an essential moral component, then 
we should be grateful. There are, after all, less agreeable alternatives, from which we 
have been spared. In fact, if we accept this evaluative version ofPlatonism, it becomes 
rational to be optimistic about the future, and about our prospects for understanding 
the cosmos. 
For if we know that things exist because they are instances of absolute moral value, 
then we can rationally expect that the world will turn out well. We have reason to 
think that suffering need not be meaningless, and that cruelty is an affront to the order 
of the cosmos rather than an essential part of the system. In short, we may feel that 
life is worth living, and that the confirmation of this is included at the heart of Being 
itself. While stating this may not explicitly involve the assertion that existence is 
given, it amounts to the same idea. We are grateful for existence just as we are grateful 
for that which is gratuitously bestowed upon us and which we feel to be of great 
value. Hence the gift of Being is implicit in the formulation of evaluative Platonism. 
To see that this is so, consider what we have to be thankful for, given the truth of 
evaluative Platonism. Firstly, we should be grateful that there is something instead of 
nothing. If existence is explained by the Form of the Good, then existence is good, 
and since it may not have happened at all, we should recognize this and appreciate it. 
Furthermore, since the Good is self-explanatory, it follows that our feelings of gratitude 
are ultimately directed at Goodness itself, which is also Being itself. It is because 
there is an ultimate value that there is anything at all, which is both wondrous and 
excellent. Secondly, we should be happy that there exists a concrete world in which 
we live, for it need not have been. Again, this is explicable because the Form of the 
Good includes deep moral features as well as formal values such as Harmony. Although 
there need not have been anything concrete at all, the Good has given itself to immanent 
things in order that its moral dimension be fully expressed (which requires moral 
agents). 
Most importantly, we should be grateful that our concrete existence is explained 
by an ultimate moral value instead of something more sinister. It is logically possible 
that our world was constructed by an evil demon of enormous power, whose purpose 
was to bring forth conscious and sensitive beings solely so that he could, in the end, 
inflict maximal cruelty upon them. In this case, the demon would have to allow some 
positive value into the world, but ultimately he would ensure that there was a greater 
degree of pain and suffering than pleasure and well-being. If this possibility was the 
real world, instead of a horrible nightmare, then we could have no hope for ourselves. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
149 
We would exist only because some fiend sought entertainment in our suffering, and 
we should expect nothing more than indefinitely prolonged suffering as our fate. As 
such, life would be bereft of meaning, and we would literally be better off dead. 
Certainly, it would be better in such a world to remain ignorant of the total truth, 
since the truth would be too terrible to come to terms with. 
If the immanent world was framed as a consequence of the instantiation of moral 
value, then we have reason to believe that such a dreadful situation is not to be our 
fate. For if the realization of moral virtue is the reason that we exist, indeed if it is the 
reason why the entire space-time world exists, then we can reasonably conclude that 
virtue will give meaning to our lives. Indeed, if virtue is the form and purpose of our 
concrete situation, then we have a foundation for hope, and for ultimate optimism. 
Suffering can be borne with the confidence that it is not in vain, and not merely for 
the purpose ofsomebody's amusement. Life can be fully lived in the light of ultimate 
value, rather than the dark suspicion that nothing that we do will really matter. It is 
not clear that we can be justified in maintaining such an attitude if ultimate moral 
value is irrelevant to the meaning ofthe world. Thus if the Platonist theory is correct, 
there is another reason to be grateful. For without hope in a meaningful future, our 
lives would be less than they are. Similarly, if value explains physical reality, we 
have reason to expect that the final truth of things will not lead us to despair. Unless 
we have some kind of intuition that ultimate value is responsible for our world, it is 
difficult to see how we can love truth. And if we cannot love truth, it is difficult to 
find any grounding for our quest for truth, whether this quest is scientific or spiritual. 16 
If evaluative Platonism is correct, then clearly we ought to be grateful for the fact 
of existence (as well as the fact of concrete existence). This indicates that we can 
interpret it as a representation of the schema. Transcendent Being is incarnated here 
as ultimate ethical value, and it is given to beings in that it is instantiated within the 
immanent world. For this gift, we may be grateful. It may give us hope, it justifies 
our longing for truth, and it is far better than absolute nothingness. 
To the extent that Leslie's axiarchism constitutes a satisfactory answer to the 
fundamental question, it follows Platonism. The claim that something is intrinsically 
better than nothing is the basis of his theory, and he shares this view with Plato (and, 
in fact, a number of other philosophers). Although he is not keen to introduce 
transcendent universals into his ontology, he argues that there must be an absolute 
sense to moral value, which suggests that there is something like a transcendent source. 
He also argues that the reason for existence is that there is an 'abstract' need for 
goodness, and this is something which, as a matter of fact, has been satisfied. It is 
possible to understand this in terms of the gift of Being. Arguably, if axiarchism is 
correct, then a feeling of gratitude for existence is demanded, for goodness has been 
realized without effort. As such, it seems that Being is a gift from goodness itself, 
although in a sense it is a gift from nowhere. 
In the end, however, Leslie's formulation is not a perfect exemplification of the 
gift schema. At the same time, and arguably for the same reasons, it is not a perfectly 
satisfactory answer to the fundamental question. It is an indeterminate position, for it 
can be formulated as a kind of theism as well as a kind of atheism. The basic position 
of axiarchism does not allow for a truly transcendent Being, but it is not a deflationary 
position either. Although it makes sense to feel gratitude for the goodness of existence, 
it is not clear that we can be grateful to anybody or anything, unless we adopt what he 

150 
The Problem of Existence 
has called 'extreme axiarchism'. This version of the thesis entails that there is a God, 
and that God may be identified with the world's creative ethical requiredness. Leslie 
claims that such a deity is not a person, but a principle, which contradicts traditional 
theism. 17 Without God as a person, it becomes more difficult to speak of God's gift 
of himself. As such, extreme axiarchism does not exactly fit the pattern of the gift-
giving schema. It is only an approximation. 
Evaluative Applications: Aesthetic Value 
It is clear that the evaluative view which derives from the philosophy of Plato shares 
much with theism. It may even be true to say that the gift of Being is, for evaluative 
Platonism, a gift of love, in much the same way as it is for theism. This seems 
appropriate because Being is given to beings for the sake of goodness, which is not 
very different from a caring relationship in which the good of the beloved is a primary 
consideration. The connection becomes clear, for example, when Socrates claims 
that the heavens and the earth are bound together by ties of love. Indeed Platonism 
claims that the entire cosmos exhibits an order that derives from the loving gift of 
transcendent Being upon finite creatures, whose lives are wholly dependent upon 
this relationship. As such, it is similar to theism. 
The philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche starts from diametrically opposed premisses. 
He assumes with Schopenhauer that there is no ultimate moral value to be found in 
the fact of existence, and that, considered by itself, human life is undesirable, miserable, 
and hopeless. All oflife is suffering, and there is no redemption, no final value that is 
attained by enduring our suffering, apart from that which is achieved in art. His entire 
philosophy is a repudiation of the Christian and Platonist view that the meaning of 
life must lie outside of the world, in a great transcendent object which justifies what 
happens to exist. At the same time, his philosophy seeks to find joy in life, to affirm 
the world of the here and now, not in terms of that which lies beyond, nor in terms of 
any moral purpose, but in terms of purely temporal, purely immanent aesthetic meaning. 
There are parallels between Quentin Smith's metaphysics of felt meaning, which 
is based on atheism, and Nietzsche's aesthetic conception of existence. In particular, 
the declaration that 'God is dead' is important to both. To exclaim that God is dead is 
odd, because it appears to misrepresent the very idea of the deity. An eternal being 
cannot die, for if it is ever true to say that he is alive, it must be true at all times. As 
such, the statement is deliberately provocative, indeed it is a little perverse if taken 
literally. Many commentators have interpreted Nietzsche's claim as a forceful 
metaphorical expression of the cultural fact that belief in God has died, rather than a 
literal espousal of atheism. But there is another meaning to be found within this 
proclamation. As it was originally formulated, it is neither a dispute with theism, nor 
a neutral commentary on the state of contemporary attitudes towards religion. On the 
contrary, it appears that Nietzsche himself was forlorn at the death of God, and agonized 
at its dreadful consequences. This is the sense that we get from his first pronouncement 
of divine demise, in The Gay Science: 
The madman jumped into their midst and pierced them with his eyes. 'Whither is God?' he 
cried; 'I will tell you. We have killed him- you and I. All of us are his murderers. But how 
did we do this? How could we drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the 
entire horizon? What were we doing when we unchained the earth from its sun? Whither is 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
151 
it moving now? Wither are we moving? Away from all suns? Are we not plunging 
continually? Backward, sideward, forward, in all directions? Is there still any up or down? 
Are we not straying as through an infinite nothing? Do we not feel the breath of empty 
space? Has it not become colder? Is not night continually closing in on us? Do we not need 
to light lanterns in the morning? Do we hear nothing as yet of the noise ofthe gravediggers 
who are burying God? Do we smell nothing as yet of the divine decomposition? Gods, too, 
decompose. God is dead. And we have killed him. 
How shall we comfort ourselves, the murderers of all murderers? What was holiest and 
mightiest of all that the world has yet owned has bled to death under our knives: who will 
wipe this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean ourselves? What festivals of 
atonement, what sacred games shall we have to invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too 
great for us? Must we ourselves not become gods simply to appear worthy of it? There has 
never been a greater deed; and whoever is born after us - for the sake of this deed he will 
belong to a higher history than all history hitherto.' 18 
The death of God is more than a claim about cultural transformation or a statement of 
the atheist philosophical position. It also has a metaphysical meaning, which is 
indicated by his use of the idea of a 'death' rather than simple non-existence. Nietzsche 
appreciated, more than most critics of religion, that the death of God involves the 
death of(the traditional formulation of) a rational meaning for existence. This means 
that there is a vacuum, an absence of ultimacy, which affects not only our beliefs but 
also our feelings, and the way that we live. This absence cannot be approached or 
understood as a superficial phenomenon, as the modem 'causal atheist' seems to do. 
It is extremely important, for without a meaning for existence, we are faced with the 
possibility of ultimate despair. The place that was once filled by God should be filled 
again, if not by a deity then by some other form of significance. Otherwise, as he 
says, we must 'become gods' to appear worthy of the murder that we have perpetrated. 
Nietzsche's resolution of this problem was to suppose that there is another meaning 
for existence, not a rational meaning but a non-cognitive, aesthetic meaning. In this 
supposition, his position resembles the metaphysics of felt meaning. 
In the Birth of Tragedy the aesthetic meaning of existence was expressed through 
the pseudo-mythical idea that there is a cosmic artist who has created the universe to 
celebrate his own redemption and exorcise his own suffering. This cosmic artist, 
however, was a transcendent Being, and does not entirely resolve the problem of the 
death of God. Although the cosmic artist was supposed to be amoral, to be guided 
only by his own sense of beauty, and to be the True Subject of all art, with whom we 
may have a mystical union if we become artists ourselves, it is an unsatisfactory 
postulate. Nietzsche himself came to this conclusion later in his career, and he wrote 
in a 'Critical Backward Glance' that the entire aesthetic metaphysics could be 'rejected 
out of hand as so much prattle or rant'. !9 He claimed that the main point was to 
replace the vengeful, life-hating philosophy of Christian morality with a system of 
aesthetic values that would be life-affirming. 
In all of his later philosophical works, Nietzsche was concerned to some extent 
with the problems of aesthetics, and in particular the nature of art. However it is clear 
that he became much less concerned with explaining the fact of existence on the 
basis of its beauty. In the ontology of the Will to Power, he has presented a system of 
immanent metaphysics which accounts for the order of the world in terms of a universal 
tendency to seek enhanced and increased power. He posits a vast collection of drives, 
each of which acts on other drives in order to make them seek its ends. This tendency, 

152 
The Problem of Existence 
this Will to Power, is used to explain all of the phenomena of the world, from the 
basic forces of physics to the evolution of consciousness, science and morality. But it 
is clearly an internally driven tendency. There is no ultimate 'why' here, for the world 
is just Will to Power, and that is all that it is. Nothing outside the world is postulated 
to explain why it is like this, or why it exists. The only points at which an ultimate 
aesthetic value is invoked occur when Nietzsche says that the world is 'a work of art 
which gives birth to itself', and when he claims that the artist is an obvious and 
natural example of the Will to Power. 
If the death of God signifies the absence of a transcendent source, the Will to 
Power ontology becomes a new vision of the gift of Being. Although it is no longer a 
gift oflove for which we are to be grateful, it is a gift of creative power within which 
we may conceive our own selves as manifestations of beauty. The Will to Power 
gives itself to the world, or gives birth to the world, not in the spirit oflove but in the 
spirit of an artist giving himself over to his work. It creates because it is overfull, it 
has too much beauty, and therefore it gives itself. This is one way in which Nietzsche's 
metaphysics may be interpreted as an application of the gift-giving schema. In this 
case, the Will to Power is interpreted as Being, although it is not a transcendent deity 
but a universal organization within the immanent world. It can then give itself to 
beings in that it incarnates itself in specific drives, whose patterns of activity are 
manifestations of the central drive for enhanced power. 
There is another way in which his aesthetic view of existence may be seen as 
coincident with the idea of the gift of Being, and as an application of the schema. 
Even ifNietzsche does not focus on the fundamental question itself, it seems that his 
overall attitude, and his evaluation of existence, provides an answer. Although the 
death of God means the absence of an ultimate rational meaning, and the lack of an 
ultimate ethical value, it also has a positive aspect. Nietzsche does not see God in 
terms of the mystical tradition; instead, he views the Christian deity as life-denying 
and ascetic, as the old-fashioned monarchical God who orders the world to exist, and 
decrees what its nature shall be. If this God is dead, then existence must be free and 
spontaneous, for it is no longer under the thumb of a commander, no longer the 
product of a commandment. The world then becomes playful, artistic, and joyous. 
We can then respond to its lack of rational-moral meaning with ecstatic dance rather 
than baleful mourning. There is hence a different kind of ultimate value, an aesthetic 
meaning to existing, which results from the death of God. Indeed, Nietzsche struggled 
to clarify this meaning, and insisted upon a 'transvaluation of all values' as the way 
forward, as the future of culture and civilization. 
The aesthetic meaning of the world, if it is to become a vital way of understanding, 
does not answer the fundamental question with an explanatory proposition. Although 
it may be expressed by saying that there is something instead of nothing because this 
is beautiful, and because the world is a work of art, this does not supply an 'explanatory 
mechanism'. It is rather an invitation to dance, a call to find beauty in the world, and 
to play with the playfulness of existence. It is also a signification of the playful gift of 
Being itself. For if the ultimate value, in terms of which the fundamental question is 
answered, is an aesthetic value, and if we must respond to this with dance and poetry 
and art, then we must also appreciate that our finite existence, the Being which is 
Will to Power and nothing else besides, is a spontaneous, creative, gratuitous gift. 
Nietzsche does nothing to provide a rational explanation beyond his invocation of 
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
153 
aesthetic meaning - and yet this in itself is a way of understanding the gift of Being. 
In fact, it is a direct, emotionally charged way of understanding. 
As he says, the world of Will to Power has no goal, unless it is the joy of the circle 
itself. It is eternally self-creating and eternally self-destroying Gust as Dionysus dies 
and is reborn each year) and thus it gives itself again and again, reinventing its meaning 
with each transformation. Thus to see the world as having this playful, aesthetic sense 
is to see it as a gift, and not only that, but to relish the gift, and to accept it. Nietzsche 
advocated the idea of amor fati- a love of one's fate, which is also a love oflife as it is: 
contingent, gratuitously bestowed, and dazzling. This is what must follow if we take 
aesthetic value as ultimate. It is also, clearly, an appreciation of things, immanent things, 
as they are given to us. Thus we must, if we feel this way about life, agree that things 
are indeed gifts, and that it is Being that gives them, even if this Being is an emptiness, 
a playful striving without an aim, which gives itself only to swallow itself up again. 
The Meaning oflt All 
The gift of Being is a metaphor. It represents a general metaphysical structure, to be 
found in each of the satisfactory responses to the fundamental question that I have 
discussed. In fact, I have argued that it represents the common ground to each of the 
answers. This is a startling claim, for it means that there is something in common 
between theists and atheists, and between Platonists and Nietzscheans. But of course, 
there need be no common propositional content in these positions, only a structure 
which is reflected in fundamental attitudes more than fundamental doctrines. 
The gift metaphor is effective even if there is no transcendent Being. In a way, the 
Nietzschean-atheist application is a demonstration of the greatness of the metaphor, 
for its ability to sustain the absence of one of the terms of the giving relation is a 
strength rather than a weakness. Being need not be given by a transcendent 'entity'. 
It can also be given by sheer nothingness, or by a 'non-thing'. Being, as Heidegger 
emphasized, is not itself a being. 
In a way, all of the satisfactory answers to the fundamental question follow the lead 
of the deflationary approach. For its basic claim is that reason cannot deal with the 
fact of existence, and each of the answers I have discussed adopts a similar stance. To 
an ultimate question there must be an ultimate answer, and this must refer to something 
which lies beyond reason, whether it be divine or not. Thus the Form ofFormhood, 
while it is the source of intelligibility, does not have a deeper ground than itself. And 
the mystical deity, though necessarily existent, must somehow be itself and also be 
other than itself, must be within and outside of the immanent world, and therefore 
transcends rationality just as it transcends mundane comprehension. Ultimate values, 
whether ethical or aesthetic, also lie beyond rationality, and we must either adopt 
them or not. We cannot really say why anybody should be moral, nor can we say why 
anybody should be rational. These things must be intuited, rather than rationalized, 
for they represent the end-points, the extremities of thought, beyond which there is 
no strictly logical path. 
There is another reason for thinking that the deflationary approach is primary, in 
the sense that it is the natural origin of our thoughts about the fundamental question. 
We begin our asking of this question with a feeling of fear, for it appears to lie beyond 

154 
The Problem of Existence 
us. But if we are to overcome this fear, we must be reconciled with the question itself. 
The natural way of obtaining such a reconciliation is to be reconciled directly with 
the inexplicability of the fact that something exists. This is what is achieved by the 
brute fact view, even if it pays the price of admitting that there is something astonishing, 
awesome or joyous about the world itself. If this is found unsatisfactory, we may 
pursue an actual answer to the question, but this means that we must overcome the 
feelings of frustration which this kind of quest involves. I have argued that there is at 
least one way of doing this, although nothing that I have said entails that it is unique. 
We can fmd an answer, and also be reconciled with the feeling that the question is 
'beyond us' by recognizing, in one way or another, the transcendence of Being. That 
is, by adopting an interpretation ofBeing in itself, whether as God, or as Intelligibility, 
or as Goodness, or as the Will to Power, we may answer the question in a certain way 
without destroying our sense of wonder at existence. So there are two basic approaches: 
the deflationary view, which offers reconciliation by way offacing the impossibility 
of answering the question, and the construction of an interpretation of Being, which 
reconciles us directly with the question by providing an answer. These two approaches 
result in different ways of expressing the gift of Being. 
The reason we should use a metaphor in answering the fundamental question is 
connected to the sense of moving beyond the realm of reason. Such a form of 
transcendence can involve the feeling that we are also moving beyond literal meaning, 
but this does not mean that our answers become entirely senseless. Language allows 
us to be intuitive as well as rational, and to answer philosophical questions within an 
emotional as well as a rational framework. The main argument ofthis chapter was an 
attempt to show that metaphor of the gift of Being is a schema which applies to each 
of the satisfactory responses to the question of existence. A response is fully satisfactory 
only if it reflects the sense of existence as understood through both cognition and 
feeling. Metaphor can do this in a way that mundane literal usage cannot. Thus the 
gift metaphor is fitting because it emerges naturally from our astonishment, and reflects 
the intensity of our feelings, as much as it supplies a resolution of the inquiry itself. 
Still, I want to say that the gift metaphor has truth. That is, the proposition that 
Being gives itself to beings is correct, it is capable of endorsement, and reflects a 
genuinely explanatory proposal, albeit one that has various divergent expressions. 
The reason that this is a true metaphor is that there is a genuine limit to rational 
construction. Transcendent Being, whether or not it is represented as a necessary 
existent, genuinely lies at this limit. If the proposition is watered down into something 
literal, it may be stated as follows: 'The reason that there is something instead of 
nothing is that there is a mysterious non-thing which we cannot describe, except by 
saying that it is Being itself, and this has gratuitously bestowed existence upon the 
less mysterious immanent things which we encounter in the world.' This proposition 
rightly reflects the oddity of existence. It claims both that the source of the gift is 
ineffable, and also that the gift itself is without justification. 
In a way, the fundamental question resembles the question that Job asked God. It 
has an existential aspect, and it asks for a reason in a situation where human reality 
confronts the ultimate reality. The question asks for a response to 'why', but this is a 
'why' which cannot be entirely fathomed. It is a question whose very appearance is a 
reflection of the oddity of the one who has dared to ask the question. How is it possible 
to seek, let alone to find, a resolution for such an inquiry? Is it not too much for us -
www.ebook3000.com

The Gift of Being 
155 
and at the same time, do we not demand it all the more passionately because we feel 
that it cannot be obtained? 
I believe that the answer can be formulated, but only when we understand that it 
cannot be an answer which leaves everything clear. It must be the kind of explanation 
which does not 'explain away' but instead invites us into a deepened appreciation of 
mystery. Metaphor, when properly formulated, can provide a more human answer 
than straightforward mundane discourse. Such an answer will not succeed in making 
the fact of existence less awesome, but it can succeed in bringing human beings 
closer to the centrality of this fact. And this is a way of understanding the fact, although 
it does not provide a complete understanding. G.K. Chesterton has remarked that the 
Book of Job simply answers a mystery with a mystery: 
Indeed the Book of Job avowedly only answers mystery with mystery. Job is comforted 
with riddles; but he is comforted. Herein is indeed a type, in the sense of a prophecy, of 
things speaking with authority. For when he who doubts can only say 'I do not understand,' 
it is true that he who knows can only reply or repeat 'You do not understand.' And under 
that rebuke there is always a sudden hope in the heart; and the sense of something that 
would be worth understanding.2° 
This appears to be what is needed in the case of the fundamental question. We need to 
be comforted by the riddle, not because we cannot be comforted by an explanatory 
answer, but because finding such comfort was our original intention, our first quest. 
A mysterious and metaphoric understanding of the fact of existence must therefore 
become the answer. It must be understood as an explanation. 
We must not be misled into thinking that we have found an abstract answer to an 
abstract question. Above all else, the gift of Being is given to us here and now. It is 
the reality which unfolds before our eyes, within our bodies, around us in the world 
of immanent things. We should not forget that our question is deeply related to the 
question of what it is to be a thing, an entity, a 'something' which is not nothing. The 
idea that there are 'mere things' is an illusion. Each immanent thing is a gift, it is 
something miraculous, if only for its existence. It becomes no less miraculous in a 
context where a vast number of other things also exist. The reason that a thing may 
appear as a mundane thing is simple. We become involved in mundane projects, and 
in doing so, we naturally begin to treat the objects with which we deal as 'mere 
things' which serve our ends, but have no reality of their own. The idea of the gift of 
Being is a repudiation of this peculiar form of 'anti-realism'. It is the idea that we 
should respond to the world of beings with respect, with love and gratitude, and with 
a sense of the hidden meanings that lurk in the obscurity of the everyday. In moments 
of despair, when we call out 'Why is there a world?' the answer is forthcoming: this 
world is our gift. We can use it or neglect it, but it remains true that it is given to us. 
Our ordinary projects tend to distract us from the fundamental fact of existence. 
This leads to the feeling of oddity when the fundamental question appears. Yet if we 
are to address the question at all, let alone answer it, we must account for the ordinary 
life of ordinary affairs which does not tend to inspire any awe, wonder, marvelling or 
metaphor. When we appreciate the question in all of its grandeur, with respect to all 
of its possible answers and all of the possible feelings we have about it, our feelings 
of awe become more and more appropriate. This is so when we are engaged in everyday 
affairs, and not just when we are thinking about why we have any ordinary affairs at 

156 
The Problem of Existence 
all. The positives and negatives of existence, the values and the terrors that we 
experience in our relationship with the universe, may also appear when we are just 
walking down the street, or having a beer at the local pub. 
If we reel back, stunned by the realization that the world is spectacularly gratuitous, 
then we have at least come to a final point, a true realization which is a completion of 
thought and feeling. This is part of what is entailed by coming to understand why 
there is something instead of nothing. On the other hand, if all that we can see are 
'mere things', things which we take for granted, then we have lost the sense of 
existence. In the midst of the darkening of the world, when all is lost and when we 
can find neither ourselves nor the meaning of our lives, we should reflect that existence 
is given to us, and respond to this as a gift. Whether this response means embracing 
the love of God, or becoming ourselves more completely, in all the glory of our 
creativity, the final significance of the gift lies in the way that we appreciate it. 
Notes 
See Q. Smith, 'Causation and the Logical Impossibility of a Divine Cause', Philosophical 
Topics, vol. 21:1, Spring 1996, pp. 169-91. 
2 
An even more radical doctrine is that the standard notion of identity is not applicable to 
anything at all. In other words, the strict Leibnizian definition of identity, which entails 
identity in all features, can be treated as merely an ideal. It is then an intelligible concept 
which is never perfectly realized, although there are approximate instances. A discussion 
of these possibilities may be found in J.N. Findlay's essay, 'The Logic of Mysticism' in 
Ascent to the Absolute, George Allen & Unwin Ltd, New York, 1970, pp. 173-5. 
3 
A. Watts, Behold the Spirit: A Study in the Necessity of Mystical Religion, Vintage Books, 
New York, 1972, pp. 141-3. 
4 
Q. Smith, The Felt Meanings of the World, p. 140. 
5 
Ibid., p. 181. 
6 
Ibid., pp. 181-2. 
7 
Ibid., p. 194. 
8 
Ibid., p. 196. 
9 
Ibid., p. 195. 
10 Ibid., p. 20 I. 
l1 Ibid., p. 197. 
12 Plato, Republic, p. 273. 
13 Meister Eckhart, 'Selected German Sermons', in Selected Writings, trans. 0. Davies, 
Penguin Books, London, 1994, p. 237. 
14 B. Spinoza, 'Ethics' in The Chief Works of Benedict de Spinoza, trans R.H.M. Elwes, 
George Bell & Sons, London, 1891, vol. 2, p. 68. 
15 See W. Desmond, Perplexity and Ultimacy, State University of New York Press, Albany, 
NY, 1995, Chapter 6, which elucidates a particular understanding of 'agape'. 
16 See A. Witherall, 'The Value of Truth and the Care of the Soul', Journal of Applied 
Philosophy, vol. 13:2, pp. 189-97. 
17 J. Leslie, Value and Existence, p. 6. 
18 F. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, trans. W. Kaufmann, Vintage Books, New York, 1974, p. 
181. 
19 F. Nietzsche, The Birth ofTragedy, p. 10. 
20 G.K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man, Dodd, Mead & Company, New York, 1953, 
pp. 104-105. 
www.ebook3000.com

Index 
aesthetic meaning 107-10, 151-2 
aesthetic value 23, 111, 116, 158-9 
analytic truth approach 55-9 
antinomies 32-6, 44 
anxiety 2, 3, 5, 53, 65, 76, 86, 89, 121 
Aristotle 25, 40, 73 
Armstrong, D.M. 61-2, 63, 64 
atheism 136, 149, 150 
A-theory 99 
awe 2, 3, 4, 30, 31, 37-8,42,43, 45, 53, 
65-7, 77, 81, 86, 101, 118, 119, 121, 123, 
136, 141, 155 
axiarchism 50, 93, 97-103, 118, 150 
Ayer, A.J. 21, 22, 23, 26 
Baldwin, T. 63, 77, 83, 140 
Barrett, C. 26 
beauty 23, 91, 102, 103, 105, 111, 116, 117, 
152 
being 1, 2, 38, 47, 55, 56, 57, 65, 74, 81-3, 
86, 107, 117, 122-4, 128-34 
boredom 14, 42, 89, 104 
brute fact view 29-30, 49, 130, 135 
B-theory 99-100 
Chesterton, G.K. 155 
deflationary view 19, 29, 38, 39, 44, 50, 65, 
77 
Dionysus 107-11, 116 
divine necessity 82-5 
Eckhart, M. 143 
Edwards, P. 20, 23, 24, 26, 38 
Einstein, A. 21, 34 
ethical requirements 98-100 
existential quantifier 56 
fear 2, 4, 5, 7, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 
38, 121, 153-4 
Field, H. 64 
felt meanings 30, 38-42, 44-7, 49, 136-9 
Form ofFormhood 74-7,85,93-4, 132, 139, 
141, 142, 147, 153 
free logic 57 
frustration 2, 5, 53, 55, 57-9, 65, 67, 72, 
76-7, 86, 121, 140, 154 
gift of Being 121, 122-4, 128-33, 145, 146, 
153 
global marvelling 47-8, 137-8 
global rejoicing 46-7 
God1,8,9, 12, 13, 14,26,33,36,37,39,40, 
41,43,44,45,48,49,59,67-9, 71,77-86, 
96, 101, 112, 113, 116, 127, 130-31, 132, 
133, 136, 137, 138, 142-5, 150, 151, 152, 
154, 156 
godless desolation 137 
goodness 24, 40,90-97, 100, 117, 118, 119, 
148, 149 
Heidegger, M. 14, 89, 127, 153 
Hintikka, J. 58 
Hume, D. 37, 40, 85, 136 
inconceivability 13, 81-3, 143 
intelligibility 16, 19, 36, 55, 66, 70,74-7,85, 
94, 95, 131-2, 141-2, 147, 153 
intimacy 124, 132-3, 138-9, 142 
joy2, 14,42,45-8,49,50,89, 106,115,117, 
119, 121, 124, 138, 150, 153 
Jung, C. 5 
Kant, I. 30-39, 42-5, 48, 55, 85 
Leibniz, G. 40, 59, 67, 69-72, 96 
Leslie, J. 93, 97-101, 118, 146, 149 
Lewis, D.K. 60-65 
Locke, J. 59 
Lowe, E.J. 9 
metaphysical necessity 50, 128-30, 146 
metaphysics offeeling 40, 41 
metaphysics of reason 39, 40,43 
Moore, G.E. 54 
mystical theism 81-5, 131 

158 
The Problem of Existence 
necessitarian view 53-5, 66, 135, 139-42, 
144, 147 
Nietzsche, F. 103, 105-19, 125, 133, 146, 
150--53 
nothingness 1, 66,81-4,86, 96, 104, 111,116, 
117, 123, 128, 137, 138, 144, 147, 149, 153 
Nozick, R. 7-12 
ontology 60, 97, 101, 105, 107, 112, 114, 125, 
135, 149, 151, 152 
Parfit, D. 29 
pessimism 103, 105, 106, 108 
Plato 23, 40, 73-5, 93-5, 96, 97, 141, 142, 
146-7, 149, 150 
platonism 72, 75, 85, 95, 97, 100, 101, 118, 
147-50 
possible worlds 7-9, 50, 55, 58, 59-66, 67, 
69, 70, 72, 73, 79,80,83-4,95,96,99,140 
presentism 103-4 
principle of sufficient reason 67-72 
question of existence 2, 3, 7, 19, 20, 24, 29, 
38,43,54,55,58,59,61,65-7, 71, 72, 75, 
83,90,96,97,108, 11I,I12,I18, I29,I34, 
135, 136, I54 
Quine, W.V. 55 
Rescher, N. 97 
Sartre, J.P. 20, 39 
Schopenhauer, A. 39, IOO, I03-7, I08, I09, 
110, Ill, I50 
Searle, J. 55 
Smith, Q. 30, 39-49, 70, 7I, 77, 78, 79, 80, 
89, II2, I27, I33, 136-9, I44, 150, I56 
Spinoza, B. 44, I43-4 
Strawson, P.F. 4I 
subtraction argument 63-4, 76, 78, 83, 84, I40 
Tillich, P. 80 
theism 37, 45, 59, 67, 7I, 77, 82-6, 10I, I05, 
II2, II4, I27, I3I, I40, I42-5, I50 
theory of Forms 72-6, 93, I40 
transcendent 13, I6, 24, 27, 36, 37, 53, 73, 
77, 79-SI, 84, 85, 94, 97, I05, I22, I23, 
I24, I30--35, I37-9, I44, I52 
awe 65, 77, 86, I2I 
being 45, 54, 66, 67, 7I, 73-5, 84, I2I, 
I23,I28-37,I38,I39-45,I48,I49,I50, 
I5I, I53, I54 
transcendental deduction 3I-2 
value I, I2, I5, 26, 27, 42, 43, 86, 89-IOI, 
105, 107, I08, 109, lli, 113, 116-I9, I24, 
I25, I32, I36, I45, I46-53 
vanlnwagen,~S-9,67,69 
Watts, A. 13I 
Will to Power 105, Il2-I8, 151-4 
Wittgenstein, L. 20, 25-9,38-9,42-4 
wonder4, 15,25-8,38,43,44,99,IOO, I21, 
133, 136, I54, I55 
world-whole 39, 4I-9, 66, 70, 79, I27, 133, 
136-9, I44 
world-wholle 80 
www.ebook3000.com

