THE MANIPULATION OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
-i-
editors
ALBERT D. BIDERMAN
Bureau of Social Science Research, Inc.
HERBERT ZIMMER
Associate Professor of Psychology
University of Georgia
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York · London
-ii-
THE MANIPULATION OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
-iii-
Copyright © 1961 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All rights reserved. This book or any part thereof must not be reproduced in any form 
without the written permission of the publisher, except for any purpose of the United States 
Government.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 61-5669
Printed in the United States of America
-iv-
Contributors
ROBERT ROGERS BLAKE, Ph.D.
Professor of Psychology, University of Texas
R. C. DAVIS, Ph.D.
Professor of Psychology, Indiana University
LOUIS A. GOTTSCHALK, M.D.
Associate Professor of Psychiatry and Research Coordinator,
Department of Psychiatry, Cincinnati General Hospital
LAWRENCE E. HINKLE, Jr., M.D.
Associate Professor of Clinical Medicine in Psychiatry,
New York Hospital — Cornell Medical Center

PHILIP E. KUBZANSKY, Ph.D.
Chief Psychologist, Boston City Hospital
MALCOLM L. MELTZER, Ph.D.
Staff Psychologist, District of Columbia General Hospital
JANE S. MOUTON, Ph.D.
Social Science Research Associate, University of Texas
MARTIN T. ORNE, M.D., Ph.D.
Teaching Fellow, Department of Psychiatry,
Harvard University Medical School
-v-
-vi-
to
CHARLES E. HUTCHINSON
and
HERMAN J. SANDER
for their leadership in this area 
-vii-
-viii-
Acknowledgments
The editing of this book was carried out as a project of the Bureau of Social Science 
Research, Inc. Dr. Robert T. Bower, director of the Bureau, generously gave his time 
and talents to this project.
Valuable assistance in editing the contributors' manuscripts was given by Nadine 
Pitts, Frank G. Davis, Merle Goldberg, and Doris F. Julian.
The preparation of the chapters contained in this book was supported in part by the 
United States Air Force under Contract 18(600) 1797 monitored by the Rome Air 
Development Center of the Air Research and Development Command and under 
Contract AF 49 (638)-187 monitored by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research of 
the Air Research and Development Command.
The work of the editors was greatly facilitated by representatives of the Air Force, 
particularly Major Leo N. Brubaker and Lieutenant Colonel Robert E. Work.
The chapters by Dr. Martin T. Orne and by Dr. Lawrence E. Hinkle, Jr., draw upon 
work supported by the Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology, Inc.

-ix-
-x-
Contents
 
Introduction
1
1
The Physiological State of the Interrogation Subject
as it Affects Brain Function
19
 
Lawrence E. Hinkle, Jr.
2
The Effects of Reduced Environmental Stimulation 
on Human Behavior: A Review
51
 
Philip E. Kubzansky
3
The Use of Drugs in Interrogation
96
 
Louis A. Gottschalk
4
Physiological Responses as a Means of Evaluating 
Information
142
 
R. C. Davis
5
The Potential Uses of Hypnosis in Interrogation
169
 
Martin T. Orne
6
The Experimental Investigation of Interpersonal 
Influence
216
 
Robert R. Blake and Jane S. Mouton

-xi-
7
Countermanipulation through Malingering
277
 
Malcolm L. Meltzer
 
Author Index
305
 
Subject Index
316
-xii-
. . . wollte nur forschen, Raetsel loesen, ein Stueckchen Wahrheit aufdecken. Dies mag vielen wehe, 
manchen wol getan haben, beides nicht meine Schuld und nicht mein Verdienst. Sigmund Freud in a 
letter to Romain Rolland, May 13 1926 *
Introduction — manipulations of human 
behavior
In  recent  years,  concern  has  been  expressed,  in  both  scholarly  and  popular 
literature, about the dangers of scientific developments that could be used to control 
and manipulate human behavior. The fear is frequently voiced that techniques have 
been  developed  to  an  extent  which  threatens  fundamental  values  of  Western 
civilization.
Anxious alarms and dramatic speculations have overshadowed reports of sober 
efforts to determine which dangers are real and which imagined.
This book represents a critical examination of some of the conjectures about the 
application of  scientific knowledge to the manipulation  of  human behavior. The 
problem is explored within a particular frame of reference: the interrogation of an 
unwilling  subject.  A  number  of  scientific  areas  have  figured  prominently  in 
speculations regardirig the application of science to the manipulation of behavior in 
interrogation (69). For this work, scientists who had done research in each of these 
areas were asked to review the state of relevant knowledge in their fields, to consider 
whether and how it might be applied by interrogators, and to evaluate the recourse 
available to highly motivated persons for resisting the attempted influence. Their 
reports constitute the body of this book.

Attention has been focused on interrogation because of the central position this 
topic has had in recent public discussions of prisoner-of-war behavior — issues that 
made scientific methods of manipulating behavior a major public concern. Much of the 
work in this book was sponsored by the U. S. Air Force because of their interest in the 
problems which face the prisoner of war. Such aspects of prisoner exploitation as 
ideological conversion and the elicitation of false con-
*E. L. Freud, Ausgewaehlte Briefe, Berlin: S. Fischer, 1959.
-1-
fessions  have  received  relatively  more  public  and  academic  discussion  than  the 
attempts to elicit factual information through interrogation. Nonetheless, the editors 
believe that there are some major advantages to approaching the broader topic of the 
manipulation of human behavior by limiting attention initially to the latter type of 
situation. The background of recent concern with these problems may illuminate some 
of the considerations leading to the particular emphasis of this work.
Background
The notoriety that Communist exploitation of United Nations prisoners of war has 
received in the United States gave impetus to professional and lay concern with 
problems  of  the  manipulation  of  behavior.  Various  writers  have  associated  the 
compliance  effected  by  Communist  captors  with  phenomena  observed  in  the 
laboratory;  e.g.,  effects  reported  following  experimental  work  in  pharmacology, 
hypnosis, sleep deprivation, sensory deprivation, semi-starvation, electrical stimulation 
of the brain, as well as in social-psychological investigations of persuasion and group 
conformity pressures (3, 10, 13, 14, 16, 20, 23, 24, 28, 32, 39, 67).
The  most  radical  expressions  of  concern  have  alleged  that  techniques  for 
manipulating behavior are now capable, or are at least on the threshold of being 
capable, of eliminating the determination of the subject as a barrier to successful 
influence (21, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 44, 52, 60). These claims have been 
challenged: other investigators have been impressed by the strength, stability, and 
resilience of long-established values and social controls, and by rational regard for 
self-interest, either as limiting the compliance of those subjected to coercive and 
persuasive influence attempts, or as enabling the subject to resist completely (2, 4, 7, 
11, 15, 18, 50, 53, 54, 55, 65, 66, 68).
Certain other commentators have viewed the successful exploitation of captives in 
Korea and similar incidents as less indicative of increasing perfection in the arts of 
influence and coercion. They have attributed the successes of the captor to individual 
defects of background and stamina in the prisoners who collaborated, or to a general 
deterioration of the vitality of social values and controls in contemporary society (16, 
25, 31, 61, 62, 63).

Scientific examination of the manipulation of behavior has been made difficult by 
the intensity of the recent controversy over national
-2-
prisoner-of-war policy. Concepts such as determinism vs. moral responsibility are 
among the philosophical and value considerations implicit in this debate which have 
added considerably to the problems already posed by existing biases. There has been 
dispute regarding the extent to which individual repatriated prisoners of war are legally 
or  morally  responsible  for  deviations  from  ideal  standards  of  military  conduct, 
especially in the matter of yielding information or making "confessions" to the captor 
(9, 25, 31, 39, 41, 47, 49, 54, 64).
A central question of fact has stood out in this controversy, quite apart from the 
moral and philosophical issues raised: whether all individuals, regardless of how 
strongly motivated to resist, could be made to comply with demands for information, 
"confessions,"  or  other  collaboration  by methods  employed  by the  Communists, 
provided that the intensity, duration, and quality of the pressures were sufficiently 
great. Popularly, this proposition was phrased: "Every man has his breaking point." It 
gained acceptance as a premise in policy formulation, although the question remained 
regarding which, if any, of the situations encountered by United States prisoners of war 
in Korea approached those extremes of "stress" that no individual could be expected to 
lesist (40, 48, 64, 68).
Critics of the policy evolved after the Korean War — "The Code of Conduct" — 
argued that the failure of the policy makers to consider imminent developments in 
scientific methods of human manipulation has been a more serious error than a lack of 
understanding  of  the  practices  actually encountered  by prisoners  in  Korea.  One 
scientist (39, page 54) has written: ". . . one thing is certain — our national policy 
concerning  the  conduct  of  our  prisoners  of  war  has  not  yet  fully  faced  up  to 
psychological developments which are appearing over the horizon of the future." His 
own conclusion was that armed forces could protect information from an enemy only 
by denying it to persons subject to capture or, where this was not feasible, by giving 
such persons means for destroying either themselves or their memories.
In  the  study leading  to  the  present  book, the  U.  S.  Air  Force  through their 
sponsorship  has  sought  an  authoritative  examination  of  publicized  speculations 
regarding the possible use of scientific developments in the manipulation of behavior 
against future prisoners of war. A specific objective has been to examine an enemy's 
possible use of scientific techniques to elicit guarded information from captives, which 
is the form of prisoner exploitation having the most immediate and and direct military 
significance.
It is axiomatic that interrogation has become a highly overdramatized subject. Aside 
from treatments of its more sensational aspects,
-3-

very little information on the topic appears in open-source literature. The dearth of 
sober information on interrogation has had the unfortunate consequence of facilitating 
the exploitation of United States prisoners of war by Communist captors (64).
Our purpose here has been to bring together in one book authoritative information 
on  methods  of  behavioral  control  that  have  been  the  subject  of  considerable 
speculation in discussions of interrogation. Scientists representing a variety of fields 
have examined a number of hypothetical means that might occur to an interrogator for 
eliciting information against the will of his subject. Their attention has been more on 
what could be done than on what actually may have been done.
All the questions that are frequently raised about these methods cannot be answered 
by such an approach, however, since many of them are not translatable into scientific 
terms.
Origin of Nonrational Concern
Many  scholars  have  observed  that  science  replaces  magic  and  witchcraft  as 
societies secularize. The problems of living in the present age remain much as they 
have always been, however. They generate many of the same wishes and terrors. The 
aspirations and anxieties that not so long ago were projected onto conceptions of the 
wizard and witch are now directed to the scientist.
Two of the most basic of life's problems are linked to the individual's power 
position vis-à-vis his fellow men: the inability to make others fulfill one's wishes; and 
the reverse, the fear of being controlled by others, with the consequent loss of the 
autonomy that is believed to be fundamental to the conception of the self. These 
opposites  are  incongruously  exaggerated  in  paranoid  thinking,  one  of  the  most 
prevalent mental symptoms of Western man. They doubtless exist in the fantasy of 
most persons, to extents that differ from paranoia in intensity and pervasiveness.
The profound fascination of the topic under consideration may stem from the 
primitive,  unconscious,  and  extreme  responses  to  these  problems,  which  gain 
expression in myth, dreams, drama, and literature. On the one hand, there is the dream-
wish for omnipotence; on the other, the wish and fear of the loss of self through its 
capture by another. The current interest in problems of manipulation of behavior 
involves basic ambivalences over omnipotence and dependency, which, if projected, 
find a ready target in the "omniscient" scientist (30).
-4-
Myth and Reality

The "mad scientist" of the horror movie and novel has been with us for many years. 
More recent fiction has enlisted him in the service of the great nation-state. With the 
perfection of mass-destruction weapons and the elaboration of totalitarian efforts to 
control human behavior, the myth has begun to converge with aspects of reality.
Conjectures concerning the prospects of "total annihilation of the human will" 
appear almost as frequently as those regarding the threat of mankind's total destruction 
by thermonuclear or similar weapons. Regarding weapons of physical destruction, 
responsible scientific evidence is offered along with uninformed and ill-informed 
surmises, both in support of forecasts of doom and in rebuttal. In the case of the threats 
science poses to human autonomy, however, sensationally speculative expressions, like 
those of the Brave New World that Aldous Huxley (21) recently revisited, have enjoyed 
a near monopoly. In professional journals and publications, as well as in statements for 
popular consumption, scientists have sometimes contributed to uncritical thinking 
regarding the potential application of scientific developments to the control of human 
behavior. Some scientists have done so in their zeal to make the public aware of the 
dangerous tool which the techniques for manipulating behavior could become in the 
hands of totalitarian and other irresponsible practitioners. A common error has been to 
assume that some scientific development, or some explicit scientific theory, was being 
applied by Commanist "brainwashers" and other manipulators (2, 4, 5, 18). Other 
scientists, and interpreters of science, have also contributed to the identification of the 
behavioral  scientist  as  a  powerful  and  unscrupulous  practitioner  of  the  arts  of 
influence, as in Vance Packard's Hidden Persuaders (45).
It has been pointed out that the ways in which the popular communication media 
define the problem are akin to those of prescientific times (56). Raymond Bauer (2) 
has noted the resemblance of the concept "brainwashing" to demonology: the idea of 
the "brainwashed" does not differ greatly from that of the "possessed" (6). "The battle 
for  the  mind"  (52),  sometimes fought against  "the hidden persuader,"  has  many 
elements of the occult.
Viewing the problem in magical or diabolical terms is not an altogetlier irrational 
analogy, given the existence of those who simultaneously practice and seek perfection 
of the means for controlling behavior and conceive of their efforts as directed toward 
"possessing the will" of their victims. As one of us has pointed out in discussing
-5-
Communist interrogation and indoctrination practices (6), the Western conception of 
"brainwashing," in terms akin to "possession," is matched by the Communists' view of 
what they seek and how to achieve it as exorcism. Thus, the Chinese Communist 
leaders not only find nothing to resent in charges that they "brainwash" their opponents 
(cf. 1), but regard the term as a quite apt and honorable description of what they wish 
to  achieve.  To  take  another  example,  the  symbolic  imagery  of  the  medieval 
Hexenhammer (22)  is  reflected  in  the  designation  of  the  Soviet  World  War  II 
inquisitorial apparatus as SMERSH ("Death to Spies") (57).

Scientific sobriety demands that the dry examination of experimental evidence 
replace the lively books on exorcism of ancient times. As in many contemporary works 
which are closer to the livelier lore of ancient times, however, the present review deals 
with human concerns antedating science that are at the root of the central question: 
"Can man really be made to behave contrary to his profoundest beliefs and his 
conscious self-interest?"
Symbols of science can be used in a magical way, as much of the "brainwashing" 
literature illustrates. Various writers have invested the techniques of interrogators with 
the  magic  of  science  by  attaching  technical  labels  to  what  actually  have  been 
traditional and pragmatic practices (2). In assuming the attitude of the "hard-headed" 
scientist toward the problem, there is a danger in falling into an equivalent misuse of 
science. This would be the case were one, in effect, to attempt to counter those who 
present a diabolical image of the "brainwasher" by invoking superior scientific deities 
to frighten this specter away. Thus, magical thinking and projections, as has been 
indicated, pervade prevalent judgments regarding the significance of the behavioral 
alterations that interrogators can effect. By substituting impassive scientific names for 
ordinary language with its intense connotations for human values, the impression may 
be given of eliminating not only these extravagant judgments but also almost all the 
human significance of these effects. In this way, for example, "treachery" can become 
mere "attitude change" or "a shift in the subject's frame of reference."
Is Control of Behavior Asymptotic?
Difficulties  inhere  in  dealing  scientifically  with  a  problem  that  relates  so 
immediately to basic human values. Assumptions in this work hold the person against 
whom the interrogation efforts are
-6-
directed — who is designated following common intelligence usage as "the source" — 
to be highly motivated to safeguard the information; and that, at least initially, the 
source regards denying information to his interrogator as "more important than life 
itself." It apparently has not been a rarity for individuals undergoing interrogation to 
say "go ahead and shoot" in the face of a convincing threat of death, and yet to reveal 
the information thus  guarded under seemingly mild pressure  later (8). Similarly, 
Western jurisprudence recognizes that lengthy interrogation, even without physical 
coercion,  can  produce  "unwilling"  confessions,  true  or  false,  of  capital  crimes. 
Divergent interpretations have been placed on reported cases of individuals who have 
resisted very intensive interrogations without divulging information. Some use it to 
demonstrate the existence of an unconquerable, inextinguishable human will. Others 
regard the instances of successful resistance to interrogation as mere illustrations of 
remediable deficiencies in interrogation technique.

Neither this nor any other scientific volume, in the opinion of the editors, can 
resolve the differences implicit in these two orientations, or yet other interpretations. 
On  the  basis  of  scientific  tests alone,  they are  difficult  to  resolve  even  with a 
completely deterministic set of assumptions. As the approach of this review illustrates, 
for any given set of motivations of the source, however powerful, one can at least 
speculate about possible manipulations to overcome them. On the other hand, it is 
possible to speculate about methods of heightening motivations and defenses against 
any conceivable manipulative assault. Exclusively scientific tests probably cannot 
foreclose either possibility at this time.
Another important qualification to conventional ideas about the ultimate limits of 
the control of human behavior will become apparent in some of the discussions that 
follow. The purposes that men have in seeking to control, or to influence, the behavior 
of others involve the distinctively human capabilities of men and their significance for 
one another. The major fallacy of the totalitarian interrogator grows out of a poor 
appreciation of this fact. Some of the chapters here indicate that there are limits to 
which  the  ability  of  a  source  to  reveal  information  can  be  separated  from  his 
willingness to do so. The analytic divisions we make between such aspects of mental 
activity as the recall and transmittal of information on the one hand and motivations on 
the other do not correspond to behaviors that are totally independent of one another in 
the organism. Furthermore, much of the use one person can make of another resides in 
the latter's ability to function in a voluntary fashion: in his having
-7-
initiative,  making choices, preferring,  and  rejecting.  The  fallacy of  belief  in  the 
possibility of total control for any purpose stands out as bizarre in the extreme when 
acted on by those whose purposes involve the control of self-initiated behavior. An 
example, simultaneously tragic and ridiculous, is the ideological interrogation.
A system in which mental conformity is sought through coercion and manipulation 
embodies an ever-present fear on the part of the controllers that conformity will be 
based on opportunism rather than conviction. In oppressive ideological systems, such 
as modern Communism, which demand "true sincerity" from their subjects rather than 
mere  outward  conformity,  the  inquisitorial  process  appears  to  be  a  natural 
development. It is a difficult matter to determine whether thoughts are indeed "true 
thoughts."  The  inquisitorial  process,  being  itself  highly  coercive,  reinforces  the 
original suspicion regarding opportunistic conformity. In a vicious circle, coercion is 
used to produce conformity, generating fears that the conformity produced is insincere, 
generating in turn further coercion to make it "sincere." The abhorrence of these 
practices by those subjected to them makes the fears of the controllers well founded 
and further reinforces the vicious circle.
Under these circumstances, the ultimate test of the loyalty and sincere devotion of 
the individual to the system is his acceptance of the inquisitorial process itself: the 
purge, coercion, confession,  and the entire paraphernalia of enforced conversion. 

Malleus Maleficarum (22, page 212) provides an illustration of the manner in which 
the victim is compelled to adopt the frame of reference of the inquisitor:
He [the suspected witch] must be asked if he believes that there are such things as witches, and that 
such things as were mentioned could be done, as that tempests could be raised or men and animals 
bewitched.
Note that for the most part witches deny this at first; and therefore this engenders a greater suspicion 
than if they were to answer that they left it to superior judgment to say. . . . So if they deny it, they must 
be questioned as follows: Then are they innocently condemned when they are burned? And he or she 
must answer. (Cf. Krivitzky, 26, page 141.)
One final test of loyalty demands that the prisoner act as though he hated himself 
with the intensity of the criminal definition which the system has placed upon him.
At the outset of the study the impression of the editors from their prior investigation 
of  interrogation problems was  that the effectiveness of scientific innovations for 
controlling human behavior may have been exaggerated in most public discussions. 
Before  final  evaluations,  alarming  or  otherwise,  were  ventured  from  a  human 
standpoint regarding the significance of the control over behavior
-8-
which scientific developments will make possible, it was felt that a more sober, 
systematic,  and  accurate  examination  was  required  from  a  purely  objective 
perspective. This evaluation relates to the applicability of such developments to a 
specified type of objective and to the nature and limits of the alterations of objective 
behavior that these developments will permit a would-be manipulator to induce in a 
resistant person. Although such an effort cannot settle the philosophical and emotional 
questions raised about the significance of the control which can be exerted, it can 
indicate that some are ill-founded and others premature. Yet others relate to very real 
matters.
This work does not represent an attempt to minimize the problem. The conclusions 
reached do in fact show that many developments can compound tremendously the 
already almost insuperable difficulties confronting the individual who seeks to resist an 
interrogator unrestrained by moral or legal scruples. On the other hand, it can be 
shown  that  many  of  the  measures  popularly supposed  to  render  an  interrogator 
omnipotent  actually  have  no  demonstrable  applicability  to  his  purposes.  Other 
measures that appear to have high potential utility for the control or influence of 
behavior seem to owe their effectiveness to quite different kinds of processes than 
popularly supposed. Among the latter are "placebo" measures, the success of which 
depends largely upon the attribution to them of a nonexistent potency by the subject, 
and at times the manipulator. Knowledge, it appears, is a "two-edged sword" in 
interrogation.
The latter fact is a source of some comfort. Several scientists have reported on the 
possible applications of scientific knowledge that might be made by the most callous 

interrogator or power. The results of their thinking are available here for anyone to use, 
including the unscrupulous. The alternative is to confer on the would-be manipulator a 
monopoly of knowledge by default. His success, as the various chapters of this book 
illustrate, depends heavily on the ignorance of his victims. Skinner (58) has argued that 
those who are most concerned with restricting the vulnerability of men to control by 
others have the most to gain from a clear understanding of the techniques employed 
(pages 320-322). (See also Skinner, 59.)
Focus On Objective Behavior
The question of controlling fundamental attitudes and values may hold greater 
interest for many than our attention to the eliciting of guarded facts by interrogators. 
Much concern of recent years regard-
-9-
ing behavior control, as has been discussed, has centered on connotations that have 
come to be conveyed by the term "brainwashing." The source of this concern is the 
belief that individuals can be "changed" in some fundamental way by devious and 
mysterious acts of influence. Certainly, Communist practitioners of "thought-reform" 
visualize the creation of a "new man" as their objective. People of Western nations, 
frightened and puzzled by these Communist practices, have also felt that the behavior 
displayed by many victims of such efforts could be explained only in terms of some 
very basic changes within the individual.
The difficulties confronting attempts to examine such complex issues scientifically 
argue in favor of dealing first with simpler and more objective forms of behavioral 
influence. In the "brainwashing" model, we have a basically nonrational attempt to 
effect nonrational changes of subjective states. Practitioners of "thought-reform" seek 
"real" changes in beliefs and values. They demand that the victim be "honest, sincere, 
and full" in his "self-examination, repentance, and change" (27). It is difficult to find 
objective indicators of the extent to which a "thought-reformer" has achieved "honesty 
and sincerity," and particularly difficult when given the special ideological meanings 
such terms have for the practitioners of "thought-reform." As for producing "real" and 
"fundamental" changes in the person, the superficial and stereotypical concepts about 
human personality on which Communist " thought-reform" efforts are predicated 
might  lead  one  to  expect  that  any  fundamental  changes  they  produce  must  be 
accidental rather than a realization of a deliberate objective.
There is no question that it is possible for men to alter, impair, or even to destroy 
the effective psychological functioning of others over whom they exercise power. The 
concepts influence, control, and manipulation denote a certain kind of alteration: the 
consummation of a purpose of the influencer in the behavior of the influenced. If we 
wish to examine scientifically questions denoted by the terms influence, control, or 

manipulation, we must be able to observe objectively and to define in precise terms 
both the effects sought and those obtained.
A focus on the elicitation of guarded factual information simplifies the analytical 
problem considerably by posing a model that involves such objectively specifiable 
purposes and effects. To achieve further simplicity for purposes of this review, the 
contributors were asked to consider as their primary model interrogations where the 
interrogator's objectives consisted of obtaining simple, objective information regarding 
the physical world.
-10-
Interrogators in this age of "psychological warfare" increasingly seek "social and 
psychological intelligence" from their sources. As in most social science interviewing, 
the content of this type of reporting depends on such factors as the subjective state and 
the  personal  and  cultural  frames  of  reference  of  the  reporter.  Considerable 
simplification is achieved by avoiding the complex problems of interviewing, which 
involve influencing persons to report psychological and social information accurately, 
and the infinitely more complex question of what constitutes accurate information on 
such topics.
There are various motivations or values which may underlie the resistance of a 
source to an interrogation attempt. The interest here is in any method through which 
these bases of resistance may be changed, outweighed, neutralized, or circumvented so 
that the person comes to behave in a manner he was originally strongly motivated to 
avoid.  The  particular  form  of  behavior  toward  which  attention  is  directed,  the 
imparting of factual information, has various peculiarities. Some of these distinctive 
features are considered in the reviews. Few experiments, however, have dealt directly 
with attempts to elicit precisely this form of behavior. The attention of the contributors 
was  broadened  of  necessity  to  exploit  the  relevance  of  experiments  studying 
interpersonal influence on other forms of behavior.
This book does not pretend to examine the processes by which fundamental and 
lasting alterations of the value system of a subject come about. Nonetheless, in the 
review of experimentation on interpersonal influence (Chapter 6), it was imperative to 
consider knowledge developed through experiments that involved theoretical concepts 
such as "changes in attitude or belief." From the present perspective, the validity of 
such observations does not depend upon the degree to which observed changes truly 
reflect stable and lasting changes in the subject. When a determination is made that 
later behavior negates some value strongly affirmed earlier in the experiment, or the 
reverse, the experiment accords sufficiently with the questions being posed here.
Although the kind of influence attempt considered here represents a considerably 
simpler problem than the attitude changes or even attitude reporting used here for 
some inferences, it nonetheless involves the production and observation of complex, 
symbolic, learned human behavior. Thus, evidence regarding the manipulations that 

are possible of the salivary response or other simple responses of either animals or 
humans would not provide answers to the questions raised by this review.
-11-
Scientific Purpose
We have attempted here to communicate scientific information to scientists, and the 
work originally undertaken for the U. S. Air Force has been revised and supplemented 
to this end. Emphasis has been placed on detailing the scientific implications of both 
the general and the specific subject matters, and their value for theory and research. 
The number of relevant questions left unanswered by the study points to the need for 
further investigation of the problem under consideration. The contributors represent a 
variety of scientific fields, and their material either separately or in the aggregate will 
undoubtedly hold interest for specialists in still other fields. The writing style here is 
akin  to  the  broader  style  of  papers  designed  for  presentation  at  meetings  of 
representatives from several different scientific disciplines.
This work might help the armed forces to offset the lack of knowledge that was in 
part  held  responsible  for  much  of  the  success  Communist  captors  achieved  in 
interrogation of United States prisoners of war in Korea (64). Its value for this purpose 
is limited in that it assumes an interrogator who pursues his objective of developing 
information  rationally.  Past  experience  indicates  that  practices  encountered  by 
prisoners of war are not determined exclusively by considerations of logic (5). A 
rational  examination  of  the  problem  cannot  lead  to predictions  of  a nonrational 
opponent's actions. Historically, there has been frequent resort to coercive practices for 
eliciting information, despite abundant evidence that such measures are relatively 
ineffective. Some estimates of what an opponent is likely to do, in addition to those 
based on considerations of what it will be feasible and advantageous for him to do, are 
required  in devising  measures  for  thwarting  enemy exploitation  attempts  against 
prisoners of war.
If the present study also receives the attention of interrogators, it may offset their 
tendency to adopt the sensational stereotypes of interrogation on which many of them 
appear to have modeled their practice in the past.
Sources
This book is based exclusively on publicly available scientific material. Parallel, but 
secret, investigations can be presumed to have been undertaken by a number of police 
and intelligence systems.
-12-

Although the generally available literature would probably reflect in an over-all 
way  the  achievements  of  secret  research,  it  is  conceivable  that  some  unknown 
discoveries or applications may have been made. Our contributors have indicated gaps 
in specially relevant knowledge, many of which would not be pursued intensively in 
the ordinary course  of scientific development. Largely,  however, the unanswered 
questions that are central to the topic of this book also point to critical gaps in present 
scientific knowledge.
It should be noted that interrogations almost invariably proceed in private. The two 
major sources of information about them are: practitioners of the "art" and their 
victims. The former are generally required to guard the details of their craft as secrets; 
the latter may have a limited perception, understanding, and memory of what they 
have experienced. It is possible that practice in some respects has advanced beyond the 
level of the inferences and conjectures presented here. In other respects, experience has 
proven that some potentialities of interrogation have been overestimated. Free access 
to the guarded handbooks of interrogators everywhere probably would not lead to any 
substantial modification in the general conclusions of this review.
Scope
A thorough review has been attempted of the scientific areas that have figured most 
prominently in speculations concerning "scientific interrogation."
Because of its defensive application during interrogation, one aspect of the problem 
receiving special consideration in this book is the ability of the source to thwart his 
interrogator by feigning psychological disorder. Malingering is a time-honored tactic. 
Its discussion here illustrates some of the implications of personality evaluation for 
manipulative situations.
Personality  evaluation  historically  has  been  considered  a  clinical  adjunct  to 
manipulation. Its application requires the manipulation to be "tailor-made" to the 
specific  individual  differences  encountered  in  the  intelligence  source.  No 
comprehensive discussion of this topic has been attempted here for several reasons: (a) 
most means of personality evaluation require the willing cooperation of the subject, 
which is not likely to be obtainable from reluctant sources; (b) assessments not 
requiring the cooperation of the source (e.g., observation, graphology, analysis of 
speech or gestures) yield notoriously poor agreement among independent judges or 
observers, unless the behavior
-13-
is categorized into minutiae that are difficult to interpret meaningfully; (c) knowledge 
is lacking on how to effect maximal exploitation by differential treatment of sources on 
the basis of personality information, if it were available in reliable form; and finally (d) 

consensus on a theory of personality, which is critical to the integration and application 
of personality data, does not exist.
Published speculations that electrical stimulation of the brain might be employed 
for  purposes  of  nefarious  influence  led  the  editors  to  believe  initially  that  an 
examination of this area should also be included in this book. The notion that the 
action of the brain, and thereby the action of an individual, might be controlled directly 
is an ancient one. Electrical brain stimulation was one of the methods "Big Brother" 
used in Orwell's 1984 to control his subjects. Scientists, including Lilly (13, 29), Miller 
(39),  Olds  (42,  43)  and  Sargant  (52),  have  indicated  that  recent  experimental 
developments  give  some  basis  to  the  fiction-writers'  conjectures.  Observations, 
primarily from animal experimentation, led to the following surmises. First,  and 
earliest, were possibilities suggested by observations of Penfield (46) that cortical 
stimulation might elicit "memory" and some spontaneous verbalization of information. 
Second, animal experiments raised the possibility that subjective experiences from 
subcortical stimulation might be so intense as to provide a basis for the administration 
of reinforcements of unprecedented strength. Also, the possibility was raised that 
organisms might be made more "teachable" by direct interventions of this kind.
The editors asked Sidney Marvin, M.D., Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 
who has been working on subcortical stimulation for pain relief in human subjects, to 
review current knowledge and techniques in this area from the perspective of this 
book. Colonel Marvin found that experimentation had not progressed sufficiently to 
allow for other than conjectural statements regarding the questions raised. The editors 
believe it sufficient for the purposes of this volume to quote briefly the general 
conclusions of Colonel Marvin's report:
. . . In conclusion it should be said that in its current status: (1) subcortical electrostimulation is 
strictly in the research stage of development and that information is sketchy and variable, (2) precise 
implantation of electrodes into a given brain location is possible only within ±0.5 cm, a reasonable 
estimate of the present accuracy, (3) although damage to the central nervous system by such techniques 
is relatively minimal and usually reversible, still it is a major factor to be considered, (4) current 
knowledge and working concepts of neuroanatomy and other related disciplines are insufficient. . . .
-14-
Unless  knowledge and techniques exist far more advanced than those known to the Western 
scientific community, intracranial stimulation as presently known would not be employed in any rational 
attempt to elicit intelligence.
Also  excluded  from  these  pages  is  a  consideration  of  the  role  of  Pavlovian 
conditioned reflex theory in interrogation. The notoriety attained by this theory, as 
explaining the inspiration and effectiveness of Communist techniques of coercive 
interrogation (20, 32, 36, 52), has prompted studies by other investigators. A number of 
students of the subject (2, 4, 17, 18, 55, 56) have refuted the contention that Pavlovian 
theory influenced these practices, whereas Schein (56) and Farber, Harlow, and West 
(10) indicate the inadequacy of simple conditioning models to account for the kinds of 
complex behavior patterns produced in the course of interrogation.

Contributors have been free to choose eclectically whatever models and theories 
appeared most adequate to their respective topics. On the whole, matters of length, 
level of generality, and organization similarly have been left to the judgment of the 
individual contributors.
In those cases where the contributors to this book were not themselves highly 
conversant  with  interrogation  practices,  the  editors  have  drawn  on  their  own 
experience and on research that they have conducted on interrogation in advising the 
contributors and in editing the chapters. The editors thus actively sought to increase the 
relevance of the reviews to the realities of interrogation.
ALBERT D. BIDERMAN
HERBERT ZIMMER
Washington, D. C.
March 1960
References
1. Ai Ssu-ch'i. "On problems of ideological reform". Hsueh Hsi, 1951, 3.
2. Bauer R. A. "Brainwashing: Psychology or demonology?" J. soc. Issues, 1957, 13(3), 41-47.
3. Bexton W. H.  Some effects of perceptual isolation on human subjects. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, McGill Univer., 1953.
4. Biderman A. D. Communist techniques of coercive interrogation. Lackland Air Force Base, Texas: 
Air Force Personnel and Training Research Center, December 1956. AFPTRC Development Report TN-
56-132.
5. Biderman A. D. "Communist attempts to elicit false confessions from Air Force prisoners of war". 
Bull. N. Y. Acad. Med., 1957, 33, 616-625.
6. Biderman. A. D. Effects of Communist indoctrination attempts: Some comments based on an Air 
Force prisoner-of-war study. Washington, D. C.: Office of
-15-
6. Intelligence Research, U. S. Dept. of State, October 7, 1957. External Research Paper No. 132.
7. Biderman A. D. "Effects of Communist indoctrination attempts: Some comments based on an Air 
Force prisoner-of-war study". Soc. Probl., 1959, 6, 304-313.
8.  Biderman  A.  D.  Social-psychological  needs  and  "involuntary"  behavior  as  illustrated  by 
compliance in interrogation. Sociometry, 1960, 23, 120-147.

9. Biderman A. D., and Monroe J. L. "Reactions to the Korean POW episode". A paper read at the 
Annual Convention of the Amer. Psychol. Ass., Washington, D. C., September 1958.
10. Farber I. E., Harlow H. F., and West L. J. "Brainwashing, conditioning, and DDD (debility, 
dependency and dread)". Sociometry, 1957, 20, 271-285.
11. Federn E. "The endurance of torture". Complex, 1951, 4, 34-41.
12. Galambos R., and Morgan C. T. "The neural basis of learning".  Handbook of Physiology. 
Washington, D. C.: Amer. Physiol. Soc., in press.
13. "Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry".  Factors used to increase the susceptibility of 
individuals to forceful indoctrination: Observations and experiments. New York: GAP Publications 
Office, December 1956. GAP Symposium No. 3.
14. "Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry". Methods of forceful indoctrination: Observations 
and interviews. New York: GAP Publications Office, July 1957. GAP Symposium No. 4.
15. Hacker A. "Dostoevsky's disciples: Man and sheep in political theory".  J. Politics, 1955, 18, 
590-613.
16. Haring J. "Preface" (to special issue on "Brainwashing"). J. soc. Issues, 1957, 13(3), 1-2.
17.  Hinkle  L.  E.,  Jr.  "In  Group  for  the  Advancement  of  Psychiatry",  Methods  of  forceful 
indoctrination: Observations and interviews. New York: GAP Publications Office, July 1957.  GAP 
Symposium No. 4. Pp. 285-292.
18. Hinkle L. E., Jr., and Wolff H. G. Communist interrogation and indoctrination of "Enemies of the 
State. Analysis of methods used by the Communist state police. (Special Report), A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. 
Psychiat., 1956, 76, 115-174.
19. Hunter E. Brainwashing: The story of men who defied it. New York: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy, 
1956.
20. Hunter E. Brainwashing in Red China. New York: Vanguard Press, 1953.
21. Huxley A. Brave new world revisited. New York: Harper Bros., 1958.
22.  Institoris  (H.  Kraemer)  and  Sprenger  J.  Malleus  Maleficarum.  Translated  by  Montague 
Summers. London: J. Rodker, 1928.
23. Janis I. L. Are the Cominform countries using hypnotic techniques to elicit confessions in public 
trials? Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp., April 25, 1949, RM 161.
24. Jordan H. "You too would confess". Argosy, February 1957, 15-17, 57-63.
25. Kinkead E. In every war but one. New York: Norton, 1959.
26. Krivitzky W. G. In Stalin's secret service. New York: Harper Bros., 1939.
27. Lifton J. "Thought reform of Western civilians in Chinese Communist prisons".  Psychiatry, 
1956, 19, 173-195.

28. Lilly J. C. "Mental effects of reduction of ordinary levels of physical stimuli on intact, healthy 
persons". Psychiat. res. Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1956, 5, 1-28.
29. Lilly J. C., Hughes J. R., Alvord E. C., Jr., and Galkin T. W. "Brief, noninjurious electric 
waveform for stimulation of the brain". Science, 1955, 121, 468-469.
-16-
30. Mausner B., and Mausner Judith. "The anti-scientific attitude". Scient. Amer., 1955, 192, 35-39.
31. Mayer W. E. "Why did so many GI captives cave in?" U. S. News and World Report, February 
24, 1956, 56-62.
32. Mayo C. W. "Destroying American minds — Russians made it a science". U. S. News and World 
Report, November 6, 1953, 97-101.
33. Meerloo J. A. M. "The crime of menticide". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1951, 107, 594-598
34. Meerloo J. A. M. "Menticide".  In Conversation and Communication, New York: Internat. 
Univer. Press, 1952. Pp. 149-157.
35. Meerloo. J. A. M. "Thought control and confession compulsion". In R. M. Lindner (Ed.), 
Explorations in Psychoanalysis, New York: Julian Press, 1953. Pp. 28-37.
36. Meerloo J. A. M. "Pavlovian strategy as a weapon of menticide". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1954, 110, 
173-196.
37. Meerloo J. A. M. "Medication into submission; the danger of therapeutic coercion".  J. nerv. 
ment. Dis., 1955, 122, 353-360.
38. Meerloo J. A. M. The rape of the mind. Cleveland: World Publ. Co., 1956.
39. Miller J. G. "Brainwashing: Present and future". J. soc. Issues, 1957, 13(3), 48-55.
40. "Misconduct in the prison camp: A survey of the law and an analysis of the Korean cases". A 
student note. Columbia law Rev., 1956, 56, 709-794.
41. Murray J. C. "Singing is for the birds". The Army Combat Forces J., 1955, 6(1), 15-21.
42. Olds J. "A physiological study of reward". In D. C. McClelland (Ed.), Studies in motivation. 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1955, Pp. 134-143.
43. Olds J. "Self-stimulation of the brain: Its use to study local effects of hunger, sex, and drugs". 
Science, 1958, 127, 315-324.
44. Orwell G. Nineteen eighty four. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1949.
45. Packard V. The hidden persuaders. New York: McKay, 1957.
46. Penfield W., and Rasmussen T. The cerebral cortex of man: A clinical study of localization of 
function. New York: Macmillan, 1950.

47. Peterson D. B. Prisoners swayed didn't fall: Communists "sold" very few, says top Army 
psychiatrist. U. S. News and World Report, August 28, 1953, 35, 28.
48. Prugh G. S., Jr. "Justice for all RECAP-K's". The Army Combat Forces J., 1955, 6(4), 15-26.
49. Piagh G. S., Jr. "The code of conduct for the armed forces". Columbia law Rev., 1956, 56, 686-
687.
50. Riesman D. "Some observations on the limits of totalitarian power". Antioch Rev., 1952, 12, 155-
168.
51. Rolin J. Police drugs. Translated by L. J. Bendit. New York: Philosophical Library, 1956.
52. Sargant W. Battle for the mind. New York: Doubleday, 1957.
53. Schein E. H. "Reaction Patterns to severe, chronic stress in American Army prisoners of war of 
the Chinese". J. soc. Issues, 1957, 13(3), 21-30.
54. Schein E. H. "Epilogue: Something new in history?" J. soc. Issues, 1957, 13(3), 56-60.
55. Schein E. H. "Brainwashing". Encyclopedia Brittanica, in press.
56. Schein E. H. "Brainwashing and totalitarianism in modern society". World Politics, in press.
-17-
57. Sinevirskii N. Smersh. Edited by K. Hill and M. Hill. Translated by C. W. Boldyreff. New York: 
Holt, 1950.
58. Skinner B. F. Science and human behavior. New York: Macmillan, 1956.
59. Skinner B. F. Walden II. New York: Macmillan, 1959.
60. Tennien M. No secret is safe behind the Bamboo Curtain. New York: Farrar, Straus and Young, 
1952.
61. "U. S. Congress, Senate". Committee on Government Operations, Permanent Subcommittee on 
Investigations.  Communist interrogation, indoctrination and exploitation of American military and 
civilian  prisoners.  84th  Congress,  2nd  Session,  Senate  Report  No.  2832,  December  31,  1956. 
Washington, D. C.: U. S. Govt. Print. Off., 1957.
62. "U. S. Congress, Senate". "Committee on Government Operations, Permanent Subcommittee on 
Investigations". Hearings, June 26, 1956. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Govt. Print. Off., 1956.
63.  "U.  S.  Dept.  of  the  Army".  Communist  interrogation,  indoctrination  and  exploitation  of 
prisoners of war. Army pamphlet No. 30-101, May 1956. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Govt. Print. Off., 
1956.
64. "U. S. Dept. of Defense". POW: The fight continues after the battle. The report of the Secretary 
of Defense's Advisory Committee on Prisoners of War, August 1955. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Govt. 
Print. Off., 1955.

65. West L. J. "United States Air Force prisoners of the Chinese Communists". In Group for the 
Advancement of Psychiatry,  Methods of forceful indoctrination: Observations and interviews, New 
York: GAP Publications Office, July 1957. GAP Symposium No. 4, pp. 270-284.
66. West L. J. "Psychiatric aspects of training for honorable survival as a prisoner of war". Amer. J. 
Psychiat., 1958, 115, 329-336.
67. Winokur G. "The germ warfare statements: A synthesis of a method for the extortion of false 
confessions". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1955, 122, 65-72.
68. Wolff H. G.  Commitment and resistance. Washington, D. C.: Bureau of Soc. Sci. Res., Inc., 
January 1959. Study SR 177-D, Special Report No. 3.
69.  Zimmer  H.,  and  Meltzer  M.  L.  An  annotated  bibliography  of  literature  relevant  to  the 
interrogation process. Washington, D. C.: Georgetown Univer Med. Center, 1957.
-18-
CHAPTER 1
The physiological state of the 
interrogation subject as it affects brain 
function
LAWRENCE E. HINKLE, JR.
Introduction
When an interrogation is carried out for the purposes of intelligence, we may 
assume that it is intended to obtain information and not simply to produce compliant 
behavior on the part of the man being interrogated. One might describe an interrogator 
as a man who tries to obtain information from another man who may or may not 
possess it and who is not necessarily motivated to give the information if he does. The 
interrogator would like to have this man produce his information rapidly, accurately, 
completely, and without amendments or additions. In the words of the law, he wants 
"the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth" — and often he wants this as 
soon as possible because the information that he seeks has perishable qualities. In the 
urgency of his need, he may interrogate a man who is injured, fatigued, or in pain. He 
may use various maneuvers such as prolonged or repetitive interrogation in order to 
overcome his informant's unwillingness to give information. In doing so he incurs the 

risk  that  his  efforts  may  produce  compliant  behavior  without  eliciting  accurate 
information.
The information that the interrogator seeks represents what his source still knows 
about various events, situations, organizations, devices, etc., to which he has been 
exposed in the past. The most complete and accurate information that he can hope to 
obtain can be only an approximation of the "true facts of the case" even "under
-19-
the  best  circumstances."  It  is  the  purpose  of  this  chapter  to  inquire  into  these 
"circumstances," to consider some of the situations where interrogation may be carried 
out, how these affect an informant's ability and willingness to give information, and 
what the ideal circumstances of interrogation may be. The term "circumstances" is 
taken to mean "the condition of the man being interrogated and the situation in which 
he finds himself at the time." We shall not consider methods of interrogation or the 
nature of the interrogation process, but rather the limitations placed upon these by the 
state of the man who is being interrogated.
The human brain, the repository of the information that the interrogator seeks, 
functions optimally within the same narrow range of physical and chemical conditions 
that limit the functions of human organs in general; and it has, in addition, certain 
special limitations of its own. Any circumstance that impairs the function of the brain 
potentially affects the ability to give information as well as the ability to withhold it.
Effects of Disturbed Bodily Functions Upon Brain Function
Some aspects of the physical and chemical conditions necessary for the normal 
function of the human brain are rather precisely known. The brain, like other organs of 
the human body, exists in an "internal milieu" which is maintained in a remarkably 
steady state by a great number of feedback mechanisms, some quite complex. Any 
disturbance in the constancy of this milieu brings into play homeostatic responses 
which may involve the great majority of bodily processes as well as the activities of 
the man as a whole. When environmental conditions pose a threat, these mechanisms 
are capable of creating major alterations in the internal economy and in many facets of 
behavior (59, 129, 130). It is largely in this manner that changes in the condition of the 
man being interrogated may affect his ability to give accurate information.
Some features of the internal milieu may be considered briefly in order to illustrate 
some of the vulnerabilities of the brain to external influences.
The temperature of the human internal environment is maintained very near 37.5° 
C. A rise in temperature above 44° C (112° F) (10, 33, 121), or a fall below 24° C (75° 
F) (73, 116) may damage the brain permanently or be fatal. An elevation of body 

temperature to  41°  C  (106°  F)  or  above  — which may occur during  the fever 
accompanying
-20-
disease or during heat stroke — nearly always impairs brain function. Sometimes such 
impairment appears at much lower temperatures. Similarly, a depression of body 
temperature to approximately 31° C (88° F) — a level which is sometimes produced 
artificially during anesthesia or which may occur naturally in men after extreme 
exposure to cold — also impairs brain function (2, 9, 37, 62, 123). The nature of the 
impairments of brain function that occur during these and similar disturbances of 
homeostasis are discussed shortly. These impairments show many points of similarity, 
regardless of the conditions causing them.
The concentration of the fluid in the internal milieu is maintained remarkably close 
to 310 miliosmols per liter. An increase in its concentration (as may occur after 
hemorrhage or after injuries that create shock) may impair the function of the brain. A 
decrease in its concentration (which can take place if a man is forced to drink 
excessive amounts of water over a short period of time) also may impair brain funtion 
(38, 134). 1
The internal milieu contains a number of organic and inorganic substances in 
solution, and the concentration of each of these is also maintained at a remarkably 
steady level. Disturbances in the concentration of any of these substances, upward, 
downward, or in their relative proportions, may impair brain function. This impairment 
may be produced directly by the effect of these changes on the brain, or indirectly 
through the impairment of the function of other vital organs, which in turn produce a 
disturbance of the internal milieu. It would not be profitable to attempt to list the limits 
of the various elevations, depressions, or relative disproportions of these substances 
beyond which an impairment of brain function may occur. In practice no single change 
occurs, but rather a disturbance of the concentration of several. A variety of rather 
common  conditions  may  produce  such  disturbances.  Among  these  are  excessive 
sweating, deprivation of water, diets deficient in salt, ingestion of excessive amounts 
of water or other nonsalty beverages over a short period of time, ingestion of excessive 
amounts of salt in food when water is restricted, ingestion of sea water in the absence 
of other water, poison-
1 The awkward term “brain function” is used here because there is no other that denotes all of the 
complex activities that the higher centers of the brain make possible. (We shall disregard its less 
complex and vegetative activities.) Terms such as “mentation,” “mental activity,” and “thinking” are 
inadequate. Consider all the human functions that are absent when the higher centers of a man's brain 
are inactive, and he is in “coma.” The term “brain function,” as here used, refers to all of these.
-21-
ings of various sorts, vomiting or diarrhea from any cause, burns, shock caused by 
injuries, hemorrhage, and impairment of kidney function (14, 30, 42, 43, 100, 134). 

Even very rapid breathing, which sometimes occurs in people who are anxious or 
afraid, may lead to chemical changes in the blood that cause disturbances of brain 
function (17, 36, 77, 96).
Many of the crude procedures that interrogators have utilized from time to time to 
make informants "tractable" and to "make them talk" have an adverse effect upon the 
composition of body fluids: the "hot box" or "sweat box"; the deprivation of water; the 
salty diet; the "water treatment"; the use of emetics to produce vomiting; and the use of 
cathartics such as castor oil to produce diarrhea. These procedures have been used by 
both European and Oriental interrogators in the historical past. They were also in use 
quite recently in Communist countries, and perhaps still are. American prisoners of 
war encountered some of them during World War II and the Korean War, and it is 
likely they will encounter some of them again in the future.
The brain, like other organs, maintains its functions by constant metabolic activity. 
The basis for this activity is energy obtained by the oxidation of the organic chemicals 
available from food. Thus, a constant supply of oxygen must be brought to the brain by 
the blood in the amount of approximately 50 cc per minute (40, 66, 102). The most 
common way by which the brain becomes deprived of oxygen is by failure of the 
circulation (65), which may be brought about by loss of blood from hemorrhage, by 
shock resulting from injury (which has an effect on the circulation quite similar to that 
of hemorrhage), or by illness. Such failure of the circulation may occur also when a 
man is forced to stand still in a fixed position for a long time. It is responsible for the 
common phenomenon of the soldier who faints while standing at attention (20, 22, 89, 
90, 107). Transient circulatory failure is also involved in "emotional fainting," which 
occurs as a result of an acute fall in blood pressure produced by an "emotional" 
stimulus. Failure of the circulation has other adverse effects on cerebral metabolism in 
addition to the effects produced by relative anoxia.
Unlike other organs, the brain cannot use proteins and fats as sources of energy, and 
thus  must  rely  on  carbohydrates  (65).  It  is,  therefore,  peculiarly  sensitive  to 
deficiencies in its supply of sugar, a substance normally present in blood. Small 
increases in sugar concentration, which usually occur after meals, have no discernible 
effect on brain function, but relatively small decreases in concentration
-22-
may have a distinct effect on mood and behavior. Small decreases set in motion 
homeostatic processes that lead to feelings of nervousness, restlessness, sweating, and 
inability to concentrate (27, 36, 92). A fall in blood sugar occasionally occurs in people 
who are anxious or fearful, and seems to contribute to their symptoms. A serious 
deficiency of blood sugar profoundly impairs brain function (65). This is one of the 
terminal events of starvation, and it contributes to the final stupor of the starved man 
(54, 67).
The brain is not dependent on the immediate level in the blood of any foodstuff 
other than sugar, but it does ultimately suffer if it is deprived of other foods over a long 

period of time. The prolonged deficiency of protein and fat, which is usual in general 
starvation, very probably contributes to changes in brain function occurring under 
these circumstances (1, 18, 54, 67, 82). More immediate and readily recognizable 
changes in brain function occur when the diet is relatively deficient in one of the 
accessory foodstuffs, or vitamins, which the body cannot produce itself, but which it 
requires in minute but definite amounts. Among these the "B" group of vitamins are 
the most immediately relevant to the brain, probably because they take part in various 
processes of carbohydrate metabolism. A relative deficiency of thiamin (vitamin B1) 
causes beriberi; a deficiency of niacin causes pellagra; a deficiency of vitamin B12 
causes  pernicious  anemia;  and  a  deficiency  of  pyridoxine  (vitamin  B6)  causes 
nervousness, insomnia, weakness, abdominal pain, and difficulty in walking. All these 
diseases may be associated with pronounced changes in brain function (95, 99, 120). 
Beriberi  and  pellagra  have  been  endemic  among  prisoners  of  war  from  time 
immemorial (54).
The normal function of the brain is also dependent upon the removal of metabolic 
end-products from the fluid that surrounds it. Especially when there is impairment of 
the lungs, liver, or kidneys (the organs primarily involved in maintaining the normal 
composition of the blood and in clearing it of toxic substances), the internal milieu 
becomes deranged and impairment of brain function follows. The kidney is the organ 
most often implicated in this phenomenon because it is highly vulnerable to many 
common disturbances. Dehydration, surgical shock, hemorrhage (14, 38, 43), or the 
circulatory impairment produced by very long standing (20, 22, 89, 90, 107), all may 
impair kidney function to such an extent that the internal milieu may be seriously 
disturbed.
In summary, brain function is readily impaired by disturbances in homeostasis. It is 
easily disordered by physical abnormalities that affect the body as a whole, including 
such common conditions as
-23-
fever,  a  profound  lowering  of  body  temperature,  dehydration,  overhydration, 
disturbances  in the composition of  the blood, disturbances of respiration, shock, 
hemorrhage, diarrhea, vomiting, poisonings, starvation (partial or complete), and even 
static  postures  that  are  too  long  maintained.  The  disturbance  of  brain  function 
produced by each of these-and indeed that produced by any homeostatic disturbance, 
or by any physical or chemical assault upon the brain — is remarkably uniform in 
many of its features. Even though the symptoms produced by any given homeostatic 
disturbance (such as overbreathing or dehydration, for example) may exhibit certain 
idiosyncratic  features  (such  as  muscle  cramps  or  thirst),  there  are  fundamental 
common elements in the disturbances of brain function which follow from all these 
types of assault.

Manifestations of Disordered Brain Function Produced by Disturbances of 
Homeostasis
All severe and uncompensated disturbances of homeostasis produce a syndrome of 
disturbed brain function which, in civilian life, is most commonly encountered in 
hospitals. This syndrome (officially, the "brain syndrome")  2 occurs in acute and 
chronic forms (128), and includes deliria of various sorts, some of which have been 
given the names of drugs or diseases thought to cause them. The present consensus is 
that  the  "brain  syndrome,"  whether  acute  or  chronic,  is  fundamentally  a  single 
syndrome, regardless of its cause (24, 25, 29, 76, 92, 97, 108, 128, 131).
The "brain syndrome" in its fully developed state is an across-theboard impairment 
of brain function: an impairment of all those aspects of mental activity that are 
commonly tested when the physician undertakes to assess the "mental status" of the 
patient. A patient exhibiting this syndrome can no longer carry on his usual complex 
activities, assume his daily responsibilities, or cope with interpersonal relations. As its 
symptoms develop, he may become restless, talkative, and delirious; ultimately, he 
becomes totally confused and lapses into unconsciousness.
The full-blown "brain syndrome" usually occurs in people who are distinctly ill, 
injured, or depleted. Generally, such people are interrogated only when it is feared that 
their information may be irretriev-
2 The syndrome has many other names: The “organic reaction syndrome,“ ”symptomatic psychosis,“ 
“toxic-infectious exhaustive state,” “psychosis with somatic disease,” “dysergastic state,” among others.
-24-
ably lost. Their deranged condition is easily recognized, and the information that they 
give can be evaluated with this in mind. However, under less drastic conditions the 
syndrome may develop slowly and be difficult to recognize, and its existence may 
elude an interrogator.
In the earliest stages of the "brain syndrome," the subject experiences the various 
uncomfortable  symptoms  associated  with  his  physical  state:  pain,  fatigue,  thirst, 
hunger, drowsiness, or the like. He loses some of his capacity to carry out complex 
responsibilities accurately, speedily, effectively, and to plan and delay his activities. 
This is especially noticeable in his impaired ability to meet new situations and his 
occasional  lapses  in  dealing  with  familiar  situations  (24,  25).  His  interpersonal 
relations may deteriorate; conflicts arise which he might have avoided under other 
circumstances. He is likely to become emotionally labile, irritable, depressed, jumpy, 
and tense, and at other times to be unexpectedly blunted or apathetic in his reaction. 
His concern for the finer aspects of human behavior-for neatness, accuracy, honesty, 
veracity, and kindness, as well as patriotism and honor — may fall off to varying 
degrees, whereas at the same time he shows an increased and at times frantic concern 
for  his  more  immediate  bodily  needs  such  as  food,  water,  sleep,  rest,  and  the 
alleviation of pain.

In this early stage of the syndrome, the only outward manifestations of disturbed 
behavior, other than those directly associated with illness, injury, or depletion, are 
likely to be a slight deterioration of dress, speech, and personal appearance. The 
subject's performance on short-term tasks, including psychological tests of moderate 
complexity, may not be outside the normal range (24, 25), especially if he is highly 
motivated at the time. Yet, despite his ability to rise to a short-term challenge, his 
performance on tasks generally will be slowed, less accurate, and less effective. If his 
premorbid  level  is  unknown,  a  moderate  deficit  may  be  undetected.  Frank 
disorientation may be absent. He is more likely to be vague and forgetful about time, 
place, and person, to have to be reminded, or to make a conscious effort to remember.
People  who  are  injured,  ill,  or  depleted  by  combat  or  exposure  are  often 
interrogated if they seem to be in good condition and capable of pulling themselves 
together. Under these circumstances they may be subject to disturbed brain function in 
this earlier and subtler form. The presence of this condition may not be recognized by 
either the interrogator or the man being interrogated, even though the source may wish 
to cooperate with his interrogator and may appear
-25-
to be mentally "normal." However, the subject's memory may be especially deceptive. 
There may be a distinct hiatus in his memory, without its being noticed either by the 
source or by one who examines him. More often he is vague, uncertain about details, 
and has temporary blocks of memory, especially for the nuances, or the finer (and 
sometimes the most important) details.
In this state, the subject may have no frank illusions, hallucinations, or delusions, 
but he overvalues small events, misinterprets, blames others, and accepts explanations 
and  formulations  which  he  might  reject  as  patently  absurd  under  different 
circumstances. He does not confabulate, but he may be willing to state that a report is 
"clearly true," or that an event "actually occurred," when in fact the report merely 
could  be  true,  or  the  event  might  have  occurred.  His  intellectual  functions,  his 
judgment, and his insight decline to a similar degree.
As  the  "brain  syndrome"  develops,  the  subject's  dress,  behavior,  and  speech 
deteriorate further. His orientation for time, place, and person becomes increasingly 
deficient. Initially he may have been quite aware of the impairment of his mental 
faculties, and his awareness potentiates the apprehension that he may experience. The 
subject is especially prone to become fearful if his illness is  precipitated rather 
suddenly by acute infection, injury, poisoning, or dehydration. When it comes on more 
slowly or is due to starvation, his mood may be one of apathy or depression.
The subject is quite likely to have thinking difficulties and sensory experiences, 
illusions, delusions, hallucinations, and projective or paranoid thinking. Frequently 
these contain naively transparent elements of wishful thinking. If starved, he may 
believe that he is about to receive a large meal or he may see it before him. Such 
experiences  may  be  frightening.  If  the  syndrome  develops  gradually,  he  may 

perseverate, or pointlessly repeat a fragment of thinking, speech, or behavior; or he 
may confabulate and create figmentary "memories" to cover up actual defects in his 
memory. Such confabulation may occur even if the subject has a reputation for the 
utmost adherence to veracity. Since he may be more than usually suggestible (131), the 
combination of confabulation and suggestibility may make it possible to elicit from 
him a plausible story that is largely figmentary.
Other mental activities deteriorate also. His intellectual functions fall off. His 
capacity to calculate, to abstract, to estimate time, to recall items, digits, or stories is 
impaired. General information that one might expect him to know is not available to 
him. His judg-
-26-
ment is faulty. Although he may at first have had some insight into the fact that he has 
lost his faculties, later he may have none at all. His memory becomes defective, at first 
for recent or special events, and later for all sorts of events and topics. The subject's 
awareness is increasingly clouded, and he becomes more and more drowsy as the 
process advances to the borderline of the pathological.
The state just described is not uncommon among men who have been through 
prolonged combat (114) or through prolonged and depleting activities of any sort (4, 
39, 83, 124, 135), in men who are injured, who are ill, who have undergone serious 
exposure to the elements, and who are malnourished or deprived of water. It can be 
assumed that the U. S. Armed Forces would not deliberately create such a state in 
prisoners of war, but it is quite likely to occur among them naturally, simply because 
men often become prisoners of war after strenuous combat, and may be ill or wounded. 
It can be assumed that future enemies probably will create such a state in American 
prisoners  of  war,  although  they  may  not  do  so  with  any  sophisticated  intent. 
Historically, it has been the common practice of captors, police, and inquisitors to 
isolate their prisoners in places that are cold, damp, hot, unventilated, unsanitary, and 
uncomfortable, to deprive them of food, fluids, sleep, and rest and medical care, and to 
beat,  torture,  harry,  overwork  and  threaten  them,  as  well  as  to  question  them 
interminably with leading questions. Such procedures have been used partly because 
they make prisoners more "pliable," more "ready to talk," and more "cooperative." 
They  are  very  likely  also  to  make  the  information  obtained  from  the  prisoner 
increasingly unreliable.
Some Circumstances under Which Brain Function May Be Disturbed without 
Demonstrable Disturbance of Other Bodily Functions
The phenomena just considered relate to men who have suffered some disturbance 
of their homeostasis — some measurable change in the internal environment affecting 
the body as a whole, other organs as well as the brain. People who experience the 
effects of isolation, fatigue, or sleep loss may show no measurable disturbance of their 

general homeostasis. They may nonetheless exhibit impaired brain function, for the 
brain has special vulnerabilities over and above those that it shares with other organs. 
It is possible to have disturbed brain function in the absence of any other significant 
alteration in homeostasis.
-27-
The brain of man is an organ that deals with "information," using this term in the 
technical sense as it is used in communications theory (135). The accumulation and 
transmission of information in this sense is a characteristic of all living organisms. The 
nervous system of the higher animals is a specialized apparatus capable of dealing with 
information in complex ways and thereby greatly increasing the general adaptive 
capacities of the animal. The exceedingly complex nervous system of man has this 
fundamental function. It takes in information from the organs of special sense, and 
from the sensory nerve endings within the body and its surfaces, and transmits this 
information to the brain. There it is analyzed, organized, evaluated, stored, and used as 
a basis for organizing the activities of the man as a whole. We might say that 
"information" arising from the configurations of minute amounts of energy is the 
substrate for the activities of the brain, in somewhat the same sense that "food" is the 
substrate for the activities of the gastrointestinal tract.
Deprived of information, the brain does not function "normally." It must have a 
certain quantity of patterned, meaningful, sensory input from the external environment, 
and some opportunity to organize its output as behavior (31, 60, 74, 86, 87, 91, 136). 
Nor can the brain perform one sort of activity continuously and maintain its efficiency. 
Even though the task undertaken is entirely "mental" (or, as one might say, involves 
only the carrying out of activity within the brain), and no significant changes in the 
general physical state of the individual occur as a result of it, the phenomenon of 
"fatigue" eventually supervenes, and brain function deteriorates (4, 32, 41). In addition 
to this, the brain requires "sleep" from time to time — a cessation of its "conscious" 
pattern of activities; otherwise its functions suffer (35, 64, 84, 98, 118). Thus the brain 
has special vulnerabilities of its own; it cannot function "normally" unless it receives a 
certain amount of information upon which to operate, and it cannot carry out a single 
pattern of activities unremittingly and indefinitely.
These points are considered briefly.
Isolation
The experiments of Hebb and others (11, 44, 45, 53, 55, 56, 80, 109, 126), who 
have concerned themselves with "sensory deprivation," have consisted of putting men 
into situations where they received no patterned input from their eyes and ears, and as 
little patterned input as possible from their skin receptors. In some cases there was a
-28-

diminution in sensory input itself; but it appears to have been the lack of patterning, 
the  paucity  of  information,  that  was  important.  The  subjects  were  deprived  of 
opportunity for purposeful activity. All of their other bodily needs were taken care of-
food, fluids, rest, etc. Yet after a few hours the mental activities of the participants 
began to go awry. Their capacity to carry out complex tasks and to perform well on 
psychological tests fell away. They developed illusions, delusions, and hallucinations, 
a mood of fearfulness, and many of them discontinued the experiment.
Such experimentally contrived situations are by no means the same as those of 
persons  in  prolonged  prison  isolation,  yet  undoubtedly  some  aspects  of  these 
observations on sensory deprivation are applicable to our understanding of the reaction 
of the individual to prolonged isolation. It is well known that prisoners, especially if 
they have not been isolated before, may develop a syndrome similar in most of its 
features to the "brain syndrome" (57, 58, 91). They cease to care about their utterances, 
dress, and cleanliness. They become dulled, apathetic, and depressed. In due time they 
become  disoriented  and  confused;  their  memories  become  defective  and  they 
experience hallucinations and delusions. In these circumstances their capacity for 
judgment and discrimination is much impaired, and they readily succumb to their need 
for talk and companionship; but their ability to impart accurate information may be as 
much impaired as their capacity to resist an interrogator.
Classically, isolation has been used as a means of "making a man talk," simply 
because it is so often associated with a deterioration of thinking and behavior and is 
accompanied  by  an  intense  need  for  companionship  and  for  talk.  From  the 
interrogator's viewpoint it has seemed to be the ideal way of "breaking down" a 
prisoner, because, to the unsophisticated, it seems to create precisely the state that the 
interrogator desires: malleability and the desire to talk, with the added advantage that 
one can delude himself that he is using no force or coercion. The prisoner himself may 
be taken in by this and later stoutly maintain that the interrogator "never laid a hand on 
me." However, the effect of isolation upon the brain function of the prisoner is much 
like that which occurs if he is beaten, starved, or deprived of sleep.
The fact that some people, who have been through prison isolation before, or who 
can create for themselves an active and purposeful inner life of fantasy, can endure 
isolation for a long time (5, 15, 75) does not vitiate the fact that total isolation 
effectively disorganizes
-29-
many people who are initially obliged to undergo it, even when it is not carried out 
under circumstances of uncertainty and threat, as it usually is. There appears to be a 
wider  range  of  variability  in  the  capacity  of  men  to  withstand  isolation,  sleep 
deprivation, and fatigue than in their ability to withstand dehydration or fever, for 
example,  even  though  ultimately  brain  function  may  be  deranged  by  all  these 
conditions. We shall consider the basis for this.

Sleep Deprivation
For reasons not yet known, a brain cannot continue to function without occasional 
periods of sleep. The amount of sleep men require is quite variable. Some can function 
effectively for fairly long periods with relatively few hours of sleep obtained at 
irregular intervals (64, 68). Under experimental conditions men have been known to 
endure for more than a hundred hours without sleep at all (16, 35, 46, 72, 98, 118, 
123), and for more than two hundred hours with only a few brief naps (64). Yet most 
people deteriorate markedly after about seventy-two hours without sleep, and all 
deteriorate sooner or later (35, 46, 64, 118, 122). The highest functions suffer first; the 
capacity to cope with complex and changing situations without making mistakes or 
errors in judgment is often the first to go. This is followed by a deterioration of dress, 
speech,  and  behavior;  dullness;  emotional  lability;  defects  of  recent  memory; 
disorientation; hallucinations, delusions, thinking disturbances; and impaired judgment 
and intellectual functions, all increasing in severity with the passage of time (35, 46, 
64, 72, 98, 118, 122). Even at a fairly late stage of this deterioration, people faced with 
an acute challenge and highly motivated to meet it may briefly perform complex tasks 
quite adequately; but ultimately even this capacity is lost (4).
Sleep deprivation affects brain function directly, while producing little or no change 
in the general internal milieu. Efforts to demonstrate a disturbance of the general 
homeostasis consistently associated with lack of sleep have been largely futile (84, 
118). The constituents of the blood and the function of organs other than the brain may 
show little or no abnormality in those who have been without sleep for many hours. 
People whose thinking and behavior are seriously deranged may show "nothing wrong 
with them" on physical examination or various chemical tests. Their demonstrable 
defect is a disturbance of brain function.
-30-
Fatigue
“Fatigue” is a term which has more than one scientific meaning, as well as more 
than one popular meaning. We shall use it to denote a group of somewhat similar 
phenomena which occur in muscles, in reflex arcs, and in the brain. “Muscle fatigue” 
is precisely defined and denotes the deterioration in the function of a muscle produced 
by  its  steady  or  repeated  activity.  The  phenomenon  is  readily  measured  and 
reproduced. It is associated with measurable changes within the muscular system, and 
it has its counterpart in the “muscle fatigue” that occurs in the intact man after 
muscular activity. The fatigue of neural arcs is similarly definable and reproducible. 
On the other hand, “fatigue” of the man as a whole has been given various definitions 
(4, 32, 88). It is often seen in people who are depleted or ill, but no measurable bodily 
change is necessary to it or consistently associated with it. The “fatigue syndrome” 
may be produced in a man if he is put to performing a given task over and over, 
without rest and without change. After a while he performs this task less rapidly, less 

efficiently, less effectively, and with more mistakes. This falling off in his performance 
on the specific task is usually accompanied by a feeling of “weariness,” or “fatigue.” 
His impaired performance on this task is not necessarily associated with any other 
changes in his bodily functions, and his performance on any other task may be 
unimpaired; indeed, if he is suitably motivated, he may perform even the task that 
fatigued him quite adequately for a short period of time (4, 32). In addition, the 
rapidity with which the fatigue syndrome develops is influenced by the attitude of the 
man to the task that he must perform (4, 32, 81).
“Fatigue” and impaired performance of the degree just described, or of even greater 
degree, is readily produced by purely “mental” tasks; and if such tasks are continued 
long enough, performance deteriorates to the extent that the task can scarcely be 
carried on (4). However, the most extreme degrees of fatigue that have been studied 
have been associated with combat or with other extremely trying military operations 
where muscular activity, lack of sleep, and sometimes injury played a part in their 
production (4, 8, 13, 32, 41, 49, 50, 81, 83, 88, 111, 114, 115, 135). Bodily changes 
were therefore present. The fatigue that occurs in combat or other military operations 
is like that occurring during the prolonged and unremitting interrogation carried out by 
state police in various countries (57). The observed mental phenomena are quite 
similar in both cases. The profoundly
-31-
fatigued man, after combat or military operations, or after prolonged interrogation, 
shows a deterioration of his speech, dress, and general behavior, emotional lability and 
blunting,  confusion,  disorientation,  defects  of  memory,  hallucinations,  delusions, 
illusions, paranoid thinking, impairment of intellectual functions, loss of judgment, and 
very little insight (4, 57, 114). Perseveration and confabulation may occur under these 
circumstances, as they also may after sleep loss (114). In addition, profound anxiety is 
often exhibited by those who have been in prolonged combat and who have undergone 
terrifying experiences (114).
THE MANIFESTATIONS OF DISORDERED BRAIN FUNCTION PRODUCED BY ISOLATION, 
SLEEP DEPRIVATION, AND FATIGUE
The symptoms of disordered brain function that occur under these conditions differ 
little, except in detail, from those of the "brain syndrome," as this is produced by 
disturbances of homeostasis. It is easy to differentiate a man who has been long 
isolated or who is profoundly sleepy or tired from one who is suffering the effects of 
pneumonia, gunshot wounds, or starvation; but this differentiation is made upon the 
basis of symptoms and signs other than manifestations of disturbed brain function. It is 
not profitable to argue whether or not the symptoms produced by isolation, fatigue, and 
sleep deprivation should properly be classified under the "brain syndrome." However, 
if one assumes that the effective performance of complex tasks, alertness, orientation, 
memory, discrimination, and judgment are dependent upon the function of the brain, 
then there can be no doubt that isolation, fatigue, and sleep deprivation produce 
disturbances of brain function. If one accepts that the function of the brain is always 

associated with electrochemical events occurring within it, then these changes in brain 
function are, in fact, "organic," as are all brain functions. So far as "organicity" is 
concerned, the effects of isolation, fatigue, and sleep deprivation upon the brain are 
different from those produced by pneumonia, starvation, or gunshot wounds primarily 
in the rapidity of their occurrence and the extent to which they can be reversed. Not all 
of the phenomena that may occur as a part of the "brain syndrome" have yet been 
described as occurring during isolation, fatigue, or sleep loss, but this seems to be a 
function of the limited number of observations that have been made on people who are 
subject to these conditions in extreme degree.
On the other hand, there is a difference in the predictability of the point at which 
disturbed brain function will be produced by these various circumstances. One can 
state within rather narrow limits the
-32-
levels of body temperature, blood glucose, or oxygen saturation, beyond which a 
severe disturbance of brain function can be expected. Isolation, sleep loss, and fatigue, 
however, present no such narrow limits. It is probably correct to say that if any of these 
are carried on long enough they will disorganize the brain function of anyone; but the 
differences in the ability of man to withstand these conditions are very wide. Under 
experimental conditions, some people have succumbed to sensory deprivation within 
one-and-a-half hours, whereas others have maintained adequate function for thirty-six 
hours or more (126). Under prison isolation, as this has been carried out by Russian 
and  Eastern  European  state  police,  most  prisoners  developed  symptoms  of 
disorganization within three to six weeks (57); but some have been known to endure 
this for many months (15, 75), and some have succumbed within days. After forty-
eight hours without sleep, some people become disorganized and ineffective, whereas 
others have been known to go as long as a hundred hours with their functions largely 
intact (35, 64). A task that will fatigue some men within a short while can be carried on 
by others for many hours with no evidence of fatigue (4, 32).
It must be conceded that these differences in the ability of men to withstand 
isolation, fatigue, and sleep deprivation may be based on subtle differences in their 
genetically inherited characteristics; but if this be true, no evidence has yet been 
brought forward to substantiate it. On the other hand, there is abundant evidence to 
indicate that the personality of a man and his attitude toward the experience that he is 
undergoing affect his ability to withstand it. People who enter prison with attitudes of 
foreboding, apprehension, and helplessness generally do less well than those who enter 
with assurance and a conviction that they can deal with anything that they may 
encounter.  Those  who  readily  withdraw  into  a  life  of  meaningful  fantasy  and 
intellectual activity seem to do better than those who are dependent upon activity and 
interaction with other people. Some people who are afraid of losing sleep, or who do 
not wish to lose sleep, soon succumb to sleep loss; others, convinced that they can stay 
awake indefinitely, have done so for well over a hundred hours (64). A great number of 
reports from industry, and from experimental observations, indicate that the attitude of 
workers and experimental subjects is as important in determining the rate at which 

they fatigue as are the tasks they undertake (4, 81). Troops, carried without sleep or 
rest to the limit of endurance, have been able to straighten up and present a smart 
appearance for a short time when an appeal was made to their pride (118). In short, the 
brain, the organ that deals with infor-
-33-
mation, also organizes its responses on the basis of information previously fed into it. 
This information, in the form of a personality developed through the experiences of a 
lifetime, as well as immediate attitudes and the awareness of the immediate situation, 
conditions the way that the brain will react to a given situation. There can be no doubt 
that personality, attitudes, and the perception of the immediate situation seriously 
influence the ability of a brain to endure the effects of isolation, fatiguing tasks, and 
loss of sleep.
Some Conditions under Which the Function of the Brain May Be Disturbed by 
Factors Not Intrinsically Harmful
In a certain sense one might regard isolation, sleep loss, and fatigue as direct 
assaults upon the brain; for the first can be regarded as depriving the brain of the 
substrate of its operations, and the last two can be regarded as leading to the depletion 
of processes in the nervous system which can only be repaired with a period of rest. 
However, hypotheses such as these cannot easily be applied to the explanation of the 
human reactions to pain, hunger, and situations interpreted as dangerous or threatening. 
Here one is dealing with a form of sensory input that may be of great intensity, but 
which is not in itself disorganizing to brain function even if continued indefinitely. 
Pain of fairly high intensity may be borne by individuals over a long period of time 
without necessarily producing impairment of their highest integrative functions (8, 50). 
In the heat of combat or of physical contests intensely painful conditions may pass 
quite unnoticed and may not impair performance. When the attention is focused 
elsewhere by various means, such as hypnosis, the pain of childbirth or of surgical 
operations may be withstood and not be remarked upon (103, 125). The reaction to 
pain is therefore quite variable (3, 6, 7, 28, 48, 50, 63, 69, 78, 93, 94, 112, 132, 133). 
So likewise is the reaction to hunger (21, 34). Hungry men have produced intellectual 
and artistic output of a high order, and have been responsible for extraordinary military 
feats. Men have undergone prolonged fasts without significant impairment of their 
highest faculties. And, so far as dangerous situations are concerned, there are some 
who are stimulated or even exhilarated by them, and many others who act as if they do 
not regard them as dangerous at all.
Thus, hunger, pain, signals of danger, and similar forms of sensory input cannot be 
shown to be necessarily toxic to the human brain, for, under the right circumstances, 
any individual apparently can
-34-

tolerate them indefinitely. The weight of evidence is that it is not the sensory input 
itself, but the reaction of the individual to this input which may adversely affect his 
brain function. This is not so with isolation, sleep deprivation, and fatigue, where the 
effects are intrinsically adverse, and the reaction of the individual is a factor only in 
determining how long these effects can be withstood. With hunger, pain, and signals of 
danger, the adverse effects on brain function may be entirely the result of the reaction 
of the individual. Activities of the brain, initiated in response to incoming information, 
lead to an impairment of brain function. This special vulnerability of the brain to its 
own  activities,  long  suggested  by  clinical  observation,  has  recently  received 
experimental support (24, 25).
Hunger
The  syndrome  commonly  associated  with  the  reaction  to  hunger  is  slow  in 
developing, but it can be expected to occur in the majority of those who are exposed to 
prolonged hunger from any cause (18, 67). It has been seen among starved populations 
(1), among inmates of concentration camps (54, 70), and among prisoners of war (47, 
61, 67, 104), and has been reproduced experimentally (18, 67, 82). This and other 
rigors of the prison camp experience were probably responsible for a good deal of the 
symptomatology that occurred among American prisoners in Korea (79, 105, 113). 
People deprived of food very soon develop a persistent hunger, which does not leave 
them until death approaches or nutrition is restored (18, 21, 54, 67). Accompanying 
this hunger there is a constant preoccupation with food, which may encompass the 
greater part of waking thoughts and activity (18, 54, 67). As starvation progresses, the 
niceties of dress and behavior are neglected, and if the lack of food carries with it a 
threat of death, behavior may cease to be governed by the restraints of "honesty," 
"unselfishness," "pride," and "honor," which are active under normal circumstances; in 
short, the very highest integrative functions drop away (18, 54, 67). During the earlier 
stages of hunger, irritability and emotional lability are the rule, but later profound and 
continuing apathy occurs (18, 19, 54, 61, 67, 104). In the most advanced stages of 
inanition, defects of memory, confusion, hallucinations, delusions, and intellectual 
deficits become evident (1, 54, 67). Advanced inanition is associated with major 
changes in the physical state of the individual. Although it is quite possible that this 
state is directly responsible for the derangement in brain function which takes place, 
the disturbances of behavior and of mood which occur during the
-35-
early part of starvation are present long before any significant derangement of the 
internal milieu can be demonstrated (18, 19, 67).
It is not to be taken that the reaction to hunger is always the same. In starved 
communities, in concentration camps, and in experimental situations, some people 
endure hunger for a long time, and maintain their highest level functions with very 
little evidence of disorganization until the effects of illness or lack of food supervene 

(1, 18, 19, 54, 67, 70). Such people, although they do feel hunger and are aware of it, 
are  able  to  engage  in  thought  and  behavior  other  than  that  centering  around  a 
preoccupation with food; their symptoms are less outstanding and their behavior is 
more "normal." So far as is known, this greater ability to withstand hunger has no 
constitutional or genetic basis; on the other hand, the attitude of the man to the 
experience that he is undergoing appears to be of great importance in determining his 
capacity to endure hunger.
Pain
The investigation of pain has been especially enlightening in this regard, because 
many careful laboratory studies have defined the difference between the "sensation of 
pain" and the "reaction to pain" (3, 50, 52, 110, 132, 133). The sensation of pain seems 
to be roughly equal in all men, that is to say, all people have approximately the same 
threshold at which they begin to feel pain, and when carefully graded stimuli are 
applied to them, their estimates of severity are approximately the same (6, 28, 48, 50, 
51, 71, 85). In general, the reaction to pain is in proportion to its severity, and the most 
intense pains incapacitate men for any sort of complex function during the period of 
their duration. Yet exception must be taken even to this statement, for when men are 
very highly motivated, as they may be when their own lives or the lives of others are at 
stake, they have been known to carry out rather complex tasks while enduring the most 
intense pain. The variability of human reactions to the moderately severe grades of 
pain, such as those found in various diseases, is notorious. Some people perform quite 
effectively over many years while experiencing the pains of chronic headache, peptic 
ulcer, arthritis, or similar conditions; others with like amounts of pain are severely 
incapacitated (3, 6, 7, 8, 28, 48, 50, 63, 69, 78, 93, 94, 103, 112, 125, 132, 133).
The adverse reaction to chronic pain of moderate severity is clinically familiar. It is 
characterized by withdrawal from the more complex and responsible functions of life, 
a certain amount of irritability
-36-
and emotional lability, and concentration upon personal comfort and survival at the 
expense of the needs of others and of the society. Under experimental circumstances, 
those who try to "carry on" while experiencing moderate pain show impairment of 
their performance on complex tasks, impairment of decision making, loss of efficiency, 
and difficulty in estimating time (8) — symptoms which would be expected to occur in 
the early stages of the “brain syndrome” and much like those of people who have 
suffered the destruction of a small segment of their cerebral hemispheres (24, 25).
It is possible that the differences in the way that various people react to pain may be 
partly determined by their constitutions, for it sometimes appears to the clinical 
observer that people of “mesomorphic” build, the heavily muscled and big-boned 
individuals, are those who react to pain with stoicism or with anger and a mobilization 

for  action  that  temporarily  enhances  their  performance;  whereas  the  lighter  and 
asthenic  “ectomorph”  often  reacts  to  pain  with  withdrawal,  incapacitation,  self-
concern, and anxiety. Yet the exceptions to this are many, and the variations in the 
reaction of the same person from time to time are great. In general, it appears that 
whatever may be the role of the constitutional endowment in determining the reaction 
to pain, it is a much less important determinant than is the attitude of the man who 
experiences the pain (3, 6, 7, 48, 50, 52, 69, 94, 110, 112, 125, 132, 133).
Threat
Threats of any sort, direct, implied, or symbolic, are not necessarily derived from 
sensory input which is intrinsically “unpleasant.” The question of the intrinsically 
noxious nature of a threat does not even arise. Complex situations, symbols, and small 
cues arouse potent reactions entirely because of the interpretation put upon them. In 
different  men  similar  situations  produce  different  reactions.  Some  men  react  to 
ostensibly dangerous situations with continued effective performance. When men react 
to such situations as threatening, and when their reactions are characterized by anxiety 
or other intense emotions, these reactions may disorganize their brain function. Intense 
anxiety,  for  example,  is  sometimes  associated  with  defects  in  every  area  of 
performance that is impaired in the “brain syndrome.” Threat is not usually thought of 
as a “physical” stimulus and the syndrome of anxiety is quite distinct from “brain 
syndrome.” However, the defect in function that occurs in the anxious man is quite 
real.
-37-
DISTURBANCES OF BRAIN FUNCTION PRODUCED BY PAIN, HUNGER, AND THREATS
Pain, hunger, and threats are usually thought of as psychological stimuli because the 
conditions that produce them may not be noxious unless perceived to be so. The 
features that determine whether or not a man will perceive a given situation as noxious 
—  his  personality,  his  past  experiences,  his  immediate  mental  set,  and  the 
characteristics of the situation — are outside of the scope of this chapter, but we must 
take due note of their importance.
On the other hand, the psychological reactions to pain, hunger, and threats will be 
discussed.  These  reactions  are  not  called  "organic  reactions,"  and  they  are  not 
considered to be part of the "brain syndrome," but this is a sterile distinction.
The same considerations that were applied to the reactions to isolation, fatigue, and 
sleep loss apply also to those of pain, hunger, and threats. Insofar as mood, thought, 
and behavior are functions of the brain, the disturbances of mood, thought, and 
behavior that occur in reaction to pain, hunger, or threat are disturbances of brain 
function. Insofar as all brain functions are concomitants of electrochemical events in 
the brain, these disturbances are "organic." Yet the impaired function associated with 

anxiety is distinguished from the "brain syndrome" because of its reversibility, and 
because of the relatively greater disturbance of mood and behavior than of intellectual 
functions, memory, or orientation that usually occur with anxiety. Yet impaired brain 
function, not entirely distinguishable from the organic reaction pattern, and in effect 
"permanent," may in some cases be produced by anxiety alone (24, 25).
Quite aside from the question of whether or not the reaction to threats, hunger, and 
pain may be directly associated with changes in brain function, there is no doubt that it 
may be  associated  with notable  changes  in  the  function  of  other  organs.  When 
environmental conditions pose a threat, adaptive mechanisms are capable of creating 
important changes in the internal economy (59, 129, 130). Manifestations of disturbed 
function  of  the  gastrointestinal  and  cardiovascular  systems  are  most  frequently 
reported by prisoners (57), but disturbance of any organ system may occur. In the 
absence of other causes of disease, dysfunctions produced in this manner are not 
usually fatal, although they may be. When combined with the effects of isolation, loss 
of sleep, or starvation, they lead to rapid deterioration and sometimes to death. Even if 
one were to overlook entirely the
-38-
direct effect upon the brain of reactions associated with anxiety, fear, or depression, the 
indirect effect of the homeostatic derangements that often occur at the same time 
would ultimately be deleterious to brain function.
Some Implications of This Information
We  have  drawn  a  distinction  between  the  "willingness"  of  a  man  to  give 
information and his "ability" to do so. The implications of this may now be considered.
As the master organ of human adaptation, the brain functions as a whole in enabling 
man to carry out the exceedingly complex activities of life in the societies that he has 
erected. Even impairment of the lower level functions of the nervous system, for 
example, of sight, hearing, or motor function, to some extent impairs his performance 
of these activities. Yet many of the highest level activities of man remain possible 
despite  such  impairment.  Milton  was  blind,  Beethoven  was  deaf,  and  Winston 
Churchill was not the last statesman to carry on after he had suffered a cerebro-
vascular accident. The part of the brain essential to these highest level activities, 
without which they cannot be carried on, is the most recent evolutionary development 
and  the  part  particularly  well-developed  in  man:  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  the 
neopallium. It is this that must be intact for the performance of the creative and 
responsible tasks that confront a mature man and, in fact, for all those "conscious" 
activities that are part of being an alert, sentient, and civilized human being.
Within the cerebral hemispheres are many discrete pathways which have to do with 
lower level functions, including those of sight, hearing, and the motor functions that 

have been mentioned. These lower level functions are relatively localized. Damage to 
their pathways can impair them temporarily. But the highest level functions, those 
necessary for the adequate expression of human needs, appetites, and drives, those 
which  provide  the  mechanisms  for  symbolic  activity  ("memory,"  "abstraction," 
"cognition," "integration," "reason," and so on), and those which enable men to tolerate 
frustration,  to  deal  effectively  with  threats,  and  to  maintain  effective  and  well-
modulated defense reactions, do not appear to be localized within the hemispheres (24, 
25).
In carrying out these highest integrative functions, the cerebral hemispheres behave 
somewhat  in  the  manner  of  a  data-processing  machine  that  has  "digital"  (or 
"counting") and "analogue" (or "meas-
-39-
uring") characteristics, as well as many other characteristics not yet duplicated by man-
made apparatus (26). The cerebral hemispheres have no specific pathways associated 
with "abstraction," "cognition," "integration," "reason," or similar mental activities. 
Rather, they include a maze of potential pathways, over any of which the complex 
patterns of activity associated with the highest integrative functions may be set up. 
Thus, when any part of the hemispheres is damaged, none of the highest integrative 
activities are entirely lost, but the capacity to perform all is impaired to some extent. It 
is for this reason, undoubtedly, that anything that impairs the function of the cerebral 
hemispheres-direct injury, drugs, toxins, diseases, homeostatic disturbance of all sorts, 
isolation, sleep loss, fatigue, and some reactions to pain, hunger, and threats — 
ultimately produces a global impairment of the highest integrative activities.
Yet it is also true that some high level functions of the brain are more vulnerable 
than others. It seems to be a characteristic of the central nervous system that those 
functions that are "newest" and most complex, those which have appeared most 
recently in evolutionary development, are most vulnerable and drop out first when the 
function of the brain is impaired. The cerebral hemispheres provide no exception to 
this general rule. When they are impaired, the first functions lost are those that are 
thought to be the most complex and to have been acquired most recently by civilized 
man: the capacity to carry out the highest creative activities, to meet new, challenging, 
and complex situations, to deal with trying interpersonal relations, and to cope with 
repeated frustration (24, 25). Relatively small degrees of homeostatic derangement, 
fatigue, pain, sleep loss, or anxiety may impair these functions.
As  impairment  of  brain  function  continues,  somewhat  less  complex  activities 
deteriorate. There is a lessening of the speed and efficiency with which the ordinary 
tasks of daily life are carried out. Concern about "accuracy," "propriety," "moral 
rectitude," "honor," and "feelings of other people," and similar "socially oriented" 
behavior falls away, and an increased concern about sleep, rest, comfort, food, and 
other bodily needs becomes apparent (24, 25, 54, 67). There is less adherence to 
niceties in speech, behavior, and dress. Emotional displays lose some of their social 
orientation. Judgment and insight are less acute. These complex aspects of brain 

function may be distinctly impaired, whereas orientation, memory, recall, and the 
capacity to perform well on psychomotor tests are still intact.
Symptoms  of  impaired  orientation  appear  as  impairment  proceeds.  Memory 
becomes faulty, the capacity to recall remote events being re-
-40-
tained after memory for  recent events  is  lost. Difficulty in  simple computations 
becomes evident, and impairment of performance on tests becomes quite noticeable.
With still further impairment awareness becomes clouded. It is at this point that 
misinterpretations, illusions, delusions, and hallucinations may appear, and "delirium" 
may occur. Large defects in memory and profound impairment of discrimination and 
judgment  are  evident.  As  they  develop,  confabulation  may  take  place  and 
perseveration is likely.
With further deterioration of brain function, loss of contact with reality and finally 
loss of consciousness occur.
It is notorious that threats, pressures, and deprivations, skillfully manipulated by 
police and interrogators with long practice in their use, will "break" almost any man, 
"soften him up," "make him cooperate," and "make him talk." They succeed because 
the most complex, the most "civilized," and the most "socially determined" aspects of 
human behavior are most affected by these procedures. The "less civilized" behavior 
patterns, directed at comfort and survival, are brought to the fore in a man whose 
capacity for judgment and discrimination is diminished. "Honor," "bravery," "security," 
"loyalty," and "patriotism" then have less weight in determining his behavior; pain, 
fear, and confusion have more. Rationalizations come easier to him, and points that 
once seemed important are now unimportant. He becomes more "willing to give 
information."
"Willingness to give information" is an "attitude," a "mental set," an "increased 
propensity of the individual to react in a given manner." It is not, in itself, a discrete 
function of the brain; it is a statement about the likelihood that a given pattern of 
reaction will occur,  provided this reaction pattern can occur. Various degrees of 
"willingness"  exist  so  long  as  the  brain  has  any  "ability"  whatsoever  to  give 
information. The "ability to give information" is a statement about the capacity of the 
brain to furnish information: the possibility that it can do so under any circumstances. 
"Willingness" and "ability" are not necessarily parallel.
It is easy to see why various police procedures often increase the willingness of 
men to give information. So far as one can tell, the willingness to give information is 
not determined by any constitutional factor or by the direct action of any agent from 
the outside, but by information already within the brain, what might be called its 
"directions for action." Most of the "directions" which call for a prisoner to withhold 

information were implanted there by his society. They are the sum total of those 
learned reactions that have
-41-
to do with "loyalty," "honor," "propriety," "security," and so on. As brain function is 
impaired, information derived from past experience generally becomes less potent as a 
guide for action, whereas information derived from the immediate experience, pain, 
thirst, discomfort, and threats to life, becomes more potent. The "attitude" is likely to 
change, and the man becomes more "willing" to do whatever is necessary to secure his 
comfort and survival.
The  new  "attitude,"  the  newly increased  propensity,  is  directed  toward  doing 
whatever  is  necessary  to  secure  comfort  and  survival.  It  is  directed  toward 
"compliance," toward doing what the situation seems to demand. This new state of the 
informant may be a trap to an interrogator, especially if he is a vigorous and persistent 
man with a good hypothesis as to what he might uncover. He is now dealing with a 
man who is likely to have lost some of his finer capacity for discrimination and 
judgment, whose insistent physiologic needs impel him toward ready solutions that 
may serve to relieve him of his discomfort, whose memory for details may be fuzzy 
and confused, and who is more than usually ready to accept a plausible suggestion. 
The source is, indeed, more prepared to talk, but he is also more likely to be inaccurate 
and to give false, misleading, incomplete, or inexact information, of a type like that 
which  his  interrogator  happens  to  be  seeking.  The  fact  that  the  giving  of  this 
information does not redound to his credit or to his long-term self-interest and the fact 
that he is prepared to state that it is true, and later to defend his statements, should not 
be taken as evidence of its accuracy.
Note that these are statements of probability; they are not absolute. "Willingness" is 
not necessarily enhanced as "ability" deteriorates. Our simple hierarchical outline of 
the way that brain function falls off is generally true. All the disturbing influences that 
we have mentioned can be accompanied by the "brain syndrome," and can ultimately 
cause disorganization and unconsciousness. However, one cannot make a more exact 
statement, because the precise nature of the symptoms and the facility with which they 
are produced are dependent upon the personality of the prisoner, what has happened to 
him before, and how he views the circumstances in which he finds himself at the time 
(24, 25, 131). These factors have a great deal to do with the form of the "brain 
syndrome" produced by disturbances in homeostasis. They determine whether a man 
becomes garrulous or withdrawn, anxious or angry, paranoid or trusting. They likewise 
determine the form of the "brain syndrome" produced by isolation, sleep loss, and 
fatigue, and they further have an important influence upon his ability to withstand pain 
and hunger, and they
-42-
approach being an absolute determinant of whether or not a "threat" will produce a 
disorganizing reaction.

Unwillingness to give information is a mental set. If it is strongly imbedded in a 
man before his capture, it may continue to govern one aspect of his behavior right up 
to  the  point  of  delirium or  unconsciousness,  no matter  what symptoms he may 
develop. Some people -criminals adhering to the "code of the underworld" (127) as 
well as prisoners of war adhering to the "finest military traditions" (119) — do not give 
information although they reach the point of disorganization or death. The evidence 
suggests that a learned reaction pattern, if sufficiently reinforced, can sometimes 
govern a specific aspect of behavior as long as a man retains the capacity to carry out 
that behavior.
From the theoretical point of view it is hard to escape the conclusion that a man is 
best able to give accurate information when he is in an optimal state of health, rest, 
comfort, and alertness, and when he is under no threat. This would seem to be the 
optimal situation for interrogation. Any attempt to produce compliant behavior by 
procedures which produce tissue damage, disturbances of homeostasis, fatigue, sleep 
deprivation, isolation, discomfort, or disturbing emotional states carries with it the 
hazard of producing inaccuracy and unreliability.
However, it is often necessary for the interrogator to question people who are 
experiencing  moderately  severe  effects  of  illness,  injury,  fatigue,  discomfort,  or 
anxiety. A body of practical experience indicates that relatively reliable information 
can be obtained from most such people, if the information sought is neither complex 
nor extensive. The interrogator faces two special hazards under these circumstances. 
First, the source may have a fairly serious degree of mental disturbance that is not 
immediately  evident  and  it  may escape  the  interrogator's  attention.  Second,  any 
informant in a threatening situation is liable to say whatever will please his captors, 
even  though  he  may  not  do  so  intentionally.  These  ever-present  hazards  of 
interrogation are enhanced under adverse circumstances. It may be assumed, in the 
absence of evidence to the contrary, that the simpler, the briefer, and the more readily 
verifiable the information that is sought, the more likely is the evidence of the source 
to be of value.
On the other hand, granting that various procedures designed to make men more 
compliant will impair their ability to give accurate information, do these procedures 
not cause men to give more information than they might otherwise have given? Cannot 
a man be made to reveal information against his will?
-43-
Disordered brain function is indeed easily produced in any man. No amount of "will 
power" can prevent its occurrence. It can be produced without using physical means, 
that is, by fatigue or sleep deprivation. Since it may be associated with mental 
clouding,  confusion,  lack  of  discrimination,  impaired  judgment,  and  increased 
suggestibility, it is probably true that most men can be brought to a state where they 
will agree to statements that are dubious, incomplete, or quite inaccurate. Under these 
conditions some men will make up entirely fictitious stories incriminating themselves. 
Therefore, it is usually not difficult to obtain signed "confessions" that are biased, 

incomplete, inaccurate, or even totally untrue. This is the means by which Communist 
state police have produced false confessions with great regularity (57), although not 
with universal success (12, 101, 106, 117, 119).
Most people who are exposed to coercive procedures will talk and usually reveal 
some information that they might not have revealed otherwise. However, there is no 
evidence  that a man  must  always reveal  a  specific item of  information  that he 
possesses. Disturbed brain function of the subject does not allow the interrogator to 
abstract information at will. An interrogator may occasionally trick a disturbed man 
into revealing bits of information that he had intended to conceal, but information so 
revealed is likely to be limited and interspersed with unreliable statements. If he elects 
to do so, a prisoner may endure to death or disorganization without revealing what he 
knows.  Very few  men,  however,  can hold  themselves  to such  rigorous  behavior 
through all the vicissitudes of captivity.
References
1. Aginger J., and Hemmager E. Unusual neural conditions following hunger period of 1945-46. 
Arch. Psychiat., 1951, 186, 483-495.
2.  Albert  S.  N.,  Spencer  W.  A.,  Boling  J.  S.,  and  Thistlethwaite  J.  R.  Hypothermia  in  the 
management of the poor-risk patient undergoing major surgery. J. Amer. med. Ass., 1957, 163, 1435- 
1438.
3.  Association for Research in Nervous and Mental Disease.  Symposium on Pain. Baltimore: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1943.
4. Bartley S. N., and Chute E. Fatigue and impairment in man. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1947.
5. Beck F., and Godin W.  Russian purge and the extraction of confessions. Translated by E. 
Mosbacher and D. Porter. New York: Viking Press 1951.
6. Beecher H. K. The measurement of pain. Pharm. Rev., 1951, 9, 59-209.
7. Beecher H. K., Keats A. S., Mosteller F., and Lasagna L.  Effectiveness of oral analgesics 
(morphine, codeine, acetylsalicylic acid) and problem of placebo "reactors" and "non-reactors." J. 
Pharm. exp. Therapeutics, 1953, 109, 393-400.
-44-
8. Benjamin F. B. The effect of pain on performance. U. S. Armed Forces med. J., 1957, 8, 332-345.
9. Berman E. F., Patt H. H., and Akman L. Artificial hibernation. J. Internat. Coll. Surgeons, 1955, 
24, 282-291.
10. Best C. H., and Taylor N. B. The physiological basis of medical practice. (6th ed.) Baltimore: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1955.

11. Bexton W. H., Heron W., and Scott T. H. Effects of decreased variations in sensory environment. 
Canad. J. Psychol., 1954, 8, 70-76.
12. Biderman A. D. Communist attempts to elicit false confessions from Air Force prisoners of war. 
Bull. N. Y. Acad. Med., 1957, 33, 616-625.
13. Biliings R. M., Chalke F. C. R., and Shortt L. Battle exhaustion. Canad. med. Ass. J., 1947, 57, 
152-155.
14. Bland J. H. The clinical use of fluid and electrolyte. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1952.
15. Bone E. Seven years' solitaiy. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1957.
16. Brauchi J. T., and West L. J. Sleep deprivation. J.A.M.A., 1959, 171, p. 11.
17. Brown E. B., Jr. Physiological effects of hyperventilation. Physiol. Rev., 1953, 33, 445-471.
18. Brozek J. Psychology of human starvation and nutritional rehabilitation. Scient. Mon., 1950, 70, 
270-274.
19. Brozek J. Nutrition and behavior; psychologic changes in acute starvation with hard physical 
work. J. Amcr. Diet. Ass., 1955, 31, 703-707.
20. Brun C., Knudsen E. O. E., and Raaschou F. The influence of posture on the kidney function. 
Acta. Med. Scand., 1945, 122, 315-331.
21. Carlson, A. J., and HoelzeL F. Alleged disappearance of hunger during starving. Science, 1952, 
115, 526-52.
22. Chalmers T. M., and Squires R. D. Observations on the renal response to motionless standing. J. 
Physiol., 1953, 122, 58-59.
23. Chapman W. P., Finesinger J. C., and Chesley G. Effect of direct suggestion on pain sensitivity in 
normal control subjects and psychoneurotic patients. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1953, 118, 19-26.
24. Chapman L. F., Thetford W. N., Berlin L., et al. Highest integrative functions in man during 
stress. Proc. Ass. Res. Nerv. Ment. Dis., 1958, 36, 491-534.
25. Chapman L. F., and Wolff H. G.  Disease of the neopallium and impairment of the highest 
integrative functions. Med. Clinics N. Amer., 1958, 42, 677-689.
26. Cherry C. On human communication. Cambridge, Mass.: Technology Press, 1957.
27. Conn J. W., and Seltzer H. S. Spontaneous hypoglycemia. Amer. J. Med., 1955, 19, 460-478.
28. Couston T. A. Indifferenct to pain in low grade mental defectives. Brit. med. J., 1954, 1, 1128-
1129.
29. Curran D. Psychoses; toxic infective psychoses. In British encyclopedia of medical practice. (2nd 
ed.) Vol. 10. London: Butterworth, 1952. Pp. 403-416.

30. Danowski T. S., Fergus E. B., and Mateer F. M. The low salt syndromes. Ann. int, Med., 1955, 
43, 643-657.
31. Davis K. Final note on case of extreme isolation. Amer. J. Sociol., 1947, 52, 432-437.
32. Dill D. B. Nature of fatigue. Geriatrics, 1955, 10, 474-478.
33. DuBois E. F. Fever and the regulation of body temperature. Springfield, Illinois: C. C. Thomas, 
1948.
-45-
34. Editorial. Appetite and hunger. Lancet, 1955, 269, 707-708.
35. Edwards A. S. Effects of loss of 100 hours' sleep. Amer. J. Psychol., 1941, 54, 80-91.
36. Edwards W. L. J., and Lummus W. F.  Functional hypoglycemia and the hyperventilation 
syndrome. Ann. int. Med., 1955, 42, 1031-1040.
37. Ehrmantraut W. R., Ticktin H. E., and Fazekas J. F. Cerebral hemodynamics and metabolism in 
accidental hypothermia. A.M.A. Arch. int. Med., 1957, 99, 57-59.
38. Elkinton J. R., and Danowski T. S. The body fluids. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1955.
39. Ellis F. P. Hot climate fatigue in the Royal Navy. Lancet, 1952, 263, 527-553.
40. Fazekas J., Kleh J., and Finnerty F. A.  Influence of age and vascular disease on cerebral 
hemodynamics and metabolism. Amer. J. Med., 1955, 18, 477-485.
41. Floyd W. F., and Welford A. T. Symposium on fatigue. London: H. K. Lewis, 1953.
42. Gamble J. L.  Companionship of water and electrolytes in the organization of body fluids. 
Stanford, California: Lane Medical Lectures, Stanford Univer. Publications, 1951.
43. Gamble J. L.  Chemical anatomy. Physiology and pathology of extracellular fluid. (6th ed.) 
Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, 1958.
44.  Goldberger L.,  and Holt  R. R.  Experimental  interference with  reality  contact: Individual 
differences. Paper read at Harvard Symposium on Sensory Deprivation, Boston, June 1958.
45. Goldberger L.,  and Holt R. R.  Experimental interference with  reality  contact (perceptual 
isolation): Method and group results. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1958, 127, 99-112.
46. Goodnow, Jacqueline, and Rubinstein I.  Effect of sleep loss on problem solving behavior. 
Washington, D. C.: Walter Reed Army Inst. of Research, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, March 
1957, WRAIR-40-57.
47. Gottschick J. Neuropsychiatric disease among German prisoners of war in the United States. 
Arch. Psychiat., 1950, 185, 491-510.
48. Hall K. R. L., and Stride E.  Varying responses to pain in psychiatric disorders; study in 
abnormal psychology. Brit. J. med. Psychol., 1954, 27, 48-60.

49. Hanson F. R.  The factor of fatigue in the neuroses of combat. Bull. U. S. Army Med. Dept. 
(suppl.), November 1949, 9, 147-150.
50. Hardy J. D., Wolff H. G., and Goodell Helen.  Pain sensations and reacactions. Baltimore: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1952.
51. Haugen F. P. Recent advances in neurophysiology of pain. Anesthesiology, 1955, 16, 490-494.
52.  Haugen  F.  P.,  and  Livingston  W.  K.  Experiences  with  Hardy-Wolff-Goodell  dolorimeter. 
Anesthesiology, 1953, 14, 109-116.
53. Hebb D. O., Heath E. S., and Stuart E. A. Experimental deafness. Canad. J. Psychol., 1954, 8, 
152-156.
54. Helweg-Larsen P., Hoffmeyer H., Kiefer J., et al.  Famine disease in German concentration 
camps; complications and sequels. Acta. Psych. et Neurol. Scand., 1952, 83, Suppl.
55. Heron W., Bexton W. H., and Hebb D. O. Cognitive effects of decreased variation to sensory 
environment. Amer. Psychologist, 1953, 8, 366. (Abstract)
-46-
56. Heron W., Doane B. K., and Scott T. H. "Visual disturbances after prolonged perceptual 
isolation". Canad. J. Psychol., 1956, 10, 13-18.
57. Hinkle L. E., Jr., and Wolff H. G. Communist interrogation and indoctrination of "Enemies of the 
State. Analysis of methods used by the Communist state police. (Special Report), A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. 
Psychiat., 1956, 76, 115-174.
58. Hinkle L. E., Jr., and Wolff H. G. "The methods of interrogation and indoctrination used by 
Communist state police". Bull. N. Y. Acad. Med., 1957, 33, 600-615.
59. Hinkle L. E., Jr., and Wolff H. G. "The nature of man's adaptation to his total environment and 
the relation of this to illness". A.M.A. Arch. int. Med., 1957, 99, 442-460.
60. Houston F., and Royse A. B. "Relationship between deafness and psychotic illness". J. ment. 
Sci., 1954, 100, 990-993.
61. Hultgren H. P. "Prisoners of war; clinical and laboratory observations in severe starvation". 
Stanford Med. Bull., 1951, 9, 175-191.
62. Julian O. C., Dye W. S., Grove W. I., et al. "Hypothermia in open heart surgery". A.M.A. Arch. 
Surg., 1956, 73, 493-502.
63. Karp D., and Burns B. D. "Responses to painful stimulus in schizophrenic patients before and 
after lobotomy". Treat. Serv. Bull., 1954, 9, 15-39.
64. Katz S. E., and Landis C. "Psychologic and physiologic phenomena during prolonged vigil". 
A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1935, 34, 307-317.
65. Kety S. S. "Circulation and metabolism of the human brain in health and disease". Amer. J. Med., 
1950, 8, 205-217.

66. Kety S. S., and Schmidt C. F. "The determination of cerebral circulation in man by the use of 
nitrous oxide in low concentrations". Amer. J. Physiol., 1945, 143, 53-56.
67. Keys A., et al. The biology of human starvation. Minneapolis: Univer. of Minn. Press, 1950. 2 
vols.
68. Kleitman N. Sleep and wakefulness. Chicago: Univer. of Chicago Press, 1939.
69. Kornetsky C. "Effects of anxiety and morphine on anticipation and perception of painful radiant 
thermal stimuli" J. comp. physiol. Psychol., 1954, 47, 130-132.
70. Kral V. A. "Psychiatric observations under severe chronic stress". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1951, 108, 
185-192.
71. Kutscher A. H., and Kutscher H. W. "Evaluation of the Hardy-Wolff-Goodell pain threshold 
apparatus and technique; review of the literature". Internat. Rec. Med., 1957, 170(4), 202-212.
72. Laslett H. R. "An experiment on the effects of loss of sleep". J. exp. Psychol., 1924, 7, 45-58.
73. Laufman H. "Profound accidental hypothermia". J. Amer. med. Ass., 1951, 147, 1201-1212.
74. Leiderman H., Mendelson J. H., Wexler D., and Solomon P. "Sensory deprivation; clinical 
aspects". A.M.A. Arch. int. Med., 1958, 101, 389-396.
75. Lermolo Elizabeth. Face of a victim. Translated from the Russian by I. D. W. Talmadge. New 
York: Harper Bros., 1955.
76. Levin M. "Chronic delirium in organic dementia". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1945, 102, 256-259.
77. Lewis B. I. "The hyperventilation syndrome". Ann. int. Med., 1953, 38, 918-927.
-47-
78. Lewis T. Pain. New York: Macmillan, 1942.
79. Lifton R. J. "Home by ship; reaction patterns of American prisoners of war repatriated from 
North Korea". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1954, 110, 732-739.
80. Lilly J. C. "Mental effects of reduction of ordinary levels of physical stimuli on intact, healthy 
persons". Psychiat., Res. Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1956, 5, 1-28.
81. Luongo E. P. "Occupational and non-occupational stress in relation to employee health". Indust. 
Med., 1955, 24, 242-246.
82. McCance R. A., and Widdowson E. M. "The effect of undernutrition upon the composition of the 
body and its tissues". Acta. Med. Scand., 1953, 146, 45-46.
83. McGrath S. D., and Wittkower E. D. "Some observations on aircrew fatigue in the RCAF-Tokyo 
airlift". J. aviat. Med., 1954, 25, 23-37.
84. Mangold R., Sokoloff C., Conner E., et al. I. "The effects of sleep and lack of sleep on the 
cerebral circulation and metabolism of normal young men". J. clin. Invest., 1955, 34, 1092-1100.

85. Meehan J. P., Stoll A. M., and Hardy J. D. "Cutaneous pain threshold in native Alaskan Indian 
and Eskimo". J. appl. Physiol., 1954, 6, 397-400.
86.  Mendelson  J.,  and  Foley  J.  M.  "Abnormality of  mental  function  affecting  patients  with 
poliomyelitis in tank type respirator". Trans. Amer. Neurol. Ass., 1956, 81, 134-138.
87. Mendelson J., Solomon P., and Lindemann E. "Hallucinations of poliomyelitis patients during 
treatment in a respirator". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1958, 126, 421-428.
88. Miller A. T., Jr. "Present status of the study of human fatigue". N. Car. med. J., 1948, 9, 580-582.
89. Moyer J. H., Mills L. C., Ford R. V., and Spurr C. "The effect of head-up tilted position and 
ambulation on renal hemodynamic and water and electrolyte excretion in patients with hypertension, 
with and without renal damage". J. lab. clin. Med., 1955, 45, 179-190.
90. Ni T. G., and Rehberg P. B. "On the influence of posture on kidney function". J. Physiol., 1931, 
71, 331-339.
91. Nitsche P., and Wilmanns K.  History of prison psychoses. New York: Nerv. and Ment. Dis. 
Publishing Co., 1912. Nerv. & Ment. Dis. Monog. Series No. 13.
92. Noyes A. P., and Kolb L. C. Modern clinical psychiatry. (5th ed.) Philadelphia: Saunders, 1958.
93. Penman J. "Pain as an old friend". Lancet, 1954, 266, 633-636.
94. Piercy M., Elithorn A., Pratt R. T. C., and Crosskey M. "Anxiety and autonomic reaction to 
pain". J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiat., 1955, 18, 155-162.
95. Preu P. W., and Geiger A. J. "Symptomatic psychoses in pernicious anemia". Ann. int. Med., 
1935, 9, 766-778.
96. Rice R. L. "Symptom patterns of the hyperventilation syndrome". Amer. J. Med., 1950, 8, 691-
700.
97. Romano J., and Engel G. L. "Delirium". A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1944, 51, 356-357.
98. Rothman T., Goodman R. J., and Tyler D. B. "Experimental insomnia; EEG changes during 112 
hours of wakefulness". Trans. Amer. Neurol. Ass., 1947, 71, 173-174.
99. Samson D. C., Swisher S. N., Christian R. M., and Engel G. L. Cerebral
-48-
99. metabolic disturbance and delirium in pernicious anemia. A.M.A. Arch. int. Med., 1952, 90, 4-14.
100. Saphir W. "Chronic hypochloremia simulating psychoneurosis". J. Amer med. Ass, 1945, 129, 
510-512
101. Schein E. H. The Chinese indoctrination program for prisoners of war; a study of attempted 
"brainwashing. Psychiatry, 1956, 19, 149-172

102. Scheinberg P., Blackburn I., Rich M., and Saslow M. "Effects of vigorous physical exercise on 
cerebral circulation and metabolism". Amer. J. Med., 1954, 16, 4
103. Schneck J. M. "Studies in scientific hypnosis". Nerv. and ment. Dis. Monographs, New York, 
1954, No. 84
104. Schnitker M. A., Mattman R. E., and Bliss T. L. "Clinical study of malnutrition in Japanese 
prisoners of war". Ann. int. Med., 1951, 35, 69-96
105. Segal H. A. "Initial psychiatric findings of recently repatriated prisoners of war".  Amer. J. 
Psychiat., 1954, 111, 358-363
106. Segal J. Factors related to the collaboration and resistance behavior of U. S. Army PW's in 
Korea. Washington, D. C.: Human Resources Research Office, George Washington Univer., December 
1956. HumRRO Technical Report 33
107. Soffer A. "Dangers of inactivity during automobile travel". Amer. J. med Sci., 1955, 229, 475-
476
108. Solomon H. C., and Yakovlev P. I. (Eds.) Manual of military neuropsychiatry. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 1944
109. Solomon P., Leiderman P. H., Mendelson J., and Wexler D. "Sensory deprivation: A review". 
Amer. J. Psychiat., 1957, 114, 357-363
110. Spiegal E. A., Kletzkin M., Szekely E. G., and Wycis H. T. "Role of hypothalamic mechanisms 
in thalamic pain". Neurology, 1954, 4, 739-751
111. Stanbridge R. H. "Fatigue in air crew; observations in Berlin airlift" Lancet, 1951, 261, 1-3
112. Stansky E. "Psychology and psychotherapy of pain". Arch. Psychiat., 1953, 190, 49-79
113. Strassman H. D., Thaler Margaret B., and Schein E. H. "A prisoner of war syndrome: Apathy as 
a reaction to severe stress". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1956, 112, 998-1003
114. Swank R. L. "Combat exhaustion; descriptive and statistical analysis of causes, symptoms and 
signs". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1949, 109, 475-508
115. Swank R. L., and Marchand W. E. "Combat neuroses; the development of combat exhaustion". 
A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1946, 55, 236-247
116. Talbott J. H. "Medical progress; the physiological and therapeutic effect of hypothermia". N. 
Eng. J. Med., 1941, 224, 281-288
117. Thorin D. The ride to Panmunjon. Chicago: Regnery, 1956
118. Tyler D. B. "Psychological changes during experimental sleep deprivation"  Dis. nerv Syst., 
1955, 16, 293-299
119. U. S. Congress, Senate. Committee on Government Operations, "Permanent Subcommittee on 
Investigations". Hearing, June 26, 1956. Washington, D. C.: Govt. Print. Off., 1956

120. Vilter R. W., Mueller J. F., Glazer H. S., et al. "The effect of Vitamin B deficiency induced by 
desoxypyridoxine in human beings". J. lab. clin. Med., 1953 42, 355-357.
-49-
121. Wakim K. G. "The physiologic effects of heat". J. Amer. med. Ass., 1948, 138, 1091-1097
122. Warren N., and Clark B. "Blocking in mental and motor tasks during 65 hour vigil". J. exp. 
Psychol., 1937, 21, 97-105
123. Wayburn E. "Immersion hypothermia". A.M.A. Arch. int. Med., 1947, 79, 77-91
124. Weaver E. M. F., Van J. D. Valkenburg, Stewart J. B., et al. "Medical problems of long range 
fighter missions; study in fatigue". J. aviat. Med., 1947, 18, 341-351
125. West L. J., Niell K. C., and Hardy J. D. "Effects of hypnotic suggestion on pain perception and 
galvanic skin response". A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1952, 68, 547-560
126. Wexler D., Mendelson J., Leiderman P. H., and Solomon P. "Sensory deprivation; a technique 
for studying psychiatric aspects of stress". A.M.A. Arch Neurol. Psychiat., 1958, 79, 225-233
127. "What Schulz said in delirium as he lay dying". In The New York World Telegram, October 25, 
1935, 68(99). Pp. 1 and 4
128. Whitehorn J. C. "Statistical diagnostic classification". In R. L. F. Cecil and R. F. Loeb (Eds.), A 
textbook of medicine. (9th ed.) Philadelphia: Saunders, 1955 Pp. 1675-1676
129. Wolff H. G. "Life stress and bodily disease". Proc. Ass. Res. Nerv. Ment. Dis., 1950, 29, 1059-
1094
130. Wolff H. G. Stress and disease. Springfield, Ill.: C. C. Thomas, 1953
131. Wolff H. G., and Curran D. "Nature of delirium and allied states".  A.M.A Arch. Neurol. 
Psychiat., 1935, 33, 1175-1215
132. Wolff H. G., Hardy J. D., and Goodell H. "Nature of pain. Minn. Med.", 1952, 35, 534-540
133. Wolff H. G., and Wolf S. Pain. Springfield, Ill.: C. C. Thomas, 1948
134. Zimmerman  B., and Wangensteen O. H.  Observations on water intoxication in surgical 
patients. Surgery, 1952, 31, 654-669
135. Zimmerman H. A. "Fatigue in B-29 crewmen". Bull. U. S. Army Med. Dept., 1947, 7, 304-307
136. Ziskind E. "Isolation stress in medical and mental illness". J. Amer. med Ass., 1958, 168, 1427- 
1431.
-50-

CHAPTER 2
The effects of reduced environmental 
stimulation on human behavior: a review
PHILIP E. KUBZANSKY
Introduction
This chapter is concerned with experimental investigations of the effects upon 
human behavior of a reduction in either absolute or relative amounts of sensory or 
perceptual  stimulation.  Experimental  efforts  to  achieve  such  a  reduction  in 
environmental input to the organism have been referred to in the literature by various 
terms, of  which the most common appear to be "sensory deprivation," "sensory 
isolation," and "perceptual isolation." Although it is difficult to distinguish between the 
use of these terms, an effort will be made to examine the similarities and differences 
found in the growing number of investigations in this problem area. Regardless of the 
differences in descriptive terminology, these conditions have been observed to produce 
marked changes in the behavior of subjects exposed to them. These changes have 
included  modifications  in  thinking,  perception,  and  feeling  states, as  well  as  an 
increase in imagery, often bizarre in content. It is the purpose of this chapter (a) to 
examine briefly the sources of interest in this problem, (b) to review the extant 
experimental literature in order to assess the current status of knowledge
________________ 
Partial assistance for the preparation of this report was provided by the Office of Naval 
Research, Contract Nonr. 1866(29). The author would also like to thank R. R. Holt and P. H. 
Leiderman for their critical reading of the manuscript and their many helpful suggestions.
-51-
about  this  problem,  and  (c)  to  review  briefly  its  implications  for  our  general 
understanding of behavior.
Background

Interest in these problems by diverse groups long antedates the current concern. 
Small (71), in 1900, summarized a great deal of data relevant to the relationship 
between social life and solitude. He offered the generalization that
All knowledge of self and things is relative. Personal orientation depends largely on objects in the 
visual field. In the presence of a desert, a prairie, a sea, or the sky; in an absolutely dark cavern, or on 
the summit of a mountain, a feeling of disproportionateness between the man and what he sees 
overwhelms consciousness. Paralysis of association results. Retrogression to a half-vegetative state like 
that of infancy follows. If the eyes be open, they do not see. They have neither fixation point nor 
accommodation. Their gaze is as vacant as in the early days after birth, as stolid as the frozen stare that 
follows death. All the life that there is, lies within. When that which has seemed real, abiding and certain 
in the objective field becomes a blank, the psychic condition passes rapidly through a change whose 
nearest analogue is the bladder of air in a receiver from which the air is being exhausted. In the effort to 
expand itself to the range of its new conditions, the self finds itself only a loosely related mass of 
reflexes from experience, distrusts their  coherence and their  affinities,  sees the  flitting  nature of 
consciousness, loses tself in the Unknown. (17, page 39.)
Until  recently  our  primary  sources  of  data  on  this  problem  have  been  the 
autobiographical accounts of prisoners, explorers, and shipwrecked sailors. They have 
reported rather dramatic, often gripping accounts of the response to isolation in narrow 
and cramped prison quarters, in endless days at sea, or in stark and desolate polar 
regions. Reports by Bombard (11), Byrd (15), Ritter (63), and Burney (13), to mention 
only a few, describe the inexorable monotony of these conditions and report unusual 
changes in thinking, feeling, and perception. Hallucinationlike experiences seemed 
quite common and a marked hunger for contact with people and things were manifest. 
These accounts, as well as a variety of other anecdotal literature, suggested the key 
role of a varied external environment against which to verify internally arising percepts 
and ideas. Two recent reviews have summarized these somewhat scattered, largely 
autobiographical reports (50, 72).
In recent years, interest in a systematic study of these problems has heightened 
considerably. This increase of interest can be at-
-52-
tributed to converging influences coming from three major sources. The first of these 
sources has been the rapid pace of development in several scientific disciplines. 
Advances in neurophysiology have led to a gradual revision in our conception of the 
nervous system and have produced data that provide changing physiological models 
for psychological events (37). There are now available increasingly sophisticated 
electrophysiological methods of measuring neural function at various levels of the 
nervous system. Recent reports (29, 61) have demonstrated electrical changes in the 
central nervous system followfag reduced sensory input. These changes are believed to 
have chemical consequences. Neurochemistry has begun to provide techniques for 
evaluating the nature of these consequences.
Psychoanalysis is another discipline in which interest in these issues is growing. 
Here,  increasing  emphasis  is  placed  on  the  importance  of  understanding  ego 

functioning and its role in mediating behavior. From this viewpoint, the question may 
be raised, "If the ego is the executive aspect of personality, enabling the individual to 
cope with reality,  what becomes of ego functions in the absence of an external 
environment with which to cope?" Although Freud (31) dealt with these issues early in 
his work, interest in an experimental approach to this problem is relatively recent. The 
work of Hartmann (36) in elaborating the theoretical basis of "ego psychology" is 
important in this development.
A second major source of interest in human response to restricted environments has 
come from the military establishment. Technological developments, as seen in a 
variety of military applications, have given the pursuit of these questions a new 
urgency.  With the advent of  space craft, isolated radar stations, and a generally 
increased reliance on automated equipment, the problem of efficient functioning in 
severely restricted, monotonous environments is no longer merely of theoretical or 
academic interest. The problem of efficient personnel selection and utilization, in a 
wide variety of these circumstances, has provided marked impetus to the initiation and 
development of research programs dealing with reactions to limited sensory and social 
environments.
In this connection, the experience of prisoners of war with Communist "thought-
reform" has had similar effects. The revelation that isolation may be one factor in the 
susceptibility of humans to radical changes in customary behavior and beliefs has 
heightened interest in the study of isolation. The shocked fascination of the general 
public, not excepting the scientific community, has served to highlight the need for a 
systematic understanding of the effects of physical and
-53-
social isolation on behavior. Literature on methods of "thoughtreform" or ideological 
reform has attempted to place these procedures in a context which emphasizes the fact 
that they are well known and not the result of new discoveries or magical innovations 
on the part of the Communists (9, 10, 42, 49, 67). In these procedures, solitary 
confinement and monotonous, barren surroundings play an important role in making 
the prisoner more receptive and susceptible to the influence of the interrogator. The use 
of this technique rests not on laboratory science but is part of the empirical know-how 
of police and military interrogation.
A third major source of interest in these phenomena, although perhaps less dramatic 
than the foregoing, has come from developments within academic psychology. One 
such development has taken place in the area of motivation, in which a number of 
experimenters (14, 34, 58) have attempted to establish the existence and operation of 
what has been called curiosity or exploratory drive as a primary motive. Attributing a 
significant role in the determination of behavior to such a drive, we find that this 
research has arisen in a context which seeks to refute the strongly prevalent view of the 
organism as a passive receptacle of experience; one which responds only to drive-
relevant stimulation. As formulated by Hebb, "Characteristically, stimulus response 
theory has  treated the animal as more or  less inactive unless  subject  to special 

conditions of arousal." (37, page 244.) In contrast to this approach, studies dealing 
with the relevance for behavior of a curiosity or exploratory drive indicate that the 
organism has an active need for experience, and initiates and structures activity in 
accordance with that need. Studying human response to restricted environments may 
indicate the mode of operation of the "need for experience."
Another development within academic psychology has contributed to the current 
concern with the effects of restricted environments on human subjects. Studies of 
sensory deprivation early in the life of animals, and the effects upon subsequent 
development and learning, have a relatively long history within psychology. Originally 
designed to evaluate the relative influence of innate organizational processes (as 
opposed to learning) on perception, these researches have since been more directly 
focused on the general effects of early deprivation upon a variety of subsequent 
behaviors. Although experimental work, because of ethical considerations, has of 
necessity been confined to animal investigations, clinical and anecdotal evidence such 
as the reports of Spitz (73, 74, 75) and others (22, 23, 26, 27), and those on "feral man" 
(70, 71) have supplemented these studies. These reports
-54-
have highlighted the importance of a full range of early environmental experience to 
the  development  of  normal  adult  functioning.  The  occurrence  of  serious  and 
irreversible  disruptions  of  normal  development  and  behavior  has  been  reported. 
Because this work is beyond the scope of the present chapter, the reader is referred to 
Beach and Jayne's (5) review of this literature.
Methodological Considerations
Before turning to an examination of the experimental findings, it may be well to 
consider some of the methodological and conceptual problems raised by research in 
this area. The diversity of variables involved in a systematic study of response to 
reduced environmental stimulation makes  for considerable complexity. It will be 
useful to take a brief overview of procedures employed by various investigators.
Three experimental approaches have been identified in the literature (72). In the 
first of these, efforts were directed toward an  absolute reduction of input to the 
organism from the external world. Lilly (50) immersed two subjects up to three hours 
in a tank of slowly circulating tepid water, wearing nothing but a head mask that 
covered eyes and ears. There was minimal visual, auditory, or tactile stimulation. 
Subjects received an initial set of training exposures to overcome fear of the situation. 
On the day of the experiment, they were placed in the tank and were instructed to 
inhibit all movement so far as possible. The use of a soundproof, darkened room (65, 
79) as a method for achieving sensory deprivation is similar in intent 'o the foregoing 
procedure. The subject's arms and hands are enclosed in cardboard cuffs and gloves. 
Plugs are placed in the ears to reduce further levels of stimulation. Although absolute 

reduction in sensory input is the goal here, this latter method places less of a restriction 
on motor activity.
A second approach to reducing sensory stimulation was used by Bexton, Heron and 
Scott (8). They reduced patterning of sensory inputwhile retaining levels of input at 
near normal. In this procedure using twenty-two male college students, the subject 
wore a pair of translucent goggles that permitted the perception of light but not of 
objects. Auditory input consisted of the masking sound of fan and airconditioner 
motors, and tactile experience was reduced through the use of cuffs and gloves that 
permitted no direct exploration of the immediate surroundings.
-55-
In a third approach, sensory deprivation consisted of  monotony or absence of 
change in the external environment, e.g., providing a repetitive auditory experience 
while presenting the subject with an impoverished visual field. In this procedure 
goggles are not used and the subject is exposed to normally patterned vision of a 
highly restricted environment. Wexler, Mendelson, Leiderman, and Solomon (80) 
placed seventeen subjects into polio tank respirators with arms and legs in cardboard 
cuffs. The repetitive drone of the respirator motor provided an auditory masking 
sound, whereas the visual environment consisted of the front of the respirator and the 
blank walls of a screen. Since the ports of the respirator were left open, subjects 
breathed for themselves. This procedure relies on monotony to achieve its effects and 
is thus similar to situations in which highly repetitive simple tasks are performed. It is 
also most similar to the environment of the prisoner in solitary confinement as well as 
other isolation situations as encountered in real life.
Without  attempting  a  comprehensive  survey  of  methodological  problems  and 
issues, some examination of the choices confronting researchers in this problem area 
may be helpful. What are the limitations and problems of these procedures? Efforts at 
the absolute reduction of sensory input are limited by the impossibility completely of 
doing away with sensory experience in a living conscious organism. Even the most 
sophisticated instrumentation cannot eliminate sensations and perceptions arising from 
internal body functions. This end point of the stimulation continuum thus must remain 
theoretical.  To  the  extent  to  which  this  goal  is  relevant  to  testing  a  variety of 
hypotheses, it can only be approximated.
Few if any investigators have attempted a rigorous definition of the terms they have 
employed. Most have used their experimental methods to provide an empirical basis 
for their conceptions. Indeed it is understandable that the number of descriptive terms 
and phrases in the literature is almost as large as the number of investigators. Without 
becoming too deeply embroiled in the sensation-perception issue, it may be useful to 
think of attempts at the absolute reduction of intensity of input to the organism as 
sensory deprivation,  whereas  reduced  patterning  and  monotony  may  be  more 
meaningfully seen as  perceptual deprivation. The outstanding characteristic of the 
latter two approaches appears to be the decrease in the structure and variety of input. 
This inevitably results in a reduction of information. The term "isolation" is one which 

seems to be relevant to the social dimension rather than to the sensory and perceptual 
aspects of the various experimental conditions employed. At this stage of
-56-
our knowledge, it is unclear as to whether there are different behavioral consequences 
of sensory as opposed to perceptual deprivation, in the sense used above. It is possible 
to conceive of this range of stimulus conditions as a complex continuum.
In view of the unique complexities presented by research in this area, it is clear that 
somewhat arbitrary choices of procedure have been made. These choices must be 
evaluated in terms of the limitations they impose on the results obtained. Thus the 
observation of cognitive and perceptual functioning and the descriptions of emotional 
and  affective  changes  makes  simultaneous  verbal  reports  of  experience  in  the 
experimental situation most desirable. Retrospective reports raise difficult questions 
about their accuracy and make it impossible to study the concurrence of physiological 
events and verbal behavior. On the other hand, verbal reports of experiences by the 
subject during the experiment provide a complex feedback situation. The testing of 
perceptual  and  cognitive  functions  during  the  experiment  constitutes  a  definite 
modification of procedure.
One form of control over the subject's sensory experience has been achieved in 
many experiments by restricting his mobility. This is accomplished by restraining the 
subject, limiting the space available to him or by instructions to remain still. This 
limitation of mobility reduces kinesthetic and proprioceptive input. It is difficult to 
know  whether  the  results  obtained  are  a  function  of  the  additional  sense  of 
confinement or restriction which goes beyond reduction in sensory stimulation.
Most studies in this field have striven for absolute isolation of the subject from 
other  human  contact  by  avoiding  all  communication  between  subject  and 
experimenter. Although social isolation contributes to reduced sensory input, whether 
this reduction is primarily effective in terms of loss of social contact per se, loss of 
patterned stimulation from speech, absolute reduction of sensory stimulation, or some 
combination of these is still to be determined.
Furthermore, the social isolation in these experimental settings is artificial and 
limited  in  that  the  subject  knows  there  is  an  observer  who  is  interested  in  his 
performance. He usually has good reason to suspect that this observer has strong 
motivation to prevent the occurrence of any long lasting or profoundly debilitating 
effects. These implicit aspects of the subject-experimenter contract may be major 
factors in the presumed social isolation seen in experimental studies. These limitations 
to isolation do not apply to situations such as those of the prisoner or shipwrecked 
sailor. In the former case there are the additional implications of the status of "enemy" 
which
-57-

undoubtedly also influences the individual's response. The "escape at will" clause 
present in laboratory studies constitutes a major difference from the motivational 
conditions of real life isolation situations.
These factors, along with the use of volunteers in experimental studies, constitute 
serious limitations to the laboratory testing of hypotheses regarding responses to real 
life isolation and sensory deprivation. We are unable to assess the effects of coercion 
or the ultimate consequences of prolonged confinement in a deprived environment. 
These conditions undoubtedly have a profound effect on the motivational aspects of 
the situation and thus influence response. The inability to replicate these conditions in 
the laboratory must limit our generalizations from the experimental data. In view of 
these considerations these data must be interpreted cautiously.
Empirical Findings.
The first experimental work which focused on the response of man exposed to 
reduced environmental stimulation per se was begun in 1951 in the laboratory of D. O. 
Hebb at McGill University (7, 8, 28, 38, 39, 40, 41, 69). Although earlier studies had 
dealt with more limited aspects of this problem, they grew out of an essentially 
different experimental interest. The McGill studies initially arose out of a concern with 
the contribution of perceptual isolation to the mechanism of brainwashing and the 
effects  of  monotony  upon  a  person  with  a  long  sustained  watchkeeping  task. 
Previously Mackworth (52) had shown that in a vigilance task requiring prolonged 
observation, subjects increasingly and strikingly failed to respond to an appropriate 
stimulus. From this point of departure, the framework of these and other studies was 
expanded to focus on a wide variety of other variables.
Our approach in reviewing these studies has been influenced by the consideration 
that in the early stages of acquiring systematic knowledge about a problem, it may be 
useful to underemphasize considerations of experimental rigor and elegance in favor of 
developing a richer background of hypotheses and conceptual formulations, even if 
only at a suggestive level. Because of their exploratory nature, these investigations 
have often been designed to look for a wide range of possible relationships, rather than 
to test specific, focused hypotheses. For these reasons this review will not dwell upon 
limitations of experimental method and procedure. In general, the studies are uneven in 
quality, and range from carefully designed and
-58-
executed procedures to vaguely formulated, poorly controlled observations with small 
samples.  Similarly,  measurement  in  these  studies  has  varied  from  precise 
psychophysical  calibration  to  loosely  defined  clinical  judgments  unchecked  for 
reliability. The effort has been to provide a comprehensive review of all pertinent 
studies for whatever light they shed on the problem or support they lend other studies. 
In  reviewing  this  work  we  have  largely  restricted  our  concern  to  the 

psychophysiological aspects of experimental work with isolation and reduced sensory 
input.  No  attempt  has  been  made  to  include  the  social-psychological  aspects  of 
isolation which, while relevant, represent a special subproblem.
For purposes of clarity we shall report the findings in the following categories: 
perceptual and motor abilities; cognitive and learning abilities; personality findings; 
feeling states; imagery; and physiology. In addition, we shall consider findings bearing 
on methodological choices, clinical applications, and a brief survey of theoretical 
interpretations. Despite some arbitrariness in these classifications and the necessity of 
considering the same experimental work in several categories, this approach will 
permit a more coherent view of the evidence within a given experimental domain. In 
referring to these studies, reduced patterning, imposed structuring, and homogenous 
stimulation are referred to as perceptual deprivation; absolute reduction in variety and 
intensity  of  sensory  input  will  be  called  sensory  deprivation. In  a  number  of 
experimental procedures elements of both are present.
Perceptual and Motor Abilities
The problems of vigilance under conditions of perceptual deprivation have been 
studied by Mackworth (52). Additional literature in this area was reviewed by Holland 
(44), who summarized these studies as showing  a greater over-all percentage of 
detection when the number of signals per experimental session increases, and a more 
equivocal finding of an increased probability of detection for longer intersignal times. 
He  interpreted vigilance behavior as  a problem of  reinforcement scheduling and 
probability of response. In this context, signal detections serve as reinforcements for 
observing responses. His own findings confirmed the earlier reports that within a given 
session, despite individual differences, the use of a larger number of signals increased 
response  rate.  He  calls  attention  to  the  "rather  precise  control  exerted  by  the 
environment over the human operator's observing behavior" (page 67).
-59-
Hochberg, Triebel, and Seaman (43), working with a different experimental interest, 
performed a series of studies on the percepts obtained under conditions of spatially 
homogeneous colored illumination over the entire visual field. These studies were 
designed to test the hypothesis that a colored Ganzfeld would lose its color under these 
conditions. Utilizing eyecaps made from halved table-tennis balls, these investigators 
found  that complete disappearance of  color was obtained in most  cases,  despite 
considerable individual differences in the course of the adaptation process and in the 
phenomenal content during adaptation.
Similarly, restricting stimulus input to homogeneous visual stimulation, W. Cohen 
and Cadwallader (20) studied the effects of uniform visual stimulation utilizing a 
different apparatus. Subjects' exposure to these conditions lasted from three to ten 
minutes while sitting alone in a room. The findings showed that under both monocular 

and binocular conditions, subjects reported a temporary cessation of ordinary visual 
experience after prolonged exposure to a uniform visual field. With increased exposure 
to these conditions the initial reports of the field as being "foglike" changed to an 
experience of "blanking out." The "blanking out" or "white-out" phenomenon often 
persisted for thirty seconds or more and the reappearance of the field occurred only 
after extensive eye movements and blinking, or with the introduction of an object to 
the field. Factors that facilitated "white-out" were found to include both extensive prior 
stimulation  and  scotopic  (rather  than  photopic)  stimulation.  A similar  finding  is 
reported by Ditchburn, cited by Bruner (12), who showed that if a visual pattern is 
stabilized on the retina so that it is not even displaced by the natural tremor of the eye, 
it disappears from view within about six seconds.
Bexton et al. (8), utilizing the procedure of reduced patterning of stimulus input, 
had twenty-two paid male volunteer college students serve as subjects and compared 
their performance with an equivalent control group. They were told to lie on a 
comfortable bed in a lighted cubicle, and they wore translucent goggles, cuffs, and 
gloves. Auditory input was reduced through the use of a partially soundproof cubicle, a 
U-shaped foam rubber pillow for the subject's head, and the masking hum of fan and 
air-conditioner motors, which was fed into earphones in the pillow. Upon leaving, after 
two or three days in the experimental situation, subjects had difficulty in focusing; 
objects appeared fuzzy and did not stand out from their backgrounds; the environment 
seemed two-dimensional; and colors appeared to be more saturated than usual. The 
experimenters also found deteriora-
-60-
tion in visual motor coordination as measured by such tasks as the Wechsler Digit 
Symbol test, handwriting specimens, and the copying of prose paragraphs. Another 
study by the same group (69) showed that performance on the Thurstone-Gottschaldt 
Embedded Figures test declined, whereas no change was manifest in a mirror tracing 
task.  The  deterioration  of  performance  on  the  digit  symbol  test  has  since  been 
confirmed by Davis, McCourt, and Solomon (21), who studied ten paid volunteer 
subjects  under  different  experimental  conditions  of  perceptual  deprivation.  These 
investigators failed to find deterioration in the Witkin Embedded Figures test. Vernon 
and Hoffman (76), after conditions of sensory deprivation lasting twenty-four and 
forty-eight hours, questioned four subjects  about difficulty in focusing, increased 
saturation of hues, and lack of three-dimensional perception, and reported negative 
findings for all three phenomena.
Heron, Doane, and Scott (41) extended the duration of their experimental procedure 
to six days and served as their own subjects. They described the disturbances in visual 
perception as unexpectedly profound and prolonged, with similar manifestations for all 
three participants. These effects included apparent movement phenomena (with and 
without head and eye movements by the observers), distortions of shape, accentuation 
of afterimages, perceptual lag, and increases in color saturation and contrast. Further 
work from the same laboratory (28) described the fluctuating curvature of surfaces and 
lines, and disturbances in size constancy. In addition, these investigators observed that 

autokinetic effects were harder to abolish, larger figural aftereffects were obtained, and 
spiral aftereffects were more persistent. A loss of accuracy in tactual perception and 
spatial orientation was noted.
Freedman, Grunebaum, and Greenblatt (30) studied the effects of isolation and 
reduced patterning of visual and auditory input upon visual perception. As controls 
they employed paid male volunteers, who received only social isolation. To induce 
perceptual deprivation, these investigators used translucent goggles, white noise fed 
into earphones, cotton gloves, and cardboard cuffs for the subjects' arms. Each of the 
eight experimental subjects was placed on a bed in a lighted room and was instructed 
not to move about. The control group of six subjects was similarly treated without the 
additional restrictions to visual, auditory, and tactile input. Both groups remained in 
the situation for eight hours and had no contact with the experimenters during this 
time. They found changes in perception similar to those cited by the McGill group.
Their report describes measurable perceptual "aberrations" found
-61-
in every experimental subject, but none in the control subjects. In some subjects these 
aberrations persisted for over one hour, and consisted of  two-dimensional forms 
changing shape and size and of straight lines moving and curving. Comparing pre- and 
postisolation performance, they observed a decrement in size constancy and changes in 
the Müller-Lyer illusion. In both instances, changes consisted of increased variability 
of judgment rather than unidirectional effects. Visual-motor coordination, as seen in 
the copying of Bender-Gestalt figures, was significantly impaired following exposure 
to the experimental conditions.
An increase in apparent movement phenomena through perceptual deprivation has 
been demonstrated in a study designed specifically to test this relationship. Ormiston 
(59) compared thirty minutes of perceptual deprivation, sensory bombardment, and a 
neutral condition for their effects on the perception of the phi phenomenon with thirty 
subjects serving in each condition. The deprivation condition was realized through 
having subjects sit in a bare room wearing translucent goggles, ear plugs, and ear 
muffs. The sensory bombardment condition exposed subjects to motor tasks, a tape 
with varied sound effects, taste and smell stimuli, and a variety of colored goggles. The 
neutral condition consisted of having subjects sit on a couch in a waiting room. A 
comparison of pre- and posttests showed a statistically significant increase in the 
perception of phi for the deprived group, whereas the bombardment group showed a 
trend toward decrease in phi perception. The neutral group showed no change.
Vernon,  McGill,  Gulick,  and  Candland  (78)  studied  the  effects  of  sensory 
deprivation upon a variety of perceptual and motor skills. Eighteen paid volunteer 
subjects were placed in a small, dark, lightproof, soundproof chamber containing a 
bed, an icebox with food, and toilet facilities. Subjects wore gauntlet-type gloves to 
reduce tactile stimulation and inhibit movement as well as the noise of movement. 
They were instructed to lie quietly and make as little noise as possible. A control group 

which did not receive sensory deprivation consisted of a similarly motivated group of 
graduate students. The experimental subjects remained in confinement for one, two, or 
three days, at the end of which they were required to perform a variety of tasks. The 
effects of sensory deprivation were assessed by a comparison of differences in pre- and 
postconfinement scores with those of the control group who were tested at similar 
intervals. The findings revealed significant deterioration in visual-motor coordination 
as seen in a rotary pursuit task, a rail-walking task, a mirror tracing problem, and 
mazes. In perceptual tasks, such as color
-62-
perception  and  delayed  auditory  feedback,  a  similarly  significant  decline  in 
performance was observed. The only task of this series which did not show a decline 
was a test of depth perception, in which a trend was obscured by the large variability of 
scores. It should be noted that the mirror-tracing finding in this study contradicts that 
reported by Scott et al. (69).
Utilizing the shortest periods of exposure to reduced sensory input, Rosenbaum, 
Dobie, and Cohen (64) studied the effects of 0, 5, 15, and 30 minutes of two conditions 
of visual deprivation upon tachistoscopic recognition thresholds for numbers. For one 
group of sixteen subjects, visual deprivation was achieved by blacked-out rubber 
goggles, while a similar second group received perceptual deprivation through the use 
of goggles permitting the perception of diffuse light. These investigators found no 
differences between their two groups; both improved with successive days of practice. 
The five-minute condition resulted in a lowered threshold for both groups. The thirty-
minute  condition  produced  no  change  from  the  zero  level.  Since  none  of  the 
experiments using longer periods of deprivation measured recognition thresholds, it is 
difficult to say whether failure to observe changes in this task was a function of an 
insufficient period of deprivation or whether no relation is to be expected.
In summary, the findings of these studies indicate a generally disorganizing effect 
of deprivation upon perception. The effects thus far demonstrated have been confined 
largely to the visual modality. These effects include the following: breakdown in 
visual-motor coordination, an increase in apparent movement phenomena, increase in 
color saturation, decline in size and shape constancies, loss of accuracy in tactual 
perception and spatial orientation, increase in persistence of autokinetic effect, larger 
figural aftereffects, difficulty in focusing, fluctuating curvature of lines and surfaces, 
and a general decrease in the efficiency of perceiving relevant stimuli. Although 
several studies are in disagreement about some of the above details [e.g., Vernon and 
Hoffman (76)], most reports are remarkably convergent in their findings despite wide 
differences in experimental conditions. These effects may be best characterized as a 
general loosening of subjects' ability to perceive reality and the weakening of stable 
internal norms against which to evaluate perceptual (visual) experieuce. The increase 
in variability of a number of visual functions and loss of accuracy may be best 
understood in these terms. The breakdown of internal norms is demonstrated in a 
variety of other functions and begins to suggest one general parameter which may 
make isolation and sensory deprivation effective in increasing

-63-
the vulnerability and receptivity to new external environmental influences.
Cognitive and Learning Abilities
A wide  variety of  studies  have  referred  to  subjective  reports  of  difficulty in 
concentration, attention, and problem solving following isolation and confinement (8, 
16, 17, 30, 65, 80). These and other studies have also examined the effects of isolation 
and deprivation upon a wide range of cognitive functions. Included have been such 
abilities as those involved in a variety of intelligence test performances, learning and 
association tasks, logical reasoning, etc. We turn here to a consideration of these 
aspects of the experimental literature.
The report of Bexton et al. (8) is elaborated in a subsequent study (69). These 
researchers  investigated  cognitive  performance  during  isolation  and  perceptual 
deprivation. In order to evaluate the duration of the effects, they examined several 
other functions following four days of isolation. On several occasions during isolation, 
they  had  subjects  perform  tasks  such  as  mental  multiplication,  arithmetic  catch 
problems, completing number series, anagrams, and wordmaking. Despite the fact that 
the decline in the twenty-two subjects of the experimental group was not statistically 
significant for all these tasks, the deterioration due to the experimental conditions was 
consistent. In a second series they found no change in digit span or analogies during 
isolation, whereas associative learning tended to decline, but not significantly. In a 
postisolation series they found significant deterioration in judgment of anomalies and 
in  two  block  design  tasks.  Their  general  findings  suggest  that  performance  on 
intelligence test items grew progressively worse as length of stay in the cubicle 
increased.
Starting with this observation, Vernon and Hoffman (76) used a procedure of 
sensory deprivation similar to that described above. They studied the ability of four 
paid volunteer male college students to learn lists of adjectives after twenty-four and 
forty-eight  hours  of  confinement.  Comparing  their  experimental  subjects  to  an 
equivalent control group, they found that the ability at rate-learning improved with 
continued sensory deprivation. In  a follow-up study,  nine experimental and nine 
control subjects, who were all paid volunteer male college students, were compared for 
ability to learn a longer list of adjectives after twenty-four, forty-eight, and seventy-
two hours of sensory deprivation (77). In this instance there were no significant 
differences between groups in errors or trials to criterion, although
-64-
the experimental group made fewer overt errors and showed less variability. Thus, 
despite failure to confirm their own previous findings, this study did not support the 
deterioration finding of the McGill group.

Goldberger and Holt (32) studied fourteen paid volunteer male college students 
under perceptual deprivation conditions similar to those of the McGill experiments. 
They utilized the halved tabletennis ball procedure of Hochberg et al. (43) to occlude 
vision and white noise to mask other auditory input. Subjects lay on a bed in a cubicie 
for  eight hours and were  encouraged to talk during their time in isolation. The 
following  tests  were  administered  at  the  end  under  the  experimental  conditions: 
arithmetic reasoning, digit span, and story recall. Subjects were then taken out of the 
isolation and a test of logical deductions was given. Comparison of the performance of 
the experimental subjects pre- and postconfinement (without a control group) showed 
that only the last of these, logical deductions, reflect significant impairment.
Davis, McCourt, and Solomon (21) utilizing a modification of the polio tank-
respirator procedure initially described by Wexler et al. (80) kept five pairs of paid 
volunteer male college student subjects in relative perceptual deprivation for over ten 
hours. These subjects did not know one another. Although they could talk to each 
other, they were confined separately and could not see each other. In comparing scores 
before and after isolation they found no change in performance on a block design task. 
These authors considered the possibility of procedural variables causing failure to 
confirm Bexton et al. (8) in finding impairment in block design performance.
B. Cohen, Rosenbaum, et al. (17) studied four normal subjects and six patients from 
various clinical groups under conditions of brief deprivation. Subjects were seated 
individually for one hour in an isolation chamber in a comfortable chair. They wore 
goggles which were either blacked out or else permitted diffuse light perception. 
Audition was minimized through car plugs, padded earphones, and the masking sound 
of a fan motor. Their fingers were wrapped in elastic bandages and they wore elbow-
length gloves. The instructions were to relax and move as little as possible. Subjects 
were  also  told  that  they  would  perceive  sensations  ordinarily  below  conscious 
awareness.  These  experimenters  report  that  there  was  no  "gross  cognitive 
deterioration" under these conditions as measured by the number of word associations 
produced in two minutes. The small sample size, the brief period of isolation, and the 
limited measure employed in this study suggests caution in interpreting this result.
-65-
S.  Cohen,  Silverman,  Bressler,  and  Shmavonian  (18)  reported  an  exploratory 
investigation  on  four  subjects  exposed  singly to  four  hours  of  confinement  and 
deprivation while seated in an anechoic chamber, with instructions to keep awake and 
to estimate the passage of successive thirty-minute intervals. All four subjects showed 
an  increase  in performance  on digit  span,  and decrease in arithmetic reasoning, 
abstraction, and general reasoning. All subjects reported difficulty in problem solving 
and logical thinking. The small sample size and absence of a control group limit the 
relevance of these findings.
The few reports available, their currently sketchy detail, and their limited controls 
make it difficult to arrive at a firm generalization concerning the effects of deprivation 
and isolation on cognitive skills. Some tentative agreements among the studies may be 

worth  highlighting.  It  appears  that  the  skill  most  severely impaired  under  these 
conditions is that of general reasoning and problem solving, whether the situation 
involves verbal-conceptual materials or numbers. On the other hand, in several studies 
performance on simple recall tasks or rote learning seems either to improve or else 
does not decline. Tasks that involve analysis and synthesis of visual materials such as 
block design show equivocal results; in some studies there is deterioration, in others no 
change is seen. Some of these equivocal results may be a function of differences in 
procedure  or  duration  of  deprivation  and  confinement.  The  sequence  in  which 
postisolation tests are administered may be a relevant variable here since the duration 
of the effects, if any, is as yet unknown.
The  conceptual analysis  of  cognitive skills  into categories  such  as  reasoning, 
memory, arithmetic, and manipulation would serve a very useful purpose in these 
studies. Goldberger and Holt (32) offer a tentative generalization which begins to 
specify some of the different factors involved in various tasks. They point out that, 
"Probably any task that can be done satisfactorily in a single brief effort by the use of 
highly overlearned sets of operations (as in simple arithmetic problems), and any 
learning or memory performance requiring passive receptivity (cf., digit span, rote 
learning) rather than reflection and manipulation of ideas (cf., logical reasoning) would 
be least interfered with by moderate amounts of isolation." (32, page 109.) This 
formulation appears to account for some of the reported results,  but the criteria 
employed to classify cognitive tasks need further specification and expansion. For 
example, are there differences in the types of memory or recall involved in digit span 
as  opposed  to  remote  memory?  Although  the  available  results  are  certainly 
inconclusive, the Gold-
-66-
berger  and  Holt  generalization  suggests  that  remote  recall  would  be  relatively 
unimpaired  by isolation. This  would  have implications  for  one interested  in  the 
interrogation problem where, leaving motivational issues aside, it would seem that the 
information a person might recall when cooperating would be reliable. Furthermore the 
data suggest a decreased interest in and ability to reason through the complexities of 
the interrogator-prisoner relationship and thus a decreased ability to cope rationally 
and effectively with the situation at hand.
Despite the more tenuous nature of the findings in the area of cognitive skills, to the 
extent to which a generalization is possible, it seems that in addition to the decline in 
internal norms or standards for perceiving reality, under conditions of deprivation and 
isolation there is a lessened ability to reason closely and solve complex problems. 
Should such a generalization be supported by subsequent findings, a relevant question 
remains about the extent of such impairment in quantitative terms.
Suggestibility

An issue related to that of cognitive functioning in isolation and deprivation is that 
of suggestibility. The reported success of isolated confinement in modifying beliefs 
and convictions initially directed interest to the question of suggestibility. Despite this 
concern, systematic data on this problem remain surprisingly sparse.
Heron (39) cited the work of Bexton (7) pertinent to this issue. After twenty hours 
of perceptual deprivation, twenty-four subjects were exposed to a recorded propaganda 
message consisting of a ninetyminute talk read in a boring monotone and arguing for 
belief in various psychical phenomena. To measure attitude change, a series of attitude 
scales of the Bogardus type were administered before and after confinement. A control 
group of twenty-seven subjects received both scales before and after a similar interval. 
Both groups, experimental and control, showed a significant change in attitude after 
listening  to  the  records.  The  change,  however,  was  significantly  greater  for  the 
experimental subjects. Similarly, measures of interest in the topic and assessments of 
its  importance  showed  a  greater increase  for  the subjects  exposed to perceptual 
deprivation. Although follow-up data were not systematically obtained, incidental 
evidence indicated that for some subjects at least, these effects persisted for as long as 
three to four days. Vernon and Hoffman (76) tested subjects for degree of body sway 
suggestibility following varying periods of
-67-
sensory deprivation. These authors remark cryptically that attempts to measure this 
phenomenon "proved unsuccessful."
The question of suggestibility has also been approached from a different vantage 
point. Rather than estimate the effects of isolation upon suggestibility, others have 
sought to establish a relationship between suggestibility as a personality attribute and 
response to deprivation. Petrie 1 measured body sway suggestibility in a group of nine 
subjects who had been exposed to the conditions of confinement and perceptual 
deprivation described by Wexler et al. (80). Her observations revealed a trend toward a 
negative relationship between amount of body sway and length of time voluntarily 
spent in deprivation.
Camberari (16) studied the response to sensory deprivation of twenty male unpaid 
volunteer  psychology  graduate  students  evenly  divided  into  suggestible  and 
nonsuggestible groups. This division was based on the composite scores of these 
subjects on several tests of suggestibility. Isolation and sensory deprivation were 
brought about by suspending subjects nude in a tank of water by means of a harness. 
His over-all findings appear to contradict that of Petrie in that the suggestible group 
remained in the situation significantly longer (183 minutes) than the nonsuggestible 
group (111 minutes). Upon closer examination, however, one finds that one of the ten 
measures in the battery was body sway suggestibility and that for this particular 
measure there was a negative relationship with length of stay similar to Petrie's.
The Camberari data pose the difficulty of interpreting the notion of suggestibility. 
The meaning of the term is difficult to assess independent of the operations defining it 

and the experimental consequences. As such it has limited utility for assessing the 
effects of deprivation and isolation upon the readiness to modify one's own conviction 
or belief in favor of those coming from an external authority figure. Once again, 
leaving aside the complex motivational issues which limit generalization of laboratory 
studies to real life situations, we are left with the Heron findings that following 
isolation and confinement, beliefs around a topic such as psychical phenomena change 
significantly. This observation is also consistent with the hypothesis of a decline in 
internal perceptual norms and in ability to reason efficiently. It would seem likely that 
changing the emotional relationship between the authority and the subject would 
introduce another  complex variable which cannot be assessed  without data.  The 
tendency to modification of belief in experimental circumstances is
1 Personal communication, 1958.
-68-
quite consistent with the reports of the response of prisoners. It should be kept in mind 
that in the latter situation additional elements of uncertainty, stress, and coercion were 
brought to bear in inducing these changes (10, 42).
Personality Findings
The relationship of personality attributes to tolerance for isolation is one which has 
significant implications for issues as diverse as personnel selection and personality 
theory. That the study of response to this situation might be relevant to the study of 
personality was pointed out: by Hochberg et al. (43).
Whether any relationships exist between personality factors, the mode in7 which the  Ganzfeld is 
perceived, and the course of color adaptation, is yet to be investigated. However, the indeterminacy of 
the situation, the individual differences in hallucinatory objects and the intense fear and feelings of 
'going  blind'  expressed  by  some  of  the  subjects  suggest  a  possible  method  for  investigation  of 
personality structure. (page 155.)
We referred previously to the work of Camberari (16). In addition to finding 
differences between suggestible and nonsuggestible subjects in tolerance for sensory 
deprivation, he observed a number of related personality attributes that seemed to 
differentiate the two groups. The suggestible subjects appeared to be more productive 
and more tolerant of regressive behavior, including delusions, hallucinations, and 
fantasies. The nonsuggesiible subjects, on the other hand, tended to be more threatened 
by disturbances in body schema, defensive about their intellectual control, and more 
aware of external factors which reinforce reality.
Wexler et al. (80) studied seventeen paid male volunteer subjects exposed to 
confinement and perceptual deprivation in a polio respirator up to thirty-six hours. 
They used  a series of personality measures including the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory and the Edwards Personal Preference Schedule. None of the 

MMPI scales was related to duration of stay in isolation. For the Edwards test these 
authors reported a significant negative relationship between need Exhibitionism and 
length of stay in isolation, as well as near significant positive relationships between the 
latter variable and need Affiliation, need Succorance, and need Nurturance. They 
interpreted these findings to mean that subjects with greater tolerance for deprivation 
relate themselves more genuinely to people and seek more contact and emotional 
exchange with others. In a second experiment (47), with eleven subjects, under more 
severe conditions of isolation, these
-69-
investigators  failed  to  confirm  the  original  findings,  observing  instead  a  near 
significant  positive  relationship  between  need  Autonomy  and  length  of  stay  in 
deprivation.
Unlike Wexler and his associates, S. Cohen et al. (18), who studied four volunteer 
subjects seated in an anechoic chamber for four hours, found that the two subjects 
described  as  "schizoid  personalities"  on  the  basis  of  clinical  interviews  and 
psychological tests were comfortable in isolation and were willing to prolong it, 
whereas the two "fairly well integrated" subjects, who described the experience as 
unpleasant, were anxious, and felt that they could not tolerate the isolation much 
longer.
In  studying  ten  subjects  consisting  of  normal,  neurotic,  schizophrenic,  and 
sociopathic individuals for response to one hour of isolation, B. Cohen et al. (17) 
reported that normal and neurotic subjects exhibited an increased sensitivity to the 
residual stimuli in the chamber. The schizophrenic subjects showed no appreciable 
increase or decrease in their hallucinatory behavior and had a generally positive 
reaction to the situation, devoid of the anxiety typically exhibited by normal subjects.
A more recent study of the response of schizophrenics to sensory deprivation was 
performed by Harris (35). Utilizing a procedure similar to that of the McGill group, he 
placed twelve subjects in isolation for periods up to two hours. He reports that the 
patients generally tolerated the procedure well. For  the most part, hallucinations 
became less intense and less vivid. Over-all symptomatology either improved or 
showed no change. These findings appear to be consistent with those of the two earlier 
studies cited previously.
Working  in  a  different  theoretical  context,  Petrie,  Collins,  and  Solomon  (60) 
attempted to relate pain tolerance, cortical satiation, and perceptual deprivation. Using 
kinesthetic figural aftereffects, measures of pain threshold, and tolerance for isolation 
in the polio respirator, their findings tend to support the hypothesis that susceptibility 
to  satiation  is  associated  with  tolerance  for  pain  and  intolerance  for  perceptual 
deprivation. Here satiation is seen as a key factor mediating the perceived intensity of 
stimulation; the higher the satiability the less intense are succeeding sensations.

Still another approach was taken by Goldberger and Holt (33) in their experiment. 
They emphasized psychoanalytic concepts, such as resistance to regression and modes 
of handling primary process material. Fourteen subjects were rated for the maturity 
with which they handled primary process as manifested in Rorschach test responses. 
Their verbal behavior during eight hours of isolation and
-70-
postisolation interview was then assessed by a scheme of content analysis which 
stressed modes of dealing with primary process material.
Two relatively independent reaction patterns to isolation were identified. In the first 
of these, subjects engaged in a variety of behaviors within the limits set by the 
situation and instructions. They talked freely, experienced pleasurable affect, little 
unpleasant affect, thought rationally, and engaged in daydreams, fantasy, and playful 
thinking without being threatened by the situation. In the second reaction pattern, there 
was unpleasant affect, anxiety-laden intrusions of the primary process, preoccupation 
with terminating the experiment, and impaired efficiency in rational or secondary 
process thinking. They found these two reaction patterns to be significantly correlated 
in the expected direction with the Rorschach measure of maturity of handling primary 
process materials. Those who on the Rorschach handled primary process in a mature 
and effective way were those who reacted in an adaptive way to isolation. Conversely, 
those who on the Rorschach handled primary process with poor control or avoided it 
reacted negatively to isolation. This finding is consistent with several others which 
point to the exaggeration of usual personality defenses under the stress of isolation (18, 
56, 65). From this point of view it should be possible, at least theoretically, to predict 
the dimensions of an individual's response to deprivation and isolation.
An overview of  these data emphasizes the truism of  marked individuality of 
response. Whether differences observed among various studies is a systematic function 
of varying experimental conditions is as yet unclear. Whereas the findings of Wexler et 
al.  (80)  and  Goldberger  and  Holt  (33)  indicate  a  positive  relationship  between 
emotional relatedness and length of stay in isolation, several others have made a 
different observation. The findings on suggestibility as a personality attribute and those 
on the relationship to satiation and pain thresholds remain conceptually unrelated to 
the other work. The Goldberger and Holt demonstration of relationships between 
preisolation personality attributes and the content of response to isolation is a carefully 
executed study which has a clear theoretical orientation and makes complex but 
reliable assessments of verbal and other behavior. Other studies have tended toward 
utilization of too simplified an index of response such as length of stay which fails to 
take into account complex behavior during the isolation situation. It may well be that 
personality variables and their interrelationships are insufficiently reflected in such a 
simple measure of tolerance for isolation.
-71-

In addition it would seem desirable that workers in this area offer a conceptual 
framework within which to view personality response. Thus specification of terms 
such as "schizoid" and "withdrawn" may have more meaning, permit replication of 
procedures, and evaluation of results. Although some of this difficulty in the present 
studies stems from their preliminary nature, there appears to be some insensitivity to 
the  need  for  both  conceptual  and  operational  specification  of  measurement  and 
assessment  techniques.  Progress  with  the  problem  of  personnel  selection  and 
utilization for a variety of tasks, as well as theoretical clarification, awaits such 
refinement in research programs.
Feeling States
Changes in subjective feeling in response to reduced environmental input has been 
a common observation in these studies. These observations range over many different 
experimental conditions, from the uniform visual stimulation presented by W. Cohen 
(19) in which the pattern of input to one modality is reduced, to sensory deprivation in 
the water tank suspension procedure used by Lilly (50) and Cambareri (16), where the 
effort is made at a total reduction of sensory input. We have already mentioned the 
breakdown in the subjects' ability to concentrate, think clearly, and solve mental 
problems. Bexton et al. (8) emphasized the progressive increase in irritability during 
confinement, followed on release by a sense of being dazed and confused. They also 
noted the presence of headaches, fatigue, and mild nausea, persisting in some cases for 
twenty-four hours after confinement.
Lilly (50) whose subjects both had a number of trial exposures to the situation in 
order to get used to it found in the actual situation early feelings of relaxation and 
enjoyment, followed by tension, restlessness, and an extremely heightened awareness 
of residual stimulation. This course continued into fantasy and reverie, and finally into 
the projection of visual imagery. Following the isolation experience, subjects reported 
a sense of refreshment as though having just awakened from sleep. Camberari (16), on 
the other hand, utilizing a similar procedure without preliminary exposures, found no 
such progressive stages, and subjects came out of the immersion feeling fatigued rather 
than rested. Suggestible subjects felt secure during most of their stay in the tank, 
although there were some reports of apprehension, fear, and panic. The nonsuggestible 
subjects generally tended to deny any affective or emotional involvement.
-72-
After prolonged visual stimulation, W. Cohen (19) found that his subjects had 
feelings  of  drowsiness,  excessive  yawning,  and  their  voices  took  on  a  hesitant, 
drawling quality. In a study of perceptual deprivation, Hebb, Heath, and Stuart (38) 
reported that subjects who wore earplugs for three consecutive days while going about 
their  normal  activities  showed  slight  to  marked  irritability,  seclusiveness,  and 
personality disturbances not due to discomfort. One subject manifested poor speech 
coordination while in the experimental conditions. Goldberger and Holt (32) noted that 

despite  the  individual  differences  in  response,  all  of  their  subjects  found  the 
experimental situation frustrating because of lack of things to do, see, and hear, and the 
physical discomfort attributed to motor restriction. Comparing sensory and perceptual 
deprivation with sensory bombardment, Ormiston (59) found that the former group 
reacted with unpleasant affect, whereas the latter group experienced mixed affect of 
amusement and anxiety.
Davis et al. (21) required their ten subjects to complete an adjective check list 
describing their feelings following isolation. This was compared with the same check 
list  completed  under  control  conditions.  Significantly  more  somatic  complaints, 
feelings of physical inactivity, and mental clouding were checked following isolation, 
whereas  significantly  less  satisfaction,  elation,  friendliness,  and  impulsivity were 
reported.
Several studies indicated a wide range of response ranging from comfort and 
satisfaction, through sleep, to unpleasant affect, anxiety, and paranoid fear (19, 30, 65).
Goldberger and Holt (32) also reported marked variations in postisolation feeling 
states. Seven subjects described such reactions as feeling dazed, disorganized, groggy, 
dizzy, and unstable; eight subjects indicated a state of fatigue; four subjects described 
motivational changes such as losing interest in things; two subjects showed virtually 
no disttirbance.
In part these responses may be interpreted as a reaction to the novelty and threat of 
a strange and unfamiliar situation. Undoubtedly these subjective states also reflect the 
earlier discussed individuality of personality response to these experimental settings. 
The  general  response  to  isolation  seems  to  include  boredom, a general  state  of 
restlessness related to inactivity, and often anxiety or fear of extreme proportions. 
Postisolation responses most often seem to reflect fatigue, drowsiness, confusion, loss 
of time orientation, and a need to reorient one's self to the familiar aspects of reality. 
These subjective states appear to be consistent correlates of the changes in
-73-
perception, cognitive function, and personality function previously described. These 
feeling states would seem to make one quite vulnerable to new input from a controlled 
source such as might appear in the prisoner-interrogator relationship. To the extent to 
which  an  interrogator  becomes associated  with the  reward  of  anxiety reduction, 
providing  human  contact  and  directed  activity,  and thus  providing  relief for  the 
cumulative discomfort of isolation, he assumes a benevolent role which may be one 
source of his influence. [See Biderman (9) and Lifton (49).]
Imagery

Lacking a more adequate descriptive term, we shall in this section use the term 
"imagery" in dealing with a wide variety of phenomena seen in studies of isolation and 
deprivation,  including  what  have  been  called  hallucinations,  delusions,  illusions, 
fantasies, daydreams, dreams, hypnagogic states, and the like. As pointed out earlier, 
these phenomena constitute perhaps the most dramatic aspect of this research, and 
indeed the promise of studying their genesis has undoubtedly been most responsible 
for exciting the interest of clinically oriented groups. Apart from the autobiographical 
accounts  of  isolation,  normal  persons  have  rarely  reported  feelings  of 
depersonalization,  breakdowns  in  body  image,  and  hallucinatory  phenomena. 
Furthermore, the ability to produce such states experimentally brings these concepts 
much closer to understanding by permitting close observation and perhaps control. 
With this introductory remark, let us turn to an examination of the pertinent data.
We have already referred to the observation of Hochberg et al. (43) about individual 
differences in hallucinatory objects. Three subjects in one of his studies reported the 
appearance of such hallucinatory objects during adaptation, and it was later difficult to 
convince them that such shapes had not been included as part of the experimental 
procedure. Bexton et al. (8) reported that these phenomena were largely visual and 
ranged from simple geometrical forms and patterns, to simple colors, to complexly 
integrated scenes which were sometimes in color and three-dimensional. The latter 
often  contained  dreamlike  images.  Subjects  were  able  to  exercise  only  minimal 
conscious control over the content. The images often involved other senses including 
auditory, kinesthetic, and somesthetic elements. There were also reports of bodily 
strangeness  and  peculiar  perceptions  of  body  image.  Usually  these  experiences 
disappeared when the subject began a complex task, such as mental arithmetic.
-74-
Time of onset for these phenomena varied from twenty minutes to seventy hours. In 
the supplementary report (39) it is noted that subjects did not believe in the reality of 
these experiences and that compared to normal imagery greater vividness is the main 
difference. Often there was considerable movement of the visual patterns, at times 
sufficiently disturbing to cause subjects to experience nausea.
To test the notion that residual stimulation was necessary for the production of these 
phenomena, these same investigators placed opaque goggles on three subjects after 
several  days  in  isolation  with  translucent  goggles.  These  subjects  had  been 
'hallucinating' persistently.  With this change, they observed  an initial increase in 
vividness, but in one subject this was soon followed by a very marked diminution, and 
by the total disappearance of these experiences in the other two. With restoration of 
translucent goggles, the 'hallucinations' reappeared. Two other subjects, run from the 
beginning with opaque goggles and then shifted to translucent ones, showed an 
increase in the incidence and vividness of these visual phenomena.
Under the conditions of isolation utilized in Vernon's series of experiments, despite 
some differences in results, a similar implication emerges (79). Two conditions of 
sensory deprivation were compared. In one, nine subjects were blindfolded when they 

periodically had to leave the cubicle. As a result of this procedure they were exposed to 
a variety of visual stimulation from light leaks, etc. In a second phase, conditions of 
deprivation were more extreme; the eleven subjects did not leave the lightproof cubicle 
during their stay. Contrasting the visual imagery reported under these two sets of 
circumstances, the authors found that the less extreme condition produced many more 
'hallucinatory' phenomena. In addition there seemed to be a positive relationship 
between length of confinement and number of images. The content of the imagery 
tended toward simple flashes of lights or geometric shapes, rather than meaningful, 
symbolic, integrated scenes. These authors concluded that confinement permitting the 
greatest amount of nonpatterned visual stimulation produces the greatest., amount and 
variety of images. A similarly limited amount of imagery is reported by Ruff et al. (65) 
who, using both volunteers and nonvolunteer military personnel as subjects observed 
'hallucinations' in only two subjects out of more than sixty, run under a variety of 
experimental conditions of isolation.
Mendelson and Foley (54) observed that a number of polio patients treated in tank-
type  respirators  developed  psychoticlike  symptoms  of  disorientation,  confusion, 
'hallucinations,' and delusions. Physiologi-
-75-
cal, psychiatric, and behavioral studies of these patients suggested that these symptoms 
were not a function of toxic or metabolic factors, but were the result of conditions of 
life in the respirator. In a follow-up report discussing these phenomena, Mendelson, 
Solomon, and Lindemann (57) summarized the elements present in these terms: denial 
of  distressing  reality;  wish-fulfillment  in  terms  of  reassuring,  pleasurable  life 
situations; rehearsallike anticipation of dreaded possibilities. The authors describe the 
'hallucinations' as representing a restitutional attempt on the part of the ego to predict 
and cope with anticipated stress.
Starting with these observations, Wexler et al. (80) placed seventeen normal adult 
male volunteers in the tank-type respirator up to thirty-six hours in the perceptual 
deprivation  procedure  previously  described.  These  investigators  described  the 
incidence  of  a  range  of  mental  experiences  in  their  subjects.  These  experiences 
included  the  occurrence  of  'analogies,'  'daydreams,'  'fantasies,'  'pseudosomatic 
delusions,' 'illusions,' and 'hallucinations.' These phenomena were not related to length 
of stay in confinement. Under similar, but more severe, conditions of confinement 
these investigators reported a comparable total incidence of these phenomena, with a 
higher frequency of occurrence in the categories reflecting more marked deviations 
from normal imagery (47). This observation held true despite the fact that subjects 
remained in the experimental situation for a much shorter period.
S. Cohen et al. (18) observed male and female volunteer subjects seated in isolation 
for two hours in a dark acoustical chamber with no orienting instructions, the only 
sound being a low hum from a ventilator motor. In this exploratory study the period of 
deprivation and isolation lasted two hours. Seven of the ten subjects reported unusual 
visual phenomena ranging from flashing lights to moving objects. The authors suggest 

classification of the experience on the basis of criteria such as vividness, recognition of 
subjectivity of experience, conscious control, and emotional accompaniments. Another 
interesting aspect of this report is the description of changes in the texture and 
consistency of the chamber walls and floor. Descriptions of an actual metal wall 
included such adjectives as, "soft," "ruglike," and "spongy, velvetlike." The lack of 
orienting instructions in this experiment introduces an element of anxiety which may 
be a factor in the images reported.
Freedman et al. (30) found that several subjects experienced changes in body 
image, spontaneous auditory and visual illusions or 'hallucinations.' These latter were 
not subject to conscious control
-76-
and had qualities different from dreams or daydreams. They appeared to originate 
outside the self, and did not seem to be meaningfully related to anything.
Goldberger and Holt (32) also found that subjects in eight hours of isolation 
reported the spontaneous occurrence of visual and auditory imagery different from that 
perceived in the normal waking state. These were usually recognized as internal in 
origin, although several subjects perceived them as being external. These authors feel 
that these phenomena are most like hypnagogic imagery. In addition they found 
subjects with body image disturbance, depersonalization, and dreams dealing with the 
experimental situation. In discussing these data, they argue against the use of the term 
"hallucination"  in  that  it  requires,  in  addition  to  an  illusory image,  a  failure  to 
recognize its unreality. On the other hand, it is known that alcoholic patients in 
delirium tremens, or patients under mescaline intoxication may often recognize the 
unreality  of  their  percepts  and  hallucinations.  The  definition  of  terms  here  is 
complicated by confusion and inconsistency in language usage. Goldberger and Holt 
suggest consideration of these phenomena in terms of vividness, structure, persistence, 
realism,  and  plausibility.  From  this  standpoint  they offer  the  generalization  that 
perceptual deprivation during the period of experimental confinement tends to increase 
the vividness and structure of imagery without a breakdown in reality testing.
In summary, there are now several studies which point to the importance of some 
extraneous  stimulation  for  the  occurrence  of  visual  and  auditory  images  and 
hallucinations (39, 65, 79). The role of body movement as a factor in the causation of 
these phenomena has been cited (30, 32, 65). Freedman et al. (30) attribute the 
occurrence or nonoccurrence of imagery, at least in part, to differences in motility and 
kinesthetic feedback. Although this factor is partially confouuded with variations in 
visual input, they point out that in only two procedures, those of Ruff et al. (65) and 
Vernon et al. (79), was there free movement and these two report the lowest incidence 
of imagery. Freedman et al. (30) emphasize the role of motor activity in the general 
maintenance of spatial and cognitive orientation.
Direct  quantitative  comparisons  of  various  studies  in  this  area  will  require 
agreement about the descriptive parameters of the experiences here subsumed under 

the  rubric  of  imagery.  These  dimensions  should  make  possible  a  more  precise 
evaluation of different experimental conditions for their relationship to the production 
of these experiences. Similarly it would make possible the detailed comparison of 
imagery in sensory and perceptual deprivation conditions to
-77-
that seen in hypnagogic states, mescal intoxication, and experimental response to 
flicker.
Another problem in the quantitative assessment of the imagery phenomena lies in 
the fact that most of the data has been obtained by retrospective report. This procedure 
raises difficulties in the reliable assessment of vividness, frequency, or other suggested 
dimensions of analysis. It may be that encouraging verbal report during the procedure 
and making simultaneous recordings of other variables such as physiological responses 
will make possible independent assessment of these experiences.
Without  such  independent  assessment  it  would  be  premature  to  consider  the 
imagery experienced in deprivation experiments as necessarily indicative of pathology 
as a number of reports have implied. Such experiences may indeed reflect creative 
adaptations to a special environment. The evidence that artists, mystics, and religious 
individuals may utilize isolation for constructive syntheses of experience cannot be 
ignored. It would seem that the response to the increased awareness of primary process 
material may be more predictive of adaptation than would the fact of the increase itself 
or its content. The imagery phenomena may turn out to sustain some individuals 
confronted by real life situations of isolation and deprivation. On the other hand, the 
anxiety engendered by the rise of primary process material may serve to increase an 
individual's susceptibility to external pressures as in the interrogation situation. In 
general,  a  broader  conceptual  framework  than  that  provided  by  the  model  of 
psychopathology would seem to be needed.
Physiological Findings
Apart from an intrinsic interest in the consequences of reduced stimulation for 
physiological functioning, such data can also be compared to concurrent verbal reports 
of  the  experience.  One  such  index  of  response  thus  far  studied  has  been  the 
electroencephalogram. Attention has focused on this instrument in hopes of clarifying 
the nature of cortical activity in sensory and perceptual deprivation. In addition it has 
been used to make assessments of the sleep-wakefulness cycle under these conditions.
Heron (39) described the results of periodic EEG tracings on six experimental 
subjects. The results showed that slower frequencies appear in the parieto-occipital 
tracings taken at sixteen hours than those taken at the beginning of the isolation period; 
even after subjects had emerged from isolation for some hours, the records had not 
returned to their normal state. This finding was confirmed in a

-78-
quantitative analysis of wave frequencies within a given time interval. Furthermore, 
they found that records obtained while a subject was 'hallucinating' showed greatly 
reduced amplitude and appeared similar to those which might be obtained from a 
subject in an alerted state. Though these investigators were unable to make accurate 
determinations of sleep-wakefulness patterns, it was their general impression that 
subjects slept more during the early part of their stay in isolation and progressively less 
later in the period of confinement.
Studying  the  EEG  correlates of  the "white-out" phenomenon, W. Cohen (19) 
hypothesized that under conditions of uniform visual stimulation, the "termination" of 
visual  experience  should  be  accompanied  by a  return  of  alpha  activity.  Despite 
considerable individual differences, he found that in occipital records, strong alpha 
activity usually followed the onset of "white-out" with a latency of one second. In 
general, the onset of alpha occurred when visual experience spontaneously became less 
differentiated. The occurrence of "white-out" seemed to be related to the amount of 
alpha shown. Thus about half the subjects showed little alpha even when kept in the 
dark without stimulation.
Vernon et al. (78) in their study of perceptual and motor skills under conditions of 
twenty-four, forty-eight, and seventy-two hours of sensory deprivation, found that 
despite the fact that subjects ate well, there was a consistent loss of weight, averaging 
two and one-half pounds. Measuring strength of grip with a hand dynamometer, they 
observed  gains  for  control  and  confined  groups  except  for  the  seventytwo-hour 
confined  group  which  showed  a  slight  loss.  A third  measure  was  galvanic  skin 
resistance taken before and after isolation. The authors hypothesized a gain in skin 
resistance because of the quiet and sleeplike conditions for the confined groups. 
Instead they found that while control group values rose, a statistically significant drop 
from preisolation conditions appeared in the experimental group. There was, however, 
no report of control for the humidity in the chamber.
Utilizing a continuous recording of skin resistance throughout isolation on their 
four subjects, S. Cohen et al. (18) found that resistance rose and remained high for the 
two subjects comfortable in isolation. For the remaining two subjects, less comfortable 
with  the  experience,  this  autonomic  index  remained  low.  Ruff  et  al.  (65)  cited 
observations that confirm the foregoing, and point to skin resistance measures as a 
useful reflection of arousal, which parallels overt behavioral manifestations during 
isolation.
A similar analysis is provided in a detailed case study of the psychological and 
physiological responses of two subjects exposed to per-
-79-
ceptual deprivation in the tank respirator procedure (56). General relationships were 
observed  between  patterns  of  EEG,  heart  rate,  and  epinephrine-norepinephrine 

excretions on the one hand, and behavioral measures of activity, verbalization, and 
emotional responses on the other.
A more detailed analysis of the catechol amine response of ten subjects isolated in 
the tank respirator is provided in another report by this group of investigators (55). 
Comparing preisolation, isolation, and postisolation excretion levels, these authors 
found a generalized increase in both measures followed by a decline after removal 
from the respirator. They emphasized the wide variability of response, and identified a 
number of individual patterns which are masked by the group data. Their findings also 
showed  that  of  the  two  measures,  epinephrine  seemed  to  change  more  than 
norepinephrine in response to this stress.
R. C. Davis (24) compared the physiological responses of twenty-two subjects 
exposed  to minimal  stimulation with that of  twenty-eight  subjects  who  received 
unpatterned stimulation at near normal levels. The "reduced-stimulus" group lay on a 
cot in a dark soundproofed room for about forty minutes, whereas the "unpatterned-
stimulus" group was given continuous moderate light and sound after five minutes. He 
recorded  circulatory  and  respiratory  variables  and  muscle  potentials  from  three 
locations. Comparing the changes in the two groups during isolation, the "reduced-
stimulus" group showed a significantly greater increase in muscular and circulatory 
activity and a decrease in respiratory activity. The author finds the responses of the 
"reduced-stimulus" group similar to those seen in subjects anticipating a stimulus.
In general, the data on physiological response is sparse, with much of it resting on 
case observations. Few of the studies utilize precise measurement as well as adequate 
controls and sample sizes. Nonetheless, a number of indices have by now shown 
promise of providing useful information about response to sensory deprivation. These 
include  EEG,  skin  resistance,  epinephrine-norepinephrine  excretion  levels,  and 
muscular, respiratory, and circulatory activity. There has been frequent mention of 
movement of gross musculature as related particularly to the phenomena discussed in 
the section on imagery. [The Davis study (24) cited previously measured muscular 
activity but not imagery.] Such determinations might prove helpful in relating the role 
of kinesthetic stimulation to behavior generally and to body image in particular. This 
latter relationship has been a subject of much speculation.
-80-
The physiological measures thus far observed have received attention largely due to 
their presumed relationship to the concept of arousal. The work of the McGill group 
has been concerned with the use of EEG tracings as an index to the state of arousal 
(39). Others have used skin resistance measures in this way. The work with catechol 
amines has focused on the deprivation situation as a stressor agent. Needless to say a 
variety of other approaches are possible. Thus the measurement of eye movements 
during the occurrence of imagery and the comparison with eye movements as they 
appear in dreams [see Dement and Kleitman (25)] may yield important information 
about the possible similarities of the two processes. Furthermore, the specification of a 

variety of physiological changes under conditions of sensory deprivation may provide 
other important clues in the clarification of the entire range of observed effects.
Length of Stay in Experimental Isolation and Time Perception
In this section we shall consider several aspects of the literature being reviewed. 
One issue concerns tolerance for isolation and deprivation as measured by voluntary 
length of stay in the situation. Findings on this problem have varied considerably, 
depending on the experimental conditions. Many investigators have not attempted to 
assess this aspect of the problem. Others have discarded data from subjects who failed 
to complete a prescribed length of stay. Thus it is difficult to compare the various 
experimental procedures for degree of stress as it might be reflected in such a measure.
It was suggested earlier that length of stay is perhaps too simplified an index of 
tolerance for isolation. There is little information available on the relationship between 
this and other responses in the deprivation situation. Although it is  perhaps  not 
independent  of  problem-solving  efficiency,  or  incidence  of  imagery,  for  certain 
purposes an estimate of tolerance measured in length of stay is important.
The sensory deprivation procedures involving suspension in water (16, 50) appear 
to be sufficiently extreme as to make a stay of more than three hours quite difficult. 
Use of a darkened, soundproof cubicle seems to make considerably longer periods of 
isolation tolerable. Ruff et al. (65) reported that subjects stayed as long as seven days. 
Both water tank and cubicle procedures presumably attempt an absolute reduction of 
levels of sensory input. In the latter there is much more mobility and less restriction 
necessitated by the physical needs of the subject for food and toileting.
The reduced patterning procedure of the McGill group has been
-81-
tolerated  for  as  long  as  six  days.  In  the  tank  respirator  procedure,  despite  the 
experimenters having set a limit of thirty-six hours, subjects have tended to stay much 
shorter times. Comparing two sets of conditions of deprivation using this procedure, it 
was found that under less severe deprivation, subjects stayed an average of 18.8 hours. 
With more extreme conditions, another group averaged a significantly shorter 8.8 
hours (47). Reducing social isolation by allowing subjects to talk to a second subject in 
an adjacent respirator has been shown to increase the length of stay significantly (21).
Ruff et al. (65) reported on the importance of the subjects' knowledge of the length 
of confinement. This knowledge added structure to the experience and thus increased 
the capacity to withstand the situation. They also reported that repeated exposures have 
a similar effect in reducing the stress of the experimental conditions; an observation 
also made by Lilly (50). Upon repetition, the situation loses some of its novelty and the 
subject becomes better able to assume an attitude of passive acceptance. They make 

the general observation that when subjects are run to maximum tolerance, the decision 
to leave is made when there is an impending or partial breakdown of personality 
defenses.
The option of leaving at will, available to all subjects in laboratory research on this 
problem,  complicates  extrapolation  of  these  findings  to  real  life  situations. 
Nevertheless, the data on length of stay are useful, insofar as they permit some 
assessment of the total impact of isolation and deprivation.
Another issue which some investigators have examined is that of orientation in 
time. In general, these studies have shown a wide range of response, from minimal to 
gross disorientation in time judgment. Lilly (50) reported a subjective postisolation 
impression of being out of step with time, as though the day had started all over again 
following isolation. This was not confirmed by Camberari (16). Wexler et al. (80) 
reported data for seventeen subjects which showed no consistent pattern of either 
underestimation or overestimation of time. Comparing these results to those obtained 
under more severe deprivation, it was found that in the latter conditions average time 
error was greater (47). This difference did not achieve statistical significance and 
appears to have been, in part, an artifact of the relative availability of time cues under 
the two conditions.
In a situation requiring the estimation of successive thirty-minute intervals, S. 
Cohen et al. (18) found that the two subjects comfortable in isolation underestimated 
the passage of time, whereas the two disturbed by the experiment overestimated time 
in isolation. Ruff
-82-
et al. (65) cited the importance of awareness of time as an orienting factor during 
deprivation which adds structure to the experience. Their subjects showed a general 
tendency to underestimate time. The loss of time awareness often seemed to make the 
experiment intolerable.
Goldberger and Holt (32) also referred to this lack of time orientation as an 
important source of frustration in isolation. Time seemed to pass very slowly for their 
subjects. Despite this, their judgments were surprisingly accurate, with a relatively 
small but consistent underestimation. This finding suggested to the authors the relative 
independence of experiencing time from the act of judging time. Ruff et al. (65) have 
suggested that the underestimation of time is a defensive maneuver where the subject 
avoids a premature anticipation of his release from confinement. Thus he avoids the 
frustration of having to remain in the situation at a time when he might otherwise 
expect release.
The  importance  of  time  orientation  in  influencing  response  to  isolation  and 
confinement is well documented. Burney (13) describes the elaborate procedures he 
developed for telling time and of his precise knowledge of dates during eighteen 
months of solitary confinement. Anecdotal reports have cited very complex schemes 

worked out by subjects to maintain their orientation in time. Just as deprivation and 
isolation appear to disrupt general cognitive orientations, so too this situation appears 
to have similar disruptive effects on time perception. As  such,  resistance to the 
disintegrative effects of deprivation and isolation might well emphasize the importance 
of developing orienting anchors in the external environment for both time and space.
Stimulus Hunger
Although  the  implication  of  most  studies  thus  far  discussed  has  been  that 
deprivation produces "stimulus-hunger," only one study has made a direct attempt at 
its measurement. The boredom and restlessness mentioned in the section on feeling 
states may refer to the phenomenon. Lilly (50) has explicitly described "stimulus-
hunger" in the following terms.
. . . a tension develops which can be called a "stimulus-action" hunger; hidden methods of self-
stimulation develop: twitching muscles, slow swimming movements (which cause sensations as the 
water flows by the skin), stroking one finger with another, etc. If one can inhibit such maneuvers long 
enough, intense satisfaction is derived from later self-stimulations. (50, page 6.)
-83-
Bexton  (7),  using  the  apparatus  previously described,  attempted  to  determine 
whether perceptual deprivation would lead subjects to elect to listen to materials they 
might otherwise consider uninteresting or tedious. These subjects, college students, 
had  an opportunity to listen to records  of  five minutes'  duration.  These  records 
contained the following types of material: eight repetitions of the 16-bar chorus of 
"Home on the Range"; two talks for children, taken from a religious primer; radio 
commercials for soap; and part of a stock market report. Subjects were divided into 
two groups of four each. One group heard the records before isolation, whereas the 
second group was told nothing about it until several hours after entering isolation. 
Once in the experimental situation, subjects were told they could hear any of these 
materials, whenever and as often as they liked. They found that the four subjects 
exposed to the material before isolation universally disliked the records and only asked 
to hear them a total of nine times. The other group asked for the records fifty-three 
times, and reported that they helped to relieve the boredom. In addition, it was found 
that the rate of requests for the records was dramatically higher during the second half 
of  the  confinement  period.  Previous  exposure  to  the  material  seemed  to  be  the 
principal factor influencing the demand for stimulation.
One major problem that subjects report in the deprivation situation is the lack of 
things to see, hear, do, or think about. This subjective complaint seems to have clear 
relevance to the notion of curiosityexploratory drive studied in experimental work with 
animals. The isolation conditions thus seem to increase receptivity to otherwise dull, 
uninteresting material. Whether the same is true for "ego-alien" material is not yet 
known. In the context of other disruptions of the individual's functioning, this effect 
appears  to  magnify  the  affective  value  of  stimulation.  Quantification  of  these 

phenomena  might  provide  a  useful  index  for  comparing  the  relative  severity of 
deprivation conditions.
Influence of Experimental Setting
We have already referred to the findings of Ruff et al. (65) in highlighting the 
effects of time structure in increasing the tolerance of subjects for deprivation. Such 
factors as provision of tasks during isolation, specification of the length of deprivation, 
and previous exposure to isolation result in making the experimental conditions more 
tolerable to subjects. The comparison of two conditions of confinement in the tank 
respirator has also pointed to the increase
-84-
in stress and decreased length of stay that accompanies an increase in isolation and 
reduced contact with experimenters and environment (47). Additional papers discuss 
other variables operating to influence response to isolation and deprivation (18, 46). 
These  include  such  factors  as  experimenter's  expectations,  subject-experimenter 
relationship, and the physical setting of the experiment.
Kandel, Myers, and Murphy (45) compared the effects of two sets of instructions on 
the reporting of visual sensations in ten minutes of darkness. They found that one 
group, who were told the experiencing of such sensations was to be expected under 
these conditions, reported significantly more visual sensations than did another group, 
told  that these sensations appeared  in psychiatric patients.  Prior  verbalization of 
"fantasy material" through exposure to Rorschach cards did not increase the number of 
sensations reported when compared with a group not given this test.
A  number  of  other  procedural  issues  require  further  clarification.  We  have 
mentioned earlier that all of these studies have employed volunteer subjects, generally 
paid volunteers, with the exception of that of Ruff et al. (65). When, in one study (80), 
these volunteers were questioned about their motivation for participating, they offered, 
in addition to the money, reasons such as aiding science and testing themselves. There 
is  no  such  data  available  on  possible  differential  reactions  of  volunteers  and 
nonvolunteers.  Similarly,  one  must  leave  open  the  possibility  that  solitude  and 
perceptual deprivation sought at the individual's own need or whim may have different 
effects than when imposed by an experimenter who creates a highly artificial situation 
so that he may systematically observe the subject. Another issue related to the work of 
Kandel et al. (45) cited above, is that of the experimenter's purpose in the research. 
Instructions  that  stress  endurance,  or  content  of  thinking,  may produce  different 
responses than do those that state the experimenter's interest to be in the problem of 
rest and relaxation.
These studies highlight the importance of procedural variables and limit the direct 
comparison of studies utilizing different procedures. They emphasize again the need 

for specification of experimental purposes and for procedural choices consistent with 
those purposes. In this connection the importance of evaluating the total context and its 
implicit motivational and emotional consequences needs to be clearly recognized.
-85-
Clinical and Anecdotal Reports
The application and relevance of these findings to diverse areas of interest have 
proceeded along with the basic exploration of these phenomena. One of the earliest 
interests in this area was reported by Spitz in a series of articles (73, 74, 75) which 
dealt with the deleterious developmental and behavioral effects of institutionalization 
and separation from the mother upon infants. A reading of these reports indicates that 
perceptual deprivation was a prominent feature of the experience of these children.
A more direct application of isolation and deprivation to clinical procedures has 
been attempted recently (1, 2, 3, 4). In these procedures, patients with a variety of 
clinical diagnoses were kept in a darkened hospital room, wore translucent goggles, 
and had their arms in cardboard cylinders. These periods of isolation ranged from two 
to six days. Although few of the cognitive changes described earlier were observed, 
these investigators concluded that deprivation led to a state of disorganization, and in 
some  cases  precipitated  psychotic  reactions.  On  the  other  hand,  some  groups, 
particularly  depressives,  seemed  to  show  improvement  in  the  form  of  increased 
motivation, socialization, and assertiveness.
Phenomena akin to those reported in isolation and deprivation have also been 
reported in aviators, especially in high speed, high altitude flying. Citing clinical 
material on these flyers, Bennett (6) compared their reactions to those seen in isolation 
studies. Operating in a severely restricted environment with extremely monotonous 
stimulation, aviators have reported feelings of isolation, unreality, and dreamlike 
states.  Evidence  suggests  that  these  feelings,  called  by  some  the  "breakoff 
phenomenon," occur at times in approximately one-third of jet pilots.
Earlier reference was made to the response of prisoners who in solitary confinement 
apparently experience similar reactions. Meltzer (53) reported the occurrence of a 
range of effects in such prisoners. These included, on the one hand, occasional tense 
pacing, restlessness, tension, and assaultiveness. On the other hand, some prisoners 
exhibit  a  regressed,  dissociated,  withdrawn,  hypnoid,  and  reverielike  state. 
Hypochondriacal states of a transient type were also seen.
Already mentioned is the work of Mendelson and Foley (54) which showed the 
importance of isolation and deprivation in polio patients. Two recent papers have 
appeared that stress the importance of these findings in understanding a number of 
phenomena seen in medical

-86-
practice (48, 81). These reports stress the relevance of this work to the hallucinations 
of cataract patients, and to the disturbances seen in patients with orthopedic disorders 
who are suspended in traction.
Perceptual deprivation also has relevance to prolonged and repetitive tasks in man-
machine systems, such as long distance driving, flying, assembly line production, 
continuous  monitoring  duty  at  isolated  stations,  etc.  The  factor  of  the  external 
environment and its influence upon behavior is increasingly being recognized for its 
role in a wide variety of practical situations. The findings discussed in this chapter may 
account for such things as accidents, loss of efficiency, and emotional alienation often 
observed in these situations.
Interpretations and Implications
Focused  research  on  the  responses  of  human  subjects  exposed  to  reduced 
environmental stimulation has only recently begun. The phenomenal growth of interest 
in  this  problem  and  some  reasons  for  this  have  been  discussed.  Many  of  the 
investigations referred to in this paper are pilot studies; others leave much to be desired 
in  rigor,  elegance,  and  methodological  sophistication.  At  the  same  time,  these 
investigations now provide a rich source of new observations and hypotheses, which 
touch on a wide variety of issues. The findings, tentative though they are, have 
important implications.
The results of this work, of the research on curiosity or exploratory drive, and of 
studies on early sensory deprivation converge to provide a revised conception of 
human motivation. This conception recognizes and emphasizes the "immediate drive 
value of cognitive experience" as a necessary factor in a theory of motivation (37).
From the viewpoint of theory this work has important implications for several 
scientific  disciplines.  Methodologically  it  makes  available  a  technique  for  the 
relatively  controlled  study  of  imagery  and  hallucinations,  a  problem  thus  far 
inaccessible  to experimental  observation without the  use  of  drugs.  Practically,  it 
suggests a whole range of applications from management of medical patients to 
highway design.
Theoretical accountings of how reduced environmental input produces the various 
responses described in previous sections have varied widely. Our purpose here will be 
simply to indicate the range of explanations used and some of the terms of their 
analyses.
Rapaport (62) discusses these data from the viewpoint of psychoanalytic theory, in 
the context of the relationship between id and ego functioning. In a detailed discussion 
of these issues, he states that

-87-
in  the  absence  of  external  stimulation,  the  ego  becomes  unable  to  maintain  its 
autonomy from the id and the "effectiveness of these (ego) structures in controlling id 
impulses may be impaired" (page 19). The reduced control of these impulses may be 
manifested in the difficulty of thinking, in the unpleasant affect, emotionality, and 
content of imagery previously discussed. In this formulation, ego functioning is closely 
tied to external stimulation. Ruff et al. (65) extend this notion to account for individual 
differences by using the concept of sharpness of ego boundaries. Orientation in time 
and space structure the situation and may thus help the individual retain ego autonomy 
by keeping some ego functions in operation. Since isolation destructures the id-ego 
relationship, initial variations in the differentiation of ego boundaries may account for 
the individual differences seen.
The  increased awareness  of  primary process  material  states  in psychoanalytic 
terminology what others have described as the heightened awareness of internal bodily 
states. The decline in perceptual stability and reasoning and the increase in anxiety and 
imagery seem to arise not only as a function of the increased sensitivity to one's own 
thoughts, feelings, and ideas but also because of the absence of an external reality 
against  which  to  validate  one's  inner  experiences  experientially  or  consensually. 
Although periodic "regression in the service of the ego," to use Kris's phrase, can be 
quite productive and creative, the sustained inability to go through the validation 
process seems both to increase anxiety and the distance from the social community. 
Burney's (13) reluctance to leave his solitary confinement after eighteen months, which 
has been observed in other autobiographical reports as well, may be one manifestation 
of this process. At the same time, if one accepts Hebb's notion of the "immediate drive 
value  of  cognitive  experience"  (37),  the  increased  receptivity  to  any  cognitive 
experience as seen in the brainwashing reports becomes more comprehensible.
A recent paper by Bruner (12) places the work on deprivation in a functional 
context. Perception is seen as instrumental behavior that permits the organism to 
manage its necessary transactions with the environment. Successful management of 
these transactions depends on acquiring an adequate internal model of the external 
world. Early sensory deprivation interferes with the learning of a stable model. Thus 
the organism becomes limited in acquiring a full range of efficient problem-solving 
strategies.  Deprivation  in  adult  life  interferes  with  the  perceptual-cognitive 
maintenance needs of the organism. Thus, it disrupts the vital evaluation process by 
which one monitors
-88-
and corrects the models and strategies used in dealing with the environment. Freedman 
et al. (30) utilize a similar notion of "perceptual degradation" to account for their 
findings. They attribute the observed phenomena to the organism's continuous search 
for order and meaning in the unstructured perceptual environment provided in their 
experimental setup.

From a neurophysiological point of view, Lindsley (51) emphasizes the function of 
the  reticular  activating  system  because  of  its  role  in  attention,  perception,  and 
motivation. This system serves the homeostatic function of adjusting input-output 
relationships. Sensory deprivation is one of a class of conditions which upsets the 
balance and thus disturbs the regulating function of the ascending reticular activating 
system. With markedly reduced input, perception is disrupted; attention gives way to 
distractibility; interest gives way to boredom; and activity is either held in abeyance or 
becomes highly stereotyped and nonadaptive. Heron (39) points out how sensory and 
perceptual deprivation may be equivalent. He cites evidence to show that the capacity 
of a stimulus to evoke and maintain arousal is lost upon repeated exposure of the 
stimulus. Hebb (37) presents an excellent theoretical discussion of the implications of 
the concept of arousal and the manner in which these findings bear upon a variety of 
issues in motivation theory, such as the generality or specificity of drive states, the 
need  for  varied  stimulation,  and  the  intrinsically rewarding  quality  of  cognitive 
activity.
These  findings  are  relevant  to  the  problem  of  interrogation.  There  are  no 
experimental data available in the studies reviewed bearing directly on the relationship 
of isolation and deprivation to the amount and accuracy of information which can be 
obtained when under interrogation. Nonetheless, the findings reported suggest some 
major parameters which may facilitate or inhibit the disorganizing effects of isolation.
Before considering further the implications of these studies for the interrogation 
problem, it may be important to point out some limitations. There has been some 
tendency to equate the effects of sensory and perceptual deprivation studies with those 
reported under conditions of solitary confinement. One possibly gratuitous assumption 
in equating the two is that. the nonpatterned stimulation in these studies simply 
accelerates the debilitating effects observed with social isolation alone. Several studies 
(21,  30,  32)  explicitly  control  or  account  for  the  social  isolation  variable  as 
contributing little to the effects observed. Schachter (66) studied the reactions of five 
students to social isolation without interference with ordinary sensory
-89-
input. He concludes that for isolation two to eight days seems to produce relatively 
little of the painful effects seen in the autobiographical reports of sailors and explorers. 
However, specific investigations of the social factors in the sensory deprivation studies 
will be necessary in order to make a more precise generalization.
We have earlier elaborated some aspects of the differences in motivation between 
the experimental situations and the real life conditions. Because of these differences, 
and of limited data, caution in generalizing the relevance of these experimental studies 
is necessary. Pending clarification of these issues, some tentative implications may be 
suggested as relevant.
The loss of internal standards and the absence of opportunity to validate one's ideas 
against an objective reality would seem to apply in real life as well as in experimental 

circumstances.  The  boredom,  restlessness,  irritability,  and  other  mood  changes 
observed also may well apply. The stimulus-hunger and increased suggestibility which 
have been observed may make an individual more vulnerable to revealing information 
he might otherwise withhold, particularly when accompanied by the social uncertainty 
induced in the interrogation situation. Unprepared for these consequences of isolation 
and  deprivation,  like  many  experimental  subjects,  an  individual  may  become 
apprehensive and indeed panicked by his reactions. The appearance of hallucinatory-
like phenomena and their emotional accompaniments have often been quite anxiety 
provoking. On the other hand, previous exposure to these circumstances, familiarity 
with their consequences, and training individuals in techniques of dealing with them 
may well increase resistance. Knowledge of the importance of retaining spatial and 
time orientation, and self-stimulation in concrete tasks, are two examples of techniques 
for reducing stress by increasing psychological structure. Schachter (66) points out that 
isolates who are able to keep occupied with distracting activities appear to suffer less 
and be more prone to the state of apathy. Schonbach (68), in an experimental study, has 
demonstrated that a state of deprivation is far more bearable under conditions of 
irrelevant and distractive thought than under conditions where thought is concerned 
almost wholly with the source of deprivation.
Since direct research on the problem of resistance to interrogation in a realistic 
setting is difficult, some reliance on the type of study reviewed here is necessary. 
Further investigation of these problems will undoubtedly continue to shed new light on 
resistance to the disorganizing consequences of deprivation. However, despite their 
often dramatic results, these studies have remained within the limi-
-90-
tations posed by ethical considerations and have not pushed subjects to their ultimate 
limits. Indeed, polio patients survive years in respirators without psychosis, whereas 
prisoners, sailors, and explorers often successfully endure long months of severe 
deprivation  and  monotony.  Furthermore,  the  autobiographical  evidence,  even  if 
selfselected, implies that the long term effects are reversible and in some instances 
leave the individual with a sense of having achieved a new and better personality 
synthesis. From this point of view, the findings reviewed must be considered as 
suggestive, rather than spelling out in final terms the complete and precise parameters 
of response.
References
1. Azima H., and Cramer Fern J.  Effects of the decrease in sensory variability on body scheme. 
Canad. J. Psychiat., 1956, 1, 59-72.
2. Azima H., and Cramer Fern J.  Effects of partial perceptual isolation in mentally disturbed 
individuals. Dis. nerv. Sys., 1956, 17, 117-123.

3. Azima H., and Cramer-Azima Fern J. Studies on perceptual isolation. Dis. nerv. Sys., (Monogr. 
Suppl.) 1957, 18, No. 8, 80-85.
4. Azima H., Vispos R. H., and Azima Fern J. Observations on anaclitic therapy during sensory 
deprivation, In Solomon P., Kubzansky P. E., Leiderman, P. H. , et al. (Eds.),  Sensory Deprivation. 
Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in press.
5. Beach F. A., and Jaynes J. Effects of early experience upon the behavior of animals. Psychol. 
Bull., 1954, 51, 239-263.
6. Bennett A. M. H.  Sensory deprivation in aviation. In P. Solomon, P. E. Kubzansky , P. H. 
Leiderman, et al. (Eds.), Sensory Deprivation. Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in press.
7. Bexton W. H.  Some effects of perceptual isolation on human subjects. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. McGill Univer., 1953.
8.  Bexton  W.  H.,  Heron  W.,  and  Scott  T.  H.  Effects  of  decreased  variation  in  the  sensory 
environment. Canad. J. Psychol., 1954, 8, 70-76.
9. Biderman A. D. Communist techniques of coercive interrogation. Lackland Air Force Base, Texas; 
Air Force Personnel and Training Research Center, December 1956. AFPTRC Development Report TN-
56-132.
10. Biderman A. D. Communist attempts to elicit false confessions from Air Force prisoners of war. 
Bull. N. Y. Acad. Med., 1957, 33, 616-625.
11. Bombard A. The voyage of the Heretique. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1953.
12. Bruner J. S.  The cognitive consequences of early sensory deprivation. In P. Solomon, P. E. 
Kubzansky, P. H. Leiderman, et al. (Eds.), Sensory Deprivation. Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in 
press.
13. Burney C. Solitary Confinement. New York: Coward-McCann, 1952.
14. Butler B. A.  Discrimination learning by rhesus monkeys to visual exploration motivation.  J. 
comp. physiol. Psychol., 1953, 46, 95-98.
15. Byrd R. E. Alone. New York: Putnams, 1938.
-91-
16. Camberari J. D. The effects of sensory isolation on suggestible and nonsuggestible psychology 
graduate students. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Univer. of Utah, 1958.
17. Cohen B. D., Rosenbaum G., Dobie S. I., and Gottlieb J. S. Sensory isolation: Hallucinagenic 
effects of a brief procedure. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1959, 129, 486-491.
18. Cohen S. I., Silverman A. J., Bressler G., and Shmavonian B. Problems in isolation studies. In P. 
Solotrion, P. E. Kubzansky, P. H. Leiderman, et al. (Eds.), Sensory Deprivation. Cambridge: Harvard 
Univer. Press, in press.

19. Cohen W. Some perceptual and physiological aspects of uniform visual stimulation. Washington, 
D. C.: Research and Development Division, Office of the Surgeon General, Department of the Army. 
1958, Progress Report No. 1.
20. Cohen W., and Cadwallader T. C. Cessation of visual experience under prolonged uniform visual 
stimulation . Amer. Psychologist, 1958, 13, 410. (Abstract)
21. Davis J. M., McCourt W. F., and Solomon P. Sensory deprivation: (1) Effects of social contact, 
(2) Effects of random visual stimulation. Paper read at Amer. Psychiatric Ass., Philadelphia, April 1958.
22. Davis K. Extreme social isolation of a child. Amer. J. Sociol., 1940, 45, 554-565.
23. Davis K. Final note on a case of extreme isolation. Amer. J. Sociol., 1947, 50, 432-437.
24. Davis R. C. Somatic activity under reduced stimulation. J. comp. physiol. Psychol., 1959, 52, 
309-314.
25. Demerit W., and Kleitman N. The relation of eye movements during sleep to dream activity: An 
objective method for the study of dreaming. J. exp. Psychol., 1957, 53, 339-346.
26. Dennis W. Infant reaction to restraint: an evaluation of Watson's theory. Trans. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 
1940, Ser. II, 2, 202-218.
27. Dennis W. Infant development under conditions of restricted practice and of minimum social 
stimulation. Genet. Psychol. Monogr., 1941, 23, 143-191.
28. Doane B. K., Mahatoo W., Heron W., and Scott T. H.  Changes in perceptual function after 
isolation. Canad. J. Psychol., 1959, 13, 210-219.
29.  Evarts  E.  V.  Neurophysiological  mechanisms  underlying  hallucinations.  Paper  read  at 
Symposium on Hallucinations, Amer. Ass. Advancem. Sci., Washington, D. C., December 1958.
30. Freedman S. J., Grunebaum H. U., and Greenblatt M.  Perceptual and cognitive changes in 
sensory  deprivation.  In  P.  Solomon,  P.  E.  Kubzansky,  P.  H.  Leiderman  ,  et  al.  (Eds.),  Sensory 
Deprivation. Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in press.
31. Freud S. The interpretation of dreams. London: Allen Sc: Unwin, 1915.
32. Goldberger L.,  and Holt R. R.  Experimental interference with reality coiltact (perceptual 
isolation): Method and group results. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1958, 127, 99-112.
33.  Goldberger L.,  and Holt  R. R.  Experimental  interference with  reality  contact: Individual 
differences. In P. Solomon, P. E. Kubzansky, P. H. Leiderman, et al. (Eds.),  Sensory Deprivation. 
Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in press.
34. Harlow H. F. Mice, monkeys, men, and motives. Psychol. Rev., 1953, 60, 23-32.
35. Harris A. Sensory deprivation in schizophrenia. J. ment. Sci., 1959, 105, 235-237.
-92-

36. Hartmann H. Ego psychology and the problem of adaptation. New York: Internat, Univer. Press, 
1958. (Originally published in 1939.)
37. Hebb D. O. Drives and the CNS (conceptual nervous system). Psychol. Rev., 1955, 62, 243-254.
38. Hebb D. O., Heath E. S., and Stuart E. A. Experimental deafness. Canad. J. Psychol., 1954, 8, 
152-156.
39. Heron W.  Cognitive and physiological effects of perceptual isolation. In P. Solomon, P. E. 
Kubzansky, P. H. Lciderman, et al. (Eds.), Sensory Deprivation. Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in 
press.
40. Heron W., Bexton W. H., and Hebb, D. O. Cognitive effects of a decreased variatiou in the 
sensory environment. Amer. Psychologist, 1953, 8, 366. (Abstract)
41. Heron. W., Doane B. K., and Scott T. H.  Visual disturbances after prolonged perceptual 
isolation. Canad. J. Psychol., 1956, 10, 13-18.
42. Hinkle L. E., Jr., and Wolff H. G. Communist interrogation and indoctrination of "Enemies of 
the State". Analysis of methods used by the Communist State Police. (Special Report), A. M. A. Arch. 
Neurol. Psychiat., 1956, 76, 115-174.
43. Hochberg J., Triebel W., and Seaman G.  Color adaptation under conditions of hornogenous 
visual stimulation (Ganzfeld). J. exp. Psychol., 1951, 41, 153-159.
44. Holland J. G. Human vigilance. Science. 1958, 128, 61-67.
45. Kandel E. J., Myers T. I., and Murphy D. B. Influence of prior verbalization and instructions on 
visual sensations reported under conditions of reduced sensory input.  Amer. Psychologist. 1958, 13, 
334. (Abstract)
46. Kubzarisky P. E. Methodological and conceptual problems in the study of sensory deprivation. 
Amer. Psychologist, 1958, 13, 334. (Abstract)
47. Kubzansky P. E., Leiderman P. H., Mendelson J., et al.  A comparison of two conditions of 
sensory deprivation. Paper read at Amer. Psychol. Ass., Washington, D. C., September 1958.
48. Leiderman P. H., Mendelson J., Wexler D., and Solomon P.  Sensory deprivation: Clinical 
aspects. A. M. A. Arch. int. Med., 1958, 101, 389-396.
49. Litton R. J. "Thought reform" of western civilians in Chinese Communist prisons.  Psychiat., 
1956, 19, 173-195.
50. Lilly J. C. Mental effects of' reduction of ordinary levels of physical stimuli on intact, healthy 
persons. Psychiat. res. Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1956, 5, 1-28.
51. Lindsley D. Are there common factors in sensory deprivation, sensory distortion, and sensory 
overload? In  P. Solomon, P. E. Kubzansky,  P. H. Leiderman, et al. (Fds.),  Sensory Deprivation. 
Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in press.
52. Mackworth N. H. Researches on the measurement of human performance. Med. res. Council. 
spec. Rep. Ser., No. 268, London: H. M. S. O., 1950.

53. Meltzer M. Solitary confinement. In Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry. Factors used to 
increase the susceptibility of individuals to forceful indoctrinations Observations and experiments. New 
York: GAP Publications Office, 1956, GAP Symposium No. 3, 96-103.
54. Mendelson J., and Foley J. M.  An abnormality of mental function affecting patients with 
poliomyelitis in tank type respirators. Trans. Amer. Neurol. Ass., 1956, 81, 134-138.
55. Mendelson J., Kubzansky P. E., Leiderman P. H., et al. Catechol amine excretion and behavior 
during sensory deprivation. A. M. A. Arch. genet. Psychiat., 1960, 2, 147-155.
-93-
56. Mendelson J., Kubzansky P. E., Leiderman P. H., et al. Physiological and psychological aspects 
of sensory deprivation: A case analysis. In P. Solomon, P. E. Kubzansky, P. H. Leiderman, et al. (Eds.), 
Sensory Deprivation. Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in press.
57. Mendelson J., Solomon P., and Lindemann E. Hallucinations of poliomyelitis patients during 
treatment in a respirator. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1958, 126, 421-428.
58. Montgomery K. C.  The role of the exploratory drive in learning. J. comp. physiol. Psychol., 
1954, 47, 60-64.
59. Ormiston D. W.  The effects of sensory deprivation and sensory bombardment on apparent 
movement thresholds. Amer. Psychologist, 1958, 13, 389. (Abstract)
60. Petrie A., Collins W., and Solomon P. Pain sensitivity, sensory deprivation and susceptibility to 
satiation. Science, 1958, 128, 1431- 1433.
61. Posternak Jean M., Fleming T. C., and Evarts E. V. Effects of interruption of the visual pathway 
on the response to geniculate stimulation. Science, 1959, 129, 39-40.
62. Rapaport D. The theory of ego autonomy: A generalization. Bull. Menninger Clin., 1958, 22, 13-
35.
63. Ritter Christiane E. A woman in the polar night. New York: Dutton, 1954.
64. Rosenbaum G., Dobie S. I., and Cohen B. D. Visual recognition thresholds following sensory 
deprivation. Amer. J. Psychol., 1959, 72, 429-433.
65. Ruff G. E., Levy E. Z., and Thaler V. H. Factors influencing reaction to reduced sensory input. 
In P. Solomon, P. E. Kubzansky, P. H. Leiderman, et al. (Eds.),  Sensory Deprivation. Cambridge: 
Harvard Univer. Press, in press.
66. Schachter S. The psychology of affiliation. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer. Press, 1959.
67. Schein E. H. The Chinese indoctrination program for prisoners of war; A study of attempted 
brainwashing. Psychiatry, 1956, 19, 149-172.
68. Schönbach P. Cognition, motivation and time perception. J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1959, 58, 
195-202.

69. Scott T. H., Bexton W. H., Heron W., and Doane B. K. Cognitive effects of perceptual isolation. 
Canad. J. Psychol., 1959, 13, 200-209.
70. Singh J. A. L., and Zingg R. M. Wolf-children and feral man. New York: Harper, 1942.
71. Small M. H. On some psychical relations of society and solitude. Pedagogical Seminary, 1900, 
7, 13-69.
72. Solomon P., Leiderman P. H., Mendelson J., and Wexler D. Sensory deprivation: A review. Amer. 
J. Psychiat., 1957, 114, 357-363.
73. Spitz R. A. Hospitalism. An inquiry into the genesis of psychiatric conditions in early childhood. 
Psychoanal. Stud. Child., 1, 53-74. New York: Internat. Univer. Press, 1945.
74. Spitz R. A. Hospitalism: A follow-up report. Psychoanal. Stud. Child., 2, 113-117. New York: 
Internat. Univer. Press, 1946.
75. Spitz R. A.  Anaclitic depression.  Psychoanal. Stud. Child., 2, 313-342. New York: Internat. 
Univer. Press, 1946.
76. Vernon J. A., and Hoffman J. Effects of sensory deprivation on learning rate in human beings. 
Science, 1956, 123, 1074-1075.
77. Vernon J. A., and McGill T. E. The effect of sensory deprivation upon tote learning. Amer. J. 
Psychol., 1957, 70, 637-639,
-94-
78. Vernon J. A., McGill T. E., Gulick W. L., and Candland D. R. The effect of human isolation upon 
some perceptual and motor skills. In P. Solomon, P. E. Kubzansky, P. H. Leiderman, et al. (Eds.), 
Sensory Deprivation. Cambridge: Harvard Univer. Press, in press.
79. Vernon J. A., McGill T. E., and Schiffman H. Visual hallucinations during perceptual isolation. 
Canad. J. Psychol., 1958, 12, 31-34.
80. Wexler D., Mendelson J., Leiderman P. H., and Solomon P. Sensory deprivation: A technique for 
studying psychiatric aspects of stress. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1958, 79, 225-233.
81. Ziskind E. Isolation stress in medical and mental illness. J. Amer. reed. Ass., 1958, 168, 1427- 
1431.
-95-
CHAPTER 3

The use of drugs
in interrogation
LOUIS A. GOTTSCHALK
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to review available scientific knowledge on the use of 
pharmacologic agents to influence the communication of information which, for one 
reason  or  another,  an  informant  does  not  wish  to  reveal.  This  problem  in 
communication is not an unfamiliar one to the psychiatrist, who often aims to recover 
unconscious conflicts or memories from the neurotic or psychotic patient in the hope 
of producing therapeutic benefit. The purpose of this chapter, however, is not so much 
to review our knowledge on how to bring to a person's awareness, the feelings, 
impulses, and ideas of which he is not consciously aware; rather, the object is to focus 
particularly on the problem of getting data from a source of information when the 
individual is aware of the information but does not want to communicate it, either 
because the giving might incriminate him or put into possible jeopardy an aggregate of 
people toward whom he feels strong allegiance, identification, and belonging.
In the physician's customary role as a helping person and as a healer, it is generally 
contrary to his method of operation to employ any coercion, overt or subtle, to induce 
a patient to behave in a way that may be detrimental to himself or to his social or 
national group of origin. Coercion may be used, however, if the patient is considered to 
be behaving in a manner that is destructive to himself (e.g., a diabetic refusing to take 
insulin or an alcoholic refusing to stop drinking) or to his social group. Furthermore, 
the code of ethics, particularly of the psychiatrist, ordinarily binds the physician to 
keep
-96-
confidential the secrets that his patients impart to him, whether or not the patient has 
been aware or unaware of their nature. In the practice of psychiatry, the code of 
respecting and keeping the confidences of a patient is considered to be a tool that 
facilitates the confession or expression of otherwise taboo material from the patient. 
The psychiatrist's office is, ideally, one place where the patient finds that he has 
immunity from punitive or disapproving action by the society in which he lives, except 
for the adverse criticism forthcoming from the patient's own internalized standards of 
behavior.
Occasionally the psychiatrist's occupation brings him into contact with patients with 
whom  the  psychiatrist  himself  is  led  into  a  conflict  between  his  interest  in 

championing the welfare and privileged communications of his individual patient and 
that of the welfare of the group: family, city, state, nation. In such a quandary, e.g., the 
question of what to do about a person who has confided his participation in a major 
crime, the physician's obligation to the individual and to the community may be in 
opposition to one another. In this position the physician may be forced to disqualify 
himself as a continuing confidant for the patient until the patient has remedied his 
social obligation to the state.
Mentioning these situations and the customary attitude of the medical profession 
has  a bearing on the substance of  this report. The use  of drugs  in obtaining a 
confession from a criminal, or in obtaining information that a source may consciously 
wish to keep confidential for fear of repercussion to himself or his group, is fraught 
with ethical conflicts for the physician. This explains in part why there is a relative 
paucity of systematized published scientific investigation by physiciaits on this matter. 
The general feeling in western countries regarding the employment of chemical agents 
to "make people do things against their will" has precluded serious systematic study of 
the potentialities of drugs for interrogation. It has not, however, precluded considerable 
speculation on the subject, some of it rather unrealistic.
Much  relevant  scientific  information  has  been  published  on  the  therapeutic 
employment of drugs. The bulk of the medical articles of the last few years on the 
effects of drugs on behavior deals with the use and effects of these drugs on the 
mentally ill population. In fact, a growing avalanche of articles of this type sprang up 
with the advent of tranquilizing drugs. From this large body of publications, the 
reviewer aims to extrapolate to the problems of interrogation. Then, there is a notably 
smaller  group  of  studies  that  deals  principally  wiih  explorations  in  methods  of 
assessing the psychopharma-
-97-
cologic effects of drugs on relatively normal individuals. From these studies, too, the 
reviewer aims to transfer what has been learned to the problems of interrogation. 
Finally, there are the relatively rare published investigations on the use of drugs for 
purposes of interrogation in police or security procedures; these are reviewed carefully 
because of their direct relevance.
No  published  reports have  come  to  the  attention  of  this  author  detailing  the 
scientific application of drugs by intelligence agencies of any nation as a means of 
obtaining information. Apparently, what knowledge is available, whether derived from 
haphazard experience or systematic study, is not accessible in open sources. This 
reviewer found only two references touching on this topic. Rolin (112) casually claims 
that  the  Nazis  used  mescaline  to  get  information  from  prisoners  at  Dachau.  In 
discussing the methods of communist indoctrination of Americans who have fallen 
into the hands of communists or communist-controlled countries, Hinkle (62) has 
stated that the methods of Russian interrogation and indoctrination are derived from 
age-old police methods that have been systematized, and are not dependent on drugs, 
hypnotism, or any other special procedure designed by scientists. 1

Methodological Problems in Determining the Applicability of Drugs to 
Interrogation Procedures: Nonspecific Effects of Drugs on Verbal Behavior
One of the crucial questions arising in evaluating the use of a drug for interrogation 
techniques is what responses are related to the pharmacologic activity of the drug 
administered and what responses are related to some other aspects of the transactions 
taking place when a person receives medication from another person. A large variety of 
nonpharmacologic factors can affect the responses of an individual after getting a dose 
of medication (see also Masserman and Pechtel, 102). In fact, one of the major 
problems plaguing investigators of
1 Popular literature contains a number of accounts alleging the use of drugs in interrogations. Recent 
well-publicized examples include the alleged use of mescaline against Cardinal Mindszenty (S. K. 
Swift, The Cardinal's Story, New York: Macmillan, 1949); the prison memoir of an American civilian 
held by the Chinese Communists (R. T. Ryan, I came back from a Red death cell, Saturday Evening 
Post, January 17, 24, 31, and February 7, 1953); and the account by the Communist editor, Henri Alleg, 
of an alleged use of sodium pentothal in interrogations he received while held by French forces in 
Algeria (H. Alleg, The Question, New York: George Braziller, 1958, pp. 91-102).
-98-
ps class="continued"ychopharmacologic relationships is how to discriminate the factors 
that are responsible for observed effects, how to single out factors so their sole effects can 
be observed, and how to study summation and combined effects of different factors.A series 
of nonpharmacologic factors within the total transaction of a person giving another person a 
drug has been found to be more or less capable of contributing to the responses occurring 
with administration of the drug. These factors may be listed and what is known about each 
will be taken up separately.
1. Reactions due primarily to the "placebo phenomenon."
2. Silent administration.
3. Reactions to attitudes or motivations of the person administering the medication 
and interacting with the informant.
4. Drug effects modified by the current state of the recipient organism.
Reactions Due Primarily to the "Placebo Phenomenon," i.e., Reactions to Taking a 
Medicinelike Substance, Even Though It Is Pharmacologically Inert
There has been an increasing interest in the importance and mechanism of action of 
the placebo (46, 67, 83, 135, 136). The studies of Beecher and his group (7, 8) indicate 
that 30 to 50 per cent of individuals are placebo reactors, that is, respond with 
symptomatic  relief  to  taking  an  inert  substance.  If  one  is  interested  in  the 
pharmacology of a new drug and tries it out on a group of patients, a third to a half of 
this group will be relieved of their symptoms by a placebo; they react favorably to the 
syringe, pills or capsule, regardless of what it contains. Thus they dilute the significant 
data derived from the half or two-thirds of the group that react only to the active 
ingredient in the syringe or capsule. In studying a new drug-whether one is interested 

in applying its pharniacologic effect toward the alleviation of pain, amelioration of 
emotional distress, or the facilitation of communication of covert information-the 
scientist is not primarily interested in the subjective and behavioral effects of syringes 
and pills. Thus the scientist is obliged to take into account the placebo reactors, who 
must be screened out if one is to get an accurate idea of what the drug itself does.
Of course, to relieve pain or facilitate communication in a patient or prisoner, the 
"placebo phenomenon" can be made use of itself and
-99-
the investigator can expect that in 30 to 50 per cent of trials pain may be relieved or 
interrogation may be facilitated.Some additional factors are known which increase the 
likelihood of a placebo effect: 
1. A sympathetic woman investigator can obtain a higher percentage of pain relief 
from various niedicatimis than can a colder, more remote male (7).
2. Individuals under increased stress are more likely to respond to placebos (9).
3. Greater responsiveness is associated with certain personality characteristics 
according to Rorschach findings with placebo reactors in a group of 162 
postoperative patients: (a) more than one "insides" response; (b) Sum C > M; (c) 
A% < 50%; (d) CF > FC; (e) more than two “anxiety” responses; (f) less than 
two “hostility” responses; (g) average F + % 51; (83).
4. Clinical psychiatric findings in the same study regarding placebo reactors found 
greater responsiveness characteristic of individuals who are more anxious, more 
self-centered, more dependent on outside stimulation than on their own mental 
processes; persons who express their needs more freely socially, who are talkers, 
and who drain off anxiety by talking and relating to others. In contrast to the 
placebo reactors, the nonreactors are clinically more rigid and more emotionally 
controlled than average for their age and background. No sex and I.Q. 
differences between placebo reactors and nonreactors were found (83).
If one is interested in ascertaining whether a drug produces a given effect to a 
degree greater than a placebo, it becomes obvious that the effect produced by the drug 
must  exceed the chance variations of the placebo effect to a reliable extent. In 
experimental investigations exploring the usefulness of drugs for various purposes, the 
placebo and other nonspecific reactions to medicaments must be separated from the 
effects specific to the active drug. Devising an experimental study using infrahuman 
animals to assess the pharmacologic effect of a drug only postpones the assessment of 
the complicated responses likely to occur when the drug is given to a human being. For 
the researcher interested in discriminating specific from nonspecific effects of drugs, 
Beecher (7) has outlined a series of principles and practices on the basis of seventeen 
drug studies in which he has participated, as follows:
•
1. Subjective responses are the resultant of the action of the original stimulus and the psychic modification of that 
stimulus.

-100-
o
2. Man is the essential experimental subject for a definitive answer to questions in this field, and men are easier to work with 
than women, for with men the controls are simpler.
o
3. The investigating staff is constant during any given series of experiments.
o
4. The "unknowns" technique is employed throughout. The agents tested and the time they are tested are unknown not only 
to the subjects but to the observers as well. This requires the use of placebos, also as unknowns.
o
5. When a new agent is to be compared with the agents of past experience, and this is nearly always the case, a standard of 
reference is required (morphine in standardized dosage is used as the standard for analgesics, etc.).
width="5%"> 
o
6. Randomization of new agent, placebo, and a standard of reference is essential.
o
7. Significant comparisons of side actions of agents can be made only on the basis of equal strength in terms of their primary 
therapeutic effect.
o
8. Mathematical validation of supposed difference in effectiveness of the two agents is necessary.
o
9. The subjective (and behavioral) effects of drugs can be quantified accurately and rapidly only when placebo reactors are 
screened out.
Silent Administration
The obverse of placebo administration, the deliberate administration of an inert material, is silent 
administration, the unknown administratiou of a pharmacologically potent substance.
The act of administering a medication usually potentiates its effect since it invokes the status of a 
professional person and the prestige of social institutions and organizations that are a part of the 
setting. A general recognition of this fact has made the control of the placebo effect a routine feature of 
all carefully designed drug studies. Conversely, silent administration has received little or no attention.
Not all psychoactive drugs are equally suited to silent administration. A minimal requirement is the 
successful masking of the drug by substances otherwise introduced into the body, such as foods, 
liquids, smoke, or air. From this point of view the ideal drug would be tasteless, odorless, and 
completely soluble.
Theoretically, the net effect of a silently administered drug should be equal to its effect following 
routine procedures minus its placebo effect. In practice this effect would be modified by the state of 
the organism, the general setting in which the subject finds himself, and his typical and persistent 
modes of reacting, i.e., personality-constitutional factors. One may expect a very different reaction 
from a subject who is sensitive to his internal, subjective processes than from one who has learned to 
disregard and reject them in favor of "objective" external cues. Likewise, reactions will vary between 
subjects who yield to and expand upon their internal experiences and those who
-101-
strive to maintain a steady state by exercising deliberate control in the manner of negative feedback 
compensation.

For these reasons it is difficult to specify dosage levels at which a subject is likely to become aware 
that he is responding to a drug, since so much depends on personality and situational factors and on the 
subject's previous experience with drugs. In naive subjects moderate doses which noticeably modify their 
behavior may escape their attention, or be ascribed to other sources, such as fatigue, thirst, apprehension, 
dyspepsia, etc.
The judicious choice of a drug with minimal side effects, its matching to the subject's personality, 
careful gauging of dosage, and a sense of timing, makes silent administration a hard-to-equal ally for the 
hypnotist intent on producing self-fulfilling and inescapable suggestions. Surpassing "magic room" 
procedures in their efficacy, the drug effects should prove even more compelling to the subject since the 
perceived sensations originate entirely within himself.
Reactions to Attitudes or Motivations of the Person Administering the Medication and Interacting 
with the Informant
One  of  the  major  problems  involved  in  the  assessment  of  drug  effects  is  distinguishing  the 
psychopharmacologic effect of a drug from that consciously or unconsciously desired by the person 
administering the drug. Another related problem of consequence is the extent to which a drug effect, 
noted by one person using the drugs to achieve his special aims, may be expected to occur in the hands of 
another person using the same drug for an essentially different aim. Although one assumption of this 
present report is that drug effects are to some extent generalizable from one situation to another, the 
limitations of such generalizing need to be clarified. The inference exists that the reaction to a specific 
drug when used by a physician to relieve the symptoms of a patient will produce a similar response when 
used to extract covert information from a recalcitrant source. In every instance, where such extrapolations 
are made from one such situation to another, the reviewer does so merely because little or no germane 
scientific reports are available in connection with the interrogation situation. In every instance where such 
an extrapolation is made, it is for heuristic purposes, and the generalized ideas and concepts require 
careful testing and validation.
What is some of the evidence that attitudes and motivation of the giver of the drug may affect the 
observed responses?
A classical study by Hill et al. (61) illustrates how the behavioral
-102-
effect of a drug may be influenced by the incentives given for participating in a drug study. The subjects 
were former narcotic addicts who volunteered for research. They were accepted after thorough screening 
by a board of hospital psychiatrists and other professional personnel, with a view to selecting only 
subjects with histories of repeated relapses to narcotic addiction and very unfavorable prognoses for 
future abstention from narcotic: drugs. Simple visual-manual reaction times were measured: without 
administration of drugs; 50 min after subcutaneous injection of morphine; and 50 min after subcutaneous 
injection of 250 mg of pentobarbital; each was measured under four incentive conditions, defined in 
terms of the schedule of morphine rewards offered for participation in the experiments. When a fixed 
reward was given a week in advance of the tests, morphine accelerated and pentobarbital slowed reaction 

times. When a fixed reward was scheduled for delivery after completion of the tests, neither drug affected 
reaction times significantly. When the amount of the posttest reward was made contingent upon speed of 
performance, morphine exerted no significant effect, but pentobarbital accelerated reaction times. When 
the same group of subjects were retested one to three days later, with posttest rewards again fixed for all 
subjects regardless of performance, morphine slowed reaction times and pentobarbitat had no significant 
effect. In other words, depending on the incentive conditions arranged by the investigators, the same dose 
of either morphine or pentobarbital exerted. either no effect or acted as a "stimulant" or as a "depressant" 
on simple visual-manual reaction times. Nevertheless, the action of either of these drugs was "specific" 
with respect to the actions of the other; thus, the action of morphine changed from "stimulant" to 
"depressant" when conditions changed from "low" incentive (rewards fixed and delivered before testing) 
to "high" incentive (rewards contingent on performance and scheduled for delivery after testing); whereas 
the action of pentobarbital changed from "depressant" to "stimulant" when identical changes in incentive 
were made. Further analysis of the data of Hill et al. revealed that, in comparison with the range of 
changes in mean reaction times produced by varying the incentive level when no drug was administered, 
morphine reduced but pentobarbital increased the sensitivity of the subject's performance to changes in 
incentive level.
A study by Wolf and Ripley (137) illustrates further that the effect produced by a drug depends not 
only on the particular agent used, the dose and route of administration, but also on the circumstances 
under which it is given or how its effect is measured. (See also: Rinkel, 110, 111; Sargant, 116.) They 
observed the effects of amo-
-103-
barbital (0.1 to 0.5 gm intravenously) on 700 patients with various complaints, including hypertension 
and "tension headache." They found that after administration of the drug, the patients were "at ease" if the 
setting was "secure" and friendly, but the patients were tense and anxious with equal facility if disturbing 
topics were introduced during interviews. The effects of the amobarbital on headache and blood pressure 
varied similarly with the nature of the interpersonal milieu. Another illustration is the report of Beecher 
(7) that a higher percentage of pain relief from various medications was obtained by a sympathetic 
woman investigator than by a colder, more remote male.
Drug Effects Modified by the Current State of the Recipient Organism
It is now well known that many drugs when taken internally may produce a transient excitant effect 
where the user becomes euphoric, talkative, and sometimes emotionally responsive. For example, it has 
been known through the ages that alcohol loosens the tongue during an excitant phase and that a person 
with enough alcohol may reveal things he would not ordinarily discuss. As is also well known, however, 
people react differently under the influence of alcohol. Some become depressed and morose. Some 
become excited and volatile. Some talk freely and others shut up like a clam. As has been previously 
pointed out, different people may have different reactions to the same drug and similar reactions may 
occur to different drugs. One cannot always predict what type of reaction may be obtained.
RELEVANCE OF NONPHARMACOLOGICAL FACTORS

Various factors such as sex, intelligence, and mental and physical condition can influence the speech 
patterns of an individual. In order to assess the pharmacology of a drug, the predrug differences in verbal 
communication must be taken into account. Furthermore, there is strong evidence that the pharmacologic 
effect of a drug interacts with the status of the human organism receiving the drug.
EFFECT OF SEX, INTELLIGENCE AND EDUCATIONAL LEVEL ON SPEECH PATTERNS
It is obvious and requires no documentation that people with differing intelligence and educational 
level show large qualitative differences on tests of intelligence. That they speak differently under 
standardized conditions of eliciting the speech would seem to follow, but this has not heretofore been 
investigated systematically. It is also
-104-
a common observation that the sexes use language differently, if not in a formal, structural way, then in 
the items of information that they choose to convey in their speech. Gleser, Gottschalk, and John (54) 
have studied the relationship of word-type usage to gender and intelligence as measured by the Wonderlic 
test. They obtained five-minute speech samples of a group of ninety occupationally adjusted, medically 
healthy individuals. These speech samples were elicted by standardized instructions given by a male 
investigator.  The  wordtypes  were  analyzed  and  scored  according  to  two  systems  of  categories:  a 
grammatical system and a "psychologic" system. The "psychologic" system attempted to classify words 
according to the emotive, cognitive, and perceptive processes conveyed, and the animate and inanimate 
objects  denoted,  regardless  of  grammatical  part  of  speech.  Under  these  experimental  conditions, 
significant differences were found to occur in the proportion of certain types of words used by men as 
compared to women. These differences appeared principally among the "psychologic" categories of 
words. For example, women tended to refer to themselves more frequently than did men. Women 
expressed more feeling and emotion, and used more negations. They used relatively fewer words 
referring to place or spatial relations and to denoting destructive action. Significant differences were also 
found to be associated, step-wise, with level of intelligence. These differences occurred principally 
among the grammatical categories. For example, the more intelligent adult was found to use significantly 
more adjectives and prepositions, but fewer adverbs, verbs, and interjections. A multiple correlation of . 
65 was obtained between these variables and Wonderlic I.Q. scores. The differences between the sexes in 
word-type  usage  tended  to decrease  at  the  highest  level  of  intelligence.  These  investigators  have 
published tables of separate word-frequency norms for males and females and for word categories that 
vary with intelligence.
In  summary,  this study illustrates that gender and intelligence influence speech patterns at the 
microscopic level of word-types. In experimental studies for determining whether or not a drug will 
facilitate  interrogation,  the  fact  that  intelligence  and  gender  separately  affect  speech  requires 
consideration. Suitable controls need to be included in the research design.
EFFECT OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PERSONALITY AND CEREBRAL FUNCITIONS ON REACTIONS TO 
DRUGS
There is considerable evidence to support the concept that the mental and physical state of an 
individual can affect his reaction to pharmacologic agents.

-105-
Kornetsky and Humphries (77, 78) have shown that there are reactors and nonreactors to drugs and 
that the reactors are likely to be those who are more depressed (on the D scale of the MMPI), to have 
more unreasonable fears, and overreact to environmental stimuli (the Pt. scale of the MAIPI). These 
investigators explored the effects of a placebo, promazine, secobarbital, and meperidine hydrochloride on 
a series of objective motor, intellectual, and perceptual activities, as well as on subjective responses. The 
subjective responses were evaluated 30, 90, 150, and 210 min after the drug was taken. Promazine and 
secobarbital had an adverse effect on the performance of motor tasks but not on simple intellectual and 
perceptual tasks. Meperidine hydrochloride in 50 to 100-mg doses did not impair performance in any of 
these same psychologic functions. The more deviant a subject was on four MMPI scales (psychasthenia, 
depression, hypochondriasis, and hysteria) the greater the effect of the drugs. Also, those who were most 
affected by one drug were most affected by another. Finally, if large enough doses of a drug were given, 
all subjects tended to respond in the same manner.
In  a  well-controlled  study,  Lasagna  et  al.  (84)  concluded:  "In  addition  to  dose  and  route  of 
administration, the nature of the subject and the situation in which a drug is administered are important 
determinants of drug effects." Using a double-blind technique, these investigators administered, in 
randomized order, a placebo (1 ml of physiological saline solution subcutaneously), amphetamine (20 
mg/ 70 kg body weight subcutaneously), heroin hydrochloride (2 to 4 mg subcutaneously), morphine 
phosphate (8 to 15 mg subcutaneously), and sodium pentobarbital (50 and 100 mg intravenously) to 
twenty healthy "normal" volunteers,' thirty patients in a hospital for chronic diseases, and thirty former 
narcotic addicts serving prison sentences in an institution devoted to the treatment of narcotic addiction. 
At intervals, before and after administration of the drugs, the subjects completed a questionnaire designed 
to measure the "subjective" mood changes induced, and this was supplemented by discussing with the 
subjects their responses to the drugs. In "normal" and, to a lesser degree, in chronically ill patients, 
amphetamine surpassed morphine, heroin, pentobarbital, and a placebo in producing euphoria. In the 
narcotic  addicts, however,  morphine was  reported  to  produce  a more pleasant  effect than heroin, 
amphetamine, or a placebo.
Laverty (85) gave randomized injections of sodium amytal and a placebo to forty subjects divided into 
four groups of ten each: introverted neurotics, introverted normals, extroverted normals, and extroverted 
neurotics, as assessed by scores on Guilford's R scale for
-106-
extroversion. The sedation threshold, as measured by the onset of slurred speech, was highest for neurotic 
introverts and it decreased step-wise for each of the groups in the order given. In other words, the group 
of introverted neurotics required the largest amount of intravenous sodium amytal (6.4 mg/kg body 
weight) before developing slurred speech.
Weinstein et al. in a series of studies (127, 128) have explored the differential effects of intravenous 
sodium amytal on subjects with preexisting organic brain disease and nonbrain-damaged individuals with 
illness not involving the nervous system. Some of the brain-damaged patients, who before receiving the 
drug had expressed awareness of illness and who had good orientation for place and person, with the drug 
became disoriented for place and grossly misidentified the examiners and explicitly denied illness. 
Weinstein claims that these changes with sodium amytal occurred only in the brain-damaged individuals; 

whereas, in nonbrain-damaged individuals receiving sodium amytal, the subjects talked of illness in terms 
of a third person, used more "concrete" symbols, selectively misinterpreted questions about illness, and 
misnamed the examiners in "paraphasic" fashion. (Incidentally, Weinstein reports that with the types of 
patients he studied, sodium amytal did not make them more communicative.) The significance of 
Weinstein's investigations appears to be that the person with brain-damage gets his sensorium more 
disorganized with sodium amytal than a nonbrain-damaged individual; an instance, apparently, of the 
effect of adding insult to injury.
Hoch, Cattell, and Pennes (64, 65) administered sodium amytal, pervitin, and mescaline to each of 
sixteen patients suffering from the pseudo neurotic form of schizophrenia, twenty-four patients with an 
overt form of schizophrenia with slight. to moderate deterioration, and nine schizophrenic patients with 
severe deterioration. With these drugs, especially with mescaline, they found typical physiologic changes 
occurring, mainly involving the vegetative nervous system. However, with most patients, some aspects of 
the drug experience seemed to be a direct continuation of previous personality factors. For instance, a 
patient who showed obsessive compulsive features before the drug experiment would tend to show the 
same obsessive structure while intoxicated. The same was true about anxiety attitudes, intellectualizations 
of conflicts, preoccupations with artistic, philosophical, or other matters.
Although Beringer () in his drug studies, using mescaline, did not find any correlation between 
personality and drug reaction, Stockings (122) found that cyclothymic and schizothymic individuals re-
-107-
sponded differently. Bensheim (15) thought that the cyclothymic group responded with euphoria and 
depression to mescaline and the schizothymic group with ecstasy. Lindemann and Malamud (94), 
experimenting with sodium amytal, cocaine, hashish, and mescaline on the same patients, found that each 
drug has its specific characteristics, but that the changes produced by a given drug were molded by the 
patient's personality (see also, 92, 93). Guttman and MacClay (59) and Sarwer-Foner (118) also found 
correlations between personality and drug reactions. Rubin et al. (114) suggested that the drug reaction be 
divided into two parts: those responses that are characteristic of a drug regardless of the patient in whom 
they occur, and those seen in a given patient regardless of the nature of the drug used. The first could be 
called  a  collective  reaction  and  the  second  an  individual  reaction  dependent  on  the  individual's 
personality.
It is perhaps of interest here that Russian scientists have also emphasized the differential response of 
different types of individuals to drugs, specifically chlorpromazine (86).
It has been obvious to those who listen to and study people with personality disorders that the verbal 
behavior of an individual suffering from an emotional disorder is relatively peculiar, both in form and in 
content. The depressed person is laconic. The manic person is diffusely wordy. The hysteric and 
schizophrenic are quite variable in the duration and length of their remarks. There are typical thematic 
and structural characteristics of the speech habits of patients with these types of psychiatric disorders. 
(See, for example, Gottschalk et al., 56.)
At present, there are more gaps than facts in our knowledge about the reactions of different personality 
types to the same and different drugs. Years of intensive research are needed to supply some of this 
unavailable knowledge.

However, it is already acknowledged that individuals with features of hysterical, conversion, or 
dissociative reactions are likely to be suggestible and to react strongly to all psychopharmacologic agents, 
including placebos (83, 85).
Drugs may tend to reinforce the need to give for individuals burdened with feelings of neurotic shame 
and guilt, especially if such feelings are enhanced by the interrogator. Drugs may also furnish the needed 
excuse and relief from personal responsibility for sources who violate internalized values and loyalties in 
revealing information.
The pharmacologic effect of the drug is probably of less decisive influence in facilitating information-
getting (although acting as a catalyst) than is the potential readiness of individuals with such per-
-108-
sonality features to behave in a typical way under certain circumstances. The consideration of drugs as an 
aid to interrogation presupposes a thorough understanding of the personality characteristics of the 
informant and of drugs, to predict what might be expected by their use.
EFFECT OF PHYSIOLOGIC CONDITIONS ON DRUG RESPONSES: BIOLOGIC RHYTHMS, NUTRITIONAL STATES, 
ISOLATION, AND FATIGUE
There is evidence that the physiologic condition of the individual affects his behavior and responsivity 
to further incoming stimuli. If so, this propensity is pertinent to our specific interest regarding the use of 
drugs in affecting the verbal behavior of informants.
It is difficult to ascertain to what extent the behavioral alterations that have been noted under various 
physiologic conditions are  mediated by biochemical  changes per se,  and  to what extent they are 
secondary psychophysiologic reactions to subtle changes in body chemistry. The answer need not occupy 
us here, except to note that a chemical alteration within the body is probably one important feature of the 
varying responsivity of  the individual. Under such circumstances, the addition of other chemicals 
complicates the problem of predicting the behavioral outcome. This is particularly true if the new 
chemical introduced into the body is mild in its effects, or if it is given in a small dosage.
Citation of every technical article bearing on this point would be unnecessarily burdensome here. 
Instead, a number of key investigations are reported to illustrate the point.
Biologic Rhythms. Benedek and Rubenstein (12, 13) have studied the relationship of associative 
material presented by women during psychoanalysis at various phases of their menstrual cycle, as 
measured by vaginal smears. These two types of data, verbal material and physiologic changes in the 
vaginal mucosa, were collected and analyzed independently by the two investigators, one a psychoanalyst 
and the other an endocrinologist. After a long period of collecting such data, the investigators related 
verbal productions to the phases of the menstrual cycle. A high concordance between the two types of 
data occurred. This has been validated in clinical studies to some extent. However, because of the 
importance of the psychophysiologic implications of this classical study, independent validation by other 
investigators would be desirable. In brief, the investigators found that during the estrogen phase of the 
menstrual  cycle,  the  women  were  more  extroverted,  had  more  fantasies,  dreams,  and  subjective 
experiences indicating strivings to be loved and impregnated and had con-

-109-
flicts about such strivings. During the progesterone phase, the women were more introverted, were more 
preoccupied with interests in their own body and self. During the premenstrual phase of the cycle, there 
were increased references to cleaning out, washing out, evacuating, losing something, and the women 
were more depressed. Again in these studies, individual variations occurred in relation to the varying 
hormonal phases of the sexual cycle, depending on the woman's personality type and the kinds of 
conflicts she had about procreation, childbirth, mothering, etc.
Nutritional States. Studies of the effects of the state of nutrition, especially vitamin deficiency, on 
human behavior are replete in the medical literature and indicate that neurological and psychiatric 
disorders may ensue with various vitamin deficiencies, particularly of the B complex. The effects of 
starvation, voluntary and enforced, in provoking increasing lassitude, apathy, depression, preoccupation 
with food, flattening of affect, and mood are sufficiently well known and are discussed in another chapter 
of this study. The more subtle effects of satiation with food and the brief deprivation of food typical of 
everyday rhythmical eating habits on response patterns to psychologic tests and interviewing procedures 
have received little careful study, even apart from problems of drug effects.
Clinical psychiatric experience indicates that some individuals become querulous, demanding, restless, 
even paranoid, and experience hunger contractions if they have not eaten for one to two hours, although 
they show no demonstrable pathologic, metabolic processes. Other individuals may miss several meals, 
yet experience no subjective reactions and show no signs of distinctly different behavior. Gottschalk and 
Gleser (55) did a controlled study of the effect of fasting for twelve hours on the speech patterns of six 
paid physically healthy and occupationally adjusted volunteers, three males and three females. MMPI's 
were obtained on all subjects. No homogeneous effect of fasting states on thematic speech variables or on 
the proportion of various categories of word-types was found under these experimental conditions. In one 
subject, however,  characteristic and repetitive reactions occurred to the stress of the mild fasting, 
reactions which were principally in the form of  significantly increased references to food, home, 
mainland, mother, and involving attempts to bridge the distances between such objects. Hypoglycemic 
states were induced by the injection of intravenous insulin in this same subject and the effects of these 
states were noted. A repetitive, but different, thematic reaction occurred to this experimentally induced 
hypoglycemia as
-110-
compared to voluntary fasting for twelve hours. The investigators concluded that fasting for twelve hours 
was not enough of a stress to produce consistent effects in the speech patterns of five, out of six, paid 
volunteers. Susceptibility of reacting to twelve hours of fasting was considered to be due to individual 
personality features. These investigators did not feel that this initial study gave them enough data to be 
able to predict accurately which subjects might react and which might not react to this stress.
Isolation and Fatigue. In unnatural biologic states, such as in experimental or enforced isolation from 
other humans or from ordinary levels of physical stimuli (19, 25, 60, 91) or in loss of sleep (124) 
emotional  disturbances  and  transient  psychotic  states  have  been  reported.  In  states  of  sleep  loss, 
paradoxical reactions to drugs may occur. In this connection, Wendt (129) is quoted as observing: "There 
are some interesting things about secobarbital or any of these drugs when ased in individuals under stress, 

e.g., after 40 hours of enforced wakefulness people become irritable, anxious, apprehensive, and difficult 
to keep awake. A small dose of secobarbital of 100 mg will wake them up and make them volunteer to go 
through another night." To this reviewer's knowledge, this phenomenon has not been reported elsewhere 
and it is important enough to merit. further testing. Such paradoxical effects have been noted clinically 
with other drugs, notably amphetamine which may have a sedative and quieting effect on restless. 
anxious, irritable small children with behavior problems presumably associated with psychomotor or petit 
mal epilepsy (see Forster, 48) and which may reduce the agitation of excited schizophrenics (21).
Methodologic Problems in Determining the Effects of Drugs on Verbal Behavior: Influence of 
Method of Sampling the Verbal Behavior on the Effect of a Drug
In this brief section, the reviewer, for the sake of completeness, wants to emphasize that the scientist 
studying this problem must realize that he will discover no more information than his method of 
evaluation will provide, and that different methods of sampling the verbal behavior of a subject under 
drugs may give somewhat different information about the psychopharmacologic effect of the drug. Each 
scientist will tend to use the measuring instrument most familiar to him, and each instrument or technique 
will have different merits.
-111-
The questionnaire of subjective reactions and the directive interview will provide yes and no answers 
and some qualified answers to structured concepts and hypothesis of the investigator. These methods have 
the advantage of relative speed and ease of evaluation.
The nondirective interview and the free-associative technique can be applied in a systematic and 
quantitative way and constitute a valuable means of studying the pharmacodynamics of drugs (see also 
Kubie, 79 and Wikler, 132), but evaluation of the data is generally slower and more complicated. 
Although some specific questions in the mind of the investigator may remain unanswered (e.g., is the 
material fantasy or fact?), these methods may provide considerable information about the drug's effect on 
symbolic processes, effects, and psychodynamic relationships. To approach definitive answers regarding 
the potential action of drugs on human behavior, emotion, cognition, and conation, our knowledge needs 
to be much more complete at the physiologic, biochemical, and psychologic levels of organization. The 
scientist would best look at his data in as many ways as possible and use a variety of approaches in 
studying these phenomena (see also Wikler, 131 ; Miller, 103).
The Efficacy of Drugs in Uncovering Information
Several investigators have employed drugs to facilitate the recovery of information not freely yielded 
by the individual.
In 1921, R. E. House, an obstetrician in Texas, observed in deliveries in which the mother had been 
given scopolamine that in a certain stage of anesthesia or sedation she might be talkative and reveal 
things she would not ordinarily discuss. He noted that after childbirth, the mother frequently forgot that 

she had suffered pain, that she had complained of it, and that she had spoken of personal matters. After 
the use of scopolamine, often with the addition of chloroform, had proved to have certain advantages in 
the obstetrical management of a woman delivering a baby, House persuaded himself to extend the use of 
scopolamine beyond its original purpose  to the interrogation of  criminal suspects. He gave many 
enthusiastic demonstrations throughout the United States. As a result, newspapers quickly applied the 
term "truth serum" to this sedative drug. House's enthusiasm about scopolamine as an adjunct in 
obstetrics led him to overenthusiastic statements about the value of the drug in interrogation. In 1931, on 
the basis of two cases, he stated (69) that a person under scopolamine could not lie and that the drug 
could distinguish the innocent from the guilty. This statement is an example of an
-112-
investigator observing the drug action he wanted to see, but which was not observed in subsequent 
studies (82).
Since House's early experiments with scopolamine (69), which led to the misnomer "truth serom," a 
great deal more has been learned about drug action. During World War II an interviewing method 
employing the administration of an intravenous barbiturate was used with disturbed soldiers who were 
experiencing acute war neuroses in order to allow them, transiently, to relive certain of their battle 
experiences which were believed to have aroused persistent emotional conflicts (58, 117). In psychotic 
patients, particularly catatonic schizophrenics, who will not talk and therefore do not participate in 
psychiatric therapy or reveal any clues to the mental experiences which may underlie their disorder, 
sodium amytal has been used to facilitate communication with the patient (117). If it works, there is a 
transient phase that can sometimes be prolonged by injecting the drug slowly, during which the patient 
will answer some questions and communicate some of his life problems. If the patient passes through this 
stage into a deeper stage of narcosis there may be a transient period of talkativeness as he recovers from 
the sedation or anesthesia.
For certain personality types, some drugs lower conscious ego control, thereby facilitating recall of 
repressed material and increasing the difficulty of withholding available information. The ideal drug for 
an interrogator would be one which not only accomplishes this feat, but does so without interfering with 
integrative capacities and intellectual functioning. Because of the uncertainty of the truth or falsity of 
statements obtained under circumstances of reduced ego control, and because certain drugs may give rise 
to psychotic manifestations such as hallucinations, illusions, delusions, or disorientation, the verbal 
material obtained cannot always be considered valid. Such data is not accepted in a court of justice and 
the information so obtained is not considered wholly accurate by the medical profession.
What experimental data and critical reviews are available which have examined the validity of such 
material from the viewpoint of the interrogator's interest in factual Inforniation?
Jean Rolin (112) has written a book entitled Police Drugs in which he inveighs strongly against the 
use of drugs for medico-legal purposes. His argument is in part moral, but it is also based on the grounds 
that there is uncertainty as to the truth of revelations obtained by such means. He concludes that ". . . from 
a purely medical standpoint, confessions obtained by drugging are valueless and do not give grounds for 
determining responsibility."
-113-

In the same book, E. V. Saher's (115) chapter on narcoanalysis provides an extensive review of the 
literature. In summarizing the viewpoint of the medical profession on narcoanalysis, he says:
Narcoanalysis is not a sure method of bringing out the truth and nothing but the truth. Any confession made is not 
necessarily true; and if no confession is made this does not necessarily prove that the patient has not committed the crime with 
which he may be charged. Does this mean that narcoanalysis has no importance at all from the angle of the administration of 
justice? The answer to this question is again in the negative, because in many cases the confession is true and often facts are 
brought out which are very helpful to the public prosecutor in proving his case. It seems fair to say that in the present stage of 
development narcoanalysis can be of great help in finding the truth. But it is also a dangerous means of investigation as the 
right interpretation of statements made depends largely on the skill of the analyst. 2
The published experimental studies on the validity of confessions obtained with drugs are few. Much 
further careful investigation is needed to clarify the problems involved. This reviewer was able to locate 
only four studies worth reporting here.
The first study is only of borderline relevance and involves the use of intravenous barbiturates as an 
aid in the differential diagnosis between conversion hysteria and malingering. The author (104) claimed 
that the use of intravenous sodium amytal was found to be helpful in detecting (and treating) individuals 
who were suspected of consciously distorting and feigning disability. He found such individuals to be 
negativistic, sullen, and nonproductive at first under amytal but prone to reveal the fact of and causes for 
their malingering as the interview proceeded. It was common in his experience to turn up a neurotic or 
psychotic basis for the malingering. (See Chapter 7.)
The other three studies deserve more detailed review because of their relative superiority, and thus 
rarity, as research studies in this highly specialized and untouched area.
Redlich, Ravitz, and Dession (109) asked a total of nine university students and professional persons 
to relate some true shame- or guiltproducing life incident. Then the subjects were asked to invent a "cover 
story"  to  be  told  to  another  examiner  who  interrogated  them  after  the  intravenous  injection  of 
amobarbital, 0.25 to 1.0 gm. In six of the subjects, the "cover story" was given during the amytal 
interrogation, in one it was mixed with the true story, and in two the true story was given. In nearly all 
subjects, the "cover story" contained elements of the guilt involved in the true story. However, except in
2 See also MacDonald, 99, 100; Underhill, 125. 
-114-
the cases of those who confessed the truth, the true story could not be inferred from the story told under 
amobarbital. An additional finding of interest was that the more normal, well-integrated individuais could 
lie better than the guilt-ridden, neurotic subjects.
Gerson and Victoroff (53) used amytal interviews on neuropsychiatric patients who had charges 
against them at Tilton General Hospital, Fort Dix, New Jersey. The patients were told that none of the 
material from the interviews would be used in the prosecution of charges against them, since it was 
considered a breach of medical ethics and because the material, derived with the full knowledge and 
consert of the patient, could not have been presented in court without violating the Twenty-fourth Article 
of War and the Bill of Rights of the Constitution of the United States.

The researchers first gained the confidence of the patients by discussing their life history. They were 
not informed that amytal would be used until a few minutes before narcoanalysis was undertaken. It was 
explained that the drug would make them sleepy and encourage them to discuss things with the doctor 
that might enable him to gain fuller understanding of the patients' personality and motivations. Under 
these circumstances, the patients' attitude varied from unquestioning compliance with the procedure to 
downright refusal to submit to the injection. (One gram of drug in 10 cc of distilled water was injected 
slowly in the median cubital vein.) Questions relevant to the charges against the patient were not brought 
up until later, the initial discussion involving relatively innocuous material about the patient's personality 
and life history which had been discussed previously. A follow-up, waking interview was carried out on 
the day following narcoanalysis, during which the covert material unearthed during the amytal interview 
was brought up, and possible psychologic factors in the patient's criminal behavior were discussed. 
During  the follow-up interview,  nine patients admitted the validity of their confessions and eight 
repudiated their confessions. Gerson and Victoroff examined the following factors interfering with the 
completeness and authenticity of the confessions: (a) inept questioning, (b) tendency of the patient to 
perseverate on unrelated topics, (c) mumbled, thick, inaudible speech and paralogia, (d) fantasies, (e) 
contradictory but apparently truthful evidence, and (f) poor rapport between doctor and patient. These 
experimenters concluded from their study that under sodium amytal subjects could sometimes lie and that 
their reasoning powers were sometimes present, although much distorted. Although they found amytal 
narcoanalysis successful for the revelation of deception, they felt that the validity of the information
-115-
garnered by this method was not so decisive that it could be admissible in court without further 
investigation and substantiation. They acknowledged that the doctor could not tell when the patient's 
recollections turned into fantasy, could not positively state whether he was simulating deep narcosis and 
actually maintaining his lies, and could not, without social investigation, determine which of contrary 
stories told under narcoanalysis was true.
Clark and Beecher (30) tested the ability of twenty, paid, volunteer male college students while under 
drugs to withhold deliberately information during four to eight hours' sessions from a male interviewer, 
who also administered the drugs intravenously. Thiopental, atropine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, 
sodium amobarbital, ethyl alcohol, scopolamine hydrobromide, pentobarbital sodium, morphine, caffeine 
sodium benzoate, and mescaline sulfate were given singly and in combination. The subjects were 
motivated by their desire for monetary compensation, their perceived importance of the experiment, and 
pride in their integrity and "will power." The information which the subjects were asked to withhold 
consisted of (a) two items of personal information (e.g., birthplace, mother's maiden name, etc), (b) an 
"experimental secret" devised to resemble military intelligence, and (c) a guilt-laden personal experience 
for which the subject devised a "cover story." All of this information was reduced to writing and 
deposited with a technician. To check possible forgetting, the subject was asked to produce the withheld 
information at the end of the experiment, and this was verified against the written version.
The drugs and combinations of drugs used in these experiments were given in such large amounts that they produced 
grossly abnormal states of mind. At various times, subjects became semicomatose, mildly delirious, panicky, markedly 
loquacious,  euphoric or underwent transient  dissociative  reactions;  yet,  curiously,  at  no  time  was there sufficient  ego 
impairment that they were unable to identify the significance of questions about the suppressed information and avoid 
answering them in response to direct questioning. As long as they remained in auditory contact with the interrogator, they 
consistently refused to reveal the suppressed items.

The “experimental secret” was not given up by any of the subjects. Similarly, none of them revealed the suppressed items 
of amnestic data in response to specific questioning. However, on two occasions the names of close relatives being used as 
suppressed information were revealed, apparently as slips of the tongue, in the course of spontaneous, dissociative rambling 
while severely intoxicated with scopolamine and thiopental in combination.
The findings with the "cover story" technique were essentially those of Redlich et al. Under thiopental narcosis, two 
subjects produced significant variations in the cover story which betrayed the content of the true story.
-116-
These individuals were of a more neurotic character pattern than the other subjects, and their true stories centered on 
problems of unresolved guilt. However, the remaining subjects, if they were able to talk at all coherently, reproduced the cover 
stories with remarkable fidelity to the original version.
In evaluating the considerable ego-integrity maintained by these subjects, it is important to consider 
that they may have felt relatively secure in a protected experimental situation, in the hands of a 
responsible experimenter and physician.
In summary, then, clinical experience and experimental studies indicate that, although a person's 
resistance to communicating consciously withheld information can be broken down with drugs, and 
particularly sodium amytal, the interrogator can have no easy assurance as to the accuracy and validity of 
the information he obtains (see also MacDonald's discussion, 100, and that of Inbau and Reid, 71). 
Furthermore, a lack of crucial information from a subject under a drug does not mean that the subject has 
no information. An interrogator would have to evaluate many other factors — the personality of the 
subject, the milieu, other sources of evidence, etc. — to decide how to interpret the outcome of an 
interview with a drugged informant.
Specific Effects of Drugs on Verbal Behavior, Particularly Drugs Potentially Applicable to 
Interrogation Procedures
After looking at these efforts to elicit information with a variety of drugs, it may be well to consider 
each psychopharmacologic agent in turn, for its possible applicability to the interrogation situation.
Barbiturate Sedatives and Calmatives
The major share of studies on the use of drugs in interviewing procedures involves the barbiturates: 
amobarbital, secobarbital, and pentothal. These drugs have been found useful in treating the acute war 
neuroses (58, 116, 117), and in civilian practice (23, 32, 106). In psychiatric practice, the purpose of these 
drugs is to effect a violent emotional response which may have cathartic value for the patient. In the 
hands of some psychiatrists (117), the emotional reliving enhanced by the drug is not considered 
necessarily related to a real experience. In order to bring about a high degree of excitement, Sargant (117) 
has recommended putting the patient back into a past which has been modified by the therapist's 
invention. In his drugged
-117-

state the patient accepts a false version of the facts as if it were the truth, and experiences the appropriate 
emotional response.
Sodium amytal has been found helpful in determining whether or not a subject is feigning ignorance 
of the English language (96). It is reported that familiarity with a language will show up under the 
influence of intravenous barbiturates.
Kelley et al. (74) reported that more reliable estimations of intelligence are frequently possible under 
amytal. They also found that patients under sodium amytal injection gave a greater number of Rorschach 
responses and fewer rejections of cards. This made diagnoses possible in cases previously considered 
unreachable. The responses were found to be qualitatively less bizarre and stereotyped, permitting more 
nuances in personality descriptions.
Brickner  (22)  has  recorded  many  interviews  of  patients  receiving  deep  narcosis  therapy  with 
barbiturates. The detailed analyses of the verbal productions of these patients have indicated certain 
typical peculiarities worthy of mention in this review. If they are present, obtained information should be 
discounted as factual data, although they certainly may reveal in an indirect way some of the gamut of 
life experiences of the interviewee. Brickner noted the processes of "fractionation" and "recombination" 
in the verbal productions of patients under deep amytal narcosis. These processes were operative not only 
at the level of words and word elements, prefixes and suffixes, but also at the level of phrases and 
clauses, ideas and concepts. The fractionation and recombination manifested itself in the juxtaposition of 
word fragments, phrases, and concepts which are not ordinarily brought together and in which the 
connection was often illogical. Brickner believed that this drug process is a caricature of the waking 
process of comparing new stimuli, percepts, and concepts with others, new and old. He believes that this 
process of comparison has survival value and is built into human neural structure.
Sodium amytal injections have not been useful in alleviating aphasic speech defects, secondary to 
cerebral insult (17, 108).
Although the detection and study of such phenomena are of basic research interest to the investigator 
studying the neuro physiologic correlates of psychologic processes, the decoding of such verbal material 
by any interrogator seeking factual information is likely to present a very difficult problem. It is probably 
such phenomena which Gerson and Victoroff (53) observed in their interviews of criminal suspects under 
barbiturates and which they found to be one of the obstacles to assessing the validity of their informants' 
verbal productions.
-118-
In summarizing the specific effects of barbiturates as facilitants in interviewing, the references already 
presented and the work of others (32, 101) indicate that, with some exceptions, the following effects on 
behavior may be expected from the administration of barbiturates to human subjects: (a) decreased 
attention to stimuli; (b) warmer and more appropriate mood; (c) decreased anxiety; (d) increased contact 
and communication; (e) reduction of psychotic manifestation.
Nonbarbiturate Sedatives and Calmatives

An increasing variety of nonbarbiturate sedatives have been compounded in recent years. Although 
they are in wide use, no experimental studies have compared these drugs to the barbiturates as adjuncts to 
interviewing individuals, either to relieve emotional disturbances or to obtain consciously withheld 
information.
A list of the chemical and trade name of some of these drugs may be worth including as an illustration 
of their variety and for heuristic purposes: ethchlorvynol (placidyl), glutethimide (doriden), methyprylon 
(noludar), methylparafynol (dormison), captodramin (suvren), oxanamide (quiactin).
Stimulants and Antidepressives
AMPHETAMINE AND ITS DERIVATIVES
A drug that has been used to a fair extent in pharmacologic therapy, but not, as far as is known, in 
interrogation work is amphetamine (benzedrine) and a similar drug, methamphetamine.
Administered intravenously to nonpsychotic individuals, researchers have found amphetamine to 
produce a "push": an outpouring of ideas, emotions, memories, etc. (24, 31, 37, 39, 73, 90). It is of 
diagnostic help with psychiatric cases by itself (24, 49, 90, 95, 121), or following an intravenous 
barbiturate (37, 39, 70, 113). It is widely marketed and used in combination with a barbiturate as a mild 
stimulant drug for patients having neuroses and neurotic character problems.
Brussel et al. (24) claim that methamphetamine hydrochloride is useful in the interrogation of the 
psychopath who feigns amnesia or withholds vital information which he covers with lies or cautiously 
alters  as  he  shrewdly  weighs  his  words.  These  authors claim,  perhaps  extravagantly,  that  such  a 
psychopath is powerless under the influence of methamphetamine. Once the drug takes effect, they hold, 
the tempo of productivity and the insurmountable urge to pour out
-119-
speech gives the liar no time to think. They also claim that functional aphasics can be expected to recover 
their speech under the influence of intravenous methamphetamine.
It should be noted again that amphetamine and its derivatives are among the main drugs that have been 
employed in well-designed and controlled studies, showing that the effects of drugs are variable and 
influenced by personality differences (83, 84, 126).
PIPRADROL
Pipradrol (meratran) is another drug of the stimulant type which increases not only psychological 
activity but motor activity as well. In reaction to the "inner push" of ideas, emotions, and speech, some 
normal subjects report mild euphoria, but others report tension and displeasure. The occurrence of the 
predominant pharmacologic effects of this drug depends to some extent on the typical personality of the 
subject (57). Like amphetamine, pipradrol in single, small doses improves the performance of normal 

subjects in tracking tests (107). It has an advantage over amphetamine in having fewer undesirable side 
effects, particularly on the cardiovascular system.
This  drug  has  been  used  in  the  treatment  of  patients  with  "simple  depressions"  (3,  44,  120). 
Pharmacologic effects are noticeable in mentally ill patients, but more than a transient therapeutic effect 
has  not  been  established.  No  studies  are  reported  on  the  use  of  this  pharmacologic  agent  for 
psychotherapeutic or interview purposes.
METHYL-PHENIDYLACETATE (RITALIN)
Phenidylate  (ritalin)  is  another  one  of  the  newer  compounds  having  analeptic  effects,  such  as 
producing arousal and elevation of mood and increasing the rate of communication. In psychiatric 
practice this drug has been reported to exert beneficial effects on psychotic patients receiving reserpine (a 
rauwolfia tranquilizer), which sometimes induces manifest depressive reactions in patients as a side effect 
(45). But a double-blind, placebo-controlled study has not found ritalin to be of any benefit in chronic 
schizophrenia (29). The analeptic effects of this drug are well established. The utility for interrogation 
purposes of the analeptic properties of this drug, as compared to those of other stimulants, such as 
amphetamine, cannot be evaluated from existing information.
IPRONIAZID (MARSILID)
Iproniazid is another antidepressive drug. Its analeptic features were first noted in chronic debilitated 
tuberculous patients who were
-120-
receiving the drug as part of an experimental chemotherapeutic regimen (35). It has been said to improve 
the performance of normal individuals, enabling them to work more energetically and more effectively, 
and to need less sleep. Iproniazid has been used in the treatment of mental depression (97) with 
encouraging results. Definitive well-controlled studies, however, have been reported for neither normal 
subjects nor mentally ill patients. Several instances of fatal toxic hepatitis have occurred when doses over 
150 mg a day were given. Nevertheless, the advent of drugs of such a presumably powerful therapeutic 
effect in depression, owing either to psychologic conflicts or secondary to chronic somatic illness, opens 
up further areas of exploration of relevance to the present topic.
Hallucinogenic or Psychotomimetic Drugs
It has been common knowledge for centuries that many drugs may modify the behavior of man to the 
extent of producing psychotic behavior. Hoch et al. (66) have pointed out that acute and chronic 
psychosis of the toxic type can be produced in susceptible individuals by central nervous system 
depressants  (barbiturates,  bromides);  central  nervous  system  stimulants  (amphetamine,  caffeine); 
analgesics (acetylsalicylic acid, acetanilid); autonomic activators and blockers (atropine, scopolaniine); 
local anesthetics (cocaine, novacaine); antimalarials (quinine, atabrine); oxytocics (ergot alkaloids); 
heavy metals (lead, mercury, arsenic); hormones (thyroid, cortisone, ACTH); gases, including low and 
high  oxygen  concentration  in  the  inhaled  air,  and even  water  in  toxic  amounts.  The  interests  of 

psychiatrists  in  these  phenomena  have  stemmed  largely from  the  supposed  resemblance  of  these 
psychoses to schizophrenia, because of the time-honored, though as yet unproven, hypotheses (11) that 
schizophrenia is due to a "toxin." Since Wikler (131) has recently reviewed the literature on this subject 
critically it will not be done here. Two psychotomimetic drugs are discussed briefly here as examples, 
from the viewpoint of their psychopharmacologic effects and their possible pertinence to interrogation 
procedures.
MESCALINE
Mention was made earlier of an alleged use of mescaline against concentration camp inmates by 
German interrogators (112, page 15).
Mescaline has also been studied as a potential diagnostic and therapeutic adjunct with psychiatric 
patients. Cattell (27) found mescaline to be a useful drug in investigating personality structure,
-121-
but of no value in the therapy of psychiatric patients. He studied fiftynine patients, seventeen with 
pseudo-neurotic schizophrenia (Group I), twenty-six with overt schizophrenia but without deterioration 
(Group II), and sixteen deteriorated schizophrenics (Group III). New psychodynamic material was gained 
from the first two groups, but relatively little from the last group. Cattell reasoned that the new material 
obtained in the mescaline state had been condensed and repressed in the drug-free state. Mescaline in 
general  (63,  65,  66,  110)  has  been  found  to  produce  perceptual  distortions  and  hallucinations, 
accentuation of affective experiences, and increased psychotic manifestations. In some patients contact 
and communication were increased and in others decreased. Denber and Merlis (40, 41) using 0.5 gm of 
mescaline in water intravenously on both psychoneurotic and psychotic patients claimed that mescaline 
induced the production of suppressed and repressed sexual and aggressive conflicts, with a predominance 
of emotional rather than ideational reactions.
Hoch (63) noted that mescaline in "normals" produced more of an "organic reaction" with some 
schizophrenic features, as compared to its effect in schizophrenics and latent schizophrenics where 
mescaline produced more complete schizophrenic disorganization. Hoch also emphasized that mescaline 
produced a falling off in intellectual functioning.
These articles are typical of the reports on the psychopharmacologic effects of mescaline. When 
interrogators extrapolate clinical psychiatric observations of this kind to the problems of interrogation, 
mescaline might serve their purposes in attempting to create an atmosphere of fear or terror in the 
informant and the illusion of magical overpowering omnipotence about himself. After such a transient 
state has been created, the susceptible informant might be induced subsequently to reveal information. 
The perceptual and cognitive disturbances produced by the drug make it unsuitable for obtaining 
undistorted information while the source is under its influence. From the viewpoint of the informant, the 
creation of a transient psychotic state by the ingestion of mescaline or lysergic acid might offer him some 
temporary protection against being successfully interrogated. An interrogator is not likely to consider an 
individual in a psychotic state a suitable candidate for providing reliable and useful information, at least 
until the drug effect wears off.
LYSERGIC ACID (LSD)

Lysergic acid (d-lysergic acid diethylamide tartrate) has been studied recently as a drug which might 
contribute additional knowledge about
-122-
the mechanisms and treatment of mental disease in general and schizophrenia in particular.
Busch and Johnson (26) gave 30 to 40 gamma of LSD-25 to twentyone chronic psychotic patients 
(mostly schizophrenics) and later to some psyclioneurotic patients. They noted that the drug transiently 
increased the mental activity of their patients 30 to 60 rain after ingestion. The effect was a transitory 
toxic state in which repressed  material came forth "sometimes with vivid realism" and emotional 
expression. Busch and Johnson thought that LSD might be useful as an adjuvant in psychotherapy.
Deshon et al. (42) studied the effect of the ingestion of 1 gamma per kg body weight of LSD on fifteen 
normal volunteers. Alterations were observed in thinking, speech, emotions, mood, sensation, time 
perception, ideation, and neurologic signs. The reaction lasted 12 to 16 hr in most cases, but several days 
in one case. The reaction was typical of an exogenous toxic state, simulating a schizophrenic reaction. 
The reaction was not specific and the extent to which it was dependent on the basic personality was not 
determined.
Bercel et al. (16) studied the relation between the type of LSD psychosis produced in normals and of 
the Rorschach Test findings of the subjects. They could not predict the type of psychotic reactions from 
the pre-LSD Rorschach, but they could often say from the Rorschach records which normal subjects 
would show psychotic symptoms.
Abramson et al. (1, 2) found, after administering large doses of LSD-25, that intellectual functioning, 
as measured by a battery of tests, was disturbed in many spheres. In another study, Levine et al. (89) 
showed that Rorschach Test scores were altered in the direction of a more psychotic picture.
Davies and Davies (36) treated sixteen mental defectives with LSD-25 in dosages of 20 to 400 gamma 
in water for as many as twenty-six treatments in three months. Seven patients became more talkative and 
cooperative. Their "memories were stimulated," but emotional reactions were limited. No lasting benefits 
were observed. An interesting, unexplained phenomenon was that only two out of the sixteen cases had 
the expected bizarre hallucinatory experiences.
There are many other reports of experimental and clinical studies employing LSD-25, but those 
reported here are fairly representative. There is enough given here to suggest the possible applications of 
LSD  to  interrogation  techniques.  It  is  apparent  that  this  drug  impairs  perceptual  and  intellectual 
functioning. The conclusions reached on mescaline hold equally for the possible applications of this drug 
to
-123-
interrogation. As a tool in the advancement of knowledge of psychopharmacology, LSD-25 is a drug on 
which clinical and experimental research is likely to continue.

Major Tranquilizers
Recently a large number of new compounds with sedative and anxiety-relieving properties have been 
introduced, sufficiently different from the classical sedatives, such as paraldehyde, chloral hydrate, 
barbiturates and bromides, to warrant using new terms to describe them. These compounds are referred to 
as "tranquilizers" or "ataraxics." They have been investigated clinically on an unprecedented scale in the 
treatment  of  psychiatric  disorders,  particularly  the  psychoses,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  the 
psychoneuroses. The use of these drugs has revolutionized psychiatric therapeutic procedures, especially 
within the mental hospitals. A thorough review of their effects and mechanism of action in mental illness 
would be out of place here. Unfortunately, the usefulness of these tranquilizers in exploring psychologic 
processes and in facilitating communication has not been very extensively tested. Their applicability to 
interrogation procedures is still speculative. Yet, for the sake of completeness, and to indicate the 
directions further research might take, the psychologic actions of these drugs deserve mention.
PHENOTHIAZINE DERIVATIVES
Among the phenothiazine derivatives now in medical use are: chlorpromazine (thorazine), mepazine 
(pacatal),  perhenazine  (trilafon),  proclorperazine  (compazine),  promazine  (sparine),  thiopropazate 
(dartal),  and  triflupromazine  (vesprin).  Of  these,  chlorpromazine  has  been  most  widely used  and 
investigated  at  this  time.  Therefore,  the  psychopharmacologic  actions  of  only this  compound  are 
discussed here.
Chlorpromazine (thorazine) . Delay and his associates (38) appear to have been the first to explore 
chlorpromazine in the treatment of mental illness. They found that the effects of chlorpromazine in 
patients with manic psychoses were somnolence, decreased responses to external and internal stimuli, 
pleasant indifference, and decreased spontaneity of speech. Subsequent reports (5, 20, 28, 32, 75, 81, 87, 
88, 134) have been in agreement that chlorpromazine is effective in quieting or abolishing severe 
agitation and psychomotor excitement, whether of manic-depressive, schizophrenic, or toxic origin. Most 
of these reports agree that the basic disorder in these conditions is not
-124-
altered by the drug. In the psychoneuroses, chlorpromazine was reported (52, 80) to decrease anxiety and 
tension temporarily, but to have no specific ameliorative effects on conversion symptoms, obsession, 
piaobia,  depression,  or  physical  pain.  A  recent,  controlled  investigation  (123)  on  the  effect  of 
chlorpromazine  on  the  communication  processes  of  psychiatric  patients  has  indicated  no  specific 
facilitating effect. In normal subjects, the effect of 10 mg of proclorperazine (a phenothiazine derivative) 
was compared with that of 10 mg of phenobarbital. No specific differences were found on tests of mental 
performance, hearing, and pain perception, although a decrement in muscular coordination and efficiency 
occurred under proclorperazine (14).
Other phenothiazine derivatives are being extensively investigated at this time in psychiatric practice 
with the hope of finding one with equal or better therapeutic effects and fewer of the side effects of 
chlorpromazine, such as Parkinsonism, obstructive jaundice, dermatitis, tachycardia, etc.

There are no reports of the use of the phenothiazine derivatives in interrogation and no evidence to 
support the thesis that these drugs might be of avail to an interrogator's work, except perhaps with excited 
and agitated informants who might be encouraged to report material in exchange for peace of mind. On 
the other hand, such drugs might help a harried informant to keep his knowledge to himself
RAUWOLFIA ALKALOIDS
The  principal  rauwolfia  alkaloids  being  used  in  psychiatric  practice  are  reserpine  (serpasil), 
deserpidine (harmonyl), and rescinnamine (moderil). Of these, reserpine has been most thoroughly 
studied. Its actions are discussed here as representative of the group.
Reserpine (serpasil). Reserpine, believed to be the most active of the rauwolfia alkaloids, was 
identified by Müller et al. (105), and its sedative and antihypertensive effects were noted in animals by 
Bein (10). Initially the drug was used in the United States for treating high blood pressure (133). From 
such experiences it was noted that reserpine produced a state of calmness without significant impairment 
of sensory acuity, muscular coordination, and alertness. The effects of single doses of reserpine (2.5 to 
10.0 mg intramuscularly) were found (98) to be more marked in patients exhibiting high levels of 
psychomotor activity, regardless of the clinical psychiatric diagnosis. Repeated doses of reserpine over 
long periods of time reduced or
-125-
abolished hyperactivity, combativeness, destructiveness, insomnia, flight of ideas, etc., in the majority of 
disturbed psychiatric patients, regardless of clinical diagnosis (4, 6, 47, 51, 68, 76).
The tranquilizing action of reserpine and chlorpromazine appears to be quite similar. This similarity 
extends to some of the side effects, such as miosis, lowering of blood pressure and body temperature, 
increase in appetite, nasal congestion, and Parkinson syndrome. Although certain differences in side 
effects do occur, they do not require our attention here.
The literature on the effectiveness of reserpine and chlorpromazine as aids to individual (119) and 
group (34) psychotherapy is extensive. Whereas there is agreement that the drugs lower anxiety and 
tension, there are such notable differences of opinion about the aims of psychotherapy and about what 
constitutes psychotherapy that no definite statement can be made regarding this point. If the reviewer 
were to add his voice to the disharmonious chorus of viewpoints on this subject, he would, on the basis of 
impressionistic evaluations only, say that the tranquilizers are of some aid in the psychotherapy of those 
patients  who  are  so  agitated,  anxious,  and  hyperactive  that  they  cannot  sit  still  very  long  for 
psychotherapy.  However,  working  out  the  finer  nuances  of  emotional  conflicts  of  a  patient  in 
psychotherapy is precluded when the patient is regularly taking a tranquilizer, because the patient appears 
to become too insulated against emotional reactions to realize or care that he is responding with feeling in 
some pertinent way.
As  with  the  phenothiazine  derivatives,  the  place  of  the  rauwolfia  alkaloids  in  the  potential 
armamentarium of the interrogation has not been established. There are no relevant articles on this matter. 
Speculatively, the tranquilizers might be of avail in selected informants who are highly agitated and 
disturbed, and who might yield information in return for the relaxation they experience with such a 

sedative. On the other hand, less emotionally disturbed informants might strengthen their resolve to retain 
information under a tranquilizer. The only way to decide this problem is by experiment. Furthermore, 
tranquilizers in moderate dosage do not notably impair intellectual and sensory functioning. Therefore, 
their use probably does not contribute to the distortion of factual information produced.
Addiction
The dependence of the drug addict on the supplier of drugs has figured in speculations regarding the 
use of drugs to control behavior.
-126-
Such speculations assume that the need of an addict for a drug is so strong as to override many other 
values, including strong social proscriptions when these conflict with the satisfaction of drug-created 
needs.
The writer is unaware of any actual or alleged utilizations of drugs in this manner for the purposes of 
interrogation.
One of the cardinal criteria of addiction is the occurrence of severe reactions when the drug is 
withdrawn. Withdrawal syndromes occur with opiates, barbiturates, and, recently, an animal study has 
made this claim for meprobamates (43). Beyond a minimal dosage and time period, the continuous usage 
of these drugs produces addiction in almost everyone (72). No demonstrable impairment of cognitive or 
psychomotor functions has been identified in subjects operating under the maintenance dosage to which 
they are habituated.
Under most of the opiates, the subject is likely to show a keen awareness of a limited segment of 
reality, a decrease in spontaneity and creativity, a decrease in suggestibility, and an increase in rigidity 
and compartmentalization of thinking. As with other drugs, the reaction varies widely from individual to 
individual 50, 131).
Information contributed by an addicted source is naturally suspect, since many addicts have gone to 
great length, fabrication of information being the least of them, to maintain their drug supplies. If a source 
became addicted as a sequel to the treatment of injuries, the ability of the interrogator to give or withhold 
the drug would give him a powerful hold on the source. It appears unlikely that this weapon is so unique 
as to lead an interrogator to create addiction deliberately. An interrogator who would be willing to 
produce addiction would not hesitate to employ more reliable and instantly effective means for inducing 
results as unpleasant as withdrawal symptoms. Since the initial reactions of most subjects to drugs of 
addiction are unpleasant, these drugs would not appear to have a role as positive motivators, except for 
subjects experiencing pain.
Counteracting Drug Effects

When the effects of a drug are not consonant with the subject's wishes, the extent to which the subject 
can successfully counteract these effects without the aid of other drugs becomes an important problem. 
Inasmuch as this is an unusual condition, little or no empirical information is available. Yet, it may be 
worthwhile to indulge in some speculation.
-127-
If the subject marshals his efforts to fight a drug, one may surmise that he has become alarmed about 
its effects on him, and that this alarm most likely is in the form of anxiety over losing control. Other 
instances of this type of anxiety in neuroses, psychoses, and cerebral insult have demonstrated that it 
feeds on itself. Specifically, the anxiety increases in something like a geometric progression whenever the 
source of concern is put to the test and adequate control is indeed found to be wanting, with the mounting 
anxiety itself contributing to further loss of control. Some persons more than others habitually use the 
mechanism of control and might presumably attempt to do so in this situation.
Small to moderate doses, although affecting the subject, might not alarm him, since the drug effects 
may be within the range of his ordinary experiences, and since none of the functions which form the basis 
for his sense of control may have been seriously impaired. Because it is difficult for most persons to 
succeed in their efforts to relax, the main resultant of any effort presumably is anxiety and arousal. If this 
is  so,  the  effect  of  stimulants  would  be  intensified,  whereas  the  effect  of  sedatives  might  be 
counterbalanced to some extent. Here, the question of how massive a dosage of a sedative the subject 
could counteract would need to be considered. The phenothiazine tranquilizers might be expected to 
produce a sufficient lack of concern in the subject to prevent his attempting to undo their effect, or, more 
directly, preclude a state of arousal.
All these speculations deserve careful experimental study.
Summary and Conclusions
Nature of Reviewed Studies
A distinction has been made between interviews carried out for psychotherapy and those to obtain 
factual information. Although there has been considerable speculation regarding the possible use of drugs 
for the latter purposes, open publications of serious research dealing directly with such cases are scant. 
The paucity of reported studies on the matter has obliged the reviewer to include related published 
material of psychopharmacologic studies. When extrapolations are made from published material of this 
sort, they are presented as hypotheses, and in every instance require testing and validation.
-128-
Drug Research that May Produce Knowledge Applicable to Interrogation

Apart from any applied research that governments may sponsor for improving interrogation or for 
aiding their own personnel to resist interrogation, the pursuit of various current scientific and medical 
interests will doubtless result in developing knowledge of drug action applicable to interrogation. The 
interest of scientists in employing drugs in research transcends an interest in drug effects, per se. Drugs 
constitute  valuable  tools  for  experimentation  directed  toward  developing  basic  physiologic  and 
psychologic knowledge, such as the study of neurophysiologic correlates of symbolic and psychodynamic 
processes. Work by scientists in such areas is also likely to increase knowledge of drugs which may be 
applicable to interrogation.
Methodologic Problems in Determining the Applicability of Drugs to Interrogation Procedures
A large initial section of this report is devoted to a survey and discussion of the nonspecific effects of 
drugs and to the difficulties involved in discriminating these effects from the pharmacologic effects of the 
drugs used. The time spent in describing some of these nonspecific factors is needed to illustrate how the 
many variables involved complicate the problem of making a judgment regarding the present or potential 
usefulness of a drug for either therapeutic or intelligence purposes. This section has been included to 
point out some of the problems which require consideration in designing well-controlled studies in this 
area. The complexity inherent in psychopharmacologic research requires the integration of all levels of 
research  on  drug  action:  biochemical,  neurophysiological  and  psychological.  These  problems  are 
multiplied and prediction is lessened when the actions of drugs on living human beings are considered, 
rather than on isolated nerves, tissues, or animals of simpler neural structure. This reviewer has included 
only very few bibliographical references to work with animals, and yet a significant portion of excellent 
experimental, psychologic studies involve animals. This relative omission can be explained by the 
problem being one unique to human beings: the use of language symbols to communicate and interact 
with other human beings.
A review  of  the  literature  illustrates  a  variety of  effects  produced  by pharmacologically  inert 
substances which simulate medication
-129-
(placebos). Depending on the personality of the subject and the circumstances under which the placebo is 
administered, 30 to 50 per cent of individuals show or experience a reaction. Well-designed studies can 
distinguish the pharmacologic effect of a drug from the placebo effect. The possibility is raised that an 
interrogator might exploit the "placebo phenomenon" with a susceptible subject, instead of employing a 
pharmacologically active drug.
An examination of the literature demonstrates that the effects of drugs vary with the attitude and 
motivation of the person administering the medication and the person interviewing the informant. The sex 
and intelligence of the subject, the presence of mental or physical illness, the occurrence of biologic 
rhythms (e.g., mensis), state of nutrition (e.g., fasting or nonfasting), degree of fatigue, and experimental 
or enforced isolation have been found to affect the capacity to react and the reaction of individuals to 
testing procedures, with or without drugs. The method of sampling the verbal behavior of an individual 
under the influence of a drug, directive, nondirective, free-associative, etc., also determines the kinds of 

reactions observed. For these reasons, it is recommended that a variety of sampling methods be used in 
experimental studies.
The Efficacy of Drugs in Uncovering Information
When one examines the literature for experimental and clinical studies that bear directly on the use of 
drugs in interrogation procedures, one finds relatively few studies. Reports dealing with the validity of 
material extracted from reluctant informants, whether criminal suspects or experimental subjects, indicate 
that there is no "truth serum" which can force every informant to report all the information he has. 
Experimental and clinical evidence indicate that not only the inveterate criminal psychopath may lie or 
distort under the influence of a drug, but the relatively normal individual may, with many drugs, 
successfully disguise factual data. Less well-adjusted individuals, plagued by guilt and depression, or 
suggestible individuals, who are compliant and easily swayed, are more likely to make slips revealing 
withheld information. Even they may, at times, unconsciously distort information and present fantasies as 
facts. The anesthetic action of the drug, as in narcosis with barbiturates, can interfere with cerebral 
functioning and promote the presentation of fantasy material as fact, or otherwise alter the form of 
verbalizations  to  render  them  relatively  unintelligible.  It  would  be  very  difficult  under  these 
circumstances for an interrogator to tell when the verbal
-130-
content was turning from fact to fantasy, when the informant was simulating deep narcosis but actually 
falsifying, which of contrary stories told under narcosis was true, and when a lack of crucial information 
coining from a subject under a drug meant the informant had none to offer. To derive useful information 
from an interrogation in which drugs are employed, an interrogator would have to consider and weigh 
many important factors: the personality of the subject, the milieu, other sources of evidence, the rapport 
obtained, and the skill of the questioning. These and other factors affect the validity of information 
obtained from an informant under sedation. Analogous considerations apply to stimulants.
Specific Effects of Drugs in Interrogation Situations
Advantages and limitations of a number of different types of pharmacologic agents as adjuncts to 
interrogation  can  be  examined  by  reviewing  clinical  and  experimental  data  from  the  works  of 
psychiatrists, neurologists, psychologists, physiologists, and pharmacologists.
Barbiturates  tend  to  increase  contact  and  communication,  decrease  attention,  decrease  anxiety, 
decrease psychotic manifestations, and make the mood more appropriate and warmer. When combined 
with interview techniques that aim at arousing emotions, strong emotional reactions may be catalyzed for 
psychotherapeutic purposes. Barbiturates have been found helpful in detecting whether an individual is 
feigning knowledge of the English language and in getting mute catatonic schizophrenics and hysterical 
aphasics to talk. They are of no avail, however, in remedying the speech defects of true aphasics, even 
transiently.  The  use  of  barbiturates  has  helped  to  get  more  reliable  estimates  of  intelligence  and 
personality through psychological tests, particularly in emotionally upset individuals.

The  use  of  various  stimulant  and  antidepressive  drugs  has  been  explored,  for  diagnostic  and 
therapeutic purposes in psychiatric practice, but not to any extent for interrogation. Amphetamine, 
pipradrol, methylphenidylacetate have in common the capacity to produce an outpouring of ideas, 
emotions, and memories. An injection of amphetamine following an intravenous barbiturate is said to 
provoke a striking onrush of talking and activity from psychiatric patients. Without adequately controlling 
his study, one author claims that methamphetamine produces such a strong urge to talk that the criminal 
who feigns amnesia or withholds vital information cannot control himself and thus gives himself away. 
Iproniazid, an antidepressive drug which is relatively slow and sometimes dramatic in its thera-
-131-
peutic effect, should be considered for experimentation. This drug, and similar, less toxic analogs which 
are being developed, might be considered for use in special instances. For example, informants suffering 
from chronic depression, whether due primarily to emotional factors, situational stress, or physical 
debilitation, might become very responsive after using a medication of this type. As a class, the 
stimulants probably present the most obvious exploitative potential for an interrogator.
The psychotomimetic and hallucinogenic drugs, mescaline and LSD-25, have been used largely to 
study the nature of psychotic conditions and, in a minor way, as an adjuvant in psychotherapy. The use of 
such drugs by an interrogator would tend to produce a state of anxiety or terror in most subjects, and 
promote perceptual distortions and psychotic disorientation. Their use could constitute a definite threat to 
most medically unsophisticated subjects, i.e., the threat of making the subject "crazy." Thus, they 
emphasize the unrestricted control of the source by the interrogator. When the subject is not under the 
influence of such drugs, vital information might be extracted as a price for ceasing further medication. An 
enlightened informant would not have to feel threatened, for the effect of these hallucinogenic agents is 
transient in normal individuals. The information given during the psychotic drug state would be difficult 
to assess, for it may be unrealistic and bizarre. On the other hand, from the informant's viewpoint, taking 
LSD-25, secreted on his person (it is effective in minute dosage), might offer him temporary protection 
against interrogation, for it is not likely that an interrogator would consider an individual in a psychotic 
state a reliable source.
The introduction of new drugs like tranquilizers that sedate but do not impair intellectual functioning 
in  moderate  dosage  (e.g.,  phenothiazine  derivatives  and  rauwolfia  alkaloids)  has  caused  a  minor 
revolution in the psychiatric therapies of agitated psychotic conditions regardless of type or etiology. 
There is a possibility that these tranquilizers might be of use with selected informants who are highly 
agitated and disturbed, and who might give information they prefer to withhold in return for the 
tranquility they experience with such a sedative. Under the influence of this drug, the less emotionally 
upset informant might find that he can better master his anxieties and keep his resolve to remain silent. 
These are all speculations which require testing and experimentation.
Addiction is an added vulnerability to influence. The ability of the subject to give information is not 
notably affected by a mainte-
-132-
nance dosage. The motivational effects of obtaining drug supplies, while extreme, are not of a different 
order for most subjects than those which the interrogator could produce by other more rapid means. The 

exploitation of addiction probably constitutes a threat to persons previously addicted, or to those who 
become addicted in the captivity situation as a sequel to other aspects of their treatment, rather than 
through the deliberate creation of addiction for exploitative purposes.
Another use to which interrogators might put drugs and placebos would involve their ability to absolve 
the subject of responsibility for his acts. The popular meaning of being "drugged" or "doped" implies that 
an individual in this state has lost control over his actions and that society will not hold him responsible 
for them. When the transmittal of information is likely to induce guilt in the source, the interviewer can 
forestall some of this reaction by the administration of a placebo or drug. In some cases, this will be all 
that is require4l to remove the barrier to information transmittal. In the avoidance-avoidance conflict 
between the source's guilt over yielding information and his anxieties over the possible consequences of 
noncooperation, the "inescapable" power of the drug or placebo serves to justify the source's actions to 
himself.
What are the over-all conclusions that can be drawn from this review and critical analysis of the use of 
pharmacologic  agents  in  obtaining  information?  Are  pharmacologic  agents  of  any  value  to  the 
interrogator in eliciting vital information? The answer is that drugs can operate as positive catalysts to 
productive interrogation. Combined with the many other stresses in captivity that an individual may be 
obliged to undergo, drugs can add to the factors aimed at weakening the resistance of the potential 
informant. However, for many reasons, the use of drugs by an interrogator is not certain to produce valid 
results. The effects of drugs depend to a large extent on the personality make-up and physical status of the 
informant and the kind of rapport that the interrogator is able to establish with him. Knowing the 
pharmacologic actions of a number of drugs, an interrogating team might choose that chemical agent 
which is most likely to be effective in view of the informant's personality, physical status, and the various 
stressful experiences he has already undergone. Even under the most favorable circumstances, the 
information  obtained  could  be  contaminated  by  fantasy,  distortion,  and  untruth,  especially  when 
hallucinogenic or sedative drugs are employed.
Are there ways in which the informant can resist revealing vital information under interrogation with 
drugs? The answer is yes.
-133-
Means are available to the informant faced with the prospect of being given a drug to loosen his 
tongue. The informant should know that a drug of itself cannot force him to tell the truth, although it may 
make him talkative, overemotional, mentally confused, or sleepy. He should also know that the effects of 
drugs are quite variable from individual to individual, and that those who may use drugs against him 
cannot predict with certainty what effects will occur in his particular case. To a victim of such attempts 
the imperfect predictability of many of the direct effects and side effects of any drug offers many 
opportunities for simulation. It is likely that most nonfatal drugs will have a transient, time-limited action 
rather than a permanent one. There is no need for the informant to become panicky at any bizarre or 
uncomfortable reactions he may experience, for these reactions will probably disappear. Instead of 
passively accepting the administration of a drug, without challenging the interrogator's right to apply such 
pressure, the informant should effectively delay it, and thus stall a possibly stressful interrogation under a 
drug. Finally, since the interrogator wants accurate and factual information, the informant can confound 
the interrogator as to what is fact and fiction by a number of means. He can simulate drowsiness, 
confusion, and disorientation early during the administration of the drug. He can revel in fantasies; the 

more lurid the better. He can tell contradictory stories. He can simulate a psychosis; or, if he cares to go 
so far, he can even induce a transient psychotic state by ingesting a small amount of LSD secreted on his 
person. By these devices, he can raise serious doubts in the interrogator's mind as to the reliability of the 
information given by him.
As a final suggestion, this reviewer is inclined to agree with West (130) that the basic training of 
military personnel can be helpful in developing techniques of resistance to interrogation. A brief course 
on the limitations of the use of drugs in interrogation and on the kinds of pharmacologic effects to be 
expected from the different types of drugs would be helpful. Such training could decrease the fear, 
hypersuggestibility, and other deleterious reactions that evolve from the uncertain, the unpredictable, and 
the unknown.
References
1. Abramson H. A. Lysergic acid diethlamide (LSD-25): XXII. Effect on transference. J. Psychol., 1956, 42, 51-98.
2. Abramson H. A., Kornetsky C., Jarvik M. E., et al. Lysergic acid diethlamide (LSD-25): XI. Content analysis of clinical 
reactions. J. Psychol., 1955, 40, 53-60.
-134-
3. Andren H. E. Treatment of depression with meratran and electroshock. Dis. nerv. Syst., 1955, 16, 275-276.
4. Azima H., Cramer-Azima, Fern J., and DeVerteuil R. A comparative behavior and psychodynamic study of reserpine 
and equally potent doses of raudixin in schizophrenics. Morristown, N. J.: The Squibb Institute for Medical Research. Monogr. 
Ther., 1956 I(2), 15-25.
5. Baker A. A. Observations on the effect of largactil in psychiatric illness. J. ment. Sci., 1955, 101, 175-182.
6. Barsa J. A., and Kline N. S. Treatment of two hundred disturbed psychotics with reserpine. J. Amer. med. Ass., 1955, 
158, 110-113.
7. Beecher H. K. Experimental pharmacology and measurement of the subjective response. Science, 1952, 116, 157-162.
8. Beecher H. K. Appraisal of drugs intended to alter subjective responses, symptoms. J. Amer. med. Ass., 1955, 158, 399-
401.
9. Beecher H. K. Evidence for increased effectiveness of placebos with increased stress. Amer. J. Physiol., 1956, 187, 163-
169.
10. Bein H. J. Zur Pharmakologie des Reserpin, eines neuen Alkaloids aus Rauwolfia serpentina Benth. Experientia, 1953, 
9, 107-110.
11. Beliak L. Dementia praecox: The past decade's work and present status; a review and evaluation. New York: Grune & 
Stratton, 1948.
12. Benedek Therese. Studies in psychosomatic medicine. Psychosexual functions in women. New York: Ronald, 1952.

13. Benedek Therese, and Rubenstein B. B. The sexual cycle in women. Psychosom. Med. Monogr., Washington, 1942.
14. Benjamin F. B., Ikai K., and Clare H. E.  Effect of proclorperazine on psychologic, psychomotor and muscular 
performance. U. S. Armed Forces med. J., 1957, 8, 1433-1440.
15. Bensheim H. Typenunterschiede bei Meskalinversuchen. Z. Neur., 1929, 121, 531-543.
16. Bercel N. A., Travis L. E., Olinger L. B., and Dreikurs E.  Model psychoses induced by LSD-25 in normals. II. 
Rorschach test findings. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1956, 75, 612-618.
17. Bergman P. S., and Green M. Aphasia: Effect of intravenous sodium amytal. Neurology, 1951, 1, 471-475.
18. Beringer K. Der Meskalinrausch. Monogr. aus dem Gesamtgebiete der Neurologie und Psychiatrie, Berlin, 1927.
19. Bexion W. H., Heron W., and Scott T. H. Effects of decreased variations in sensory environment. Canad. J. Psychol., 
1954, 8, 70-76.
20. Bird E. G., Goss J. D., Jr., and Denber H. C. Chlorpromazine in the treatment of mental illness: A study of 750 patients. 
Amer. J. Psychiat., 1955, 111, p. 930.
21. Bischoff A. Üher eine therapeutische Verwendung der sogenanaten "WeckAmine" in der Behandlung schizophrener 
Erregungszustände. Mschr. Psychiat. Neurol., 1951, 121, 329-344.
22. Brickner R. M. A neural fractionating and combining system. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1954, 72, 1-10.
23. Bronner A. The role of sodium amytal in psychotherapy and diagnosis. Amer. J. Psychother., 1955, 9, 234-242.
24. Brussel J. A., Wilson D. C., Jr., and Shankel L. W. The use of methedrine in psychiatric practice. Psychiat. Quart., 
1954, 28, 381-394.
-135-
25. Burney C. Solitary confinement. New York: Coward-McCann, 1952.
26. Busch A. K., and Johnson W. C. LSD as an aid in psychotherapy. Dis. nerv. Syst., 1950, 11, 241-243.
27. Cattell J. P. The influence of mescaline on psychodynamic material. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1954, 119, 233-244.
28. Charatan F. B. E. An evaluation of chlorpromazine ("largactil") in psychiatry. J. ment. Sci., 1954, 100, 882-893.
29. Clark L. A., Ellsworth R. B., Barnett W. W., et al. Studies of the behavioral effects of ritalin. Dis. nerv. Syst., 1956, 17, 
317-327.
30. Clark L. D., and Beecher H. K. Psychopharmacological studies on suppression. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1957, 125, 316-
321.
31. Cleghorn R. A. Drugs that produce deviations in mood, including anxiety presumably without impairing capacities for 
orientation or at least secondarily to changes in mood. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1952, 108, 568-571.
32. Cohn W. M., Speck R. V., and Howard W. J. Sodium amytal as an aid in state hospital practice: Single interviews with 
100 patients. Psychiat. Quart., 1957, 31, 289-300.

33. Cowden R. C., Zax M., and Finney R. C. A preliminary note on the use of chlorpromazine with neuropsychiatric 
disorders. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1955, 73, 700-701.
34. Cowden R. C., Zax M., and Sproles J. A.  Reserpine alone as an adjunct to psychotherapy in the treatment of 
schizophrenia. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1955, 74, 518-522.
35. Crane G. E. The psychiatric side-effects of iproniazid. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1956, 112, 494-501.
36. Davies M. E. B., and Davies T. S. Lysergic acid in mental deficiency. Lancet, 1955, 269, p. 1090.
37. Delay J. Pharmacologic explorations of the personality: Narcoanalysis and "methedrine" shock. Proc. Roy. Soc. Med., 
1949, 42, 492-496.
38. Delay J., Deniker P., and Harl, J. M. Traitement des états d'excitation et d'agitation par une méthode médicamenteuse 
dérivée de l'hibernothérapie. Ann. méd.-Psychol., 1952, 110, 267-271.
39. Delay J., Pichot P., and Romanet B.  Le choc amphétaminique. Etude clinique de l'action du chlorhydrate de ß-
methylanphélamine. Bull. et mem Soc. med. hop. de Paris, 1948, 64, 308-323.
40. Denbar H. C. B., and Merlis S. A note on some therapeutic implications of the mescaline-induced state. Psychiat. 
Quart., 1954, 28, 635-640.
41. Denbar H. C. B., and Merlis S. Studies on mescaline. I. Action in schizophrenic patients. Psychiat. Quart., 1955, 29, 
421-429.
42. Deshon H. J., Rinkel M., and Solomon, H. C. Mental changes experimentally produced by LSD. Psychiat. Quart., 
1952, 26, 33-53.
43. Essig C. F.  Withdrawal convulsions in dogs following chronic meprobamate intoxication. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. 
Psychiat., 1958, 80), 414-417.
44. Fabing H. D., Hawkins J. R., and Moulton J. A. Clinical studies on alpha (2-piperidyl) benzhydrol hydrochloride, a 
new antidepressant drug. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1955, 111, 832-836.
45. Ferguson J. T. Treatment of reserpine-induced depression with a new analeptic. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1955, 61, 101-
107.
46. Fischer H. K., and Dlin B. M. The dynamics of placebo therapy: A clinical study. Amer. J. med. Sci., 1956, 232, 504-
512.
-136-
47. Flach F. F. Clinical effectiveness of reserpine. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1955, 61, 161-166.
48. Forster F. M. The epilepsies and convulsive disorders. In A. B. Baker (Ed.), Clinical neurology. Vol. 2, New York: Paul 
B. Hoeber, 1955. Pp. 1036-1074.
49. Frankl V. E., and Strotzka H. Narkodiagnose. Wien. kiln. Wchnschr., 1949, 61, 569-573.
50. Fraser H. F., Isbell H., Eisenman, A. J., et al. Chronic barbiturate intoxication. Further studies. A. M. A. Arch. int. 
Med., 1954, 94, 34-41.

51. Freeman H., Arnold A. L., and Cline H S. Effects of chlorpromazine and reserpine in chronic schizophrenic patients. 
Dis. nerv. Syst., 1956, 17, 213-219.
52. Garmany G., May A. B., and Folkson A. The use and action of chlorpromazine in psychoneurosis. Brit. med. J., 1954, 
2, 439-441.
53. Gerson M. J., and Victoroff V.  Experimental investigation into the validity of confessions obtained under sodium 
amytal narcosis. J. clin. Psychopath., 1948, 9, 359-375.
54. Gleser G. C., Gottschalk L. A., and John W.  The relationship of gender and intelligence to choice of words: A 
normative study of verbal behavior. J. din. Psychol., 1959, 15, 182-191.
55. Gottschalk L. A., and Gleser G. C. Effect of fasting and non-fasting on verbal behavior. Unpublished manuscript.
56. Gottschalk L. A., Gleser G. C., Daniels R. S., and Block S. The speech patterns of schizophrenic patients: A method of 
assessing relative degree of personal disorganization and social alienation. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1958, 127, 153-166.
57. Gottschalk L. A., Kapp F. T., Ross W. D., et al. Explorations in testing drugs affecting physical and mental activity. J. 
Amer. med. Ass., 1956, 161, 10541058.
58. Grinker R. R., and Spiegel J. P. War neuroses in North Africa. The Tunisian Campaign Jan.-May 1943. New York: 
Josiah Macy, Jr., Foundation, 1943.
59. Guttman E., and MacClay W. S. Mescaline and depersonalization. Therapeutic experiments. J. Neurol. Psychopath., 
1936, 16, 193-212.
60. Heron W., Bexton W. H., and Hebb D. O.  Cognitive effects of decreased variation to sensory environment.  Amer 
Psychologist, 1953, 8, p. 366. (Abstract)
61. Hill H. E., Belleville R. E., and Wikler A. Motivational determinants in the modification of behavior by morphine and 
pentobarbital. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1957, 77, 28-35.
62. Hinlkle L. E., Jr. In Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry, Methods of forceful indoctrination: Observations and 
interviews. New York: GAP Publications Office, July, 1957, p. 287 f. GAP Symposium No. 4.
63. Hoch P. H. Experimental induction of psychosis. In Milbank Memorial Fund (Ed.), The biology of mental health and 
disease. New York: Paul B. Hoeber, 1952, pp. 539-546.
64. Hoch P. H., Cattell J. P., and Pennes H. H. Effects of mescaline and lysergic acid (d-LSD-25). Amer. J. Psychiat., 1952, 
108, 579-584.
65. Hoch P. H., Cattell J. P., and Pennes H. H Effect of drugs: Theoretical considerations from a psychological viewpoint. 
Amer. J. Psychiat., 1952, 108, 585-589.
66. Hoch P. H., Pennes H. H., and Cattell J. P. Psychoses produced by administration of drugs. Res. Publ. Ass. Nerv. Ment. 
Dis., Proc., 1953, 32, 287-296.
67. Hoffing C. K. The place of placebos in medical practice. Amer. Acad. Gen. Pract., 1955, 11, 103-107.
-137-

68. Hollister L. E., Krieger G. E., Kringel A., and Roberts R. H. Treatment of chronic schizophrenic reactions with 
reserpine. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1955, 61, 92-100.
69. House R. E. The use of scopolamine in criminology. Amer. J. of police Sci., 1931, 2, 328-336.
70. Houston F. A preliminary investigation into abreaction comparing methedrine and sodium amytal with other methods. 
J. ment. Sci., 1952, 98, 707-710.
71. Inbau F. E., and Reid J. E. Lie detection and criminal interrogation. (3rd ed.) Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1953.
72. Isbell H. Manifestation and treatment of addiction to narcotic drugs and barbiturates. Med. Clin. N. Amer., 1950, 34, 
425-438.
73. Jonas A. D. The adjunctive use of an intravenous amphetamine derivative in psychotherapy. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1954, 
119, 135-147.
74. Kelley D. M., Levine K., Pemberton W., et al. Intravenous sodium amytal medication as an aid to the Rorschach 
method. Psychiat. Quart., 1941, 15, 68-73.
75. Kinross-Wright V. | Chlorpromazine and reserpine in the treatment of psychoses. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1955, 61, 174-
182.
76. Kline N. S. Use of rauwolfia serpentina benth in neuropsychiatric conditions. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1954, 59, 107-132.
77. Kornetsky C., and Humphries O. Relationship between effects of a number of centrally acting drugs and personality. A. 
M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1957, 77, 325-327.
78. Kornetsky C., Humphries O., and Evarts E. V. Comparison of psychological effects of certain centrally acting drugs in 
man. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1957, 77, 318-324.
79. Kubie L. A. Psychoanalysis and psychopharmacology. Psychiat. res. Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1958, 9, 61-67.
80. Lambert C. A controlled investigation into the value of chlorpromazine in the management of anxiety states. J. nerv. 
ment. Dis., 1955, 121, p. 182.
81. Lancaster N. P., and Jones D. H. Chlorpromazine and insulin in psychiatry. Brit. med. J., 1954, 2, 565-567.
82. Larson J. A. Lying and its detection. Chicago: Univer. of Chicago Press, 1932.
83. Lasagna L., Mosteller F., von J. M. Felsinger, and Beecher H. K. A study of the placebo response. Amer. J. Med., 1954, 
16, 770-779.
84. Lasagna L., von J. M. Felsinger, and Beecher H. K. Drug induced mood changes in man. I. Observations on healthy 
subjects, chronically ill patients and "post addicts." J. Amer. med. Ass., 1955, 157, 1006-1020.
85. Laverty S. G. Sodium amytal and extraversion. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiat., 1958, 21, 50-54.
86. LeGuillant L., and Roelens R.Travaux soviétiques sur les neuroleptiques. La Presse médicale, 1956, 64, 1225-1227.
87. Lehmann H. E. Selective inhibition of affective drive by pharmacologic means. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1954, 110, 856-857.

88. Lehmann H. E., and Hanrahan G. E. Chlorpromazine. New inhibiting agent for psychomotor excitement and manic 
states. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1954, 71, 227-237.
89. Levine A., Abramson H. A., Kaufman M. R., et al. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25). XIV. Effect on personality as 
observed in psychological tests. J. Psychol., 1955, 40, 351-366.
-138-
90. Liddell S. W., and Weil-Malherbe H. The effects of methedrine and of lysergic acid diethylamide on mental processes 
and on the blood adrenaline level. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiat., 1953, 16, 7-13.
91. Lilly J. C. Mental effects of reduction of ordinary levels of physical stimuli on intact healthy persons. Psychiat. res. 
Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1956, 5, 1-28.
92. Lindemann E. Psychological changes in normal and abnormal individuals under the influence of sodium amytal. Amer. 
J. Psychiat., 1932, 11, 1083-1091.
93. Lindemann E., and Clark L D. Modifications in ego structure and personality reactions under the influence of the 
effects of drugs. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1952, 108, 561-567.
94. Lindemann E., and Malamud W. Experimental analysis of the psychopathological effects of intoxicating drugs. Amer. 
J. Psychiat., 1934, 13, 853-881.
95. Ling T. M., and Davies L. A.  The use of methedrine in diagnosis and treatment of the psychoneuroses.  Amer. J. 
Psychiat., 1952, 109, 38-39.
96. Lipton E. L. The amytal interview. A review. Amer. Practit. Digest Treat., 1950, I, 148-163.
97. Loomer H. P., Saunders J. C., and Kline N. S. A clinical and pharmacodynamic evaluation of iproniazid as a psychic 
energizer. Psychiat. res. Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1957, 8, 129-141.
98. Luttrell R. R., and Morrison A. V. A preliminary report on the tranquilizing effect of reserpine. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 
1955, 61, 183-187.
99. MacDonald J. M. Truth serum. J. crim. Law, Criminol. police Sci., 1955, 46, 259-265.
100. MacDonald M. D. Narcoanalysis and criminal law. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1954, 111, 283-288.
101. MacKinnon H. L. Narcoanalysis and allied procedures. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1948, 105, 224-225.
102. Masserman J., and Pechtel C. An experimental investigation of factors influencing drug action. Psychiat. res. Rep. 
Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1956, 4, 95-113.
103. Miller N. E. Effects of drugs on motivation: The value of using a variety of measures. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1956, 65, 
318-333.
104. Morris D. P. Intravenous barbiturates: An aid in the diagnoses and treatment of conversion hysteria and malingering. 
Mil. Surg., 1945, 96, 509-513.
105. Müler J. M., Schlitter E., and Bein H. J. Reserpin, der sedative Wirkstoff aus Rauwolfia serpentina Benth. Experientia, 
1952, 8, p. 338.

106. New J. S., and Kelly A. R. Narcosynthesis in civilian practice. Southern med. J., 1947, 40, 349-355.
107. Payne R. B., and Moore E. W.  The effects of some analeptic and depressant drugs upon tracking behavior. J. 
Pharmacol., 1955, 115, 480-484.
108. Raines G. N., and Cohn R. Intravenous sodium amytal and generalized language dysfunction. Neurology, 1951, 1, 
229-308.
109. Redlich F. C., Ravitz L. J., and Dession G. H. Narcoanalysis and truth. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1951, 107, 586-593.
110. Rinkel M., DeShon J., Hyde R. W., and Solomon H. C. Experimental schizophrenia-like symptoms. Amer. J. Psychiat., 
1952, 100, 572-578.
111. Rinkel M., Hyde R. W., Solomon H. C., and Hoagland H. Experimental psychiatry. II. Clinical and physiochemical 
psychosis. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1955, 111, 881-895.
112. Rolin J. Police drugs. Translated by L. J. Bendit. New York: Philosophical Library, 1956.
-139-
113. Rothman T., and Sward K. Studies in psychopharmacologic psychotherapy: Effective psychotherapy during drug-
induced states. A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1957, 78, 628-642.
Rubin M. A., Malamud W., and Hope J. M. Electroencephalogram and psychopathological manifestations 
n schizophrenia as influenced by drugs. Psychosom. Med., 1942, 4, 355-361. 
115. Saber E. V. Narcoanalysis in police drugs. Appendix in J. Rolin, Police drugs. New York: Philosophical Library, 1956.
116. Sargant W. Battle for the mind. New York: Doubleday, 1957.
117. Sargant W., and Slater E. Physical methods of treatment in psychiatry. (3rd ed.) Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1954.
118. Sarwer-Foner G. J.  The transference and non-specific drug effects in the use of the tranquilizer drugs, and their  
influence on affect. Psychiat. res. Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1957, 8, 153-167.
119. Savage C., and Day J. Effects of a tranquilizer (reserpine) on psychodynamic and social processes. A. M. A. Arch. 
Neurol. Psychiat., 1958, 79, 590 596.
120. Schut J. W., and Himwich H. E.  The effect of meratran on twenty-five institutionalized mental patients. Amer. J. 
Psychiat., 1955, 111, 837-840.
121. Simon J. L., and Taube H. A preliminary study on the use of methcdrine in psychiatric diagnosis. J. nerv. ment. Dis., 
1946, 104, 593-596.
122. Stockings G. T. Clinical study of the mescaline psychosis with special reference to the mechanism of the genesis of 
schizophrenia and other psychotic states. J. ment. Sci., 1940, 86, 29-47.
123. Tourlentes T. T., Hunsicker A. L., and Hurd D. E. Chlorpromazine and communication processes. A. M. A. Arch. 
Neurol. Psychiat., 1958, 79, 468-473.
124. Tyler D. B. Psychological changes during experimental sleep deprivation. Dis. nerv. Syst., 1955, 16, 293-299.

125. Underhill H. C. Criminal evidence. Revised and edited by J. L. Niblock, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1935.
126. Von J. M. Felsinger, Lasagna L., and Beecher H. K. Drug-induced changes in man. 2. Personality and reaction to 
drugs. J. Amer. med. Ass., 1955, 157, 1113-1119.
127. Weinstein E. A., Kahn R. L., Sugarman L. A., and Linn L. The diagnostic use of amobarbital sodium in brain disease. 
Amer. J. Psychiat., 1953, 109, 889-894.
128. Weinstein E. A., Kahn R. L., Sugarman L. A., and Malitz S. The serial administration of the "amytal test" for brain 
disease; its diagnostic and prognostic value. A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1954, 71, 217-226.
129. Wendt G. R. Quoted by H. Freed in Symposium: Discussion and critique on methodology of research in psychiatry. 
Psychiat. res. Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1958, 9, p. 70.
130. West L. J. Psychiatric aspects of training for honorable survival as a prisoner of war. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1958, 115, 
329-336.
131. Wikler A. The relations of psychiatry to pharmacology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1957.
132. Wikler A. Some problems in experimental psychiatry. Psychiat. res. Rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1958, 9, 89-111.
133. Wilkins R. W. Clinical usage of rauwolfia alkaloids, including reserpine (serpasil). Ann, N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1954, 59, 
36-44,
-140-
134. Winkelman N. W., Jr. Chlorpromazine in the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders. J. Amer. med. Ass., 1954, 155, 
18-21.
135.  Wolf  S.  Effects  of  suggestion  and  conditioning  on  the  action  of  chemical  agents  in  human  objects  —  the  
pharmacology of placebos. J. clin. Invest., 1950, 29, 100-109.
136. Wolf S., and Pinsky R. H. Effects of placebo administration and occurrence of toxic reactions. J. Amer. med. Ass., 
1954, 155, 339-341.
137. Wolf S., and Ripley H. S. Studies on the action of intravenously administered sodium amytal. Amer. J. med. Sci., 1948, 
215, 56-62.
-141-
CHAPTER 4

Physiological responses
as a means of
evaluating information
R. C. DAVIS
To almost any stimulus from outside the body responds with widespread changes in its physiologic 
functioning. Many of the changes are invisible and unknown to the person himself. In some situations, 
these changes have been found to be valuable for indications of the degree of credence which should be 
given to a person's statements. This chapter reviews the responses available for such interpretations, the 
validity of the method, and possible improvements and extensions of its use which may occur in the 
future.
The use of physiologic responses in police interrogation has become commonplace. Such practices, 
long based on supernatural principles, have in fact been used since ancient times (35). As long ago as the 
eighteenth century Daniel Defoe proposed a test of this sort with a scientific rationale (31). Actual 
experiment on physiologic tests of deception seems to have begun with psychologists in Germany early 
in the century, with Benussi (2), an Italian with German training, offering the most extensive and 
promising results. Benussi used breathing changes as his principal criterion. A few years later Marston 
(29) and Larson (23), on the basis of certain experimental work, reported success with systolic blood 
pressure changes. These two physiologic variables have been the core of commercial "lie detectors" ever 
since, with the addition of the galvanic skin response following the work of Summers (33, 34) in the 
1930's.
Under a contract with the Office of Naval Research, which was
-142-
also supported by the other services, a group at Indiana University undertook a comparison of variables 
and combinations of variables that was reported in 1952 (17). Meanwhile the use of the "standard" 
methods has spread widely as an applied art with a certain body of tradition. (Lee (26) gives an account 
of current practices.) Controlled experiments, however, on which to base actual practice have too often 
been lacking. An excellent survey of the current status of the field has recently been provided by Ferracuti 
(18) in Italian.
The present survey will be organized into the following topics: (a) Evaluation of present practices. (b) 
Response  variables  and  instrumentation.  (c)  Interrogation  procedures.  (d)  Data  interpretation  and 
operator's decisions. (e) Psychological principles of lie detection.
Evaluation of Present Practices

We may consider "current practices" en masse and ask how effective these have been. This problem is 
considered  by  Inbau  (20),  apparently  by  comparing  "lie  detector"  results  with  jury  verdicts  and 
confessions. The agreement between detection and the criterion for various sets of data is about 70 per 
cent, with 20 per cent of the cases discarded as ambiguous.
This figure must be compared, of course, with some percentage of success to be expected by chance. 
If every case were treated independently, the percentage of success would be 50 per cent. It is, however, 
common practice to examine a group of suspected persons, of whom it is known that only one is guilty. If 
the operator then selects one from the group as guilty, his chances of being correct by sheer luck are less 
than 50 per cent. If, on the other hand, an operator knows, in a particular situation, that most of the 
examinees sent him are later judged guilty, his "percentage of success by chance" could be much higher.
It would be difficult to analyze field results in greater detail than in Inbau's review (20). The jury 
decision is an imperfect criterion, of course, and may not be independent of the lie detector results since a 
prosecutor might be inclined to bring to trial more cases in which the lie detector results were clear. If the 
test has been used widely for screening, as it is reported to be, many suspects with negative finding on the 
instrument would not be brought to court. Most of these would be true negatives, and the percentage of 
success might actually be higher if they were included. The percentage obtained will depend clearly on 
the group from which it is derived. Further-
-143-
more, there is no telling exactly what procedures are used by various examining officers nor just what in 
the instrument records (or possibly aside from them) influences the judgment as to whether the lie 
detector test indicates guilt. For determining which methods and conditions give the most valid results, 
and  whether  improvement  is  actually  possible,  we  must  turn  to  experimental  comparisons.  This 
experimental knowledge of factors which are likely to influence the outcome could then be used in future 
attempts to evaluate uses in the practical situation.
The en masse result leads to the conclusion that psychological methods of detection in the criminal 
interrogation situations do provide information although the amount is uncertain, and the present problem 
confronting users is to maximize the information.
Laboratory  experiments  (17,  23,  33)  have  generally reported  greater  percentages  of  successful 
detection than the figure given by Inbau for field results. He is, however, skeptical of results obtained 
from these laboratory experiments. The situations are different in many wayssome of the differences 
tending to favor the laboratory, some the field situation. Although the severity of consequences in the 
laboratory is much less, the lying is also likely to be of a simpler sort and conditions better controlled. 
With some of the very high percentages reported for the laboratory studies, there is some question that the 
criterion may be adjusted to maximize success on one particular set of data and thus cannot be expected 
to have general application.
Response Variables and Instrumentation

At present instruments may be classed into three groups: (a) the traditional ones which have both 
laboratory and field use; (b) those which have been tried in the laboratory, in some cases incompletely; 
and (c) those which have possible value but have not been tested for lie detection.
In the first group the variables are breathing, blood pressure, and galvanic skin response.
Indices with Field and Laboratory Tests
BREATHING
Although this variable was the first put to experimental test (2), the particular feature, the I/E ratio, or 
time of inspiration divided
-144-
by time of expiration, seems to have dropped out of sight in practice. Benussi's experimental report was 
that during lying the I/E ratio is increased because of a change in the form of the breathing curve. It is 
easy to see why the ratio has been neglected in practical work, for it is laborious to compute and the 
determining points in the breathing cycle are difficult to distinguish, especially in a record taken at the 
usual slow speed. In the "Indiana study an attempt to evaluate it was abandoned because measurements 
were so unreliable. Common practice seems to be to regard any marked disturbtnce of breathing as 
indicative of deception (24).
The technique of recording the breathing rhythm is rather simple. The common pneumatic system is 
open to criticism because of the nonproportionality introduced by the compressibility of air, the general 
inconvenience of keeping the system free from leaks, and the awkward readjustment when S throws the 
recorder off scale by a movement. A simple electrical pickup and recording system can be substituted 
(17).
The Indiana study considered two aspects of respiration: amplitude and breathing cycle time (the 
inverse of rate). In amplitude the response in truth telling was an increase, with the maximum 5 to 10 sec 
after he delivery of a question. In lying the mean response was also an increase, but in a lesser amount. 
The fact that a smaller increase in amplitude typically indicates deception requires an operator to make a 
sort of inverted interpretation on this point. Breathing cycle time increased in both conditions, but more in 
lying. Thus breathing during deception is shallower and slower than in truth telling. These facts are 
confirmed by the agreement of the two groups. There seems to be much better discrimination between the 
two conditions when these measures are used in a long series of questions; i.e., they discriminate poorly 
at first as compared to other measures, but in the long run are among the best discriminators. It may be 
that breathing in the early part of a series is made irregular by a reaction to the general situation. After 
some adaptation it becomes possible to compare the responses to questions in purer form. According to 
some later work (8) the inhibition of breathing seems rather characteristic of anticipation of a stimulus.
One drawback in the use of respiration as an indicator is its susceptibility to voluntary control. If an S 
wished to produce a confused record he could probably do so by alternating over and under breathing, if 

he could keep up this or another program in the face of questions. But this drawback is not present in 
breathing alone. If an examinee knows that changes in breathing will disturb all
-145-
physiologic variables under control of the autonomic division of the nervous system, and possibly even 
some others, a certain amount of cooperation or a certain degree of ignorance is required for lie detection 
by physiologic methods to work. Respiration, therefore, on balance in the present state of knowledge 
seems to be one of the better measures.
BLOOD PRESSURE
The systolic blood pressure was first used as a deception indicator by Marston (29) and the method in 
common use is the contribution of Larson (23). It is evidently the chief reliance of present field 
practitioners of detection. Inbau (20) and others write that blood pressure is the main channel for the 
deception reaction in a real situation, although galvanic skin response may have greater power in the 
laboratory. (It seems unlikely that this is a fundamental difference between the two measures. The manner 
in which they are used and the length of sitting may be involved. The point would seem to require 
experimental checking.)
The systolic pressure will typically rise by a few millimeters of mercury in response to a question, 
whether it is answered truthfully or not. The evidence is that the rise will generally be greater when S is 
lying than when telling the truth. In using this measure, the operator, consciously or unconsciously, uses 
some sort of cut-off to separate the two categories. Records are often presented [e.g., (26)] in which a 
large difference in response to neutral and critical questions makes the decision obvious. However, as 
might be expected, there are instances which are not so clear. The content of neutral questions will 
produce variations in the response, and one must then decide whether a response to a critical question is 
"positive" if it is larger than any other, or if it is larger than average by some amount. It is likely that the 
criterion is a somewhat variable one in ordinary practice.
The instrument currently in use consists of a pressure cuff similar to that used in medical practice, but 
equipped with a side branch tube which connects to a tambour through a pressure reducer. The method is 
to inflate the cuff (on the upper arm) to a point between systolic and diastolic pressure; that is, to about 
100 mm of mercury. This may be adjusted from time to time to follow changes in S's blood pressure. 
Under these circumstances there is a flow of blood to the lower arm only during the upper half of the 
pulse wave, and there is practically no venous return from the arm since the cuff pressure far exceeds the 
pressure in the veins, and occludes them. The side branch from the cuff will convey pressure variations to 
the
-146-
tambour and its stylus. Variations produced both by the pulse and by those slower changes are referred to 
as systolic blood pressure variations.
The method has long been criticized (4) for its technical incorrectness. It does not give a true measure 
of systolic (or diastolic) pressure. This criticism has made little impression on those who use the method, 
since they can exclaim, with some justification, "But it works!" It is a more telling objection that the cuff 

disturbs the blood supply to the arm a great deal and that it produces many undesirable side effects (7). 
The practical stoppage of circulation can become, in the course of a sitting, quite painful, and in a long 
sitting, dangerous. Operators, who are aware of these consequences, release the pressure from time to 
time to restore circulation. The side effects are such as to produce reactions in the other autonomically 
controlled variables which one may be measuring, and even in the blood pressure itself.
The Indiana study used a different method, unfortunately also open to these objections to occluding 
the blood supply. By mechanical means, a steadily increasing pressure was applied to a cuff and the point 
of complete occlusion determined by means of a pulse detector on the lower arm. The experimental 
results confirm the opinion that it is one of the better indicators of deception. Again discrimination is poor 
(almost nil) in the early part of a sitting and improves to a high point later.
Recently the writer (7) investigated the requirements of continuous arterial oressure measurement, and 
proposed a "closed circuit" method which uses a strain gauge applied to an artery with very little 
pressure. This device is simple to construct and use and seems well suited to the recording of variations in 
arterial pressure, although it will not as now developed indicate the base level of pressure. It has been 
used in a number of tests and experiments to record reaction to stimuli of various sorts (questions, flashes 
of light, and warning and reaction signals in decision situations). Although it has not been tested in a 
detection situation, there is good reason to think that it will do at least as well as the occlusion or near 
occlusion methods.
THE GALVANIC SKIN RESPONSE
In the 1930's Summers (33, 34) reported some rather spectacular laboratory results in the detection of 
deception with the galvanic skin response (GSR). With a certain type of situation he was able to detect 
lying better than 90 per cent of the time. Since this work, the use of the GSR has increased and apparatus 
for registering it for detection purposes is made commercially.
-147-
The GSR seems to be one of the most easily triggered responseseven slight stimuli will produce the 
decrease in the electrical resistance of the skin, reflecting activation of the sweat glands (an internal 
condition, rather than the secretion of sweat). Recovery, however, is typically slow in this variable, and in 
a routine examination the next question is likely to be introduced before recovery is complete. Partly 
because of this fact there is an adapting trend in the GSR; with stimuli repeated every few minutes the 
response gets smaller, other things being equal.
On the other hand, long term changes in skin resistance may have a certain significance. A decrease in 
resistance which persists for a long period might be more significant of deception than one which has a 
quick recovery. In any case there is reason to believe that the significance of a change is related to the 
base level obtaining before it begins (17).
Not all available instruments have a provision for readily determining base level and long persisting 
trends. The structure of a proper instrument is more complex for the GSR than for the first two 
physiologic variables, although for modern electronics it is simple. The resistance measuring principle 
seems most satisfactory; a constant current is passed through S, the I/R drop across him is measured, and 
its fluctuations recorded.

Such a circuit with a device for automatically setting the recording pen back on scale is described in 
the Indiana report. For satisfactory recording nonpolarizing electrodes are required, although some 
commercial suppliers seem to overlook this necessity.
In the Indiana study the GSR was the best of the indicators in a short series though its power of 
discrimination fell as adaptation progressed. The investigation was concerned, however, only with the 
short term decreases that follow questions with about a 2-sec latency. There may be still further power in 
the GSR when it is used differently. The interpretation of the response is certainly made difficult by the 
confounding adaptation trend, and an interview needs to be planned to allow for such a trend, results 
being evaluated with regard to it.
Variables Tested Only in the Laboratory
PULSE RATE
Although pulse rate is sometimes referred to in reports of field studies, it is probably little regarded. In 
fact, at the usual recording
-148-
speed pulse rate changes (represented in the blood pressure record) would be very hard to discover.
The rate, in the form of cycle time, was included in the comparison of the Indiana study. The 
technique was to use a somewhat faster paper speed and make actual measurements of the time occupied 
by a certain number of beats. Contrary to the usual expectation the predominant response to questions is a 
slowing of the rate, reaching a maximum after about 5 sec. In lying the heart rate slows down more than 
in truth telling. This response is in part also the one produced by loud noises (10), threats of shock (17), 
and many other types of stimuli not requiring considerable muscular movement. In comparison with the 
other variables of the comparative study the pulse rate variable discriminates moderately well. Apparently 
it suffers from the same handicap as GSR — with adaptation, it loses power.
To be interpreted immediately the rate would need to be recorded by a tachometer such as the one 
described in (13) or that manufactured by the Yellow Springs Instrument Company. These tachometers 
translate time into a lateral deflection of a recording pen. Since these instruments are operated by the 
electrocardiogram, they are a bit uncertain if S is not in a shielded room. They are more complex than the 
GSR instrument and might present problems in the hands of an inexperienced operator. Nevertheless, 
heart rate may turn out to be a very good adjunct in detection.
VOLUME PULSE
The volume pulse has been studied in a number of experiments in the Indiana laboratory in a variety 
of situations (8, 9 ,10) and it was included in the comparison made in the Indiana lie detection study. The 
physiologic function is the pulsatile change in the volume of some part such as the finger. The reaction to 
stimuli is typically a decrease in the amplitude of the pulse wave, which is a manifestation of constriction 
of the arterioles in the region. This reaction is produced by questions in an interrogation and is greater 

when S is lying than when telling the truth. Under certain circumstances in a moderately long series of 
questions the response differentiates well between truth and lying.
The function is measured by some type of plethysmograph. The electrical impedance plethysmograph 
has the considerable advantage of convenience in attachment. Such an instrument is moderately complex 
to build but fairly simple to operate.
The constriction recorded by the plethysmograph is closely related
-149-
to a rise in blood pressure recordings. As a fundamental phenomenon, it may have an advantage in lie 
detection.
PRESSURE PULSE
The pressure pulse is distinguished from the volume pulse in method of recording; a pickup device 
with a very high resistance to movement is used. The effects recorded are variations of the blood pressure 
rather than local conditions at the site of pickup. The pulsatile variations are the difference between 
systolic and diastolic pressure.
A measure of this sort was tested in the Indiana study with rather poor results in detection of deception 
and more recent studies of other conditions (9) also suggest it is a rather unsatisfactory variable. Probably 
systolic and diastolic are correlated positively to a substantial degree, but as one or the other has a greater 
increase, the pressure pulse goes one way or the other.
ELECTROMYOGRAM (MUSCULAR TENSION)
This variable is in a different class from the previous ones in that it is under the influence of the central 
nervous system rather than the autonomic division (respiration is affected by both). Although muscular 
tension can be recorded by other means than electrical, the operating difficulties of the electrical method 
are less with suitable equipment and the records more interpretable. The EMG can be compared in several 
places if one desires.
For  recording  EMG  an  amplifier  is  needed,  with  sensitivity  in  about  the  range  of  the  usual 
electroencephalograph. The output of this needs to be integrated in one way or another to make it easily 
read (17). The electrodes attached to S are simple metal disks.
The Indiana study included one experiment using EMG in lie detection, but this was carried out 
independently rather than as part of the battery in which various measures were compared. Results were 
extremely satisfactory so far as they went. However, the test must as yet be considered exploratory and 
needs repetition for statistical reasons.
Convenient, portable EMG apparatus is now available, though it is somewhat expensive, and with a 
little experience an operator could learn to run it. An important technical limitation is the necessity for 
having S in a shielded room (for example, grounded fly screen), which could be easily provided only in 
some central laboratory.

Of course, the skeletal muscle can be activated intentionally by S. If S wished he could contract the 
measured muscle upon each ques-
-150-
tion and thus confuse the record, although the strategy would probably not occur to him. Such a 
movement would also have the effect of disturbing all the usual measures of lie detection, and evidently 
is not a common occurrence. The use of the method has some interesting possibilities since conflict 
between two responses can be recorded (17).
OCULAR MOVEMENTS
Somewhat similar in operation to the EMG the ocular movements permit the study of a choice of 
responses. If two or more visual targets are provided the eyes may unconsciously turn toward one or 
another in response to a question. The method lends itself well to the map or picture exploration method 
(see the following).
A substudy of the Indiana lie detection research tested the power of the ocular movements as a 
detector with good results. At least under special experimental conditions good discrimination can be 
obtained. This method, however, has the handicap of being rather cumbersome and slow. It involves 
photographing the eye movements with art ophthalmograph and evaluating the record after it has been 
developed.
Proposed Variables Not Yet Tested
VELOCITY OF PULSE WAVE
Speed  of  transmission  of  the  pulse wave  along  an artery has  been  proposed  by the  group  at 
Washington State University (5) as a possible indicator of deception. The variable measured is primarily 
the pressure increase in the artery that follows a heart systole and is propagated through the fluid in the 
artery in a manner fairly well described by a known equation. (This propagation of pressure wave is quite 
a different matter from the flow of blood.) If the pressure wave is picked up at two points a known 
distance apart, its velocity can be calculated. The Washington State group has worked on a device that 
would do this automatically.
The velocity, according to the equation, depends on the level of blood pressure, and it would seem that 
in the same individual, variations in pressure would be the principal source of variation in velocity. 
Consequently, the scheme would be an indirect measure of blood pressure.
Since the pickups would be activated by pulse pressure, and since pulse pressure is quite variable 
itself, it seems probable that such
-151-

a device would require a good deal of monitoring of sensitivity to give suitable readings. The scheme is 
also rather complex and seems to be an alternative to the simpler method of recording pressure described 
previously.
GASTROINTESTINAL REACTIONS
Recent instrumental developments (11, 12, 36) make possible the use of the gastrointestinal reactions 
as a means of detection. According to one method, gastric or intestinal activity is recorded from surface 
electrodes attached to S, one on the abdomen and one on the arm. Stimulus effects upon GI activity have 
been demonstrated (11), though much remains to be discovered about them. A probable handicap of the 
method is the extreme slowness of response and recovery in this sector; it might be necessary to space 
questions several minutes apart. Nevertheless, the variable might turn out to be highly discriminative.
THE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM
The EEG is a possible response variable for use in detection although it has never been tested. The 
problem expected is that under interview conditions the alpha rhythm would probably be blocked most of 
the time, and there would be very little opportunity for it to exhibit the "arousal" or "alerting" reaction. In 
other words, the variable may be too sensitive to all sorts of stimuli and reach its maximum response, as it 
were, too readily, but no one can be certain this would happen without a trial. Equipment for recording 
the EEG is basically the same as that described for the EMG. An integrator is not generally used in 
connection with it, though such a transformation might in fact be useful.
Interrogation Procedures
Certain general facts and a few known particulars indicate how prior conditions may affect detection 
results.
Adaptation Effects
A general effect that needs to be taken into account is the rule of adaptation. Almost all the response 
variables discussed are known to become less responsive with repeated stimulation, some at a greater,
-152-
some at a lesser rate (10). Beyond influencing the choice of variable this fact should also regulate 
procedure. Interrogation would be expected to become progressively less effective as it proceeds, and the 
diminishing returns would limit length of session: one cannot detect a difference between responses that 
are practically nonexistent. In other words, instrumental detection would not be expected to combine well 
with a "wear-them-down" procedure. Profitable sessions would then probably be an hour or less.
Furthermore,  questioning  or  stimulation  of  other  sorts  before  the  instrumental  session  would 
undoubtedly also produce a deadening of response. For example, there is considerable transfer of 
adaptation from one stimulus to another in the GSR. Immediately following a period of highly disturbing 

events it is possible that an S might be induced to tell the truth, but the situation would be a poor one for 
instrumental methods, since S is already in such a high state of excitement that increments in the response 
variables would be small. This can be inferred from experimental results, but it would be well to have 
direct confirmation.
For similar reasons, possibly because of the same adaptation mechanism, a condition of fatigue or 
prolonged  sleeplessness  would  be  unfavorable  in  discriminating  truth  from falsehood.  Physiologic 
reactions are likely to be reduced in such circumstances. This suggestion accords with the common 
experience of being "too tired to care one way or the other." The stimulus threshold is raised and the 
person eventually falls asleep — a state of relative indifference to all ordinary stimuli. By the same token 
one would expect alcohol and barbiturates, and perhaps tranquilizers, to be unfavorable to detection.
Because of these considerations there may actually be a contradiction between trying to secure an 
admission and detecting lying by instruments. For instrumental detection one needs an S with a lively 
autonomic (or sometimes central) nervous system, whereas fatigue might favor contradictions and 
admissions. It would seem that an examiner must determine whether he intends to use instrumental 
methods as a means of detection or merely as a stage property for intimidatin the subject.
Indoctrination of the Subject
The importance of a state of alertness in S is demonstrated by one of the Indiana studies. A visit to the 
Chicago Police Laboratories had brought to light the practice of convincing S of the power of the
-153-
instrument by "detecting" which card had been selected from a stacked deck. In a situation which also 
required a certain deception by the experimenter, the Indiana experiments compared the instrumental 
detections with and without prior demonstration of the effectiveness of the technique. There was a large 
margin in favor of the "no demonstration" procedure. Apparently when S is convinced that the instrument 
is infallible, he is resigned and ceases to be excited about the critical questions. A certain amount of 
contest in the situation seems favorable to detection. The experiment may be taken to show that even for 
the police officer, honesty is the best policy.
Pretesting of Ss
There is a very attractive possibility of weighing in advance the testimony of the instruments. If 
certain Ss are characteristically "detectable" when telling falsehoods and certain others are not, it should 
be possible to assign people in advance to the one class or the other. The practical advantage is clear; by 
deciding at the outset that certain cases are "inoperable" one's percentage of successful detection and 
confidence in his results for the remaining cases can be enormously increased. (See discussion in the 
Indiana report (17).) Exclusion of the inoperable cases would be especially advantageous if their number 
is small. The possibility of this classification depends on the consistency with which individuals respond 
differentially to critical and neutral questions.

Two experiments in the Indiana series were carried out to test that proposition, one being included in 
the report, the other being completed too late for inclusion. Both studies, based on the galvanic skin 
response, found a high degree of consistency among Ss, especially for those on whom detection failed on 
the first series of questions. The second set of questions also failed to detect deception. The results of the 
second study, on a larger group, confirm this finding. The implication is that using one or two pretests in 
which S is lying by instruction on known occasions would serve to distinguish persons susceptible to 
instrumental methods from those who are not. On the "susceptible" Ss, the certainty of the detection 
diagnosis will be greatly improved. One point needs further investigation: whether or not a pretest with 
one set of questions will pick out individuals who are susceptible to detection with a different set of 
questions. In the experiments mentioned the same questions were used for both pretest and test.
-154-
Required Response of the Subject
It is possible to query S without demanding replies from him at all, to require yes-no answers to 
appropriately framed questions, or to ask questions which require explanatory statements from S. Some 
experimental results (14) lead to the general proposition that if some overt response is required there are 
greater autonomic  and muscular  reactions to a  stimulus.  With larger  responses  one  would  expect 
differentiation between truth and falsehood to be easier. One experiment in the Indiana study confirmed 
this expectation for lie detection. Subjects who were required to reply "Yes" or "No" to questions gave 
more differential responses on the instrument (GSR). It also seems probable that requiring a strong verbal 
or motor response to questions would further increase Ss' recorded reactions and make them easier to 
differentiate. However, "explanatory" answers should probably be avoided for purposes of instrumental 
detection. Inasmuch as the overt response required does seem to influence the physiologic records, 
responses of uncontrolled length would tend to confuse the interpretation.
Relationship of Operator and Subject
The possibility of an interviewer and subject having effects upon one another has been brought out in 
several studies in a psychiatric situation (15, 27). Physiologic reactions apparently occur in each in 
response to the other. Although no study has been made of such interaction in a police-type interrogation, 
the occurrence seems quite likely. In any such interview the manner of the operator while asking a 
question is probably subject to unconscious variation. If, in turn, the interrogator's manner is influenced 
by the S-if he gets angry or feels sympathetic, for example-the results could be extremely confused. 
Actually presentation of a set of questions on "flash cards" or in a "memory drum" device may be 
indicated.
Plans for Interrogation

Lie detection experiments have generally dealt with just one plan of questioning: the presentation of a 
series of supposedly neutral questions with certain critical ones imbedded in it at unannounced places. 
Responses to the two sorts of questions are evaluated as
-155-
though they were independent. Field workers, on the other hand, have developed a variety of ingenious 
plans (20, 26) which seem sometimes to be more effective. A radically different plan is to let S know 
when a critical question or group of questions is coming. This procedure is accomplished by going 
through a question series in the same order often enough so that S knows what to expect. A series of 
responses is then evaluated as a whole: deception being taken as indicated, on the later repetitions, when 
responses become progressively larger as the critical questions are approached and die out rapidly 
thereafter. In some variables there is, further, the possibility of observing a mounting base level as 
questions  near  the  climax.  For  a  situation  other  than  lie  detection,  experiments  (16,  32)  have 
demonstrated the progressive  increase in reaction to stimuli as a noxious  question is approached. 
Conditioned responses are said to be formed to the preceding stimuli on the earlier runs through the 
series. As a method of detecting deception there is much to be said for this organized schedule of 
questions.  Whereas  the  unexpected  question  will  produce  a  brief  response,  with  unidentifiable 
anticipation probably enlarging responses to neutral stimuli and confusing the issue, the organized 
schedule permits a detection based on a number of readings, in fact, on the pattern of responses in a 
whole series. So far, however, an exact method of evaluating the data is not at hand. It would be quite 
desirable to have an experimental evaluation of this method.
Whatever general scheme of questioning is used, there must be some regard to the adaptative process 
already described. Size of response to a question in nearly all variables is going to be affected by its 
position in a series. Current practice evidently recognizes the fact by avoiding the first position for critical 
questions. A position at the end of a series would be almost as unfavorable, since, other things being 
equal, the response to a stimulus in that position will be the smallest. Question series of one form or 
another need to be so planned that the adaptation trend can be discounted in the interpretation.
Data Interpretation and Operator's Decisions
An operator in field work usually has neither the time nor the means to make a statistical analysis of 
his results or perhaps even to compute the averages of the several responses to all questions. Apparently 
the successful operator will learn to decide on the meaning
-156-
of his results by some rules of thumb which he has difficulty putting into words even to himself. To 
exactly what set of cues he is responding it is difficult to say, for apparently no one has made an analysis 
of the exact difference between records which are judged positive and those which are judged negative or 
inconclusive.
For the experimenter the problem is different, since he is obliged to say exactly how he has arrived at 
an answer. His procedure, therefore, will usually be, as in the Indiana studies, to settle upon some rather 

obvious aspect of response that can be definitely measured, and then find out how well he can do at 
detection  with  this  information  about  each  response.  Naturally,  he  is  discarding  a  good  deal  of 
information while he does this, information about other features of  the response which might be 
supplementary or superior to that which he is using. For example, in most GSR work only the maximum 
amplitude of the response is considered. It may well be that the duration of the response also has a 
meaning (beyond its correlation with amplitude). In fact, an unreported portion of the Indiana study 
indicated that this was true. The field operator might allow for this feature intuitively along with other 
characteristics such as latency, doubleness or singleness of response, rate of rise, etc. Not that the 
experimenter could not study these things, but he must take them one by one, test them singly and 
according to various rules of combination and weighting, a laborious and lengthy process. His hope, of 
course, is that in the long run he will be able to tell the field operator just what he should take into 
account to secure maximum reliability of decision. Certain suggestions can be offered a priori and some 
from experimental evidence.
The logic of the detection task imposes certain requirements. Basically the assignment is one of 
differentiating two conditions, truth telling and lying, on the basis of readings which are correlated with 
them ("prediction" in the statistical sense of the word). The operator or experimenter must proceed by 
finding, for a given S, the mean response to the critical and to the neutral questions. The alternative, of 
simply comparing critical responses of an S to those of other persons, will not be satisfactory because Ss 
differ in their level of responsiveness to any stimulus. By representing the responses to critical questions 
by R o and those to neutral questions by R n, we may say the first quantity to be considered is R c — R n. 
We must then decide on the basis of data which sign of the result is indicative of lying, if either. We 
might, under  some circumstances, then  determine  from data  how  many persons  will be  correctly 
classified when the difference is of a certain degree. The number of detections would
-157-
be maximized by using a low number as the dividing point, but the number of errors of calling true 
answers false would be reduced by using a higher number.
Evaluation of this sort would be premature under many circumstances. It may well be that the 
questions asked are not of equal stimulating power even to those giving true answers. A critical question 
dealing with a crime or other "sensitive" information would doubtless elicit a larger response than, say, a 
question about an inconsequential matter. (It is a routine GSR demonstration that words such as "mother," 
"sex," "hate," etc., produce more response than, for example, the names of common articles of furniture.) 
Hence it is necessary to complicate the comparison before the decision of truth or falsity can be made. 
The value Rc — Rn for each S should be compared with that for a group of Ss responding to the same 
questions. The function to be used is therefore (Rc — Rn)Subject1 — (Rc — Rn)Average Subject. This function the 
experimenter would then need to evaluate for its detecting power; the field operator needs to arrive at an 
approximation of this function to reach a proper decision. Having this, the field operator should ideally be 
provided with a table showing the probability of correct detection and the probability of error for each 
value of the function. Such tables do not exist at present.
For good discrimination it is essential that measures to be compared be quite reliable. Each recorded 
response to a question may be considered as partly determined by the question and partly by "accidents" 
of the environment and in S himself. For example, there may be some influence of a previous question, of 
the questioner's tone of voice, of even trivial events, noises, etc., in the examining room. Naturally, the 

first step in securing reliability would be the control of these extraneous factors. A good examining room 
should be provided where outside events are neither seen nor heard and where S cannot see the examiner 
nor the operation of the instruments. Despite these precautions there will still be "error" fluctuations 
beyond the operator's capacity to manipulate. These disturbing effects can be set against one another by 
the usual technique of repeating the observations and considering the average of the series.
When several physiologic functions are recorded, or several features of one kind of response are 
measured, there is the further problem of how they should be weighted and combined in making a 
"prediction." Several variables, rather than one, would be expected to provide a more accurate basis for 
decision. Aside from the usual advantages derived from multiple measures there is the fact of indi-
-158-
vidual specificity of response, demonstrated in a number of experiments (22, 28), which would make 
multiple measures particularly valuable. Individuals tend to react in one physiologic sector or another. 
One individual may "specialize" in a heart reaction, for example, and another in the GSR. Recording a 
number of physiologic variables gives, therefore, a better chance of locating each person's special kind of 
reaction.
The  Indiana  studies  have  imparted  some  knowledge  of  the  methods  of  combination.  In  one 
investigation a large group of physiologic variables were recorded, more, of course, than would be 
practical in a field situation with the idea of comparing their effectiveness. "Discriminant analysis" was 
used in the main analysis of the results. This technique is based upon a computation of optimum weights 
to be assigned to the measures in order to give maximum discrimination when they are added together in 
standard score form. The weights derived from one group of Ss must then be tested on another before 
they can. be considered as firm. This elaborate method gave strange results in the Indiana study. First, by 
use of it on the original group, truth and lying were differentiated no better than they were by the best 
single measure. This result is rare with variables that correlate with a criterion and only poorly with each 
other. Second, the same weights applied to a second group did give a very substantial improvement 
indeed, whereas by the operation of random fluctuation one would expect the second group always to 
give worse results than the first. It may be that the second set of data was more reliable than the first, or 
fit the assumptions of the model better.
It is still possible that a set of weights suitable for transfer to field use could be derived in this way. A 
particular set of weights, of course, would have to be calculated for the particular grouping of response 
variables intended for field use. On the other hand, it seems likely that a different method of combination 
might have greater discriminating power.
In the Indiana group for which discriminant analysis improved detection but little, a simpler method 
gave very good results. It was found, for example, that merely counting the number of variables showing 
an indication of lying for each question formed a highly successful lying score. In this method one is 
avoiding the assumption of linear addition, and the good result of this sort of treatment suggests that it is 
well to avoid that assumption. There is also a great deal gained in simplicity.
There is still another possibility—a combination technique that does not simply add measures together 
but treats them as alternatives.

-159-
This technique remains to be developed, but it is, in fact, the logical approach in view of response 
specificity. Suppose, for example, there is an S who responds in a highly favored sector, such as heart 
rate, and very little in another-GSR, vasoconstriction, and other variables. We may presume that each of 
the response variables is admixed with a certain amount of random fluctuation ("error"). For such a case 
the heart rate response could be highly differential of truth and lying, but the other kinds of response 
would be less than average and, if added to the heart rate response as standard scores, or more simply 
combined, they would tend to offset the positive heart rate indication. It might come about, therefore, that 
combining measures in the ordinary fashion would involve greater error proportionate to "true" score than 
a single measure, properly chosen for each person.
An effective plan for this situation would be to determine by experiment what alternative patterns of 
response are discriminative of truth and falsehood. A record could be examined for such patterns, or, 
possibly, the pattern to be expected could be discovered by preliminary trials and a record watched for an 
exaggeration of this particular S's special pattern.
In field use, it is quite possible that interpretations of this sort are actually made, though rather 
unsystematically; a large response in one physiologic variable may be counted heavily, and the neutral 
indications of other variables not allowed to offset it. The multiple record would be used in such cases 
simply for selecting the most revealing variable for a particular S when he has one.
Psychological Principles of Lie Detection
The effectiveness of lie detection procedures is limited by a lack of knowledge of what psychological 
principles are involved in successful lie detection. There is little examination in the literature of the basic 
psychological principles at work. Particularly important is the question: "Just what general properties of a 
situation provoke the physiologic reactions which make lie detection possible?"
Prima facie it seems improbable that there is a special kind of response peculiar to lying. In the early 
days Marston (29) recognized that truth and falsity are not psychological categories. Obviously a person 
can give a false answer merely because he is misinformed. If the answer is true to the best of his 
knowledge and belief, one would certainly expect no physiologic signs of its falsity. Marston's contention 
was, therefore, that the physiologic reactions were present
-160-
only when there is consciousness of deception. If this is taken to mean that S must know that his 
statement is untrue, it is probably correct in most cases; that is to say that under some circumstances he 
would tell the truth. The possibility is not to be dismissed, however, that detection could be accomplished 
when S had completely suppressed memory of an event or distorted the essential features of it in his own 
thinking. Evidence of response under these conditions appears in the "subception" experiments (1, 19, 21, 
25, 30).

On the other hand, it seems that trivial deception, even when fully known to S, would not provoke 
much physiologic reaction. A person probably can say he is feeling fine when he is not without the 
deception coming to light on the instruments.
It  is  questionable,  therefore,  whether  the  idea  of  "consciousness  of  deception"  makes  for  an 
appreciable  refinement.  If  it  is  true  that  deception  is  best  with  heightened  awareness  of  it,  the 
characteristics of a situation which will heighten that awareness require examination.
The physiologic response in lying, as found in experiments and field trials, is a pattern of changes in 
the recorded variables. Essentially the same pattern of response occurs when S is telling the truth under 
interrogation, and detection is possible only because the changes are greater, as a rule, during lying. If the 
responses are not specific to lying per se, or to the consciousness of lying, then knowledge of just what 
characteristics of a situation produce them is of first importance.
Three possibilities can be suggested: the  conditioned response theory, the conflict theory, and the 
punishment theory. Each of these implies a somewhat different mode of operation in the detection 
situation.
According to the conditioned response theory the critical questions play the role of conditioned stimuli 
and evoke some "emotional" response with which they have been associated in the past. This principle is 
known to operate in situations other than lie detection. Conditioning of the GSR was demonstrated, for 
example, in the experiment of Diven (16), and it is a familiar fact that words such as those with sexual or 
other personal association evoke large responses. It would therefore be expected that questions relating to 
some fairly traumatic experience would produce especially large reactions. If this is the basis of detection, 
lies about trivial matters would be nearly impossible to detect. Asserting that a barn is a house, for 
example, would produce little response from the ordinary individual because neither word is connected 
with any large reaction on his past life. Denying that he took part in a crime might be
-161-
expected to produce a large reaction on this theory, because the crime probably produced a large 
"emotional" disturbance when it occurred. On the conditioning principle it would further be expected that 
the bodily reaction would be somewhat different, according to the kind of past experience the question 
was connected with. [Different stimulus situations do have a degree of specificity in the kind of reaction 
they produce according to certain evidence (6).] Whether, in fact, the physiologic response in lying differs 
according to the emotional reaction of S to a question is a problem deserving some investigation.
The simple conditioning theory can, however, hardly be the whole explanation of the lying reaction, 
for in laboratory experiments, such as some of those in the Indiana study, lying about rather trivial 
matters according to instruction did lead to enough differential reaction to yield a fairly good detection 
percentage. In fact, percentages of detection were so high as to suggest that lack of too great general 
stress is favorable to detection.
The theory of  conflict, following the psychoanalytic lead, would presume that a specially large 
physiologic disturbance would occur when two incompatible reaction tendencies are aroused at the same 
time. Whether there is a greater disturbance than the sum of the two separate excitations is questionable 
(3), but at any rate the two would be greater than one. In the process of deception two reaction tendencies 

may be expected. Long habit would dispose the person to answer a critical question straightforwardly. On 
the other hand, when he is lying there are circumstances which arouse in him the tendency to denial. In 
the  Indiana  studies  one  experiment  was  based  explicitly  on  this  principle,  but  with  the  plan  of 
distinguishing the two response tendencies by different sorts of muscular activity. The experiment gave 
good results, but not because it was possible to distinguish the two reaction tendencies. A better plan 
might have been to associate a "yes" answer with one hand and a "no" answer with the other. The purpose 
may be served, however, if the two response tendencies merely summate in the same place, and this could 
well be the mechanism by which the usual detection test works.
On the conflict hypothesis, both reaction tendencies would probably need to be strong for good results. 
Not much can be done about the tendency to reveal information openly. On the other hand, the tendency 
to  deny  it  may  be  subject  to  some  manipulation.  This  suggestion  again  leads  to  a  paradoxical 
recommendation: the situation must be so ordered that S makes a strong effort to conceal the infor-
-162-
mation. This strategy, opposite to that which might encourage admissions, may in fact be favorable to 
instrumental detection. The experiment, already described, which showed better detection when S was 
encouraged to think he might "beat the instrument" lends itself to this interpretation.
If conflict is the basis of the large reactions that signify deception, then there is some danger of 
confusion with large reactions produced by strictly personal emotional problems. It is an established fact 
(see the preceding) that words touching on emotionally sensitized areas will produce large reactions, 
regardless of deception. A question touching on such an area might provoke a reaction greater than that 
produced by a mild conflict. Errors from this source would be checked by comparing the reactions of 
several persons to the same questions and, where possible, by comparing a person's reactions to sensitive 
questions when he may be lying with those he gives to the same subject matter when there is no occasion 
to lie.
A third possible basis of  detection is the  punishment, or better,  threat-of-punishment principle. 
According to this idea a person will give a large physiologic response during lying because he anticipates 
serious consequences if he fails to deceive. In common language it might be that he fails to deceive the 
machine operator for the very reason that he fears he will fail. The "fear" would be the very reaction 
detected. More analytically put, S is giving a conditioned physiologic response to the operator's question 
because the content of the question has been associated with the possibility of unfavorable consequences. 
Lying is technically, then, an avoidance reaction with considerably less than 100 per cent chance of 
success, but it is the onl'y one with any chance of success at all. The physiologic reaction would be the 
consequence of an avoidance reaction which has a low probability of reinforcement, but not too low. If 
the theory has any validity at all it must be supposed that the physiologic reaction is associated with a 
state of uncertainty. It does seem that a lie told with a complete certainty of its acceptance would be 
unlikely to produce much reaction; and on the other hand we have the experimental evidence already 
mentioned that a lie told with no prospect of success whatever is also poorly detected. For good detection 
a situation may be necessary where S is willing to gamble on a rather long chance with some hope of 
success.

To make this punishment theory cover the experimental results one needs to take "punishment" in a 
broad sense, since in experiments S quite often suffers no serious loss if he is detected. He does, 
nevertheless, lose the game which he is playing and possibly this is
-163-
countable as a punishment. There seem to be no experimental observations on the general situation.
On this last type of theory successful detection would depend a good deal on S's attitude both toward 
the instrument and the situation as a whole, for good results would depend on S trying to "beat the game." 
If the hypothesis is correct, there would be some advantage to finding out what his attitude is and 
possibly encouraging him to engage in risk-taking behavior. Once again there seems to be all opposition 
between procedures designed to secure information and those that would lead to the best instrumental 
detection.
Present knowledge is not sufficient to lead to a decision on which, if any, of these three theories is 
correct. Since the theories here discussed are not mutually contradictory, it is quite possible that all the 
conditions referred to are actually operative in some degree in the detection situation. In that event 
detection would be best when critical questions are associated with somewhat traumatic past events, 
when S is threatened with possible but not certain punishment as a result of lying, and when critical 
questions, perhaps by reason of the uncertain consequences, arouse conflicting reactions in S.
Although direct, practical experience is lacking, some general findings of laboratory experiments are 
applicable. The relevance of many of the experiments for the criminal detection problem suffers from the 
fact that they involved no "crime." This makes them more pertinent for broader interpretations, however. 
Experiments concerned, for example, with discovering a person's birth month, when he has been told to 
say no to every question, are closer to the intelligence interrogation situation than to criminal detection. 
The concern in these experiments is with lying rather than with crime. From their success, we may 
conclude that crime is not essential for lie detection.
The intelligence interrogation, however, has certain peculiarities. Studies directed specifically to these 
distinctive problems would be required for more reliable conclusions regarding the applicability of 
findings from previous experimentation to practical employments in intelligence interrogations. One may 
suppose that the person questioned, typically, will have little personal involvement in information sought. 
The questions frequently will not be about something he has done or for which he feels responsible or 
guilty. He may or may not know what information is important to his interrogator. Perhaps he is not very 
deeply motivated to conceal the specific items or information, but loyalties and threatened penalties may 
dispose him
-164-
to do so. If the source regards the matter as unimportant, the motivational aspects of the situation would 
be rather like those in the common demonstration of detecting which card has been picked from a deck, a 
trick not difficult to do as a parlor game when a "lie detector" is available. However, if the source is 
highly motivated toward concealment and anticipates reprisals if he "breaks," the situation is rather like 
crime detection.

Special considerations also arise in the intelligence interrogation situation because of the kinds of 
people to be interrogated, their physiologic condition, their emotional state, and their attitudes. They 
differ from both the suspected criminals and the normal individuals or college students used in most 
experiments. The effect of factors like these is scarcely known for the groups already studied. It is terra 
incognita for the sources of factual interrogations.
A special condition for the intelligence situation is that the subject's cooperation in submitting to the 
instrumental recording might be difficult to obtain. One naturally speculates about the possibility of 
devising a few recording instruments that would need no attachment to S and might be concealed from 
him. Considering the complex problems attending overt electrodes and recorders, the information gained 
from hidden instruments is likely to be quite meager and unreliable. Furthermore, it is not certain that an 
S who is not aware of the process would actually respond in the same way as one who is. It would seem 
necessary that interrogators use the ordinary type of instrument and rely on persuasion or coercion to get 
subjects into it. There is still the possibility that sophisticated subjects would, under coercion, introduce 
confusion by moving about and controlling breathing. How often this would happen can only be 
determined through experience.
Nevertheless, on the basis of the facts known from laboratory and field work one might expect that the 
physiologic methods can be applied to intelligence interrogations with reasonable success. Most of the 
considerations already discussed would seem to apply.
Summary
In spite of the early scientific foundations of lie detection in the work of Benussi, Marston, Larson, 
and Summers (2, 22, 23, 29, 33, 34) there is at present a rather broad gap between current practice and
-165-
scientific knowledge. There is, on the one hand, some information from the laboratory, which could be 
applied, and there are procedures of questioning, developed in field work, which await experimental 
testing. Although variation in procedure and in selection of cases makes present field data quite difficult 
to evaluate, it does seem probable that a significant amount of detection is being secured by physiologic 
methods. Laboratory experiments generally confirm the success of the technique.
Laboratory science can make some immediate contributions to the improvement of detection methods. 
Developments have made possible better instrumentation for the recording and analysis of variables 
which currently figure in criminal detection, and suggest the possibility of recording various others which 
could increase the accuracy of detection. For some of these additional variables, experimental evidence is 
already available, others have yet to be tested.
Experiments have also yielded certain results that could be applied to interrogation procedures, of 
which the following are illustrative. The factor of adaption, differential to particular responses, could be 
allowed for systematically. The attitude of the examinee influences results considerably; they are better 
when he does not believe the instrument is infallible. Rather, clearer results are obtained when he believes 
he has a chance of winning the game. Pretesting of Ss in order to drop a few prospects from consideration 

would greatly improve the confidence users could have in results on those remaining. Making S take an 
active part by giving some sort of answer also favors detection. Feedback of the operator's visible 
reactions  has  an  effect  on  the  source's  subsequent  physiologic  responses.  Beyond  these  facts, 
experimental evidence bears on a number of other practical matters, such as the order and nature of 
questions.  Detailed  instruction  in  these  matters  to  personnel  who  might  become exposed to  such 
manipulations will go far in frustrating any interrogator who seeks to make use of them.
With respect to the evaluation of results, experiments have done more to set the problem than to 
answer it. Various possibilities of statistical combinations and evaluations o responses have been tried, 
but the optimum method is not yet known.
Much could be learned from planned experimental studies of the psychological basis of detection.. 
Precisely what is it that makes the source's responses different in lying and telling the truth? The 
difference might depend on a conditioned autonomic response, ona conflict of response tendencies, or on 
the chance of successful avoidance of punishment, or some combination of these. Knowledge of
-166-
these  effects  might  provide  a  basis  for  the  choice  of  conditions  that  would  provoke  the  most 
discriminating kind of response.
Further development of the method and. the successful extension of it to other areas, such as military 
interrogation, appears in prospect.
References
1. Adams J. K. "Laboratory studies of behavior without awareness". Psychol. Bull., 1957, 54, 383-405.
2. Benussi V. Die Atmungsymptome in der Lüge. Arch. f. d. ges. Psychol., 1914, 31, 244-273.
3. Bowles J. W. "Electromyographic factors in aircraft control: A muscular action potential study of conflict". Randolph 
Air Force Base, Texas: U. S. Air Force School of Aviation Medicine, 1956. Rep. no. 55-125.
4. Chappell M. W. "Blood pressure changes in deception". Arch. Psychol., 1929, 17, No. 105, 1-39.
5. Dana H. F., Barnett C. C., and Dennison D. R.  Improved electronic apparatus for measuring deception induced 
physiological changes. Mimeographed report from the author, Washington State College.
6. Davis J. F. "Manual of surface electrornyography". Unpublished manuscript. Allan Memorial Institute of Psychiatry, 
Montreal, 1952.
7. Davis R. C. "Continuous recording of arterial pressure: An analysis of the problem". J. comp. physiol. Psychol., 1957, 
50, 524-529.
8. Davis R. C. "Somatic activity under reduced stimulation". J. comp. physiol. Psychol., 1959, 52, 309-314.

9. Davis R. C., and Buchwald A. M. "An exploration of somatic response patterns: Stimulus and sex differences". J. comp. 
physiol. Psychol., 1957,50, 44-60.
10. Davis R. C., Buchwald A. M., and Frankmann R. W. "Autonomic and muscular responses and their relation to simple 
stimuli". Psychol. Monogr., 1955, 69, 1-71.
11. Davis R. C., Garafolo, Loraze, and Kverin K. "Conditions associated with gastro-intestinal activity". J. comp. physiol. 
Psychol., 1959, 52, 466-475.
12. Davis R. C., Garafolo, Loraze, and Gault F. P. "An exploration of abdominal potentials", J. comp. physiol. Psychol., 
1957, 50, 519-523.
13. Davis R. C., Siddons G. F., and Stout G. W. A cardiotachometer. Office of Naval Research, Technical Report No. 5, 
Contract 908(03). Unpublished manuscript. Indiana Univ., 1955.
14. Dawson H. E., and Davis R. C. "The effects of an instructed motor response upon somatic response to a brief tone". J. 
comp. physiol. Psychol., 1957, 50, 368-374.
15.  DiMascio  A.,  Boyd  R.  W.,  and  Greenblatt  M.  Physiological  correlates  of  tension  and  antagonism  during 
psychotherapy. A study of "interpersonal psychology." Psychosom. Med., 1957, 1999-104.
16. Diven K. "Certain determinants in the conditioning of anxiety reactions". J. Psychol., 1937, 3, 291-308.
17. Ellson D. G., Davis R. C., Saltzman I. J., and Burke C. J.  A report of research on detection of deception. 1952. 
(Contract  N6onr-18011  with  Office  of  Naval  Research.)  Distributed  by  Department  of  Psychology,  Indiana  Univer., 
Bloomington, Indiana.
-167-
18.  Ferracuti,  F.  Il  poligrafo.  In  Corso  lnternazionale  di  Criminologia.  Roma:  Instituto  di  Criminologia.  Presso 
L'Universita di Roma, 1955. 
19. Goldiamond, I. Indication of perception. I. Subliminal perception, subception, unconscious perceptions: An analysis in 
terms of psycho-physical indicator methodology. Psychol. Bull., 1958, 55, 373-411. 
20. Inbau, F. E. Lie detection and criminal interrogation. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1942. 
21. Jenkin, V. Affective processes in perception. Psychol. Bull., 1957, 54, 100-107. 
22. Lacey, J. I., and Lacey, Beatrice. Verification and extension of the principle of response stereotypy. Amer. j. Psychol., 
1958, 71, 50-73. 
23. Larson, J. A. The cardio-pneumo-psychogram. J. exp. Psychol., 1922, 5, 323-328. 
24. Larson, J. A. Lying and its detection. Chicago: Univer. of Chicago Press, 1932. 
25. Lazarus, R. S., and McCleary, R. Autonomic discrimination without awareness: A study of subception. Psychol. Rev., 
1951, 58, 113-122. 
26. Lee, C. D. The instrumental detection of deception. Springfield, III.: C. C. Thomas, 1953.

27. Malmo, R. B., Boaz, T. J., and Smith, A. A. Physiological study of personal interaction. Psychosom. Med., 1957, 19, 
105-119. 
28. Malmo, R. B., Shagass, C., and Davis, F. H. Symptom specificity and bodily reactions during psychiatric interview. 
Psychosom. Med., 1950, 12, 362-376. 
29. Marston, W. M. Systolic blood pressure changes in deception. J. exp. Psychol., 1917, 2, 117-163. 
30. McConnell, J. V., Culler, R. L., and McNeil, E. B. Subliminal stimulation: An overview. Amer. Psychologist, 1958, 13, 
229-242. 
31. Moore, J. R. Defoe's project for lie detection. Amer. J. Psychol., 1955, 68, p. 672. 
32. Rosenberg, S. The extinction of the GSR to verbal CS by various types of experimental therapy. Unpublished master's 
dissertation, Indiana Univer., 1951.
33. Summers, W. G. A new psychogalvanometric technique in criminal investi. gation. Psycho. Bull., 1937, 34, 551-552. 
34. Summers, W. G. Science can get confession. Fordham law Rev., 1939, 5, 334f. 
35. Trovillo, P. A history of lie detection. Amer. J. police Sci., 1939, Nos. 6 and 1, 29-30. 
36. Wenger, M. A., Engel, B. T., and Clements, T. L. Initial results with the magnetometer method of recording stomach 
motility. Amer. Psychologist, 1955. 10, 452. (Abstract) 
-168-
CHAPTER 5
The potential uses of
hypnosis in interrogation
MARTIN T. ORNE
Introduction
Through the years some lay and professional people have considered hypnosis almost a magical 
means of influencing others, curative, mystical, bordering on the supernatural. This has been so largely 
because the phenomenon of hypnosis seems to allow for a high degree of control of the subject's 
behavior. However, over the years, too, evidence has been accruing to suggest that hypnosis is neither 
fraudulent as some have maintained nor is it so mysterious as to defy experimental analysis.

Because of the apparent control of behavior during hypnosis it has understandably been proposed as a 
tool for interrogation. This chapter aims to evaluate these proposals. There is an utter dearth of literature 
concerning the actual use of hypnosis in interrogation. Either this technique has never been used, or if it 
has, no one has chosen to discuss it in print. Despite fairly extensive conversations with experts from a 
variety of countries, the author has found no one who admits to familiarity with its use in interrogation. 
An approximation to) such usage, however, does exist in isolated instances with criminal suspects.
Since there is no direct evidence on this problem, it becomes necessary to analyze the issues and 
separately evaluate each question.
________________ 
This paper is based in part upon work under a grant from the Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology, 
Inc.
-169-
In this way a considerable number of inferences may be made regarding the utility of hypnosis for 
interrogation.
This report will first consider the potential use of hypnosis in the interrogation of captured personnel. 
Three separate issues are involved here: (a) Can hypnosis be induced under conditions of interrogation? 
(b) If this is possible, then can a subject be compelled to reveal information? (c) If information is so 
obtained, how accurate will it be?
The second section will consider proposals advanced for the defensive uses of hypnosis, the problem 
being  the  feasibility  of  protecting  personnel  from enemy interrogation.  Three  suggestions  will  be 
evaluated: (a) the use of posthypnotic suggestions to prevent subsequent trance-induction; (b) the use of 
posthypnotic suggestions to induce amnesia on capture for sensitive information; and (c) the use of 
posthypnotic suggestions to make captured personnel more resistant to stress.
In the final section a distinction will be drawn between what the hypnotic trance per se can accomplish 
and what the hypnotic situation as a social event may make possible.
Some Theoretical Views
Before discussing the possible use of hypnosis for interrogation, we should like to review briefly what 
is known about the nature of the state itself. Mere description of the subject's overt behavior is an 
inadequate definition of hypnosis. He is usually described as passive, apparently asleep, and responsive 
only to the hypnotist's words. It is true that in the absence of specific suggestions to the contrary the 
subject seems to be extremely passive and to become unusually dependent upon the hypnotist for 
direction. However, an individual in hypnosis may also appear to be fully awake. No reliable objective 
criteria have yet been developed which will unequivocally identify the hypnotic state. This is particularly 
true in regard to physiological criteria. In the absence of reliable objective criteria, it becomes necessary 
to describe hypnosis in terms of the subjective events which the hypnotized individual experiences. The 

cardinal characteristic of the state is that a potentiality exists for the subject's perception of reality to be 
distorted in accordance with the hypnotist's cues. This distortion may affect any and all modalities of 
perception in regard to both external and internal events. Although this distortion of reality may be 
extremely real to the subject and his
-170-
behavior appropriate to it, considerable evidence suggests that at some level the individual continues to 
remain aware of the world as it really exists. Another attribute of the hypnotic state is that the subject 
experiences it as discontinuous from his normal waking experience. In association with this, amnesia for 
the experience may spontaneously occur. Finally, the subject generally experiences some compulsion to 
comply with the hypnotist's requests, along with a striking disinclination even to wish resisting them.
It is inappropriate in this context to review in detail the many theories proposed to account for the 
clinical observations. We shall briefly consider some of the theoretical views most generally held, since 
their implications differ markedly regarding the degree to which the state increases the susceptibility of a 
person to purposeful influence.
Primarily of historical interest are the views of Mesmer (13) and his latex followers, who held that 
hypnosis, or the Mesmeric trance, results from a flow from the hypnotist to the subject of a force called 
animal magnetism. This view is important because it is the basis of the lingering lay opinion that 
hypnosis is in some way an overpowering of a weak mind by a superior intellect. There is no presentday 
investigator who would defend this position, and in fact it is contradicted by recent evidence.
Since the time of Braid (14) in 1843, the view has been widely held that hypnosis is a state of 
artificially induced sleep. More recently, Pavlov (56) proposed a similar view when he maintained that 
cortical inhibition, sleep, and hypnosis are essentially identical. This view is currently held throughout 
those parts of the world where Pavlovian theory is accepted as a creed. This position implies that 
hypnosis is a state characterized by a profound neurophysiological alteration and that the subject in trance 
is somehow passively compelled to respond when appropriate suggestions are given. To the American 
investigator there appears to be overwhelming experimental evidence against this view. For example, 
Bass (4) has shown that the patellar reflex, which disappears in sleep, is not diminished in hypnosis. 
Wells (78) et al. have demonstrated that all hypnotic phenomena can be elicited in a state that in no way 
resembles sleep, which would lead one to hypothesize that the sleeplike aspect of hypnosis is not intrinsic 
to the state itself but is rather a result of the suggestion that the subject go to sleep. Barker and Burgwin 
(3) have shown that the EEG changes characteristic of sleep do not occur in hypnosis, although a true 
sleep may be induced hypnotically. However, there are two Russian papers (50) which contradict these 
findings, claiming that the characteristic rhythm of hypnosis resem-
-171-
bles that of drowsiness and light sleep. These studies have not been replicated.
The view proposed by Janet, Prince, Sidis, Corot, etc., which was current at the turn of the century, 
maintains that hypnosis is a state of temporary dissociation analogous to that which occurs in hysteria. 
Although this position seems reasonable in view of the similarity of the two conditions, it tells us little 

about the actual nature of hypnosis. The implicit assumption of this theory-that hypnosis is a sign of 
pathology — is not generally accepted today.
The Nancy school, especially Bernheim (9), revolutionized thinking about the hypnotic state by 
introducing the concept of suggestion and suggestibility. This orientation has been supported most 
notably by Hull (32), who, in a major monograph on hypnosis, concluded that hypnosis is primarily a 
state of heightened suggestibility. These views focus upon a trait in the subject, suggestibility, which is 
heightened by hypnotic induction techniques. Hull also relates the phenomenon to a habit, insofar as it 
becomes increasingly easy for a subject to achieve a state of hypnosis once he has been able to do so. 
Although the concepts of suggestion and suggestibility provide a bridge between hypnosis and the normal 
waking state, they do not offer explanations of the causes of the state or of the ongoing processes of 
hypnosis.
Welch (77) has attempted to explain hypnosis and its induction by an ingenious application of 
conditioning theory,  utilizing the concept of abstract conditioning. He has pointed out that trance 
induction proceeds from suggestions which are almost certain to take effect to those that are more likely 
to be resisted. Several suggestions for experimental testing of this theory have never been followed up.
In contrast to the foregoing views, which focus either on the hypnotist or on some trait of the subject, 
several more recent approaches have been concerned with the interaction between the subject and the 
hypnotist. Schilder (63), White (83), and Sarbin (61) have all in one way or another emphasized the social 
relationship which exists in the hypnotic situation and especially the needs of the subject in this context. 
Also,  Kubie  and  Margolin  (40)  and  Milton  Erickson  (20)  have  concentrated  on  the  subject's 
psychodynamics as being most relevant to the induction of hypnosis. White's view (83) is perhaps the 
first major formulation of this kind, and it represents a major departure in thinking about the trance state. 
He emphasizes that hypnosis takes place because the subject wishes to play the role of the hypnotized 
subject as currently defined by the subject and the hypnotist. It should be noted that the concern is with 
the subject's
-172-
wish to be hypnotized, and this motivation is considered of primary importrace to the induction of 
hypnosis. All the theories of this group, which might be called the "motivational theories" of hypnosis, 
emphasize the subject's wish to be in a hypnotic trance. Although other concepts are of necessity evoked 
to explain various phenomena in hypnosis, the actual occurrence of the trance state is related to the wish 
of the subject to enter hypnosis. This writer is a proponent of this approach, and the critical comments in 
this report are undoubtedly colored by this viewpoint.
It is important to recognize that almost no experimental work has been done that would support the 
validity of these various theoretical views, although there is some evidence already mentioned which 
tends to refute some of them. The general acceptance of the motivational view is based on the clinical 
impression of both experimentalists and clinicians that it accounts best for the major portion of the 
clinical data.
Trance is commonly induced in situations where the subject is motivated a priori to cooperate with the 
hypnotist, for example, to obtain relief from suffering, to contribute to a scientific study, or (as in a stage 
performance) to become, temporarily at least, the center of attraction. Almost all the currently available 

knowledge about hypnosis has been derived from these situations, and it is well to keep in mind the 
source of these data when one attempts to evaluate the possible utility of hypnosis in situations differing 
from these.
There is a small body of evidence stemming from the criminal cases in which hypnosis has allegedly 
played a role, which are radically different from those where hypnosis is normally observed. Because 
these situations may be more relevant to the questions of hypnosis in interrogation, this body of 
knowledge deserves particular attention and is discussed subsequently.
Hypnosis in the Interrogation Situation
The Induction of Hypnosis
The initial problem in utilizing hypnosis for interrogation is to induce trance. It is to be expected that if 
the subject wishes to withhold information he will not 'wish to enter hypnosis. Therefore, hypnosis must 
either be induced against the subject's will or without his awareness. A common conception of hypnosis 
holds that it may be induced without any prior relationship between subject and
-173-
hypnotist and regardless of the subject's needs in the situation, with only the hypnotist suddenly gazing at 
his victim and commanding him to fall asleep. A motivational view of hypnosis would hold that trance 
induction  depends upon  the subject's  needs  of  the moment  and his  expectation  that  the hypnotic 
relationship is to fulfill them. In this section we will evaluate trance induction procedures from the 
viewpoint of their dependence upon a positive relationship between subject and hypnotist and the 
subject's wish to cooperate.
THE UNAWARE SUBJECT
There are three situations in which hypnosis has been reported to have been induced without the 
subject's awareness. In the first, hypnosis is induced while the subject is asleep. Another arises when the 
subject is seeking psychiatric help and hypnosis is induced in the course of a clinical interview with no 
explicit mention of the process. The third situation involves a trance spontaneously entered by individuals 
who are observing trance induction in another subject.
1. Sleep. The older literature is replete with statements that hypnosis may readily be induced by giving 
suggestions to sleeping subjects in a low but insistent voice; the subject becomes gradually more 
responsive to the suggestions until eventually he enters a somnambulistic state of hypnosis [ Bernheim 
(9), Braid (14), Binet and Fere (12), etc.]. Unfortunately, there are no cases given to support these 
statements. As so often the case in hypnosis literature, the statements appear to have been carried over 
from one textbook to another without any critical evaluation.

In a recent study by Theodore X. Barber (2) sleeping subjects were requested to perform standard 
hypnotic tasks. He found considerable similarity between compliance to suggestions given during sleep 
and reactions to customary hypnotic techniques. It should be pointed out that, in his study, Barber 
requested permission from the subjects to enter their rooms at night and talk to them in their sleep. 
Several of them remarked that this was hypnosis, and one may reasonably assume that most, if not all, of 
the subjects perceived that trance induction was the purpose of the study. This study, therefore, tells us 
little about what would happen if a truly naive sleeping subject were exposed to such a situation. No 
investigation is available on this point. Casual experimentation by the author failed to demonstrate the 
feasibility of this technique. The sample consisted of only four subjects, three of whom awakened to ask 
belligerently what was taking place, whereas the fourth continued to sleep.
-174-
Perhaps as in sleep learning (which seems to be effective only in a twilight state), response to 
suggestion may be obtained only in a receptive subject who has agreed to participate in the study and who 
is neither deeply asleep nor fully awake. Whether any increase in suggestibility over the normal waking 
state occurs has never been established.
2.  Rhythmic, Repetitive Stimulation. Many trance induction techniques utilize the fixation of the 
subject's attention on a rhythmic, repetitive stimulus. Thus, metronomes, rotating spirals, mirrors, and 
swinging pendulums (75) [even the subject's own breathing (39)] have been used to induce hypnosis. In 
another context, the trance phenomena seen among primitive people frequently occur in ceremonies 
involving prolonged stimulation by rhythmic drums. Many authors have emphasized the importance of 
monotonous rhythmic verbal suggestions, especially during the induction stage of hypnosis. Recently, 
Kroger and Schneider (38) have proposed the use of an electronic aid which gives a repetitive signal 
approximating the alpha range of ten cycles per second as an adjunct. It is not clear whether these 
techniques directly facilitate hypnosis or whether they tend to produce a state of drowsiness that is 
interpreted by the subject as "I'm responding to hypnosis" which, in turn, facilitates further responses to 
suggestions. Certainly, the use of such techniques or even of monotonous rhythmic speech is by no means 
necessary in order to induce hypnosis.
All sophisticated discussions of hypnotic trance induction recognize that a successful response to a 
suggestion will facilitate further successful responses to suggestions. Even early descriptions of eye 
fixation advise the hypnotist to wait until the subject begins to show signs of fatigue and only then begin 
to give suggestions to the effect that the subject's eyes are growing heavy. Ideally, the hypnotist times 
these suggestions to occur  immediately preceding the time when the subject begins to experience 
heaviness. Thus he takes the credit for having induced the state of drowsiness that is an inevitable 
consequence of eye fixation. Mechanical aids of this type may facilitate induction only to the extent that 
they bring about an event that is attributed to the suggestive effect of the hypnotist. However, it is also 
possible, as some of the proponents of these techniques suggest, that a neurophysiological basis exists for 
the facilitation of hypnosis. In this context it is relevant that road hypnosis and the break-off phenomenon 
encountered by pilots occurs in individuals subjected to peculiar types of repetitive, rhythmic stimulation 
despite a high
-175-

motivation to retain alertness. An intriguing question on which no evidence exists is the relationship of 
hypnotizability and susceptibility to road hypnosis or the break-off phenomenon. Furthermore, in the 
context of this discussion, the utilization of rhythmic stimuli as aids to trance induction is particularly 
relevant insofar as being subjected to such stimulation does not require the individual's cooperation. 
Whether an actual relationship exists between the drowsiness which can thus be induced and hypnosis is 
highly questionable and remains to be investigated. What is a somewhat more likely possibility is that 
drowsiness may be induced even in the uncooperative subject which may be attributed to some hypnotic 
influences. This would then tend to make the subject more liable to respond to other suggestions. Clearly, 
it is an area that might fruitfully be explored. No investigation utilizing such procedures in recalcitrant 
subjects has been made. In a later section on "magic room" techniques, the implications of using this and 
related tools are explored.
3. In a Therapeutic Relationship. Studies by Adler and Secunda (1), Sargant and Fraser (62), Schneck 
(65), and Rosen (59) have used techniques of trance induction which were aimed at preventing the 
subject from knowing that he was being hypnotized. These techniques all depended upon the subject's 
desire to obtain help with his problems from a therapist. It is frequently possible to utilize the therapeutic 
situation in such a manner as to achieve a hypnotic state eventually. For example, the therapist may talk 
to the patient about relaxing, and the virtues of relaxing, or the virtues of concentrating, thus obtaining his 
fixation on one particular object. He may suggest that the patient will be more comfortable if he closes 
his eyes, that in this way the patient can relax more or concentrate better. Thus, in a suitable subject a 
deep level of hypnotic trance can be achieved in a relatively brief period of time without ever using the 
term hypnosis and without the subject ever being aware that hypnosis is taking place. Meares (46) uses 
the neurological examination in this fashion as a test for hypnotizability.
In all the instances cited it must be emphasized that although the subject does not explicitly consent to 
enter hypnosis, a relationship of trust and confidence exists in which the subject has reason to expect help 
from the hypnotist. Furthermore, the hypnotist is an individual of high reputation and high prestige and 
there  is  some  legitimacy  in  the  subject's  expectations.  Standard  medical  practice  includes  many 
maneuvers by the physician which are essentially meaningless rituals to the average patient, and to which 
the patient
-176-
complies without hesitation because it is assumed by him that this will eventually benefit him. These 
situations, despite their outward similarity, differ greatly from those where trance induction is attempted 
by a stranger, without the subject's knowledge or consent.
4. Spontaneous Trance. Subjects who observe hypnosis in a demonstration may spontaneously enter 
trance. An experience of the author's concerning a psychotherapy patient with whom hypnosis had been 
used may be cited as an example. The author appeared on an educational television program where he 
demonstrated various hypnotic phenomena with several subjects. The patient watched the program in a 
friend's home. She reported that when the author induced trance in the subjects, she went into a trance, 
coming out of it when the author terminated trance in the television subjects. Spontaneous hypnosis 
occurred despite the fact that its appearance was a source of embarrassment to the patient since she was in 
the company of friends.

It is fairly easy to maximize the probability of this occurrence by mentioning the possibility of this 
phenomenon and conveying one's expectation that this may happen. Here again we are dealing with 
subjects who are essentially in sympathy with the purposes of trance induction in a situation which is 
viewed as safe by the individual entering trance. Again, no conclusions can be drawn as to the feasibility 
of inducing trance empathically in a subject who does not wish to enter trance. It has been rioted 
clinically that individuals who have negative attitudes about hypnosis do not enter hypnosis under these 
circumstances. White's (86) study, in which he has demonstrated that subject's attitudes about hypnosis, 
as shown on the TAT, are predictive of their hypnotizability, is relevant here.
THE ANTAGONISTIC SUBJECT
We have been able to uncover only three studies that experimentally test whether a subject can resist 
the induction of hypnosis. Wells (80) instructed his subject to fight actively against trance induction — 
the subject was unable to resist. It should be mentioned that this subject had been previously hypnotized 
by Wells. This study was replicated by Brenman (16) who arrived at the same conclusions.
An even more dramatic experiment is reported by Watkins (74), again dealing with a subject who had 
previously been hypnotized by the experimenter. A nurse, who was known as a good subject, voiced the 
opinion to Watkins that under no circumstances could she be hypnotized against her will. He took the 
challenge and they set up
-177-
an experiment. Another nurse and a female psychiatrist were asked to witness the experiment. A dollar 
bill was placed in front of the subject and she was told that she could keep it if she did not enter trance. 
However, Watkins is careful to point out that this was a matter of prestige, not of monetary remuneration. 
Since no restrictions were placed on the subject, she closed her eyes, plugged her ears, talked and 
shouted. Watkins, speaking close to her ear, suggested that she would feel a pain in her head which would 
grow stronger and stronger, and that the only relief she would find would be to enter a deep sleep. The 
subject paused at times, removed her fingers from her ears to hold her head, and said that her head hurt. 
After six minutes she stopped shouting, tossed the dollar bill at the experimenter, and said, "Here, take it," 
and went into trance.
In determining the significance of these experiments, we feel that the "demand characteristics" of the 
situation are relevant. Demand characteristics are defined as those aspects of the experimental situation 
which implicitly convey the hypothesis of the experimenter to the subject. The author, in another 
publication (52), has shown that the demand characteristics of an experimental situation may greatly 
influence a subject's hypnotic behavior. It is clear that at some level a cooperative subject wishes an 
experiment to "work out," i.e., to help fulfill the experimenter's expectations. If a subject grasps the 
purpose of the experiment and/or the bias of the experimenter, he is disposed toward producing behavior 
which will confirm the experimenter's hypothesis. This is particularly true in a hypnotic relationship.
In all three studies, the subject had previous trance experiences with the hypnotist, which, we may 
assume, initiated a positive relationship between the subject and hypnotist. Although the subject was 
instructed to resist entering hypnosis, it was in the context of participating in an experiment to test this 
issue. It seems possible that in all three cases the subject was responding as if the experimenter were 
implicitly asking the subject to collaborate with him in order to demonstrate that trance could be induced 

despite the subject's resistance. The subject's motivation in this situation may be conceptualized as: (a) the 
overt attitude of resistance requested during the experiment and (b) the more fundamental attitude of 
cooperation to show that trance can be induced against a subject's will. In our view, the latter attitude was 
more relevant in determining the subject's behavior.
The author feels that, because of the preceding objections, these three studies offer no conclusive 
evidence regarding the question of
-178-
the  possibility  of  inducing  trance  in  a  resistant  subject  who  has  been  previously hypnotized.  An 
experimental situation designed to test this question would have to take two variables into account: (a) the 
usually positive relationship between subject and hypnotist and (b) the demand characteristics of the 
situation. These two factors are necessary since in the setting of interrogation the aims of subject and 
hypnotist are apt to be at variance. One possible experimental design might involve two experimenters: 
one with whom the subject has a positive relationship, and the hypnotist with whom he does not. It should 
somehow be conveyed to the subject that the experimenter with whom he has the positive relationship 
believes (or hypothesizes) that the subject will be able to refrain from entering trance. Under these 
circumstances, we hypothesize that the hypnotist will be unable to induce trance in the resisting subject. 
We further assume that if the hypnotist is able to create a positive relationship, he would then be 
successful. In other words, whether a subject will or will not enter trance depends upon his relationship 
with the hypnotist rather than upon the technical procedure of trance induction. Admittedly, these 
predictions are based on extremely subtle phenomena. A test of these hypotheses would necessitate 
observers trained in evaluating nuances of feelings in order to be able to judge the nature of the 
relationship between subject and hypnotist. It is imperative that this factor be controlled if we are to draw 
any valid conclusions about an interrogation situation, since a positive relationship may come into 
existence only after it has been carefully nurtured.
The same kind of situation could be utilized in studying the induction of trance in resistant subjects 
who have never before been hypnotized. No data are available on this question. However, the problem is 
identical to the one discussed above except, perhaps, that additional resistances would be encountered.
SUMMARY
In summarizing the evidence we are led to the conclusion that despite many apparent indications that 
hypnosis can be induced without the subject's knowledge or consent, all these situations seem to depend 
upon a positive relationship between subject and hypnotist. The most favorable of these situations occur 
when the subject (a) expects to derive benefit from his association with the hypnotist and (b) has trust and 
confidence in the hypnotist's ability to help. No reliable evidence exists that hypnosis can be induced 
directly from sleep in an unaware subject, nor is there good evidence that a subject is unable to resist 
trance induction if thoroughly motivated
-179-
to do so. An unexplored area relevant to this problem is the relationship of rhythmic stimulation and 
environmentally induced states of fatigue to suggestibility. It is also suggested that the question of 
whether hypnosis can be induced against the subject's will can be tested only by experiments that control 

the relationship between subject and hypnotist. In a study that utilized a hypnotist unknown to the subject 
and where the structure of the total situation was clear to the subject that it was desired and expected that 
he be able to resist hypnosis, current theory and clinical data lead us to expect negative results. No studies 
of this kind have been done, however.
The Degree of Behavioral Control Which Hypnosis Makes Possible
Assuming an interrogator were able to circumvent the technical obstacles and induce hypnosis in a 
subject who wants to withhold information, to what extent would the subject remain master of his fate, 
even in deep trance? This is an area where wide disagreements prevail among authorities and where 
experimental evidence is highly contradictory.
Throughout this discussion no differentiation will be made between behavior that results from direct 
suggestion and that induced posthypnotically. Erickson and Erickson (21) maintain that posthypnotic 
behavior is performed in a self-limited hypnotic state. All phenomena elicited by means of posthypnotic 
suggestions may also be seen in trance, although the reverse is not always true. In line with Erickson and 
Erickson, we feel that the subject carrying out posthypnotic suggestions is in an hypnotic trance state, 
although at times a less intense one. The difference between the two states, if any, seems to be a 
difference in degree rather than kind.
Young (84) reports that subjects resist specific hypnotic suggestions if they have decided in advance to 
do so. Wells (79), on the other hand, reports contrary data. He found that none of his subjects was able to 
resist the predicted command or, indeed, any other. This contradiction exemplifies the controversial 
nature of the question of behavioral control in hypnosis. The problem has generally focused on the more 
specific  question  of  whether  a  person  can  be  induced  through  hypnosis  to  violate  major  social 
prohibitions which he has internalized or to commit some self-destructive act. It is the usual practice to 
use the term "antisocial acts" to refer to such behavior, but in this chapter terms more descriptive of the 
subjective significance of the act for the person are preferred.
-180-
Behavior Violating Internalized Prohibitions
The question is usually phrased in terms of whether an individual will commit antisocial or self-
destructive acts in response to direct suggestion. Behavior considered to be antisocial is that which is so 
defined by the culture in which the individual has been raised. However, the question is complicated by 
the fact that some behavior is defined as antisocial in one context and as socially required in another, for 
example, murder vs. the soldier's obligation to fight. One of the major research difficulties is that some 
behaviors are considered taboo under normal circumstances, whereas they are felt to be legitimized in an 
experimental setting. The extent to which behavior is legitimized in this manner will depend largely on 
the subjects orientation both to the behavior in question and toward experimentation. All the material in 
the following discussion must be viewed in terms of the major difficulty of creating a situation which is 
contrary to the individual's internalized controls and which cannot be legitimized by the situation in 

which it is tested. Heron (31), Kline (35), Marcuse (43), Weitzenhoffer (76), etc., have discussed the 
problem of definition in evaluating the literature on hypnotically induced antisocial behavior.
The early view in this controversy over the elicitation of "antisocial" behavior, which answered the 
question in the negative, had been generally accepted until recently. Still, such classic authors as Forel 
(23) and Moll (48) believe that hypnosis is potentially capable of allowing sexual assault.
LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS
Supporting the negative view is the classic experiment reported by Janet (34). He asked a deeply 
hypnotized female before a distinguished group of judges and magistrates to stab people with rubber 
daggers, to poison them with sugar tablets, and in this fashion to commit several "murders," all of which 
she did without hesitation. As the company dispersed, the subject was left in charge of some of the 
younger assistants who, intending to end the experiments on a lighter note, suggested to the subject that 
she was alone and would undress. This promptly caused her to awaken. It should be noted that the 
"murders" were committed in such a way as to be play acted, whereas undressing would have certainly 
been real to the subject. In this classic instance, at least, she had no difficulty in discerning the difference. 
If, then, hypnotic subjects do not lose contact with the
-181-
"real" situation, can they be induced to violate internalized prohibitions? Several modern investigators 
claim that this is indeed possible.
Wells  (80),  in  an  experimental  demonstration,  induced  a  subject  by means  of  a  posthypnotic 
suggestion to take a dollar bill from the hypnotist's coat which was hanging on the wall and to accept it as 
his own money. Thus, in effect, the subject stole a dollar bill. The subject was unaware of this "crime" 
and denied vehemently that he had committed it. Wells maintains that failures to induce a subject to 
commit certain acts do not negate this possibility since the subject may not have been hypnotized deeply 
enough or improper techniques may have been used; whereas even one success demonstrates the 
possibility of achieving this result.
Brenman (16) conducted a series of experiments involving minor aberrant and self-injurious acts. 
Thus, in repeating the Wells study, she had a subject remember falsely that she had taken $2 instead of $1. 
The subject returned the $2 to the experimenter. She also was able to induce one subject to go through 
other people's pocketbooks, and to have another subject insult an acquaintance.
Schneck and Watkins in two separate reports cite evidence that behavior ordinarily constituting a 
crime can be produced by hypnosis. Both these reports deal with military situations. Schneck (64) 
inadvertently caused a soldier to commit a military offense by carrying out a posthypnotic suggestion and 
thus deserting his duty. It must be remarked, however, that Schneck himself was a medical officer in the 
army at the time he was conducting this experiment. Although the soldier may have neglected his duty, it 
was implicitly at the order of the medical officer and Schneck later made certain that no harm came to the 
soldier because of his military offense.
Watkins' (73) experiments, also conducted in this setting, are of particular relevance to us. Watkins 
induced a soldier to strike a superior officer by suggesting that the officer was a Japanese soldier and, 

according to the report, the soldier had to be restrained from inflicting serious injury to his officer. In 
another more relevant instance, Watkins was able to obtain information from a WAC under hypnosis 
which she had previously said she would not reveal and which was classified SECRET. The experimental 
demonstration took place before a professional group. Before the induction of hypnosis the WAC was 
asked how she would respond to interrogation by the enemy; she replied that she would reveal only her 
name and serial number. The hypnotist asked the subject to pretend that he was a German military 
intelligence officer and then proceeded to induct
-182-
trance. When the WAC was in hypnosis he represented himself as her First Sergeant and proceeded to 
question her about classified matters, She answered all of his queries, whereupon an officer stopped the 
proceedings "in the interest of military security."
Although these demonstrations appear convincing, they are open to the criticism that Watkins was an 
Army officer and although offenses were apparently committed, no serious damage could possibly result 
in this setting. At some level, at least, the individuals in question must have been aware of this fact.
A different type of experimental situation was constructed by Rowland (60) and also by Young (86). 
Two experiments were performed; one required that the subject throw acid at a research assistant, the 
other that he pick up a rattlesnake. Rowland's original experiments employed an invisible glass which 
protected the research assistant from the acid, and an invisible wire screen which prevented the subjects 
from picking up the rattlesnake. Although there were only two subjects in each experiment, all four 
carried out the hypnotist's commands. No attempt was made to conceal the fact that, in one case, this was 
a highly corrosive acid, and in the other, that this was a poisonous snake.
Young (86) slightly changed the conditions of the experiment by using a harmless snake which looked 
almost identical with a water moccasin and replacing the acid with tinted water while the subject was not 
looking, thus obviating the need for screens or invisible glass which might be perceived by the subject. 
The similarity of the colored water to the acid was dramatically shown by the fact that in one instance the 
experimenters themselves became confused and acid was thrown at the research assistant, necessitating 
the immediate use of first aid. Again the subjects performed both the homicidal and the self-destructive 
acts in the laboratory. Both experimenters report that normal control subjects in the waking state refused 
to pick up the rattlesnake or throw the acid when requested to do so.
Although these experiments seem to be extremely convincing, we must take into account the setting in 
which they were conducted. All the situations were clearly experimental ones, and were perceived as such 
by the subjects. The hypnotists who request the homicidal or self-destructive behavior are known to the 
subjects as reputable men. It is highly probable that the subjects, at some level, were convinced that in the 
experimental situation no serious harm would be permitted to come to anyone. This kind of situation is 
similar to that of a stage magician who asks a volunteer from the audience to cut off some individual's 
head with a guillotine which has been
-183-
convincingly demonstrated. Under these conditions volunteers from the audience will readily trip the 
appropriate lever. This could be be construed to be a homicidal act were it not for the fact that the 

volunteer from the audience knows full well that some kind of trick is operating that will prevent any 
harm from occurring, even though he cannot see the mechanism of the trick or know how it works. The 
question may be raised why control subjects in the waking state refused to perform these acts. One 
wonders whether the expectation that they ought not to do this was somehow communicated to them. 
Ways in which these objections might be met experimentally are discussed later.
By far the most sophisticated attempt to deal with this problem of the possible recognition of the 
situation as unreal has been undertaken by Kline (35). Unfortunately, only one subject was involved. He 
performed  an  antisocial  act,  however,  which  was  "not  only  antisocial  but  punishable  by  law." 
Furthermore, while the subject had agreed to participate in a study to test the legal implications of 
hypnosis, the act was undertaken in a setting outside of the laboratory which was, to all intents and 
purposes, "real" (personal communication). The act, which is not detailed in the paper "for reasons of 
legality and recognizability," was clearly opposed to the internalized inhibitions of the subject. By most 
reasonable normative criteria, it would be viewed as highly objectionable. Four experimenters, competent 
hypnotists, failed in their attempts to induce the subject to perform the act. When the subject's perception 
of the reality situation was altered, however, he was willing to perform the action for three of the four 
experimenters. The experimenter for whom he refused revealed later that she herself was upset by the 
nature of the requested act and by the deception. In a further experiment the subject was reassured that 
the action was all right but no perceptual alteration was used. Under these conditions he was willing to 
perform the action for only one of the experimenters. It was also possible to induce the subject to perform 
the act by first requesting him to visualize its performance before directly requesting the action.
This study is particularly interesting in that the subject was willing under some situations to perform 
an action for the experimenter with whom he had the best rapport but not for the others. He refused to 
perform this action in the waking state despite the experimenters' attempts at persuasion.
Probably the most convincing aspect of this study is that with varying conditions, all, some, or none of 
the experimenters could
-184-
induce the subject to perform the act. The limitations of the study are that only one subject was employed 
and that the subject was himself interested in investigating the legal implications of hypnosis. In this 
context, it is interesting both that the subject had amnesia for his action and that after he was finally 
informed of his behavior he felt that the need to demonstrate the point made the experiment legitimate. 
Further investigation along this line, especially utilizing subjects less ego-involved in the purpose of the 
study, would seem necessary in order to draw a more definitive conclusion.
Speaking for the negative in this controversy is an experiment reported by Haupt (30). The subject was 
a student who was in hypnotherapy with Haupt. The posthypnotic suggestion was given that the student 
would, upon awakening, pick up Haupt's notebook, leaf through it, and read it. This is an action which the 
author feels the student would never have dared under normal circumstances. After waking, the student 
rose, went to the table, looked at the open notebook and asked: "Here you write your notes, don't you?" 
He made no attempt to pick it up or read it. When memory for the posthypnotic suggestion was restored, 
the student reported that he had felt a drive to read the notebook but restrained himself. Haupt observes 
that the subject's behavior was a compromise between the suggestion and what was socially acceptable 

and that since this minor infraction was not performed, it is not possible to induce more deviant behavior 
by means of hypnosis.
A fairly elaborate study by Erickson (19), reporting some thirty-six individual experiments, supports 
the view that violations of social prohibitions  cannot be achieved in hypnosis. This study is open to 
question in view of the reported results in laboratory settings by others. Erickson is known to his subjects 
as a responsible investigator. The fact that he did not have any positive results would lead one to wonder 
if he did not implicitly convey his expectations of refusal. In view of the relationship between subject and 
hypnotist in both the Haupt and Erickson studies, it may be that the subject would act in accordance with 
the hypnotist's implicit expectations.
In a review of the literature on this subject Weitzenhoffer (75) attempts to reconcile the contradictory 
evidence  on  inducing  socially  prohibited  behavior.  He  points  out  that  attempts  which  have  been 
successful are those in which the subject was given a hallucinated pseudo-situation which redefined the 
behavior as socially acceptable. An instance of this would be the Wells' (80) demonstration. He induced 
the subject to "steal" a dollar bill by being told it was his own money. Thus, from the subject's viewpoint 
he was no longer
-185-
committing a transgression. Weitzenhoffer attributes failure to induce subjects to perform "antisocial" acts 
to  those  situations  in  which  the  subject  perceives  the  transgressive  nature  of  his  behavior.  This 
explanation, although seductive at first glance, does not appear to do justice to the literature. Erickson 
attempted in some instances to create this type of situation and obtained negative results. On the other 
hand, Schneck was unaware of the normative implications of his posthypnotic suggestion at the time it 
was given. Nor was there any attempt to disguise the dangerous nature of the situations in the Rowland or 
Young experiments.
It seems appropriate, in this context, to note that frequently subjects in hypnosis appear to show an 
increase of super-ego-type inhibitions. This has been pointed out by Gindes (27) and has been observed 
by the author. Bramwell (15) reports a case that clearly illustrates this point. A patient suffering from 
pulmonary disease was treated by hypnotic suggestion by her physician in the presence of a nurse. Before 
trance was terminated, the physician remembered that he had not examined the patient that week, and 
asked her to bare her chest so that he could examine her. Much to his amazement, the patient refused to 
do so despite the fact that this was a routine procedure to which she had never objected in the past. After 
the patient was awake, the physician again asked her and she permitted him to proceed with the 
examination without any objection. The nurse asked the patient sometime later why she had refused in 
hypnosis, and the patient expressed disbelief that she had done so. Under some circumstances, at least, 
behavior normally prohibited but appropriate to the situation will not be carried out in hypnosis. 
Apparently, under hypnosis the subject may interpret interpersonal motives and intentions differently 
from when they occur in the waking state.
EXPERIMENTAL REQUIREMENTS
To satisfy the requirements of an adequately controlled investigation of violations of internalized 
prohibitions in hypnosis, a number of conditions would have to be met. These have not been dealt with in 
any experimental study to date.

As has been pointed out previously, the experimental situation legitimizes much behavior which the 
subject, in other contexts, views as contrary to his internalized prohibitions. It is desirable to determine 
whether the behavior is also legitimized in the experimental setting by subjects who are not hypnotized. 
One way in which this can be determined economically 'is to utilize a control group of
-186-
subjects who are highly motivated to simulate hypnosis in order to deceive the experimenter. If the 
experimenter is not aware that the subjects are simulating, he will treat them as he does real subjects. If 
these controls perform the antisocial act, we may assume that the experimental situation itself has 
legitimized behavior that appears to be antisocial. A refusal of the control subjects to perform the given 
action would lend support to the hypothesis that the behavior cannot be legitimized solely by the 
experimental situation.
An additional possibility must be considered. Abundant evidence exists that under some circumstances 
of social legitimization, individuals indulge in behavior that is ordinarily viewed as antisocial; for 
example, lynching behavior, or extreme exhibitionism and sexual license in association with drinking or 
marijuana. In some instances, hypnosis may provide the legitimization for behavior which the person 
wishes to perform but which he feels he cannot do under normal circumstances. It is not clear whether it 
is hypnosis per se or the hypnotic situation which is instrumental in the production of these acts. Clinical 
evaluation of each experimental subject thus becomes necessary for an understanding of the motivations 
involved.
If we assume that the subject, even in deep hypnosis, retains an awareness of his surroundings and at 
some level a grasp of the actual realities of the situation no matter how subjectively real his hallucinated 
environment is, it becomes necessary to take into account the total situation in order to evaluate the true 
meaning of the subject's behavior. Thus, no set of experiments which asks the subject to violate a social 
prohibition in a psychological laboratory of a university, and which is conducted by individuals known to 
be reputable investigators by the subject, can provide definitive answers. The only purpose for which a 
psychologist would ask a subject to throw acid at another individual would be to contribute to science or 
new knowledge. And even these aims would be precluded by a concern for the safety of the individuals 
involved. Thus the behavior, however antisocial on the surface, is not contrary to the subject's values in 
its total context.
A better test of the question would be an experiment performed by someone who is not known to be a 
university professor. For example, a carnival hypnotist might suggest to a subject obtained as a volunteer 
during a demonstration that he return after the performance. At that time during a reinduced trance he 
would suggest that he should rob the local jewelry store and bring him, the hypnotist, the stolea jewelry. 
This kind of an experiment would be psychologically totally different from anything which has ever been 
attempted in
-187-
a laboratory. The following conditions would have been met: (a) the behavior would be in fact criminal, 
(b) the motive of the hypnotist would be clearly for personal or financial gain, (c) the hypnotist would not 
have a reputation as a serious responsible investigator, and (d) the relationship between the subject and 

the hypnotist is of brief duration and would not in itself in any way justify the type of action being 
undertaken by the subject for the hypnotist.
It is possible to approximate closely this type of situation in a college environment. Thus, a graduate 
student assistant might utilize a subject in an "unauthorized" trance-induction, and request that the subject 
enter one of the senior-professors' rooms and appropriate a Ph.D. examination paper, which the subject 
knows to be confronting the graduate student. The arrangements required to make this kind of a study 
feasible would be more practical and the test of the hypothesis almost as severe. "Simulating" hypnotic 
controls would be necessary to determine whether the situation is still perceived as experimental by the 
subject.
NONLABORATORY INSTANCES OF CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR
What appears to be more relevant for the subject of interrogation are those reported instances of 
criminal behavior  that  were  allegedly induced  by hypnotic  means.  Considerable interest has  been 
expressed by the legal profession in this problem, and it has generally been held that a crime committed 
under hypnosis would be the responsibility of the hypnotist rather than that of the subject. For this reason 
the plea of hypnotic influence has at various times played a role in legal defense. There are a fair number 
of cases on record prior to 1900, particularly among the German-speaking peoples (29). Unfortunately, it 
is hard to evaluate these cases objectively at this late date. For the most part, they deal with sexual 
offenses and we must point out that hypnotic influence is often claimed to justify behavior which might 
have been quite desirable to the subject at the time of its occurrence. It has  never been clearly 
demonstrated that hypnosis has played a significant role in these cases, and it seems in several instances 
that the relatives, rather than the subject, claimed hypnotic influence.
We will discuss briefly the three documented cases which have been reported within recent years in 
which hypnosis has allegedly played a role in criminal behavior. Each of these three cases was studied 
extensively by psychiatrists. One was studied by Walther Kroener (58), another by Ludwig Mayer (44), 
and the most recent case by Paul Reiter (58).
-188-
In the case he studied, Kroener reports that a sensitive, young, unmarred, male schoolteacher came 
under the hypnotic influence of a "frieadly" neighbor. The relationship began with neighborly hospitality 
and  proceeded  to  the  point  where,  by  means  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  the  neighbor  induced  the 
schoolteacher to give or lend him small sums of money and goods. In order to test his power over the 
schoolteacher the hypnotist gave him a posthypnotic suggestion that he (the victim) would shoot himself 
in the left hand. The schoolteacher actually did shoot himself in his left elbow joint, subjectively 
perceiving the event as an accident. By means of a posthypnotic suggestion the hypnotist induced his 
victim to confess to crimes that the hypnotist had committed. Throughout the entire affair, which lasted 
for five years, the schoolteacher had no recollection of the hypnotic sessions. The schoolteacher was 
convicted, but began to suspect the nature of his relationship with his neighbor on the basis of a chance 
remark. After many appeals he was recommended for examination to Kroener, who eventually uncovered 
the true state of affairs by re-hypnotizing the schoolteacher and thereby causing him to remember all the 
hypnotic experiences with his neighbor.

The  study by  Mayer  (44),  usually  called  the  Heidelberg  case,  involves  a  twenty-four-year-old 
housewife who was victimized by a man who posed as a doctor treating her. Ostensibly he systematically 
trained her in hypnosis for seven years. At first he swindled money from her under the pretense of curing 
her of various complaints which he himself had induced by hypnotic suggestion. Later, presumably by 
means of his hypnotic influence, he compelled her to have sexual relations with himself and with his 
friends. Also as a result of his suggestions she made six attempts on her husband's life and several 
attempts upon her own. The hypnotist was arrested and convicted despite his consistent plea of not guilty.
The third case, investigated by Reiter (58), deals with a man who was sentenced to prison for helping 
the Germans during the last war. At this time he was in an extremely depressed and disillusioned frame of 
mired. While in prison he met a man who especially fascinated him because of his apparent knowledge of 
religion, mysticism, and occultism. The two became friends and experimented extensively with Voga and 
hypnotism. They were alone in the same cell for nearly eighteen months, besides being together in the 
workshop every day. After awhile, the hypnotist informed his victim that he (the hypnotist) was an 
instrument employed by the guardian spirit, and that the guardian spirit was speaking to the victim 
through the medium of the hypnotist. From that time on the victim felt that
-189-
he had to carry out all the orders of the guardian spirit. After they were released from prison the men 
continued their relationship — and the guardian spirit continued to make demands. The guardian spirit 
ordered his victim to turn over his wages to the hypnotist; he found a girl for the victim to marry and 
ordered him to do so, which he did; he ordered him to procure money in order to establish a political 
organization through which they could create a better society and unite the Scandinavian countries, the 
goal being the salvation of mankind. It was toward the latter end that the guardian spirit, through the 
medium of the hypnotist, pointed out the bank that the victim was to rob. The robbery was accomplished, 
and a year later orders came for another bank robbery. During the execution of this task the victim 
committed murder and was apprehended.
In all three cases a common element was present. In some manner the subject was dissatisfied and the 
individual who later became the hypnotist provided gratification. In the first case, the schoolteacher lived 
alone, and appeared somewhat isolated because of insufficient social contacts. The neighbor provided 
friendship and initially performed many minor services for him. In the Heidelberg case the subject 
initially met the hypnotist in a situation where he presented himself as a physician who could relieve a 
symptom that was causing her acute distress. The subject appeared to have had psychosomatic symptoms 
before contact with the hypnotist, which might have reflected tension in her marriage. Furthermore, the 
hypnotist  appeared  to  be  a  sexually  attractive  psychopath  and  hypnosis  may  have  provided  the 
opportunity for the gratification of some of the victim's needs. In the last case the subject was dejected 
with intense feelings of worthlessness, as an aftermath of collaboration during the war. The hypnotist 
became a friend prior to the beginning of the hypnotic experiments. The intensity of this relationship can 
be inferred from the fact that the subject at the time began to feel considerably more comfortable. Thus, 
in each case the relationship between subject and hypnotist was such that the former derived need 
gratification from the association.
Frequently relationships exist between two individuals that have no connection with hypnosis but are 
marked by intense feelings and a strong tendency on the part of one individual to comply with whatever 
requests are made of him by the other. The transference relationship seen in psychotherapy is a case in 

point. If this type of relationship exists between two individuals, it would seem unnecessary to employ 
hypnosis to explain behavior on the part of one person which benefits the other. Only in the absence of 
this kind of pre-
-190-
existing relationship is it meaningful to speak of hypnosis as being a necessary prerequisite for the 
behavior.
Undoubtedly, hypnosis played some role in the cases we have discussed. However, if we are to make 
inferences from these data to the situation of hypnosis in interrogation it is necessary to keep in mind that 
the relationship between the interrogator and the subject is not often comparable to the long-term 
relationships which existed in the cases cited.
SUMMARY
In summing up the evidence on behavior violating internalized prohibitions as it is applicable to an 
interrogation situation, we find ourselves in the unfortunate position of having no study available that is 
not vulnerable to serious criticism. The experimental laboratory studies suffer from the defects of a 
pseudo-reality situation where the "nansgressive acts" cannot be defined as such in the context of the total 
situation, and from the defect of the mutually shared wishes and motives of experimenter and subject. 
The only three cases of criminal acts apparently involving hypnosis which are reliably reported in the 
recent literature all involve an intense emotional relationship between hypnotist and subject. Such a 
relationship may be difficult to establish in the interrogation situation. In the absence of meaningful 
evidence, any conclusions reached must be of a conjectural nature. Experimental tests of the question are 
feasible, but would require camouflage of the institutional responsibilities of the investigators. The author 
would postulate that only in rare interrogation subjects would a sufficiently deep trance be obtainable to 
even attempt to induce the subject to discuss material which he is unwilling to discuss in the waking state. 
The kind of information which can be obtained in those rare instances is still an unanswered question.
Recall and Accuracy of Information Obtained in Hypnosis
Despite the previously discussed technical problems, it may be possible for an interrogator to obtain 
information from a hypnotized subject. Also, a subject may willingly enter hypnosis. In either case the 
interrogator must evaluate the veridicality of the elicited material.
A great deal has been written, especially in the press, about the unfailing accuracy with which subjects 
in hypnosis will recall past events. Statements have frequently been made about individuals
-191-
having perfect memory in hypnosis, about their ability to recall anything that has happened to them even 
while infants, and, according to some, even prior to birth (37).

Two separate issues have to be examined: (a) is the subject in hypnosis able to recall historically 
accurate information which he cannot remember in the waking state and (b) is information obtained from 
a subject in hypnosis necessarily accurate when it has been suggested to him that he cannot lie?
Is Information More Accessible to Recall Under Hypnosis?
A mechanism frequently used to facilitate recall is that of hypnotic age regression. The subject is 
"regressed" or taken back in time to the situations toward which recall is directed. For example, if a 
subject in deep hypnosis is given the suggestion that he is, let us say, six years old, he will begin to act, 
talk, and to some extent think in the manner of a six year old. He will hallucinate the appropriate 
environment and will give such details as the people sitting next to him in school, teachers' names, color 
of walls, etc. The subject's actions under these circumstances are exceedingly convincing, and it has 
frequently been assumed that an actual regression to the suggested age takes place, with many of its 
psychologic and physiologic components. It is often assumed that the information obtained under these 
circumstances is accurate.
Platonov  and Prikhodivny (57)  published two  studies which  claim to  prove the reality of  age 
regression by means of intelligence tests. One of the most striking studies is by Gidro-Frank and 
BowersBuch (25), who demonstrated that the infantile type of plantar response appeared in subjects who 
were regressed in age to approximately five months. Unfortunately they did not investigate whether the 
subjects were aware of the type of plantar response to be expected in infancy. The subject population 
included medical students and nurses, and it is reasonable to assume that they were not entirely naive. 
Single case studies which claim to demonstrate "real" age regression have been reported by a variety of 
investigators: Spiegel, Shor and Fishman (69), Schneck (66), Mercer and Gibson (47), LeCron (41), 
Bergman, Graham, and Leavitt (8), and Kline (36).
Despite these studies, which are based mostly on single cases, there is little evidence for the validity of 
hypnotic age regression. Young (85) in a study using a number of subjects has demonstrated that their 
performance on intelligence tests was not appropriate to their suggested age. Unhypnotized control 
subjects were more suc-
-192-
cessful in simulating their age than were subjects in deep hypnosis. There was no correlation between the 
apparent depth of hypnosis and the extent of regression.
Orne (51) conducted a study of hypnotic age regression in ten subjects employing the Rorschach test 
and drawing samples, and was able to demonstrate that, while some regressive elements appeared, it was 
clear that nonregressive elements were also present. Furthermore, the changes toward regression did not 
show any consistency from subject to subject. The drawing samples in age regression were evaluated by 
Karen Machover who characterized them as "sophisticated oversimplification." They did not resemble the 
drawings of six year olds. For one subject his drawings at age six were available, but there was not even a 
superficial resemblance. In this context it is particularly significant that subjects often gave their teacher's 
name with great conviction. Later inquiry disclosed that the names were inaccurate and did not refer to 
first grade teachers at all, but to the subjects' teachers at a much later time.

Finally, there are studies by True and Stephenson (72) and McCraitie, Crasilneck, and Teter (45) who 
investigated EEG's taken during hypnotic age regression. Neither study demonstrated any change in the 
direction of a childhood EEG. It is also of interest that these studies do not report an increased heart rate 
(present in infants) nor changes in EKG tracings.
To summarize, the literature on hypnotic age regression fails to demonstrate that the phenomenon is 
anything more than an extremely convincing form of role-playing, as suggested by Sarbin (61), Young 
(85), and Orne (51). There is little evidence in any of these studies to indicate that recall for nonernotional 
material is significantly improved.
It is important for our purposes to distinguish between emotionally neutral material and emotionally 
charged events, which are subject to active forgetting or repression. There is abundant evidence that 
emotionally laden material that is not normally accessible can be recovered by hypnosis. Probably it is 
this phenomenon which has led to the erroneous assumption that all types of material may be recalled in 
this fashion.
Two specific studies deal with memory in hypnosis: Stalnaker and Riddle (70) asked subjects in 
hypnosis to recall the poem "The Village Blacksmith." At first glance, hypnosis appeared to increase their 
recall of the poem. Much of the apparent improvement was due to appropriate confabulation of poetic 
material in the manner of Longfellow. The significant point is that subjects in hypnotic
-193-
trance show a marked tendency to confabulate with apparent verisimilitude. White, Fox, and Harris (82) 
demonstrated that hypnosis does not improve memory for recently learned material, but appears to 
improve memory for meaningful material, such as poetry, slightly. They do not make any statements 
about the accuracy of reproduction.
The Accuracy of Information Obtained in Hypnosis
Considerably less material is available about the veracity of the material furnished by a subject in 
hypnosis. As the preceding discussion indicates, subjects in deep hypnosis tend to confabulate in the 
direction of what they perceive to be expected of them. We should like to examine the extent to which 
subjects in hypnosis can purposely misrepresent material, although it has been suggested to them that 
they cannot do this. As we have already indicated, Young (84) has shown that subjects can resist specific 
suggestions if they have decided in advance that they will do so. Wells (79) had demonstrated the 
opposite. Earlier quoted comments on demand characteristics apply to both these studies. The issue 
remains to be resolved by an adequate empirical test.
Beigel (6, 7) reports three cases of hypnosis used in an effort to ascertain the facts in marriage 
counseling situations. In a personal communication, he maintains that people in hypnosis may lie, refuse 
to answer, or wake up when asked direct questions on sensitive matters. However, he claims to have 
successfully elicited information which subjects were reluctant to reveal in the waking state by means of 
a hypnotic reliving of the situation. The crucial factor, in Beigel's opinion, is the indirect nature of this 
method, i.e., the subject is unaware of revealing information since his major concern is the reliving of an 

experience. However, this approach utilizes a form of age regression, and is, as such, subject to the 
criticisms already made with regard to this technique. Another objection derives from the fact that the 
subject's motivations are not adequately taken into account. Beigel's subjects were, for the most part, 
therapy patients. It is, perhaps, not too far fetched to assume that psychotherapy patients "want," at some 
level, to reveal information to their therapist. Nor is it unreasonable to believe that they "need" to do so. 
Confessions to a therapist satisfy multiple needs of patients in psychotherapy.
In reviewing the existing literature we have found only one author who deals with prevarication under 
hypnosis (Beigel). However, our own clinical work has amply convinced us that subjects are
-194-
fully capable of deliberately lying when motivated to do so. Although this report deals specifically with 
hypnosis, it may, at this juncture, be useful to consider also the question of prevarication under the 
influeuce of drugs commonly used in narcosynthesis. Its relevance is confirmed by the findings of 
Grinker and Spiegel (28) and others who, in the treatment of traumatic neurosis by narcosynthesis, 
obtainod results which closely paralleled those observed by hypnotic treatment of these neuroses (17). 
Individual differences in response to treatment are found both in narcosynthesis and hypnosis, whereas 
treatment techniques show marked similarities. Friedlander (24), Schilder (63), and others have described 
trance-induction techniques utilizing sleep-inducing drugs. With these similarities in manner we feel that 
it is appropriate to mention here some of the work done on the question of prevarication under the 
influence of these drugs, which as treated in more detail in Chapter 3.
Muehlberger (49), for example, who considers narcosynthesis as a useful technique, admits that 
nevertheless, "Unless supporting evidence is obtainable, the reliability of results of 'truth serum' tests are 
open to serious question" (page 524). In a study of malingering soldiers Ludwig (42) reports that they 
remained negativistic and uncommunicative while under drugs.
In a thorough discussion of drug-induced revelation, Dession et al. (18) conclude that:
In some cases correct information may be withheld or distorted and, in others, erroneous data elicited through suggestion. 
Nevertheless, narcoanalysis, when correctly used, may enable the psychiatrist to probe more deeply and quickly into the 
psychological characteristics of the subject. For these reasons, the results should not be regarded by the psychiatrist as "truth" 
but simply as clinical data to be integrated with and interpreted in the light of what is known concerning the dynamics of the 
subject's conflictual anxieties, motivations, and behavioral tendencies.
Thus the bare results of an interview under the influence of drugs should not, standing alone, be considered a valid and 
reliable indicator of the facts. As a sole procedure, narcoanalysis is not sufficiently reliable.
We feel that these conclusions apply not only to narcoanalysis but to hypnosis as well.
If, as we have proposed, an individual under the influence of these drags is in a state akin to hypnosis, 
then the results of these drug studies support our theory that some subjects may lie, confabulate, or 
withhold information while in trance. This poses a special problem for the military interrogator. Even 
those informants who believe they are telling the truth may in fact be offering a composite of delusion, 
fantasy, and reality. Thus, the convincing delivery of
-195-

information obtained under hypnosis may easily lead an interrogator astray.
SUMMARY
A mechanism frequently used to facilitate recall is that of hypnotic age regression. There is no 
evidence to indicate that this technique is anything more than a convincing form of role-playing, real only 
on an emotional level. Thus it probably does not greatly facilitate the recall of past events. Hypnosis does 
not improve recall for nonmeaningful material, and does so only slightly for meaningful material. 
However, there is evidence that emotionally laden material that is not normally accessible can be 
recovered in hypnosis. It has been demonstrated that subjects can be under both hypnosis and drugs.
It is possible that information may be obtained by hypnosis. Such information may be either accurate 
or inaccurate. Inaccuracies may be the result of deliberate prevarication, or of an unwitting confusion of 
fantasy and reality. The determination of the truth or falsity of information obtained in hypnosis would 
have to be based on outside criteria.
Defensive Uses of Hypnosis
Simulation of Hypnosis
An interrogator who employs hypnosis may find that his subject apparently enters trance and gives the 
desired information. It is possible that the subject may not be in trance but may be simulating. The 
literature on the problem of simulation is extremely misleading. The classical view holds that subjects are 
unable to deceive experienced hypnotists because hypnotic behavior "looks different" in a number of 
ways. Furthermore, claims have been made that in order to detect fraud the hypnotist need only suggest 
anesthesia to the subject and test for it with a painful stimulus.
However, there are some indications in the literature that the detection of simulation is not a simple 
task. For example, Pattie (55), a thoroughly experienced investigator, felt that it was necessary to request 
his subjects sign forms reading as follows:
I, realizing that the experiment performed on me will probably be published in a scientific journal, solemnly declare that I 
was not faking or imitating the hypnotic trance but that I was genuinely hypnotized and do not remember the events of the 
experimental periods.
-196-
When discussing this problem with a number of clinicians, one invariably finds that they report 
anecdotal evidence of having been deceived at one time or another. Orne (52) has conducted a series of 
studies  investigating  simulation.  He  has  been  unable  to  discover  any physiological  indices  which 
differentiate simulators from deeply hypnotized subjects. In addition he also found that the overwhelming 
majority of apparently naive subjects are capable of simulating well enough to deceive even experienced 
hypnotists. Regarding pain, Orne (2) found and Shor (68) has confirmed that the simulating subjects 
generally tolerated higher levels of electric shock than did subjects in deep hypnosis. Using a fairly wide 

spectrum of behavioral tasks, they found it was not possible to differentiate unequivocally between real 
and simulating subjects. However, certain kinds of behavior were observed only in the true hypnotic 
subjects, although not in all of them. Orne (53) has termed this behavior "trance logic." It is characterized 
by a mixture of hallucinations and perceptions from the real world. Typically, this mixture controverts the 
rules  of  logic normally operating  in  the  waking  state.  For  example, a subject might  describe  an 
hallucination of an individual sitting in a chair as "I can see Mr. X but I can see the chair through him." 
The appearance of trance logic in naive subjects is always indicative of hypnosis. However, trance logic 
helps discriminate neither those real subjects who do not manifest this behavior nor those simulators who 
have been taught to demonstrate it.
Considerable research remains to be done on the recognition of simulating behavior. At our present 
state of knowledge it is vital to bear in mind that the deep hypnosis is essentially a clinical diagnosis. 
Although under some circumstances this diagnosis can be made with a high degree of reliability, 
definitive signs of deep trance have not yet been identified. Until such pathognomic signs are developed, 
a subject trained to employ trance logic may not find it too difficult to deceive an interrogator.
Training in Hypnosis in Anticipation of Future Interrogation
Three related suggestions have been made for what may be called the defensive use of hypnosis. Thus, 
Estabrooks (22) proposed that hypnosis might be useful in (a) preventing subsequent trance induction in 
captured personnel, (b) causing personnel possessing sensitive information to develop amnesia for this 
material in case of capture, and (c) enabling captured personnel to resist stressful and painful
-197-
interrogations by training them to develop anesthesia and analgesia when required.
These suggestions are ingenious and appealing as defensive measures. Any objective evaluation of 
these proposals is made difficult by the paucity of relevant studies, and we are forced to extrapolate from 
the meager evidence available. In judging the practicality of these suggestions it is necessary first of all to 
take into account that only approximately 20%, of the military population can be expected to go into a 
sufficiently deep somnambulistic state conducive to such training. Furthermore, both the full cooperation 
of the military personnel involved and the availability of competent hypnotists would have to be taken for 
granted. In addition, training soldiers in this manner would be a time-consuming process.
PREVENTING TRANCE INDUCTION
Training Soldiers to Resist Subsequent Trance Induction upon Capture. Here we are immediately 
confronted with the question of whether trance can be induced against the individual's wishes and 
whether posthypnotic suggestions are effective in preventing trance induction. The first question has been 
discussed previously. Although the crucial experiment has not yet been done, there is little or no evidence 
to indicate that trance can be induced against a person's wishes. The proposal to train individuals not to 
do something they are able to avoid anyway appears to be of doubtful utility. It may be sufficient to warn 
them of possible techniques of trance induction and inform them that they are able to resist, if they so 
desire. In fact, the question ought to be raised whether training in hypnosis may not precondition an 

individual for subsequent trance induction, regardless of suggestions that they ought to resist hypnosis. 
There is no evidence that training in hypnosis predisposes subjects toward trance induction with or 
without their cooperation. However, there is considerable evidence that training in hypnosis makes 
subsequent trance induction easier with only token cooperation by the subject.
Effectiveness of Posthypnotic Suggestions Designed to Prevent Subsequent Trance Induction. As a 
matter of routine, subjects are given the suggestion that they will enter hypnosis only with a competent 
psychologist or physician, and only if they desire to do so. It is the writer's practice to suggest further that 
they will begin to laugh if one of their friends or a stage hypnotist attempts to induce hypnosis. 
Nevertheless,  in  several  instances  these  experimental  subjects  have  permitted  themselves  to  enter 
hypnosis with individuals whom they
-198-
knew to be inexperienced. At times they have reported compulsive laughing jags just before falling 
asleep, in line with the posthypnotic suggestion, which did not, however, prevent their entering hypnosis. 
Two subjects trained in this manner entered hypnosis while watching a stage demonstration from the 
audience, again despite suggestions to the contrary. This observation has been confirmed by Sutcliffe 
(71), who has had similar experiences. Furthermore, the writer has himself hypnotized three subjects who 
had received specific suggestions from other hypnotists that they would be unable to enter trance with 
anyone else.
Spontaneous Trance. The spontaneous appearance of trance warrants some consideration. It has been 
noted during psychotherapy that patients who have had considerable hypnotic experience will sometimes 
use the trance state as a defense mechanism in order to avoid awareness of painful material. Such material 
will emerge during spontaneous trance and will subsequently be repressed when the patient emerges from 
the hypnotic state. The writer has observed this several times in clinical situations and it has been 
reported  in  personal  communications  by  several  other  therapists.  Since  hypnosis  may  occur 
spontaneously in therapeutic situations as a means for avoidance of stressful situations, it may well occur 
equally spontaneously in other stress situations, and could be utilized by an alert interrogator.
We have been able to terminate hypnosis in several instances when trance had been induced by 
inexperienced hypnotists who were unable to terminate it. In these instances it was necessary to establish 
a hypnotic relationship with an uncommunicative subject in deep hypnosis. Contrary to popular belief, 
this can be accomplished readily and rapidly usually in less than half an hour. These findings are relevant 
to the dangers of spontaneously occurring trance during interrogation. Thus, although the interrogator 
may not have induced the trance, he could assume the role of hypnotist and communicate with the 
subject.
CONCLUSION
In view of the foregoing considerations, it appears not only fruitless but potentially dangerous to train 
subjects to resist subsequent trance induction. If the hypnotist has sufficient skill and experience, he 
might well be able to utilize the very suggestions given against entering hypnosis as the necessary wedge 
to induce hypnosis. Thus, if the suggestion has been given that the subject will not enter trance but

-199-
will laugh, and the hypnotist observes the subject beginning to laugh, he might suggest that the subject 
will begin to laugh more and more and will laugh so hard that he will become exhausted and go to sleep. 
In the same manner a posthypnotic suggestion of a headache or any other subjective experience which 
aught to prevent hypnosis can be utilized as a means of inducing it. Another danger of the hypnotically 
trained soldier is the greater likelihood of spontaneous appearance of trance in a stressful situation such as 
interrogation. Hence, the use of trance as a means of preventing subsequent trance induction by a 
potential captor has inherent dangers.
INDUCTION OF AMNESIA
More appealing perhaps than the previous suggestion is the possibility of causing captive subjects to 
forget whatever sensitive information they may have learned. Here again we encounter several technical 
problems. A blanket suggestion to forget all sensitive material will frequently fail to take effect. It is well 
known that the effectiveness and permanency of a hypnotic suggestion are directly related to the concrete 
definition of a specific task. As a rule, general suggestions such as blanket amnesia have unpredictable 
effects even in very good subjects. It may be possible to suggest that a soldier only remember his name, 
rank, and serial number in the event of capture. However, this raises not only the serious question of 
whether this could be accomplished but also of whether it might deprive the soldier of information which 
may be vital to him during captivity. A state of severe psychopathology would be artificially induced, 
which may be adaptive in some respects but extremely disturbing in others.
The decision of what to say during interrogation would be made for the soldier beforehand. The 
inevitable impoverishment of knowledge and loss of ego control would furnish the interrogator a very 
effective way of controlling his captive. The captive would be seriously distressed by the feeling of loss 
of self-evident and necessary information, and the interrogator would be a able to assume the role of a 
helpful individual ready to assist the recall of memory. Such a quasi-therapeutic relationship would 
inevitably produce an alliance between captive and interrogator with concomitant formation of a strong 
positive relationship. Recall would eventually take place, as in the treatment of amnesia under normal 
circumstances. The captive's defense would be lowered so that, as recall takes place, information would 
tend to be shared with the helpful interrogator.
In other words, the induced psychopathology may be sufficiently
-200-
disturbing to the captive to make him the easy victim of any technique aimed at relieving his discomfort. 
He may become a willing and cooperative subject for hypnosis, legitimized now as a treatment technique. 
Sodium pentothal may also be used, and is generally successful in leading to rapid recall. Since under 
these circumstances, control over the information is no longer an ego function of the captive nor his 
responsibility, he would feel little constraint in sharing his knowledge as it comes to him. Only after re-
establishment of complete recall would he became aware of betraying vital information.
In  summary,  then,  it  does  not  appear  feasible  to  cause  a  potential  captive  to  forget  sensitive 
information selectively. Such discrimination would require that, in giving the posthypnotic suggestion, 
the hypnotist would have to be aware of all types of present and potential future information that the 

subject has or will have, and that he make allowance for all eventualities. The alternative, to cause the 
soldier to forget everything about himself other than his name, rank, and serial number, would work only 
in a small minority of people. However, even for them a potentially vulnerable situation would develop, 
more vulnerable in fact than if no suggestion had taken place. The artificially induced pathology could 
easily be broken down, if recognized as such by the interrogator, who could secure the cooperation of the 
soldier by presenting interrogation as treatment of a sick person. It may be far safer to rely on the soldier's 
own ego control to decide what information ought not to be revealed to an enemy than to make this 
decision for him by posthypnotic means. Artificially induced amnesia would deprive the soldier of his 
ego functions and put him at the mercy of his captors. This method also has other serious defects; 
offensive action, such as escape or cooperation with fellow prisoners to obstruct interrogation, would be 
severely handicapped.
HYPNOSIS AS A MEANS OF RESISTANCE TO STRESS
The final suggestion that we should like to discuss in this section concerns the use of posthypnotic 
suggestion in training individuals to resist stress, particularly pain. Extensive information is available 
about the use of hypnosis as a means of suppressing pain. Major surgical operations have been performed 
with hypnosis as the sole anesthesic.
Laboratory  experiments  have  demonstrated  that  with  hypnotic  analgesia  subjects  do  not  report 
experiencing pain but continue to respond physiologically much as they do in the waking state (Shor, 68). 
Beecher (5) has shown that patients' reactions to placebos
-201-
(a suggestive phenomenon analogous to hypnosis) is far greater under situations of great stress and high 
anxiety than in the laboratory. It appears that hypnosis and placebos are most effective in situations of 
high anxiety and it is probable that their major effect is on the anxiety component of pain. During 
interrogation this component is most threatening to the individual, and thus hypnosis seems to be a 
particularly appropriate method of protection.
Whether such a procedure is feasible depends on a number of considerations. As stated in preceding 
sections, only a relatively small number of individuals will enter a sufficiently deep somnambulistic state 
permitting the development of the profound analgesia necessary for this purpose. Furthermore, the author 
is not aware of any instance where a major surgical procedure was undertaken during posthypnotically 
induced analgesia. Although we are certain that in some individuals this is potentially possible, clinicians 
working with hypnosis generally believe that the hypnotic state itself is more efficacious in inducing 
analgesia than posthypnotic suggestions.
Another question that arises concerns the type of suggestion which ought to be given to the subject. It 
would seem manifestly inappropriate to attempt to suppress any and all pain sensations that the individual 
may experience subsequent to hypnosis. First, we seriously doubt the effectiveness of such a suggestion. 
Second, if it should take effect, it may be dangerous since pain serves a useful function as a physiologic 
warning signal. It would be more appropriate to focus the suggestion on the inability to feel pain at the 
hands of captors. However, if the subject were captured and felt any pain at all, the entire suggestion 
would rapidly break down. This is likely to occur in all but very few instances. (It is due to this need for 
repetitive reinforcement of suggestions of analgesia that major surgery is undertaken in hypnosis rather 

than posthypnotically.) It is generally known that any one failure of a hypnotic suggestion will diminish 
the effectiveness of subsequent suggestions. Such failure will tend to eliminate almost completely the 
suggestion concerning the modality where it failed. Here again, the soldier who is taught to rely on 
hypnosis as an analgesic and finds it ineffective in certain situations may be considerably worse off than 
if he had not trusted this mechanism in the first place.
It seems, then, that the use of hypnosis in withstanding stress, and particularly pain, is impractical. 
Few individuals are able to enter a trance sufficiently deep to permit profound analgesia. Furthermore, the 
analgesia would have to be produced posthypnotically, a less effective method than that produced during 
trance. The post-
-202-
hypnotic suppression of all pain may also be dangerous to the individual. Finally, if such posthypnotic 
analgesia were possible and it should break down, it would leave the individual more vulnerable than if 
he had not relied upon this mechanism at all.
Motivating Instructions
Our findings with individuals who have had instructions to simulate hypnosis are particularly relevant. 
Much of our current research employs simulating subjects as controls and, as we have pointed out 
previously, these subjects are willing and able to tolerate extremely painful stimuli. In fact, in a recent 
study Shor (68) found that simulators uniformly tolerate a higher level of painful electric shock than do 
subjects in deep hypnosis. These findings indicate that appropiiate motivating instructions are as effective 
as hypnosis in enabling individuals to tolerate laboratory situations of pain. Whether this also holds true 
in  situations  which  represent  real  danger  to  the  organism,  such  as  major  surgery  or  the  threats 
encountered during interrogation, remains to be demonstrated. This suggests that motivational sets might 
be devised which would effectively protect personnel against breakdown under stress. How enduring 
such motivating instructions are remains to be studied.
Autogenous Training
One of the main defects of the three proposals discussed is that each involves a lessening of ego 
control. There is an application of hypnosis which might be explored fruitfully since it relies largely upon 
the responsibility of the subject for his actions. This is the technique of autogenous training developed by 
Schultz (67). Instead of the usual procedure in which the hypnotist suggests the occurrence of various 
events, the subject is taught that he is capable of inducing them in himself by proper concentration. He is 
taught the technique by a series of graduated steps. These are so designed that each is mastered before the 
subject is permitted to go on to the next one. For example, in the initial exercise the subject is taught to 
concentrate on his right hand becoming heavy and he is shown the most advantageous posture. After 
being shown the exercise by the teacher, he is instructed to repeat the procedure by himself between three 
and five times a day for a two-minute period each. Within a period of two weeks or so a large proportion 
of the subject population is able to achieve a considerable degree of subjective heaviness. He is then

-203-
taught to induce a feeling of warmth and eventually goes on to control of respiration, relaxation of the 
body, and if desired selective anesthesia. The interesting feature of this technique is that the subject 
eventually becomes fully capable of producing these phenomena through his own efforts rather than by 
the suggestions given him by the teacher (hypnotist). Probably, the hypnotist is internalized by the subject 
in this process, and thus becomes an ego resource. Such a technique would also be useful in solitary 
confinement for controlling anxieties that otherwise might be overwhelming. The major distinction 
between this use of hypnosis and those commonly advocated is that the procedure would be one more 
technique of mastery available to the captive without sacrificing any degree of ego control. There is some 
anecdotal  evidence  that  individuals  trained  in  this  manner  found  it  useful  during  confinement  in 
concentration camps.
It is difficult to determine whether the technique of autogenous training is in itself the effective 
mechanism or whether it merely represents a form of pseudo-mastery which can become an ego support. 
Both factors probably play a role. Thus, an increased degree of control over pain can undoubtedly be 
achieved. Equally important is the illusion of mastery that the individual may be able to create without 
recourse to external aids. Thus, if he is deprived of his clothing and his dignity he would still have at his 
disposal a technique which depends strictly upon concentration and which cannot be taken from him. 
When the individual feels at the mercy of an apparently all powerful captor, it may well be as important 
to him to be able to demonstrate to himself that he can control his respiration or can make a limb heavy as 
the actual ability to decrease physical pain.
Biderman (11) has discussed the importance to the interrogation subject of maintaining the feeling of 
control through either real or illusory devices. As long as the individual is able to induce subjective 
changes at will he may maintain a feeling of control which cannot be taken away. Anecdotal evidence 
obtained in personal communication from an individual subject to extensive interrogation by the Gestapo 
may illustrate the point. This subject found that he was able to control the point of passing out during 
interrogation. He would decide not to pass out just yet but perhaps some 60 sec later. Whether in fact he 
had control of this kind or whether he had the illusion of control is unimportant because the subjective 
feeling  helped  to  maintain  his  mastery  of  the  situation  throughout  several  months  of  intensive 
interrogation. It is possible that autogenous
-204-
training may be a technique for providing the potential captive with an untouchable and effective 
technique of mastery in a situation where he is physically totally at the mercy of his captors.
SUMMARY
The suggestion that hypnosis be utilized as a means of enabling potential captives to withstand enemy 
interrogation appears impractical. At best, it could be utilized with an exceedingly small percentage of 
subjects. Prevention of subsequent trance induction, by a posthypnotic suggestion to that effect, seems 
unlikely. The posthypnotic induction of amnesia and anesthesia for the event of capture would leave the 
captive in a more vulnerable position than he would have been otherwise, if indeed it is feasible at all. 
The training in hypnosis necessary to achieve these phenomena might well make the subject more 
accessible to attempts at trance induction by an enemy interrogator.

Our primary objection to all three of the proposed suggestions is based on the inevitable result of 
diminishing the individual's responsibility for his own actions by placing reliance on mechanisms outside 
his ego control. It is preferable and safer to utilize techniques designed to increase the soldier's ego 
control and potential mastery of unpredictable circumstances than to place faith in a semiconscious 
mechanism. Information about what the soldier might expect under conditions of captivity, about the 
techniques of enemy interrogation, about the kind of reactions he might experience in himself would all 
be desirable in terms of increasing his ego control and therefore his mastery of a potentially difficult 
situation. Two specific techniques designed to enhance ego control were suggested: the use of motivating 
instructions and the technique of autogenous training.
Defense Against the Use of the Hypnotic Situation in Interrogation
The technical reasons for the limited utility of hypnosis as an instrument of interrogation have been 
discussed here at some length. It is highly questionable whether it is possible to induce a trance in a 
resistant subject. Furthermore, even if trance could be induced, considerable evidence indicates that it is 
doubtful whether a subject could be made to reveal information which he wished to safeguard. And 
finally, it has been shown that the accuracy of such information, were any to be obtained, would not be 
guaranteed since subjects in hypnosis are fully capable of lying. However, it is possible that both
-205-
hypnosis and drugs, such as pentothal, scopolamine, sodium amytal, etc., may nonetheless be applicable 
to interrogation procedures. It would be well to differentiate between the effectiveness of hypnosis as 
such and the hypnotic situation. The latter seems to offer greater potential applicability for interrogation 
purposes.
The psychological meaning of the situation to the captive during interrogation is one which varies 
widely from individual to individual. It is not our purpose here to review the meaning of capture and 
interrogation from a psychodynamic viewpoint,  1 but only to consider briefly why individuals will 
undergo extremes of physical and mental suffering to prevent the interrogator from obtaining the desired 
information. The answer seems to lie in the extreme guilt such a person would experience were he to 
collaborate with the enemy while he is in control of his faculties. His self-image would suffer especially 
in terms of his values and his identification with comrades, country, etc. For interrogation purposes it 
would be extremely useful if it were possible to alleviate the guilt of an informant.
Let us consider the captive who is in fever and delirious, and who in this condition divulges vital 
information. Neither he nor his comrades would hold him responsible for the disclosure. By the same 
token a soldier who leaves his post as a guard is subject to court martial, but if he collapses because of 
illness he would not be committing a punishable offense. Parenthetically, it may be noted
1 Parenthetically, it may be noted that conditions of interrogation are sometimes conducive to a regression on the part of the 
source. The interrogator can exercise complete  control of the source's physical being — his primitive  needs such as 
elimination, eating, and sleeping, and even bodily postures. He is also in a position to reward or punish any predetermined 
activity on the part of the captive. This tends to create a situation where the individual feels unable to observe any control over 
himself. This extreme loss of control is handled in a variety of ways, one of which is a regression to a childlike state of 
dependence on and identification with the aggressor. A discussion of the similarities and differences between this type of 

situation and hypnosis is given by Gill and Brenman in their recent book (26). It is doubtful that this type of situation is 
conducive to the induction of hypnosis as we know it. This question could only be tested in such coercive situations, however. 
Obviously the creation of an experimental situation even vaguely approximating that of punitive interrogation is well nigh 
impossible within the legitimate ethical limitations imposed on experimental work.
Biderman (11), discussing the compliance of prisoners of war with interrogators, believes that some prisoners adopt a 
cooperative role because of the need to reassure themselves that they retain some control over their behavior in the coercive 
situation. Complying "voluntarily" for such cases is less threatening, and may be regarded by them as less shameful, than 
losing control completely over their actions. This "self-defeating" defense may also play a role in the responses of an 
antagonistic subject to a hypnotist he fears.
-206-
that in many cultures physical illness would not be accepted as an excuse. For example, in the old 
German army a soldier who fainted would be punished. At any rate, contemporary United States culture 
clearly excuses the individual when he is incapacitated. A sophisticated discussion of the relationship of 
illness to social responsibility is given by Parson (54).
This principal has been extended to mental illness. Although considerable controversy exists about 
mental illness as a defense in criminal cases, the fact remains that our courts have become progressively 
more liberal in this respect. Insanity is accepted in our courts as a valid plea which modifies both verdict 
and sentence.
The captive in interrogation is apprehensive of a dangerous and painful ordeal. If he is provided with a 
situation where he is no longer held responsible for his actions, he may well be "willing" to collaborate 
with an enemy. Both hypnosis and some of the drugs inducing hypnoidal states are popularly viewed as 
situations where the individual is no longer master of his own fate and therefore not responsible for his 
actions. It seems possible then that the hypnotic situation, as distinguished from hypnosis itself, might be 
used to relieve the individual of a feeling of responsibility for his own actions and thus lead him to reveal 
information. The hypnotic situation is more complex than indicated here. A simplification of it is 
undertaken since a more complete discussion would be inappropriate in this context.
Social Measures
A number of social measures would increase the prisoner's feelings of helplessness if such an approach 
were employed.  For example, the prevalence of rumors that semimagical techniques of extracting 
information are being used over which the informant has absolutely no control might operate in this way. 
A group of captives who had collaborated, and who could verify that the individual has no control over 
his actions, would enhance this indoctrination of the new prisoner. The prisoners who did not reveal 
information might be transferred rather than punished, with vague rumors filtering back as to what had 
happened. This would have the advantage of maximizing anxiety while not directing hostility at the 
immediate captors. In  any case, a captor seeking to exploit the hypnotic situation would prevent 
consensual validation of the prisoner's feeling that he could control himself during interrogation. The 
captor might treat the captive who gives information somewhat like a sick individual in
-207-

order to avoid any notion that there is an element of choice involved in his behavior.
The Magic Room Technique
The trance induction itself might be initiated through the use of drugs since this would clearly convey 
to the prisoner that he is unable to prevent himself from responding. The second stage of "trance 
induction" might utilize a situation which the author has described elsewhere (53) as the "magic room." 
This procedure involves convincing the subject that he is responding to suggestions. An example of this 
would be the case of the prisoner who is given a hypnotic suggestion that his hand is growing warm. 
However, in this instance, the prisoner's hand actually does become warm, a problem easily resolved by 
the use of a concealed diathermy machine. Or it might be suggested to the prisoner that when he wakes 
up a cigarette will taste bitter. Here again, he could be given a cigarette prepared to have a slight, but 
noticeably bitter, taste. The prisoner's own cigarettes, as well as any lying about the room, would have 
been especially prepared, and the hypnotist would also smoke these as though nothing were unusual. In 
this manner, the idea could be conveyed to the subject that he is responding to the given suggestions. It 
can easily be seen how, with sufficient ingenuity, a large number of "suggestions" can be made to work 
by means unknown to the subject. The vital issue here would be that the subject became convinced that 
he was responding to suggestions and, for example, that the cigarettes really do not taste bitter, but that he 
experiences them as such because he cannot resist the suggesion.
An unresolved question is the classification of the state in which a prisoner who collaborates under 
these circumstances finds himself. We feel it helpful to recognize that it may or may not be hypnosis. The 
crucial variable is the creation of a situation where the individual is legitimately able to give tip 
responsibility for his actions and therefore is permitted to avoid a threatening situation. It is probable that 
these manipulations occasionally would elicit some form of trance phenomenon, but the crucial aspect 
would be the situation, not the presence of a hypnotic state.
Although the hypnotic situation as a tool of interrogation might yield information, the interrogator 
would have no more assurance of its accuracy than with the elicitation of information by hypnosis proper. 
The same cautions which have been stated with regard to hypnosis remain applicable here. Furthermore, 
for the success of the
-208-
technique  the  interrogator  would  have  to  act,  in  his  relationship  with  the  captive,  as  though the 
information must be correct. Unless the interrogator is certain that the information is false, any doubt he 
betrayed would increase the subject's feeling of control and decrease the effectiveness of the hypnotic 
situation. Consequently, the interrogator would be denied the use of techniques of cross examination upon 
which much of his success in deriving accurate information ordinarily depends. In constructing a pretense 
that the prisoner has lost responsibility for his behavior, he is also relieved of any responsibility for giving 
accurate and pertinent information. On the other hand, the interrogator could utilize to advantage any 
information he has that the subject does not know he has. For example, the informant could be given a 
hypnotic drug with appropriate verbal suggestions to talk about a given topic. Eventually enough of the 
drug  would  be  given  to cause a short  period  of  unconsciousness.  When the subject  wakens,  the 
interrogator could then read from his "notes" of the hypnotic interview the information presumably told 

him. It can readily be seen how this technical maneuver fits into the general concept of the "magic room," 
and how it would facilitate the elicitation of information in subsequent interviews.
Although  there is  no  direct  evidence  that  such  techniques  have been  or  will  be employed  by 
interrogators nor any evaluation of their effectiveness, they represent simple extensions of hypnosis to 
traditional interrogation practices as described by Biderman (10).
The effectiveness of the polygraph as a lie detection device is sometimes employed, apart from the use 
of the machine, to create a situation where the subject feels incapable of preventing himself from 
revealing the truth. According to Inbau and Reid (33), many of the confessions obtained with the lie 
detector are obtained before the actual use of the polygraph. This is clearly analogous to our estimate 
regardiug the possible use of' hypnosis, i.e., separating the hypnotic situation from the effectiveness of 
hypnosis per se.
The hypnotic situation has been discussed in detail in order to point oat the defensive procedures 
which can be taken to protect personnel from this type of interrogation. With lie detection, to use this 
parallel once more, the most effective defense has been a high level of sophistication of' the subject. 
Similarly in the hypnotic situation, knowledge seems to be the most effective defense. Even one or two 
lectures on hypnosis might be highly effective in conveying the information that an individual cannot be 
hypnotized against his will, but that a situation can be devised where he could be tricked into believing 
that he has been hypnotized. Furthermore, demon-
-209-
strating that the individual is able to lie under hypnosis and cannot be compelled to speak the truth, or to 
follow suggestions really contrary to his beliefs, would probably be extremely effective.
SUMMARY
If it were to be used on interrogation subjects, hypnosis itself may be quite innocuous, but it is entirely 
possible that the utilization of the hypnotic situation for this purpose could be a serious threat. Such a 
situation would alleviate the informant's guilt by relieving him of the responsibility for his behavior, and 
would supply him with an alternative to a dreaded and potentially stressful situation. A method of "trance 
induction," similar to what we have called the "magic room," could be employed to produce a hypnotic 
situation. The use of the hypnotic situation, as opposed to hypnosis, would make this interrogation 
technique applicable to a greater percentage of potential informants. Defensive measures to protect 
personnel from those techniques depend upon the knowledge and confidence of the subject.
Summary and Conclusions
This report has attempted to evaluate the utility of hypnosis in interrogation procedures. Various 
theoretical views as to the nature of hypnosis were briefly reviewed. The author aligns himself with the 
"motivational theorists" who maintain that an understanding of the phenomenon of hypnosis is to be 
found in a consideration of both the subject's motivation in the situation and his relationship to the 
hypnotist.

Because of the dearth of  evidence bearing directly on the question of  the use  of hypnosis  in 
interrogation, the problem was broken down into a series of component questions, with each considered 
separately. A review of the available literature bearing on the question of whether trance can be induced 
in resistant subjects led us to conclude that such a possibility is extremely doubtful. It seems that while 
trance may be induced without the subject's awareness, this generally requires the existence of a positive 
relationship between hypnotist and subject, a requirement not always met in the interrogation situation.
Assuming that a trance may be induced in a potential informant, what degree of behavioral control 
does hypnosis allow? This question generally focuses on the possibility of inducing a subject to violate 
social prohibitions. Although many laboratory experiments have
-210-
been directed at this question, they suffer from the criticism that they are only, after all, "contrived" 
situations and the subject, in all probability, perceives them as such at some level. Although the author 
doubts that proscribed behavior can be induced against the subject's wishes, he must admit that the crucial 
experiments have not been performed, and the resolution of this question must await this event. There are 
three documented cases of "real, nonlaboratory" situations involving the use of hypnosis for compelling 
criminal behavior. However, close scrutiny of these instances reveals that in each case an intense 
emotional relationship existed between hypnotist and subject. The bearing of these cases on the question 
at hand is consequently in doubt. One need not invoke hypnosis to explain behavior on the part of one 
individual to please another, be it criminal or not, when an intense emotional relationship exists between 
the individuals involved. One element which hypnosis introduces is the subject's lack of awareness of his 
own  motivation;  a  motivation  which  seems  to  derive  not  from  hypnosis  but  from  the  emotional 
relationship between hypnotist and subject. Again, the interrogation situation does not readily evolve such 
a relationship.
The question of the accuracy of information obtained during a hypnotic trance has been considered. It 
seems clear from the evidence that such information need not be veridical; the subject remains fully 
capable of distortions, despite hypnotic suggestions to the contrary.
These various proposals lo utilize hypnosis as a defense against interrogation have been discussed: (a) 
to give hypnotic suggestions designed to prevent further trance induction, (b) to increase resistance to 
pain  and  psychic  stress  by  appropriate  posthypnotic  suggestion,  and  (c)  to  induce  amnesia 
posthypnotically for sensitive information in the event of capture. All these proposals involve diminishing 
the subject's mastery of the situation. They function as artificially induced repressive mechanisms and 
suffer from the same drawbacks commonly seen in repression: a loss of ego control and a consequent 
lessened degree of flexibility in dealing with reality. Captured personnel are already threatened by loss of 
ego control, and we feel that proposals which would further impoverish the ego are extremely hazardous 
and would make the individual more vulnerable than he already is. We have suggested alternative 
defensive measures which would not sacrifice ego control, namely, appropriate instructions and the 
technique of autogenous training.
The distinction has been drawn between the use of hypnosis per se and the hypnotic situation. The 
hypnotic situation could be used quite effectively for interrogation purposes. The common belief that
-211-

an individual in hypnosis is not responsible for his actions, although probably incorrect, could be 
exploited. The hypnotic situation, by relieving the subject of responsibility for his actions, alleviates guilt 
and thus allows the captive to divulge information which he might not otherwise yield. Ways in which an 
interrogator might seek to maximize the effectiveness of such a situation include the use of drugs, the use 
of a technique we have called the "magic room," various social measures, etc. Defensive measures 
necessary against such a technique would involve the dissemination of appropriate information.
References
1. Adler M. H., and Secunda L. "An indirect technique to induce hypnosis". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1947, 106, 190-193.
2. Barber T. X. "Hypnosis as perceptual-cognitive restructuring: III. From somnambulism to autohypnosis" J. Psychol., 
1957, 44, 299-304.
3. Barker W., and Burgwin S. "Brain wave patterns accompanying changes in sleep and wakefulness during hypnosis". 
Psychosom. Med., 1948, 10, 317-326.
4. Bass M. J. "Differentiation of hypnotic trance from normal sleep". Exper. Psychol., 1931, 14, 382-399.
5. Beecher H. K. "Evidence for increased effectiveness of placebos with increased stress". Amer. J. Physiol., 1956, 187, 
163-169.
6. Beigel H. C. "Prevarication under hypnosis". J. clin. exp. Hypnosis, 1933, 1, 32-40.
7. Beigel H. C. "The problem of prevarication in marriage counseling". Marriage and Family Living, 1953, 15, 332-337.
8. Bergman M. S., Graham H., and Leavitt H. C. "Rorschach exploration of consecutive hypnotic chronological age level 
regressions". Psychosom. Med., 1947, 9, 20-28.
9. Bernheim H. Suggestive therapeutics: a treatise on the nature and uses of hypnotism. New York: London Book Co., 
1947.
10. Biderman A. D. Communist techniques of coercive interrogation. Lackland Air Force Base, Texas: Air Force Personnel 
and Training Research Center, Dec., 1956. AFPTRC Development Report TN-56-132.
11. Biderman A. D. Social-psychological needs and "involuntary" behavior as illustrated by compliance in interrogition. 
Sociometry, 1960, 23, 120-147.
12. Binet A., and Féré C. Animal magnetism. New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1888.
13. Boring E. G. A history of experimental psychology. New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts, Inc., 1950.
14. Braid J. Neurohypnology. London: George Redway, 1899.
15. Bramwell J. M. Hypnotism; its history, practice and theory. New York: Julian Press, 1903.
16. Brenman M. "Experiments in the hypnotic production of antisocial and self-injurious behavior". Psychiatry, 1942, 5, 
49-61.

17. Brenman M., and Gill M. M. Hypnotherapy: a survey of the literature. New York: International Universities Press, 
1947.
-212-
18.  Dession  G.  H.,  Freedman  L.  Z.,  Donnelly  R.  C.,  and  Redlich  F.  C.  "Drug  induced  revelation  and  criminal 
investigation". Yale law J., 1953, 62, 315-347.
19. Erickson M. H. "An experimental investigation of the possible antisocial uses of hypnosis". Psychiatry, 1939, 2, 391-
414.
20. Erickson M. H. "Deep hypnosis and its induction". In L. M. LeCem (Ed.), Exp. Hypnosis. New York: Macmillan, 1952. 
Pp. 70-112.
21. Erickson M. H., and Erickson E. M. "Concerning the nature and character of post-hypnotic behavior". J. gen. Psychol., 
1941, 24, 95-133.
22. Estabrooks G. H. Hypnotism. New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1943.
23. Forel A. Der hypnotismus. Stuttgart, Germany: von Ferdinand Enke, 1902.
24. Friedlander A. A. Die hypnose und die hypno-narkose. Stuttgart, Germany : von Ferdinand Enke, 1920.
25. Gidro-Frank L., and Bowers-Buch M. K. "A study of the plantar response in hypnotic age regression". J. nerv. ment. 
Dis., 1948, 107, 443-458.
26. Gill M. M., and Brenman Margaret. Hypnosis and related states. New York: International Universities Press, 1959.
27. Gindes B. C. New concepts of hypnosis. New York: Julian Press, 1951.
28. Grinker R. R., and Spiegel J. P. War neuroses. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Blakiston Co., 1945.
29. Hammerschlag H. E. Hypnotism and crime. Translated by John Cohen. Wiltshire, Hollywood, 1957.
30. Haupt J. "Eine experimentelle untersuchung zur frage der kriminellen hypnotisch-suggestiven beeinflussbarkeit". 
Ztschr. f. d. ges. Neurol. u. Psychiat., 1937, 159, 767-768.
31. Heron W. T. "Hypnosis as a factor in the production and detection of crime". Brit. J. med. Hypnotism, 1952, 3, 15-29.
32. Hull C. Hypnosis and suggestibility. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1933.
33. Inbau F. E., and Reid J. E. Lie detection and criminal interrogation. Baltimore, Maryland: Williams & Wilkins Co., 
1953.
34. Janet P. Psychological healing; a historical and clinical study. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1925.
35. Kline M. V. "The dynamics of hypnotically induced anti-social behavior". J. Psychol., 1958, 45, 239-245.
36. Kline M. V. "Hypnotic age regression and intelligence". J. genet. Psychol., 1950, 77, 129-132.
37. Kline M. V. A scientific report on "The search for Bridey Murphy." New York: Julian Press, 1956.

38. Kroger W. S., and Schneider A. "An electronic aid for hypnotic induction: A preliminary report". Int. J. clin. and exp. 
Hypnosis, 1959, 7, 93-98.
39. Kubie L. S., and Margolin S. An apparatus for the use of breath sounds as a hypnogogic stimulus. Amer. J. Psychiat., 
1944, 100, 610.
40. Kubie L. S., and Margolin S. "The process of hypnotism and the nature of the hypnotic state". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1944, 
100, 611-622.
41. LeCron L. M. "The loss during hypnotic age regression of an established conditioned reflex". Psychiat. Quart., 1952, 
26, 657-662.
42. Ludwig A. "Clinical features and diagnosis of malingering in military personnel; use of barbiturates as an aid in 
detection". War Med., 1944, 5, 379.
43. Marcuse F. L. "Anti-social behavior and hypnosis". J. clin. exp. Hypnosis, 1953, 1, 18-20.
-213-
44. Mayer L. Das verbrechen in hypnose. Munchen: J. F. Lehman, 1937.
45. McCranie E. J., Crasilneck H. B., and Teter H. R. "The EEG in hypnotic age regression". Psychiat. Quart., 1955, 29, 
85-88.
46. Meares A. Hypnography: a study in the therapeutic use of hypnotic painting. Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 
1957.
47. Mercer M., and Gibson R. W. "Rorschach content in hypnosis: chronological age level regression". J. clin. Psychol., 
1950, 6, 352-358.
48. Moll A. Hypnotism. New York: Walter Scott, 1904.
49. Muehlberger C. W. "Interrogation under drug influence". J. crim. L. and Criminol., 1951, 42, 513-528.
50. Nevsky M. P. "Bioelectrical activity of the brain in hypnotic sleep". Neuropatologia: Psikhiatriia, 1954, 54, 26-32.
51. Orne M. T. "The mechanisms of hypnotic age regression: an experimental study". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1951, 46, 
213-225.
52. Orne M. T. "The nature of hypnosis: artifact and essence". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1959, 58, 277-299.
53. Orne M. T. "Hypnotically induced hallucinations, AAAS symposium on hallucinations, December 1958". In L. J. West 
(Ed.) Hallucinations, in press.
54. Parsons T. The social system. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1951.
55. Pattie F. A., Jr. "The genuineness of hypnotically produced anesthesia of the skin". Amer. J. Psychol, 1937, 49, 435-
443.
56. Pavlov I. P. "The identity of inhibition with sleep and hypnosis". Sci. Mon., 1923, 17, 603-608.

57. Platonov K. I., and Prikhodivny E. A. "K pbyekitvnomu dokazatelstu eksperimentalnovo izmeneiya lichnosti". 
Psikhoterapia, 1930, 191-203.
58. Reiter P. J. Antisocial or criminal acts and hypnosis: a case study. Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1958.
59. Rosen H. "Hypnodiagnostic and hypnotherapeutic fantasy-evocation and acting out techniques". J. clin. exp. Hypnosis, 
1953, 1, 54-66.
60. Rowland L. W. "Will hypnotized persons try to harm themselves or others?" J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1939, 34, 114-
117.
61. Sarbin T. R. "Contributions to role-taking theory: I. hypnotic behavior". Psychol. Rev., 1950, 57, 255-270.
62. Sargant W., and Fraser R. "Inducing hypnosis by hyperventilation". Brit. J. Med., 1935, 1, 378.
63. Schilder P. The nature of hypnosis. New York: International Universities Press, 1956.
64. Schneck J. M. "A military offense induced by hypnosis". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1947, 106, 186-189.
65. Schneck J. M. "Modified technique for the induction of hypnosis". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1947, 106, 77-79.
66. Schneck J. M. "Spontaneous regression to an infant age level during selfhypnosis". J. genet. Psychol., 1955, 86, 183-
185.
67. Schultz J. H. Das autogene training. Stuttgart: Georg Thieme, 1932.
68. Shor R. "Explorations in hypnosis: a theoretical and experimental study". Doctoral dissertation, Brandeis, 1959.
69. Spiegel H., Shor J., and Fishman S. "A hypnotic ablation technique for the study of personality development". 
Psychosom. Med., 1945, 7, 273-278.
70. Stalnaker J. M., and Riddle E. E. "The effect of hypnosis on long delayed recall". J. gen. Psychol., 1932, 6, 429-440.
-214-
71. Sutcliffe P. "Personal communication".
72. True R. M., and Stephenson C. W. "Controlled experiments correlating electroencephalogram, pulse, and plantar 
reflexes with hypnotic age regression and induced emotional states". Personality, 1951, 1, 252-263.
73. Watkins J. G. "Antisocial compulsions induced under hypnotic trance". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1947, 42, 256-259.
74. Watkins J. G. "A case of hypnotic trance induced in a resistant subject in spite of active opposition". Brit. J. med. 
Hypnotism, 1941, 2, 26-31.
75. Weitzenhoffer A. M. General techniques of hypnotism. New York and London: Grune & Stratton, Inc., 1957.
76. Weitzenhoffer A. M. "The production of antisocial acts under hypnosis". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1949, 44, 420-422.
77. Welch L. "A behavioristic explanation of the mechanism of suggestion and hypnosis". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1947, 
42, 359-364.

78. Wells W. R. Experiments in "waking hypnosis" for instructional purposes. J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1923, 18, 239-404.
79. Wells W. R. "Ability to resist artificially induced dissociation". J. abnorm. Psychol, 1940, 35, 261-272.
80. Wells W. R. "Experiments in the hypnotic production of crime". J. Psychol., 1941, 11, 63-102.
81. White R. W. "Prediction of hypnotic susceptibility from a knowledge of subject's attitudes". J. Psychol., 1937, 3, 265-
277.
82. White R. W., Fox G. F., and Harris W. W. "Hypnotic hyperamnesia for recently learned material". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1940, 35, 88-103.
83. White R. W. "A preface to the theory of hypnotism". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1941, 36, 477-505.
84. Young P. C. "Is rapport an essential characteristic of hypnosis"? J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1927, 22, 130-139.
85. YOung P. C. "Hypnotic regression — fact or artifact"? J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1940, 35, 273-278.
86. Young P. C. "Antisocial uses of hypnosis". In L. M. LeCron (Ed.), Exp. Hypnosis, New York: Macmillan, 1952. Pp. 
403-406.
-215-
CHAPTER 6
The experimental investigation of interpersonal 
influence
ROBERT R. BLAKE AND JANE S. MOUTON
Introduction
Interrogation is basically a situation of attempted interpersonal influence. A number of disciplines 
have long been concerned with the discrepancies between the actions, opinions, and judgments an 
individual displays when he is alone and those he displays when he is interacting with others who behave 
differently.  This  chapter  will  review  experimental  investigations  of  the  conditions  under  which 
individuals change or resist changing their behavior to accord with that of others with whom they are 
interacting.
Consideration will be given here to shifts of behavior in the direction of the frame of reference of 
others ("conformity"), absence of movement or shifts in a different direction ("resistance"), and to the 
observance of some explicit request or prohibition ("compliance"). Although experimental work has 

largely been confined to observations of differences between behavior in an interpersonal influence 
situation and that in a prior private situation, those few studies which have measured the persistence and 
stability of the change will also be considered. Continued display of conformity behavior when the person 
is no longer interacting with the source of influence may be termed "conversion." In the interrogation 
situation the source may reveal information unwittingly and unintentionally, he may furnish it
________________ 
Appreciation is expressed to Dr. Muzafer Sherif who offered valuable suggestions regarding certain aspects of 
this report.
-216-
reluctantly in compliance to direct questions, he may conform and yield to pressures for information as 
long as they exist, or he may search for ways of being helpful once some degree of conversion has taken 
place.
The change from the person's prior position which is required for conformity with the group in these 
experiments rarely if ever involves the intensity of conflict which is assumed to characterize the 
interrogation of a resistant source. The relevance of this review for the problem of the volume rests on the 
validity of the assumption that the dynamics of influence operate beyond the range of intensity of conflic. 
which has been studied experimentally. At the conclusion of this review we will consider the problem of 
extrapolation  by  briefly  assessing  the  implications  of  the  current  knowledge  of  the  dynamics  of 
interpersonal influence.
Several types of investigations have been excluded from this review: (a) anthropological reports in 
which conformity behavior has been noted but has not been subjected to experimental analysis; (b) 
investigations of audiences or meetings of larger assemblages where acceptance of or resistance to 
influence does not result from direct interaction among those composing the situation; (c) investigations 
dealing with shifts in reaction from knowledge or awareness of norms attributed by the experimenter to 
groups whose members are not psychologically present; (d) influence aspects of reference group behavior 
which contain variables that differ in kind and complexity from those inherent in influence exerted under 
face-to-face conditions; and (e) programmatic research reports and theoretical discussions of various 
aspects of the problem that are available in a number of other sources (2, 17, 29, 39, 46, 65, 90, 91, 99, 
121, 126).
Characteristics of the Experimental Situations
Material and Instructions
Experimental situations used to study conformity, compliance, and conversion are described here 
according to the following characteristics: (a) types of stimulus materials employed; (b) contexts or 
background conditions in which pressures are exerted; (c) personal dimensions used to assess the 

contribution of  individual differences to conformity and conversion behavior; and (d)  methods  of 
measuring the impact of conformity pressures on a critical subject.
A variety of tasks and performances figured in the studies which
-217-
have been reviewed. Instructions and stimulus materials have been used to produce the following types of 
responses: (a) expressions of opinions, attitudes, preferences, and interpretations, (b) perceptual and 
factual judgments, (c) attempts at logical analyses, and (d) behavior in relation to a direct request or an 
explicit prohibition.
EXPRESSION OF OPINIONS, ATTITUDES, PREFERENCES, AND INTERPRETATIONS
The stimulus materials used to evoke expressions of attitude, opinion, or preference have included 
attitude scales such as the Thurstone Scale of Militarism (10, 18, 20, 60, 61), attitudes toward Russia (52), 
toward feminism (79), and toward a variety of campus, political, and economic items (129). Others have 
reported findings for a number of attitude statements without giving complete descriptions of their 
composition (8, 34, 64). The expression of opinions or attitudes regarding typical cases or problem issues 
has also been used (27, 81, 92, 114, 120, 134). Typical discussion topics include federal aid to education 
(47), labor-management relations (40, 48), nationalism vs. internationalism (82), divorce (54), and the 
handling of a juvenile delinquency problem (37, 41). Ratings of personality and social characteristics of 
both self and others also have been used  as  stimulus  tasks  (24,  57).  The expression  of personal 
preferences has included such items as line drawings (8, 34), food preferences (38, 73, 95), ranking of 
camping equipment for a hypothetical trip (55, 56), and ranking men in order of desirability as President 
of the United States (108). Pictures that are subject to personal interpretation as the basis for composing a 
story (4), or unclear drawings that are named by the subject (88, 90, 131, 132, 133) comprise another type 
of problem. Making such judgments as the truthfulness of a person defending himself against charges of 
revealing a fictitious crime (25), the intelligence of people from photographs (49), the better one of two 
paintings (97), the driver at fault from a picture of an auto accident (129), or revealing of discrepancies in 
examination grades (93) constitute other tasks that have been used.
TASKS REQUIRING LOGICAL ANALYSIS
Tasks eliciting responses that are predominantly logical in character include the solution of puzzles 
and games (32, 33), constructing objects (67), sending messages over telegraph keys (12), mental 
arithmetic problems (18, 94), the solution of a problem of football strategy (41), artillery range problems 
(13), and the ordering of patterns of thumbtacks according to perceptual criteria (127).
-218-
DIRECT REQUESTS AND PROBIBITIONS
Influence may be exercised directly through requests and prohibitions. Examples are requests for 
volunteers (9, 112, 113, 117) and for the endorsement of a petition (19); prohibitions, such as a poster 
forbidding entry to a building (45); a stoplight regulating pedestrian traffic (83); a sign prohibiting 
drinking from a fountain (78); a traffic light where turning signals are legal (5), or a command to stop a 

designated activity (53). The task involving the cutting of squares or other geometric forms under 
pressure from others to change the rate of production contains some elements of the direct request or 
prohibition stimulus (109, 110, 120).
JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTUAL AND FACTUAL MATERIALS
Perceptual materials have included estimations, procedures requiring the subject to match a standard 
stimulus to variable stimuli, and discrimination problems. The first group includes the autokinetic 
problem (16, 21, 23, 30, 36, 42, 58, 69, 75, 79, 84, 85, 91, 101, 111, 121, 122, 124, 125, 130), estimation 
of the number of dots on a card or slide (37, 43, 74, 100), the number of beans in a jar (70), the length of 
rectangles (22, 65), the distance between rectangles (65), the length of lines (98, 102, 18), the length of a 
slot of light (11, 97), the distance traversed by a moving light (118), the number of flashes of light in a 
standard time interval (76, 77), the number of clicks of a metronome (18, 103, 105, 123), the weight of a 
series of standard objects (60), size estimation of unspecified objects (72), and recognition of simple 
visual objects (115). matching procedures have been limited to the comparison of a straight line to lines 
of variable lengths (1, 3, 6. 7, 15, 35, 50, 105, 114), matching of stimuli differing in brightness (3), and 
matching of rectangle sizes and other geometric forms (8, 34, 71). Discrimination tasks include judging 
which is the shorter of two lines (87, 89), whether there is an odor in a bottle of odorless water (28), and 
which square has the largest number of dots (74). Common information types of items (31, 126), and 
memory tasks (80, 113), have also been used.
Framework or Social Background
Properties  of  the  situation  other  than  stimulus  materials  and  instructions  for  reacting  to  them 
contribute to the particular adjustment that occurs. The effect of context or framework in modifying the 
response that designated stimulus materials produce is well known
-219-
in sensory and perceptual research. The analogue of context or framework is often provided by the 
reactions of others to the same or comparable stimulus materials.
Social background may vary from simple awareness of the reactions by others to direct efforts by 
others to exert influence on the critical subject. An example of the latter is the judging situation where 
others present give uniformly incorrect reports before the response of the critical subject. A response 
conforming to the social background provides an index of conformity, whereas a response consistent with 
the stimulus material provides an index of resistance to the influence exerted by others.
Direct influence also is exerted in the situation requiring group members to agree on a single option 
from among a set of alternatives, with the influence usually exerted in the direction of converting the 
deviant member. Prohibition situations also contain context factors. Observing a transgression may free 
the subject to resist the prohibition.
DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN THE REACTIONS OF THE CRITICAL SUBJECT AND THE RESPONSE OF ANOTHER 
PERSON OR PERSONS, WITHOUT DIRECT INTERACTION BETWEEN THEM

A frequently used method of exerting influence is that of presenting stimulus materials and letting the 
critical subject hear reports of others before giving his own response. For some of the studies the 
discrepancy is "spontaneous" or "natural" (28, 36, 52, 84, 111, 118, 121, 124, 125), e.g., two naive 
subjects react to the autokinetic task (121), estimate line lengths (118), or judge attitude statements (52). 
The degree of convergence toward the responses of another person constitutes an index of conformity. In 
other experiments the reports of instructed subjects are controlled by the experimenter. Face-to-face and 
other methods of communicating the reports of others to the critical subject have been employed.
In the face-to-face situation the subject joins a group. He is given a fixed position in the sequence of 
responding, with responses of others prearranged by the experimenter (1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11, 21, 23, 24, 30, 35, 
38, 43, 48, 50, 51, 57, 58, 64, 69, 71, 75, 80, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 96, 97, 98, 100, 101, 102, 105, 107, 114, 
115, 122, 126, 128). Responses may be uniformly correct or incorrect. Incorrect ones may diverge from 
the correct or appropriate answer in varying amounts. Reports by others also may be at variance with one 
another, with some correct and others incorrect by varying degrees. In other situations, one instructed 
assistant engages in the designated action prior to the
-220-
subject and serves as a model for him (5, 19, 45, 53, 72, 78, 83, 86, 94, 95, 112, 113, 117, 130).
A modification of the face-to-face situation is the simulation of a group through the use of tape 
recordings (10, 18, 20, 31, 61, 63, 91, 103, 106, 109, 110). A naive subject participates under the 
impression that he is a member of a group composed of several persons, each of whom, like himself, is 
alone in adjoining rooms. All are interconnected by a communication system. The subject hears the 
instructions of the experimenter, experiences the stimulus materials to be judged, and hears the responses 
by the others. He reacts at the proper time by writing his responses in the blank spaces left for his reports. 
With the exception of the naive subject's responses, the entire experimental protocol usually consists of 
tape recordings. The simulated situation provides a standard social context for all subjects.
Another variation of the basic face-to-face situation is one where several people are tested together, 
with partitions or booths separating them from one another. Each has a panel with a row of signal lights 
that record the responses of others (8, 34, 35, 71). The task is constant for all members, and usually 
consists  of  materials  presented  by  slides  projected  on  a  wall  so  that  all  subjects  can  see  them 
simultaneously. The experimenter controls the presumed responses of the other subjects through a master 
switchboard. The effect is that each subject acts as a critical subject. All respond at the same time, with 
their responses recorded at the central control panel.
Also used is the requirement for requesting or relinquishing pieces of a puzzle or game by one 
member when members exchange parts to complete the puzzle. The participant understands that he must 
complete his puzzle or task before the group goal is achieved. Members are given a standard portion of 
the task at the beginning. Then they interact by requesting necessary pieces from one another in order to 
finish. Both the Group Squares Puzzle (33) and a Bingo game (32) have been used in this manner. Social 
interaction is indirect. The experimenter is able to arrange the responses of "other" members to requests 
for pieces or parts. After a subject has correctly completed his individual task, he is subjected to pressures 
from some other member to yield a part so that someone else may complete a puzzle. The index of 
resistance to social pressure is the number of trials in which the subject refuses to yield.

Influence without direct interaction is employed by the experimenter who communicates instructions 
to the subject on ways to change his performance so that he can contribute more appropriately
-221-
to the group task. This type of pressure has been applied in studies of slowdown in production of cutting 
paper objects (109), in utilizing information on an artillery problem (13), and in sending messages on 
telegraph keys (12).
EXPERIMENTER'S ANNOUNCEMENT OF GROUP NORMS
Still another version of inducing influence consists of individual responses given in private and 
collected by the experimenter. The experimenter either computes a norm actually representing the 
responses of members and reports it (22), or appears to compute a norm, but actually announces, 
according to a prearranged design, an incorrect norm for the reactions of the group (26, 49, 64, 66, 75, 77, 
129, 131, 132, 133).
GROUP DISCUSSION
Actual discussion, where members have the opportunity to exert influence on one another, has been 
employed in numerous studies (4, 9, 27, 48, 54, 55, 56, 70, 79, 81, 82, 92, 94, 108, 134). Interaction is 
direct, without control by the experimenter. The individual may be asked to indicate his position on a 
particular issue in private prior to the group discussion, at various points during its course or at the end of 
the discussion. Comparison of initial position with later positions provides a measure of susceptibility or 
resistance.
Interaction in a group has been controlled through notes, ballots, or votes passed among members. 
Each participant writes notes to others in the group, which may be delivered so that "discussion" among 
members is uncontrolled (25, 41, 47). Under other conditions prearranged notes, ballots, or votes are 
substituted (40, 74, 116, 120, 127). Comparison of positions before and after exchange of notes provides 
an index of change.
Properties of the Person
Another set of factors associated with conformity inheres in the "state of the person" at a particular 
time. Such factors can be identified through reference to individual differences in previous experience, 
personality characteristics, or physiologic states. Contrasted with a novice, a specialist in dealing with a 
certain type of materials is more resistant to shifting.
Individual differences in acceptance of conformity pressures related to properties of the person that 
have been investigated include experimentally created prior experiences, measures of physiologic states, 
and
-222-

indices of psychological experiences subsequent to behavior in the pressure situation.
EXPERIMENTALLY INDUCED PRIOR EXPERIENCES
Experiences have been created prior to the subject's exposure to conformity conditions to permit 
determination of the extent to which the experimentally defined experiences contributed to the adjustment 
elicited. These experiences include differences in the degree of familiarity with the stimulus materials 
prior to the influence situation (49), differences in the characteristics of a prior task in which social 
influence has also been exerted (88, 90), experiences with other members, including cooperative efforts in 
which a response consistent with the false one reported by another in the situation is rewarded (76, 87, 
90), individual experiences of success or failure (20, 58, 72, 75, 98, 100, 115), and experiences designed 
to increase insecurity (124) or decrease self-evaluation (119).
PHYSIOLOGIC MEASURES
Two physiologic characteristics have been related to susceptibility. One series of studies contrasted 
subjects of different ages (11, 38, 89); another compared men and women (25, 34, 79). Differences in 
physiologic states that have been evaluated include: degree of thirst (78); strength of food preferences 
(95); degree of sleep deprivation (42); and anxiety states as measured by degree of palmar sweat (64, 82). 
In several studies, it is impossible to determine whether the measure is regarded as a physiologic index or 
whether a physiologic difference represents a scale of psychological differences.
PERSONALITY MEASURES
A variety of measures have been used to assess personality characteristics of subjects prior to the 
pressure situation. Standard measures used are the A-S Reaction Study (10, 63, 72), Guilford-Martin 
Inventory of' Factors, GAMIN (23, 75), California F-Scale (10, 34, 54, 101, 128), Fiedler AS Inventory 
(125), Likert Scale of Attitude toward the Negro (23), Levinson-Sanford Scale of Attitude toward Jews 
(23), Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (4, 33, 50), Cattell 16 PF (115), Barron-Welsh Art 
Scale (74), Welsh Figure Preference Test (32), Terman Concept Mastery Test (32, 34), Idea Classification 
Test (32), Rorschach Test (85), Thematic Apperception Test (65, 105), and other measures of emotional 
instability (10, 27), problem-solving (106), and age of independence training (80). Other measures used 
are checklists and ratings procedures (6, 11, 33, 34, 70), and clinical
-223-
diagnoses  (36,  84,  125).  Measures  of  originality  have  been  constructed  to  determine  individual 
differences in this dimension (8). Needs, such as achievement (80, 115), dependency (69), anxiety (82), 
conformity (64, 131), self-approval (104), conventionality (10), and affiliation (54, 115), have been used 
as measures of personality in more recent conformity research.
Several different types of measures have been used to determine if degree of susceptibility to some 
type of outer anchoring, whether social or perceptual, is a general characteristic of individuals, which will 
permit predicting their behavior in conformity situations. Dependence on the perceptual field has been 
measured by the Tilted Room, Tilted Chair, and the Embedded Figures Test (86). Personal dependence on 
the social field (18, 34, 90) and susceptibility to direct influence attempts (62, 133) have been measured 
through experimentally created situations.

Interaction among Factors
Specific adjustments toward or away from conformity are determined by interactions among the three 
classes of factors. The impact of each must be considered in relation to the others if accurate prediction of 
adjustment is to be achieved. For example, under conditions where (a) the stimulus materials are difficult 
to judge, (b) the reactions of others constituting the social background are only slightly divergent from the 
correct response, and (c) the individual is characteristically conforming, the prediction is that his behavior 
can be easily influenced in the direction of conformity. To understand conformity, it is necessary to 
specify the interrelations among the concrete nature of the stimulus materials, the properties of the social 
context or framework, and the state of the person at the time of his reaction.
INDICES USED TO EVALUATE CONFORMITY, RESISTANCE, AND CONVERSION
Numerous indices have been employed to evaluate the extent to which influence has been exerted in 
conformity situations. The phrase "shifting of responses" refers to any of the several ways used to 
measure the effects of social influence.
PROGRESSIVE CHANGES WITH TRIALS
A standard procedure is that originally employed by Sherif (121). Numerous trials are administered 
under group conditions, with progressive shifts in responses evaluated as a function of differences
-224-
between trials (36, 51, 58). The procedure has been used with the autokinetic task (121), in judging the 
length of slots of light (97), and in estimating the number of dots (37). A change in responses to accord 
with those given by other members is regarded as conforming. No change or changes in an opposite 
direction are regarded as independent or resistant.
CHANGE SCORES BETWEEN PREGROUP AND POSTGROUP CONDITIONS
A widely used procedure is that of evaluating performance of a subject under private conditions and 
then under pressure conditions (12, 24, 27, 30, 48, 49, 52, 54, 60, 67, 69, 72, 73, 76, 84, 92, 94, 98, 100, 
101, 115, 116, 129, 130, 132, 133), allowing interpretations either in terms of conformity or resistance. 
Occasionally, the subject's performance on the same task has been measured once again under private 
conditions (4, 21, 25, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43, 47, 48, 55, 56, 70, 79, 82, 94, 108, 111, 120, 131, 134), with the 
magnitude of shift in behavior from combinations of scores from the pre-pressure to the post-pressure 
conditions constituting the index. When changes due to pressure persist in the post-pressure situation, the 
index is a measure of conversion. When the individual gives a conforming response in the pressure 
situation and returns to his independent position in a later testing situation, the shift can be interpreted as 
temporary conformity. An interpretation of independence or resistance can be made when an individual 
acts in a consistent manner from the pre-pressure to the post-pressure situation. A "sleeper effect" is said 
to occur when an individual maintains independence in the pressure situation, but shows the effects of the 
pressure situation in the post-pressure private situation.
DEVIATION FROM CORRECT OR MODAL RESPONSES

Error scores for factual or logical materials that are answered correctly by the subject under private 
conditions are used to assess the effects of conformity piessures. Performance of a comparable group of 
subjects tested under control conditions has provided standardization data as a basis for judging the 
degree of influence exerted by pressure conditions (31).
Under conformity conditions, persons other than the subject give responses differing from the correct 
or preferred one. The number of times an individual gives a response either in the direction of the correct 
score or of the erroneous judgments constitutes his conformity score (1, 3, 8, 11, 18, 31, 34, 35, 48, 61, 
71, 74, 77, 80, 87, 88, 89, 90, 96, 102, 103, 105, 106, 114, 119, 125, 126, 127, 128). The conformity
-225-
score distribution has been used to compare the personality characteristics of conformers and resisters (6, 
7, 50, 65, 85, 86).
DISCREPANCY BETWEEN OTHERS' AND SUBJECT'S RESPONSES
Another technique consists of taking the stated opinion of others participating in the experiment as the 
baseline to evaluate the magnitude of the discrepancy in the response made by the critical subject (10, 20, 
23). Responses closer to the position represented by the background are interpreted as indicating a greater 
degree of conformity than more divergent responses. A modification of this method is establishment of a 
range of confederate responses so that if the critical subject reacts within that range, he is regarded as 
having conformed to the established pattern (16, 91, 122).
DIFFERENCES IN AVERAGE SCORES AND MAGNITUDE OF VARIABILITY BETWEEN GROUPS
Another measure consists of comparison of performances of groups of subjects confronted with 
pressures in varying degrees. The criterion of change is the average performance of the group on a single 
trial, or scores massed across trials, without regard for the serial order of changes. Variability has been 
similarly measured to determine the extent of decreases in the range of individual responses (11, 22, 63, 
75, 81, 118, 121, 124).
ACTION CRITERIA
A standard method consists of predesignating, as evidence of conformity, a specific action that is 
identical to responses by other persons present in the experimental situation. The frequency with which 
such a response occurs constitutes an index of conformity (5, 9, 19, 28, 38, 45, 53, 78, 83, 92, 93, 112, 
116, 117). Unreadiness to yield under other conditions constitutes an index of resistance (13, 32, 33, 109).
Summary
A variety of experimental situations have been employed in the study of conformity, resistance, and 
conversion. These have been reviewed, together with various ways of measuring the impact of the social 
context on the critical subject, including those which constitute indices of conformity or conversion.

Stimulus  materials  with  certain  characteristics  have  been  employed  most  frequently.  Relative 
simplicity and case of measurement of
-226-
elicited responses is one factor accounting for the choice of materials. They rarely have involved the type 
of activities that are subjected to conformity or conversion pressures in our daily lives. Generally, the 
materials used provoke little intrinsic interest. The situations often have a quality of artificiality that 
makes it difficult to draw general conclusions for use in interpreting reactions in more vital and real 
lifelike situations.
The types of influences exerted have not been of an extreme emergency, or life and death character. 
The interaction often consists only of the subject's hearing a report on the adjustment being made by 
others to the situation. To approximate more closely the life conditions of conformity, it will be necessary 
to design experimental situations in which the maintenance of resistance to conformity pressures places 
an individual in jeopardy of relinquishing valued status, prestige or membership, or where conversion is a 
means to attain important utilitarian objectives.
Personality tests have been the most popular means of assessing the role personal characteristics play 
in conformity behavior. Most tests have been used in only one or two studies, with the result that 
relatively little direct comparison of findings is possible.
Among six types of conformity indices, the change of scores between pregroup and postgroup 
conditions has been the most widely used measure. The deviation from correct or modal responses also 
has been a frequently used index of change.
Factors Associated with Conformity Behavior
A variety of factors have been shown to arouse conformity and resistance behavior. This Ieview of 
findings includes sections on results of differences in the shifting of responses attributable to: (a) the 
nature of the stimulus materials employed to evoke conformity; (b) characteristics of the social situation; 
and (c) the contribution of personal factors in determining the adjustment made under conformity-
producing conditions. Also included is a summary of studies of interaction effects among factors that 
increase or decrease conformity behavior.
Differences in Shifting of Responses Attributable to Stimulus Materials Employed
Several studies have evaluated those differences in conformity behavior that are associated with the 
nature of the stimulus materials
-227-

and the conditions of their presentation. Evaluation involves four considerations: the nature of the 
material  judged,  whether  factual,  attitudinal,  or  expressive  of  personal  preferences;  differences  in 
selections  from  the  same  materials,  whether  easy or  difficult,  clear  or  ambiguous;  conditions  of 
presentation, whether permitting judgments to be made by the subject with ease or with difficulty; and the 
experimenter's instructions to the subject, whether strong and definite or weak and vague.
QUALITATIVE DIFFERENCES IN THE MATERIALS JUDGED
Reactions to materials that can be answered on the basis of logic or "fact" appear to be more resistant 
to conformity pressures than those for which responses depend on social experience. Helson, Blake, and 
Mouton (61) studied the frequency of shifting as a function of the content of the task. Greater shifting of 
responses from the correct or modal report toward the erroneous responses expressed by others was 
observed for attitude statements than for materials involving knowledge or ability.
Festinger and Thibaut (41) employed two different discussion problems as stimulus materials, and 
reported results consistent with those by Helson, Blake, and Mouton (61).
Crutchfield (34) presented a variety of stimulus materials to a test sample under social pressure 
conditions. Since he describes results obtained for some but not all the materials, it is impossible to 
determine if response shifts are a function of the character of the stimulus materials.
The materials most subject to conformity effects appear to derive meaning or validity from a social 
frame of reference, such as attitudes toward war or general social problems.
DIFFICULTY
Degrees of shifting vary with differences in properties of the same materials. One source of variation 
is the difficulty experienced by the subject in reacting to the materials presented. The hypothesis tested 
holds that the more difficult the materials, the more easily the individual is influenced.
Blake, Helson, and Mouton (18) had male college students respond to arithmetic items and the 
metronome click counting problems under simulated conditions. For  the arithmetic items, shifting 
increased toward the erroneous response of the simulated group as the difficulty of the problems 
increased. Results for the metronome are interpreted as indicating that variations in rate were not 
sufficiently great
-228-
for shifts from social pressure related to difficulty to appear in a statistically clear manner.
Coleman,  Blake,  and  Mouton  (31)  have  demonstrated  a  significant  relatiorkship  between  task 
difficulty and susceptibility to conformity pressures. The results are interpreted as indicating that an 
individual certain of the correct answer is more able to resist pressures because he is more able to respond 
in terms of internal cues.
Asch (3) used the experimental task of matching a standard to three variable. lines. Differences 
between the variable lines and the standard were small for one set of trials, and larger for another set. 

Fewer errors Nere made by subjects when the discrepancy between lines was greater. These results 
support the hypothesis that difficult stimulus milterials lead to a greater degree of conformity.
Bereada (11) used child subjects for two different tasks, and investigated frequency of shifting as a 
function of the difficulty of items. The gretatest shifting for both tasks occurred in those trials that 
produced the highest frequency of errors under private conditions. Goldberg and Lubin (51) tested and 
confirmed the hypothesis that social itifluence on a subject's judgments is a positive linear function of his 
errors for similar judgments under private conditions.
In a study by Wiener (132), the task consisted of selecting one of two naules for each of ten 
ambiguous designs, and indicating the degree of certainty of each judgment on a four-point scale ranging 
from "absolutely certain" to "absolutely uncertain." Results indicate a greater percentage of change for 
designs rated on the uncertain end of the judgment scale, and for higher ambiguity designs within each 
category of certainty.
Kelley and Lamb (73) in an experiment on taste used phenylthiourea (PTU), which is tasteless to some 
individuals but extremely bitter to others. The results suggest that the tasters' greater resistance to 
majority influence springs from the greater intensity of their opinions about PTU.
Fisher, Williams, and Lubin (44) confirmed that a measure of the subject's self-certainty regarding the 
stimulus situation consistently constituted a fair degree of predictive power for conformity scores: the 
more certain a person is of his judgment, the more resistant he is to influences toward conformity.
Pressures have been maintained at a constant level in some studies of the relationship between 
ambiguity of the materials and conformity. Caylor (26) defined the ambiguity of the stimulus materials as 
the  number  of  equally  probable  reactions  perceived  as  appropriate  in  response  to  the  Stouffer 
questionnaire approach to conflict in norms.
-229-
Conformity was measured as the difference between private and public responses in the direction of 
perceived group norms. Conformity was found to be positively associated with the more ambiguous 
stimulus materials.
Wiener, Carpenter, and Carpenter (131) failed to confirm the relationship reported by Caylor (26). 
Explanation of the failure is not apparent in the published report.
CONDITIONS OF PRESENTATION
Several studies have employed varied conditions of presentation of the task in terms of difficulty of 
discrimination. The general hypothesis tested is that susceptibility is greater the farther removed stimulus 
materials are from direct examination.
Deutsch and Gerard (35) employed two conditions to present the same materials. The materials for one 
were present for visual examination at the time the subject made his judgments. Materials for the other 
were removed 3 sec prior to the subject's report. Significantly less influence was exerted by other persons 
when stimulus materials were present.

Raven and Rietsema (110) studied conditions of presentation and susceptibility as a function of the 
clarity of the task and found that the subjects who understood the requirements conformed more to the 
needs of others even though this placed them at a personal disadvantage.
Luchins (87) investigated susceptibility under conditions permitting some subjects to test objectively 
their experience with the stimulus materials. Child subjects permitted to test the accuracy of their 
judgments were less influenced by the confederate.
These studies generally agree in confirming the prediction that susceptibility is less when subjects 
have the opportunity to employ an objective frame of reference.
ORIENTATION TO THE TASK
Instructions used to orient subjects to stimulus materials have been shown to be correlated with 
susceptibility. Shifting in the direction of endorsement of a petition as a function of the strength of the 
request has been investigated by Blake, Mouton, and Hain (19). An increase in compliance attributable to 
increases in strength of the request was found for influence created by the compliant model, and a 
decrease when the model resisted. These results were confirmed by Rosenbaum (112) using a similar 
request to solicit volunteers.
-230-
Freed, Chandler, Mouton, and Blake (45) assessed the reactions of male college students to three 
degrees of strength for a sign forbidding entry to a classroom building. The frequency of compliance was 
found to be positively or negatively related to the strength of the prohibition stimulus in the same manner 
as in the studies just summarized.
SUMMARY
The effects of conformity pressures have been demonstrated to vary with (a) the nature of the stimulus 
materials to which subjects react aad (b) the conditions of their presentation. Reactions are evoked more 
easily when  pressures  are  exerted  on  attitudes  toward  social  issues;  factual  matters  and  personal 
preferences seem to be most resistan to change. This generalization is important for its implication that 
susceptibility is highest in areas dealing with political ideology, social attitudes, and expressions of 
opinions.
Unambiguous materials evoke more resistance to change than ambiguous ones. A situation where it is 
difficult for the subject to check on the accuracy of his response results in a decrease of resistance. 
Greater susceptibility has been shown to occur with increases in request strength when pressures are 
created by a compliant model as well as the converse.
Conformity Behavior and Social Context
Conformity pressures may be created when a person is confronted with reactions differing from his 
own. Individual reactions under private conditions have been compared with reactions to the same 

problem in a social context. Properties of social contexts singly or in combination have been studied to 
determine their effects on increases or decreases in susceptibility.
EFFECT OF REACTIONS OF ANOTHER PERSON OR PERSONS
The studies summarized in this section are those designed to show the influence of a social situation in 
modifying an individual's response.
OPINION AND ATTITUDE EXPRESSIONS
Wheeler and Jordan (129) investigated the effect of knowledge of majority viewpoints on changing 
opinions. Knowledge of group opinion during the third administration of an attitude questionnaire
-231-
produced frequency of shifting in the direction of agreement with the majority three times greater than 
that in the control condition, with disagreement reduced to approximately one-half of chance expectancy.
Gorden (52) evaluated shifts in responses from an initial individual administration of a twelve-item 
scale of attitudes toward Russia to responses given in the presence of other members. Over half of the 
subjects shifted toward group opinion, and approximately a third shifted away from it, with no change in 
the total shift score for approximately an eighth.
Helson,  Blake, Mouton,  and Olmstead (63) reported that naive subjects expressed  significantly 
different degrees of agreement or disagreement with statements matched for degree of militarism as a 
function and in the direction of prearranged responses by other subjects.
Horwitz, Piana, Goldman, and Lee (67) found significant differences in expressions of attitudes 
toward their teacher by ROTC students following reported unanimity of group attitude. Duncker (38) 
reports that children, responding after one, two, or three other subjects expressed their food preferences, 
had a selection rate of 81 per cent for foods chosen only 26 per cent of the time earlier in private.
ACTION STUDIES
A series of experiments employing situations that either restrict or prohibit an action, or else are 
designed to produce compliance with a request, have consistently indicated that direct knowledge of the 
reactions of others can produce shifts in behavior.
Grosser, Polansky, and Lippitt (53) found that a significantly larger number of naive child subjects 
engaged in unauthorized activities under the influence of perceiving violations by a model in the 
experimental rather than in the control conditions. Freed, Chandler, Mouton, and Blake (45) have 
reported similar results in a prohibition situation (see foregoing), as have Barch, Trumbo, and Nagle (5) 
who observed the behavior of motorists in turning lanes to determine conformance with or violation of a 
state law requiring turn signals. The behavior of a person following a lead car was significantly related to 
that of the lead car driver. Blake, Mouton, and Hain (19) obtained similar results for endorsement of a 
petition (see the foregoing).

Frequency of acceptance of a request for volunteers as a function of the perception of acceptance by 
another person has been investigated by Rosenbaum and Blake (113) and by Rosenbaum (112). Both 
studies demonstrate a decrease in acceptance frequency when subjects
-232-
see an experimenter's assistant refuse the request as well as the converse.
Schachter and Hall (117) found that group influences produced greater frequency of volunteering 
when half the class had been preinstructed to volunteer. Confirmation of these results for public versus 
private conditions has been reported by Blake, Berkowitz, Bellamy, and Mouton (15).
JUDGMENTAL TASKS
The effect of the group situation in influencing judgments was demonstrated by Munsterberg (104) in 
an early period of psychological experimentation. Students first were asked individually to identify which 
of two cards contained the largest number of dots. Initially, 60 per cent reported the correct answer. After 
a preliminary show of hands, correct judgments on an individual basis increased from 60 to 64 per cent. 
Significance of the differences obtained was not evaluated, but findings are consistent with those of later 
investigations. Clark (28) has reported that 20 per cent of students perceived the "odor" of a bottle of 
odorless water in the presence of other persons, compared with only 11 per cent in private.
The classical experiment in this area is by Sherif (121). He employed the autokinetic situation to 
demonstrate the influence of another's response on judgments by naive subjects. The convergence under 
group conditions of initially divergent responses showed the operation of social influence. Schonbar (118) 
duplicated the essential experimental conditions of Sherif's study and reports similar results.
Matching a standard line with three variable lines was the task employed by Asch (1) to investigate the 
influence of erroneous reports on naive subjects. Less than 1 per cent of the responses for the same trials 
in private was incorrect. By prearranging for reports by seven accomplices to be uniformly incorrect on 
certain trials, Asch was able to show a significant tendency for naive subjects to shift toward the incorrect 
position taken by others.
Blake and Brehm (16) investigated the effect on naive subjects of hearing the recorded responses of 
five accomplices. Amount of movement reported for the autokinetic task was varied in magnitude, 
divergence, and convergence. Pressures created under simulated conditions produced conformity effects 
apparently similar in character to those created under face-to-face conditions. McConnell and Blake (91) 
have confirmed this finding, as have Olmstead and Blake (107) for both face-to-face and simulated group 
conditions.
-233-
SUMMARY
The studies just summarized are in general agreement. Knowledge of the reactions of another person 
in the same situation can influence the subject's response in the direction of the other person's behavior, 
with susceptibility found for a wide variety of tasks.

Composition of the Social Context
Differences in susceptibility have been related to various features of the social context, including the 
number of others present, degree of unanimity in their reactions, and the magnitude of the discrepancy 
between the subject's own position and that of others.
Number of Others Present. There is evidence that the presence of several other persons giving uniform 
responses may produce increases in conformity behavior beyond those attributable to the effect of a 
single other person. The general proposition is that conformity pressures increase with number of other 
persons present as a negatively accelerated function.
Asch (1) varied the number of accomplices giving erroneous reports from one, two, three, four, eight, 
to sixteen. He reported direct but unequal increments in shifting for increases from one to two to three 
accomplices but no significant increases for a larger number.
Helson (60) arranged for one, two, or three other persons to report their judgments prior to the critical 
subject. The effect was found to be directly proportional to the number of accomplices giving prior 
reports. Luchins and Luchins (89) report that, of the group judging after three accomplices reported, 80 
per cent showed conformity effects, whereas only 10 per cent shifted their responses after one other 
accomplice reported.
Group size has been investigated "in reverse" by Ziller and Behringer (134). They varied the number 
of naive subjects present relative to one instructed subject. The confederate was more effective in two- 
and five-person groups than in three- and four-person groups. Conditions of this experiment have not 
been described in detail.
Hare (55) investigated the influence of group size on the attainment of consensus, and found that 
participants in groups of five changed their opinions more toward the group consensus after discussion 
than  those  in  groups  of  twelve.  This  finding  disagrees  with those  just  reported.  No  accomplices 
participated; discussion time was constant,
-234-
thus giving each member less opportunity to exert influence on others in the larger groups.
Three  investigators  reported  no  differences  in  shifting  as  a  function  of  the  number  of  others 
participating. Sherif (121) reported no significant differences in the degree of convergence for subjects 
responding to the autokinetic task in the presence of one or of two other members. Degree of unanimity 
was not prearranged; the study thus is not comparable to those employing controlled responses by others. 
Goldberg (49) varied the number of subjects working together in judging the intelligence of persons in 
nine photographs. Judging in the presence of others produced responses differing significantly from those 
given under private conditions. No differences in shifting were found for subjects who judged initially in 
the presence of two or of four other persons. Data. were not given for results from three-man groups. Use 
of imputed, falsified norms may in part account for his findings.

Kidd (76) varied group size from one to two to four to six, and supplied fictitious, imputed norms for 
each group. No significant differences in shifting were found for differences in group size.
Unanimity. Asch (1), in one condition, arranged for the instructed "naive" subject to respond correctly 
and the instructed majority of six other persons to respond incorrectly. The degree of shifting toward the 
majority view was comparatively slight. When the person who had been giving the correct report began 
to agree with the incorrect majority, the frequency of shifting was found to be comparable to that under 
the condition of routine unanimity.
Mouton, Blake, and Olmstead (103) have confirmed one aspect of Asch's finding. Little shifting from 
correct reports occurred when, of four other persons reporting prior to the critical subject, two gave 
correct and two incorrect responses. A significant increase in shifting occurred when all four uniformly 
gave an incorrect answer.
In Hardy's study (54) of unanimous contrasted with near-unanimous groups in a discussion of divorce, 
unanimity of opposition was not related to susceptibility but was significantly related to changes in 
attitudes expressed after exposure to the group pressure situation, in the direction of conformity pressures. 
He suggests that the differences between his results and those reported by others may be attributable to 
the distinctive features of the tasks employed.
Magnitude of the Discrepancy Between the Correct Report or the Subjects' Own Position and Reports 
by Others. The effect of the perceived discrepancy on shifting a critical subject away from his
-235-
private position, and the extent to which the subject shifts toward full agreement with reports by others 
have been evaluated.
Jenness (70) used initial individual judgments of the number of beans in a jar to assign students with 
initially divergent estimates and those with initially similar estimates to groups of three members and four 
members respectively. After discussion to arrive at a group estimate, the variation among individual 
judgments was reduced more in the three-member than in the four-member groups.
Festinger, Gerard, Hymovitch, Kelley, and Raven (40), using a labor dispute problem, prior to and 
during interaction measured the opinions of undergraduate students of the same sex in groups varying 
from six to nine members; the interaction was controlled by fictitious notes distributed after ten minutes 
of apparent interchange. Those who perceived themselves as initially disagreeing changed more than 
those who perceived themselves as initially agreeing with others present.
Goldberg (49) has reported significant differences in conformity related to degree of discrepancy, but 
not for ratio of actual conformity to discrepancy (see foregoing).
Wiener (132) reports a relationship between amount of discrepancy from norms and susceptibility, 
whereas Helson, Blake, and Mouton (61) confirm a positive relationship between the magnitude of 
discrepancy and the amount of susceptibility (see previous discussion).

Under one condition of the autokinetic situation used by Whittaker (130), a confederate estimated that 
the distance that light moved was one inch more than the subject's largest judgment. For other conditions 
the confederate's prior reports were two, eight, or twelve times as large as the subject's largest, earlier 
judgment. Greater shifts occurred for the two conditions using the smallest discrepancies between 
responses. The author suggests that larger discrepancies have a negative effect on the subject by tending 
to influence him in an opposite direction.
Harvey, Kelley, and Shapiro (57) investigated the relationship between the reaction of an individual to 
degree of discrepancies between his opinion of himself and others' opinions of him, and found a 
significant shift toward lower self ratings, with change in an unfavorable direction greatest for the most 
unfavorable, fictitious evaluations by acquaintances than by strangers.
Harvey and Rutherford (58) found that "unsuccessful," naive college subjects with one-half as many 
pretrials on the autokinetic task were more ready than the same size, "successful" group to shift
-236-
in response to consistently and uniformly divergent pressures than to initially agreeing and increasingly 
divergent pressures.
Evidence for the greater impact of small discrepancies on judging easily discriminated materials has 
been presented by Blake, Helson, and Mouton (18) and by Asch (3) (see above).
Since results obtained by Olmstead and Blake (107) and by Mouton, Blake, and Olmstead (103) (see 
the preceding) are not in complete agreement with those just summarized, further clarification is required.
Wiener, Carpenter, and Carpenter (131) report failure to confirm the work of Asch (3), but do not 
explain their failure. The per cents of college students who disagreed with subjects' choices of names for 
ten ambiguous designs were entered next to the design for half the trials. No relationship was found 
between number of changes and per cent of disagreement.
Summary. In four studies of the composition of the social situation and its relation to conformity, size 
of the group has been demonstrated to be a critical factor, with progressive increases in shifting for 
increases from one to two to three persons, and little or no evidence of greater influence by a larger 
number. Three other studies fail to confirm this relationship. All studies agree in finding no further 
increments in conformity associated with increases in number of divergent reports. Currently available 
evidence suggests that increments beyond those attributable to three other persons may be associated with 
a decrement in amount of influence exerted toward conformity.
Findings clearly indicate that conformity influences are significantly decreased when other members 
are not in unanimous agreement. With objective, discriminable stimuli, subjects tend more to agree when 
the discrepancy is small. For socially anchored materials, more subjects shift when the discrepancies are 
large.
CHARACTERISTICS OF OTHER MEMBERS

Studies of pressures as a function of personal characteristics have evaluated such factors as age, sex, 
prestige, degree of acquaintance, and degree of comparability in ability and interests.
Age. Duncker (38) found that the presence of another child, but not an adult, significantly shifted food 
preferences above a control condition, and younger children were more influenced by older children than 
the reverse.
In a study by Berenda (11), the teacher serving as the accomplice influenced younger children (seven 
to ten) more than older children
-237-
(ten to thirteen), and other children as accomplices significantly influenced both age groups, with younger 
children more influenced. Postsession interviews demonstrated that giving a correct answer contradicted 
by eight peers was seen as a violation of the group for which "majority" correctness was assumed. 
Jacubczak and Walters (69) report contradictory results for the autokinetic effect. In their experiment, the 
order of exposure to adult and child peer proved highly important. The availability of an abstract only 
makes it impossible to evaluate completely the findings.
Sex. Luchins and Luchins (89) report that greater influence was exerted when the prior report on a 
discrimination  task  was  given  by  women  than  by  men  college  student  confederates.  Statistical 
significance for differences was not reported; the number of experimental subjects was small.
Prestige. A number of investigations have tested the hypothesis that the higher the status of the other 
person, the greater his influence.
Lefkowitz, Blake, and Mouton (83) introduced four variations in a traffic situation for two-thirds of 
the trials, one for each sixth, including a confederate dressed in high status attire who (a) obeyed or (b) 
violated the traffic signal; and a confederate dressed in low status attire who (a) obeyed or (b) violated the 
signal.  The confederate  was  absent  for  the remaining  one-third  of  the trials. Significantly greater 
frequency of violation occurred under the influence of a violator. An additional significant increase in the 
frequency of violations was found when the confederate appeared in high status attire.
Mausner (96) arranged for the confederate to give the wrong answer in all trials on the Maier Art 
Judgment Test. The mean increase in wrong answers was significantly higher when the confederate was 
introduced as an art director than as a fellow student.
Cole  (30)  varied  expertness  of  the confederate in a four-man  group  making judgments  in  the 
autokinetic situation. Subjects were more influenced by his prearranged, extreme judgments when he was 
given expert status. When the task was described as an intelligence test and the confederate introduced as 
highly intelligent, the mean movement score of subjects tended to shift away from that of the confederate.
In  another  study,  Mausner  (97)  created  success  and  failure  for  confederates  participating  with 
undergraduate students in twenty trials of using a stylus to reproduce the length of a slot of light. A 
greater degree of shift occurred when the critical subject judged with

-238-
a confederate perceived as successful on the prior task. A similar design was used by Mausner and Bloch 
(100), with results corroborating those by Mausner (99).
Raven and French (109) varied the status or prestige of a person under two conditions: the person 
initiating the influence was seen either (it) as elected by the group and having its support or (b) as not 
elected or supported by the group. The elected supervisor was able to exert more influence.
Acquaintances vs. Strangers. The effect of acquaintances or strangers on the expression of attitudes 
has been investigated by Lambert and Lowry (81). Male undergraduates filled out comparable forms of 
the F scale alone, in groups of five without discussion and in groups of five after discussion. Some of the 
groups were composed of "high acquaintances," and others included individuals who were relatively 
unacquainted. Results show a reduction in variability of scores in the case of together and discussion 
conditions for high acquaintance subjects, with low acquaintance subjects apparently unaffected by either 
pressure condition.
Harvey, Kelley, and Shapiro (57) have reported a significant shift toward lower self ratings under 
influence created by acquaintances and by strangers (see above).
Kidd (76) created and controlled the degree of acquaintance by restricting the duration of prior 
participation to 1, 2, or 3 hr. Subsequent judgments were not significantly influenced.
Minority Group Membership. To evaluate the effect of minority group membership on susceptibility, 
Bray (23) used Gentiles as critical subjects, whereas the confederates were presented as Negro, Jew, and 
Gentile.  Since  results  are  contradictory,  only  replication  and  refinement  will  make  it  possible  to 
comprehend the relationships.
Homogeneity-heterogeneity. In  all  but  one  study  of  the  homogerteity-heterogeneity  dimension, 
heterogeneity is artificially created by experimenters' remarks.
Festinger and Thibaut (41) found for discussion of football but not juvenile delinquency significantly 
greater readiness of homogeneous groups to shift opinion as a function of receiving notes from others.
Gerard  (48)  created  homogeneity  and  heterogeneity  similarly  for  discussion  of  federal  aid  to 
education, and found changes in opinion to be unrelated to the homogeneity-heterogeneity dimension.
Festinger, Gerard, Hymovitch, Kelley, and Raven (40) report no differences in opinion change among 
groups told that "experts" were
-239-
present compared with control groups. Since there were no influence attempts directly traceable to 
"experts," this variation appears to have been a manipulation of homogeneity-heterogeneity in the proper 
sense rather than a variation in the prestige dimension (see above).

Summary. Differences in susceptibility are related to characteristics of the persons creating the 
influence. Age differences found include greater influence exerted on children by children than by adults, 
and on younger children by older children than on older by younger children. Several studies have 
reported greater susceptibility to pressures created by acquaintances than by strangers. Other differences 
reported do not reveal a clear pattern.
Greater influences are exerted when the other person has a higher status than the subject. This finding 
is obtained consistently. Uniform results have not been obtained from experiments designed to evaluate 
the influence of homogeneity-heterogeneity among members.
PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND COMMITMENT
Two related dimensions of influence exertion are evaluated in tests of these hypotheses: conditions 
permitting anonymity should decrease the extent of influence; and personal commitment in a prior, 
private performance should increase resistance.
Anonymity. Mouton, Blake, and Olmstead (103) found that influence was significantly greater when 
college subjects disclosed their personal identity than when conditions permitted anonymity (see above). 
Deutsch and Gerard (35) and Asch (3) obtained similar results (see above).
Reduced susceptibility to pressures under conditions of anonymity has been clearly demonstrated; this 
explains use of the secret ballot as a basic instrument of personal expression.
Commitment. Of two studies varying the personal commitment factor, one by Deutsch and Gerard (35) 
introduced three variations. The highest frequency of shifting occurred when recording was not required, 
with lowest frequencies resulting when the responses were recorded, personally signed, and given to the 
experimenter.
Fisher, Rubinstein, and Freeman (43) used a tachistoscopic presentation for the task of indicating the 
number of dots exposed on a trial-by-trial basis. The conditions were: first, judging without partners; 
second, judging only after the partner; third and fourth, judging both prior to and following the partner. 
No differences in the frequency of shifting were found for the experimental conditions
-240-
except for the last ten trials of the second, when the confederate's judgments were five standard 
deviations above the mean of the standardizing group: subjects' responses were significantly higher than 
those under commitment conditions. For the fourth condition, most influence was found on the intertrial 
basis when the confederate's report was one standard deviation above that of the critical subject. Although 
subjects did not shift significantly for any one trial, judgments given prior to the confederate steadily 
increased. These results demonstrate the stabilizing influence of personal commitment on a within-
session basis, with the partner's influence exerted in an anticipatory fashion.
Summary. Anonymity and commitment have opposite effects on an individaal's reaction. An individual 
who makes a definite commitment prior to being subjected to pressures resists and maintains his position 

more strongly. The degree of public commitment is positively related to the degree of resistance to 
influence.
INTERACTION WITH OTHER PARTICIPANTS PRIOR TO THE EXPERIMENTAL SERIES
Several studies have evaluated susceptibility as a function of the kind of relationships existing 
between the leader and other members or among the members themselves. Variations in leadership styles 
are  of  two  different  types:  leader  centered  vs.  group-centered  classroom teaching  methods  and  a 
participatory style vs. the supervisory style. Variations in relations among members that have been 
studied are perceived independence on a partner to attain a goal, and perceived success jointly with the 
partner in working toward a goal.
Leader-Centered vs. Group-Centered Interaction. Approximately half the subjects in the study by 
Bovard (22) participated in "leadercentered" classes, i.e., routine lecture and question-answer type 
interaction  and  the  others  in  "group-centered"  classes  with  frequent  interaction  among  members. 
Individual judgments showed significant convergence toward the announced group norm in all groups. 
No differences were observed for judgments made on the first day. Both the dispersion of initial 
judgments and degree of convergence after the announced group norm and during the last week of the 
course were significantly greater for group-centered classes.
Participatory vs. Supervisor Leadership Behavior. Maier and Solem (94) arranged for half the groups 
to have leaders instructed to encourage member participation, and the other half, observers free
-241-
to participate only in member roles. No differences in initial judgments were found. After an eight-minute 
discussion of the Maier Horse Trading Problem, groups with leaders significantly increased their per cent 
of correct answers.
Preston and Heintz (108) had students first give individual rankings of the names of twelve prominent 
men for their desirability as President of the United States; next, a group ranking of the twelve names in 
four- to five-person groups having either participatory or supervisory leaders; and a  final individual 
ranking. Final individual rankings of participatory leaders and followers correlated significantly higher 
with the group rankings. There also was more shifting from initial to final rankings for those working 
under participatory leaders.
Hare (56) replicated the experiment by Preston and Heintz (108), and reports similar findings.
Interdependence among Members. Berkowitz (12) had partners send and decode messages transmitted 
by telegraph keys to each other. Subjects who believed they would gain a prize worked fastest on 
improvement trials; those who believed only their partners would gain a prize worked faster than subjects 
who knew nothing of the prize. Facilitation from perceived dependency on another for attaining a goal 
constitutes a significant influence factor.
Success-Failure. Kidd and Campbell (77) varied reported success of the group on a preliminary 
anagram task. Members who had had prior experience of success with one another conformed to a 

significantly greater degree to the attributed group norm for a later task. Conformity for control subjects 
was similar to that under the failure condition.
Summary. Greater susceptibility occurs when the leader's behavior is intended to increase interaction 
among  members.  This  may  be  because  individual  differences  become  more  evident  and  greater 
possibilities exist for the exertion of pressure. Findings also indicate that greater pressure exists when one 
member recognizes that another member is dependent on his performance for success, and that greater 
susceptibility occurs among members who have shared success.
Cohesion and Valuation of Group Membership
Cohesion is a variable in the group situation. One hypothesis tested is that a subject's behavior is more 
influenced when he has
-242-
evidence that he is liked by others or feels that the group is attractive. Back (4) varied cohesion by the 
experimenter's remarks among like sex pairs. Both subjects wrote a story about three sets of pictures, 
differing primarily in details, and then discussed them with each other. Greater change occurred toward 
features in the partner's story under the high rather than under the low cohesion conditions.
Festinger, Gerard, Hymovitch, Kelley, and Raven (40) report similar findings, as does Berkowitz (13).
Schchater,  Ellertson,  McBride,  and  Gregory  (116)  created  high  and  low  cohesion  among 
undergraduate women subjects in three person groups. During interaction each subject worked alone, but 
communicated with fictitious other persons through a series of notes controlled by an experimenter. 
Positive influence induction consisted of notes encouraging increased production for half of the subjects 
under each condition, and negative influence for the other half. No effect was attributable to cohesion 
under the positive induction condition. Under negative influence, high cohesion subjects significantly 
decreased their productivity; the low cohesion group showed no changes.
In a study of children by Grossner, Polansky, and Lippitt (53), the collaborator was friendly with half 
the subjects and encouraged their working together; with the other half, he acted withdrawn and worked 
separately. The critical subject more frequently chose the same toy as the friendly collaborator.
Gerard (48) used instructions to vary cohesion. High cohesion subjects shifted their opinions toward 
the group recommendation significantly more than those under the low cohesion condition.
In the study by Dittes and Kelley (37), group members were given false ratings of the degree to which 
others present liked them and wished them to remain in the discussion. Those in the very low acceptance 
group, who had the lowest index of private conformity, showed the highest degree of public conformity. 
Those participating under average attraction conditions exhibited the greatest degree of shifting toward 
the group view, indicating a consistency in private conviction and public expression. The finding implies 
that the person of indeterminate or average acceptance is probably least secure and most susceptible.

Jackson and Saltzstein (68) varied both the congeniality dimension and experimentally induced 
acceptance and rejection. The four conditions were: (a) psychological membership, in which the member 
felt highly accepted and the group held high attraction for him; (b) psychological nonmembership, in 
which the person had low
-243-
acceptance and the group was not attractive to him; (c) preference group membership, in which the 
person had low acceptance by the group but high attraction to it; and (d) a marginal group relationship 
characterized by high acceptance and low attraction. Subjects worked in four- or five-man groups under 
two different orientations to the task: a normative condition, competing with other groups, and modal 
conditions, in which they were compared as individuals. Conformity was greater in the normative than in 
the modal situation and in the high attraction than in the low attraction situation. However, conformity for 
the low attraction condition was uniformly higher than had been predicted. The combination of telling 
subjects that their performance was inferior and that they were least accepted apparently led to feelings of 
rejection and anxiety and to higher conformity.
In the study by Kelley and Shapiro (74), the hypothesis that more highly accepted members would 
conform less because the wrong answer would be detrimental to attaining the group goal was  not 
confirmed. The results are consistent with other studies varying the acceptance dimension.
Thibaut and Strickland (127) varied pressure by high, moderate, or low confidence expressed by 
others in the subjects working under either the set to solve the problem or the set to maintain group 
membership. Under group membership orientation, conformity increased as other members, by ballots, 
showed increased confidence in the judgments of subjects. For subjects given a task set, conformity 
decreased  as  pressures  increased.  The  study  demonstrates  the  greater  susceptibility of  individuals 
motivated to maintain group membership.
Each of the studies agrees in showing that subjects in high cohesion groups are more susceptible to 
conformity pressures.
Pressures toward Uniformity
The effect of increasing pressures toward uniformity has been investigated in several studies.
Festinger and Thibaut (41) found a significant increase in shifting as pressure toward uniformity 
increased (see above).
Jones,  Wells,  and  Torrey  (71)  found  that  correct  feedback  was  more  significant  in  increasing 
independence than incorrect feedback in increasing conformity. Differences between partial and total 
reinforcement were not significant. A second study, in which subjects were told they would participate in 
later sessions with the same group members and be evaluated by them, revealed an increased amount of 
conformity.
-244-

Gerard (47) created pressures toward uniformity by indicating that a second discussion of the same 
issue would follow with local politicians participating. A significantly greater change from pre- to 
postdiscussion occurred for the high pressure condition, but only for subjects participating also under 
attributed homogeneity.
Festinger, Gerard, Hymovitch, Kelley, and Raven (40) found that significantly more shifting occurred 
among groups told there was a "correct" answer (see above). Brehm and Festinger (24) tested and 
confirmed the hypothesis that greater pressures toward uniformity occur when the task is described as 
important.
Blake, Mouton, and Olmstead (20) emphasized the importance of accuracy, and implied team penalties 
for mistakes by individuals on a metionome-counting task. Subsequent shifting was greater for the group 
subjected to high pressure. Accuracy requirements reinforced by fear of penalty increase the readiness of 
individuals to shift their opinions. Deutsch and Gerard (35) used a similar design, and obtained parallel 
results.
Summary. Increases in pressures toward uniformity have been shown to be related positively to 
increases in frequency of conformity behavior. Emphasis on rewards for successful performance and the 
importance of accuracy or penalties for mistakes also have been found to be related to susceptibility.
Psychologic and Physiologic Properties of the Person
Personal characteristics of the subject may be psychologic, physiologic, or differing amounts or types 
of prior experience.
Experimentally Created Differential Experience in Subjects
Individual differences have been created experimentally by different amounts of familiarity with the 
task, prior experiences of success or failure, differences in anxiety and insecurity, variations in properties 
of the prior task, and pretraining with reward.
Degree of Familiarity. The assumption tested is that subjects with greater amounts of experience 
should be more able to resist pressure exerted by others.
Goldberg  (49) provided all subjects  with three degrees of  experience. The hypothesis was not 
confirmed (see above).
Harvey and Rutherford (58) found that subjects with fewer pre-
-245-
trials showed significantly greater readiness to shift in response to pressures (see above).

Prior Success or Failure. Several studies have tested the hypothesis that failure results in decreased 
reliance on one's own judgments.
After creating individual, private experiences of success or failure for undergraduate psychology 
students, Mausner (98) arranged interaction for success-success pairs, failure-failure pairs, and success-
failure pairs. Those who had experienced failure showed a significantly greater tendency to shift toward 
the answer given by the partner. In the success-failure pairings, the unsuccessful member shifted toward 
the successful one, but the successful ones did not shift from their prior estimates. In the failure-failure 
pairings, members' responses tended to converge.
Similar results have been reported by Mausner and Bloch (100) and by Blake, Mouton, and Olmstead 
(20) (see above).
Kelman (75) used the autokinetic task to investigate the effects of success and failure. By comparison 
with the control and the ambiguous conditions, shifts toward the confederate were significantly higher for 
the failure group and significantly lower for the success group. Similarly, differences in responses 
between the interaction situation and the postindividual session showed that the successful group shifted 
away from the confederate's report, and the failure group shifted toward it. The data suggest not only that 
failure experience increases susceptibility but that success decreases it.
Keisler (72) found no differences between the success and failure groups in imitation of a model in the 
pressure situation when his behavior was not labeled correct or incorrect. "Successful" subjects who 
perceived a model obtaining chance scores followed him significantly less often than "unsuccessful" 
subjects judging after a successful model.
In the study by Schroeder and Hunt (119), subjects wrote selfevaluations after disapproval by a neutral 
source. Those who gave more self-devaluating responses yielded to a significantly greater degree in the 
pressure situation.
When an individual has a prior alone experience of failure, he is more susceptible to pressures on a 
second task. However, subjects are less susceptible following a group experience of failure than of 
success.
Degree of Anxiety or Insecurity. Sherif and Harvey (124) varied familiarity with the experimental 
setting and with the manner of the experimenter. Subjects judged the autokinetic task initially in
-246-
private; two to seven days later, they judged in pairs. Comparisons were made of ranges and medians of 
judgments for private and pair sessioiis. The greater the uncertainty induced under private conditions, the 
more individuals fluctuated in the ranges and medians of their judgments, with dispersion significantly 
reduced in the pair sessions for those experiencing maximum uncertainty. No differences occurred 
between private and. group judgments for those experiencing lesser degrees of uncertainty. The findings 
are interpreted as indicating that subjects served as "anchors" for one another when field anchorages were 
reduced.

Properties of the Prior Task. Pretraining has been provided on tasks with properties differing from 
those of the tasks used to exert pressures. Luchins (88) used the task of naming the percept in a series of 
twelve drawings. By comparison with a control group, the erroneous response was given more frequently 
by those who had had pretraining with a confederate whose identical response was labeled "correct" in 
the preliminary series and "incorrect" in the second series. When the confederate's preliminary response 
was not supported by features of the drawing, no differences were found between the experimental and 
the control groups for another condition.
Luchins and Luchins (90) varied the responses of the confederate to the preliminary series of pictures. 
Half the subjects judged pictures of clearly delineated objects, and the other half an ambiguous set of 
lines. Conformity was higher when the preliminary series was ambigaous and when the confederate's 
responses to the preliminary series were congruent with those of a control group judging privately.
Reward Pretraining. In some studies, independence has been rewarded, whereas in others conformity 
to a false group position has been reinforced. In the study by Luchins and Luchins (90) just reviewed, the 
experimenter called the naive subject's responses "right" when they agreed with those of the confederate. 
Subjects showed greater susceptibility on a subsequent test series. Feedback has a stabilizing effect even 
when the information is incorrect. Comparable conditions in another study by Luchins (87) produced 
similar results (see above).
Crutchfield (34) reports that conformity increased on a task involving perceptual judgments when the 
experimenter called the erroneous reports of others "right," but that subsequent responses to attitude 
statements by the same subjects were not influenced.
Conformity effects following pretraining with reward for erroneous responses appear to be related to 
the content of the tasks.
-247-
McQueen's (93) study involving the return of examination papers with correct and incorrect scores 
revealed that deceptions decreased significantly under the two pressure conditions.
Scott (120) found that college debaters who were rewarded showed a significantly greater average 
change in the direction of their positions. Differences between losers and control subjects were not 
significant.
SUMMARY
A prior individual experience of failure on the task that later is subjected to conformity pressures 
consistently has been found to render an individual less resistant. A direct correlation has been reported 
between the degree of experimentally produced anxiety experienced prior to the pressure situation and 
susceptibility, with those experiencing the greatest degree of anxiety being least resistant. Properties of a 
prior task on which a confederate gave a false response have been found to be related to the degree of 
susceptibility to pressures exerted by the same confederate in a later, different task. Pretraining with 
reward for incorrect responses also has been shown to render a person more susceptible.

Differential Historical Experience in Subjects
Different childhood experiences, as revealed biographically or through questionnaires and projective 
measures, and their effects have been investigated.
Childhood Experience. Conformity tendencies have been related by Mussen and Kagan (105) to 
perceptions of parents as shown in fantasy. Male college students wrote responses to eight TAT cards on 
an individual basis. Then they participated in judging lengths of lines as the fourth person in a group of 
five. TAT stories were scored for presence or absence of parental punishment themes. A significantly 
greater per cent of extreme conformists perceived parents as harsh, punitive, restrictive, and rejecting.
Krebs (80) tested the hypothesis that the later the age of independence training during childhood, the 
greater the resistance to opinion change. Male college students were classified as either early or late in 
independence training, according to Winterbottom's questionnaire. Greatest conformity occurred for 
individuals classified as late in independence training.
McQueen's (93) investigation of deception in an examination situ-
-248-
ation found that students classified in the dominant life style according to McGuire's Index of Value 
Orientation reported significantly more errors (see above).
Physiologic Characteristics and States of the Person
Age and sex of the subjects, differences in amount of sleep deprivation, strength of food preferences, 
and degree of anxiety have been related to susceptibility.
Sex. Burtt (25) asked college women and men in groups of four to twenty-six persons to judge the 
truthfulness of a person recounting an intaginary crime, once prior to and once after the discussion. 
Analysis of the data revealed only small and insignificant differences between men and women in degree 
of shifting as a function of discussion, with a tendency for women to shift more than men. Jenneis (70) 
reported similar results (see above).
Crutchfield (34) has summarized unpublished results by other investigators who have tested women 
on the same battery of items that he has employed with men. By contrast with college men, responses by 
college women showed a significantly higher degree of conformity, and that, by comparison with adult 
men, a sample of college women alumnae in their early forties showed significantly lower conformity 
scores. The highly selected composition of the alumnae group means that the findings cannot be easily 
interpreted as indicating that older women are less compelled to conformity than men.
Kirkpatrick (79) has compared frequency of shifting by men and by women toward responses given by 
the opposite sex. The BeliefPattern Scale of attitudes toward feminism was administered individually to 
college students, then to one man and one woman as a committee, and again individually. Although 

women changed their positions less than men in the group situation, they were less inclined to revert to 
their original position.
The finding by Coleman, Blake, and Mouton (31) (see foregoing), indicating differential susceptibility 
of men and women as a function of the material being judged, makes it mandatory that the nature of the 
task be considered in future work.
Age. Differences in susceptibility have been related to age. Duncker (38) has reported that children 
under two and two-thirds years of age did not respond to food preferences expressed by others, thus 
demonstrating a lack of susceptibility for the task employed.
-249-
Berenda (11) found that children aged seven to ten gave erroneous responses as a function of the 
incorrect reports by others with significantly greater frequency than children ten to thirteen years old (see 
preceding).
Luchins (89) used ten- to thirteen-year-old children as subjects in one series and male college students 
in another series. Attempts to increase conformity as a function of the assistant's erroneous reports were 
more successful with children.
Physiologic States of the Person. Fisher and Rubinstein (42) found that subjects who had been awake 
continuously for 48 to 52 hr showed significantly greater changes in autokinetic judgments, both between 
trials and within trials, than control subjects.
Kimbrell and Blake (78) experimentally created two degrees of inducement to thirst: strong and 
moderate. Subjects then were asked to wait for the remainder of the experiment near a drinking fountain 
with a sign forbidding its use. Under conditions of moderate thirst, the naive subject was significantly 
influenced by the confederate who violated the sign. No differences were found for the strong thirst 
condition.
Four- to six-year-old kindergarten children were placed by Marinho (95) in two groups, one showing a 
preference for one of two kinds of fruit paste, and the other, with indefinite preferences. Half of each 
group served as control and half as experimental subjects. Susceptibility to a confederate's selection was 
found in both groups, although predominant preferences were more difficult to shift.
Lawson and Stagner (82) tested the hypothesis that attitude change during group discussion is 
accompanied by increases in anxiety, and that amount of change is proportional to the amount of anxiety. 
Male undergraduate college students were preselected by attitude scales to represent extreme positions 
toward nationalism or internationalism. Anxiety was measured by palmar sweat both before and after 
each subject participated in the pressure situation. Two naive subjects interacted with an instructed 
majority who took the opposite point of view. Attitude shifts were found to be accompanied by decreases 
in palmar sweat, particularly for those initially holding nationalistic opinions.
Hoffman (64) used selected items from the F-scale to differentiate students with high and low inner 
conformity needs. In the pressure situation, GSR readings were taken as each subject responded orally to 

social attitude items after hearing erroneous group norms that alternately agreed or disagreed with 
responses subjects had given six
-250-
weeks earlier. Unexpectedly, both groups shifted significantly toward the false norms, with conformity 
producing less anxiety than resistance, although the differences were significant for high conformity 
subjects only.
SUMMARY
The findings regarding sex are inconclusive, with minor evidence that men may be more resistant. to 
social pressures than women. A consistent finding is that younger people are more responsive to social 
pressures than older individuals. Loss of sleep appears to render a person more susceptible. Definite food 
preferences  render  the  individual  more  resistant  to  change.  Two  studies  report  that  shifting  is 
accompanied by a decreased amount of anxiety.
Psychologic Properties of the Person
Psychologic dimensions investigated have included ascendancysubmission; lack of nervous tension 
and self-confidence; authoritarianism; dimensions described by the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory; the Rorschach Test; the Thematic Apperception Test; intelligence; complexity-simplicity; 
originality; dependence on the perceptual field; pathologic tendencies of the person; and characteristics 
assessed by self-ratings and self-descriptive check lists.
Ascendancy-Submission. Several different personality measures have been employed to assess the 
effects of individual differences in ascendancy-submission. Helson, Blake, Mouton, and Olmstead (63) 
used the Allport-Allport  A-S Reaction Study to classify subjects and then had them judge eighteen 
statements from the Thurstone Militarism Scale. Submissive people were more influenced to shift their 
responses (see foregoing). Mouton, Blake, and Olmstead (103) also employed the A-S Reaction Study as a 
measure of ascendancysubmission. Under name disclosure conditions only, submissive subjects were 
found to conform more often as a function of the erroneous reports; of others (see preceding).
Beloff (10) also used the  A-S Reaction Study. Both male and female subjects responded to the 
Thurstone-Chave War Scale initially in private and later as the fifth person in the simulated group 
situation. Others, gave strongly agreeing, neutral, and strongly disagreeing responses, in random order 
and balanced, to the anti-, pro-, and neutral attitudes toward war statements. He found a negative rela-
-251-
tionship for men only between ascendancy and conformity. For women, a positive relationship was 
observed, with more submissive women conforming less than those in the ascendant. Beloff provides no 
basis for interpreting the divergent results.

Kelman (75) classified subjects on the ascendancy scale from the Guilford-Martin Inventory of 
Factors GAMIN. Subjects low in ascendancy, who had participated under the failure, ambiguous, or 
control conditions, were found to be more susceptible to influences. Under the success condition, 
increased susceptibility was found for those higher in ascendancy.
The ascendancy scale of the Guilford-Martin Inventory of Factors GAMIN also was used by Bray (23) 
to classify subjects who later responded to the autokinetic task. For the anti-Semitic subgroup judging 
with a Jewish confederate, higher ascendancy subjects were more susceptible; no relationship was found 
for the subgroup classified as not anti-Semitic judging under the same conditions. For the subgroup 
classified as not anti-Semitic judging with a Gentile confederate, high ascendancy correlated significantly 
with shifting, with no difference found for the anti-Semitic subjects under the same conditions. Low 
ascendancy was correlated with increased susceptibility for the subgroup classified as not anti-Negro that 
judged after a Negro confederate. These complicated relationships do not fit a systematic pattern.
Ascendancy-submission has been measured by teachers' ratings in studies by Berenda (11) and 
Jenness (70). Neither independencesubmission nor ascendancy-submission was found to be related to 
susceptibility (see above).
The evidence indicates that a basic association exists between these two sets of variables in the 
direction of greater susceptibility as a function of greater submissiveness. The relationship has been 
confirmed for male subjects only, with an inversion of relationship reported for women in one study.
Lack of Nervous Tension and Self-confidence. Kelman (75) and Bray (23) related two additional scales 
— I, self-confidence and N, lack of nervous tension — from the Guilford-Martin Inventory of Factors 
GAMIN to susceptibility. Kelman found that subjects scoring either low in self-confidence or showing 
lack of nervous tension had significantly higher suggestibility scores except under conditions of prior 
success. Bray reports the same findings for lack of nervous tension. However, when the total sample was 
subdivided for prejudice on the Levinson-Sanford Scale of Attitude toward Jews or the Likert Scale
-252-
of Attitude toward the Negro, most of the correlation was contributed by the prejudiced subgroups only.
As measured by the Maudsley Personality Inventory, Beloff (10) found conformity to be positively 
related to neuroticism for men negatively related for women (see preceding).
Autlioritarianism. Susceptibility was related by Wells, Weinert, and Rubel (128) to scores on the 
Gough version of the F-scale. The students who gave incorrect answers under influence had significantly 
higher mean scores on the F-scale, indicating a tendency to more susceptibility by higher authoritarian 
scores. Crutchfield (34) reports a significant correlation of +.39 between higher scores on the F-scale and 
more yielding to others on a twenty-one item test. For the same subjects, the correlation between yielding 
and staff observer ratings of authoritarianism in a psychodramatic situation was found to be +.35. Beloff 
(10) reports a positive relationship between authoritarianism on the F-scale and susceptibility for both 
men and women. Hardy (54) found no relationship between F-scale scores and public and private 
conformity.

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory. Goldberg, Hunt, Cohen and Meadow (50) used the Asch 
line judging problems to obtain groups of undergraduate students showing differences in susceptibility. 
The male high conforming group was found to make lower scores on the masculinity-femininity (more 
feminine), the hypochondriacal, and psychasthenic scales of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory, and to make lower anxiety scores on the Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale. The female: high 
conformity group rated significantly higher on the psychasthenic scale of the MMPI and the Taylor Scale. 
The divergent findings for men and women were not interpreted.
Crutchfield (33) used the Group Squares Test to identify three groups of male subjects differing from 
one another in degrees of readiness to yield under influence. Those least responsive to pressures were 
found to be low in introspectiveness and more masculine, as measured by the MMPI. Using the Asch line 
judging problems, Barron (6) selected extreme groups in independence and yielding. He found no 
significant differences between groups on the MMPI scales nor did Crutchfield (34) using a different 
task.
It is difficult to identify basic relationships between MMPI measures and susceptibility. A probable 
relationship is that men low on MMPI masculinity are more susceptible.
-253-
Intelligence. Neither Berenda (11) nor Jenness (70) found significant correlations between intelligence 
measures and susceptibility (see above). Fisher, Williams, and Lubin (44) report no relationship, but the 
measures used were not explained. Other investigators have shown a significant inverse relationship 
between intelligence and conformity. Crutchfield (34) found correlations of -.51 with the Terman Concept 
Mastery Test and -.63 with staff ratings between intelligence and frequency of yielding (see above).
The relationship between intelligence and responsiveness to pressures has been found in two studies 
by Crutchfield to be curvilinear. One (32) employed the Group Squares Test, and the other (33), the 
"Bingo" task. Those scoring in the intermediate range of responsiveness scored highest on intelligence 
measures, including the Terman Concept Mastery Test and the Idea Classification Test in the first study 
and an undefined measure in the second study.
Nakamura (106) investigated the possibility that conformity as a nonintellectual variable contributes to 
variability in problem-solving ability. Intelligence as measured by Part II, Analogies, of Form B of the 
Concept Mastery Test was held constant by statistical means. For men, there was a significant negative 
correlation between tendency to conform and performance on all problems combined, but especially on 
the  restructuring  problems.  The  negative  correlation  for  men  above  twenty-one  years  only  was 
considerably higher. For younger men, results were consistent with those for women. A significant sex 
difference was found, with men superior in problem-solving and intelligence, but lower on conformity.
Studies  of  the  relationship  between  intelligence  and  susceptibility  are  not  entirely  clear;  if  a 
relationship does exist, it probably is inverse and curvilinear.
Complexity-Simplicity. Barron  (7)  categorized  two  extreme  groups  of  subjects  as  yielders  and 
independents.  Using  the  Barron-Welsh  Art  Scale  to  measure  complexity-simplicity,  he  found  that 

independents made significantly higher complexity scores. Crutchfield (32) found that those who yielded 
in the intermediate range showed less preference for symmetry on the Welsh Figure Preference Test.
Originality. From a sample of USAF captains, Barron (8) selected the extreme groups on eight 
measures of originality, including scores from the Rorschach Test, the Thematic Apperception Test, 
anagrams, and plot titles. Susceptibility scores were obtained on a twenty-one item test. Significant 
differences between groups were found, with those classified as original yielding less. Crutchfield (32) 
found that
-254-
students responding to the Group Squares Test in the intermediate range were rated by instructors as 
highest on originality.
Dependence on the Perceptual Field. Linton (86) measured dependence on the perceptual field by 
subtasks and a composite score on the Tilting Room, Tilting Chair, and Embedded Figures tasks. Other 
measures included the degree of attitude change after reading an article contrary to own opinion and the 
influence of personal attitudes on a syllogisms test. Subjects were divided into two groups according to 
the extent of change toward the judgments of a male confederate who responded five inches above the 
subject's pregroup norm on the autokinetic task. The conformity measure for the autokinetic situation 
correlated significantly with the composite score for the degree of dependence on the perceptual field. No 
significant correlations were found between social influence and performance on the syllogisms and 
attitude task. The Embedded Figures Test also was administered to high and low yielders in a study by 
Rosner (114). Yielders failed to locate the test pattern in the complex figures significanitly more often 
than nonyielders.
Compliance with Requests. Wiener, Carpenter, and Carpenter (132, 133) classified undergraduate 
psychology students by three degrees of their compliance with a request to return some experimental 
materials. The mean conformity score was significantly higher for the group that completed and returned 
the material. Helson, Blake, and Mouton (62) report comparable results.
Projective Materials. Hoffman (65) composed extreme groups of those who shifted most and least 
toward false group norms reported for two) tasks. High conformers were found to score significantly 
lower on all Thematic Apperception Test measures of ego strength, and higher on measures of parental 
dominance, aggression directed toward self, success striving, overconcern for parents, and readiness to 
submit to authority.
Linton (85) using the Rorschach Test found significant correlations between high conformity and low 
W, high P, flexor M, high Hd, high F%, high M; Sum C, high Sum C, and animal responses consisting 
mostly of insects, sea life, birds or bats, in contrast to a preponderance of dogs, rabbits, elephants, or 
bears. The picture of the high conformity person is one of high constriction.
Needs. A cluster of studies have investigated relationships between conformity and strength of various 
needs or drives, as measured by

-255-
personality tests, including affiliation, dependency, approval, and achievement.
In the study by Jacubczak and Walters (69), child subjects, half classified as high-dependent and half 
as low-dependent, were subjected to pressures, once from a peer and once from an adult. Differences 
were small and not statistically significant.
Hoffman (64) found that subjects with high conformity needs tended to conform when faced with 
divergent norms, and showed less anxiety when they did so (see above).
Hardy (54) determined the degree of affiliation motivation by subject's responses to TAT type pictures 
prior to the discussion task. In the no-support condition, the high- and medium-need affiliation groups 
were more conforming than the low group. In the partner condition, the medium and low groups 
conformed more than the high group (see above). Samelson (115) reports in an abstract that he failed to 
find a relationship between need affiliation and conformity on a discrimination task.
Moeller and Applezweig (102) placed women college students into groups representing combinations 
of high and low social and selfapproval needs, as measured by a sentence completion form of The 
Behavior Interpretation Inventory. Consistent with findings from Hoffman's (64) study of need affiliation 
and from the achievement studies, summarized next, subjects high in social approval needs and low in 
need for self-approval significantly and consistently yielded to the erroneous reports by others. No 
differences were found for persons scoring high in self-approval needs and low in social approval needs, 
or  for  those  scoring  high  on  both  measures.  Qualitative  data  from  postexperimental  interviews 
substantiate the findings.
Krebs (80) validated the hypothesis that the greater the achievement need of a person, the more 
resistant he is to opinion change.
Samelson (115) provided information that might allow the individual to account for the discrepancy 
between physical and social reality. Subjects identified simple visual stimuli presented tachistoscopically. 
Personality data available included measures of need achievement and affiliation based on McClelland's 
scoring of TAT responses, a measure of sensitivity to social stimuli and approach, and a measure of 
anxiety, both drawn from items on the Cattell 16 PF. Significantly less conformity was found under the 
reduced  conflict  situation  when  prior  failure  by  the  others  provided  the  naive  subject  with  an 
"explanation" for the social discrepancy. No relationships between conformity and need affiliation or 
anxiety were found. In the usual full conflict situation, both need achievement and social
-256-
approach were negatively but not significantly correlated with conformity, whereas under the reduced 
conflict condition the correlation was positive and significant.
Since only one or two studies have employed the same measures of strength of needs, the conclusions 
drawn can only be regarded as tentative ones.

Rating and Check List Procedures. Barron (6) selected extreme groups in susceptibility. In self-ratings 
on the Gough Adjective Check List, subjects low in conformity perceived themselves as possessing 
intellectual and cognitive originality, open-mindedness, a high degree of personal involvement, emotional 
reactivity,  and  lack  of  social  ease  or  absence  of  social  virtues;  yielders  perceived  themselves  as 
possessing ease and facility in interpersonal relations, personal effectiveness, playfulness in achieving 
goals, and personal stability and health. On the eighty-four descriptive item check list, independents 
placed significantly higher values on creativity, close interpersonal relations, and the importance of the 
individual  as  opposed  to  the  group.  Yielders  saw  themselves  as  practical-minded,  physicalistic  in 
thinking, and group-oriented.
Self-descriptive  questionnaire  and  personality  inventories,  used  by  Crutchfield  (34)  to  contrast 
extreme  groups,  characterized  the  independent  person  as  one  who  is  adventurous,  self-assertive, 
possessed of self-respect, and free from compulsion about rules. Conforming persons were seen as rigid, 
externally sanctioned, inconsistent, anxious, and possessing moralistic attitudes and conventionality of 
values.  High  conformers  described  their  parents  in  rigidly  idealistic  terms;  as  parenc.,  they  saw 
themselves as restricting children, whereas independent subjects saw themselves as permissive parents.
In another study by Crutchfield (33), staff ratings on an adjective check list described those subjects 
most responsive to social influence as fluid, impulsive, tense, and disturbed; those least responsive as 
rigid, calm, conventional, and practical; those intermediate in responsiveness as moderate, conventional, 
careful, stable, quiet, intelligent, and serious. On self-ratings, those who were most responsive agreed 
with the staff assessment; those least responsive tended to overrate themselves; whereas those who were 
intermediately responsive underrated themselves. Crutchfield (32) also reports significant relationships 
between  responsiveness  and  such  variables  as  impulsiveness,  dominance,  flexibility,  spontaneity, 
femininity, and independence of judgmemt, as well as differences between groups in self-perception 
based on results from adjective check lists.
-257-
Responses of students to Fiedler's inventory of assumed similarity (AS) have been used to characterize 
subjects' tendencies toward acceptance or rejection of the poor performance of co-workers, with a high 
score indicating tendencies toward rejection. Nonconformers had larger AS scores than conformers.
Pathological Trends in Personality. In a study utilizing "normal" subjects, Cervin (27) selected as 
subjects high and low scorers on several pencil and paper tests of emotional stability. Highly unstable 
subjects were found to be significantly more likely to change their opinions under opposition.
Levine, Laffal, Berkowitz, Lindemann, and Drevdahl (84) contrasted the variability in individual 
scores on the autokinetic task for patients in a Veterans Administration hospital. The psychiatric group 
was found to be more variable in perceptual judgments and to show less convergence toward group 
norms than the "control" group. Didato (36) obtained similar results for schizophrenic compared with 
normal subjects. Degree of regression in chronic schizophrenia has been reported by Spohn (125) to be 
related to the tendency to modify judgments in accordance with group norms, with those patients rated as 
moderately regressed showing more conformity in perceptual judgments than those rated as markedly 
regressed.

Personal Consistency. Blake, Helson, and Mouton (18) investigated the generality issue for responses 
to various tasks under simulated group conditions. Generality of susceptibility was demonstrated by 
individual consistency for all tasks. The split-half reliability for a composite conformity score of +.93 
also is interpreted as supporting the conclusion that the conformity response is general. Helson, Blake, 
Mouton, and Olmstead (63) demonstrated that individuals shifting their judgments on a larger number of 
attitude items moved closer to the contradictory opinions of others than those who shifted less frequently. 
Crutchfield (34) found the split-half reliability of individual conformity scores for a twenty-one item test 
to be +.90.
Rosner's (114) study revealed a high degree of consistency in conformity for all tasks and for two 
different administrations of one task.
Luchins (90) has reported a significant rank order correlation between degree of agreement with 
responses given by an assistant both in the preliminary and in the experimental series (see preceding).
Asch (3) investigated intraseries consistency in individual performance. Both subjects who conformed 
and those who resisted initially tended to maintain their behavior throughout a series of trials. Tripling the 
length of the series did not alter results.
-258-
Summary. Results suggest that those who are more susceptible to conformity pressures are more likely 
to be submissive, low in selfconfidence, less intelligent, less original, show less nervous tension, score 
higher on authoritarian scales, score on the simplicity end of the dimension of the complexity-simplicity 
scale, show greater dependence on the perceptual field, and comply with requests more frequently. 
Several investigations reveal that conformity tendencies are geiteral across several tasks.
Combinations of Variables
Significant interactions between factors were found in some studies, and pooling effects were obtained 
by simultaneous variations in others.
Variations in Stimulus and Background Dimensions
A strong request complied with by another person has been found by Blake, Mouton, and Hain (19) to 
produce the highest frequency for signing a petition (see above). Highest frequency of volunteering has 
been obtained by Rosenbaum (112) (see above). Freed, Chandler, Mouton, and Blake (45) found that the 
largest and smallest number of violations respectively occurred when subjects saw an assistant (a) violate 
a "weak" sign forbidding entry and (b) conform to a strong" sign (see preceding).
Blake, Helson, and Mouton (18) have varied difficulty of arithmetic items in combination with degree 
of discrepancy between correct answers and erroneous reports by background subjects. They report 

greatest shifting for more difficult items when the erroneous reports were only slightly divergent from the 
correct answers and the converse (see above).
Uncertainty of judgment (or difficulty) also has been varied by Deutsch and Gerard (35). Subjects 
were found to be most susceptible when responses were given from memory, and when group members 
were told that the group would be rewarded for accuracy with a prize. Differences between manners of 
presentation were not found when subjects wrote their responses prior to hearing the reports of others (see 
above).
Weiner  (132)  reported  positive  relationships  among  stimulus  ambiguity,  degree  of  certainty  of 
judgment, discrepancy from the norm, and conformity (see above).
-259-
Cole (30) found that subjects shifted away and toward the confederate's judgments respectively when 
he was alternately represented as highly intelligent and as an "expert" (see above).
Variations in Stimulus Dimensions and Sex
Coleman,  Blake,  and  Mouton  (31)  have  demonstrated  a  significant  relationship  between  task 
difficulty, susceptibility, and sex of subject. Men and women college students responded to information 
items after hearing the reports of two other men or women in the simulated group situation. Difficulty 
level was varied by precalibration on a comparable sample. Responses were analyzed separately, since 
difficulty level was varied by sex. Conformity was found to be positively and significantly related to 
difficulty of item for both men and women.
Variations in Background Dimensions
Schachter, Ellertson, McBride, and Gregory (116) found that pressures from other group members to 
increase production were equally effective for both high and low cohesion groups, and influences to 
decrease production successful only for the high cohesion groups (see above).
Gerard (47) found that the higher the attractiveness of the reference group and the greater the initial 
agreement, the smaller the amount of shifting under exposure to influences (see above). Dittes and Kelley 
(37) have investigated changes in public and private opinion by group members varying in feelings of 
acceptance. Those told that they were about average in acceptance showed higher conformity in both 
public and private expressions.
Jackson and Saltzstein's (68) results support the hypothesis concerning the behavior of highly accepted 
persons: conformity was greater in the normative than in the modal situation, and greater for the high 
attraction than for the low attraction group situation (see above).

Interaction between degree of discrepancy, characteristics of others in the situation, and extent of 
attitude change has been found when the task involves ratings of the subject by himself and by both 
himself and others. Harvey, Kelley, and Shapiro (57) found that changes in an unfavorable direction on 
self ratings were greatest for acquaintances who evaluated the subject most unfavorably (see above).
Jones, Wells, and Torrey (71) found that where individual accuracy was stressed, correct feedback was 
more significant in increasing inde-
-260-
pendence than incorrect feedback in increasing conformity (see above).
The  interaction  between  degree  of  confidence  expressed  by others  in  the  situation  and  group 
membership or task-solving orientation has been shown by Thibaut and Strickland (127) to influence 
conformity behavior. Under group mentbership set, conformity increased as confidence shown by other 
members increased. For a task set, conformity decreased as pressures increaied (see above).
Deutsch and Gerard (35) found that commitment to a judgment prior to hearing the responses of others 
reduced the degree of shifting and tended to eliminate differences between responding under anonymous 
conditions and face-to-face conditions (see above).
Festinger  and  Thibaut  (41)  and  Gerard  (47)  have  reported  similar  findings  for  the  relation  of 
homogeneity among persons composing the group and readiness to shift opinions (see above).
In Hare's (55) study of shifting related to group size, leaders were classified as good, average, or poor 
on the basis of TAT responses. He found that leader skill was correlated positively with amount of change 
for large groups only.
Variations in Background Dimensions and Personal Characteristics
Mouton, Blake, and Olmstead (103) report that submissive subjects only were found to differ in 
susceptibility as a function of whether they participated under personal identity or anonymity conditions 
(see above).
Hardy (54) found that high and medium affiliation groups were more conforming in the no-support 
condition, and the medium and low groups more so in the partner condition (see above).
Bray (23) has reported that the degree and direction of the relationship between conformity and 
personality characteristics varied for attitude subgroup and the ethnic characteristic of the confederate 
(see above).
Samelson (115) found that, in the usual full conflict situation, both need achievement and social 
approach were negatively but not significantly correlated with conformity, whereas under the reduced 
conflict condition, the correlation was positive and significant (see above).

Blake, Mouton, and Olmstead (20) found greatest shifting for subjects who had an initial experience 
of' failure and who participated under conditions of high pressures toward uniformity (see above).
A factorial design was used by Mausner and Bloch (100) to study the additivity of variables. All 
variables-prior success or failure, prestige of partrier, and prior cooperative experience-separately affected 
to a
-261-
significant degree the extent of convergence of the students to a partner's prearranged judgments. With 
the exception of the group in which both of the other factors opposed social influence, one effect of prior 
cooperative experience was to decrease the variability of response among subjects. Where all forces 
worked in the same direction, greatest consistency of response was found. Significantly higher variance 
was found for the conflict groups, so that the reaction of the individual in this type of situation is not 
predictable. The authors suggest that personality measures are needed to tap this source of variance.
Harvey and Rutherford (58) found that subjects with a fewer number of pretrials showed more 
readiness to shift in response to pressures applied in an absolute approach than to gradually increasing 
divergence pressure (see above).
Millon and Simkins (101) subjected high and low scorers on the California F-scale to influence from 
either a prestige or a nonprestige partner. More susceptibility to the prestige partner was demonstrated by 
subjects high on the authoritarian scale.
Kimbrell and Blake (78) have shown that behavior in a prohibition situation is determined partly by 
properties of individual drive strength and partly by social properties in the situation (see above).
Variations in Personal Characteristics
Kelman (75) found that subjects scoring either low in self-confidence or showing lack of nervous 
tension had significantly higher suggestibility scores for all conditions except those of prior success (see 
above).
Lawson and Stagner (82) found that attitude shifts during discussion were accompanied by decreasing 
palmar sweat (see above).
Beloff (10) found that there was a negative relationship between ascendance and conformity for men, 
with ascendant men remaining more independent, and a positive one for women, with ascendant women 
conforming more. Conformity was positively related to neuroticism for men, but opposite results were 
reported for women (see above).
Factors Associated with Conversion Behavior

Conversion may be identified by the effects remaining after the conformity pressures have been 
removed. A research design permitting assessment of the degree of conversion includes measurement first 
of individual performance under private conditions; next, the
-262-
shifting of responses under pressure conditions; and at some later time the subject's behavior under 
private, post-pressure conditions. Conversion is evident when performance in the post-pressure situation 
differs from that in the pre-pressure situation in the direction of the divergent reports others gave in the 
conformity situation.
The phenomenon of conversion has received far less attention in researcll studies than susceptibility. 
The result is that at best only an imperfect picture can be drawn of psychological factors associated with 
conversion. Additional limitations in assessing the dynamics of conversion result from the failure of 
many experimental studies to employ sound designs. Nevertheless, because of its importance, it seems 
useful to evaluate the present state of understanding of conversion behavior.
Severl investigators have reported effects of prior group influence on later alone judgments of 
perceptual tasks. In Sherif's study (121), male college students judged one hundred trials in four sessions, 
each held one day apart. The first three sessions were composed of groups of two or three members each, 
and the fourth of individuals judging by themselves. Initially, different individual judgments converged 
toward a common norm in the group situations, and the group norm persisted into individual sessions. 
Sherif (122) has reported similar results for prearranged responses given by an assistant. For the majority 
of the subjects in the alone postgroup session, greater convergence was found toward the responses 
reported by others. Schonbar (118) obtained comparable results. Judgments of length of lines and of a 
moving slot of light were made individually after a series of judgments had been given in the presence of 
another person. The influence of the subjects' reactions persisted into the postgroup, private situation. She 
has also reported the important finding that the longer the individual resists modifying his judgments, the 
longer the persistence of the influence in the later private situation.
The autokinetic situation was used by Bovard (21), with the degree of conformity determined by shifts 
in standard deviations among pregroup, group, and postgroup judgment series. Rank order coefficients 
showed significant correlations for the sizes of the standard deviations among the three situations. 
Subjects  were  ranked  in order for  degree  of  susceptibility to  change  in  the  group  situation. The 
susceptibility to conversion — the extent to which changes persisted for twerity-eight days into the post-
pressure situation-is represented by a rank order correlation of.92. Subjects who showed larger shifts in 
their mean judgments also showed a greater tendency to retain the shift over the twenty-eight-day period.
-263-
Rohrer, Barron, Hoffman, and Swander (111), trained ROTC students under alone conditions to make 
judgments for points of light traversing distances of two inches for one-half and eight inches for the other 
half of the subjects. They then had subjects judge in pairs. The mean distance judged under the interaction 
conditions  was  six  inches.  Significant  consistency  was  obtained  between  estimates  given  under 
interaction conditions and those given under private conditions one year later. Similarities between 
performances after initial training and the private situation were small, indicating that when the rank 

order in the postgroup serves as the criterion, pretraining influences are negligible by comparison with 
effects produced within the interaction situation.
Schachter  and  Hall  (117)  used  the  frequency  with  which  subjects  "followed  through"  on  a 
volunteering commitment. Subjects who volunteered independently (without knowledge of the responses 
of others) showed the highest relative frequency of carrying out the promised action.
Marinho (95) studied the persistence of experimentally shifted food preferences in four- to six-year-
old children. In a private test situation one year later, the aftereffect of the social influence situations 
persisted in all those children originally having indefinite taste. Importance attaches to this study since it 
suggests that those most susceptible to conversion effects are the ones least committed  before group 
pressures are exerted (see previous sections).
Duncker  (38)  investigated  carryover  effects  on  food  preferences,  and  found  that  when  the 
experimental situation was repeated two or three times a week for an unstated period, significant effects 
were shown to persist, indicating the adoption of new preferences under repetitive social reinforcement.
Gerard (48) studied conversion effects in groups of three members, which differed both in degree of 
cohesion and in the extent of initial disagreement on the solution of a labor-management case. One week 
after participating in a fifteen-minute discussion, subjects made individual judgments that were recorded 
on a seven-point scale, both before and after discussion in a two-person situation with a confederate. For 
persons  initially  interacting  under  high  cohesion  conditions,  individual  judgments  given  prior  to 
discussion with the confederate showed significaritty greater convergence toward the original group 
position. High cohesion members also showed more resistance to shifting toward a different position 
under  the  social  influence  condition  than  did  subjects  participating  initially  under  low  cohesion 
conditions. Similar results were found relating degree of initial agreement among members to resistance: 
the finding is that the greater the
-264-
initial agreement among members, the lesser the susceptibility in a second pressure situation.
Several studies have reported results that relate degree of conversion behavior to variations in 
background factors or to personality characteristics of the subjects.
Hardy (54) studied differences in the amount of conformity pressure  exerted by unanimous as 
contrasted with near-unanimous opposition in a discussion  situation. Conversion was increased by 
unanimity of opposition in the pressure situation (see previous sections).
Willingness to volunteer bas been studied by Bennett (9) to determine the effect of perceived 
unanimity. One-third of the groups of college subjects participated under discussion conditions, one-third 
under lecture conditions, and one-third as control groups. The measure for the degree of influence exerted 
was the number of positive responses by subjects to subsequent mail requests for volunteers. The factor 
of perceived group unanimity in the decision to volunteer was found to be significantly related to the 
carrying out of the specified action.

McKcachie (92) measured shifting of opinions among students in six sections, three of which were 
taught by leader-centered methods and the other three by group-centered methods. After one month, 
classes were given hypothetical problems concerning either Negroes, criminals or children, with class 
members asked to arrive at a unanimous decision. One week later, the attitude scales used at the 
beginning of the experiment were readministered. Leader-centered as contrasted with group-centered 
classes showed more convergence. These findings are opposite those reported by Bovard (22) (see 
above).
Hoffman  (64)  measured  Conversion  effects  by readministering  a  scale  of  social  attitude  items 
individually two weeks after the pressure situation. The conversion score consisted of the proportion of 
all conforming responses that persisted for the two-week period. Persons classified as low in conformity 
needs had significantly higher conversion scores than those classified as high in conformity needs (see 
above).
Results are generally consistent in showing that responses altered by social pressure persist into the 
future as conversion phenomena. The degree of conversion is limited, however, by the intensity of one's 
initial preference, with the general rule being that the more indefinite one's position, the greater the 
impact of a later social situation and the greater the carryover effect into the future. Suggestive is the 
finding that the longer one resists altering his position under pressure conditions, the longer he retains the 
altered position in the postpressure situation.
-265-
Although increased susceptibility has been shown to be related to higher inner conformity needs of 
subjects, one experiment suggests that those lower in inner conformity needs may be more likely to show 
increased conversion effects at a later time. Persons exposed to unanimous divergent responses of others 
are more likely to demonstrate conversion behavior. If the interaction is leader-centered rather than 
group-centered, then greater conversion may be expected at a future time.
Implications for Interrogation
The implications for interrogation of research on conformity can be evaluated by describing known 
key factors that are likely to produce maximum suggestibility for any given individual. If the goal is to 
aid an individual to resist interrogation pressures, then opposite conditions must be created.
Conformity and Resistance
Task
Individuals appear to be more susceptible to conformity pressures when expressing social opinions, 
ideological attitudes, and abstractions that are not rooted in concrete experience than when they are 
dealing with factual materials, with which they are well acquainted, or with personal preferences. 

Regardless of the materials, increases in susceptibility appear when an individual is uncertain of his 
beliefs, uninformed regarding the facts of the situation, or when objective cues that could aid him in 
maintaining his orientation to the situation are reduced or eliminated. Available experimental evidence 
demonstrates the key importance for conformity of inadequate individual knowledge and understanding. 
An important inference is that resistance to conformity or to interrogation pressures can be heightened by 
insuring that an individual is well informed of necessary facts and their implications.
Social Situation
Tendencies toward conformity and conversion are heightened when an individual is with at least three 
other persons, when others are in
-266-
unanimous agreement and when their reactions represent only small departures from the position believed 
by the individual to represent his own convictions. Resistance is minimized by leading the individual 
away from his own position gradually by small steps.
If the other individuals present are personally acquainted with the subject, and are persons whom he 
respects, additional conformity pressures are created. Furthermore, if the individual is required to act in 
his own name and is not required to commit himself to a position prior to the application of pressure, 
greater  influence  in  the  conformity  direction  can  be  exercised.  A group  situation  tends  to  foster 
conformity, when the group is led according to a permissive groupcentered approach, when members are 
dependent on one another to obtain significant goals, when the situation calls for unanimous agreement 
among members, and when the group is cohesive.
To create these conditions in life, it would be necessary to compose groups by careful selection to 
insure friendliness and responsibility among members, with all but one — the person on whom pressures 
are to be applied — agreeing unanimously in support of a position not greatly divergent from the position 
held by the critical person.
It would appear that the best single antidote against conformity pressures is intimate acquaintance and 
thorough understanding of the issues involved. Although yet to be demonstrated experimentally, it also is 
probable that an individual would be aided in maintaining independence through understanding of 
conformity pressures. If not understood, they can operate "silently" to render an individual uncertain of 
himself, ready to follow others, and to capitulate to an interrogator.
The Person
A peisonality profile of the kind of individual who is least able to resist conformity pressures, and 
probably interrogation pressures as well, would include such characteristics as submissiveness, lack of 
self-confidence, lack of originality, lack of achievement motivation, desire for social approval, and being 
uncritical, conventional, and authoritarian.

Conversion
As with conformity, conversion is highest for individuals whose initial response regarding factual 
matters or attitudes is indefinite,
-267-
vague, and uncertain. Conversion  further appears to be more complete for individuals who resist 
conformity pressures for a longer time. Unlike conformity, however, conversion effects are heightened 
when capitulation occurs under leader-centered group pressure conditions. Here again, it would seem that 
one of the most powerful factors determining conversion is limited understanding of the problem or 
minimum insight into one's own attitudes or convictions. Resistance to conversion probably can be 
increased through insuring that the individual remains well informed and understands his own opinions 
and attitudes sufficiently well to express them clearly.
Future Research Directions
A number of limiting factors make generalizations from laboratory situations to life difficult.
Laboratory Settings vs. Real Life Situations
Laboratory situations are relatively bland as far as involvement is concerned, at least in comparision 
with lifelike settings where the personal stakes connected with conformity, compliance, and conversion 
are higher. Because of the limited investment a laboratory situation usually evokes in an individual, direct 
or absolute comparisons between results obtained in it and actual life settings are likely to be treacherous. 
There is a need for the type of research that provides the experimenter with the opportunity to control and 
manipulate variables under realistic operating circumstances. Only then can generalizations be made with 
higher probability of accuracy. Current knowledge of relevant variables should make it possible to design 
experiments for lifelike settings with a minimum of trial and error. Such studies could be combined with 
experiments on sleep deprivation or simulated space flights, in which the experimenter's control over 
living conditions and the duration of the experiment is quite high.
Artificial Tasks vs. Significant Issues
Many of the experiments reviewed in this study have employed tasks requiring adjustments of 
individuals  under  conformity  or  conversion  conditions  that  are  extremely  artificial.  As  a  result, 
conformity or resistance may develop under conditions that bear little resemblance
-268-
to actual situations. Future laboratory investigations can benefit from employing tasks that arouse deeper 
personal commitment and stronger group loyalties.

Theory vs. Empiricism and Intuition
Even a cursory examination of the principal reports summarized here shows that much of the work in 
this area has been designed according to empirical understanding, intuition, and "hunch." Experiments 
designed to test systematic and theoretical issues are needed. Sherif's general formulations concerning 
frames of reference (123) and Helson's adaptation-level theory (59), applied in analyzing the conditions 
of social adjustment, constitute examples of theories that have already demonstrated their usefulness in 
experimental designs. Such theoretical statements can serve to bring order to an otherwise chaotic field of 
endeavor.
Simultaneous Variation of Factors vs. Single Variable Designs
Results  from  more  recent  experiments  give  substantial  support  to  the  view  that  conformity, 
compliance, and conversion are complex matters of adjustment that occur when a host of circumstances, 
rather than a single factor, are favorable. Critical factors include the nature of the task, the circumstances 
of the situation within which the behavior occurs, and the characteristics of the individual on whom 
pressures are exerted. Each possible source of influence needs to be varied simultaneously within the 
design of a single experiment, if we are to obtain a more nearly accurate picture of the dynamics of 
conformity. In terms of present understanding, it can be stated that the interaction of sources of influence 
is not additive, but that true interaction among variables occurs.
Replications vs. "One-Shot" Studies
The  literature  is  riddled  with  "one-shot"  studies  that  make  acceptance  of  conclusions  tenuous. 
Replication experiments are needed to insure that conclusions from single studies will stand.
Conformity vs. Conversion
Over 90 per cent of work in this area has been concerned with conformity, yet the conditions under 
which changes induced by conformity
-269-
pressures extend into future behavior are of critical concern. Such experiments are not difficult to design. 
For the most part, they represent an extension of the conditions already used in studying conformity to 
secure measurements of the residual effects of conformity pressures. Great progress in the understanding 
of both conformity and conversion phenomena may be expected from investigations designed to measure 
the persistence of conversion over time.
References

1. Asch, S. E. "Effects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion of judgments". In H. Guetzkow (Ed.), 
Groups, leadership and men. Pittsburgh: Carnegie Press, 1951.
2. Asch S. E. Social psychology. New York: Prentice Hall, 1952.
3. Asch S. E. "Studies of independence and conformity. A minority of one against a unanimous majority".  Psychol. 
Monogr., 1956, 70, No. 9 (Whole No. 416)>.
4. Back K. W. "Influence through social communication". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol, 1951, 46, 9-23.
5. Barch A. M., Trumbo D., and Nangle, "J. Social setting and conformity to a legal requirement".  J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1957, 55, 396-398.
6. Barron F. "Some personality correlates of independence of judgment". J. Pers., 1952, 21, 287-297.
7. Barron F. "Complexity-simplicity as a personality dimension". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1953, 48, 163-172.
8. Barron F. "The disposition toward originality". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1955, 51, 478-485.
9.  Bennett  Edith  B.  Group  discussion,  decision,  public  commitment,  and  perceived  unanimity  as  factors  in  the 
effectiveness of "group decision. Amer. Psychologist, 1952, 7, 315. (Abstract)
10. Beloff H. "Two forms of social conformity: Acquiescence and conventionality". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1958, 56, 99-
104.
11. Berenda Ruth W. "The influence of the group on the judgments of children". New York: King's Crown Press, 1950.
12. Berkowitz L. "Effects of perceived dependency relationships upon conformity to group expectations." J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1957, 55, 350-354.
13. Berkowitz L. "Liking for the group and the perceived merit of the group's behavior". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1957, 
54, 353-357.
14. Blake R. R. "The other person in the situation". In  R. Tagiuri and L. Petrullo (Eds.),  Person Perception and 
interpersonal behavior. Stanford, California: Stanford Univer. Press, 1958. Pp. 229-242.
15. Blake R. R., Berkowitz A., Bellamy R. Q., and Mouton Jane S. "Volunteering as an avoidance act". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol, 1956, 53, 154-156.
16. Blake R. R., and Brehm J. W. "The use of tape recording to simulate a group atmosphere". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 
1954, 49, 311-313.
17. Blake R. R., and Helson H. (Eds.), Adaptability screening of flying personnel. Situational and personal factors in 
conforming behavior. Randolph Alr Force Base, Texas: U. S. Air Force School of Aviation Medicine, September 1956.
-270-
18. Blake R. R., Helson H., and Mouton Jane S. "The generality of conformity behavior as a function of factual anchorage, 
difficulty of task, and amount of social pressure". J. Pers., 1956, 25, 294-305.
19. Blake R. R., Mouton Jane S., and Hain J. D. "Social forces in petition signing". Southwestern soc. sci. Quart., 1956, 36, 
385-390.

20. Blake R. R., Mouton Jane S., and Olmstead J. A. "Susceptibility to counter-norm attitude expressions in a small group 
situation". In R. R. Blake and H. Helson (Eds.), Adaptability screening of flying personnel. Situational and personal factors in 
conforming behavior. Randolph Air Force Base, Texas: U. S. Air Forcc School of Aviation Medicine, September 1956. Pp. 49-
55.
21. Bovard E. W. Jr., "Social norms and the individual". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1948, 43, 62-69.
22. Bovard E. W. Jr., "Group structure and perception". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1951, 46, 398-405.
23. Bray D. W. "The prediction of behavior from two attitude scales". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1950, 45, 64-84.
24. Brehm J., and Festinger L. "Pressures toward uniformity of performance in groups". Hum. Relat., 1957, 10, 85-91.
25. Burtt H. E. "Sex differences in the effect of discussion". J. exp. Psychol., 1920, 3, 390-395.
26. Caylor J. S. "Stimulus factors in conformity". Amer. Psychologist, 1957, 12, 388. (Abstract)
27. Celvin V. "Experimental investigation of behavior in social situations. I. Behaviour under opposition".  Canad. J. 
Psychol., 1955, 9, 107-116.
28. Clark Helen. The crowd. Psychol., Monogr., 1916, 21, 26-36.
29. Cohen B. P. "A probability model for conformity". Sociometry, 1958, 21, 69-81.
30. Cole D. L. "The influence of task perception and leader variation on autokinetic responses". Amer. Psychologist, 1955, 
10, 343. (Abstract)
31. Coleman Janet F., Blake R. R., and Mouton Jane S. "Task difficulty and conformity pressures".  J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1958, 57, 120-122.
32. Crutchfield R. S. "Assessment of persons through a quasi group-interaction technique". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1951, 
46, 577-588.
33. Crutchfield R. S. "Correlates of individual behavior in a controlled group situation". Amer. Psychologist, 1953, 8, 338. 
(Abstract)
34. Crutchfield R. S. "Conformity and character". Amer. Psychologist, 1955, 10, 191-198.
35. Deutsch M., and Gerard H. B. "A study of normative and informational social influences upon individual judgment". J. 
abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1955, 51, 629-636.
36. Didato S. V. "The influence of social factors on group conformity in normal and abnormal personalities: A study of 
perception of unstable stimuli and norm formation". Amer. Psychologist, 1955, 10, 368-369. (Abstract)
37. Dittes J. E.,. and Kelley H. H. "Effect of different conditions of acceptance upon couformity to group norms".  J. 
abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1956, 53, 100-107.
38. Duncker K. "Experimental modifications of children's food preferences through social suggestion". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1938, 33, 489-507.
39. Festinger L. "An analysis of compliant behavior". In M. Sherif and M. O. Wilson (Eds.),  Group relations at the 
crossroads. New York: Harper Bros., 1953.

40. Festinger L., Gerard H. B., Hymovitch B., et al. "The influence process in the piesence of extreme deviates". Hum. 
Relat., 1952, 5, 327-346.
-271-
41. Festinger L., and Thibaut J. "Interpersonal communication in small groups". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1951, 46, 92-99.
42. Fisher S., and Rubinstein I., "The effects of moderate sleep deprivation on social influence in the autokinetic situation". 
Amer. Psychologist, 1956, 11, 411. (Abstract)
43. Fisher S., Rubinstein I., and Freeman R. W. "Intertrial effects of immediate self-committal in a continuous social 
influence situation". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1956, 52, 200-207.
44. Fisher S., Williams H. L., and Lubin A. "Personal predictors of susceptibility to social influence". Amer. Psychologist, 
1957, 12, 360. (Abstract)
45. Freed A., Chandler P. J., Mouton Jane S., and Blake R. R. "Stimulus and background factors in sign violation", J. Pers., 
1955, 23, 499.
46. French J. R. P., Jr. "A formal theory of social power". Psychol. Rev., 1956, 63, 181-194.
47. Gerard H. B. "The effect of different dimensions of disagreement on the communication process in small groups". 
Hum. Relat., 1953, 6, 249-272.
48. Gerard H. B. "The anchorage of opinions in face-to-face groups". Hum. Relat., 1954, 7, 313-326.
49. Goldberg S. C. "Three situational determinants of conformity to social norms". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1954, 49, 
325-329. (Abstract)
50. Goldberg S., Hunt R. G., Cohen W., and Meadow A. "Some personality correlates of perceptual distortion in the 
direction of group conformity". Amer. Psychologist, 1954, 9, 378. (Abstract)
51. Goldberg S. C., and Lubin A. "Influence as a function of prior judgment error". Amer. Psychologist, 1957, 12, 360. 
(Abstract)
52. Gorden R. L. "Interaction between attitude and the definition of the situation in the expression of opinion". Amer. 
sociol. Rev., 1952, 17, 50-58.
53. Grosser D., Polansky N., and Lippitt R. "A laboratory study of behavioral contagion". Hum. Relat., 1951, 4, 115-142.
54. Hardy K. R. "Determinants of conformity and attitude change". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1957, 54, 289-294.
55. Hare A. P. "Interaction and consensus in different sized groups". Amer. sociol. Rev., 1952, 17, 261-267.
56. Hare A. P. "Small group discussion with participation and supervisory leadership". J. abnorm. soc. Physiol., 1953, 48, 
273-275.
57. Harvey O. J., Kelley H. H., and Shapiro M. M. "Reactions to unfavorable evaluations of self made by other persons". 
J. Pers., 1957, 25, 393-411.
58. Harvey O. J., and Rutherford Jeanne. "Gradual and absolute approaches to attitude change". Sociometry, 1958, 21, 61-
68.

59. Helson H. "An experimental approach to personality". Psychiat. Res. rep. Amer. Psychiat. Ass., 1955, 2, 89-99.
60. Helson H. "Adaptation-level as a basis for a quantitative theory of frames of reference". Psychol. Rev., 1948, 55, 297-
313.
61. Helson H., Blake R. R., and Mouton Jane S. An experimental investigation of the effectiveness of the "big lie" in 
shifting attitudes. J. soc. Psychol., 1958, 48, 51-60.
62. Helsort H., Blake R. R., and Mouton Jane S. "Petition-signing as adjustment to situational and personal factors". J. soc. 
Psychol., 1958, 48, 3-10.
63. Helson H., Blake R. R., Mouton Jane S., and Olmstead J. A. Attitudes
-272-
63. as adjustments to stimulus background and residual factors. J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1956, 52, 314-322.
64. Hoffman M. L. "Conformity as a defense mechanism and a form of resistance to genuine group influence". J. Pers., 
1957, 25, 412-424.
65. Hoffman M. L. "Some psychodynamic factors in compulsive conformity". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1953, 48, 383-393.
66. Hollander E. P. "Conformity, status and idiosyncrasy credit". Psychol. Rev., 1958, 65, 117-127.
67. Horwitz M., Piana Gabriel M., Goldman Della M., and Lee F. J. "Veridicality of' attitudes toward authority and effects 
on learning". Amer. Psychologist, 1955, 10, 336. (Abstract)
68. Jackson J. M., and Saltzstein H. D. "The effect of person-group relationships on conformity processes". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1958, 57, 17-24.
69. Jacubczak L., and Walters R. H. "An experimental investigation of suggestibility in terms of dependency behavior". 
Amer. Psychologist, 1958, 13, 328. (Abstract)
70. Jenness A. "The role of discussion in changing opinions regarding a matter of fact". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1932, 27, 
279-296.
71. Jones E. E., Wells H. H., and Torrey R. "Some effects of feedback from the experimenter on conformity behavior". J. 
abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1958, 57, 207-213.
72. Keisler E. R. "The differential effect of success and failure upon imitative behavior". Amer. Psychologist, 1956, 11, 
369. (Abstract)
73. Kelley H. H., and Lamb T. W. "Certainty of judgment and resistance to social influence". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 
1957, 55, 137-139.
74. Kelley H. H., and Shapiro M. M. "An experiment on conformity to group norms where conformity is detrimental to 
group achievement". Amer. sociol. Rev., 1954, 19, 667-677.
75. Kelman H. C. Effects of success and failure on "suggestibility" in the autokinetic situation. J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 
1950, 45, 267-285.
76. Kidd J. S. "Social influence phenomena in a task-oriented group situation". J. abnorm, soc. Psychol., 1958, 56, 13-17.

77. Kidd J. S., and Campbell D. T. "Conformity to groups as a function of group success". J. abnorm. soc. Psvchol., 1955, 
51, 390-393.
78. Kimbrell D. L., and Blake R. R. "Motivational factors in the violation of a prohibition". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1958, 
56, 132-133.
79. Kirkpatrick C. "An experimental study of the modification of social attitudes". Amer. J. Sociol., 1936, 41, 649-656.
80. Krebs A. M. "Two determinants of conformity, age of independence training and achievement".  J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1958, 56, 130-131.
81. Lambert W. E., and Lowy F. H. "Effects of the presence and discussion of others on expressed attitudes". Canad. J. 
Psychol., 1957, 11, 151-156.
82. Lawson E. D., and Stagner R. "Group pressure, attitude change, and autonomic involvement". J. soc. Psychol., 1957, 
45, 299-312.
83. Lefkowitz M., Blake R. R., and Mouton Jane S. "Status factors in pedestrian violation of traffic signals". J. abnorm. 
soc. Psychol., 1955, 51, 704-706.
84. Levine J., Laffal J., Berhowitz M., Lindemann J., and Drevdahl J. "Conforming behavior of psychiatric and medical 
patients". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1954, 49, 251-255.
-273-
85. Linton Harriet B. "Rorschach correlates of response to suggestion". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1954, 49, 75-83.
86. Linton Harriet B. "Dependence on external influence: Correlates in perception, attitudes, and adjustment". J. abnorm. 
soc. Psychol., 1955, 51, 502-507.
87. Luchins A. S. "On agreement with another's judgments". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1944, 39, 97-111.
88. Luchins A. S. "Social influences on perception of complex drawings". J. soc. Psychol., 1945, 21, 257-274.
89. Luchins A. S., and Luchins Edith H. "On conformity with true and false communications". J. soc. Psychol., 1955, 42, 
283-304.
90. Luchins A. S., and Luchins Edith H. "Previous experience with ambiguous and non-ambiguous perceptual stimuli 
under various social influences". J. soc. Psychol., 1955, 42, 249-270.
91. McConnell J. V., and Blake R. R. "A methodological study of tape-recorded synthetic group atmospheres".  Amer. 
Psychologist, 1953, 8, 395. (Abstract)
92. McKeachie W. J. "Individual conformity to attitudes of classroom groups". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1954, 49, 282-
289.
93. McQueen R. "Examination deception as a function of residual, background, and immediate stimulus factors". J. Pers., 
1957, 25, 643-650.
94. Maier N. R. F., and Solem A. R. "The contribution of a discussion leader to the quality of group thinking: The effective 
use of minority opinions". Hum. Relat., 1952, 5, 277-288.

95. Marinho Heloisa. "Social influence in the formation of enduring preferences". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1942, 37, 448-
468.
96. Mausner B. "Studies in social interaction: III. Effect of variation in one partner's prestige on the interaction of observer 
pairs". J. appl. Psychol., 1953, 37, 391-393.
97. Mausner B. "The effect of one partner's success in a relevant task on the interaction of observer pairs". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1954, 49, 557-560.
98. Mausner B. "The effect of prior reinforcement on the interaction of observer pairs". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1954, 49, 
65-68.
99. Mausner B. "Studies in social interaction: I. A conceptual scheme". J. soc. Psychol., 1955, 41, 259-270.
100. Mausner B., and Bloch Barbara L. "A study of the additivity of variables affecting social interaction". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1957, 54, 250-256.
101. Millon T., and Simkins L.  C. "Suggestibility of authoritarians and equalitarians to prestige influence".  Amer. 
Psychologist, 1957, 12, 404. (Abstract)
102. Moeller G., and Applezweig M. H. "A motivational factor in conformity". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1957, 55, 114-
120.
103. Mouton Jane S., Blake R. R., and Olmstead J. A. "The relationship between frequency of yielding and the disclosure 
of personal identity". J. Pers., 1956, 24, 339-347.
104. Munsterberg H. "Beiträgezur experimentellen Psychologie". In Ruth W. Berenda , The influence of the group on the 
judgments of children. New York: King's Crown Press, 1950.
105. Mussen P. H., and Kagan J. "Group conformity and perceptions of parents". Child Develpm., 1958, 29, 57-60.
106. Nakamura C. Y. "Conformity and problem-solving". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1958, 56, 315-320.
-274-
107. Olmstead J. A., and Blake R. R. "The use of simulated groups to produce modifications in judgment". J. Pers., 1955, 
23, 335-345.
108. Preston M. G., and Heintz R. K. "Effects of participatory vs. supervisory leadership on group judgment". J. abnorm. 
soc. Psychol., 1949, 44, 345-355.
109. Raven B. H., and French J. R. P., Jr. "Group support, legitimate power, and social influence". J. Pers., 1958, 26, 400-
409.
110. Raven B. H., and Rietsema J. "The effects of varied clarity of group goal and group path upon the individual and his 
relation to his group". Hum. Relat., 1957, 10, 29-45.
111. Rohrer J. H., Baron S. H., Hoffman E. L., and Swander D. V. "The stability of autokinetic judgments". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1954, 49, 595-597.
112. Rosenbaum M. E. "The effect of stimulus and background factors on the volunteering response". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1956, 53, 118-121.

113. Rosenbaum M. E., and Blake R. R. "Volunteering as a function of field structure". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1955, 50, 
193-196.
114. Rosner S. "Consistency in response to group pressures". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1957, 55, 145-146.
115. Samelson F. "Conforming behavior under two conditions of conflict in the cognitive field". J. abnorm. soc. Pvychol., 
1957, 55, 181-187.
116. Schachter S., Ellertson N., McBride Dorothy, and Gregory Doris. "An experimental study of cohesiveness and 
productivity". Hum. Relat., 1951, 4, 229-238.
117. Schachter S., and Hall R. "Group-derived restraints and audience persuasion". Hum. Relat., 1952, 5, 397-406.
118. Schonbar Rosealea A. "The interaction of observer-pairs in judging visual extent and movement". Arch. Psychol., 
1945, 41, No. 299.
119. Schroder H. M., and Hunt D. E. "Dispositional effects upon conformity at different levels of discrepancy". J. Pers., 
1958, 26, 248-258.
120. Scott W. A. "Attitude change through reward of verbal behavior". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1957, 55, 72-75.
121. Sherif M. "A study of some social factors in perception". Arch. Psychol., 1935, 27, No. 187.
122. Sherif M. "An experimental approach to the study of attitudes". Sociometry, 1937, 1, 90-98.
123. Sherif M. The psychology of social norms. New York: Harper Bros., 1936.
124. Sherif D. M., and Harvey O. J. "A study in ego functioning: Elimination of stable anchorages in individual and group 
situations". Sociometry, 1952, 15, 272-305.
125. Spohn H. E. "The effect of group norms upon perception in chronic schizophrenic patients". Amer. Psychologist, 
1956, 11, 366. (Abstract)
126. Steiner I. D., and Peters S. C. "Conformity and the A-B-X model". J. Pers., 1958, 26, 229-242.
127. Thibaut J. W., and Strickland L. "Psychological set and social conformity". J. Pers., 1956, 25, 115-129.
128. Wells W. D., Weinert G., and Rubel Marilyn. "Conformity pressure and authoritarian personality". J. Psychol., 1956, 
42, 133-136.
129. Wheeler D., and Jordan H. "Change of individual opinion to accord with group opinion". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 
1929, 24, 203-206.
130. Whittaker J. O. "The effects of experimentally introduced anchorages upon judgments in the autokinetic situation". 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Univer. of Oklahoma, 1958.
-275-
131. Wiener M., Carpenter Janeth T., and Carpenter B. "Some determinants of conformity behavior". J. soc. Psychol., 
1957, 45, 289-297.

132. Wiener M. "Uncertainty of judgment as a determinant of conformity behavior". Amer. Psychologist, 1956, 11, 407. 
(Abstract)
133. Wiener M., Carpenter Janeth T., and Carpenter B. "External validation of a measure of conformity behavior".  J. 
abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1956, 52, 421-422.
134. Ziller R. C., and Behringer R. "Group persuasion under conditions of incubation and varying group size". Amer. 
Psychologist, 1958, 13, 353. (Abstract)
-276-
CHAPTER 7
Countermanipulation
through malingering
MALCOLM L. MELTZER
Introduction
Historically, the problem of psychopathology has been the development of techniques which would 
discover and make apparent emotional pathology that is not immediately evident. Screening tests, lie 
scales,  observational  and  interview  procedures  have  all  been  devised  with  the  primary  intent  of 
unmasking  the  potentially  or  actually  disturbed  individual  who  masquerades  behind  a  front  of 
defensiveness and superficial social conformity. The opposite type of unmasking, i.e., of the feigning or 
simulation of emotional illness which is not in reality present or is exaggerated to an extreme degree, has 
received comparatively less attention. Murphy (65) has written an excellent history of malingering and 
has shown that the problem of simulation has been present since Early Greek and Biblical times. 
Although the simulation of psychosis or of epilepsy has a long history, more attention has been given in 
the past to the feigning of diseases of single organs, and the development of laboratory techniques which 
would  differentiate  the  sick  from  the  well.  The  malingerer,  on  his  part,  has  shown  amazing 
resourcefulness in keeping abreast of the literature and in devising counter counter-measures.
The simulation of mental illness by captured prisoners of war is a potential, and perhaps effective, 
technique for evading interrogation. In almost all cultures, the mentally ill person cannot be held 
accountable for his actions, is considered incompetent, and is not
-277-
expected to give a rational account of himself, his past, or his environment. The prisoner of war, faced 
with coercive interrogation, and reluctant to betray his country and friends, might choose this as an 

honorable alternative which favors self-preservation. Certainly this has become more frequent among 
persons charged with serious crimes in courts of law. The increasing popularization of the mental health 
movement and the publicity attendant to the M'Naghten Rules and the Durham decision may lead to a 
further confounding of criminal acts and mental illness. This chapter is not concerned with the moral or 
ethical aspects of this problem, but rather is directed toward understanding how malingering may become 
a factor in situations involving the interrogation of a resistant source by a captor.
Because of the focus of interest, it seems feasible to limit the scope of this chapter to the feigning of 
those illnesses which would render the person mentally incompetent. Although a person may malinger a 
paralysis of the arms or legs, blindness, or a low back pain, none of these symptoms would make it 
impossible for him to testify or reveal information. However, psychosis, mental deficiency, or amnesia 
would more than likely lead an interrogator or examiner to the conclusion that the person is not a reliable 
source of information who can be expected to report events accurately and realistically. Thus, the primary 
aim of this behavior is evasion rather than the financial gain which is often the motivation for simulating 
physical disease. More specifically, it is an evasion of responsibility, the responsibility for past acts or for 
future acts, as related to the giving of information. In this chapter, then, malingering refers to the planned 
and deliberate simulation of mental symptoms for the purpose of evading responsibility.
Two  things  become  apparent  in  reviewing  the  literature  on  malingering.  The  bulk  of  it  is 
impressionistic and subjective, and at times there is more disagreement than agreement among the 
writers. Much of the polemics revolve around issues such as the moral reprehensibility of malingering; 
whether or not the malingerer is, by definition, an emotionally disturbed person; the differentiation of 
malingering from the Ganser syndrome; whether or not the Ganser syndrome is an hysterical or psychotic 
reaction; and the difficulties of detecting malingering. For the most part, it appears that those who are 
optimistic about detecting malingering might do well to share some of the pessimism of their colleagues. 
As Davidson (19) points out, even the best clinicians make errors in this area, and MacDonald (58) 
stresses the need for professional skill and long experience in determining whether malingering is an 
element of the clinical picture.
-278-
Primarily, this chapter will attempt to bring some order and clarity to this area by reviewing and 
evaluating the literature, and by attempting to fit these findings to constructs taken from the broader area 
of social psychology. Hopefully, this may present certain reference points for thinking about malingering 
and evaluating it, and may provide an orientation for organizing techniques to detect malingering. Studies 
from the experimental literature which deal with related concepts will be included. The following four 
pathological states will be considered, the simulation of which might lead the interrogator to conclude 
that the source is unreliable or incompetent: psychosis, the Ganser syndrome, mental deficiency, and 
amnesia.
Adoption of a Deceptive Role
The simulation of psychosis or of any mental aberration may be considered as a conscious and 
deliberate attempt to take a specific social role. According to Sarbin (77), the concept of role deals with 
the organized actions of a person in harmony with a given status or position. A position may be 

considered a system of rights and duties exercised by the person who occupies the position. It is 
equivalent to a cognitive system of role expectations. The role expectations, which are learned through 
direct or indirect experiences, deal with with the behavior expected of the occupant of a particular 
position, and with the behavior anticipated of the person occupying the reciprocal position in the social 
interaction situation. Thus the position or status of the mentally ill person is culturally transmitted just as 
any other role, and consists of a system of expectations about the behavior of the mentally ill person. It 
also includes the reciprocal expectation that the person dealing with the deranged patient will protect him, 
consider him not responsible for his actions, prevent him from doing harm, make few if any demands on 
him to be rational, and institute therapeutic and rehabilitative measures. The organized behavior of the 
individual, directed toward fulfilling these expectations of the self and other, is called the role. Thus, the 
person who plays the role of the psychotic is trying to determine the role of the examiner or interrogator, 
and he expects a certain response from him. How successful he will be in enacting that role seems to be 
dependent on three factors. The first relates to the adequacy and validity of his role perception, i.e., how 
well he has perceived and understood the organized set of actions comprising that role. The second 
appears to be related to a generalized skill at taking and
-279-
enacting roles. Finally, certain enduring or temporary motivational and qualitative characteristics of the 
self structure are probably influential in determining the choice and adequacy of the role. This possible 
consonance of basic personality to enacted role is one of the most complicating factors in recognizing 
malingering, and is one with which almost all workers in this field have wrestled.
Although these notions on role behavior may help in understanding malingering in general, there is as 
yet little empirical work which would aid in the prediction of the persons and the circumstances which 
might combine to produce simulation of psychosis. It is apparent that almost all individuals play different 
roles, and the role played is partly dependent upon who the partner is in the social situation. Block (9) and 
Block and Bennett (11) have demonstrated that a single subject varies his behavior as the interpersonal 
situation changes. Meltzer (62) has shown that there are individual differences in the ability to shift roles, 
and this ability seems partly related to the sophistication and complexity of the person's understanding of 
others. The complexity of this understanding did not appear to be a function of self and ideal-self 
discrepancy in a homogeneous sample of college students. However, Gough (35) and Cameron (14) have 
argued that role-taking ability is related to emotional well-being. Studies by Sarbin and Farberow (78), 
Sarbin and Hardyck (79), and Sarbin and Jones (80) have tended to confirm that adequate role perception 
and validity of role enactment are positively related to adjustment. However, in a study by Helfand (40), 
schizophrenics in remission were found to be more adept at taking the role of a standard stimulus person 
than were either normals or chronic schizophrenics. In addition, Drake (21) found that the better actors in 
a college drama department scored higher than did poorer actors and nonactors on two of the three 
neurotic scales of the MMPI. Thus, there are somewhat contradictory findings concerning the question of 
adjustment in relation to skill for enacting a variety of roles.
The more specific question of the type of person who will attempt to simulate the role of the psychotic 
has not been investigated experimentally. From role theory comes the suggestion that the role chosen and 
played well is the one which is congruent with the nature and organization of the self (77). This would 
tend to support those writers who feel that malingering of psychosis is a symptom of a serious personality 
defect, if not a psychosis in itself. This position is most clearly taken by Ossipov (69) who feels that the 

person who simulates a psychosis is accentuating his own latent characteristics. Moreover, several 
authors have pointed out that malingering may be used to
-280-
conceal an actual psychosis, and that which was at first considered malingering may show up as a grave 
disorder later (13, 22, 34, 47, 58). Eissler (22) explains this as an attempt to hold a psychosis in abeyance 
by acting as if the behavior is under control and not something one is submitting to. Furthermore, on 
recovery from psychosis, a person may claim he was malingering because it may be too humiliating to 
have others know that that he was suffering from a psychiatric disorder (22, 58). Thus, regardless of the 
problem of who is best at taking roles, the disturbed or the integrated individual, there are many who 
would  hold  that  the  choice  of  a  specific  role,  that  of  the  psychotic,  usually  indicates  serious 
psychopathology.
However, others argue that while the malingerer may be emotionally upset, there are also many 
normals and near normals who malinger under extreme circumstances (22, 23, 29, 30, 41, 58, 88, 91). As 
MacDonald (58) and Ossipov (69) indicate, the simulation of mental incompetence is more frequent 
when there is danger of loss of life. Certainly the malingerer does not expect to be punished more 
severely for having committed a murder and feigning psychosis than for having committed a murder 
without feigning psychosis, if through simulation there may be a chance of avoiding punishment.
The interrogation situation appears similarly extreme. The person may see himself in a role conflict, 
and failure to resolve the conflict may cost him his life. He is occupying two positions simultaneously, 
and the role expectations of the one are not compatible with the other. As a loyal soldier he is expected by 
his country to withhold information which would aid the enemy. As a prisoner of war, the enemy expects 
him to reveal what he knows. As shown by Gullahorn (38), a person who is placed in a situation where 
incompatible demands are placed upon him because of his role relationships in two groups will try to 
retain both positions and find a way of satisfying them both. Toby (84) in his analysis of role conflict 
situations suggests that illness is an excuse by which a person in role conflict may avoid performing an 
obligation or duty of a role, without relinquishing the position and without suffering sanctions for failing 
to perform the duty. Thus illness, and particularly mental illness, would allow the prisoner to escape the 
role dilemma, and since illness is such a widespread excuse, special personality characteristics may not 
be necessary for selecting this role under extreme circumstances.
Turner (85) has shown that nonconforming behavior is excused by friends if they believe that the 
behavior is inconsistent with the person's usual role and was caused by unusual stress. A person may 
forgive himself in a similar fashion. Furthermore, if one conceives of malin-
-281-
gering as antisocial behavior (Szasz, 83), then there is much evidence to indicate that many people are 
dishonest at one time or another (15, 17, 39, 51, 59). Hartshorne and May (39), using school children as 
subjects, concluded that deceit or honesty is not a unified character trait but rather a specific function of 
the person's life situation. One of the situations which seems to enhance the possibility of deceit or 
cheating is a threat to the person's role. This is one way of interpreting the rather consistent finding that 
poor students who are having difficulty maintaining their roles as students are more likely to cheat (15, 
17, 39). Another indication that circumstances are influential in determining antisocial behavior is the 

finding that examination deception is a function of the particular peer group's attitude toward dishonesty 
(59). Thus, it is possible to conclude that in conflict situations and extreme circumstances, especially 
when one's life may seem to be at stake, motivational factors could override enduring personality traits, at 
least as regards an attempt at malingering. This also seems to be congruent with the finding that a person 
will take a particular role if it is seen as satisfying an important need (66).
The Imitation of Symptoms
The success of simulation appears to be greatly dependent on the validity and adequacy of the 
malingerer's perception of what comprises the role which he is trying to simulate. As pointed out by 
several writers, the person who simulates is an actor who portrays an illness as he understands it (8, 58, 
69). It would appear that the characteristics and behaviors which are perceived as crucial to the role are 
acquired through experience and observation. Personal experiences may have occurred with friends or 
relatives who were psychotic. In the two cases described by Atkin (4), the role perceptions necessary for 
the malingering were built up by confinement in mental hospitals at eariler times. The cultural stereotype 
of the deranged person also seems to be used as a basis for role enactment. Observations made of 
criminal cases being psychiatrically evaluated prior to trial tend to support this. Many Negro patients who 
are thought to be malingering tend to play the part of a slow, somewhat confused and defective person 
who understands little of what is going on around him. Like members of other oppressed minorities, some 
Negroes have adopted a mask of dullness and unawareness when interacting with the Caucasian majority 
(5). The cultural determination of the ingredients Which are perceived as comprising the psychotic
-282-
role is also evident in the work of Benedict (6). Her investigation of trancelike states in primitive cultures 
led her to conclude that the content of the hallucinations experienced is relatively constant within groups 
but highly variable between groups. This suggests that the role of the person in trance is learned from 
interaction with his own group. As she states, "Even in trance the individual holds strictly to the rules and 
expectations of his culture, and his experience is as locally patterned as a marriage rite or an economic 
exchange" (6, p. 77). Sarbin (76) gives a similar interpretation to the behavior of the hypnotized subject 
which can also be approximated through simulation. Sarbin understands this behavior as an unconscious 
attempt on the subject's part to take the role of the hypnotic subject as perceived by him through previous 
experience (see Chapter 5).
The detection of malingering depends to a great extent on the simulator's failure to understand 
adequately the characteristics of the illness he is feigning. This principle appears central to the indices of 
malingering which are reported in the literature. Although the simulator may have some understanding of 
psychosis, his understanding is usually spotty. He fails to appreciate the underlying disturbance and 
portrays isolated symptoms instead (19, 87). Thus, he may complain of hallucinations or delusions but 
not show any of the formal characteristics of schizophrenic thought. Often he presents symptoms which 
are exceedingly rare, existing mainly in the fancy of the layan (8). One such symptom is the delusion of 
misidentification, characterized by the patient's belief that he is some powerful or historic personage. This 
symptom is very unusual in true psychosis, but is used by a number of simulators (19). In schizophrenia, 
the onset tends to be gradual, delusions do not spring up full-blown overnight; in simulated disorders, the 
onset is usually fast and delusions may be readily available (47, 69). The feigned psychosis often contains 

many contradictory and inconsistent symptoms, rarely existing together (8, 47, 69, 87). The malingerer 
tends to go to extremes in his portrayal of his symptoms: he exaggerates, overdramatizes, grimaces, 
shouts, is overly bizarre, and calls attention to himself in other ways (8, 19, 47, 55, 69, 87). In doing this, 
the malingerer presents a childish, dadaistic, nonsensical picture rather than a psychotic one. On the other 
hand, Atkin (4) feels that the malingerer fails by not maintaining the simulation long enough rather than 
by failing to portray a psychotic picture accurately. Eissler (22) is more pessimistic and contends that a 
smart malingerer probably will maintain an accurate picture over a long period of time and may get away 
with it.
-283-
Jones and Llewellyn (47) feel that psychosis and mental deficiency are more frequently feigned than 
depression and euphoria, but others have reported a wide range of simulated illnesses. Several of the 
more frequently feigned symptoms are delusions, hallucinations, depression, confusion, excitement, and 
mutism. Some of the inconsistencies and fallacies apparent in the malingerer's enactment of these 
symptoms may be specified.
Delusions
The  nondeteriorated  schizophrenic  is  often  reluctant  to  discuss  his  delusions  because  he  has 
discovered that people are likely to scoff at him. If he is willing to talk about them, he will probably talk 
at great length and answer questions if the interviewer appears sympathetic and encouraging. The 
malingerer, on the other hand, feels that he must continually remind the examiner about his delusions and 
brings them up on each occasion. However, when pressed for particulars he may become evasive, 
especially if he sees a doubting attitude in the interviewer. Although some truly bizarre and complicated 
delusions may be fabricated on the spur of the moment, it is more likely that the delusions will be very 
vague and very limited. It is rare to find delusions as the only symptom of mental illness, but some 
malingerers present no other major symptoms.
Hallucinations
Malingerers often report visual and auditory hallucinations. Visual hallucinations are rather rare and 
are more characteristic of acute delirium and hallucinosis due to toxicity than of schizophrenia. Again, in 
toxic conditions this should not be an isolated symptom, and one would also expect confusion, tremor, 
slurred speech, and disorientation along with the visual hallucinations. Auditory hallucinations, which are 
more characteristic of the schizophrenic, should also be accompanied by the types of thought disturbance 
characteristic of the schizophrenic.
Depression

Depression, especially psychotic depression, is considered difficult to simulate, primarily because the 
concomitant somatic and physiological changes are absent (19, 47, 58). The truly depressed patient will 
show a poor appetite, loss of weight, constipation, and a disturbance of his
-284-
sleep cycle. Even more difficult to feign are the alterations of the physiological processes which appear in 
prolonged depressions. These may include lowered metabolism, lowered temperature, dry skin and hair, 
and lowered red cell count. However, there is evidence to indicate that motivation, attitude, and intent 
will have an effect on physiologic processes; therefore the success of the malingerer in actuating some of 
these changes should not be discounted. Arnold (3) has reviewed some of that evidence. However, the 
crude malingerer will probably not show these changes nor will he manifest the selfreproachful and self-
condemnatory ideas which are characteristic of the depressed patient. Also, the simulator may be too 
quick, alert, and responsive when he is examined.
Confusion
Confusion, stupor, and amnesia may result from the stress and strain of combat, capture, or arrest. If it 
is a temporary anxiety state, it should respond to drugs and a sympathetic attitude. Also it should at the 
outset be associated with other symptoms, such as headache, agitation, restlessness, poor concentration, 
insomnia, nightmares, ideas of physical disease such as heart trouble, the effort syndrome, dyspepsia, 
tremor, poor appetite, and an exaggerated startle reaction. The malingerer who feigns a confused state is 
usually slow, puzzled, unaware, and unable to answer even simple questions. His responses to questions 
may be bizarre, but if he is repeatedly pressed for the correct answer, he may give it. Most important 
would be close observation during periods when the patient does not know that he is being observed. 
When alone or with friends, or even when talking about certain topics with the examiner, the malingerer 
may show a surprising amount of responsiveness and alertness. However, Eissler (22) warns that the good 
malingerer is on guard to maintain his symptoms at all times, and that the behavior of both the normal 
and the abnormal changes when in solitude or when not being questioned by an authority figure.
Mutism
This appears to be a most difficult ruse to expose, but also a difficult one for the malingerer to 
maintain. Mutism may result from psychosis, organic brain disease, hysteria, or may just be malingered. 
If it is a manifestation of cerebral involvement, the other symptoms mentioned above may be evident. If it 
is of a psychotic nature, the
-285-
patient will probably be withdrawn and not responsive to his environment. Of course, physical damage to 
the speaking apparatus must be ruled out. The differentiation of hysterical and malingered mutism is 
especially difficult. Since it is a difficult symptom to maintain over a long period of time, the malingerer 
may give himself away in an unguarded moment. Narcoanalysis  may help in making the correct 

diagnosis. The hysterical patient will probably be able to speak during narcosis, whereas the malingerer 
will probably continue to be mute.
Telltales of Imposture
Aside  from  the  likelihood  that  the  simulator  will  not  realistically and  consistently portray the 
symptoms of the disorder he is feigning, he may also show evasive and uncooperative behavior while he 
is being examined (28, 47, 58, 72). Since he is aware of the unreality or exaggeration of his symptoms, he 
is apprehensive lest others recognize his ruse, and this leads him to be especially suspicious, mistrustful, 
and cautious. Of course, this behavior is also typical of the true paranoid patient and therefore cannot in 
itself be taken as evidence of malingering. However, as Sarbin (77) indicates, a person must move 
cautiously and uncertainly when he is not sure what is expected of him and how his partner in the social 
situation may react. Thus the hysteric, who is convinced of the reality of his symptoms, may revel in 
being examined, but the simulator attempts to avoid examination. Using Goffman's term (31), he is afraid 
of being found out of face or in the wrong face, and he sees the examiner as a person who may reveal his 
false face or provoke him into contradictory behavior. In his attempts to forestall examination, he may 
complain of physical illness, or he may behave in a sulky, aggressive manner. He may be ill at ease, laugh 
in a self-conscious manner, be alert, watchful, and quick to take issue.
Reid and Arthur (28), in their discussion of the behavior symptoms of lie-detector subjects, observed 
that those who were later proven guilty tended to show certain similarities in behavior. The guilty persons 
were reluctant to take the test, and they tried in various ways to postpone or delay it. They often appeared 
highly anxious and sometimes took a hostile attitude toward the test and the examiner. Evasive tactics 
sometimes appeared, such  as  sighing, yawning,  moving about, all of  which foil the examiner by 
obscuring the recording. Before the examination, they felt it necessary to explain why their
-286-
responses might mislead the examiner into thinking they were lying. Thus the procedure of subjecting a 
suspected malingerer to a liedetector test might evoke behavior which would reinforce the suspicion of 
fraud. However, it should be noted that certain persons such as psychopaths show few manifest signs of 
anxiety (Lykken, 56), and others are cool, reserved, and underreact to the lie-detector situation (10, 46). 
But, generally, the unskilled malingerer is apt to to be reluctant to be examined and to exert too much 
obvious effort in circumventing the usual diagnostic techniques. Fortunately, few of them display the 
cleverness of Thomas Mann's hero (60) who gave the impression that he was anxious to evade the 
examination because he was hiding a symptom which would keep him out of the army if discovered. This 
little bit of play acting made the examiners only too anxious to strip away his mask of health and to 
discover triumphantly the epilepsy which he was so cleverly simulating.
Some Unmasking Techniques
Among the "strategic ruses" offered by Jones and Llewellyn (47) is the method of suggestion. In this 
procedure, the interviewer suggests other symptoms by inquiring about their presence, and usually about 

symptoms which might be inconsistent with the syndrome originally presented. If the malingerer does not 
immediately agree that he suffers with that symptom, he may show up with it at the next interview. Cases 
are reported in the literature where the malingerer picked up the most outlandish and unusual suggestions 
made by the examiner and displayed that bizarre behavior shortly after the interview. The method of 
suggestion can be supplemented by indicating that an infallible cure for the patient's condition is 
available. This may consist of any number of devices, including drugs, electroshock, or hypnosis. The 
success of placebos in effecting symptomatic changes derives from the patient's confidence in the 
physician and his conviction that the drug will produce the predicted effect (74, 92). In the malingerer the 
suggested potency of a therepeutic maneuver may shake his confidence and lead to his dropping the 
symptom. This would seem to occur because of the simulator's imperfect understanding of the role he is 
playing, and of the fuzzy expectations he may have of the effects of certain procedures on the symptoms 
he is portraying. There is much in the literature to indicate that suggestibility is increased when the 
situation is ambiguous, unstructured, or difficult, and the person has few guideposts on which to rely. 
Under such
-287-
circumstances, he seems to be greatly influenced by the attitudes and perceptions of peers and authorities. 
On the other hand, studies by Spohn (81) and Didato (20) indicate that schizophrenics may be less 
susceptible to social pressures to conform. They may therefore be less susceptible to suggestions made by 
an interviewer regarding their improvement or symptoms.
The success reported for the Rorschach in detecting malingering seems to follow from the same 
principles. The malingerer is confronted with an unstructured stimulus, and there is very little in his 
background or experience which would indicate to him the responses to the Rorschach which would be 
consistent with the illness he is simulating. Thus, once again, the malingerer would be hampered by 
inadequate role expectations and an unsatisfactory frame of reference. Whether or not a Rorschach can be 
changed enough to fool an experienced psychologist is still undetermined. Fosberg (24, 25) asked his 
subjects to give two Rorschachs, a good impression one and a bad impression one, and when he found 
high correlations between the scoring categories on the two Rorschachs, he concluded that the Rorschach 
cannot be manipulated, at least with regard to its formal scoring categories. Carp and Shavzin (16) also 
asked their subjects to fake the Rorschach, and using a somewhat different method of ordering the data, 
found correlations between the good impression and bad impression Rorschachs ranging from .16 to .97. 
However, the correlations between the F, F+, and F- scores were all very high. The authors state that no 
attempt was made to determine whether the subjects were successful in altering their responses in the 
desired direction. Studies carried out with persons actually suspected of malingering, rather than being 
asked to malinger, all report a similar picture as being typical of the malingerer's behavior on the 
Rorschach (7, 73, 87). In each of these studies, the malingerer is described as constricted, evasive, 
suspicious, reluctant to respond, and determined not to give himself away. He may appeal for clues on 
how to respond, show increased reaction times, and may very often attempt to reject a particular card or 
the entire procedure. Productivity is not high, and most of the responses are cheap, popular, or vague. 
There may be much card turning, description, color naming, or perseveration. The malingerer must deal 
with the unexpected when he is presented with the Rorschach, and very often he seems to err by giving an 
extremely poor or wildly bizarre Wechsler and then a constricted, evasive but "good" Rorschach. Thus, 
there may be inconsistencies not only on the Rorschach but throughout the battery of tests.
-288-

Less ambiguous and more content-oriented projective techniques appear to be more susceptible to 
feigning. Weisskopf and Dieppa (90) found that subjects when trying to make a good or bad impression 
on the TAT could influence the diagnoses made by experienced TAT interpreters, and Meltzoff (63) 
reports essentially the same finding for the sentence completion procedure. It is interesting that in the 
TAT study, the subjects' worst stories deviated more from their neutral stories than did their best stories, 
indicating that it is easier to appear disturbed than to appear well adjusted.
Ganser Syndrome
Before turning to the simulation of mental deficiency and amnesia, it is necessary to mention a 
pathological state which resembles malingering and resembles psychosis, but which may be neither. That 
is the Ganser syndrome. In this condition, the person appears to be psychotic, but his behavior is 
strikingly similar to that of the person who is simulating psychosis. The symptoms usually arise in a 
stressful situation, and it is readily apparent that it would be to the patient's benefit to simulate psychosis. 
The symptoms are an imperfect representation of the condition they resemble and correspond to the 
mental picture that the patient might be expected to have of psychosis (32, 53, 86). The patient's behavior 
may be childish, theatrical, ludicrous, and wildly bizarre (8, 58). MacDonald (58) reports that such a 
patient may enter a room and stand on his head, wear his clothes inside out, eat the skin instead of the 
banana, and try to light his cigarette with the wrong end of the match. Most striking and characteristic of 
this disorder is the patient's inability to answer the simplest questions precisely. Instead he gives an 
approximate answer, one which is not too far wrong and is obviously related to the question, but is wrong 
nevertheless. This has been called "vorbeireden," or talking past the point, and it was first described by 
Ganser (26). An example of this would be the patient who says that 2 + 2 equals 5, 5 times 5 equals 24, a 
cat has three ears, and that there are eleven months in the year. These responses are usually given after 
great deliberation and concentration, and the patient does not appear to be upset or irritated when he is 
told he is wrong.
Almost all authors agree that this peculiar mental state arises when the patient is faced with a crisis 
and when irresponsibility would help mitigate the crisis. It is differentiated from malingering in that 
malin-
-289-
gering is a deliberate pose, whereas the patient is unaware of the driving forces which lead him into the 
Ganser  syndrome (53,  58, 68,  89). Historically it has  been considered a hysterical twilight state, 
characterized by vorbeireden, clouding of consciousness, excitement or stupor, and bizarre behavior (26, 
49). More recently it has been considered a last ditch attempt to ward off a real psychosis (54), a 
prodromal sign of psychosis (53), or an acute epidose superimposed on an actual psychotic condition (2, 
8, 61, 82). Golden and MacDonald (32) as well as Tyndel (86) see it as occupying a position intermediate 
between malingering and hysterical fugue states. Weiner and Braiman (89) feel that it occurs in a setting 
of hysteria or psychosis, and interpret it as a reaction to intolerable stress in a person who fells utterly 
helpless and who wishes to throw off his identity and responsibility. They argue that it is not malingering 
because of the uniformity seen among patients with regard to clouding of consciousness, amnesia, and 
approximate answers.

Although the Ganser state may not result from purposive deception, the overt behavior is similar 
enough  to  malingering  to  make  differential  diagnosis  an  extremely difficult  problem.  Indeed,  the 
examples given of the Ganser state are sometimes indistinguishable from those given for simulation, and 
the same inconsistencies which establish a diagnosis of Ganser syndrome are on other pages proof 
positive of malingering. However, Weiner and Braiman (89) point out that the Ganser patient rarely if 
ever offers a peculiar or approximate answer unless it is solicited, whereas the malingerer is anxious to 
display his peculiarities. Two differences between schizophrenia and the Ganser state have been noted: 
(a) the schizophrenic differs in that his responses are given explosively and impulsively rather than with 
great concentration and thought, and (b) the answers are often irrelevant rather than approximate (53, 58, 
89). The Ganser patient also differs from the schizophrenic by being able to adapt himself to the ward 
situation and to carry out the tasks of the day in a manner which would be inconceivable if he had as 
advanced a dementia as examination seems to indicate (53). Golden and MacDonald (32) and Tyndel (86) 
report success in using electroshock therapy with Ganser patients, with only a few courses being 
necessary. However, the same treatment might be effective with the malingerer for other reasons, and 
therefore this is not a crucial diagnostic test. The Ganser state may clear fairly quickly with alleviation of 
pressures, sympathy, and psychotherapy, which can also be the case in malingering.
-290-
Other Simulations
Mental Deficiency
A criminal awaiting trial or a prisoner about to be interrogated might feign feeblemindedness in hopes 
that the examiner would conclude that he is not responsible for his acts and is unable to give a meaningful 
account of himself. Mental deficiency usually entails a reduced scope of awareness of the environment, 
failure to discriminate between the consequential and the inconsequential, difficulty in forming concepts 
and using symbols, and sometimes poor memory. Although low intelligence would not preclude a source 
from being able to supply some useful information, it might lead an interrogator to reject such a person in 
favor of a more intelligent source. Although a source may play dumb with regard to certain areas of 
discussion, it probably is not too likely that he will play dumb in general, or to the degree that he will be 
classified as defective. His role as a soldier suggests that he has some capacity for training and learning, 
and if he is a commissioned or noncommissioned officer, the odds are very much against an extremely 
low level of intelligence. Thus, it is apparent that the person's history, including his past educational and 
vocational level, is important in evaluating his true intelligence; thus it would be difficult for a person 
with certain minimum accomplishments to deceive others into believing that he is an imbecile or idiot.
Almost all the studies  relating to the simulation of  mental deficiency have employed  standard 
psychometric tests of intelligence. In one of the earliest of these (43), naval recruits were asked to behave 
as if they were defectives, and then their performances were compared with those of true mental 
defectives. Hunt and Older found that the simulators did not act dumb enough, and as a group, their 
scores were higher than those attained by true mental defectives. Goldstein's finding (33) was essentially 
similar. However, more recently, Pollaczek (70) asked college males and naval recruits to simulate 

feeblemindedness on the comprehension, vocabulary, and similarities subtests of the Wechsler-Bellevue 
Intelligence Scale (Form I), and found that their mean scores did not differ significantly from the mean 
scores of the mentally defective control group. Crowley (18), using college females and comparing them 
with defective women on the Kent EGY, found that the mean score of her malingering group was 
significantly lower than that of her feebleminded group. However, all
-291-
these authors would agree that simulated mental deficiency cannot be identified on the basis of total score 
alone unless that total score is extremely low and there is contradictory information available.
Hunt and Older (43) report that the malingerer tries more items than the defective and gets them 
incorrect; whereas the defective does not even attempt many items. However, some malingerers attempt 
only a few items, but they undertake and answer correctly some of the difficult problems after failing 
easier items. This tendency to pass difficult items after failing easy ones has been reported by Crowley 
(18), Goldstein (33), and Hunt and Older (43), and reflects the inability of the malingerer to estimate 
properly the difficulty of a question. This behavior is out of keeping with the typical test performance of 
the true defective who shows little scatter on most intelligence tests. Also, Crowley(18) noted that the 
female malingerers used in her study tended to give foolish, nonsensical answers which often were wildly 
exaggerated or bizarre. The malingerers displayed a better speaking vocabulary than the defectives, and 
answered more quickly on hard questions, but more slowly on easy ones. Pollaczek (70) constructed a 
key for malingering derived from three subtests of the WechslerBellevue Intelligence Scale. Examination 
of the key suggests that malingerers tended to do too well on vocabulary and similarities, but did quite 
poorly on comprehension. Thus the malingerer may misconstrue feeblemindedness as a condition in 
which the person is unable to show judgment in even the simplest social situations, but is able to form 
concepts,  think  abstractly,  and  attain  a  rather  literate  level.  Krout  (50)  suggests  that  the  test  be 
administered twice to note inconsistent behavior. The simulator may come out with the same score, but he 
may change some wrong answers to other wrong answers, or he may even spoil some answers which 
were correct on the first administration. Krout also suggests that the examination of the suspected 
malingerer should begin with the most difficult questions and take the person back to a point near 
imbecility. If he cannot answer even the simplest questions, he is probably trying to be consistently 
defective and is malingering. Hunt (42) indicates that the malingerer and the defective may both give 
wrong answers, but that there are qualitative differences either in the answers or in the manner of 
reaching the answers. On arithmetic, for example, the defective may combine the elements of the problem 
incorrectly and thereby arrive at the wrong answer. The malingerer, however, may perform the correct 
operations, arrive at the correct answer, and then spoil it. Moreover, his response is usually closer to being 
correct and indicates that he was aware of the correct procedure for solving the problem.
-292-
Thus the simulation of mental deficiency is uncovered by procedures similar to those used in detecting 
pseudo-psychosis. Inconsistencies are most important, whether they be inconsistencies within a test or 
with the past history. The person who simulates defectiveness must be extremely clever if he is to evade 
completely the reporting of events and experiences. More than likely such extremely defective behavior 
in the examining situation will be out of line with the adaptiveness and resourcefulness shown in daily 
behavior. If the malingerer chooses to be as low as the idiot or imbecile, then he must select the items to 

which he will respond, and it is likely that he will overestimate or underestimate their difficulty, or 
demonstrate the qualitative differences between the simulator and the true defective in other ways.
Amnesia
Amnesia may  be  a symptom of  organic  brain  disfunction,  hysteria,  psychosis,  or  malingering. 
According to MacDonald (58), it is a popular and frequent symptom among malingerers. By saying that 
he cannot remember, the malingerer implies that he was not responsible for any criminal acts which 
might have occurred when he was not himself. A prisoner of war might plead an inability to respond to 
the interrogator's questions because the stress and strain of combat and capture have caused him to lose 
his memory. Since a symptom such as this is not too uncommon among soldiers who have lived through 
rather harrowing experiences, a thorough investigation and evaluation of the amnesia are warranted.
Genuine amnesia associated with pathology of the brain may result from head injury, acute infection, 
toxemia, narcotics, alcohol, or epilepsy. There may be loss of memory for events which immediately 
preceded the head trauma and for those which immediately followed. In more extreme cases, other 
symptoms will be present, such as stupor, delirium, and bizarreness (52). Immediately following cerebral 
trauma, there may be a curious in and out state of awareness, where the patient loses and regains 
consciousness (67). The patient may have a spotty memory for this period of time, which seems to be a 
function of a failure to acquire information rather than an inability to recall it. This condition may last for 
hours or days, and the patient will remember only very isolated events of that period. Retrograde 
amnesia, or the forgetting of events prior to the injury, usually spans only a short period of time prior to 
the trauma, and is of short duration. Russell (75) studied retrograde amnesia in 200
-293-
cases of head injury and found that in 180 cases the retrograde amnesia lasted only a few seconds or 
minutes, and that in only four cases was it more than 24 hours. However, in severe cases, the memory 
loss may extend to the person's entire life. Not only can there be a loss of personal memories, but there 
can also be a loss of acquired facts and performances (aphasia). According to Nielsen (67) the malingerer 
rarely imitates aphasia when he complains of amnesia. Nor does he often feign loss of personal identity, 
which sometimes occurs in genuine amnesia. The period of amnesia in epileptics usually has definite 
limits. The epileptic may be able to state what he was doing up to a certain point, then everything goes 
blank, and after a blurred period, he can again remember subsequent events (52, 67). Events during the 
seizure are not recalled, however.
Under circumstances of war, head injury and amnesia are possible, and a careful physical examination 
appears necessary. If the prisoner complains of head trauma, if the scope of the amnesia is limited to the 
period surrounding the time of the injury, and if the laboratory and physical findings are positive, the 
amnesia probably has a genuine basis in cerebral pathology.
Amnesia, however, may result from psychic trauma, and almost all authorities are agreed that it is 
exceedingly difficult to separate malingering from hysterical symptoms. Extreme combat anxiety may 
result in an amnesia, especially for the traumatic events which were most anxiety provoking. The patient's 
memory for this period is usually a complete blank, and although he wishes to fill in the gap, he finds 

himself fearful and anxious when he tries to think of the events leading up to the trauma (36, 37). 
Although in most war neuroses, the amnesia is for a circumscribed period, there are cases in which a 
person's entire past experiences and identity are forgotten (44, 52). Very often the person who is amnesic 
on a neurotic basis exhibits other typical anxiety reactions, such as tremulousness, tenseness, restlessness, 
overresponsivity, sleep difficulties, and poor appetite. The malingerer, on the other hand, may not exhibit 
these correlated symptoms, and instead of being somewhat anxious and withdrawn, he may be dramatic, 
argumentative, and demanding (55). Amnesia resulting from psychic trauma differs from that based on 
physical trauma in that there is no cerebral pathology, and the memory loss is reversible once the conflict 
is lifted.
The most effective technique for differentiating neurotic and malingered amnesia appears to be 
narcoanalysis (see also Chapter 3). The reason for this runs counter to popular conceptions. It is effective 
because it does not make the malingerer tell the truth. The
-294-
neurotic is usually able to recall the traumatic experiences when given barbiturates, and thus differs from 
the malingerer who continues to resist efforts to lift his amnesia. This difference seems well documented 
in the literature. Ludwig (55) felt that neurotic patients will talk freely under sodium amytal and will 
cooperate willingly in attempts to regain the traumatic episode. The malingerer when narcotized fails to 
show the productivity of the neurotic patient and combats every effort to recover the lost memory with 
negativism (37, 55). Hurst (44) and Nielsen (67) using hypnosis report the same differential reaction. 
Gerson and Victoroff (27) found only six out of 17 malingerers compliant to sodium amytal interviews. In 
most of their cases fears and fantasies became so intertwined with the truth that the malingerers' 
productions under amytal could not be considered valid. Adatto (1) noted this same tendency to fabulize 
under thiopental narcosis. Redlich, Ravitz, and Dession (71) asked their normal subjects to withhold an 
embarrassing incident from an interviewer during a sodium amytal interview. For the most part the 
subjects were able to do so, and the authors postulate a need for punishment in the two subjects who 
made full confessions. These authors conclude, as does Inbau (45), that "truth serums" are successful on 
persons who would have disclosed their information anyway, and that the person who is lying will 
continue his deception under drugs. See (Chapter 3.)
Not only does the person suffering from a war neurosis usually recall the traumatic events while 
narcotized but he also behaves differently during the interviews from the malingerer (1, 37). Neurotic 
patients were found to be eager to recover the events, they groped for an answer, and were upset at not 
being able to recall. In discussing the events surrounding the period of amnesia they would frequently 
become restless, perspire profusely, become tense and rigid, breathe rapidly, move convulsively, and 
sometimes cry out. The intensity of the emotion may become unbearable when the patient reaches the 
climax of the story. The malingerer rarely shows these emotional and physiologic reactions under sodium 
amytal. However, according to Grinker and Spiegel (37), there are some neurotic patients who show little 
overt anxiety and who block in the account of their experience as they approach the moment of trauma. In 
such cases, Grinker and Spiegel report that more than one session of narcosynthesis may be necessary to 
recover the trauma.
This, then, appears to be the most effective procedure for differentiating hysterical amnesia from 
malingered amnesia. According to MacDonald (57) narcoanalysis may work in even another fashion. It

-295-
sometimes provides the malingering criminal with an apparently honorable way of divulging what he 
claims to have forgotten. Although narcoanalysis seems to help in differentiating neurotic and malingered 
amnesia, it cannot rule out the possibility of organic pathology. Sodium amytal will not lift amnesia due 
to brain disfunction, and there is some evidence that it will not restore memories to acutely psychotic 
individuals (12).
Applications to Interrogation
At first glance, interrogation would appear to be a situation where malingering is quite likely to be 
employed. The captive source is faced with the dilemma of which of two roles to play-that demanded by 
his country or that demanded by the enemy-and his selection of either role might result in serious 
sanctions, including loss of life. The simulation of incompetence offers a solution to this role conflict by 
enabling the prisoner to remain loyal to his country and by providing him with an alibi for not submitting 
to the enemy. However, a number of circumstances peculiar to the interrogation situation seem to operate 
in an opposite direction and may be influential in reducing the likelihood of malingering. These factors 
appear to have a restraining influence on the prisoner and a liberating one on the interrogator.
As  compared  with  the  citizen,  the  prisoner  must  show  greater  restraint  and  care  in  adopting 
malingering as a solution because of his uncertainty of the effect of such a role. In civilian life, simulation 
is attempted partly because of the humanitarian values held by the society. The person hopes that he will 
be labeled mentally ill, and when this happens, he expects that no further demands will be made on him, 
that he will not be held responsible for his conduct, and that he will be treated with kindness and care. 
The prisoner who simulates in the interrogation situation has no such assurance about the enemy's 
humanitarian and benevolent outlook. Mental illness may be considered deviationism or negativism, 
either in the culture in general or in the interrogation situation in particular. Moreover, the prisoner may 
have become convinced, and perhaps realistically, that his life depends on his worth to the enemy, and 
that if he cannot give information, he has no worth. This may make the prisoner reluctant to appear 
incompetent, or at least completely incompetent, and therefore would act to reduce the amount and 
degree of malingering. Thus, the prisoner is uncertain that simulation would
-296-
produce the desired effect, and indeed, there is the danger that if his ruse is accepted, the directly opposite 
effect might result.
The prisoner may be restrained from or reluctant to initiate or continue malingering because of the 
nature of the prisoner-interrogator relatioaship. The relationship offers the potential for rather great 
intimacy, and therefore for the development of fear and guilt in the prisoner. Fear may not be as great a 
component in civil life since the malingerer is assured a great deal of protection. Many people are 
involved in his case, and appeals are always possible to courts, civil rights boards, mental health 
commissions, etc. The prisoner of war, however, may be placed in the custody of a single interrogator, or 
he may be made to believe that it is the interrogator alone who makes all the decisions about his well-
being, his value to the enemy, and his fate. With one authority figure who has seemingly unlimited power, 

the game becomes more dangerous, since the sanctions for being caught in a deception may be immediate 
and great, and there is no recourse or appeal to other power figures. Thus, the fear of being found out 
should be greater in the interrogation situation; this should serve to reduce the amount of malingering 
attempted and possibly reduce the adequacy of the simulation that is attempted.
Guilt may become involved because of the closeness  which sometimes grows up between the 
interrogator and the prisoner. In some lengthy interrogations, the interrogator may, by virtue of his role as 
the sole supplier of satisfaction and punishment, assume the stature and importance of a parental figure in 
the prisoner's feeling and thinking. Although there may be intense hatred for the interrogator, it is not 
unusual for warm feelings also to develop. This ambivalence is the basis for guilt reactions, and if the 
interrogator nourishes these feelings, the guilt may be strong enough to influence the prisoner's behavior. 
Under such circumstances, the person who attempts malingering may begin to feel that he is taking 
advantage of the interrogator and may feel some guilt for misleading the one person who seems to be 
interested in him and who is looking after his welfare. Guilt makes compliance more likely, or at least it 
increases the likelihood that the prisoner may drop his simulated role.
For his part, the interrogator has fewer of the restraints and control than a psychiatric interviewer 
would have in a democratic society dedicated to humanitarian values. He can easily make the prisoner 
feel that his life is under his control, and that psychosis or the simulation of psychosis would be punished 
just as severely as any other type of resistance. Although persons charged with major crimes are 
malingering in increasing numbers to avoid imprisonment,
-297-
it seems that simulation by persons charged with less serious offenses is on the decline since these people 
have realized that being committed to a mental hospital for an indeterminate period can drag out longer 
than a delineated jail term. Also, the physical techniques for treating mental illness can be quite 
frightening to a patient; thus it is likely that a malingerer will think twice before allowing himself to be 
subjected to a course of electroshock treatment and be even more reluctant to undergo a lobotomy. The 
interrogator is especially free to use these devices as threats, whereas the civilian psychiatrist must 
consider many other factors.
The interrogator has another advantage over his clinical counterpart in civilian life when it comes to 
reducing the amount of malingering in an entire group of men. When persons charged with crimes are 
placed together on the same ward while undergoing psychiatric observation prior to trial, there is a great 
deal of coaching and training occurring among them as they teach one another how to "bug out." 
Moreover, when a patient leaves the ward to go to trial, the other patients have no idea whether or not his 
ruse has been successful. The interrogator, however, can keep his prime sources separated so that there is 
no cross-fertilization, and also he can attempt to extinguish malingering in the group by exposing and 
punishing an unsuccessful malingerer. Thus he can give himself or the unit the reputation for being a 
shrewd detector of deception and a harsh punisher of such duplicity.
Once the prisoner gets the feeling that his pretense is endangered, the interrogator may supply him 
with many face-saving devices which would allow him to relinquish the symptoms that prevent him from 
cooperating, but without forcing him to admit his guilt. Already mentioned was the technique of giving 
the prisoner "treatment" for his illness, one that is guaranteed to bring about a cure. Thus the prisoner 
may behave as if the pills or the electroshock did produce a cure or that the hypnosis or narcosis did allow 

him to recover his memory, and there will be no need to admit the malingering or suffer punishment for 
it. The prisoner may use this way out if he gets the impression that the interrogator is becoming wise or is 
demanding recovery.
Another honorable way out for the prisoner could be to remain "ill" but not to allow the illness to 
interfere with the communication of relevant information. The interrogator might allow the prisoner to 
keep his simulated depression, delusions, or posturing and gesturing, but he would insist that these 
symptoms in no way interfere with his ability to recall and communicate important facts. To augment
-298-
this  approach,  the  interrogator  might  "treat"  only  those  symptoms  which  cause  memory  or 
communication difficulty, reassuring the prisoner that the other symptoms will remain for a while and 
that he will be hospitalized and be given more care and privileges than he might otherwise receive. This 
approach makes it possible for the prisoner to cooperate without revealing his deception, and it offers a 
substitute goal for the malingering — that of better treatment and privileges. From the interrogator's 
standpoint, these indirect approaches would appear to be preferable to direct confrontation, except under 
some circumstances where the evidence of malingering was overwhelming and he was certain that the 
prisoner had great ego strength.
Direct confrontation could conceivably produce a real psychic disorder, especially in those persons 
who are borderline psychotics to begin with and whose symptoms are exaggerations of their own latent 
tendences. As Hurst (44) and Eissler (22) point out, that which was feigned at one time may show up as a 
real illness at a later time. If the anxiety over sanctions for malingering is too great, the prisoner may 
deny to himself that he is willfully faking, and the symptoms may then become determined without 
awareness and thereby become less amenable to the interrogator's procedures. This seems to be the type 
of stress situation which produces a Ganser state. If forced compliance to the interrogator would produce 
more anxiety and guilt than would malingering, a serious disorder may be the alternative which the 
prisoner will take.
Thus, it would seem that the rational interrogator is constrained to use his extensive power over the 
prisoner carefully, lest a real disorder be precipitated and the prisoner's potential value be lost completely.
Conclusions
Detection of Malingering
Exact procedures for the determination of malingering are not available. Few true psychotics display 
the exact symptoms of the textbook cases, and this wide range of variability among psychotics requires 
evaluations of a wide variety of symptom patterns for the detection of malingering. The malingerer may 
demonstrate a set of symptoms which must be entertained as a possible deviation from the more usual 
syndromes. It is only through rather skillful and lengthy observations that an examiner may be able to 
come to the conclusion

-299-
that the patient is feigning his condition. Hurst (44) feels that malingering can be diagnosed with certainty 
only when the simulator is caught flagrante delicto or gives an unforced confession. Eissler (22) doubts 
the validity of confessions, since psychotics or borderline psychotics may feign malingering. The fact that 
borderline schizophrenics may try to malinger complicates the matter and makes diagnosis more difficult. 
Another complicating but undetermined factor is the effect the role may have upon the malingerer. Hurst 
(44) suggests that what was simulated may become a truly hysterical symptom after a time. There are 
therapeutic techniques which are dedicated to the proposition that a person may unconsciously take over 
portions of roles which he has consciously enacted (48, 64). Experimental support for this may be found 
in a study by Sarbin and Jones (80) which showed that the subject's self concept may shift following role 
enactment, and the change is in part a function of the specific role enacted. Thus, the determinants and 
effects of malingering are only somewhat understood. Correct diagnosis must still depend on the skill 
and experience of the examiner.
Effectiveness of Malingering as Countermanipulation
The advantages of malingering to an individual resisting coercive attempts to influence his behavior 
lie primarily in the cultural definitions of the psychotic as incompetent and not responsible for his acts. 
The discouragement of malingering involves principally the creation of the impression that psychosis is 
no excuse or that the person who is detected in malingering will be treated even more harshly than he 
might otherwise have been. When the value conflict is sufficiently great, however, neither threat nor 
actual punishment may be capable of forcing the person to abandon malingering as defense. The 
prudence in the use of threat and punishment forced on a rational interrogator by the possibility of 
creating a genuine disorder confers an additional advantage on the malingerer.
Risks of Malingering
In considering recommendations of malingering as a resistance tactic in training military personnel for 
the event of capture, certain dangers follow from these same three factors: the cultural definitions of the 
insane person, the rationality of the interrogator, and the possibility of a genuine disorder being created. 
Captors may not operate with humane cultural definitions toward the psychotic, and
-300-
they may not be constrained by rationality in their use of threats and punishments. The risk the malingerer 
takes must be evaluated in terms of the importance of the goal of resistance and the possible effectiveness 
of alternative modes of resistance and evasion open to him. The risks involve both the damage the captor 
may inflict upon him and the possibilities of a real and lasting personality disorder resulting from his 
simulation.
References

1. Adatto C. P. "Observations on criminal patients during narcoanalysis". A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1949, 62, 83-92.
2. Anderson E. W., and Mallinson W. P. "Psychogenic episodes in the course of major psychoses". J. ment. Sci., 1941, 87, 
383-396.
3. Arnold Magda B. "On the mechanism of suggestion and hypnosis". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1946, 41, 107-128.
4. Atkin I. "Simulation of insanity". Lancet, 1951, 261, 385-386.
5. Baldwin J. Notes of a native son. Boston: Beacon, 1955.
6. Benedict Ruth. "Anthropology and the abnormal". J. gen. Psychol., 1934, 10, 59-82.
7. Benton A. L. "Rorschach performance of suspected malingerers". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1945, 40, 94-96.
8. Bleuler E. Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie. Berlin: Julius Springer, 1937.
9. Block J. "The assessment of communication: Role variations as a function of interactional context". J. Pers., 1952, 21, 
272-286.
10. Block J. "Affective responsiveness in lie detection". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1957, 55, 11-15.
11. Block J., and Bennett Lillian. "The assessment of communication: Perception and transmission as a function of the 
social situation". Hum. Relat., 1955, 8. 317-325.
12. Bogoch S. "A preliminary study of postshock amnesia by amytal interview". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1954, 111, 108-111.
13. Bowman K. M. "The relation of defective mental and nervous states to military efficiency". Mil. Surg., 1920, 46, 651-
669.
14. Cameron N. Psychology of behavior disorders. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1947.
15. Campbell W. G. "Student honesty as revealed by reporting teacher's errors in grading". Sch. and Soc., 1931, 33, 97-100.
16. Carp A. L., and Shavzin A. R. "The susceptibility to falsification of the Rorschach diagnostic technique". J. consult. 
Psychol., 1950, 14, 230-233.
17. Christensen H. J. "An experiment in honesty". Soc. Forces, 1947- 1948, 28, 298-302.
18. Crowley Miriam E. "The use of the Kent EGY for the detection of malingering". J. clin. Psychol., 1952, 8, 332-337.
19. Davidson H. A. "Malingered psychosis". Bull. Menninger Clin., 1950, 14, 157-163.
-301-
20. Didato S. V. "The influence of social factors on group conformity in normal and abnormal personalities: A study of 
perception of unstable stimuli and norm formation". Amer. Psychologist, 1955, 10, 368-369. (Abstract)
21. Drake Frances E. "A study of the personality traits of students interested in acting". Speech Monogr., 1950, 17, 123-
133.

22. Eissler K. R. Malingering. In G. B. Wilbur and W. Muensterberger (Eds.), Psychoanalysis and culture. New York: 
Internat. Univer. Press, 1951. Pp. 218-253.
23. Flicker D. "Malingering — a symptom". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1956, 123, 23-31.
24. Fosberg I. A. "Rorschach reactions under varied instructions". Rorschach Res. Exch., 1938, 3, 12-31.
25. Fosberg I. A. "An experiment study of the reliability of the Rorschach psychodiagnostic technique". Rorschach Res. 
Exch., 1941, 5, 72-84.
26. Ganser S. J. M. "Uber einen eigenartigen hypterischen Dammerzustand". Arch. f. Psychiat. Nervenh., 1897, 30, p. 633.
27. Gerson M. J., and Victoroff V. "Experimental investigation into the validity of confessions obtained under sodium 
amytal narcosis". J. clin. Psychopath., 1948, 8, 359-375.
28. Gill M. "Malingering". Bull. Menninger Clin., 1941, 5, 157-160.
29. Gillespie R. I. Psychological effects of war on citizen and soldier. New York: Norton, 1942.
30. Glueck B. Studies in forensic psychiatry. London: Heinemann, 1916.
31. Goffman E. "On face-work, an analysis of ritual elements in social interaction". Psychiatry, 1955, 18, 213-231.
32. Golden S., and MacDonald J. E. "The Ganser state". J. ment. Sci., 1955, 101, 267-280.
33. Goldstein H. "A malingering key for mental tests". Psychol. Bull., 1945, 42, 104-108.
34. Good R. "Malingering". Brit. J. med. Psychol., 1942, 2, 359-362.
35. Gough H. G. "A sociological theory of psychopathy". Amer. J. Sociol., 1948, 53, 359-366.
36. Grinker R. R., and Spiegel J. P. Men under stress. Philadelphia: Blakiston, 1945.
37. Grinker R. R., and Spiegel J. P. War neurosis. Philadelphia: Blakiston, 1945.
38. Gullahorn J. J. "Measuring role conflict". Amer. J. Sociol., 1956, 61, 299-303.
39. Hartshorne H., and May M. A. Studies in deceit. New York: Macmillan, 1928. 2 vols.
40. Helfand J. "Role taking in schizophrenia". J. consult. Psychol., 1956, 20, 37-41.
41. Helgesson U. H. "The scope of psychiatry in military medicine with special reference to the navy". U. S. Nav. Med. 
Bull., 1942, 40, 80-91.
42. Hunt W. A. "The uses and abuses of psychometric tests". Ky. law J., 1946, 35, 38-72.
43. Hunt W. A., and Older H. J. "Detection of malingering through psychometric tests". U. S. Nav. Med. Bull., 1943, 41, 
1318- 1323.
44. Hurst Sir A. Medical diseases of war. (3rd ed.) Baltimore: Williams: & Wilkins, 1943.

45. Inbau F. E. Self-incrimination. Springfield, Illinois: C. C. Thomas, 1950.
46. Inbau F. E., and Reid J. E. Lie detection and criminal interrogation. (3rd ed.) Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1953.
-302-
47. Jones A. B., and Llewellyn R. L. J. Malingering: Or the simulation of disease. London: Heinemann, 1917.
48. Kelly G. A. "The psychology of personal constructs". Vol. 1. Theory of personality. New York: Norton, 1955.
49. Kraepelin E. Clinical psychiatry. London: Macmillan, 1915.
50. Krout M. H. "Malingering on psychological tests at armed forces induction centers". Psychol. Serv. Cent. J., 1950, 2, 
55-66.
51. Krueger W. C. F. "Student honesty in correcting grading errors". J. appl. Psychol., 1947, 31, 533-535.
52. Lennox W. G. "Amnesia, real and feigned". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1943, 99, 732-743.
53. Lewis A. "Psychological medicine". In F. W. Price (Ed.), Textbook of the practice of medicine. London: Oxford Univer. 
Press, 1950. Pp. 1879-1976.
54. Lieberman A. A. "The Ganser syndrome in psychoses". J. nerv. ment. Dis., 1954, 120, 10-16.
55. Ludwig A. O. "Clinical features and diagnosis of malingering in military personnel". War Med., 1944, 5, 378-382.
56. Lykken D. T. "A study of anxiety in the sociopathic personality". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1957, 55, 6-10.
57. MacDonald J. M. "Narcoanalysis and criminal law". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1954, 111, 283-288.
58. MacDonald J. M. "Psychiatry and the criminal". Springfield, Illinois: C. C. Thomas, 1958.
59. McQueen R. "Examination deception as a function of residual background. and immediate stimulus factors". J. Pers., 
1957, 25, 643-650.
60. Mann T. Confession of Felix Krull, confidence man: The early years. New York: Knopf, 1955.
61. Mayer-Gross W., Slater E., and Roth M. Clinical Psychiatry. London: Cassel, 1954.
62. Meltzer M. L. Role variability as a function of the understanding of others. Washington, D. C.: Catholic Univer. Press, 
1957.
63. Meltzoff J. "The effect of mental set and item structure upon responses to a projective test". Amer. Psychologist, 1950, 
5, 326. (Abstract)
64. Moreno J. L. Psychodrama. New York: Beacon, 1946.
65. Murphy E. L. Malingering. In W. R. Bett (Ed.), The history of conquest of common diseases. Norman, Oklahoma: 
Univer. Oklahoma Press, 1954.

66. Newman S. "The relationship between imaginative role-taking and conditions of psychological need". Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, Ohio State Univer., 1955.
67. Nielson J. M. Memory and amnesia. Los Angeles: San Lucas Press, 1958.
68. Noyes A. P. Modern clinical psychiatry. (4th ed.) Philadelphia: Saunders, 1953.
69. Ossipov V. P. "Malingering: The simulation of psychosis". Bull. Menninger Clin., 1944, 8, 39-42.
70. Pollaczek Penelope P. "A study of malingering on the CVS abbreviated individual intelligence scale". J. clin. Psychol., 
1952, 8, 75-81.
71. Redlich F. C., Ravitz L. J., and Dession G. H. "Narcoanalysis and truth". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1951, 107, 586-593.
72. Reid J. E. and Arthur R. O. "Behavior symptoms of lie-detector subjects". J. crim. Law Criminol. and police Sci., 1953, 
44, 104-108.
-303-
73. Rosenberg S. J., and Feldberg T. M. "Rorschach characteristics of a group of malingerers". Rorsch. Res. Exch., 1944, 8, 
141-158.
74. Rosenthal D., and Frank J. D. "Psychotherapy and the placebo effect". Psychol. Bull., 1956, 53, 294-302.
75. Russell W. R. "Amnesia following head injuries". Lancet, 1935, 229, 762-765.
76. Sarbin T. R. "Contributions to role-taking theory: I. Hypnotic behavior". Psychol. Rev., 1950, 57, 255-270.
77. Sarbin T. R. "Role theory". In G. Lindzey (Ed.),  Handbook of social psychology. Vol. I.  Theory and method. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1954. Pp. 223-258.
78. Sarbin T. R., and Farberow N. I. "Contributions to role-taking theory: A clinical study of self and role". J. abnorm. soc. 
Psychol., 1952, 47, 117-125.
79. Sarbin T. R., and Hardyck C. "Conformance in role perception". J. consult. Psychol., 1955, 19, 109-111.
80. Sarbin T. R., and Jones D. S. "An experimental analysis of role behavior". J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 1955, 51, 236-241.
81. Spohn H. E. "The effect of group norms upon perception in chronic schizophrenic patients". Amer. Psychologist, 1956, 
11, 366. (Abstract)
82. Stern E. S., and Whiles W. H. "Three Ganser states and Hamlet". J. ment. Sci., 1942, 88, 134-141.
83. Szasz T. S. "Malingering: Diagnosis or social condemnation"? A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 1956, 76, 432-443.
84. Toby J. "Some variables in role conflict analysis". Soc. Forces, 1952, 30, 323-327.
85. Turner R. H. "Moral judgment: A study in roles". Amer. sociol. Rev., 1954, 17, 72-74.
86. Tyndel M. "Some aspects of the Ganser state". J. ment. Sci., 1956, 102, 324-329.

87. Wachpress M., Berenberg A. N., and Jacobson A. "Simulation of psychosis". Psychiat. Quart., 1953, 27, 463-473.
88. Waud S. P. Malingering. Mil. Surg., 1942, 91, 535-538.
89. Weiner H., and Braiman A. "The Ganser syndrome". Amer. J. Psychiat., 1955, 111, 767-773.
90. Weisskopf Edith A., and Dieppa J. J. "Experimentally induced faking of TAT responses". J. consult. Psychol., 1951, 15, 
469-474.
91. Wertham F. The show of violence. New York: Doubleday, 1949.
92.  Wolf  S.  "Effects of suggestion and conditioning on  the  action  of chemical agents  in  human  subjects  —  the 
pharmacology of placebos". J. clin. Invest., 1950, 29, 100-109.
-304-
Author Index
Abramson, H. A., 123, 134, 138
Adams, J. K., 161, 167
Adatto, C. P., 295, 301
Adler, M. H., 176, 212
Aginger, J., 23, 35-36, 44
Ai Ssu-ch'i 6, 15
Akman, L. 21, 45
Albert, S. N., 21, 44
Alvord, E. C., Jr., 14, 16
Anderson, E. W., 290, 301
Andren, H. E., 120, 135
Applezweig, M. H., 219-220, 256, 274
Arnold, A. L., 126, 137
Arnold, Magda B., 285, 301
Arthur, R. O., 286, 303
Asch, S. E. 217, 219-220, 225, 229, 233, 235, 237, 240, 258, 270
Atkin, I., 232-283, 301
Azima, Fern J., 86, 91, 126, 135
Azima, H., 86, 91, 126, 135
 
Back, K. W., 218, 220, 222-223, 225, 243
Baker, A. A., 124, 135
Baldwin, J., 282, 301
Barber, T. X., 174, 212
Barch, A. M., 219, 221, 226, 232, 270
Barker, W., 171, 212
Barnett, C. C., 151, 167
Barnett, W. W., 120, 136
Baron, S. H., 219-220, 225, 264, 275
Barron, F., 218-221, 223-226, 253, 254, 257, 270

Barsa, J. A., 126, 135
Bartley, S. N., 27-28, 30-33, 44
Bass, M. J., 171, 212
Bauer, R. A., 2, 5-6, 15
Beach, F. A., 55. 91
Beck, F., 29, 44
Beecher, H. K., 34, 36-37, 44, 99-100, 104, 106, 108, 116, 120, 135-136, 138, 140, 201, 212
Behringer, R., 222, 225, 234, 276
Beigel, H. C., 194, 212
Bein, H. J., 125, 135, 139
Bellak, 121, 135
Bellamy, R. Q., 219, 233, 270
Belleville, R. E., 102, 137
Beloff, H., 218, 221, 223-224, 226, 251, 253, 262, 270
Benedek, Theresa, 109, 135
Benedict, Ruth, 283, 301
Benjamin, F. B., 31, 34, 36-37, 45, 125, 135
Bennett, A. M. H., 86, 91
Bennett, Edith B., 218, 222, 226, 265, 270
Bennett, Lillian, 280, 301
-305-
Bensheim, H., 108, 135
Benton, A. L., 288, 301
Benussi, V., 142, 144, 165, 167
Bercel, N. A., 123, 135
Berenburg, A. N., 283, 288, 304
Berenda, Ruth W., 219-220, 223, 225 226, 229, 237, 250, 252, 254, 270
Bergman, M. S., 192, 212
Bergman, P. S., 118, 135
Beringer, K., 107, 137
Berkowitz, A., 219, 233, 270
Berkowitz, L., 218, 222, 225-226, 242 243, 270
Berkowitz, M., 219-220, 224-225, 258, 273
Berlin, L., 24-25, 35, 37-40, 42, 45
Berman, E. F., 21, 45
Bernheim, H., 172, 174, 212
Best, C. H., 20, 45
Bexton, W. H., 2, 15, 28, 45-46, 55, 58, 60-61, 63-64, 67, 72, 74, 84, 91, 93 94, 111, 135, 137
Biderman, A. D., 2-3, 5-7, 12, 15-16, 44-45, 54, 69, 74, 91, 204, 206, 209, 212
Billings, R. M., 31, 45
Binet, A., 174, 212
Bird, E. G., 124, 135
Bischoff, A., 111, 135
Blackburn, I., 22, 49
Blake, R. R., 217-221, 223-226, 228-233, 235-238, 245-246, 249-251, 255, 258 262, 270-275
Bland, J. H., 22, 23, 45
Bleuler, E., 282-283, 289-290, 301
Bliss, T. L., 35, 49

Bloch, Barbara L., 219-220, 223, 225, 239, 246, 261, 274
Block, J., 280, 287, 301
Block, S., 108, 137
Boaz, T. J., 155, 168
Bogoch, S., 296, 301
Boling, J. S., 21, 44
Bombard, A., 52, 91
Bone, E., 29, 33, 45
Boring, E. G., 171, 212
Bovard, E. W., Jr., 219-220, 222, 225 226, 241, 263, 265, 271
Bowers-Buch, M. K., 192, 213
Bowles, J. W., 162, 167
Bowman, K. M., 281, 301
Boyd, R. W., 155, 167
Braid, J., 171, 174, 212
Braiman, A., 209, 304
Bramwell, J. M., 186, 212
Brauchi, J. T., 30, 45
Bray, D. W., 219-220, 223, 226, 239, 252, 261, 271
Brehm, J. W., 218-220, 225-226, 233, 215, 270-271
Brenman, Margaret, 177, 182, 195, 206, 212-213
Bressler, G., 66, 70-71, 76, 79, 82, 85, 92
Brickner, R. M., 118, 135
Bronner, A., 117, 135
Brown, E. B., Jr., 22, 45
Brozek, J., 23, 45, 35-36
Brun, C., 22-23, 45
Bruner, J. S., 60, 88, 91
Brussel, J. A., 119, 135
Buchwald, A. M., 149, 150, 153, 167
Burgwin, S., 171, 212
Burke, C. J., 143-144, 148-151, 154, 167
Burney, C., 52, 83, 88, 91, 111, 136
Burns, B. D., 34, 36, 47
Burtt, H. E., 218, 222-223, 225, 249, 271
Busch, A. K., 123, 136
Butler, B. A., 54, 91
Byrd, R. E., 52, 91
 
Cadwallader, T. C., 60, 92
Camberari, J. D., 64, 68-69, 72, 81, 82, 92
Cameron, N., 280, 301
Campbell, D. T., 219, 222, 273
Campbell, W. G., 282, 301
Candland, D. R., 62, 79, 95
Carlson, A. J., 34-35, 45
Carp, A. L., 289, 301
Carpenter, B., 218, 222, 224-225, 230, 237, 255, 275
Carpenter, Janeth T., 218, 222, 224-225, 230, 237, 255, 275

Cattell, J. P., 107, 121-122, 136-137
Caylor, J. S., 222, 229, 230, 271
Cecil, R. L. F., 50
Cervin, V., 218, 222-223, 225, 258, 271
Chalke, F. C. R., 31, 45
Chalmers, T. M., 22-23, 45
Chandler, P. J., 219, 221, 226, 231-232, 259, 272
Chapman, L. F., 24-25, 35, 37-40, 42, 45
Chapman, W. P., 45
-306-
Chappell, M. W., 147, 167
Charatan, F. B. E., 124, 136
Cherry, C., 40, 45
Chesley, G., 45
Christensen, H. J., 282, 301
Christian, R. M., 24, 48
Chute, E., 27-28, 30-33, 44
Clare, H. E., 125, 135
Clark, B., 30, 50
Clark, Helen, 219-220, 226, 233, 271
Clark, L. A., 120, 136
Clark, L. D., 108, 116, 136, 139
Cleghorn, R. A., 119, 136
Clements, H. S., 152, 168
Cline, H. S., 126, 137
Cohen, B. D., 63-65, 70, 92, 94
Cohen, B. P., 217, 271
Cohen, S. I., 66, 70-71, 76, 79, 82, 85, 92
Cohen, W, 60, 72-73, 79, 92, 219-220, 223, 226, 253, 272
Cohn, R., 118, 139
Cohn, W. M., 117, 119, 124, 136
Cole, D. L., 219-220, 225, 238, 260, 271
Coleman, fanct F., 219, 221, 225, 249, 260, 271
Collins, W, 70, 94
Conn, J. W., 23, 45
Conner, E., 28, 30, 48
Couston, T. A., 34, 36, 45
Cowden, P. C., 126, 136
Cramer, Fern J., 86, 91, 126, 135
Crane, G. E., 121, 136
Crasilneck, H. B., 193, 214
Crosskey, M., 34, 36, 37, 48
Crowley, Miriam E., 291-292, 301
Crutchfield, R. S., 218-219, 221, 223-226, 228, 247, 249, 253-254, 257-258, 277
Culler, R. L., 161, 168
Curran, D., 24, 26, 42, 45, 50
 
Dana, H. F., 151, 167

Daniels, R S., 108, 137
Danowski, T. S., 21-23, 45-46
Davidson, H. A., 278, 283-284, 301
Davies, L. A., 119, 139
Davies, M. E. B., 123, 136
Davies, T. S., 123, 136
Davis, F. H., 159, 168
Davis, J. F, 162, 167
Davis, J. M., 61, 65, 73, 82, 89, 92
Davis, K., 28, 45, 54, 92
Davis, R. C., 80, 92, 143-146, 148-155, 167
Dawson, H. E., 155, 167
Day, J., 126, 140
Delay, J., 119, 124, 136
Dement, W., 81, 92
Denbar, H. C. B., 122, 136
Denber, H. C., 124, 135
Deniker, P., 124, 136
Dennis, W., 54, 92
Dennison, D. R., 151, 167
Deshon, H. J., 103, 122-123, 136, 139
Dession, G. H., 114, 139, 195, 213, 295, 303
Deutsch, M., 219-221, 225, 230, 240, 245, 259, 261, 271
De Verteuil, R., 126, 135
Didato, S. V., 219-220, 224-225, 258, 271, 288, 302
Dieppa, J. J., 289, 304
Dill, D. B., 28, 31, 33, 45
DiMascio, A., 155, 167
Dittes, J. E., 218-219, 225, 243, 260, 271
Diven, K., 161, 167
Dlin, B. M., 99, 136
Doane, B. K., 28, 47, 58, 61, 64, 92-94
Dobie, S. I., 63-65, 70, 92, 94
Donnelly, R. C., 195, 213
Drake, Frances E., 280, 302
Dreikurs, E., 123, 135
Drevdahl, J., 219-220, 224-225, 258, 273
DuBois, E. F., 20, 45
Duncker, K., 218, 220, 223, 226, 232, 237, 249, 264, 271
Dye, W. S., 21, 47
 
Edwards, A. S., 28, 30, 33, 46
Edwards, W. L. J., 22-23, 46
Ehrmantraut, W. R., 21, 46
Eisenman, A. J., 127, 137
Eissler, K. R., 281, 283, 285, 299, 300, 302
Elithorn, A., 34, 36-37, 48
Elkinton, J. R., 21, 23, 46
Ellertson, N., 222, 225-226, 243, 260, 275

Ellis, F. P., 27, 46
Ellson, D, G., 143-145, 148-151, 154, 167
Ellsworth, R. B., 120, 136
Engel, B. T., 152, 168
Engel, G. L., 24, 48
-307-
Erickson, E. M., 180, 213
Erickson, M. H., 172, 180, 185, 213
Essig, C. F., 127, 136
Estabrooks, G. H., 197, 213
Evarts, E. V., 51, 53, 92, 94, 106, 138
 
Fabing, H. D., 120, 136
Farber, I. E., 2, 15-16
Farberow, N. I., 280, 304
Fazekas, J. F., 21-22, 46
Federn, E., 2, 16
Feldberg, T. M., 288, 304
Féré, C., 174, 212
Fergus, E. B., 22, 45
Ferguson, J. T., 120, 136
Ferracuti, F., 143, 168
Festinger, L., 217-218, 220, 222, 225, 228, 236, 239, 243-245, 261, 271-272
Finesinger, J. C., 45
Finnerty, F. A., 22, 46
Finney, R. C., 126, 136
Fischer, H. K., 99, 136
Fisher, S., 219-220, 223, 225, 229, 240, 250, 254, 272
Fishman, S., 192, 214
Flach, F. F., 126, 137
Fleming, T. C., 53, 94
Flicker, D., 281, 302
Floyd, W. F., 28, 31, 46
Foley, J. M., 28, 48, 75, 86, 93
Folkson, A., 125, 137
Ford, R. V., 22-23, 48
Forel, A., 181, 213
Forster, F. M., 111, 137
Fosberg, I. A., 288, 302
Fox, G. F., 194, 215
Frank, J. D., 287, 304
Frankl, V. E., 119, 137
Frankmann, R. W., 149, 153, 167
Fraser, H. F., 127, 137
Fraser, R., 176, 214
Freed, A., 219, 221, 226, 231-232, 259, 272
Freedman, L. Z., 195, 213
Freedman, S. J., 61, 64, 73, 76-77, 89, 92

Freeman, H., 126, 137
Freeman, R. W., 220, 225, 240, 272
French, J. R. P., Jr., 217, 219, 221-222, 226, 239, 272, 275
Freud, S., 53, 92
Friedlander, A. A., 195, 213
 
Galambos, R., 16
Galkin, T. W., 14, 16
Gamble, J. L., 22, 46
Ganser, S. J. M., 289-290, 302
Garafolo, Loraze, 152, 167
Garmany, G., 125, 137
Gault, F. P., 152, 167
Geiger, A. J., 23, 48
Gerard, H. B., 218-220, 222, 225, 230, 236, 239-240, 243, 245, 259, 260-261, 264, 271-272
Gerson, M. J., 115, 118, 137, 295, 302
Gibson, R. W., 192, 214
Gidro-Frank, L., 192, 213
Gill, M. M., 195, 206, 212-213, 286, 302
Gillespie, R. I., 281, 302
Gindes, B. C., 186, 312
Glazer, H. S., 23, 49
Gleser, G. C., 105, 108, 110, 137
Glueck, B., 281, 302
Godin, W., 29, 44
Goffman, E., 286, 302
Goldberg, S. C., 218-220, 222-223, 225 226, 229, 235-236, 245, 253, 272
Goldberger, L., 28, 46, 65-66, 70-71, 73, 77, 83, 89, 92
Golden, S., 289-290, 302
Goldiamond, I., 161, 168
Goldman, Della M., 225, 232, 273
Goldstein, H., 291-292, 302
Good, R., 281, 302
Goodell, Helen, 31, 34, 36-37, 46, 50
Goodman, R. J., 28, 30, 48
Goodnow, Jacqueline, 30, 46
Gorden, R. L., 218, 220, 225, 232, 272
Goss, J. D., Jr., 124, 135
Gottlieb, J. S., 64-65, 70, 92
Gottschalk, L. A., 105, 108, 110, 120, 137
Gottschick, J., 35, 46
Gough, H. G., 280, 302
Graham, H., 192, 212
Green, M., 118, 135
Greenblatt, M., 61, 64, 73, 76-77, 89, 92, 155, 167
Gregory, Doris, 222, 225-226, 243, 260, 275
Grinker, R. R., 113, 117, 137, 195, 213, 294-295, 302
-308-

Grosser, D., 219, 221, 226, 232, 243, 272
Grove, W. I., 21, 47
Grunebaum, H. U., 61, 64, 73, 76-77, 89, 92
Gulick, W. L., 62, 79, 95
Gullahorn, J. J., 281, 302
Guttman, E., 108, 137
 
Hacker, A., 2, 16
Hain, J. D., 218-219, 221, 226, 230, 232, 259, 271
Hall, K. R. L., 34, 36-37, 46
Hall, R., 219, 221-222, 226, 233, 261, 275
Hammerichlag, H. E., 188, 213
Hanrahan, G. E., 124, 138
Hanson, F. R., 31, 46
Hardy, J. D., 31, 34, 36-37, 46, 48-50
Hardy, K. R., 218, 222-225, 235, 253, 256, 261, 265, 272
Hardyck, C., 280, 304
Hare, A. P., 218, 222, 225, 234, 242, 261, 272
Haring, J., 2, 16
Harl, J. M., 124, 136
Harlow, H. F., 2, 15-16, 54, 92
Harris, A., 70, 92
Harris, W. W., 194, 215
Hartmann, H., 53, 93
Hartshorne, H., 282, 302
Harvey, O. J., 218-220, 223, 225-226, 236, 239, 245-246, 260, 262, 272, 275
Haugen, F. P., 36-37, 46
Haupt, J, 185, 213
Hawkins, J. R., 120, 136
Heath, E. S., 28, 46, 58, 73, 93
Hebb, D. O., 28, 46, 53-54, 58, 61, 73, 87-89, 93, 111, 137
Heintz, R. K., 218, 222, 225, 242, 275
Helfand, J., 280, 302
Helgesson, U. H., 281, 302
Helson, H., 217-219, 221, 223-226, 228, 232, 234, 236-237, 251, 255, 266, 270 272
Helweg-Larsen, P., 23, 35-36, 40, 46
Hemmager, E., 23, 35-36, 44
Heron, W., 28, 45-47, 55, 58, 60-61, 63 64, 67, 72, 74, 75, 77-78, 81, 89, 91, 111, 135, 137, 181, 213
Hill, H. E., 102, 137
Himwich, H. E., 120, 140
Hinkle, L. E., Jr., 2, 5, 15-16, 20, 29, 31-33, 38, 44, 47, 54, 69, 93, 98, 137
Hoagland, H., 103, 139
Hoch, P. H., 107, 121-122, 137
Hochberg, J., 60, 65, 69, 74, 93
Hoelzel, F., 34-35, 45
Hoffman, E. L., 219-220, 225, 264, 275
Hoffman, J., 61, 64-65, 67, 94
Hoffman, M. L., 217-220, 222-224, 226, 250, 255-256, 265, 273
Hoffmeyer, H., 23, 35-36, 40, 46

Hofling, C. K., 99, 137
Holland, J. G., 59, 93
Hollander, E. P., 222, 273
Hollister, L. E., 126, 138
Holt, R. R., 28, 46, 65-66, 70-71, 73, 77, 83, 89, 92
Hope, J. M., 108, 140
Horwitz, M., 225, 232, 273
House, R. E., 112-113, 138
Houston, F., 28, 47, 119, 138
Howard, W. J., 117, 119, 124, 136
Hughes, J. R., 14, 16
Hull, C., 172, 213
Hultgren, H. P., 35, 47
Humphries, O., 106, 138
Hunsicker, A. L., 125, 140
Hunt, D. E., 223, 225, 246, 275
Hunt, R. G., 219-220, 223, 226, 253, 272
Hunt, W. A., 291-292, 302
Hunter, E., 2, 15-16
Hurd, D. E., 125, 140
Hurst, Sir A., 294-295, 299, 300, 302
Huxley, A., 2, 5, 16
Hyde, R. W., 103, 122, 139
Hymovitch, B., 218, 222, 225, 236, 239, 243, 245, 271
 
Ikai, K., 125, 135
Inbau, F. E., 143, 146, 156, 168, 209, 213, 287, 295, 302
Isbell, H., 127, 137-138
 
Jackson, J. M., 243, 260, 273
Jacobson, A., 283, 288, 304
Jacubzak, L., 219-220, 224-225, 238, 256, 273
Janet, P., 181, 213
Janis, I. L., 2, 16
Jarvik, M. E., 123, 134
-309-
Jaynes, J., 55, 91
Jenkin, V., 161, 168
Jenness, A., 219, 222-223, 225, 236, 249, 252, 254, 273
John, W., 105, 137
Johnson, W. C., 123, 136
Jonas, A. D., 119, 138
Jones, A. B., 281, 283-284, 286-287, 303
Jones, D. H., 124, 138
Jones, D. S., 280, 300, 304
Jones, E. E., 219-221, 225, 244, 260, 273
Jordan, H., 2, 16, 218, 222, 225, 231, 275
Julian, O. C., 21, 47

 
Kagan, J., 219-220, 223, 225, 248, 274
Kahn, R. L., 107, 140
Kandel, E. J., 85, 93
Kapp, F. T., 120, 137
Karp, D., 34, 36, 47
Katz, S. E., 28, 30, 33, 47
Kaufman, M. R., 123, 138
Keats, A. S., 34, 36-37, 44
Keisler, E. R., 219, 221, 223, 225, 246, 273
Kelley, H. H., 218-220, 222, 225, 229, 236, 239, 243-244, 260, 271-273
Kelly, A. R., 117, 139
Kelly, D. M., 118, 138
Kelly, G. A., 300, 303
Kelman, H. C., 219, 220, 222-223, 226, 246, 252, 262, 273
Kety, S. S., 22, 23, 47
Keys, A., 23, 35-36, 40, 47
Kidd, J. S., 219, 222-223, 225, 235, 239, 242, 273
Kieler, J., 23, 35-36, 40, 46
Kimbrell, D. L., 219, 221, 223, 226, 250, 262, 273
Kinkead, E., 2-3, 16
Kinross-Wright, V., 124, 238
Kirkpatrick, C., 218-219, 222-223, 249, 273
Kleh, J., 22, 46
Kleitman, N., 30, 47, 81, 92
Kletzkin, M., 36-37, 49
Kline, M. V., 181, 184, 192, 213
Kline, N. S., 121, 126, 135, 138, 139
Knudsen, E. O. E., 22-23, 45
Kolb, L. C., 23-24, 48
Kornetsky, C., 34, 36-37, 47, 106, 123, 134, 138
Kraemer, H., 6, 8, 16
Kraepelin, E., 290, 303
Kral, V. A., 35-36, 47
Krebs, A. M., 219-220, 223-225, 248, 256, 273
Krieger, G. E., 126, 138
Kringel, A., 126, 138
Krivitzky, W. G., 8, 16
Kroger, W. S., 175, 213
Krout, M. H., 292, 303
Krueger, W. C. F., 282, 303
Kubie, L. A., 112, 138, 172, 175, 213
Kubzansky, P. E., 69, 71, 76, 80, 82, 85, 93-94
Kutscher, A. H., 36, 47
Kutscher, H. W., 36, 47
Kverin, K., 152, 167
 
Lacey, Beatrice, 159, 165, 168
Lacey, J. I., 159, 165, 168

Laffal, J., 219-220, 224-225, 258, 273
Lamb, T. W., 218, 225, 229, 273
Lambert, C., 125, 138
Lambert, W. E., 218, 222, 226, 239, 273
Lancaster, N. P., 124, 138
Landis, C., 28, 30, 33, 47
Larson, J. A., 113, 138, 142, 144-146, 165, 168
Lasagna, L., 34, 36, 37, 44, 99-100, 106, 108, 120, 138, 140
Laslett, H. R., 30, 47
Laufman, H., 20, 47
Laverty, S. G., 106, 108, 138
Lawson, E. D., 218, 222-225, 250, 262, 273
Lazarus, R. S., 161, 168
Leavitt, H. C., 192, 212
LeCron, L. M., 192, 213
Lee, C. D., 143, 146, 156, 168
Lee, F. J., 225, 232, 273
Lefkowitz, M., 219, 221, 226, 238, 273
LeGuillant, L., 108, 138
Lehmann, H. E., 124, 138
Leiderman, P. H., 28, 33, 47, 49-50, 52, 55-56, 64, 68-69, 71, 76, 80, 82, 85, 87, 93-95
Lennox, W. G., 293-294, 303
Lermolo, Elizabeth, 29, 33, 47
Levin, M., 24, 47
Levine, A., 123, 138
-310-
Levine, J., 219-220, 224-225, 258, 273
Levine, K., 118, 138
Levy, E. Z., 55, 64, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79, 81 85, 88, 94
Lewis, A., 289-90, 303
Lewis, B. I., 22, 47
Lewis, T., 34, 36, 48
Liddell, S. W., 119, 139
Lieberman, A. A., 290, 303
Lifton, R. J., 10, 16, 35, 48, 54, 74, 93
Lilly, J. C., 2, 14, 16, 48, 52, 55, 72, 81 83, 93, 111, 139
Lindemann, E., 28, 48, 76, 94, 108 119, 139
Lindemann, J., 219-220, 224-225, 258, 273
Lindsley, D., 89, 93
Ling, T. M., 119, 139
Linn, L., 107, 140
Linton, Harriet B., 219, 221, 223-224, 226, 255, 274
Lippett, R., 219, 221, 226, 232, 243, 272
Lipton, F. L., 118, 139
Livingston, W. K., 36-37, 46
Llewellyn, R. L. J., 281, 283-284, 286 287, 303
Loomer, H. P., 121, 139
Lowy, F. H., 218, 222, 226, 239, 273

Lubin, A., 220, 225, 229, 254, 272
Luchins, A. S., 217-220, 223-225, 230, 234, 238, 247, 250, 258, 274
Luchins, Edith H., 217-220, 223, 225, 234, 238, 247, 250, 258, 274
Ludwig, A. O., 195, 213, 283, 294-295, 303
Lummus, W. F., 22-23, 46
Luongo, E. P., 31, 33, 48
Luttrell, R. R., 125, 139
Lykken, D. T., 287, 303
 
McBride, Dorothy, 222, 225-226, 243, 260, 275
McCance, R. A., 23, 35, 48
McCleary, R., 161, 168
McConnell, J. V., 161, 168, 217, 219-221, 226, 233, 274
McCourt, W. F., 61, 65, 73, 82, 89, 92
McCranie, E. J., 193, 214
McGill, T. E., 55, 62, 64, 75, 77, 79, 94-95
McGrath, S. D., 27, 31, 48
McKeachie, W. J., 218, 222, 225-226, 265, 274
McNeil, E. B., 161, 168
McQueen, R., 218, 226, 248, 274, 282, 303
MacClay, W. S., 108, 139
MacDonald, J. E., 289-290, 302
MacDonald, J. M., 278, 281-282, 284, 286, 289-290, 293, 295, 303
MacDonald, M. D., 114, 139
MacKinnon, H. L., 119, 139
Mackworth, N. H., 58-59, 93
Mahatoo, W., 58, 61, 92
Maier, N. R. F., 218, 221-222, 225, 241, 274
Malamud, W., 108, 119, 139-140
Malitz, S., 107, 140
Mallinson, W. P., 290, 301
Malmo, R. B., 155, 159, 168
Mangold, R., 28, 30, 48
Mann, T., 287, 303
Marchand, W. E., 31, 49
Marcuse, F. L., 181, 213
Margolin, S., 172, 175, 213
Marinho, Heloisa, 218, 221, 223, 250, 264, 274
Marston, W. M., 142, 146, 160, 165, 168
Masserman, J., 98, 139
Mateer, F. M., 22, 45
Mattman, R. E., 35, 49
Mausner, B., 4, 17, 217-220, 223, 225, 238 239, 246, 261, 274
Mausner, Judith, 4, 17
May, A. B., 125, 137
May, M. A., 282, 302
Mayer, L., 188-189, 214
Mayer, W. E., 2-3, 17
Mayer-Gross, W., 290, 303

Mayo, C. W., 2, 15, 17
Meadow, A., 219-220, 223, 226, 253, 272
Meares, A., 176, 214
Meehan, J. P., 36, 48
Meerloo, J. A. M., 2-3, 15, 17
Meltzer, M. L., 1, 18, 86, 93, 277, 280, 303
Meltzoff, J., 289, 303
Mendelson, J., 28, 33, 47-50, 52, 55-56, 64, 68-69, 71, 75-76, 80, 82, 85-87, 93-95
Mercer, M., 192, 214
Merlis, S., 122, 136
Miller, A. T., Jr., 31, 48
Miller, J. G., 2-3, 14, 17
-311-
Miller, N. E., 112, 139
Millon, T., 219-220, 223, 225, 262, 274
Mills, L. C., 22-23, 48
Moeller, G., 219-220, 225, 256, 274
Moll, A., 181, 214
Monroe, J. L., 3, 16
Montgomery, K. C., 54, 94
Moore, E. W., 120, 139
Moore, J. R., 142, 168
Moreno, J. L., 300, 303
Morgan, C. T., 16
Morris, D. P., 114, 139
Morrison, A. V., 125, 139
Mosteller, F., 34, 36-37, 44, 99-100, 108, 120, 138
Moulton, J. A., 120, 136
Mouton, Jane S., 218-219, 221, 223-226, 228-233, 235-238, 240, 245-246, 249, 251, 255, 258-261, 270-273
Moyer, J. H., 22-23, 48
Muehlberger, C. W., 195, 214
Mueller, J. F., 23, 49
Müller, J. M., 125, 139
Munsterberg, H., 224, 233, 274
Murphy, D. B., 85, 93
Murphy, E. L., 277, 303
Murray, J. C., 3, 17
Mussen, P. H., 219-220, 223, 225, 248, 274
Myers, T. I., 85, 93
 
Nakamura, C. Y., 221, 225, 254, 274
Nangle, J., 219, 221, 226, 232, 270
Nevsky, M. P., 171, 214
New, J. S., 117, 139
Newman, S., 282, 303
Ni, T. G., 22-23, 48
Niell, K. C., 34, 36-37, 49-50
Nielson, J. M., 292-295, 303

Nitsche, P., 28-29, 48
Noyes, A. P., 23-24, 48, 290, 303
 
Older, H. J., 291-292, 302
Olds, J., 14, 17
Olinger, L. B., 123, 135
Olmstead, J. A., 219-221, 223, 225-226, 232-233, 235, 237, 240, 245-246, 251, 258, 261, 271, 274-275
Ormiston, D. W., 62, 73, 94
Orne, M. T., 178, 193, 197, 208, 214
Orwell, G., 2, 17
Ossipov, V. P., 281-283, 303
 
Packard, V., 5, 17
Parsons, T., 207, 214
Patt, H. H., 21, 45
Pattie, F. A., Jr., 196, 214
Pavlov, I. P., 171, 214
Payne, R. B., 120, 139
Pechtel, C., 98, 139
Pemberton, W., 138, 188
Penfield, W., 14, 17
Penman, J., 34, 36, 48
Pennes, H. H., 107, 121-122, 137
Peters, S. C., 217, 219-220, 225, 275
Peterson, D. B., 3, 17
Petrie, A., 70, 94
Piana, Gabriel M., 225, 232, 273
Pichot, P., 119, 136
Piercy, M., 34, 36-37, 48
Pinsky, R. H., 99, 141
Platonov, K. I., 192, 214
Polansky, N., 219, 221, 226, 232, 243, 272
Pollaczek, Penelope P., 291-292, 303
Posternak, Jean M., 53, 94
Pratt, R. T. C., 34, 36-37, 48
Preston, M. G., 218, 222, 225, 242, 275
Preu, P. W., 23, 48
Prikhodivny, E. A., 192, 214
Prugh, G. S., Jr., 3, 17
 
Raaschou, F., 22-23, 45
Raines, G. N., 118, 139
Rapaport, D., 87, 94
Rasmussen, T., 14, 17
Raven, B. H., 219, 221-222, 226, 230, 239, 275
Ravitz, L. J., 114, 139, 295, 303
Redlich, F. C., 114, 139, 195, 213, 295, 303
Rehberg, P. B., 22-23, 48
Reid, J. E., 209, 213, 286-287, 302-303

Reiter, P. J., 188-189, 214
Rice, R. L., 22, 48
Rich, M., 22, 49
Riddle, E. E., 193, 214
Riesman, D., 2, 17
Rietsema, J., 219, 221, 230, 275
Rinkel, M., 103, 122-123, 136, 139
Ripley, H. S., 103, 141
Ritter, Christiane E., 52, 94
-312-
Roberts, R. H., 126, 138
Roelens, R., 108, 138
Rohrer, J. H., 219-220, 225, 264, 275
Rolin, J., 98, 113, 121, 139
Romanet, B., 119, 136
Romano, J., 24, 48
Rosen, H., 176, 214
Rosenbaum, G., 63-65, 70, 92, 94
Rosenbaum, M. E., 219, 221, 226, 230, 232, 259, 275
Rosenberg, S., 156, 168
Rosenburg, S. J., 288, 304
Rosenthal, D., 287, 304
Rosner, S., 218-220, 225, 255, 258, 275
Ross, W. D., 120, 137
Roth, M., 290, 303
Rothman, T., 28, 30, 48, 119, 140
Rowland L. W., 183, 214
Royse, A, B., 28, 47
Rubel, Marilyn, 220, 223, 225, 253, 275
Rubenstvin, B. B., 109, 135
Rubin, M. A., 108, 140
Rubinstein, I., 30, 46, 219-220, 223, 225, 240, 250, 272
Ruff, G. E., 55, 64, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79, 81 85, 88, 94
Russell, W. R., 293, 304
Rutherford, Jeanne, 219-220, 223, 225, 236, 245, 262, 272
 
Saher, E. V., 114, 140
Saltzman. I. J., 143-145, 148-151, 154, 167
Saltzstein H. D., 243, 260, 273
Samelson, F., 219-220, 223-225, 256, 261, 275
Samson, D. C., 24, 48
Saphir, W., 22, 49
Sarbin, T. R., 172, 214, 279-280, 283, 286, 300, 304
Sargant, W., 2, 5, 14-15, 17, 103, 113, 117, 140, 176, 214
Sarwer-Foner, G. J., 108, 140
Saslow, M., 22, 49
Saunders, J. C., 121, 139
Savage, C., 126, 140

Schachter. S., 89-90, 94, 219, 221-222, 225-226, 233, 243, 260, 264, 275
Schein, E. H., 2-3, 5, 15, 17, 35, 44, 49, 54, 94
Scheinberg, P., 22, 49
Schiffman, H., 55, 75, 77, 95
Schilder, P., 172, 195, 214
Schlitter, E., 125, 139
Schmidt, C. F., 22, 47
Schneck, J. M., 34, 36, 49, 176, 182, 192, 214
Schnitker, M. A., 35, 49
Schonbach, P., 90, 94
Schonbar, Rosealea A., 219-220, 226, 233, 263, 275
Schroder, H. M., 223, 225, 246, 275
Schultz, J. H., 203, 214
Schut, J. W., 120, 140
Scott, T. H., 28, 45, 47, 55, 58, 60-61, 63-64, 72, 74, 91-94, 111, 137
Scott, W. A., 218-219, 222, 225, 248, 275
Seaman, G., 60, 65, 69, 74, 93
Secunda, L., 176, 212
Segal, H. A., 35, 49
Segal, J., 44, 49
Seltzer, H. S., 23, 45
Shagass, C., 159, 168
Shankel, L. W., 119, 135
Shapiro, M. M., 218-220, 222, 225, 236, 239, 244, 260, 272-273
Shavzin, A. R., 289, 301
Sherif, D. M., 275
Sherif, M., 217, 219-220, 223, 225-226, 233, 235, 246, 263, 269
Shmavonian, B., 66, 70-71, 76, 79, 82, 85, 92
Shor, J., 192, 214
Shor, R., 197, 201, 203, 214
Shortt, L., 31, 45
Siddons, G. F., 149, 167
Silverman, A. J., 66, 70-71, 76, 79, 82, 85, 92
Simkins, L. C., 219-220, 223, 225, 262, 274
Simon, J. L., 119, 140
Sinevirskii, N., 6, 18
Singh, J. A. L., 54, 94
Skinner, B. F., 9, 18
Slater, E., 113, 117, 140, 290, 303
Small, M. H., 52, 53, 94
Smith, A. A., 155, 168
Soffer, A., 22-23, 49
Sokoloff, C., 28, 30, 48
Solem, A. R., 218, 221-222, 225, 241, 274
-313-
Solomon, H. C., 24, 49, 103, 122-123, 136, 139
Solomon, P., 28, 33, 47-50, 52, 55, 56, 61, 64-65, 68-69, 70-71, 73, 76, 82, 85, 87, 89, 92, 94-95
Speck, R. V., 117, 119, 124, 136

Spencer, W. A., 21, 44
Spiegal, E. A., 36-37, 49
Spiegel, H., 192, 214
Spiegel, J. P., 113, 117, 137, 195, 213, 294-295, 302
Spitz, R. A., 54, 86, 94
Spohn, H. E., 219-220, 223-225, 258, 275, 288, 304
Sprenger, J., 6, 8, 16
Sproles, J. A., 126, 136
Spurr, C., 22-23, 48
Squires, R. D., 22-23, 45
Stagner, R., 218, 222-225, 250, 262, 273
Stalnaker, J. M., 193, 214
Stanbridge, R. H., 31, 49
Steiner, I. D., 217, 219-220, 225, 275
Stephenson, C. W., 193, 215
Stern, E. S., 290, 304
Stewart, J. B., 27, 50
Stockings, G. T., 107, 140
Stoll, A. M., 36, 48
Stout, G. W., 149, 167
Stransky, E., 34, 36-37, 49
Strassman, H. D., 35, 49
Strickland, L., 222, 225, 244, 261, 275
Stride, E., 34, 36-37, 46
Strotzka, H., 119, 137
Stuart, E. A., 28, 46, 58, 73, 93
Sugarman, L. A., 107, 140
Summers, W. G., 142, 144, 147, 165, 168
Sutcliffe, P., 199, 215
Swander, D. V., 219-220, 225, 264, 275
Swank, R. L., 27, 31-32, 49
Sward, K., 119, 140
Swisher, S. N., 24, 48
Szasz, T. S., 282, 304
Szekely, E. G., 36-37, 49
 
Talbott, J. H., 20, 49
Taube, H., 119, 140
Taylor, N. B., 20, 45
Tennien, M., 2, 18
Teter, H. R., 193, 214
Thaler, Margaret B., 35, 49
Thaler, V. H., 55, 64, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79, 81-85, 88, 94
Thetford, W. N., 24-25, 35, 37-40, 42, 45
Thibaut, J., 218, 222, 225, 228, 239, 244, 261, 272, 275
Thistlethwaite, J. R., 21, 44
Thorin, D., 44, 49
Ticktin, H. E., 21, 46
Toby, J., 281, 304

Torrey, R., 219-221, 225, 244, 260, 273
Tourlentes, T. T., 125, 140
Travis, L. E., 123, 135
Triebel, W., 60, 65, 69, 74, 93
Trovillo, P., 142, 168
True, R. M., 193, 215
Trumbo, D., 219, 221, 226, 232, 270
Turner, R. H., 281, 304
Tyndel, M., 289-290, 304
Tyler, D. B., 28, 30, 33, 48-49, 111, 140
 
Underhill, H. C., 114, 140
 
Van Valkenburg, J. D., 27, 50
Vernon, J. A., 55, 61-64, 67, 75, 77, 79, 94-95
Victoroff, V., 115, 118, 137, 295, 302
Vilter, R. W., 23, 49
Vispos, R. H., 91
Von Felsinger, J. M., 99-100, 106, 108, 120, 138, 140
 
Wachpress, M., 283, 288, 304
Wakim, K. G., 20, 50
Walters, R. H., 219-220, 224-225, 238, 256, 273
Wangensteen, O. H., 21-22, 50
Warren, N., 30, 50
Watkins, J. G., 177, 182, 215
Waud, S. P., 281, 304
Wayburn, E., 21, 30, 50
Weaver, E. M. F., 27, 50
Weil-Malherbe, H., 119, 139
Weiner, ff., 290, 304
Weinert, G., 220, 223, 225, 253, 275
Weinstein, E. A., 107, 140
Weisskopf, Edith A., 289, 304
Weitzenhoffer, A. M., 175, 181, 195, 215
Welch, L., 172, 215
Welford, A. T., 28, 31, 46
Wells, H. H., 219-221, 225, 244, 260, 273
-314-
Wells, W. D., 220, 223, 225, 253, 275
Wells, W. R., 171, 177, 180, 182, 185, 194, 215
Wendt,G. R., 111, 140
Wenger, M. A., 152, 168
Wertham, F., 281, 304
West, L. J., 2, 15-16, 18, 30, 34, 36-37, 45, 49-50
Wexler, D., 28, 33, 47, 49-50, 52, 55-56, 64, 68-69, 71, 76, 82, 85, 87, 94-95
Wheeler, D., 218, 222, 225, 231, 275
Whiles, W. H., 290, 304

White, F. W., 172, 194, 215
Whitehorn, J. C., 24, 50
Whittaker, J. O., 219, 221, 236, 275
Widdowson, E. M., 23, 35, 48
Wiener, M., 218, 222, 224-225, 229-230, 236-237, 255, 259, 275
Wikler, A., 102, 112, 121, 127, 137, 140
Wilkins, R. W., 125, 140
Williams, H. L., 229, 254, 272
Wilmarms, K., 28-29, 48
Wilson, D. C., Jr., 119, 135
Winkelman, N. W., Jr., 124, 141
Winokur, G., 2, 18
Wittkower, E. D., 27, 31, 48
Wolf, S., 34, 36-37, 50, 99, 103, 141, 287, 304
Wolff, H. G., 2-3, 5, 15-16, 18, 20, 24-26, 29, 31-40, 42, 44-47, 50, 54, 69, 93
Wycis, H. T., 36-37, 49
 
Yakovlev, P. I., 24, 49
 
Zax, M., 126, 136
Ziller, R. C., 218, 222, 225, 234, 276
Zimmer, H., 1, 18
Zimmerman, B., 21, 22, 50
Zimmerman, H. A., 27-28, 31, 50
Zingg, R. M., 54, 94
Ziskind, E., 28, 50, 87, 95
-315-
Subject Index
Abstraction, 39, 266
Accuracy, 43, 117, 170, 191-196
Acetanilid, 121
Adaptation, Level Theory, 269
Adaptation of responses, 148-149, 152
Adaptive mechanisms, 38
Addiction, 103, 106, 126-127, 132
Afterimages, 61
Age, 237, 249-250
Age regression, 192
Alcohol, 77, 104, 116, 153, 292
Algeria, 98
Allport-Allport A-S Reaction Study, 223, 251-252
Alpha activity, 79, 152, 175, see also Electroencephalogram
Amnesia, 119, 171, 197, 200-201, 205, 211, 278-279, 285, 289, 293-296 
retrograde, 293-294 171
Amobarbital, 103-104, 114-115, 117

Amphetamine, 106, 111, 116, 119-121, 131
Analeptic, 120-121
Anesthesia, 196, 201-205
Anesthetics, 121, 130, 201
Anonymity, 240, 261
Anoxia, 22
"Antisocial acts," 180-191, 282
Anxiety, 32, 37, 39-40, 70-71, 73, 78, 107, 119, 124-126, 128, 131-132, 202, 204, 207, 246-247, 250-251, 285, 294-295, 299
Apathy, 110
Aphasia, 118, 120, 294
Apparent movement, 61-63
Appetite, 284
Armed Forces "Code of Conduct," 3
Arousal, 54, 81, 89, 128, 152
Articles of War, 115
Aspirin, 121
Atropine, 116, 121
Attention, 32, 64, 119, 131
Attitudes, 9, 11, 34, 41-43, 130, 216-276, 282, 285 
of experimental subject, 163-164, 166, 176
of interrogation source, 165
Authoritarianism, 68, 251, 253, see also California F-Scale
Autogenous training, 203-205
Autokinetic effect, 61, 63, 219-220, 233, 246, 250, 263
Autonomic responses, 142-168
Avoidance, 163
-316-
Avoidance — Avoidance conflict, 133
 
Barbiturates, 114, 117, 119, 124, 127, 130-131, 153, 295
Barron-Welsh Art Scale, 223, 254
Behavior Interpretation Inventory, 256
Belief change, 53, 67-68
Bender-Gestalt Test, 62
Blindness, 278
Blood, 21-24, 295, see also Circulatory functions
Body fluids, 21-22
Body image, 74
Body schema, 69
Body sway, 67-68
Bogardus Scale, 67
Boredom, 73, 83-84, 90
Brain, 20-24, 34, 39-41, 89, 107 
damage, 107
function, 27-30, 32-37, 39, 42
organic, disease of, 285
Brain syndrome, 24-26, 29, 32, 37-38, 42
Brainwashing, 5-6, 58, 88

Break, 41
Breakoff phenomenon, 86
Breathing, 142, 144-146 
cycle of, 145, see also Respiration
Bromides, 124
Burns, 22
 
Caffeine, 116, 121
California F-Scale, 223, 250, 253, 262
Calmatives, 117-119
Captivity, 133, 204, 206, 278, 281, 285
Cataract patients, 87
Catechol amine, 80-81
Catharsis 117
Cattell 16 PF, 223
Cerebral functioning, 39, 130
Cheating, 282
Chicago Police Laboratories, 153
Chinese Communists, 6, 98
Chloral hydrate, 124
Chloroform, 112
Chlorpromazine, 108, 124-126
Circulatory functions, 22, 33, 38, 80 
blood pressure, 104, 142, 146-147
pulse, 148-152
Clinical observation, 35
Cocaine, 108, 121
Coercion, 2, 29, 58, 69, 96, 165, 300
Collective reaction, 108
Cognitive functions, 39, 57, 64-67, 74, 112 
disturbances of, 64-67
Color saturation, 63
Combat, 27, 31-32, 34, 285, 293-294
Combativeness, 126
Comfort, 41-43
Commitment, 240-241, 264
Communication, 99, 104, 120, 125, 131 
theory, 28
Communist practices, 2, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15, 44, '53- 54, 98
Complex functions, 24, 29-30, 32, 34, 36-37, 39-43, 61, 71, 254
Compliance, 19, 42-43, 206, 216-217, 255, 295, 299
Conation, 112
Concentration camps, 35-36, 98, 204
Conditioning, 15, 161-162, 172
Confabulation, 26, 32, 35, 41, 194
Confessions, 1, 3, 7, 44, 97, 113-115, 300
Confinement, 57-58, 68, 204, 282
Conflict, 161-164, 216, 300
Conformity, 216-276

Confusion, 44, 284-285
Consciousness, 41, 96, 122, 127, 161, 173 174, 210-212
Constipation, 284
Constitutional characteristics, 33, 36, 54, 101
Conversion, 8, 125, 216-217, 262-266
Cortical inhibition, 171 
satiation, 70
Cover story, 114, 116-117
Crime, 97, 158, 164, 165, 206, 278, 293, 297-298
Criminal behavior, 115, 130, 181-191, 211
Criminals, 43, 165-166, 173, 291 
interrogation of, 144
 
Dachau, 98
Data processing, 39
Data interpretation, 156-160
Daydreams, 71, 74
Death, 38, 44
Debilitation, 57, 132, 153
-317-
Deception, 114-117, 130-131, 142-168, 209, 282, 298 
detection of, 142-168, 283-300
Decorum, 26, 30, 32, 35, 40
Defenses, against interrogation, 133-134, 170, 210-211
Defenses, personality, 71, 206
Degradation, 204
Dehydration, 24, 26, 30
Deliria, 24, 206, 284, 293
Delusions, 26, 29-30, 32, 35, 69, 74-76, 113, 195, 284
Demand characteristics, 85, 99, 101-102, 178, see also Suggestion
Demonology, 4-6, 8
Dependence on the perceptual field, 224
Dependency, 4, 206
Depersonalization, 74
Depression, 168, 110, 120-121, 125, 130, 132, 284 
psychotic, 284
Deserpedine, 125
Determinism, 3, 7
Diarrhea, 22, 24
Digit span, 64, 66
Discrimination analysis, 159
Disease, 25, 130, 206, 277-304
Disorientation, 75, 113, 132
Dissociative reactions, 116
Distortion, defense in interrogation, 126, 133, 170 
perceptual, 130, 132
Dreams, 74
Drugs, 40, 96-141, 195, 206-209, 285, 287, 295-296, 298 

aintidepressive, 119-121
hallucinogenic, 121-124, 132
psychotomimetic, 121-124, 132
reactions to person administering, 102-104
silent administration of, 99, 101
therapeutic use of, 97
tranquilizing, 97, 124-126, see also specific drugs
Durham decision, 278
Dyspepsia, 285
 
Educational level, 104-105
Edwards Personal Preference Schedule, 69
Effort syndrome, 285
Ego, 53, 76, 87-88, 116-117, 201, 204 
boundaries, 88
controls, 113, 200-205, 211
strength, 299
Electrical brain stimulation, 14
Electrocardiogram, 149, 193
Electroencephalograph, 78-81, 150, 152, 171, 175, 193
Electromyogram, 150
Electroshock, 287, 290, 298
Emotion, 25, 35, 40, 112, 123, 131, 165
Emotional reliving, 117
Epilepsy, 111, 287, 293-294
Epinephrine-norepinephrine, 80
Ethics, 96-98, 113, 278
Euphoria, 104, 106, 108, 284
Experimental controls, 57, 100-101, 106, 130, 164, 186-188, 217-227, 268-270
Experimental effect, 84
Exploratory drive, 54, 84, 87
Explorers, 90-91
Exposure, injurious, 25, 27
Extrovert, 106
Eye movement, 151
 
Failure, 261
and conformity behavior, 246
Fainting, 22
Fantasy, 29, 69, 71-72, 74, 76, 85, 115 116, 130, 133, 195
Fat, 23
Fatigue, 25, 27-44, 111, 130, 153, 180
Fear, 39, 41, 69, 73, 122, 134, 163, 297
Feedback, 102 
auditory, 63
Feeling state, 72-74
Feral man, 54
Fever, 24, 30
Fiedler A-S Inventory, 223

Figural aftereffects, 63, 70
Food, see Hunger, Nutrition, Starvation
Frustration, 83
 
Galvanic skin response (GSR), 79, 142, 146-148, 154-161, 250-251, 262
Ganser Syndrome, 278-279, 289-290, 299
Ganzfeld, 60, 69
Gastrointestinal system, 38, 152
-318-
Gestapo, 204
Gough Adjective Check List, 257
Group, homogeneity of, 239 
norms of, 222
size of, 234
social, 216-270
Group Squares Test, 253
Guilford-Martin Inventory of Factors, 223, 252
Guilford's R Scale, 106
Guilt, 108, 112, 114-115, 117, 130, 133, 164, 206, 210, 212, 277-288, 295, 297, 299
 
Hallucinations, 26, 29-30, 32, 35, 52, 69-70, 74-77, 79, 87, 90, 113, 121 123, 185, 187, 284
Hashish, 108
Headache, 36, 104, 285
Hearing, 125
Heroin, 106
Homeostasis, 20-24, 27, 30, 32, 38-40, 43
Hunger, 25, 34-38, 42
Hypnagogic states, 77-78
Hypnosis, 34, 98, 102, 168-215, 287, 295, 298 
somnambulistic, 174, 202
Hypochondriasis, 86
Hypoglycemia, 110
Hysteria, 108, 114, 171, 285-286, 290, 293-294
 
Id, 87-88
Idea Classification Test, 223, 254
Ideation, 123
Identification with the aggressor, 206
Ideological change, 1, 10, 53-54
I/E Ratio, 145
Illusions, 26, 29, 32, 74, 76-77, 113
Imagery, 74-78
Immobility, 35, 57, 60-62, 65, 73, 87
Indiana University Study, 143, 147-159, 162
Individual differences, 108, 280
Induction of hypnosis, 169-215
Infection, 26, 293

Information, elicitation of, 19, 24, 27-28, 35, 41-44, 67, 89, 96, 99, 112-113, 116-117, 126, 128, 131-132, 170, 180, 191, 196, 
201, 209, 266, 278
Injury, 26, 31, 40, 293-294
Inquisition, 8, 27
Insecurity, 246
Insight, 32, 40, 268
Insomnia, 126, 153, 285
Insulin, 110
Integrative capacities, 113
Intellectual functioning, 32, 106, 113, 122-123, 126, 132
Intelligence, 7, 11, 15, 104-105, 130-131, 254 
agencies, 98
human, 104-105, 118, 130-131, 254, see Intellectual functioning
military and political, 7, 11, 15
tests of, 64, 192, 291-293, see specific test names
Interaction, 172, 216, 276, see also Social relationships and Interpersonal influence
Internalized norms and controls, 63, 67-68, 90, 180-181
Interpersonal influence, 25, 40, 216-276
Interrogation, 1-25, 29-30, 33, 41, 44, 54, 67, 74, 89-90, 98, 108, 112-126, 129 134, 142, 152-156, 164-165, 167, 169-170, 
180, 191-196, 199, 204-210, 216, 266, 277-279, 293, 296-300 
Communist, 1, 4-6, 8, 10, 22, 44, 54, 98
European, 22
experimental, 67, 112-118, 129-134, 155, 180, 191-195
ideological, 8, 12, 15
military, 167, 296-297
Nazi, 98, 121, 204
Oriental, 22
police, 98, 113, 142, 153-156, 165-166, 296-297
Soviet, 6, 33, 98, 108
United States, 12
Interviewing, 11, 113 
free-associative, 112
non-directive, 112, see also Interrogation
Introvert, 106-107
Iproniazid, 120-121, 131
I.Q., 100
Irritability, 72-73
Isolation, 27, 29-30, 32, 34-35, 38, 42-43, 51-95, 111, 130
-319-
Isolation, effects of duration, 81-83 
social, 52, 56, 61, 82, 89
tolerance of, 69-70, 81
 
Judgment, 30, 32, 40-41, 44, 62, 219, 233
Jury verdicts, 143
 
Kent EGY, 291
Kidney, 22-23
Kinesthetic input, 57

Korea, 12, 35 
war in, 2, 3, 22
 
Law, 3, 7, 9, 19, 113-115, 184, 207, 278, 297-298
Learning abilities, 64-67
Legitimacy, 181, 185, 187
Levinson-Sanford Scale, 223, 252
Lie detection, 142-168, 209, 286-287
Likert Scale, 223
Lobotomy, 298
Logic, 64, 66, 218
Lower level functions, 39
Loyalty, 41-42, 108, 278, 281, 296
Lying, 142-168, 195
Lysergic acid (LSD), 122-124, 132
 
McGill University, 58, 61, 65, 81-82
M'Naghten Rules, 278
Magic, 4-6, 8, 54, 169, 207
Magic-Room procedures, 102, 208, 210, 212
Malingering, 13, 114, 277-304
Manic psychoses, 124
Masking, 101
Mastery, 204-205, 208-209, 211
Maudsley Personality Inventory, 253
Memory, 25-26, 30, 32, 35, 39-41, 123, 191-196, 293-296, 298-299
Menstrual cycle, 109-110
Mental deficiency, 278-279, 284, 289, 291
Mental performance, 125
Mental state, 105
Meperidine hydrochloride, 106
Meprobamates, 127
Mescaline, 77-78, 107-108, 116, 122, 132
Metabolism, 22, 285
Metamphetamine, 116, 131
Military security, 98, 182-183
Mindszenty, Cardinal, 98
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, 69, 106, 110, 223, 251, 253, 280
Monotony, 53-54, 56, 58
Mood, 38, 106, 110-119, 123, 131 
changes of, 90
Morality, 3, 278, see Ethics Morphine, 103, 106, 116
Motivation, 7, 19, 31, 36, 41-44, 73, 85, 87-88, 108, 127, 130, 172-174, 178, 183-184, 187, 203, 205, 210-212, 285, 296
Muscular activity, 31, 59-64, 79-80 
coordination, 125
fatigue, 31
tension, 150
Mutism, 284-286
 

Narcoanalysis, 114-116, 195, 286, 295
Narcosis, 116-118, 295, 298
Narcotics, 103, 293
Nazis, 98
Negativism, 295
Neopallium, 39
Nervous system, 28, 40, 53
Neurochemistry, 53
Neurophysiology, 53
Neuroses, 70, 96, 106-107, 114, 119, 122 124, 128, 253, 280, 295
Nonspecific effects, 98, 129
Novacaine, 121
Nutrition, 22, 25, 28, 35, 110, 130, 250 251, see Hunger
 
Obsession, 125
Office of Naval Research, 51, 142
Opiates, 127
Oxygen, 22, 33, see also Respiration
 
Pain, 25, 34, 36, 38, 40-42, 99, 104, 125, 127, 201-205, 211, 278
Panic, 116
Paraldehyde, 124
Paralysis, 278
Paranoid behavior, 4, 26, 32, 110, 286
Parkinsonism, 125
Passivity, 170
Pentobarbital, sodium, 103, 116
Perceived discrepancy, 236-237
Perception, 57, 59-64, 106, 123, 170
-320-
Perception, disturbances of, 61-63, 122 
of depth, 63
of time, 123
Perceptual field, dependence on, 255
Perceptual stimulation, 51-95
Perseveration, 26, 32, 41, 115
Personal characteristics and conformity behavior, 237-240
Personality, 34, 42, 69-72, 74, 100-101, 106-108, 117, 131, 262, 267, 280 
and conformity, 251-259
constitutional factors, 101
evaluation of, 13
Personnel selection, 53, 72
Persuasion, 165
Pervitin, 107
Pharmacology, 96-141
Phenidylate, 120
Phenobarbital, 125
Phenothiazine derivatives, 124-125, 128, 132

Phi phenomenon, 62
Phobia, 125
Physician, role of, 96-97
Physiologic functioning, 78
Physiologic response measures, 53, 142 168
Pipradol, 120, 131
Placebo, 9, 99-101, 106, 108, 130, 201 202, 287
Plantar response, 192
Plethysmograph, 149
Pneumonia, 32
Poisoning, 24, 26
Police, 27, 33, 41, 44, 54, 98, 113, 142, 154-155
Polygraph, 142-168, 209
Posthypnotic suggestion, 170, 180, 185, 189, 198, 201-202, 211
Prestige, 101, 238
Primary process material, 70-71, 78, 88
Primitive needs, 206
Prison, 33, 52
Prisoner, 29, 33, 35, 38, 42, 44, 56, 57, 67, 69, 74, 86, 91, 170, 291, 294, 296-297
Prisoners-of-war, 1-4, 12, 22-23, 27, 35, 43, 206, 277-278, 281, 293, 297
Problem solving, 64, 66, 88
Projection, 26
Promazine, 106
Propaganda, 67
Proprioceptive input, 57
Protein, 23
Psychic trauma, 294
Psychoanalysis, 53, 70, 87-88, 162
Psychomotor functions, 127
Psychopathic states, 119, 130, 281, 287
Psychopharmacology, 96-141
Psychosis, 24-25, 91, 124, 128, 134, 278 279, 283-284, 290, 293, 297, 300
Psychosis, simulation of, 280
Psychotic states, 86, 96, 111, 114, 119, 121-123, 131-132, 280, 285, 299-300
Punishment, 161, 163-164, 281, 297-298, 300
 
Rationalization, 41
Rauwolfia, 125, 132
Reality, perception of, 63, 69, 86, 170, 181-182, 184
Reasoning, 64, 66, 71
Recall, 66-67, 191-196 
of repressed material, 113
Regression, 206
Relationship, social, 172, 176, 179, 216 276 
doctor-patient, 96-97
interrogator-source, 74, 210-212
subject-experimenter, 85, 178-191
Repetitive tasks, 87
Rescinnamine, 125

Reserpine, 120, 125-126
Residual stimulation, 75
Resistance, effectiveness of hypnosis for, 170, 205, 210-211 
to hypnosis, 177-180, 196-200
to interrogation, 90, 119, 133-134, 145, 170, 277-304
to manipulation, 2-3, 29, 90, 96, 112 113, 116-117, 119, 126-127, 133-134, 145, 170-171, 180, 196-200, 210-211, 216-276, 
278, 301
to stress, 90, 201-205
Respiration, 24, 80, 204
Responsibility, 133, 207, 209-210, 277 288, 296
Responsiveness, 124, 294
Rest, 25
Reticular system, 89
Retrospective reporting, 78
-321-
Reward pretraining, 248
Rhythmic stimulation, 180
Rhythms, biologic, 109-110
Rorschach test, 70-71, 85, 100, 118, 123, 193, 223, 251, 254-255, 288
Role, 172, 279, 296 
conflict, 281
playing, 193, 196
skill, 279-280
Rote learning, 66
Russian interrogation, 33, 98
 
Sailors, 57, 90-91
Salt, 21-22
Sanitation, 27
Schizophrenia, 70, 72, 107-108, 111, 120, 122, 258, 280, 283-284, 288, 300 
catatonic, 113
Scopolamine, 112-113, 116, 121, 206
Secobarbital, 106, 111, 117
Sedatives, 117-119, 124-126
Self, 4
Self-confidence, 252
Self-control, 128, 204, 208
Self-defeating defense, 206
Self-descriptive procedures, 257
Self-destructive acts, 96, 181-183, 189
Sensory acuity, 123-126
Sensory bombardment, 62, 73
Sensory deprivation, 28-29, 34-35, 51-95
Sex differences, 104-105, 130, 238, 249
Shame, 108, 114
Shock, 21, 24
Side effects, 121, 125-126, 134, 147
Simulation of symptoms, 118-119, 134, 196, 277-304

Simulation, detection of, 196-197
Sleep, 25, 28, 31, 33-35, 38, 40, 79, 111, 171-172, 174, 176, 178, 250-251, 285, 294 
deprivation of, 27, 29-30, 32, 35, 42-44, 153
learning during, 175
Smersh, 6
Social context, 228, 234-244, 280
Social norms and values, 2, 9, 11, 25, 108, 127, 180-191, 207, 210, 296-297 
conflict of, 300
prohibitions, 220, 259, see also Internalized norms and controls
Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology, ix, 169
Sociopathic personality, 70
Sodium amytal, 106-108, 113-115, 117 118, 206, 295
Sodium benzoate, 116
Sodium pentothal, 98, 106, 116-117, 206
Solitary confinement, 54, 56, 83, 86, 88 89, 204
Solitude, 52
Space, outer, 53
Spatial orientation, 63
Speech patterns, 32, 104, 110-111, 123
Startle reaction, 285
Starvation, 23-24, 26-27, 29, 32, 35-36, 110
Status, 279
Stimulants, 119-121, 131-132
Stimulus, ambiguity and conformity, 231
Stimulus-hunger, 83-84, 90
Stimulus-response theory, 54
Stress, 69, 100, 132, 134, 211, 281, 285, 293 
resistance to, 201-205
Subception, 161
Subcortical stimulation, 14
Sugar, 23, 33
Suggestibility, 44, 67-69, 72, 90, 108, 130, 134, 169-215
Suggestion, 26, 102, 169-215, see also Demand characteristics, Hypnosis, Placebo
Super-ego, 186
Survival, 37, 41-42
Sweating, 21-22, 148
Symbolic processes, 112
Sympathy, 100
 
Tachometer, 149
Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale, 253
Temperature, body, 20-21, 24, 27, 285
Terman Concept Mastery Test, 223, 254
Thematic Apperception Test, 223, 248, 251, 254-256, 261, 289
Thinking, 29-30, 38, 123
Thiopental, 116, 295
Thirst, 24-25, 42, 250
Thought-reform, 10, 53-54
Threat, 37-39, 41-43, 73, 132-133, 149, 163, 282, 300

-322-
Thurstone-Chave War Scale, 251
Thurstone-Gottschaldt Embedded Figures Test, 61
Thurstone Scale of Militarism, 218, 251
Time orientation, 66, 82-83, 90
Torture, 27
Totalitarianism 5
Toxemia, 293
Toxicity, 284
Trance, 169-215, 283, 295 
logic, 197
spontaneous, 177, 200, see also Hypnosis
Tranquilizers, 124-126, 128, 132, 153
Trauma, 293-294
Truth, 8, 19, 114, 116, 130-133, 142-168, 191-196, 210, 278, 294
Truth serum, 112-113, 130, 195, 295
Twilight state, 175
 
Unanimity, 235
Unconsciousness, 24, 42, 283
United State Air Force, ix, 1, 3, 12, 254
United States Armed Forces, 3, 27
United States Constitution, 115
 
Validity, 117-118
Verbal behavior, 14, 105, 108, 111-113, 130, see also Speech patterns
Vigilance behavior, 59
Vision, 60, 63, 75
Visual-motor coordination, 61-63
Vitamins, 23, 110
Volunteering, effect of on experiments, 68, 85
Vomiting, 22, 24
Vorbeireden, 289-290
 
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 14
War neuroses, 113, 117, 294-295
Washington State University, 151
Water, 21, 25, 27
Wechsler-Bellevue Intelligence Scale, 291-292
Wechsler Digit Symbol Test, 61
Weight loss, 79, 284
Welsh Figure Preference Test, 223, 254
White-out, 60, 79
Will, 7, 44, 97
Witchcraft, 4-6, 8
Withdrawal syndromes, 127
Witkin Embedded Figures Test, 61
Wonderlic Test, 105
World War II, 6, 22, 113

 
Yellow Springs Instrument Company, 149
Yoga, 189
-323-

