Guiding Clients
to Enterprise Agility
 ―
Rick Freedman
The Agile
Consultant

 THE AGILE CONSULTANT 
 GUIDING CLIENTS TO ENTERPRISE AGILITY  
 Rick Freedman 
 

Th e Agile Consultant: Guiding Clients to Enterprise Agility
Rick Freedman 
 
 
 
Lenexa, Kansas 
 
 
 
USA 
 
 
 
 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-6052-3 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-6053-0
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016951233
Copyright © 2016 by Rick Freedman 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part 
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, 
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission 
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dis-
similar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol 
with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, and images 
only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringe-
ment of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they 
are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are 
subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of 
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility 
for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, 
with respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr 
Acquisitions Editor: Robert Hutchinson
Development Editor: Matthew Moodie
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Pramila Balan, Laura Berendson, Aaron Black, 
Louise Corrigan, Jonathan Gennick, Robert Hutchinson, Celestin Suresh John, 
Nikhil Karkal, James Markham, Susan McDermott, Matthew Moodie, Natalie Pao, 
Gwenan Spearing
Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando
Copy Editor: Lori Jacobs
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Cover Designer: Isaac Ruiz Soler
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 233 
Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail 
 orders-ny@springer-sbm.com , or visit  www.springeronline.com . Apress Media, LLC is a California 
LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc (SSBM Finance 
Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail  rights@apress.com , or visit  www.apress.com . 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional 
use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our 
Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at  www.apress.com/bulk-sales .
Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text is available to 
readers at  www.apress.com . For detailed information about how to locate your book’s source code, go 
to  www.apress.com/source-code/ .
Printed on acid-free paper

 Apress Business: The Unbiased Source of Business 
Information 
 Apress business books provide essential information and practical advice, 
each written for practitioners by recognized experts. Busy managers and pro-
fessionals in all areas of the business world—and at all levels of technical 
sophistication—look to our books for the actionable ideas and tools they 
need to solve problems, update and enhance their professional skills, make 
their work lives easier, and capitalize on opportunity. 
 Whatever the topic on the business spectrum—entrepreneurship, finance, 
sales, marketing, management, regulation, information technology, among 
others—Apress has been praised for providing the objective information and 
unbiased advice you need to excel in your daily work life. Our authors have no 
axes to grind; they understand they have one job only—to deliver up-to-date, 
accurate information simply, concisely, and with deep insight that addresses 
the real needs of our readers. 
 It is increasingly hard to find information—whether in the news media, on the 
Internet, and now all too often in books—that is even-handed and has your 
best interests at heart. We therefore hope that you enjoy this book, which has 
been carefully crafted to meet our standards of quality and unbiased coverage. 
 We are always interested in your feedback or ideas for new titles. Perhaps 
you’d even like to write a book yourself. Whatever the case, reach out to 
us at    editorial@apress.com   and an editor will respond swiftly. Incidentally, at 
the back of this book, you will find a list of useful related titles. Please visit 
us at    www.apress.com  to sign up for newsletters and discounts on future 
purchases.
 The Apress Business Team  

   

 For Terri 
 Doubt that the stars are fire, 
 Doubt that the sun doth move, 
 Doubt truth to be a liar, 
 But never doubt I love . . . 

   

Contents
About the Author. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
Part I:      What Is Agile Consulting?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Chapter 1: 
The Agile Consultant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Chapter 2: 
Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Chapter 3: 
The EVOLVE Framework for Agile Evolution. . . . . . . . . . . 35
Part II:      The EVOLVE Agile Consulting Framework  . . . .45
Chapter 4: 
Explore and Engage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Chapter 5: 
Visualize Success  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Chapter 6: 
 Observe and Plan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Chapter 7: 
Lead Teams to Agility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Chapter 8: 
Visible Results  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Chapter 9: 
Evolve the Enterprise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Part III:      Engaging at Enterprise Level  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .123
Chapter 10: Agile Strategy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Chapter 11 The Leadership Commitment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Chapter 12: The Agile Enterprise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Chapter 13: The Agile Consulting Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
Part IV:      Running the Agile Consulting Practice  . . . . . . .177
Chapter 14: The Agile Consulting Skill Set  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Chapter 15: Agile Domain Expertise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
Chapter 16: Conclusion: Toward the Agile Enterprise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
Appendix A: The Roots of Agile: History and Background  . . . . . . . . . . 205
Bibliography  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225

    

  About the Author 
 Rick   Freedman  ,   author of  The IT Consultant (Pfeiffer, 2000), has experienced 
the agile transition from the inside. He has been working as an agile coach 
and trainer since the beginning of the agile movement. As Worldwide Project 
Management Director for Intel from 2001–2005, Rick evangelized, trained, 
and coached Intel project managers in the United States, UK, China, India, 
Germany, Sweden, and Australia. Since leaving Intel, Rick has trained and 
coached agile teams at clients such as Credit Suisse, Bank of New York, Turner 
Broadcasting, Motorola, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Customs 
and Border Patrol, the IRS, Wells Fargo, TransCanada, and many others. He 
authored ESI’s original Agile Project Management course and consulted with 
ESI as it expanded this offering into a suite of agile courses now delivered 
internationally. Rick’s articles about agility for TechRepublic and DZone enable 
him to remain current with agile trends and engage with a worldwide audi-
ence of agilists.  

   

 Acknowledgments 
 Thanks to Jim Highsmith for introducing me to agility through our interview in 
2000, to Tom Conrad for helping me understand how agility works at Pandora. 
Also to Ludwig and Rudolf Melik for their kind friendship. Thanks to agile 
geniuses Pete Behrens, Jean Tabaka, Ronica Roth, Mike Griffiths, Denise Vestin, 
Munir Bhimani, Scott Bird, Kay Harper, Jenny Tarwater: knowing you made 
me smarter. Matt Holt, my friend and my original believer: rock on, my brother. 
To the originators: Mike Cohn, Lyssa Adkins, Ken Schwaber, Jeff Sutherland, 
Dean Leffingwell, Jon Katzenbach and Doug Smith, Craig Larman, Rob Thomsett, 
etc.: You started a revolution that changed the world . . . no small feat.  

   

  Introduction 
 I began learning the basics of project management as a rookie in one of the 
biggest information technology (IT) shops in America, Citicorp’s global data 
center. I was hired as a specialist in Citicorp’s new PC and Network group. 
My first project went way long and over budget. I was invited to a chat with 
a systems manager, for what I expected to be a scolding. Instead, Jerry took 
me to a blackboard and explained the fundamentals of managing an IT project. 
Jerry drew four boxes on the blackboard, and put a “D” into each one. “What 
do you think the D’s are for?” he asked. I just stared, stupefied. Jerry then 
explained a simple 4D methodology for delivering IT programs. 
 Discover, Design, Develop, Deploy 
 Being a typical New York guy, Jerry didn’t explain this to me in terms of critical 
paths or network diagrams. “Discover what the client wants, and what you’re 
walking into.” Jerry advised. “Design a solution to fix the problem. Develop 
that thing that you designed, then Deploy it.” 
 I, and thousands of other project managers, took Jerry’s commonsense “4D” 
project philosophy and subsequently expanded it into phases, then tasks. We 
estimated those tasks, even though anyone who’d been in the IT field for more 
than a minute knew that estimates were invariably wrong. We created “phase 
gates” to ensure that no one illicitly progressed without permission. Those 
gates became codified, and eventually developed into the 17-binder propri-
etary project methodologies that were the rage in the 1990s. 
 I went to work for one of the Big 5 consulting firms, and was trained in its 
particular version of the multichecklist, highly enforced methodology. After a 
few months, I became such a zealot of the regimented, gated approach that I 
joined the Project Committee. 
 When I got some experience in the field I quickly understood why the “pre-
dict and plan” model was unworkable in a consulting context. Simply put, no 
client being billed by the hour will stand for dozens of hours of overhead, 
filling out forms, and passing through gates that don’t add business value. The 
client, of course, believed that project management was just the consultant 
planning his own project, and so was reluctant to pay for it, while we were 
under orders to get at least 15% of the total gig in project management fees. 

 Introduction
xiv
 Most significantly, “predict and plan” didn’t work. Upfront requirements were 
incomplete, as users couldn’t articulate what they needed. Estimates were 
“magical,” as if we could see over the horizon and know how the mix of tech-
nology, personality, and culture would play out. IT projects routinely failed. As 
I began to understand the fallacy of the “predict and plan” model, I noticed the 
shoots of a “light methodologies” movement budding, with thinkers like Rob 
Thomsett writing books like  Radical Project Management . 1 I was determined to 
find a method that maintained the rigor of a phase-gated approach with the 
low-overhead of these new “radical” project ideas. 
 When the overhead of the big consulting giant became too much, I moved 
to a local system integrator. We dealt with smaller clients and less complex 
IT challenges, but nonetheless struggled with consistent delivery. We spent 
a long time experimenting with different versions of “project toolkits” and 
eventually reached a light, adaptable 4D-style model that was less likely to 
scare away clients. With the simple application of a lean project management 
discipline, we grew the consulting practice significantly, and delivered con-
trolled, successful results. 
 I left this gig to write my first book,  The IT Consultant , 2 and began to travel 
as an advisor to other IT shops. The more small IT shops I visited, the more 
obvious the patterns. Either they were strangling in bureaucratic predictive 
project regimes that destroyed their flexibility, or they were improvising their 
way through projects, usually by throwing technical bodies against them, and 
delivering chaotic, unmanaged engagements. 
 In advising these small IT shops or consulting firms, I discovered a secret: insti-
tute a few, simple project disciplines, apply some consulting skills, like collabo-
ration and communication, and most IT shops will solve their own problems. 
 On a writing assignment during this time, I interviewed Jim Highsmith, soon-
to-be signatory of the yet-to-be-written Agile Manifesto, and Highsmith intro-
duced me to ideas that were about to revolutionize the world of software 
development. The concepts of high-performing teams that managed and moti-
vated themselves, of enforced client participation, of lean thinking throughout 
the process, fell so neatly in line with the on-the-ground experience I was 
having in the  3 field, that I quickly became an agilist. 
 1 Rob Thomsett, Radical Project Management (Prentice Hall, 2002),  www.amazon.com/Rob-
Thomsett/e/B001KD577M/ref=dp_byline_cont_book_1 . 
 2 Rick Freedman,  The IT Consultant: A Commonsense Framework for Managing the Client 
Relationship (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/Pfeiffer, 2000),  www.amazon.com/Rick-Freedman/
e/B000APKF5U/ref=dp_byline_cont_book_1 . 
 3  www.techrepublic.com/article/consultant-employs-quotlight-methodologiesquot-
for-application-development/   . 

Introduction
xv
 The “predict and plan,” PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique)-
method, Gantt-chart-style of project management taught us a lot, but it got 
strangled in its inconsistency. You can’t possible predict how projects will go, 
no matter how many gates you set up or papers you sign. The technology 
changes constantly and unpredictably. We can’t know what clients want, since 
they rarely know themselves. We can’t accurately estimate huge programs, 
but we can time-box and cost-box projects and deliver valuable, useful incre-
ments quickly. We can’t manage talented knowledge workers into compliance, 
but we can lead them to glory. 
 Agile is revolutionary for those who came up in a gated, waterfall world. It’s 
going to become a lot more revolutionary in the next few years, as these agile 
ideas of collaboration, speed-to-value, adaptability, and iterative, incremental 
delivery evolve from a strictly IT discipline into agile marketing, and then to 
agile strategic planning in the executive suite.  
 4  www.infoq.com/articles/standish-chaos-2015  . 
Successful
42%
Challenged
49%
Failed
9%
Agile
Successful
14%
Challenged
57%
Failed
29%
Waterfall
 Figure I-1.  Agile vs. waterfall success rates: The Standish Group CHAOS study, 2015  
 One thing is certain; the verdict on agile is in. Agile works, at least in some 
circumstances and for some organizations. The latest Standish Group CHAOS 
study, 4 a periodic review of project success, illustrated clearly that agile is 
more successful than waterfall. 
 Another thing is also true; the vast majority of self-proclaimed agile enter-
prises are far from being agile; most are not even doing agile. The distinction 
is meaningful; simply performing the ceremonies and techniques of agile won’t 
help the marketing department prepare for agile’s iterative cadence, nor will 
it convince leaders to accept the ambiguity and emergent nature of agile proj-
ects. Agile evolution is an agile, iterative process itself, and it usually takes a 
lot of iterations before the culture of agility begins to penetrate beyond the 
development team. 
 

 Introduction
xvi
 Companies gravitate to agile approaches for a few simple reasons. First, as we 
saw, they work; the agile community is full of success stories from enterprises 
that have adopted agile techniques and gained significant advantage. The ranks 
of developers are exerting pressure from below. Many have experienced agile, 
and bridle at reverting to traditional techniques. The cadence of technology, 
the expectations of markets, the fickleness of customers—all increase the 
pace of change, putting more businesses at risk of disruption. It’s no wonder 
executives are now looking at agility as the next holy grail of management 
theories. Agile consultants often see a significant drop in enthusiasm when 
leaders discover the depth of radical change agility requires. 
 My experience across the gamut, from strict Project Management Institute 
(PMI), CMM (Capability Maturity Model)-style predictive project management 
techniques to agile methods, leaves no doubt for me that agile is a revolution-
ary way to think about software development. Like many revolutionary ideas, 
now that it’s the norm it seems obvious and inevitable. These practices and 
principles have the potential to profoundly enhance the competitiveness and 
productivity of global business; that’s how important I believe agile’s ultimate 
impact will be. Agile proves the business advantages of iterative, incremental, 
dynamic design in a collaborative, open atmosphere of continuous improve-
ment. Knowledge workers, from the chief information officer (CIO) to the 
pair of programmers huddling over a terminal, want to move beyond fantasy 
strategies that will never be implemented, beyond fantasy specifications that 
the organization doesn’t need, won’t use, and can’t afford, beyond arbitrary 
estimates and schedules that guarantee “death march” projects. The move 
to agility was a hard-fought battle against an entrenched incumbent, and it’s 
triumphing only because it works. 
 Agile appeals to me because it’s rational, and because I evolved to it based 
on my own experience. But its real attraction is on the human side; it creates 
a team-based, collaborative, consensus culture, and it promotes the values 
that I admire. Honesty, openness, intrinsic motivation, robust collaboration, 
reflection, and improvement; these values seem so obvious from a human 
perspective, and yet the enterprises we build are often the exact opposite. 
Siloed, politically charged, hierarchical, and demotivating cultures are still the 
norm in many enterprises. Agile values of teamwork, incremental refinement, 
and change readiness are inevitable in our tumultuous business environment. 
Once executives, their teams, and their customers absorb these ideas, agile 
will change everything.  
 5  www.leadingagile.com/2011/01/untangling-adoption-and-transformation/  . 

Introduction
xvii
 Who Is This Book For? 
 Both Jim Highsmith and Mike Cottmeyer, influential agile thinkers, have recently 
weighed in on the distinction between “doing agile” and “being agile.” As Mike 
Cottmeyer phrases it,
 Agile adoption is about changing the agile doing side of the equation, while 
transformation is about changing the agile being side of the equation.  5 
 Highsmith writes passionately and persuasively about the need to take agility 
beyond methodology for agile to achieve its potential:
 Many organizations seem to be stuck at Agile 101, the rule-based 
approach to Agile (do this, don’t do that) that is a necessary first step 
towards becoming Agile, but it’s only a first step. To take advantage of the 
fast-paced responsiveness of a continuous delivery environment, the entire 
organization—from delivery teams to executive management—needs to 
embrace the process changes required to respond rapidly, collaborate 
effectively between development and operations, and embrace an 
adaptive, exploratory mindset.  6 
 My ultimate goal as an agile consultant is to help clients evolve from doing 
agile, with select teams following the process-based methods and techniques 
of scrum, for example, to being agile, through deep cultural change to the 
structure, norms, purpose and style of the enterprise. As there is a contrast 
between adopting agile and transforming to an agile culture, I see a contrast 
between the agile coach and the agile consultant. This isn’t a value judgment 
—there’s plenty of need, at the current state of agile adoption, for both. 
 Coaches are often consultants as well, focusing on the entire enterprise and 
helping organizations discover the best approach to improving agility across 
their firm. In this early stage of agile adoption, however, many agile coaches will 
have limited interaction with the executive team, primarily spending time with 
the product development teams and product owners, helping them under-
stand and adapt to agile practices. 
 The agile consultant plays that coaching role but, in the ideal scenario, is also 
working with senior managers to create an adoption framework for agile 
in the enterprise. The agile coach is often having a methods-and-practices 
conversation, while the agile consultant should be having a return-on-invest-
ment (ROI)-based, strategy-focused engagement across the entire enterprise, 
 6 https://assets.thoughtworks.com/articles/adaptive-leadership-accelerating-
enterprise-agility-jim-highsmith-thoughtworks.pdf  . 

 Introduction
xviii
evangelizing the benefits of agility and building support at the sponsor level. 
Agile consultants are also coaches, working on the nitty-gritty methodologi-
cal details with teams and individual contributors if that’s what the enterprise 
needs, or where it decides to begin. In my ideal scenario, the agile consultant 
is simultaneously building trust and expertise within the agile teams while 
advising leaders on the benefits and challenges of evolving to agility across the 
enterprise. 
 The methodology focus by many teams and firms in the beginning of their agile 
journey is understandable; in fact, it’s inevitable. Despite all of the evidence of 
agile success, clients are skeptical until they see it for themselves. It’s not rea-
sonable to expect organizations to jump into a radical new set of behaviors 
and attitudes without some demonstration of its efficacy and fit. The agile 
adoption phase is a critical and necessary step on the path to enterprise 
agility. After all, even with all the hype around agility, in most situations the 
migration is still driven bottom-up, by teams of developers who have expe-
rienced or heard about the speed, transparency, collaboration, and self-man-
agement associated with agile methods. “Grassroots” agile sometimes works 
in the open, exhibiting quick wins to gain support, and sometimes it works in 
stealth, displaying the outward signs of predictive, traditional waterfall meth-
ods. The stealth teams incrementally build the confidence of the organization 
by reporting and delivering faster. 
 Existing practices are sticky, company history is sticky, culture is sticky, and 
hierarchy is sticky. Stickiest of all is personality. Agile evolution requires us 
to help the enterprise unstick itself from its traditions. It sometimes requires 
us to help teams and individuals unstick their most fundamental behaviors. 
The effort to change norms and habits requires much more than change at 
the tactical level. While the use of a small “tiger team” to introduce agile 
into the product development function is a good practice, any improvements 
solely within that team will be undone by the stickiness of “the way things 
work here.” To make the leap from more efficient IT to a more agile enter-
prise, culture, history, and management style must be disrupted. I believe this 
requires, in addition to methodological expertise, mature consulting skills. 
Communication, facilitation, negotiation, organizational diagnosis, change man-
agement, strong business context skills—all are mandatory to effect evolution 
rather than mere adoption. 
 My hope is that, in reading this book, agile coaches, consultants, managers, 
and practitioners will gain some insight from my experiences and observa-
tions. For coaches and consultants, the obvious targets of this work, I’ll point 
out tips, tricks, and pitfalls from my consulting experience, and describe tac-
tics I’ve learned for working through challenges and barriers. For managers, 
I’ll define the role of leadership in agile organizations and in enterprises as 
they become agile. I’ll discuss in depth the evangelizing, consensus building, 
and reassurance that leaders are called upon to provide as organizations gain 

Introduction
xix
agility. For the stakeholder, such as the client or the product owner, I’ll talk 
about the profound adjustments in the relationship between developer and 
client, and the heightened level of participation and collaboration that the 
agile enterprise expects. And for the practitioner, the developer sitting in a 
cubicle writing code or designing data structures, we’ll review what it means 
to be  self-directed ,  self-managed , and  self-motivated , and the behaviors that these 
phrases imply. 
 The real skill of the agile consultant, or any consultant, is not in her ability 
to transmit the technical or domain knowledge in which she specializes; it is 
rather her sensitivity to the culture, history, and personality of the client, and 
her ability to guide this particular enterprise to the leanest, most efficient 
business model it can achieve. The tactical elements of agile practice are easy 
to teach and to learn, but, as with all profound ideas, enterprise agility is a 
journey. Agile consultants, whether acting as coaches or strategic advisors, are 
a necessary element of agile at this stage of its development. I believe we’re on 
the cusp of a torrent of agile evolution, up to the boardroom, that will change 
organizational culture forever. Like Sherpas guiding climbers, it’s our responsi-
bility to thoughtfully and sensitively guide our clients to the top.  
 

P A R T
 What Is Agile 
Consulting? 
 
I

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_1
 C H A P T E R 
 The Agile 
Consultant 
1
 Consulting matters. Our advice, good or bad, can affect the future of clients, 
their companies, their employees and customers. Some consultants, such as 
doctors and lawyers, can, by their advice, instigate reprieve or catastrophe. 
Mentors and managers are advisors, as are our peers and colleagues. Although 
we give and receive advice all day, the professional consultant has a unique 
responsibility. As a paid advisor, the consultant is ethically bound to focus on 
the client’s best interest. The best consultants have the domain expertise and 
creativity to add value, the temperament to advise gracefully, the relationship 
skills to collaborate and guide, and the tenacity to adapt to the client and 
accept their boundaries. Clients of consultants expect more than counsel; 
they want us to implement the ideas we’ve proposed, and to be accountable 
for the business results we promised. 
 When I envision an agile consultant, I see a consultant with the experience, 
mature skills, and agile domain expertise to guide a client’s evolution toward 
enterprise agility. He’s seen agile adoptions from the inside, and experienced 
the tensions inherent in the migration process. He’s run into some of the 
roadblocks of organizational culture and politics, and he’s made the transi-
tion from predictive thinking and embraced the values of adaptation and self-
direction. He’s fallen into traps, from the team to the enterprise level, and has 
figured his way out of them. He’s aware of the evolving theories of agile, from 
SAFe to tribes, and is thoughtful but enthusiastic about applying promising 
new practices with his clients. 

Chapter 1 | The Agile Consultant
4
 All of this agile experience and domain expertise, however, is essential 
but not sufficient. The participative, cross-functional, egalitarian instincts 
of agile require much more personal interaction than the old “expert from 
out of town” advisory style. At the team level, for example, modeling the 
right level of neutrality as a facilitator is critical to educating your team 
about collaborative behavior. At the management level, the ability to trans-
late unfamiliar agile concepts into accessible,  business-oriented language  
is more important than your mastery of story-point estimation. At the 
executive level, a strategic conversation about the competitive benefits 
of organizational agility will go farther than an explanation of the Agile 
Manifesto. The consultative skills that you can deploy in the face of con-
flict, resistance, failure, and reflection are more critical for success than 
is domain knowledge. Your ability to set the bar high, create a collabora-
tive, performance-oriented team atmosphere with a sense of purpose and 
achievement, while keeping everyone’s eyes on the business prize, will 
determine your success as an agile advisor. 
 Agile consultants are engaged in the intimate daily flow of human relation-
ships, biases, feuds, and triumphs. We uncover broken team and enterprise 
dynamics that have been swept under the rug forever. We raise expecta-
tions of achievement, and of the joy of work, for individuals, teams, and 
companies. Agile consultants are introducing methods designed to dis-
turb the status quo. We’re not delivering a routine consulting project to 
“migrate the client to agile”; we’re unleashing a revolution in the client’s 
house. Then we must guide clients to accept, embrace, and finally capitalize 
on that revolution. As a kaizen 1 practice, agile evolution has no end but the 
unattainable, perfection. The expectations we set, the skills and experi-
ences we bring, the humility with which we approach the client’s culture 
and history, our empathy for those whose stability we’ve disrupted—these 
account for success. Agile domain expertise is expected. Mature consulting 
skills, the ability to guide an agile evolution that fits, and sticks, are rare 
and precious. 
 I’m also visualizing a consultant who applies an agile business model in her 
own consulting practice, building an iterative, experiential relationship with 
clients accustomed to “firm fixed price, scope, and schedule” contracts. As 
we’ll see, the  traditional consulting model  is unsuited for agile evolution, and 
may be obsolete for any type of consulting engagement. The forces of digital 
disruption and lean thinking have swept over every sector, and the consulting 
business is not immune. 
 1 Gradual, continuous improvement.  

The Agile Consultant
5
 Agile Changes Consulting 
 Agile is both simple and complex. It’s simple in that the basic practices of 
scrum or XP can be taught in a day. Simplicity is inherent in the agile principles. 
“Maximizing the amount of work not done” is one of the most elegant state-
ments of lean philosophy I’ve encountered. It’s complex, however, because it’s 
designed to disrupt assumptions, processes, relationships, and hierarchies that 
are built to avoid disruption. Achieving the level of agility required to simplify 
our work is a complex endeavor. 
 Consulting is also both simple and complex. The five- step process  used by con-
sultants, whether doctor, lawyer, or architect, has been the same for centuries:
 1.  Understand the current state.  
 2.  Define the desired state.  
 3.   Analyze the gap.  
 4.   Recommend a plan of action to address the gap.  
 5.  Implement and monitor the plan.  
 This simple list of steps, however, contains multitudes. Understanding the 
current state can involve a quick walkthrough of a department, a month of 
interviews and surveys, or a year of due diligence. Defining the desired state 
is especially difficult when the aim is agility. The goal, as in all lean, kaizen 
exercises, is perfection through continuous reflection and improvement. It’s 
a goal, like speed-of-light travel, that becomes increasingly elusive the closer 
we approach.  Gap analysis  is also a challenge in an agile transition, when many 
of the gaps don’t become apparent until agile adoption begins and roadblocks 
start to emerge. Recommending a plan of action to proceed in an agile transi-
tion is also an emergent task. At each evolutionary stage in our agile expedi-
tion, the recommendations must change based on our experiences so far. We 
can perhaps overlay a map that points us to previously worn paths, but each 
voyage is distinct. 
 The  traditional consulting engagement model  , it seems, has been disrupted. 
The simple five-step approach outlined previously, used by Hippocrates with 
his first patient and by your doctor yesterday, is another victim of the “creative 
destruction” of the agile model. Once we abandon the predictive, big-upfront-
plan approach to project management and software development, we see that 
it also has to go in the agile consulting world. As agile consultants, we are 
essentially contracting to undertake an experimental, experiential quest with 
our client to discover together how far toward agility their collective aware-
ness, desire, and will can take them. We only learn their agile limit by trial and 
error. In agile evolution, when you push the boundary, the boundary pushes 
back. 

Chapter 1 | The Agile Consultant
6
 The  traditional consulting business model  , at least at the top tier, isn’t designed 
for speed-to-value. It’s designed for lengthy, entrenched projects that inter-
sperse a few veterans with legions of profitable rookies, and for which the firm 
then sells lucrative maintenance contracts, or extracts retainers, to sustain the 
changes they implemented. The fad-driven “program of the month” mentality, 
which now threatens agile, has demonstrated its bankruptcy, as the majority of 
Total Quality Management (TQM)  and  Business Process Reengineering  (BPR) 
enterprises slide back into old cultural norms. The “scope extension” sales 
philosophy, in which every consultant is an inside spy, eavesdropping in the 
cafeteria seeking the next problem the firm can swoop in and solve, is deadly 
to trust in the consultative relationship. 
 If the sponsor is aware of both the potential for agile and the risks of his cur-
rent circumstances, wants to change and understands the disruption involved, 
and has the will to adapt both himself and the culture around him, you’ve 
walked into the ideal scenario for a successful agile evolution. Good luck find-
ing that guy. Even if you successfully discover this perfect, willing candidate, the 
evolution to enterprise agility is monumental. In the ideal scenario described 
earlier, with a willing client, the contracting phase alone can be daunting. 
Whether or not the CEO wants to “go agile,” the procurement agent wants a 
signed scope of work. Training your sponsors to support and enforce corpo-
rate acceptance of an iterative, pay-as-you-go engagement with an ambiguous 
outcome is often an obstacle before you even engage. In our humanistic, par-
ticipative agile world, every element of agile transition is negotiable by anyone 
in the conversation. The most mature consultant, with superior facilitation, 
communication, influencing, and coaching skills, will have his hands full, even 
with this ideal sponsor. 
 Now consider the other end of the client spectrum. Our executive sponsor 
has read a  Harvard Business Review article on agility, heard her chief informa-
tion officer (CIO) mention it a few times, and thinks of it as a software process 
improvement project. She’s OK with trying it out in a “swat team” within the 
development group but still thinks the  Project Management Office (PMO)  
should manage all projects, wants to see a project plan before she’ll approve 
any expenditures, and still wants her quarterly strategic plan and budget from 
information technology (IT). The culture is an extension of her personality, 
which values stability and predictability over innovation and change. She’s 
granted limited access to her best and brightest coders for this “pilot test” of 
agile adoption. 
 In each of these circumstances, the key success attribute of the agile consultant 
is adaptability. The boundaries will obviously differ vastly between the scenarios, 
and will require both the sensitivity to understand them and the tenacity to chal-
lenge them. The consultant, in either case, is called upon to learn a new culture, 
a new business scenario, and a new set of personalities. None of that should be 
new to any advisor. The understanding that each engagement is unique comes 
early to an alert consultant. 

The Agile Consultant
7
 What’s different is that we now have to revamp the traditional engagement 
model entirely. The big-scope consulting project, with a defined beginning 
and end, finely negotiated deliverables, and a tightly managed change control 
process, necessarily must give way to an iterative, collaborative, time-bound 
and change-ready engagement (perhaps serially extended) that delivers value 
throughout. The agile consultant is committing to a series of time-boxed value 
deliveries, rather than a 12-month study that produces a report. The value we 
deliver in early iterations may be only the first sparks of enlightenment, but 
when we can demonstrate progress, the spread of agile principles will become 
self-reinforcing. 
 The cornerstone of an effective consultative relationship in the agile world 
is honesty, openness, and trust. The agile consulting model is less predictive, 
less prescriptive, and more evolutionary. The current state, future state, gaps, 
and plans are acknowledged as unknowable until the engagement is underway. 
These things were always obscure; just because we called it predictive plan-
ning doesn’t mean it actually predicted anything. Agile is reality-based, and we 
encounter and adapt to reality by living it. The incremental model of consult-
ing, both for agile transition clients and for our traditional consulting clients, 
is the disruptive idea that must inevitably replace the traditional leveraged, 
predictive, eternal entrenchment model of the Big 5 (or 4, or 3, or however 
many are left). 
 The nature of the engagement does not have to change radically. It just 
becomes atomized. That big-bang,  omnibus fixed-scope project  now becomes 
a series of collaborative experiments, time-bound and targeted, in which you 
and the client will discover how agile ideas affect the enterprise. Many consul-
tants are already familiar with the “discovery first” business model, in which 
the consultant charges a fee to perform some minimal due diligence, before 
committing to planning and delivery. Agile consultants are offering a series of 
discovery projects, typically expanding concentrically from the team to the 
team-of-teams, then incrementally through the enterprise. We’re promising 
to apply our skills and experience to guide teams to agility; how their existing 
competencies, attitudes, and practices will adapt is unknown. Successful agile 
consultants start their engagements with the explicit mutual understanding 
that they are guides, not project managers, and their role is advising and men-
toring, not enforcing process compliance. The agile consultant’s key  commer-
cial challenge  is ensuring that the client grasps the concept of variable scope. 
No coach or consultant can promise to “make you agile,” especially in one 
iteration or “pilot.” There are too many uncontrolled variables. 
 If we can’t promise “agility in a box,” what is our promise? We’re committing 
to the client that we actually have the agile domain experience and expertise 
we claim. We’re committing that we’re coming to the engagement “pure,” not 
trying to make ourselves indispensable and eternal but instead dedicated to 
using our domain knowledge and consultative skills to bring agility to their 
enterprise and make it self-sustainable. We’re committing that we’ll engage 

Chapter 1 | The Agile Consultant
8
collaboratively, that we’ll meet them where they are and help them adapt 
from there. We’re committing that we’ll view their agile evolution strategi-
cally, and ensure that our pursuit of agility is tightly coupled with the pursuit 
of their competitive goals. Most important, we’re committing to embody the 
agile principles and to be a role model of the adaptable, humanistic, purposeful, 
and collaborative spirit that epitomizes the agile enterprise.  
 Agile Consulting Principles 
 When I wrote my first book 2 back in 1999, the predictive planning model for 
project management and consulting engagements was still the norm. At that 
time, I formulated a list of five fundamental ideas that, I felt, were the necessary 
underpinnings of any consultative relationship. Going back to them now, I’m 
proud to report that I believe they are still applicable in the agile world; in, fact, 
I’ll make the argument that they are more pertinent than ever. Let me reveal 
those five fundamental ideas of consulting I put forth in 1999:
• 
 Focus on the relationship.  
• 
 Clearly define your role.  
• 
 Visualize success.  
• 
 You advise, they decide.  
• 
 Be oriented toward results.  
 These principles clearly did not address technical issues back then, and they 
don’t now. Instead they help define the consulting relationship you establish 
with your client, the clarity of expectations, the definition of “done,” the col-
laborative nature of the relationship, the client’s right to accept or reject your 
advice, and the orientation toward delivering value, not just white papers and 
migration plans. 
 I’ll walk through these ideas and describe why I believe that, unknowingly, I was 
articulating some agile principles in my recommended approach to the client. 
 Focus on the Relationship 
 The relationship  element  is critical in any advisory relationship, since trust is 
the first prerequisite for advising and being advised. In my Big 5 days, the key 
relationship was often with a solitary executive, who commissioned a report 
 2 Rick Freedman,  The IT Consultant: A Commonsense Framework for Managing the Client 
Relationship (San Francisco; Jossey-Bass/Pfeiffer, 2000). Available at:    www.amazon.com/
Rick-Freedman/e/B000APKF5U/ref=dp_byline_cont_book_1  .  

The Agile Consultant
9
or program, with everyone else a spectator or, at best, a “stakeholder.” The 
intimate nature of agile consulting, on the other hand, broadens our scope of 
relationships to every team and individual we touch in the process of agile 
evolution. This makes relationship cultivation central to agile consulting. We’re 
not just interviewing and commenting on the behavior of teams, or making 
remote suggestions for improvement, like consultants of old. We’re in the daily 
working life of our teams, making independent relationships with team mem-
bers, managers, customers, and executives. More to the point, we’re hands-on 
in helping change their behaviors, attitudes, and methods. The traits we typi-
cally display in a personal relationship, like empathy, patience, and respect, will 
be tested in an agile consulting relationship. Any consultant lacking the rela-
tionship focus and skills, the “emotional intelligence,” to develop collaborative 
and productive connections will struggle as an agile advisor.  
 Clearly Define your Role 
 The advisory  relationship  is always ambiguous. That’s why traditional consultants 
spend so much energy on writing pinpoint scope documents. The fear of implied 
expectations, role confusion, and scope creep made documenting the commit-
ments of both client and consultant essential. Clients can imply all sorts of com-
mitments and expectations. As I said in 1999, some clients believe that if you 
recommend a $99 accounting package, you’re bound for life to rectify any bugs, act 
as the go-between with the software publisher, and build any reports they need. 
The chain of implied expectations applies equally to agile, where the end state 
is ambiguous and roles are emergent.  What do you mean, the team’s not ready for 
continuous integration . . . we’ve been at this agile thing for three months already !  
 In the collaborative atmosphere of agile consulting, where the participation 
of the client and the upholding of commitments is vital, the importance of 
role clarity is magnified. Agile evolution isn’t a project that a consultant can 
“go do”; it is by its nature a collaborative exercise that loses all meaning if the 
players don’t understand and commit to their roles. In fact, a large part of the 
agile consultant’s challenge is to help teams and individuals clarify and under-
stand their new roles in a new world. This is not to say that we can determine 
these roles upfront. The true  scrummaster  in a rookie agile enterprise should 
arise spontaneously, not by a manager pointing to someone. At the least, as 
mentioned earlier, the consultant must ensure that the client understands 
we’re not peddling “agile in a box” but rather a mutual expedition of discov-
ery toward their maximum agility.  
 Visualize Success 
 As I’ve watched agile theory evolve since the Agile Manifesto, I’ve seen the 
debate around “the definition of done” increase exponentially. I’ve witnessed 
arcane arguments about “done” versus “done, done” versus “done, done, 

Chapter 1 | The Agile Consultant
10
done.” If we accept the premise that agile product development, software 
or otherwise, is not a project, in that it has no end that can be defined at 
the beginning, then clear agreement about what we call complete is manda-
tory. The debate about the definition of done may have become extreme, but 
the importance of defining it, especially in a paid consultant arrangement, is 
fundamental. 
 The  visualization of success  is, to me, a humanization of the quest for a defi-
nition of done. Rather than a big, upfront specification that defines success 
criteria, we now need to help the client visualize a high-level roadmap that 
illustrates, in business language, how the disparate efforts or workstreams 
come together in a cohesive scenario that supports the business strategy. The 
“vision box” exercise that Jim Highsmith recommends 3 is great for the team 
that’s trying to define priorities and overall feature mix, but my experience is 
that managers prefer a roadmap conversation that concentrates on strategic 
alignment, timing, and budgeting, one that helps them plan marketing, sales, and 
fulfillment campaigns. 
 Visualization of  potential  outcomes through roadmap planning is a powerful 
tool in the agile arsenal, but, in the consulting relationship, it’s fraught with 
risk. The agile consultant’s challenge is to present a possible future scenario, 
based on what’s now known, and not have it turn into the dreaded “fixed firm 
scope” project executives naturally favor. Before the enterprise has embraced 
or internalized agile, the tendency toward predictability and artificial certainty 
will be powerfully ingrained. Agile consultants who help their sponsors under-
stand the inevitable uncertainties and unknowns, and help them grasp the 
concept of emergent development, are more likely to succeed at visualization 
than those who confront a command-and-control culture with an ambiguous 
and variable roadmap. 
 Visualization is also about articulating the big idea that we’re evolving toward. 
In agile evolutions, where the creation of momentum and enthusiasm is a suc-
cess factor, the clarity and persuasiveness of the driving vision are key. Our 
message must speak to the fears and concerns of the teams, as well as the glo-
rious future that awaits. The time to begin thinking about the enterprise com-
munication and promotion strategy is at the beginning. The vision, roadmap, 
and our evangelizing should all send a consistent message: change is hard, what 
we’re attempting is hard, we acknowledge that we’re disrupting time-honored 
practices, but others have succeeded, and we can do this together and unleash 
creative power within the enterprise, to work with less friction and achieve 
more than we ever believed possible.  
 3 Jim Highsmith,  Agile Project Management: Creating Innovative Products, Second Edition 
(Addison-Wesley Professional; 2 edition (July 20, 2009)). Available at:  www.amazon.com/Agile-
Project-Management-Creating-Innovative/dp/0321658396/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=
UTF8&qid=1447619469&sr=1-1&keywords=agile+project+management+highsmith  .  

The Agile Consultant
11
 You Advise, they Decide 
 Consultants learn  early in their careers that client ownership of the proposed 
solution determines project success or failure. Every veteran has experienced 
the “your idea” syndrome, when the inevitable delays and unknowns impact 
the project, and the client intones those famous words. If you, as a consultant, 
are in the position of having the customer tell you that this was “your recom-
mendation” and you therefore are responsible for its success and risks, you’re 
doing it wrong. 
 Even before the collaborative ethic that imbues agile was pervasive, client 
ownership of the solution and vision was critical. The advisor advises; the 
advised considers, then decides. The  decision process  can’t be outsourced, and 
client attempts to turn consultants into “blame agents” must be resisted. We 
can explore options, describe the implications of choosing one direction or 
another, and anecdotally advise the client,  if it were me, I’d . . . , but once that’s 
done, the client, and the enterprise, must resolve to take a particular course 
and own that decision. As outside advisors, we bring many advantages; we 
can apply the experience of all the other clients we’ve worked with, cultures 
we’ve seen, and roadblocks and enablers we’ve encountered. From our van-
tage point, outside the prevailing culture and with “no dog in the fight,” we 
can unstick problems, often with simple solutions that are apparent to the 
unbiased eye. However, even if the solution is obvious to us, we need to take 
the client and her teams there, facilitating them to make the right decisions 
themselves, and to own them. 
 For agile consultants, in an emergent and evolving organization that we’re 
guiding through change and disruption, the client’s ownership of the deci-
sion process must be explicit. Both agile transitions and the projects that 
agile teams undertake must have a product owner, the keeper of the strategic 
flame, of the priorities, and of the decisions and trade-offs that accompany any 
effort. We are unambiguously coaches and advisors, working with the environ-
ment and competencies we find. As we incrementally expand the breadth of 
agile within the organization, we should also be expanding the ownership and 
enthusiasm. The natural scrummaster becomes a natural coach, who mentors 
more scrummasters who coach in turn. As Sun Tsu said in  The Art of War , “A 
leader is best when people barely know he exists. When his work is done, his 
aim fulfilled, they will say: we did it ourselves.”  
 Be Oriented Toward Results 
 The connection between this  principle  and the value-driven nature of agile 
is obvious. The value ethic of agile requires us to stop measuring success 
based on documents produced, or steps followed, or tasks performed, or 
milestones reached. At each iteration, we commit to delivering a result that 

Chapter 1 | The Agile Consultant
12
could potentially be released. It has working features that bring value. It can 
be both subjectively and objectively evaluated. While this may be a stretch 
when the project is an agile evolution, the ethic remains; agile consultants 
deliver value incrementally, and can demonstrate that value to their sponsors. 
Measuring progress in collaboration and purpose may be more difficult than 
in a software  project  , but as agilists ourselves, we maintain agile’s value focus 
when we expand the cycle of enhanced creativity, collaboration, adaptation, 
and enthusiasm that successful agile evolutions experience.  
 Agile Change Models 
 Michael Sahota, in his widely read  Survival Guide , 4 said
 Let us consider the question of the skill level Agile change agents have 
in “helping organizations with Agile.. I make the assertion that the vast 
majority of Agile change agents are at the accidental [lowest skill] level. 
The key reasons are: 
 1.   Failure to understand Agile as a system of culture and values  
 2.   Failure to understand the disruptive power of Agile in 
general and Scrum in particular  
 3.   Not understanding the difference between adoption and 
transformation  
 4.   Often no explicit adoption or transformation framework  
 5.   Weak or mis-alignment with management goals and 
objectives  
 As we’ve discussed, agile is a set of values, not a set of practices. It’s a culture, 
not a methodology. We’ve also emphasized the disruptive nature of agile, both 
practice and culture. Doing agile and being agile, as we’ve discussed, are two 
different things. And the clash of agile with current strategic planning methods, 
and indeed with big, upfront strategic plans themselves, should be obvious. 
 The lack of an adoption or transformation framework, however, is of real concern 
to the agile consultant. We may understand that we’re embarking on an iterative, 
experimental voyage with the client, but we still can benefit from some struc-
ture around the engagement. No client will, and no consultant should, embark 
on an agile engagement without some guiding framework, in my experience. 
 4 Michael Sahota,  An Agile Adoption and Transformation Survival Guide: Working with Organizational 
Culture (InfoQ, 2012). Available at:    https://www.infoq.com/minibooks/agile-
adoption-transformation   .  

The Agile Consultant
13
 For instance, Mike Cohn, in his  Succeeding with Agile, 5 recommends an adoption 
framework based on the acronym  ADAPT  :
• 
 Awareness that the current process is not delivering 
acceptable results.  
• 
 Desire to adopt Scrum as a way to address current 
problems.  
• 
 Ability to succeed with Scrum.  
• 
 Promotion of Scrum through sharing experiences so 
that we remember and others can see our successes.  
• 
 Transfer of the implications of using Scrum throughout 
the company.  
 Cohn’s framework, an adaptation of the ADKAR 6  model , has great applicability 
in defining the elements that must be in place for agile adoption in a scrum-
based environment. For consultants, it presents a stepwise series of symptoms 
that we can look for, or encourage, within the client organization. Based on 
extensive ADKAR research, this sort of framework has rich academic creden-
tials as a barometer of change readiness, and as a set of goals to achieve for 
change to self-sustain. 
 Twenty years ago, Harvard Professor John Kotter performed a study of 
change in the enterprise . 7 Kotter proposed an eight-step model that, based on 
his team’s studies, was the most successfully path to sustained organizational 
change. His  eight-step model  20 years ago was:
• 
 Establishing a Sense of Urgency.  
• 
 Forming a powerful Guiding Coalition  
• 
 Creating a Vision  
• 
 Communicating the Vision  
• 
 Empowering Others to Act on the Vision  
• 
 Planning for and Creating Short-Term Wins  
• 
 Consolidating Improvements and Producing Still More 
Change 
• 
 Institutionalizing New Approaches  
 5 Mike Cohn,  Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum (Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2010).  
 6 Awareness, Desire, Knowledge, Ability, Reinforcement.  
 7 John P. Kotter,  Leading Change (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 1996).  

Chapter 1 | The Agile Consultant
14
 It goes without saying that each of these steps had significant detail behind it, 
which I’ll not try to expand upon here, as there are great references available 
online, 8 or in Kotter’s book itself. 
 I’d prefer to concentrate on Kotter’s recently revised  eight-step model  , from his 
new book  XLR8, 9 which is much more aligned with an agile viewpoint. The original 
model, for example, took a phase-gated approach—you could only move on to 
the next step once the current step was complete. The new model, in contrast, 
is concurrent; multiple steps are incrementally advanced as organizational readi-
ness increases. Twenty years ago, Kotter’s model was focused on a core group 
of leaders selected from the hierarchy to drive change linearly; the new model 
focuses on a cross-functional network of enthusiastic volunteers, jumping on new 
opportunities and capitalizing on them quickly. For those agile consultants who 
begin their engagement at the strategic level, with a powerful sponsor who grasps 
the risks and benefits, and can mobilize the organization, Kotter’s new “accel-
erators” of change can be a powerful renewal engine. It’s demanding and radical, 
however, expecting much of the organization and its leadership. Agile consultants 
who, due to their assessment of the culture they’ve walked into, choose to take a 
more bottom-up, adoption-based approach won’t have much immediate use for a 
complex organizational model like Kotter’s. For those agile consultants who have 
the privilege of partnering with determined leaders pursuing a guiding vision of 
enterprise agility, however, Kotter’s accelerators are potent. 
 Kotter’s accelerators haven’t changed that much from 20 years ago, but their 
intent is completely different, thanks to the inroads of agile thinking. 
 Create a Sense of Urgency 
 Kotter emphasizes the development of a big, guiding idea that generates momen-
tum and enthusiasm, which he terms the  Big Opportunity . In our case, of course, 
the big  opportunity  is agility in the enterprise. Our challenge as consultants is 
to help the organization frame a compelling “burning platform” that creates 
the urgency required to counter organizational inertia. We’ll discuss in later 
chapters the disruptive challenges that are driving enterprises to seek agility.  
 Build a Guiding Coalition 
 In contrast to the hierarchical,   executive-focused coalition that Kotter origi-
nally recommended, this new coalition is cross-discipline, cross-function, and 
cross-rank. All players are equal in this more participative, “swarm” consor-
tium. This idea is congruent with one spread by Ken Schwaber 10 about the 
creation of an Enterprise Transition Team, itself a scrum team that manages the 
enterprise transition iteratively.  
 8  www.rbsgroup.eu/assets/pdfs/2013_THE_8-STEP_PROCESS_FOR_LEADING_CHANGE.pdf   . 
 9  www.kotterinternational.com/book/accelerate/  . 
 10 Ken Schwaber,  The Enterprise and Scrum (Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 2007).  

The Agile Consultant
15
 Form a  Strategic Vision and Initiatives  
 We commonly talk of the capital-v Vision statement in the agile community. 
Many of the original agile thinkers wrote extensively about different practices 
that teams could use to develop a guiding vision. While visualizing the glorious 
future state is essential, Kotter’s insistence on initiatives to move it forward 
differentiates it. It’s not just a vision we’re creating here, it’s a plan to achieve 
that vision through a specific portfolio of actions.  
 Enlist a Volunteer Army 
 In most development-centric organizations, finding a team of volunteers for 
agile adoption is not challenging. Those who have not transitioned usually 
want to, with a vengeance. Finding volunteers, however, among the concentric 
circles that surround the development team is the challenge. As agile practices 
in development teams create pressures in IT operations, which then roils 
outward toward marketing and fulfillment, our need to keep seeding the army 
of volunteers becomes more urgent, and more difficult. The ability of an agile 
consultant to work with the guiding coalition to keep the momentum going is 
a predictor of success.  
 Enable Action by Removing Barriers 
 Removing barriers, of course, is a lean and agile core principle. It’s also a 
phrase that simplifies an extraordinarily complex idea. Every process, every 
human being, every historical artifact and cultural norm within any enter-
prise can be an obstacle to progress. As we’ve said before, when you push 
the envelope in agile evolution, the envelope pushes back. Existing processes 
and behaviors that have grown over years don’t get obliterated in an instant. 
The removal of  barriers  is a key scrummaster competency. At that level, 
we’re often discussing tactical barriers, like  I can’t finish this until she does that. 
At the enterprise level, removal of  barriers  is often a miracle of persuasion, 
desire, and will.  
 Generate Short-Term Wins 
 Again, this step is clearly in line with the agile principle of iterative value deliv-
ery. The celebration and visibility aspects are emphasized in Kotter’s method. 
The visibility of short-term wins also appears, as Promotion, in Mike Cohn’s 
ADAPT framework. The importance of visible progress in the creation of 
momentum is obvious. If the teams, and the entire enterprise, couldn’t see 
incremental success and progress, why would they continue?  

Chapter 1 | The Agile Consultant
16
 Sustain Acceleration 
 Sustainment of change is the hardest part, as the many failed adopters of  TQM  , 
 BPR  , and  Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)   can testify. A resourceful leader 
can often generate enthusiasm and momentum toward a goal, and a horde of 
eager volunteers can adopt it with vigor. As change begins to penetrate the 
further layers of the institutional onion, embedded processes and cultural 
norms produce added friction. Whether you prefer the rubber band meta-
phor, in which culture is a rubber band that pulls rogue elements back into 
compliance, or the gravity theory, which proposes that organizational inertia 
is a natural force that can’t be reversed, one thing is true:  Culture eats strategy 
for breakfast . The agile consultant who can stretch his capabilities and guide 
clients to sustainable agility is truly having strategic impact.  
 Institute Change 
 The crowning step of the consultant’s art is the ability to institutionalize 
change so that it, in turn, becomes the new “personality of the organization.” 
Advising leaders on the mechanisms of communication, participative leader-
ship, agile strategic planning, and operational dexterity is the summit of the 
agile consultant’s achievement, and will take the summit of his efforts. The abil-
ity to guide a client through the disruptive process of agile evolution, and to 
see that enterprise embrace new values, live new ideals, and inculcate those 
ideals in its rookies and veterans, is an achievement worth celebrating. 
 Both Cohn’s and Kotter’s change frameworks have much to teach agile con-
sultants, whether we’re guiding the adoption of scrum practices within a 
team or driving an enterprise transition. Approaching a client engagement 
in a structured and orderly manner is a sign of professionalism. It reassures 
nervous clients that they’re in competent hands. Agile consultants don’t want 
to validate the negative view of agility, that it’s just an excuse to make it up 
as we go along. We, instead, want to demonstrate that even though agile is 
iterative and experimental, we can approach its adoption and evolution in a 
disciplined way. 
 I’m humbled by the insight and real-world experience that both Cohn and 
Kotter have built into their change frameworks. Humbled, but not satisfied. 
I’m not satisfied because, as an agile consultant, they both have flaws for me. 
Cohn’s  ADAPT method , apart from its scrum specificity, seems to be addressed 
to inside change agents. It’s not the consultant’s Awareness that needs to be 
raised but the enterprise’s and its leaders’. Similarly, the other elements of 
Cohn’s approach are necessary conditions for agility, but not a prescription 
to take the client there. Kotter’s model, while a bit more amenable to the 
outside advisor, makes the assumption that change starts at the top, and not 

The Agile Consultant
17
until multiple steps into the model do we engage the actual teams in our 
volunteer army. In addition, neither of these models takes any account of the 
engagement model that consultants must apply from a commercial perspec-
tive. The first step for us isn’t the awareness of the client or the creation of 
a sense of urgency, (although those things can be part of our sales strategy). 
First we must get engaged to do the work. We’re essentially contractors, and 
our framework needs to acknowledge that fact. Our risks and concerns are 
different from those of the inside coach or agile leader. We have to ensure 
that the client understands and accepts our proposed approach, that we’ve 
defined what “done” means, and agree on the terms of our relationship. In 
short, agile consultants need a different change model, one that suits our spe-
cial circumstances. 
 As we progress, I’ll introduce my EVOLVE consulting  framework  , which, I 
believe, takes the core elements of the transition frameworks we’ve discussed 
and adapts them to the specific concerns of the agile consultant. Before we 
explore that framework, however, let’s examine some of the challenges of 
dealing with existing culture in agile evolutions.  
 Summary 
 The agile consultant requires a unique combination of skills. Expertise in the 
agile domain, is, of course, critical, but the consultative skills of facilitation, 
negotiation, and persuasion are also key. Agile consultants, unlike many agile 
coaches, engage at the enterprise level, and so they need the capability to 
understand the business and strategic context in which agility is being imple-
mented. Agile consultants must be able to navigate conflict, resistance, and 
individual agendas to be effective. 
 Agility has changed many industries, and the consulting business has changed 
as well. The big, upfront plans of traditional project management are becoming 
obsolete, which means that the big, upfront consulting contracts, with their 
fixed fees, fixed scope, and fixed schedule, must be replaced by a more agile 
engagement model. 
 There are many similarities between the principles of good consulting and 
those of agile consulting. These principles, however, must be adapted to the 
agile world and mind-set. We’ve reviewed some attributes of mature consulta-
tive behavior and noted how they must be adapted to the agile environment. 
 Finally, we examined organizational change models, like Mike Cohn’s  ADAPT 
framework  and John Kotter’s  XLR8 model  , and seen how they can aid in evolv-
ing an organization, and some areas where they are insufficient for an agile 
consultant engaging to remake the enterprise. We mentioned the EVOLVE 
agile consulting framework, and we’ll dig into the components of that frame-
work beginning in Chapter  3 . 

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_2
 C H A P T E R 
 Agile Evolution: 
More Than 
Methodology 
 For the past ten years,  VersionOne software  , a provider of agile project tools, 
has performed a “State of Agile” 1 survey. In 2009, the survey listed “manage-
ment opposed to change,” “loss of management control,” “team opposed to 
change,” and “lack of discipline” as top challenges to agile adoption. In the 
ninth survey, five years later, top barriers to adoption are “lack of manage-
ment support,” “company philosophy at odds with agile,” “external pressure 
to follow traditional waterfall processes,” and “a broader organizational or 
communication issue.” After five years of widespread adoption, it’s still culture 
and management that obstruct agile evolution. 
 As illustrated by this graphic from the ninth State of Agile survey 2 (Figure  2-1 ), 
every issue cited here, with the possible exception of inexperience with agile, 
is a management or cultural issue. It’s management that sets the tone of cul-
ture and drives organizational communication, that sponsors agile transition 
(or doesn’t), that applies pressure to follow waterfall or systems development 
cycle (SDLC)  processes  , and that budgets for training (or doesn’t).  
2
 1 www.versionone.com/pdf/state-of-agile-development-survey-ninth.pdf .  
 2 Ibid. 

Chapter 2 | Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology
20
 Why Culture Matters 
 My favorite definition of culture is the simplest: “the way we do things here 
in order to succeed.” 3 Other concise definitions are “the personality of the 
organization” or “the operating system of the enterprise.” 
 Less concise, but more nuanced, is Edgar Schein’s 4  definition:  
 A pattern of shared basic assumptions that the group learned as it solved 
its problems of external adaptation and internal integration, that has 
worked well enough to be considered valid and, therefore, to be taught to 
new members as the correct way you perceive, think, and feel in relation 
to those problems. 
 Schein’s definition, though academic, highlights a few important points for agile 
consultants. Cultures grow and adapt, based on external conditions. They may 
not adapt at the speed we, as change agents, would hope, but the General 
Motors (GM)   of today is certainly different than the GM of 1960, or even 1990. 
 Figure 2-1.  Barriers to further agile  adoption  
 3 William E. Schneider,  The Reengineering Alternative: A Plan for Making Your Current Culture 
Work by William E. Schneider (Richard D. Irwin, 1994).  
 4 Edgar Schien,  Organizational Culture and Leadership , Fourth Edition (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2010),    www.tnellen.com/ted/tc/schein.html   .  
 

The Agile Consultant
21
That culture only must have “worked  well enough (my emphasis) to be con-
sidered valid” shows that organizations often make compromises and accept 
inefficiencies because they’re “good enough.” Finally, these cultural norms are 
swiftly taught to new members to influence the “correct” way they “perceive, 
think and feel.” Schein’s definition reminds us that while culture is tenacious, 
intentional, and influential, it’s also adaptable and open to improvement. 
 I often hear other agile consultants complain that  the culture is broken at a 
certain client’s organization. Efforts to adopt agile will often falter or fail, and 
many consultants indict “dysfunctional” firms that are too bureaucratic, too 
political, or too change-resistant to successfully evolve. I’m not a proponent 
of the “broken culture” philosophy. My observation is that cultures evolve 
because the participants want things that way. They value the outcomes of 
the current culture, which are often measured personally: my title, my author-
ity, my workload, my commitment level, my security and stability. An enter-
prise judged as dysfunctional at adopting agile is often highly accomplished 
at protecting rank, sheltering employees from disruption, offering a stable 
and secure environment, minimizing personal accountability or consequence, 
and blocking change. They may be dysfunctional from an agile perspective, but 
their evolution to their current cultural norms wasn’t an accident; it was the 
result of conscious decisions by the entire community of what is valued, what 
is acceptable, and what is not. As consultants, our work is observational and 
diagnostic, not judgmental. 
 Another widely held belief is that “people naturally resist change.” There’s 
clearly truth to this, as all consultants have experienced, but it’s ascribing resis-
tance to the wrong motivation. People don’t resist change when they get a 
raise, or win a prize, or find a great new job. They resist not change itself but 
the potential risk and loss it brings. From the executive suite to the newest 
rookie on staff, when rumblings of change begin to circulate, most people 
are immediately assessing the potential damage to their standing, reputation, 
power, workload, compensation, and accountability. The friction exists, in my 
view, not merely due to some irrational resistance to  any change. People ratio-
nally calculate the risks of upheaval and loss created by change, compared with 
the stability and personal rewards of the status quo.  
 The  Cultural Change Imperative  
 Whether starting at the top with an executive conversation about agile trans-
formation in the enterprise, or beginning at the team level with a single scrum 
or agile team, the State of Agile studies make it clear that our greatest chal-
lenges as agile consultants are managerial and cultural. When we engage at the 
software team level, for example, we learn about the disconnections, miscom-
munications, stretched resources, and strained relationships that developers 
experience. At the executive level we learn about the challenges of misaligned 

Chapter 2 | Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology
22
priorities, legacy technologies and skills, failed projects, and unmet expecta-
tions. When 43% of survey respondents claim that cultural incompatibility 
with agile is the key barrier to adoption, and 38% cite lack of management sup-
port, it becomes obvious that, if the organization is seeking increased agility, a 
strategic, consultative approach is called for. Team-based coaching will always 
be essential to organizations starting their agile journey, but it is not sufficient 
if the aim is agility across the enterprise. 
 Executives understand that they are in jeopardy and must change. In the oft-
quoted 2010 IBM study “ Capitalizing on Complexity  ,” 5 a survey of over 1,500 
chief executive officers (CEOs) in the United States, over 80% said they expected 
their organization to experience more volatility, more uncertainty, and more 
complexity in the next few years. Some 60% are experiencing high complexity 
now, and 79% expect to see more. Most alarming, in my view, is that while 79% 
expect higher complexity, only 48% feel prepared to deal with it. 
 Yet some organizations are thriving in these tumultuous times. IBM calls these 
the “Standouts.” This small percentage of CEOs are thinking about their busi-
ness differently. According to IBM’s survey results, the Standouts have three 
key attributes that account for their leadership in turbulent conditions.
• 
 Creative leadership  
• 
 Reinventing customer relationships  
• 
 Building operating dexterity  
 The connection of these traits to agile philosophy is clear. Creativity, not deci-
siveness or strong leadership, is now recognized by executives as the driver 
of competitive advantage. Drastically revamping the organization, enabling 
innovation, inviting customers and teams into the conversation—these all 
correlate directly to agile’s emphasis on people-focused, collaborative, cus-
tomer-centric practices. 
 Later in this chapter, we’ll discuss in depth the  reinvention  of customer rela-
tionships, driven by Internet-enabled forms of customer intimacy. The cus-
tomer may be an e-mail address, but the enterprise’s knowledge of customer 
habits and preferences creates a new kind of familiarity. The feedback and data 
generated by a transaction are as valuable as the transaction itself, as the firm 
builds millions of interactive relationships with complete strangers. Netflix 
knows what I want from my transaction history and that of my demographic 
cohort, as does Amazon. Google knows what I want explicitly, as I tell them 
so when I search. The CEOs whom IBM selected as Standouts focused on 
using analytics, driven by these streams of data, to increase their customer 
obsession. 
 5  www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?subtype=XB&infotype=PM&appna
me=GBSE_GB_TI_USEN&htmlfid=GBE03297USEN&attachment=GBE03297USEN.PDF .  

The Agile Consultant
23
 The data, unfortunately, has little value if the enterprise can’t respond. 
Organizational dexterity is another way of saying enterprise agility. Dexterity, 
the ability to change in reaction to events and circumstances, is a strategic 
goal that far transcends the software development practice. For information 
technology (IT), it requires re-imagining data centers, cloud, hybrid infrastruc-
tures, and mobility, as well as new development methods. As agility spreads 
from software to IT infrastructure and then across the enterprise, thoughtful 
executives will be reimagining their entire value chain to incorporate agility 
everywhere. The agile consultant, by embodying the agile principles and help-
ing translate them from product development to strategic thinking, has the 
opportunity to reshape enterprise culture and help teams and organizations 
prepare for tomorrow's tempestuous business climate.  
 Adapting Agility to Different Cultures 
 Focusing on IT for a moment, many agile consultants have experienced the 
complexity of reconciling the iterative, experimental nature of agile software 
development with the  stability  , security, and support concerns of IT infra-
structure teams. We’ll talk about DevOps and other approaches for IT to 
increase agility, but in the early days of an agile transition, IT development 
and operations teams have conflicting responsibilities. Agile software teams 
want flexibility; production IT requires stability. Agile teams want responsive-
ness and creativity; infrastructure teams seek efficiency and repeatability. Agile 
teams are cross-functional; infrastructure teams are typically specialized into 
functional server, data, and support silos. Each is prioritizing their own values 
and objectives responsibly, yet a clash is inevitable. 
 Consider these naturally opposing agendas and then amplify them across the 
entire organization to get a picture of the complexity of agile transforma-
tion. My emphasis on these political, cultural, and human complexities, rather 
than the techniques of scrum or XP, is based on one thing: experience. In 
every agile engagement I’ve undertaken, the basic methodology could be easily 
taught and practiced. The difficulty was in the discovery of the hidden web of 
personalities, alliances, duels, histories, and biases of the groups and individu-
als. Developing a strategy to evolve a resistant, fearful, change-worn firm into 
an agile enterprise requires deep understanding of both the overarching pro-
cesses and practices that are out in the open, and the unspoken social struc-
tures that really influence behavior. It also requires empathy. Team members 
aren’t resisting agile to be ornery, or to test you (most of the time). They are 
driven by the norms, fears, and insecurities of organizational life. 
 We’ve all heard of the “people,  processes  , systems” approach to thinking 
about organizations. While this is a useful high-level frame for thinking about 
the enterprise, it has a few flaws. Each of these areas can expand into a uni-
verse of subtopics. The “people” element, for example, encompasses most 

Chapter 2 | Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology
24
of the cultural, political, and personality issues we’ve discussed. Firms spend 
months on process mapping, often discovering that they don’t really know 
how work flows, don’t understand or follow their own guidelines, and the 
existing processes don’t work. As IT becomes a strategic differentiator, the 
systems element of this model soars in complexity and importance. This is a 
functional view of the enterprise, but it doesn’t reveal many of the things an 
agile consultant needs to know. 
 “People, processes, systems” has exploded into dozens of theories of organi-
zational structure. Rummler and Brache, in their classic  Improving Performance 6 
refined this into “Organization, Process, and Job/ Performer,” and applied a 
systems-thinking approach to the study of the organization. They offered a 
consultative, sober approach to reengineering, contrary to many of the radi-
cal, rip-it-out Business Process Reengineering (BPR) philosophies of that 
moment.  Improving Performance was the mature refinement of an anarchic 
BPR movement that fed on its own radical ideas to become extreme and 
counterproductive. 
 In response to the criticisms of  BPR  , Schneider 7 proposed an organizational 
view much esteemed in the agile community. In his segregation of organiza-
tions into four key cultural types
• 
 Control 
• 
 Collaboration  
• 
 Competence  
• 
 Cooperation  
 Schneider moved away from the systems view and toward a humanistic view. 
Cultures arise because the participants seek certain ideals and outcomes, and 
cultures evolve based on human traits, values, and decisions. 
 He compares the   Control culture to a military organization. In a Control culture, 
“the individual motivation . . . lies in people’s need for power. The leadership of a 
control organization values dominance most. Control cultures are prone towards 
territoriality.  Control cultures  manage performance by imparting rewards and 
sanctions. They also quickly suppress discontent or any signs of disruption. People 
are reluctant to give bosses bad news . . . leaders get told only what they want to 
hear. Subordinates feel compelled to comply and stick to business.” 8 
 In the   Collaboration culture  , values are aligned around people-driven, 
organic, informal participation, like a family or team, in which “little happens 
 6 Geary A. Rummler & Alan P. Brache,  Improving Performance: How to Manage the White Space 
in the Organization Chart (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995).  
 7 William E. Schneider,  The Reengineering Alternative: A Plan for Making Your Current Culture 
Work (Richard D. Irwin, 1994).   
 8 Ibid. at 28–29 . 

The Agile Consultant
25
that is solitary or solely independent. Harmony and cooperation are essential 
elements . . . the process is inherently win-win. This culture puts more trust in 
people than any of the others…the collaboration culture must be more adap-
tive, ready and able to make adjustments than the other three cultures. The 
organization moves ahead through the collective experience of people from 
inside and outside the organization.” 9 
 The   Competence culture  is based, in Schneider’s view, on the academic 
model, in which the things that are valued are “imagined alternatives, cre-
ative options, and theoretical concepts. Its decision making process is ana-
lytical, scientific and prescriptive. Life in a competence culture is intense and 
high-strung. The work is rigorous and carries a sense of urgency. The norms 
are excellence, superiority and challenge.” This culture “has competition at 
its center . . . this is a win-lose culture in which discord is present and less 
competent people fail. An organization whose goal is to create one-of-a-kind 
products . . . instinctively fills the organization with one-of-a-kind people.” 10 
 The   Cultivation culture  , modeled after a religious or social enterprise, “pays 
attention to potential, ideals and beliefs, aspirations and creative options.” 
With a “focus on cultivating growth and development among their people. 
They strive to help people fulfill their potential . . . the culture is value-cen-
tered. Values and the value of people hold sway. Self-expression is highly 
encouraged.” 11 
 It’s important to recognize that there’s no judgment in the Schneider model. 
No culture is deemed better than the others. Each has different values and 
intentions, but all are useful, depending on the product, the team, and the cus-
tomer. In fact, most organizations have some elements of each culture. A phar-
maceutical firm, for example, could have a Competence culture in the research 
and development (R&D) laboratories, while exhibiting a  Collaborative culture  
in the marketing team. Schneider is talking about the dominant culture, the 
culture that fits the criteria of “the personality of the organization.” 
 The agile community has reacted to the rediscovery of Schneider’s ideas with 
a robust debate over how agile consultants should apply this information. In 
a survey 12 performed by Michael Spayd of Collective Edge Coaching, agilists 
expressed a strong cultural preference for the Collaborative culture (47%) as 
an ideal for the agile team, with a  Cultivation culture  a strong second at 41%. 
With Competence at 9% and Control a tiny 3%, it’s pretty clear that agilists 
value the interaction, team ownership, and self-organization that are epito-
mized by the Collaborative, Cultivating cultures, and appreciate the cultiva-
tion of skills and human potential these cultures champion. It’s also obvious 
 9 Ibid. at 44–59. 
 10 Ibid. at 63–77. 
 11 Ibid. at 81–98. 
 12 http://collectiveedgecoaching.com/2010/07/agile__culture/  .  

Chapter 2 | Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology
26
that the hierarchical, authoritarian model of Control, or the hypercompetitive, 
win-lose ethic of the Competition culture, holds little attraction for agilists. 
 This, however, is an exploration of the ideal, a situation consultants rarely encoun-
ter. In the real world, as noted, agile consultants will encounter  Control cultures  
that nonetheless want to benefit from some agile practices, and Competence 
cultures that believe agility can enhance their competitiveness and drive to 
results. As noted, in most instances consultants will encounter mixed cultural 
environments where different teams or “silos” have adopted different values. 
Can agile consultants simply write off any of these cultures as incompatible? 
 For the agile consultant, there is no judgment, only observation and diagno-
sis. Armed with this information about the types of cultures we are likely to 
encounter, our job is to determine the best route to the level of agility that 
each unique enterprise can achieve. The practices of scrum are a great fit 
when you walk into an existing Collaboration or Cultivation culture but will 
challenge the most experienced consultant in a Control environment. 
 In Control organizations, many agilists recommend beginning their agile jour-
ney with Kanban. Kanban, the systematic work-flow approach that enables 
teams to explicitly limit their work in progress to ensure low inventory and 
a just-in-time value chain, might be a better cultural jumping-off point. While 
embodying agile principles, Kanban’s focus is not on the collaborative, itera-
tive, team mentality, or self-directed teams—it’s about the process-driven flow 
of work through a production process. It doesn’t require organizations to 
rethink their Control-Based philosophies (at least at the beginning), or to 
grapple with foreign ideas like self-organization. As such, it seems a good fit for 
an opening foray into agile ideas for a  Control culture . 
 The software craftsmanship movement, complete with its own manifesto, 13 
is a reaction to the concern by coders that all the attention on agility and 
speed-to-value risks putting them in the position of writing bad code. Scrum, 
the dominant agile method, provides a process that promotes iterative, col-
laborative development, but it doesn’t guide coders in the application of their 
craft. While quality and standards are explicit agile principles, their defini-
tion is up to the team and the product owner. The  Software Craftsmanship 
Manifesto goes beyond the delivery of “working software” to the mandate for 
“well-crafted software” that “steadily adds value.” This movement has strong 
affinity with a Competence culture, complete with the competitiveness that 
we often see in academic or scientific communities. Because agile values are 
more humanistic than a typical cutthroat competitive culture, I expect the 
software craftsmanship movement to be more collaborative than a strict 
Competence culture. When encountering a Competence culture, agile con-
sultants can use the software craftsmanship model to promote a commit-
ment to excellence that suits the prevailing values. 
 13 http://manifesto.softwarecraftsmanship.org/  

The Agile Consultant
27
 Whatever culture you encounter, there are simple techniques for easing the 
agile transition. In my career I’ve adapted to “the way things are done around 
here” by applying an  inside-outside perspective. Inside the agile team structure, 
we’re applying all the methods and practices, and measuring our progress, 
based on the agile approach we’re following. Outside, to the existing structure, 
we’re supplying some of the artifacts they expect to see, like project plans 
and status reports. Clearly a compromise with agile standards, these “adapt-
ers” enable us to begin the conversation about the difference between what 
they’re used to seeing and what agile provides. The migration from a Gantt 
chart to a burn-down chart is not momentous, but a transition period with 
some coaching on the benefits of agile can make it smoother. Reminding the 
 Project Management Office (PMO)  of the stack of unread status reports that 
inevitably pile up on their desk, versus the daily interaction of the stand-up, 
can be an opportunity to embody the “individuals and interactions” value of 
the Manifesto.  
 Strategic Goals of Agility 
 PWC, the consulting entity of IBM, recently published “Agility Is Within 
Reach,” 14 in which it defines two goals that all enterprises seeking agility 
should focus on,   strategic responsiveness and   organizational flexibility . This focus 
on two key elements of agility summarizes nicely the goal we should be aim-
ing for as agile consultants. The purpose of our engagement is not to imme-
diately change their culture, or teach them agile concepts, or create a more 
humanistic environment. Those may be outcomes of the agile transformation, 
but the strategic goal of agility is competitive advantage and enhanced busi-
ness results. Agile consultants, as opposed to scrummasters or team coaches, 
should focus on the strategic, measurable business results that agile offers the 
whole enterprise. The holistic, enterprise view of agile is ambitious, and may 
be too much for many firms, but the strategic outlook is what differentiates 
superior agile advisors. 
 The art of the consultant is to observe, diagnose, and then plan for the 
best outcome under prevailing circumstances. The likelihood of us chang-
ing a Control culture to a Collaborative one, at least in the short term, is 
slim. What we can do is diagnose the cultural proclivities of the enterprise 
and thoughtfully strategize on the best mix of agile philosophy, culture, and 
methods that will enable this particular enterprise, within this unique cul-
ture, to begin its individual agile journey. Not every enterprise has the will, 
or the desire, to evolve completely to enterprise agility. Most will make 
changes at the team level, and measure the impact of those changes, long 
 14  www.strategy-business.com/article/00316?gko=9ee79  .  

Chapter 2 | Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology
28
before they commit to changing their core beliefs and practices across the 
organization. Part of the agile consultant’s art is to help customers figure 
out where on the spectrum of agility, from scrum practice at the team 
level to enterprise-wide evolution, they’ll get the most strategic advantage 
with the least pain and disruption. As agile proponents and believers, we 
may want every organization to transform completely to these ideals we 
treasure. When we take our personal objectives and emotions out of the 
equation, our responsibility is to take a sober inventory of the customer 
organization’s current state, strategically, culturally, and operationally, and 
help the customer develop an agile roadmap that fits its will and desire to 
transform.  
 Is 20th-Century Corporate Culture Obsolete? 
 Alfred P. Sloan, president, chairman, and CEO of General Motors Corporation 
from the 1920s through the 1950s, is often regarded as the author of the 
hierarchical, departmentalized, top-down management style that typified 
American business during those years. This style was immensely success-
ful at building the giant American corporations we all know. After World 
War II, despite an abrupt decline in government spending, the U.S. economy 
boomed. One of the greatest periods of economic expansion and con-
sumer spending in history resulted, in part, from the efficiencies designed 
into Sloan’s management style, where orders flowed from the top and com-
pliance flowed from below, with no such thing as a “stakeholder,” just a 
shareholder. The success of America’s industrial war effort validated the 
autocratic, assembly-line, interchangeable worker mentality that character-
ized American manufacturing. 
 In the intervening years, however, Sloan’s  command-and-control business phi-
losophy has been severely criticized. James O’Toole, 15 in analyzing Sloan’s man-
agement philosophy, noted that
 . . . not once does Sloan make reference to any other values. Freedom, 
equality, humanism, stability, community, tradition, religion, patriotism, 
family, love, virtue, nature—all are ignored. His language is as calculating 
as that of the engineer-of-old working with calipers and slide rules: 
economizing, utility, facts, objectivity, systems, rationality, maximizing—
that is the stuff of his vocabulary. 16 
 15 James O’Toole,  Leading Change: Overcoming the Ideology of Comfort and the Tyranny of
Custom (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995).  
 16 Ibid. at 174. 

The Agile Consultant
29
 Yet even Sloan, the champion of hierarchical management, knew that technol-
ogy, markets, and consumer tastes would inevitably change. In his classic “My 
Years With General Motors,” 17 Sloan remarked that
 The circumstances of the ever-changing market and ever-changing product 
are capable of breaking any business organization if that organization 
is unprepared for change—indeed, in my opinion, if it has not provided 
procedures for anticipating change. p. 508  
 Decades later, Sloan has been proven right on that count. The disruption, by 
new Internet entrants, of everything from the corner book store to the taxi-
cab industry, and from the garage sale to the real estate market, illustrates his 
point. The success of those companies like Google and Facebook that have 
abandoned the traditional, hierarchical model of management and embraced a 
collaborative, experimental culture confirms the obsolescence of the hierar-
chical Sloan model, at least for “new economy” firms. 
 The surprising thing is that these command-and-control  managerial  theories 
are still in wide application. They seem so obviously unsuited to the modern 
business climate that their survival is clearly cultural and historical rather than 
pragmatic. When I started at Citicorp, it was described to me by a colleague as 
“the world’s largest paramilitary organization.” Warren Buffet believes that we 
only know who’s swimming naked when the tide goes out, and, during the finan-
cial crisis of the last decade, it was pretty clear that Citicorp and many other 
global financial institutions were skinny-dipping. Even in the staid financial indus-
try, the top-down autocratic model I experienced at Citicorp couldn’t manage 
the experimental, opportunistic tactics of floor traders.  
 Agile Disrupts Everything 
 We know what makes agile popular among developers. Working as a team, 
they focus together on an achievable and valuable goal, improving their skills 
and the customer’s satisfaction with every iteration. Well-running agile teams 
work in an atmosphere of self-motivation, mutual respect, openness, and 
accomplishment. What’s not to like for them? But what is it that’s driving 
executives and managers to take agile seriously as a potential revolution in 
enterprise management? 
 In the executive suite, agility, like  Total Quality Management (TQM)  and 
 BPR before it, is reaching its maximum hype cycle. From  Harvard Business 
Review to  The Huffington Post , the idea of scaling agile within IT, and then 
across the entire enterprise, is widely discussed and debated. Now that 
 17 Alfred P. Sloan,  My Years With General Motors  (New York: Doubleday, 1963), p. 504, 
   https://hbr.org/2014/03/my-years-with-general-motors-fifty-years-on  . 

Chapter 2 | Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology
30
agile has proven itself in software, everyone else, from product develop-
ment to marketing and operations, wants in. Executives want to see if they 
can get away from their fantasy 18 strategic plans,’ with dozens, sometimes 
hundreds, of projects that will never get funded or executed, and replace 
them with iterative, incremental planning techniques that actually arrive at 
consensus and deliver value. 
 Let’s examine the economic forces that are driving business thinkers to con-
sider agile as their next candidate for modernizing a faltering business model. 
There are, in my view, four strategic themes that are setting off light bulbs for 
academics and executives worldwide. 
 The biggest fear, of course, is digital disruption. In the early days of the 
Internet we used to say that nobody wanted to get “Amazoned”; now that 
services are also being disrupted, nobody wants to get “Uber-ed.” In either 
case, every business owner knows that there’s a young entrepreneur lurk-
ing somewhere, dissecting their business model and trying to figure out 
how to automate it, put it in the cloud, and take their market. The soft-
ware market has evolved from omnibus, all-in-one business products to 
an atomized world of apps, where every niche or microprocess has the 
attention of startups and investors. In this granular market, every existing 
business and process is a target. 
 The concern about digital disruption is so widespread that respected man-
agement authors like Clay Christenson 19 and Larry Downes 20 have proposed 
making the evaluation and assessment of potential disruptors a strategic 
focus of every business. As Downes says in his  Harvard Business Review article 
“ Big-Bang Disruption  ”:
 You can’t see big-bang disruption coming. You can’t stop it. And it will be 
keeping executives in every industry in a cold sweat for a long time to 
come . . . 
 According to Christensen, even the business of consulting is vulnerable.
 The same forces that disrupted so many businesses, from steel to 
publishing, are starting to reshape the world of consulting…undermining 
the position of longtime leaders and often causing the “flip” to a new basis 
of competition. The implications for firms and their clients are significant. 21 
 18 https://hbr.org/webinar/2015/05/bring-agile-planning-to-the-whole-
organization  ;   www.huffingtonpost.com/great-work-cultures/scaling-agile-to-
create-a_b_7537818.html  .  
 19  www.immagic.com/eLibrary/ARCHIVES/GENERAL/JOURNALS/H950130C.pdf  .  
 20 https://hbr.org/2013/03/big-bang-disruption/ar/1 .  
 21 https://hbr.org/2013/10/consulting-on-the-cusp-of-disruption .  

The Agile Consultant
31
 I was engaged by a smartphone manufacturing company to deliver training 
on Agile Project Management, and, as I got to know the students, one told 
a definitive story of disruption. Her team was building prototypes of new 
phones, and, in the middle of their project, Apple’s first iPhone was released. 
Prototypes just a few weeks from production were scrapped, and the design 
team did the proverbial “back to the drawing board” exercise. The innova-
tive technologies built into the iPhone were far beyond anything they’d been 
prototyping, and they realized that day that their market had changed irrevo-
cably. Which explains why they suddenly were anxious to begin a conversation 
about agile. 
 This is an example of digital disruption, but it also speaks to the  exponential 
growth in the rate of change in technology . Product cycles compress 
tighter and tighter, queues form for the next version of a gadget immediately 
after its last release, and feature wars accelerate. Ray Kurzweil, well-known 
author and winner of the 1999 National Medal of Technology and Innovation, 
says of accelerating technical change:
 An analysis of the history of technology shows that technological change 
is exponential, contrary to the common-sense “intuitive linear” view. So 
we won’t experience 100 years of progress in the 21st century—it will 
be more like 20,000 years of progress (at today's rate). Within a few 
decades, machine intelligence will surpass human intelligence, leading to 
technological change so rapid and profound it represents a rupture in the 
fabric of human history. The implications include the merger of biological 
and nonbiological intelligence, immortal software-based humans, and 
ultra-high levels of intelligence that expand outward in the universe at the 
speed of light. 22 
 While most businesses aren’t yet concerned about “software-based humans,” 
they do understand that technological change threatens their business models, 
their current products, and even their R&D function. How can you research 
and plan a product when, like the smartphone I described above, your proto-
types may already be obsolete? 
 Another key factor that explains the hype surrounding agile is   price and 
product transparency , or the death of unequal information. Before the 
Internet, the auto dealer had much more information about the price, lease 
structure, profit margin, and options than the customer. The insurance sales-
man knew much more about the likelihood of your accidental death. The 
for-profit school had private information about its success rate, as did the 
hospital. That unequal information gave the seller a decisive advantage. Those 
days of information inequality are gone, thanks to the Internet. 
 22  www.kurzweilai.net/the-law-of-accelerating-returns  .  

Chapter 2 | Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology
32
 As in the stock markets, price discovery and product information are now 
transparent to the customer. Every car buyer goes to TrueCar or its com-
petitors to learn about the car he is considering, read reviews, and check 
invoice and local pricing. The graduation and job-entry rates of for-profit 
schools are now widely available, as is the hospital’s mortality rate. I can 
go to eBay and, in an instant, learn the going price for a guitar, a table, or a 
pair of vintage earrings. Amazon reviewers will tell me which books to stay 
away from. So much data is being generated that many “big data” firms are 
springing up just to help businesses sort, categorize, and capitalize on these 
momentous data flows. 
 This transparency, of  course  , is the perfect catalyst for agility. Companies 
that can use this flow of data to understand the needs and desires of their 
marketplace, and make small, incremental changes to products in order to 
be responsive, have a deep competitive advantage. In fact, responsiveness to 
customer needs has overtaken sheer efficiency as a market differentiator. 
The Samsungs and Apples of the world, whose entire value chain can be 
redirected for every new product, use their agility to keep other players 
off balance. Amazon can, and does, incrementally change both the business 
model and the customer experience. These aren’t the low-cost producers, a 
sign of efficiency. They are the responsive producers, using data flow analyt-
ics and customer intimacy to quickly give the market what it wants. While 
Steve Jobs may have been right in his particular niche when he said that 
“people don’t know what they want until you show it to them,” for those 
businesspeople who are not Steve Jobs, data-driven responsiveness, not 
intuition, makes the competitive difference. 
 As Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema, authors of a mid-1990s best-selling 
book, 23 explained, there are three key strategies for any business: operational 
excellence, product leadership, and customer intimacy. Operational excel-
lence, of course, refers to the efficiency that Alfred Sloan valued, while prod-
uct leadership refers to the Apples, Teslas, and Gilead Sciences of the world, 
who can command premium prices for their innovative and superior offer-
ings. These strategies have remained pretty much the same, though achieved 
through technological capabilities that were unavailable until now. 
 Customer intimacy , however, has changed completely. When Treacy and 
Wiersema published, they described customer intimacy as “the extraordinary 
level of service, guidance, expertise, and hand-holding” that companies pro-
vided. Their idea of customer intimacy was based on building multiple individ-
ual relationships with customers through great customer service, outstanding 
support, and the human touch that cements relationships. 
 23 Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema,  The Discipline of Market Leaders: Choose Your Customers, 
Narrow Your Focus, Dominate Your Market (Perseus Books, 1995).  

The Agile Consultant
33
 In the time of big data, however, customer intimacy is based on the streams 
of data that both individuals and groups throw off, transaction by transaction. 
Amazon has no personal relationship with me, but it has intimate knowledge 
about my reading and shopping habits, my demographics, and my likelihood to 
respond to a product or promotion. Facebook doesn’t know me, but it sure 
knows  about me; who my friends are, what posts I favor, my politics, religion, 
and marital status. From Facebook and Amazon to Google and Twitter, per-
sonal information is currency, driving ad revenue and product sales. So is the 
collective information, captured from millions of transactions and analyzed by 
sophisticated algorithms, which enables Netflix to make recommendations to 
individual subscribers. 
 When Land’s End, for instance, was a catalog company, its ability to collect 
data was limited to individual transactions from anonymous customers. All 
Land’s End usually saw was an order form and a check. Now, on the Web, 
It can trace every click, every purchase, and all the demographics of every 
customer, even those who are just browsing. The web world of customer 
intimacy may be intrusive and invasive in some people’s eyes, but, in most 
cases, customers are volunteering this data gladly to gain the benefits of the 
 technology  . 
 In the 1950s, during GM’s heyday, the industrial mantras of efficiencies of scale, 
interchangeable parts and workers, and long production runs on standardized 
models created the industrial giants. Many of these corporate behemoths, 
including GM itself, have faltered in the new economy. The threats of digi-
tal disruption, exponential technology advances, price and product transpar-
ency, and collective customer intimacy have changed the game completely. For 
many executives and management theorists, agile across the enterprise seems 
like it might be the solution to these threats.  
 Summary 
 Agility is about much more than methodology; in fact, a methodological 
approach to agile adoption is a key indicator of failure. Agile disrupts business 
models, culture, hierarchies, and operations. Studies have shown convincingly 
that, in order to evolve to agility, organizations need to address change from 
the team level up to the executive suite. Legacy cultural and managerial ideas 
and styles are cited as the key barriers to agility, and consultants need to 
assess the culture, history, business model, and managerial style in order to 
adapt their approach to the reality at hand. 
 The standard top-down, hierarchical corporate culture is showing its age, as 
modern workers reject the command style of management and expect input 
and creative freedom. We’ve surveyed many cultural styles, and discussed how 
an agile advisor can apply the right style to the existing culture. 

Chapter 2 | Agile Evolution: More Than Methodology
34
 Change is not an option. We’ve illustrated that the basics of every business 
model, from customer intimacy to product cycle time, have been changed by 
new customer expectations and disruptive technologies. Businesses that fail to 
keep up with these changes are in mortal danger. From price transparency to 
exponential increases in technical innovation, the forces of disruption require 
enterprises to rethink the traditional way of doing business and adopt new, 
more responsive and agile models. William E. Schneider, The Reengineering Alternative: 
A Plan for Making Your Current Culture Work by William E. Schneider (Richard D. Irwin, 1994)  

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_3
 C H A P T E R 
  The EVOLVE 
Framework for 
Agile Evolution 
 In Chapter   1 we looked at existing transformation frameworks, like  ADKAR 
(Awareness, Desire, Knowledge, Ability, Reinforcement),   ADAPT (Awareness, 
Desire, Ability, Promotion, Transfer)  , and Kotter’s “accelerators.” Each of these 
 frameworks  has a lot to recommend it. So why do I feel the need to develop 
a completely new framework, rather than just advising you to learn and use 
one of these existing change models? 
 As mentioned, there are gaps in these  frameworks  for an agile consultant. 
 Cohn’s ADAPT framework  gives a consultant a basic overview of the neces-
sary conditions for an agile evolution. Cohn expands it beautifully in his book 
 Succeeding with Agile , the essential work on the techniques of agile adoption. 
The elements of the ADAPT framework are not, however, addressed to the 
needs of a consultant, who must structure a commercial agreement that suits 
the client and sets up for a successful engagement. To evolve the enterprise, 
consultants must be sure they’ve set reasonable expectations in the client’s 
mind. We must know what the client is envisioning. We’ve got to explore the 
current state, and do a bit of due diligence, before we even engage. Is this a 
3

Chapter 3 | The EVOLVE Framework for Agile Evolution
36
client you want to partner with on this complex and delicate transition, in a 
culture with which you can successfully engage? Can you do it yourself or do 
you need partners? What result are you responsible for, and to what is the 
client committing? What constitutes success? 
 This framework is certainly no original creation. I’ve shamelessly stolen those 
ideas that fit the consulting context from Cohn, Kotter, and others. We’ll discuss 
situations where, armed with Cohn’s book, I learned in practice what works and 
how to frame it. From consulting on large-scale acquisitions and organizational 
designs during my Big 5 days, and on agile projects now, I’ve encountered the 
persistence of history, legacy, and personality that makes change so challenging. 
I’ve incorporated elements from everything I’ve learned about organizational 
dynamics and change leadership, and brazenly arranged the concepts to fit my 
preordained EVOLVE acronym. My original contribution, if there is one, is to 
use these borrowed ideas fairly and wisely, from an agile mind-set, to incorpo-
rate my pragmatic experience, and to try to shift the conversation from team-
focused practice adoption to enterprise-focused agile evolution. 
 We apply a framework because the complexity and sensitivity of agile evolu-
tion necessitates consulting discipline.  Enterprise clients must know that we 
can engage strategically as well as tactically. They want to see an approach 
that indicates that the consultant has pondered their unique qualities, and 
thought through a tailored roadmap to their agility. Even if the move to agility 
is vigorously encouraged by senior management, sponsors of agile evolution 
projects want to know they’re partnering with a consulting professional who 
can negotiate, plan, and carry out a successful engagement. A  framework  is a 
marketing tool as well as a consulting tool. It illustrates that you’re credible, 
you’re experienced, and you know what works. 
 I want to make one important disclaimer: this is not by any means a “big, 
upfront plan” for “going agile.” As I hope I’ve clarified, engaging on this road 
with a client is an odyssey that will evolve and mutate as we’re experiencing 
it. There isn’t, and can’t be, a static plan for a dynamic engagement. This frame-
work doesn’t predict anything, and it doesn’t promise any outcome but kaizen, 
the eternal search for perfection. 
 We’ll walk through the key ideas within each step of the EVOLVE framework (see 
Figure  3-1 ), and then I’ll expand on each concept in its own chapter. Of course, in 
the spirit of agile, I invite you to inspect and adapt. EVOLVE is just a convenient 
way for me to structure my ideas and experiences, and perhaps a way to encour-
age a bit of consulting discipline in the emerging field of enterprise agility.  
Explore and
Engage 
Visualize
Success 
Observe and
Plan 
Lead Teams
to Agility 
Visible
Results 
Evolve and
Adapt 
 Figure 3-1.  The EVOLVE  framework  
 

The Agile Consultant
37
 What drives a sponsor, whether executive or  information technology (IT)  
manager, to engage an agile change agent? The IT manager is experiencing 
pressure to deliver more innovation, more throughput, and more functional-
ity, for more platforms. His teams are clamoring to try, or to expand, agile. 
The executive is in fear of, or already experiencing, digital disruption from 
innovative competitors. The business press is extolling the wonders of agility. 
In Kotter’s  XLR8 1 and Denning’s  Radical Management, 2 the agile ethic is applied 
to the enterprise. Their arguments, and the experiences they chronicle, are 
persuasive. In short, the belief is spreading that agility just might be a way to 
retain or advance their competitive advantage, customer responsiveness, and 
innovation. Whether focused on market position and financial metrics only, 
or sincerely striving toward a more humane, frictionless, adaptive workplace, 
executives understand that the impetus behind enterprise agility is growing 
and will soon be  overwhelming  . 
 When a client decides to engage an outside advisor, she’s already made a few 
admissions that may not be flattering. She’s accepted that she doesn’t have the 
inside resources to solve her problem, or that her leadership team can’t come 
to consensus on an approach. She may feel uneducated about agility and seeks 
an expert who can help her visualize an outcome. She may have concluded 
that her teams just can’t manage the change without a professional change 
agent, or she may just want the opinion of an objective outsider. Whatever the 
case, or combination thereof, an agile consultant must consider the situation 
and adapt the approach accordingly. An autocratic, hierarchical executive in a 
Control culture will have sharply differing concerns and expectations than the 
leader who has created a Collaborative culture, encouraging participation and 
valuing each individual. Those differing concerns and expectations will lead to 
a completely unique engagement and outcome for each. 
 Explore and Engage  
 This  Explore and  Engage step in the EVOLVE framework prompts us to 
consider the personality of the sponsor and the organization. It reminds us 
that not all clients are good clients, and not all cultures are places we’d choose 
to work. It reminds us also of three fundamental rules of consulting:
• 
 Every client and engagement is unique.  
• 
 Explore before you engage.  
• 
 Engage judiciously.  
 1 John P. Kotter,  XLR8 (Accelerate!) (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2014).  
 2 Stephen Denning,  The Leader’s Guide to Radical Management: Reinventing the Workplace for 
the 21st Century (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2010).  

Chapter 3 | The EVOLVE Framework for Agile Evolution
38
 Even when, early in the sales cycle, the client invites us in for an initial chat, 
we’re exploring all the elements: business context, enterprise and individual 
personality, culture, and atmosphere. As we’re advising the client on how to 
proceed, we’re incrementally observing every clue that might inform us of 
the best way to plan and execute this particular engagement. If the physician’s 
Hippocratic Oath is “First, do no harm,” then the consultant’s oath should be 
“Don’t prescribe before diagnosing.” Before we start to propose and negoti-
ate an agile roadmap, we need to understand what we’re stepping into, and 
where the boundaries, taboos, and pitfalls might lay. As I’ve said, in an experi-
mental, experiential engagement, we’d better consider the landscape we’re 
treading, and negotiate and engage with understanding and with clear expecta-
tions all around.  
 Visualize  Success  
 Long before the debates on the definition of “done,” the  skilled consultant  
learned that client expectations can be ambiguous, and that helping the client 
create a vision of a successful outcome is an essential practice.  Experienced 
consultants  know that organizational gravity is powerful, and that people have 
an emotional investment in their rank, their role, and their work. They’re 
invested in their culture, as they’re part of the community that built and sus-
tains it. People and teams define themselves by their place in the enterprise, 
the enterprise provides them stability and solvency and reflects the common 
values and history that took them here. In short, enterprises have a powerful, 
organic inertia. 
 When we  Visualize Success with the client, we’re preparing for agility in 
a number of ways. We’re clarifying what success looks like, and ensuring that 
consultant and client are anticipating the same process and outcome. We’re 
also helping the client develop a  communication scheme  that can be used 
to create momentum around agile evolution. Momentum is the opposite of 
inertia, and its only cure. The  wise agile consultant  will validate the client’s 
vision of agility, what it means, and its perceived benefits. For enterprise-level 
evolution, the prudent consultant begins to test the edges as early as possible, 
to determine how far on this journey he expects to go. He educates clients 
about the possible challenges and learnings they’ll encounter along the way. 
He helps the client craft a vision of agility that resonates with the enterprise 
strategy and culture. 
 Part of the consultant’s art is the ability to help the client communicate, edu-
cate, and reassure the enterprise community. I intend for Visualization to be 
an agile exercise, cascading through the organization, with sponsors initially 
participating to set the vision, and then opening participation to widening 
circles. I’ve called this Visualization step out separately because I believe it to 
be a critical predictor of success. If we can come to a common understanding 

The Agile Consultant
39
of agility’s potential strategic impact, its iterative, exploratory nature, and the 
roles, commitments, and success criteria for all players, we’ve prepared for the 
agile transition. We’ve helped the client envision our agility roadmap, we’ve 
reassured the client that we can do this, and we've started the process of 
articulating an agile vision across the enterprise.  
 Observe and Plan  
 In our initial exploration, we’ve started to get a glimpse under the covers of 
our sponsor’s enterprise, but it’s only a glimpse. In order to plan the effort 
required to migrate an entire organization toward agility, it’s prudent for agile 
consultants to know as much as they can about the client’s business, cul-
ture, and challenges. We often start our engagements at the “grassroots” level, 
allowing us the chance to see these factors from the team’s perspective. These 
initial encounters are very revealing; in an iteration or two, we can start to 
expose the challenges inside the team, and the external obstacles of weak 
process, hierarchical management, and unhealthy culture. 
 Agile consultants have a complicated mix of responsibilities: training, coaching, 
mentoring, persuading, and executing. They have a complex mix of teams that 
they’re doing it with; from gung-ho coders to reluctant server teams within 
IT, radiating out to resistant accountants and busy executives. There may be 
teams of scrummasters already in-house who’ve developed practices that 
need refinement (to be polite). There may be a  Project Management Office 
(PMO)  that’s emotionally married to a complex  systems development life 
cycle (SDLC)  that it has developed over the years. 
 If we look back at  Kotter’s accelerators  , we see that once we’ve created a 
sense of urgency behind a “Big Opportunity,” which we should have started 
in our Visualization exercise, Kotter recommends we create a guiding coali-
tion, and enlist a volunteer army. The observation and planning I recommend 
includes guiding the organization to empower a Product Owner as its key 
representative during the agile evolution. It includes determining what the role 
of any guiding coalition is: does it have veto power and decision rights, or is it a 
“cheering committee” of enthusiastic sponsors, or both? We’ll be orchestrat-
ing teams that are set up in a traditional project management  PMO  “resource 
pool,” or as a  function-centered technology  team, as they dissolve and reform 
to become agile teams. If we’re bringing in partners, or engaging with incum-
bents, we’ll need to figure out a mode of working that suits all  parties  . 
 The keys to observation and planning, in my experience, are transparency and 
discipline. Transparency is, of course, a central agile value, but I see it as a cen-
tral consulting value as well. One of the reasons we were invited into the cli-
ent’s house is because we’re objective. We’re not driving toward an agenda, as 
internal advisors might. As agile change agents, we’re enthusiastic and commit-
ted to agile ideas, but our role is not to implant our own vision. It’s, instead, to 

Chapter 3 | The EVOLVE Framework for Agile Evolution
40
objectively advise and guide clients through the delivery of their vision, within 
their competence and will. That leads us to be transparent; to be honest, open, 
and truthful about triumphs, obstacles, successes, and failures. Transparency 
builds the trust that underlies any agile transition. When trust develops, the 
boundaries among teams start to evaporate and new forms can emerge. 
 Discipline is also key. As democratic and egalitarian as agile is, groups need 
leadership. If you’re lucky as an agile consultant, 95% of the leadership toward 
enterprise agility is coming from committed managers and volunteers. If 
you’re like the rest of us, you have to prod, goad, and then end up leading the 
communication program, the training program, and the hands-on coaching of 
teams across the enterprise. I’m disappointed to report that I’ve worked with 
agile change agents who fluttered from one training course to another plan-
ning poker session, with no overarching plan or program. This misinterprets 
agility; we’re not making it up as we go along. In my vision of agile consulting, 
we’re trying some stuff that we’ve seen work, such as good scrum practices, 
and adapting our techniques and expectations every day, as the enterprise 
stutters toward agility. The orchestration of forces to deliver agility requires 
trust, adaptability, and discipline.  
 Lead Teams to Agility  
 In 1993, Jon Katzenbach and Douglas Smith wrote the classic book on team-
work in business. 3 Based on years of experience as a McKinsey consultant, 
Katzenbach, with his partner Smith, presented a set of six “team basics”:
• 
 Small number  
• 
 Complementary skills  
• 
 Common purpose  
• 
 Common set of specific performance goals  
• 
 Commonly agreed upon working approach  
• 
 Mutual accountability  
 Katzenbach and Smith called teams that exhibited these characteristics “real 
teams.”  Over 20 years later, I call them  agile teams  . The characteristics clearly 
coincide. 
 The small number theory has become the “two pizzas” idea popularized by 
Mike Cohn, or the “7 + / - 2” theory all agilists know, but the underlying 
concept remains. The communication and consensus overhead of large teams 
 3 Jon R. Katzenbach and Douglas E. Smith,  The Wisdom of Teams (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 1993).  

The Agile Consultant
41
inhibits innovation and throughput. Complementary skills are aligned with 
cross-disciplinary teams and integration of Dev and Ops. Common purpose is 
now a vision statement, performance goals are now roadmaps, iterations, and 
valuable features.  Scrum (or whatever practice you’ve chosen) is the common 
working approach. Mutual accountability is manifested in the big visible charts 
by which we measure ourselves and the kaizen manner in which we approach 
reflection and adaptation. 
 The performance indicators revealed in this classic text demonstrate that the 
 team concepts within agile didn’t come out of nowhere, and that empirical 
observation proves these fundamentals are valid. At the team level, there are 
some well-known success factors that have been shown to improve results. 
The success of the agile movement has finally made these ideas, which seem 
the opposite of real life in the typical big company, accepted as “best practice.” 
 The results of teaming successfully and adaptively, from Katzenbach’s time 
to ours, are so strongly validated and so compelling that enterprises can’t 
resist. They also can’t do it alone, at least not yet. As agility migrates across 
levels, helping managers and executives understand, accept, and support these 
team concepts is an agile consultant’s big challenge. The team approach isn’t 
trivial in a single team of like-minded and like-dispositioned coders, but as 
we ascend the organizational ladder, motives become less transparent, and 
interests come to the fore. Guiding Dev and Ops to a continuous delivery 
cycle is tough enough. Getting sales and marketing to collaborate, or siloed 
division heads to team up cross-functionally, is a whole ‘nother thing. From 
agile organizational design, to team, tribe, and squad theories of teaming, the 
agile consultant will need to adaptively apply multiple, various team forma-
tions as she engages across the enterprise. Agile consultants at the enterprise 
 level  are engaged in multiple interdependent layers of disruption and change. 
The composition, objectives, styles, and expectations of development teams, 
operations teams, marketing teams, finance teams, risk-management teams, 
and executive teams will differ sharply, and the iterative process of advising, 
inspecting, and adapting these teams is demanding. We’ll outline the experi-
ence and knowledge required to successfully advise teams at every level.  
 Visible Results  Now 
 It’s an axiom of change management that visible results encourage enthusiasm, 
engagement, and optimism. From  Cohn’s ADAPT model  to  Kotter’s accel-
erators  , the promotion of successes, large and small, is a key element of the 
transition process. Even without a sophisticated change model, most people 
know intuitively that “low-hanging fruit” is a metaphor for selecting some 
immediately achievable goals and demonstrating that we can actually produce 
results with a different approach. Any experienced consultant has bumped 
against the outer limits of culture, protocol, personality, and structure. As I 

Chapter 3 | The EVOLVE Framework for Agile Evolution
42
gained experience as a consultant, I learned from painful experience that the 
generation of momentum is the primary sustaining element of change. Gravity, 
inertia, culture, or bureaucracy, whatever you call it, all advisors experience it, 
and all change agents must navigate it in pursuit of their goal. Their complexity 
expands exponentially with the size of the enterprise. 
 Luckily for  agile consultants  , our iterative, incremental approach to agile evo-
lution is a great fit with the promotional concept. Based on our roots in IT, 
we typically start with development teams. When that  atomic unit  is working 
effectively, and producing observable results, we use all the venues at hand, 
from web sites to “lunch & learns” to posters and celebrations, to make those 
successes visible enterprise-wide. We augment that with leadership, putting 
those improvements in strategic context and underlining their business sig-
nificance. We generate momentum by producing “potentially shippable code” 
(whatever the product) and collaborating with the entire enterprise to opti-
mize the value of that product. I visualize a set of concentric circles, starting 
at the team level and radiating progressively outward, in which, at least within 
some individuals, we can plant a spark that encourages them to seek out agil-
ity and join the volunteers. This is the vision that inspires me to keep using the 
phrase   agile evolution rather than the popular  transition or  transformation . By 
succeeding at the team level, and evangelizing our success, we incrementally 
and organically evolve to our maximum agility. The momentum created by vis-
ible success is one of the emotional levers that energizes change. 
 I have a pet peeve in consulting; I hate “drive-by engagements.” A  drive-by 
engagement  occurs when a salesperson makes unreasonable promises, drops 
the project in a consultant’s lap, and drives away to the next victim. Drive-by 
engagements are often perpetrated by consultants themselves. I often see 
this in the “consultants” that are actually dedicated product implementers 
for a software provider. They come into the enterprise, configure a working 
instance of the software, train an administrator and a couple of users, and 
are gone. In  consultant-led change programs  , beginning the change effort is 
often relatively easy. The organization has already acknowledged a problem 
that it can’t fix itself, just by hiring you. Especially with agile, there’s usually a 
bottom-up groundswell of desire to participate. There are always volunteers 
so motivated by their contempt for the current circumstance that they’ll join 
the revolution. In agile, I’ve usually experienced more enthusiasm than resis-
tance at the grassroots level. It’s in evolution and sustainment that the real 
heavy lifting emerges for the agile consultant. 
 I’ve mentioned earlier the tendency of  “program of the month” efforts  to 
succeed for a minute, based on leadership’s enthusiasm and staff’s compli-
ance, and then to get dragged back by the infinite gravity of culture. But what 
actually occurs when programs fail? As a former (or reformed) Big 5 consul-
tant, I’ve observed problems across the change spectrum from the initial idea, 
to the strategic meaning, through planning, implementation, and sustenance. 

The Agile Consultant
43
Programs get initiated by a software salesman or a golf-course conversation. 
No connection is made to the strategic outcome. Plans are unrealistic, with 
big, upfront predictions and arbitrary schedules. Communication is weak. 
Implementation is sloppy and “drive-by.” These are all clear failure patterns. 
 But the most significant failure pattern in change initiatives, in my experience, 
is the failure to sustain. That’s why I hate drive-by consulting so much; it leaves 
clients unable to unlock the value they thought they were buying. By not 
implementing a sustainment program, they’ve doomed their product to grudg-
ing acceptance at best, or shelfware at worst. It’s our responsibility to ensure 
that the client understands the pull of inertia, and considers the long-term 
implications of sustaining disruptive change. 
 When the first agile team is successful, visible, and practicing kaizen, we’ve 
planted the first tiny seed. That seed sprouts when agility spreads to other 
teams. As agility propagates across the enterprise, experienced agile consul-
tants can help the client foresee the elements of gravity that might pull the 
new practices into the black hole. By collaborating with the client to under-
stand the unique circumstances within their enterprise, we can craft strate-
gies that enable the organization to become self-sustaining and continuously 
improving. By inspiring agile ideals for quality, standards, craftsmanship, and 
value, we can aspire to guiding whole enterprises not just to gain agility but 
to keep it.  
 Summary 
 While there are many organizational change frameworks, none of them fits 
precisely the unique needs of a consultant guiding an enterprise to agility. 
We’ve looked at Kotter’s accelerators and Cohn’s ADAPT frameworks, and 
then walked through the EVOLVE framework that I’m proposing specifically 
for agile advisors. The evolution to agility is too complex and fraught to simply 
feel our way through; we need to apply a structured framework, based on 
mature consulting practices mingled with the principles of agile. We’ve taken 
a brief tour of the elements of the EVOLVE framework, as a roadmap of the 
topics we’ll address in subsequent chapters. The emphasis is on an adapt-
able, lean, and agile approach to agile consulting engagements, and on the idea 
that each engagement will be different and each enterprise requires a unique 
approach.  

P A R T
 The EVOLVE 
Agile Consulting 
Framework
 
II

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_4
 C H A P T E R 
 Explore and 
Engage 
 Is there an agile personality type? Is agile evolution destined to succeed or 
fail based on the personalities of the executive team and the culture of the 
organization? Are Industrial Age companies, like Ford or Proctor & Gamble, 
with their history of hierarchical management styles, doomed to fail at agile? 
Agile consultants must consider these and many other questions before they 
embark on the mutual effort to enhance agility and responsiveness. 
 Explore the  Environment  
 Before we tackle these questions, let’s discuss why they matter. If there is a 
recognizable type of personality that is more or less likely to engage success-
fully in agile evolution, as agile advisors we should be prepared to identify 
those types, and adapt our training and consulting to the personalities we’re 
confronted with. If an executive asks us in to discuss agile adoption, it would 
be helpful to be able to put his, and his team’s, personalities on some type of 
spectrum that might give us guidance for the voyage ahead. If some particular 
types of cultures are inherently prone to fail at  agility  , should we steer clear 
of them, or take on the challenge to help them adapt? I raise these points 
because many agile  advisors  , acting at the “accidental” level of engagement 
that Michael Sahota describes, walk into every engagement with the same 
tools, methods, and practices, as if there’s a single roadmap to agility and these 
cultural and personality issues are immaterial. 
4

Chapter 4 | Explore and Engage
48
 The question of agile personality types has actually been widely studied. From 
the academic studies 1 done at Goethe University in Germany, to the  anec-
dotal analysis  performed by Mario Moreira 2 for  The Agile   Journal , the idea that 
there are specific personality types that are suited for agile has been analyzed 
both formally and informally. Even Mike Cohn has gotten into the conversa-
tion, with a post 3 on different types of resistors that agile change agents might 
find in organizations. 
 As illustrated in Figure  4-1 ,  Cohn’s analysis  isn’t specifically about distinct per-
sonalities but more about the attitudes that some resistant individuals might 
bring to the agile evolution process. He divides the  resistance camp  into four 
quadrants:
• 
 Skeptics  
• 
 Followers  
• 
 Saboteurs  
• 
 Diehards 
 He contends that team members adopt these positions based on two cri-
teria, their desire to either sustain the status quo or oppose agile methods 
and their passivity or activeness.  Skeptics  both dislike agile and are  pas-
sive participants  , while  Diehards  are invested in current processes and are 
actively resisting change. Here’s Cohn’s diagram, from the cited post, illus-
trating his theory: 
 1 aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1015&context=ecis2015_cr . 
 2 cmforagile.blogspot.com/2011/04/knowing-your-agile-personalities.html. 
 3  www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/blog/four-types-of-resistors-when-
adopting-agile   . 

The Agile Consultant
49
 Cohn’s experience-based  analysis  is important, but it only addresses resis-
tors. Moreira digs a bit deeper. Though not a rigorous study, it raises some 
interesting ideas about the sorts of team members we might encounter. He 
categorizes these  personalities  as follows:
• 
 Innovator  
• 
 Champion 
• 
 Workhorse  
• 
 Bandwagon  
• 
 Cowboy 
• 
 Deceiver  
• 
 Denier  
 From the  Denier  , who actively disputes agile theories but typically has little expe-
rience with agile concepts, to the  Innovator  , who provides agile leadership from 
within and has deep experience in agile culture, this continuum is quite useful 
for understanding and handling the objections, resistance, and impediments that 
an agile change  agent will encounter, especially as agile spreads beyond  infor-
mation technology (IT)  . The  Denier plays an important role in  agile evolution  , 
enabling agile consultants to confront head-on the myths and misconceptions 
that many first-time agile participants may be carrying. The Cowboy confirms 
Diehards
Saboteurs
Followers
Skeptics
Like status quo
Don’t like Scrum
Why they resist
How they resist
Passive
Active
 Figure 4-1.  Mike Cohn’s resistor spectrum  
 

Chapter 4 | Explore and Engage
50
the worst mythology about agile, using it as an excuse to jettison all discipline 
and make it up as he goes along. The titles Moreira has assigned are self-evident 
to any experienced change agent, agile or not. 
 On the academic side. the research 4 performed by the team at Goethe 
University in Frankfurt takes a more formal approach to the question, using 
familiar personality models like Meyers- Briggs  5 and the  Five Factor Model 
(FFM) 6 to understand how different personality factors might influence the 
acceptance and competence of individuals in an agile team. Through a series 
of interviews with agile team members, they evaluated individuals against 
the FFM personality traits and analyzed these traits against their attitudes 
and effectiveness in agile settings. The five traits in the FFM  model are:
• 
 Extraversion  
• 
 Agreeableness  
• 
 Conscientiousness  
• 
 Neuroticism  
• 
 Openness 
 They found that  Agreeableness  is a key factor for developer success with agile, 
while  Conscientiousness  is a key trait for scrummasters. The research goes 
into considerable depth about the individual traits that apply under these five 
broad categories, which I won’t reproduce here. 
 The point is that the personality traits of individuals, from the executive  spon-
sor  to the individual developer, have a significant influence on the ability to 
adopt agile techniques. While I scoff at the study’s recommendation that every 
agile team should undergo testing to uncover these attributes, I believe that 
the agile consultant who understands these personality elements, and is on 
the lookout for them when she engages, is less likely to apply a  one-size-fits-all 
approach  , and will instead design and implement a strategy that fits the team. 
 The clues are all around us when we start to engage. Is the sponsor genial and 
welcoming or austere and formal? Does the sponsor take his time to describe 
the scenario, or is he rushed and harried, answering the phone continuously 
while we chat? Is she enthusiastic, or does she seem to be responding to an 
edict from above or pressure from below? Is the client in immediate crisis 
and clutching at straws, or applying a reasoned, strategic approach to enter-
prise agility?  Experienced consultants  will spend as much energy evaluating 
 4 Ruth Baumgart, Markus Hummel, and Roland Holten, “Personality Traits of Scrum Roles 
in Agile Software Development Teams—A Qualitative Analysis,” ECIS 2015 Completed 
Research Papers, Paper 16 (2015).  
 5  www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/mbti-basics/  . 
 6  www.personalityresearch.org/bigfive/costa.html   . 

The Agile Consultant
51
the personalities as they do understanding the client’s scenario. When I engage 
with a new client, I‘m observing the demeanor, the physical setting, and the 
client’s attitude as methodically as I am the potential engagement. 
 Remember also that clients, especially at the sponsor level, are considering 
agile for strategic reasons, and that it’s our job as advisors to consider the 
strategic as well as the tactical objectives. As I’ve noted before, I still encoun-
ter many coaches who can recite the Manifesto and principles verbatim but 
never have a strategic, value chain, or process conversation with their sponsor 
(except as it exclusively relates to software development). At the enterprise 
level, this can’t succeed. If we don’t understand how clients make money, how 
they compete, how they deal with customer feedback, or what processes they 
follow to achieve their outcomes, how can we know if we’re addressing the 
right improvement opportunities? 
 When it comes to assessing the personality traits of a potential client, I believe 
that consultants must evaluate the potential for success, and make engage-
ment decisions based not on their need to pay the bills but on the probability 
that the engagement can succeed. If the potential client enterprise doesn’t 
understand what it is asking, can’t articulate a strategy or a set of success 
criteria, or simply is someone you don’t think you can advise successfully, it’s 
your professional responsibility to decline the engagement. Just as an ethical 
judge will recuse himself from a case he can’t judge impartially, ethical  consul-
tants will consider the likelihood of a successful outcome and recuse them-
selves from doomed engagements.  
 Mapping the Value  Chain 
 During this  exploration process  , it’s not just the client personalities we 
need to discover; we also need to dig into processes and value chains. 
When I engage in a change project, agile or otherwise, I often engage an 
experienced process mapping partner to help walk through both the value 
chain and the individual processes that produce the outcomes desired. My 
particular partner of choice is  ProcessTriage  , 7 a local (Kansas City) firm 
that specializes in both value chain and process mapping and improvement. 
The specific firm you choose is not the point: evaluating the value chain, 
and the processes that go into creating value, is a fundamental element 
of guiding the client to agility. We’ll explore the concept of value chain 
here, but it’s not my intention to give a full tutorial; there are many other 
sources for that, from Michael Porter’s book, 8 where the idea originated, 
to multiple web pages 9 that provide insight into the usage of value chain, 
or value stream, analysis. 
 7 https://processtriage.com/ . 
 8 Michael Porter,  Competitive Advantage (New York: Free Press, 1998).  
 9  www.netmba.com/strategy/value-chain/  is one example; there are many others.  

Chapter 4 | Explore and Engage
52
 Let’s first look back to Porter’s original idea, from his 1985 book. We’ll start 
with a couple of definitions, and a graphic (Figure  4-2 ) depicting Porter’s con-
ception of a value chain, and then we’ll dig into the  details  :
 Value chain  represents the internal activities a firm engages in when 
transforming inputs into outputs. 
 Value chain analysis (VCA)  is a process where a firm identifies its primary 
and support activities that add value to its final product, and then analyzes 
these activities to reduce costs or increase differentiation. 
 Figure 4-2.  The  value chain  
 The idea is a simple one, although performing the analysis is not. Enterprises 
have inputs and outputs, and they create competitive advantage and profits 
based on the value they can add to their inputs. According to Porter, firms 
can create competitive advantage two ways: through lower cost or through 
differentiating features. As illustrated in Figure  4-2 in the  “Primary Activities”  
section, the firm receives inputs (e.g., raw materials in an automotive business, 
or intellectual property on a content-based web site), transforms these inputs 
by performing some operation on them, creates a mechanism for distributing 
the end product, identifies customers and their needs to create demand for 
the product, and provides services to customers as they use the product to 
gain  value  . 
 

The Agile Consultant
53
 Enterprises also have a set of  “Support Activities”  as shown in the figure, such 
as IT, HR, procurement, and infrastructure, which includes elements like the 
physical plant or office, the organizational structure, and the firm’s culture. The 
tip of the arrow, in Figure  4-2 , represents the margin that firms can achieve 
when their sales are greater than their costs. When a firm can perform these 
activities efficiently and effectively it can achieve superior margins and com-
petitive advantage. 
 For businesses that primarily rely on cost advantage, like  Wal-Mart  , their anal-
ysis of the value chain will focus on removing costs from any, or all, of the value 
chain activities. They seek to identify economies of scale, high utilization, and 
efficient linkages within the chain. Those that focus primarily on differentiating 
features, like  Google  , concentrate on innovation, uniqueness, and continual 
responsiveness. This is not to say that firms concentrate solely on one or the 
other. Manufacturing firms like  Ford Motor Company  attempt to excel in both 
categories, and web-based businesses like  LinkedIn , while focusing on a unique 
niche and innovative features, must also maintain low costs to achieve margin. 
 I don’t mean to imply that, in the exploration phase, I’m going to drag a pro-
cess expert into the initial sales meeting and start drawing diagrams; that 
piece comes later. I’m emphasizing here the agile consultant’s responsibility to 
start thinking strategically about the client’s value chain from the outset. This 
is, again, where the consultant’s powers of observation are critical. As we begin 
to understand the client’s business, culture, and structure, we should start 
creating a mental model of the business, with Porter’s value chain ideas as a 
foundation, so we can start to identify improvement opportunities. When we 
think about an enterprise holistically, it becomes obvious that, while improve-
ment in the  software development process  , for example, may optimize a tiny 
element of the entire value chain, the progressive optimization of surround-
ing elements, and their support structures, is where the real impact lies. Agile 
 advisors  must make the distinction between “ suboptimization  ,” or the  optimi-
zation of one local element, and  holistic optimization  , in which we’re looking 
at the linkages, interactions, and effects of change across the entire chain, and 
targeting our efforts at the right improvement opportunities for this unique 
client. As I noted, this is a brief fly-by of  VCA , and there are many great refer-
ences to help you dig deeper.  
 Explore the  Incentives  
 In many firms, the climate is competitive, hostile, and judgmental.  Team mem-
bers are evaluated quarterly and, in many companies, are “stack-racked” against 
their peers, creating a combative, rather than a cooperative and collaborative, 
atmosphere. Some firms even have a forced “up or out” mentality, in which 
the bottom 10% of ranked employees is put on a performance plan, and “man-
aged out” if they don’t improve their rankings. While some more enlightened 

Chapter 4 | Explore and Engage
54
firms will incorporate a  “360 measurement” approach  , in which teammates 
and other managers also get a chance to weigh in on the employee’s skills and 
accomplishments, those firms are in the minority. 
 Since these rankings determine pay, promotion, and prestige, they are 
important in terms of their effect on careers, attitudes, and atmosphere. 
The theory, based on Peter Drucker’s  Management by Objectives (MBO)  
philosophy outlined in his 1954 book, 10 claimed that MBO was the cure for 
 military-style command-and-control management,  by setting agreed objec-
tives for each manager, team, and individual, thereby freeing managers to 
focus on strategic issues rather than task management. Drucker's original 
idea was that the MBO process would be a constructive dialog between 
managers and their team members, in which they would collaboratively 
determine realistic goals for the next period, whether quarterly, semian-
nually, or annually, and together build a sense of ownership, commitment, 
and improvement areas. 
 It hasn’t quite worked out that way.  MBO  works under the theory that 
objectives stay constant over the evaluation period, when in reality, espe-
cially in the agile, responsive enterprise, work is dynamic and objectives 
change frequently. There’s little space for creative activities that don’t fit 
into static objectives. Managers are typically the judges and juries in these 
organizations, and the externals, such as weak peer skills, broken processes, 
poor organizational communication, lack of vision, and lack of leadership are 
disregarded, as employees are instructed that it’s their responsibility to live 
with the culture that exists. The overall  problem with MBO-based manage-
ment is that it stifles creativity, creates a hostile and competitive environ-
ment, saddles team members with tactical goals that don’t have meaning to 
them, applies a reward-and-punishment system that is known to demotivate 
knowledge workers, and creates a “not in my objectives” atmosphere that 
values compliance over creativity. Although MBO was designed as an inter-
active exercise in which team members develop their own objectives and 
then iterate through them with their manager’s guidance, in most firms it 
has devolved into a mechanistic system in which those conversations never 
happen, team members are encouraged to take on objectives that they don’t 
believe and have no interest in, and managers are put in the uncomfortable 
position of force-fitting some team members into low ranks in order meet 
an arbitrary quota. 
 What gets measured gets managed is a common quote in executive ranks. 
That may be true, but, in agile terms, what  doesn’t get measured and 
rewarded, like intrinsic motivation, creativity, team collaboration, and a 
focus on customer value, creates disincentives for the behaviors that the 
 10 Peter F. Drucker,  The Practice of Management (New York: Harper Collins, 1954) (reissued 
April 20, 2010). 

The Agile Consultant
55
agile enterprise needs the most. We’ll discuss in later chapters the tech-
niques that agile consultants can use to guide the changes organizations 
must make, from these type of measurements to metrics that encourage 
agility, responsiveness, and creativity. I give this overview here to again 
emphasize the observational powers of agile consultants. Guiding the 
enterprise to evolve its thinking, from these traditional, individual-focused, 
static measurements to the dynamic, team-based metrics that encourage 
collaboration and creative thinking, is an example of the heavy lifting that 
enterprise-level consultants must take on. Observing and thoughtfully 
considering them is the first step of the eventual education and persua-
sion that we’ll need later in the evolution process.  
 Engaging with  Trust 
 Nothing happens without trust. From the auto mechanic to the doctor or 
accountant, if the expert can’t develop a sense of trust and confidence with 
the client, then relationship issues are likely to be a drag on current and future 
engagements, even if the service is exemplary. For the consultant coming in 
to help evolve the agile maturity of an enterprise, trust is even more critical. 
The client organization is taking a risk by inviting us into its house, introduc-
ing us to its colleagues, and exposing the organization’s challenges and flaws. 
If the consultant turns out to be incompetent or untrustworthy, all the agile 
knowledge in the world won’t save the engagement. Immature consultants, 
I’ve observed, sometimes make the assumption that being selected for an 
engagement means the client trusts them already. Big mistake. Trust is never 
granted, it’s always earned. 
 The development of trust is an uphill climb. With consultants, as with auto 
mechanics, the  “trust curve”  follows a typical path from transactional inter-
actions to favored vendor status and then toward trusted advisor standing. 
I laugh when I see LinkedIn profiles in which the individual describes her-
self as a “trusted advisor.”  Trusted by whom, and based on what? Like Abe 
Lincoln’s fifth leg, 11 calling yourself a trusted advisor doesn’t make you one. 
The progression to trust requires consultants to display honesty, forthright-
ness, and clarity from the beginning. Our consultative skills and our personal 
demeanor are under constant evaluation with every team member we meet. 
Those are the qualities clients gauge long before they have an opportunity 
to assess our agile domain knowledge. From the initial meeting to the con-
clusion of the engagement, there’s only one way to earn trust, and that is 
to deserve it. Clients don’t hire consultants to tell them what they want to 
 11 Abraham Lincoln is purported to have posed the riddle, “If you call a tail a leg, how many 
legs does a dog have?,” to which the answer was usually “five.” Lincoln’s response? “No, 
four . . . calling a tail a leg doesn’t make it one.”  

Chapter 4 | Explore and Engage
56
hear; they’re surrounded by that type of advisor all day, each typically push-
ing a personal agenda. They hire us to tell them those things that only an 
objective outsider can utter. Of course, they expect domain expertise, but 
it’s our ability to stand outside the culture, and to observe and report on 
the unproductive behaviors we see without the ego, emotion, and agenda of 
insiders, that clients value most. 
 When I think about consulting behaviors that work against  trust  , I think of the 
 “eternal engagement” business model  , in which consulting firms try to make 
themselves indispensable and embed themselves for life. I’m talking about the 
“inside spy” model I’ve mentioned previously, in which, in the name of scope 
expansion, consultants turn into eavesdroppers, searching for opportunities to 
expand their footprint. I’m talking about the notorious bait and switch model 
of the Big 5 firms, bringing in veterans for the sales process and then loading 
the engagement with green rookies. I’m talking about consultants who inflate 
their own knowledge and experience to get the gig, with the idea that they can 
learn as they go, on the client’s dime. I’m also talking about those consultants 
who still propose a big, upfront plan model, perpetuating the illusion that they 
can know, in advance, how a project will proceed and what obstacles they’ll 
encounter on the way. All of these behaviors doom the relationship to an 
adversarial, unproductive encounter, with unfulfilled expectations all around. 
 The  customer-value focus  that we preach within the agile principles also 
applies to the agile consultant. If we’re more concerned about our longevity 
in the engagement than on the client’s interests, we are behaving unprofes-
sionally, and sabotaging or own credibility and trustworthiness. The instant 
our credibility, competence, or trustworthiness is questioned by the client or 
the client’s team, the engagement is on thin ice. Through my long experience 
as a consultant, I’ve learned one simple motto: tell the truth. If you don’t have 
a specific skill that the client expects, admit it. If you have concerns about the 
potential for success, state them. If the engagement is a stretch that you think 
you can conquer, say so. If you fear, from your exploration, that there are sig-
nificant challenges that the enterprise will need to overcome, explain them, 
and describe your ideas for conquering them. Prospective clients appreciate 
honesty and self-knowledge above braggadocio and wishful thinking. 
 One error I often see  consultants  make is to assume that the client knows 
how to engage with an outside advisor. Even for large, established firms that 
frequently use outside advisors, I make it a point to clearly state the process 
I foresee, and both the client’s and the advisor’s role. How will we kick off 
the engagement? What homework might you have to do, and what back-
ground information do you expect the client to provide? At what cadence 
do you expect to engage? Who will be the Product Owner of this engage-
ment from the client side, and what will the client’s role and commitment 
look like? What are you committing to do, and to what is the client commit-
ting? What are the expected deliverables? What is the expected outcome? 

The Agile Consultant
57
What does success look like? To avoid misunderstandings and recrimina-
tions later, clarity of expectation and commitment is vital. In an ambiguous 
and incremental project like agile  evolution  , in which we can’t possible know 
the client’s desire, capacity, or commitment to change until we experience 
it, missed expectations are a constant danger, so answering these questions 
becomes imperative. 
 It’s imperative also that we are upfront about the risks and challenges of an 
agile transformation. Clients who have never undertaken a  disruptive change 
program like agile evolution may believe that it’s merely a matter of training 
and coaching a couple of scrum teams. If that’s the ultimate goal, that’s fine, 
but if the client believes that doing so equals enterprise agility, you’re setting 
the engagement up for disappointment. On the other hand, clients that have 
already experienced an attempted agile migration that’s fallen on its face or 
“snapped back” to the prevailing culture will bring skepticism and doubt into 
the engagement. A candid conversation about obstacles we’ve experienced 
before, or failed adoptions that we’ve participated in turning around, can go a 
long way to counteract any negative perceptions. In short, a large part of build-
ing trust is based on building confidence in your abilities, and in your sincere 
belief in the ultimate success of the engagement. 
 When I interview any project manager, scrummaster, or consultant for a 
potential engagement, I ask him to describe his skill set, and then to prioritize 
those skills. The magic phrase I’m seeking is   managing expectations . When the 
candidate can only articulate a set of technical skills or domain expertise and 
never mentions consulting skills or the ability to manage client expectations, 
my finger starts reaching for the eject button. The clarity of expectations, and 
the ability to help the client visualize a successful engagement and understand 
the boundaries of that engagement, separates the Subject Matter Experts from 
the consultants. Clients frequently have built fantasy castles, both in their own 
minds and across the enterprise, about the cost, schedule, and difficulty of 
achieving their agile goals. Consultants, especially in the agile realm, who have 
difficulty correcting false assumptions or reporting on adverse circumstances 
that might affect the project have a tough road ahead of them. Obstacles will 
inevitably arise, and bad news will inevitably need to be conveyed.  Agile evolu-
tion  , like agility itself, is reality-based, and reality is messy, unpredictable, and 
not subject to brute force or wishful thinking.  
 Framing the  Engagement  
 When we have evaluated the personalities of the players and the potential 
for a successful engagement, thought about the enterprise value chain, taken 
a peek at the current performance-measurement and incentive practices, 
begun to build trust and confidence with the client, and articulated roles, 
commitments, and expectations, it’s time to start developing an agreement 

Chapter 4 | Explore and Engage
58
that documents those findings. As I’ve noted, the traditional big  predictive plan 
approach is obsolete in project management, and is therefore inappropriate 
in agile engagements. In fact, agility emerges from the recognition that we 
can’t accurately predict and plan. Acknowledging this, let’s also acknowledge 
that the predictive, all-in plan is exactly what many sponsors are expecting. 
Educating the  sponsor and guiding her away from that expectation falls to the 
consultant. For many clients, the acceptance that  traditional project manage-
ment techniques  have failed is a component of their decision to embrace 
agility. Others are experimenting with agility, but still clinging to the traditional 
management techniques that reassure them with the illusion of control. 
 The first step to reaching agreement is to test your understanding of the cli-
ent’s current state of agility, the client’s perceptions and expectations.  So what 
I think you’re saying is . . . and  help me understand how . . . are two of the most 
potent phrases in the consultant’s toolkit. Our goal is to come to agreement 
on what we’re there to do, what constitutes both a reasonable approach and 
a successful outcome for the sponsor, and who is committing to do what to 
further that goal. 
 Just as I scorn the big, upfront plan, I also reject the big, upfront consulting 
contract. “Customer collaboration over contract negotiation” is an important 
 precept of agile theory  , and I have much respect for the values that produced 
that principle. Equally important to me is the iterative nature of agile evolu-
tion. Unlike a data center project or the building of a bridge, we can’t know, or 
even approximate, the end at the beginning. When we enter an engagement 
with a new client, we have no visibility into the teams’ competence, will, or 
desire to adopt agile practices, and little insight into the culture and obstacles 
we’ll discover along the route. Our engagement documents must reflect that 
reality. 
 The agreement I visualize with the client looks much more like a letter of 
 engagement  than it does a formal contract. I’m agreeing that I’ll apply my agile 
domain knowledge, and my consultative skills, to help the client discover its 
own agile destiny, and my agreements reflect that fact. I’ll state explicitly:  I’m 
engaging to assist and guide the client enterprise to their agile objectives, based on 
my experience and domain knowledge. I’ll acknowledge the client’s goals, but 
I’m not promising anything except to apply my best efforts to help the client 
reach its maximum agility within its boundaries. If the client responds that 
this is too “squishy” and ambiguous, I’ll remind him that that’s exactly what 
agile evolution entails. Just as in an agile development effort, I’m prepared to 
agree to a predefined time box and “cashbox,” and to commit to guiding the 
client to its organic limit of agility within those constraints, but there’s no 
circumstance in which I’ll commit to a fixed scope with a promised level of 
agility guaranteed at the end. 

The Agile Consultant
59
 That’s often the rub. Clients that are experienced with “big bang” consulting 
contracts are often stuck in the perception that only a fixed-scope, fixed-fee, 
fixed-budget contract protects them from unfulfilled expectations.  Traditional 
consultants  are equally convinced that only a fixed-scope project protects 
them from dreaded scope creep. We’ll talk in depth in later chapters about the 
business model of an agile consultant, but my key point here is that many cli-
ents, especially those that have not internalized the agile mind-set, will struggle 
with the iterative approach to agile evolution.  Nimble consultants  will invest 
significant energy in building trust at the start, educating sponsors about the 
known successes of the iterative, incremental approach, and partner with the 
client to develop an engagement agreement that reassures the client without 
putting the consultant in an untenable position. 
 If we’re committing to a time box and cashbox, it’s urgent that the client 
enterprise is prepared to document its own obligations, and I’m not talking 
about fees. Participation, commitment, interaction, and a robust feedback loop 
are central elements of any agile project, and they are equally critical in an 
advisory relationship. Every  experienced consultant  , agile or not, has dealt 
with the client that makes all kinds of grandiose commitments to participate 
during the contract negotiations, only to disappear in a puff of smoke when 
it comes time to actually collaborate. There’s nothing we can do to drive 
agility without the client’s participation, enthusiasm, and desire. Even the sim-
plest letter of agreement must spell out the consultant’s expectations for 
customer access, clear project ownership on the client side, and the roles 
and commitments of all key client players. Clients are frequently accustomed 
to the “throw it over the wall” style of consulting  engagement  , in which their 
involvement occurs at the beginning, to toss the specs across the desk, and at 
the end, to evaluate the consultant’s results. The burden is on the consultant 
to ensure that client participants understand and commit to their roles, and 
honor these commitments.  
 Summary 
 “A bad beginning makes a bad ending,” said Euripides back in 400 B.C., and that 
wisdom has not changed. The Explore and Engage phase of an agile engage-
ment sets the stage for success or failure. Agile consultants who dive in to an 
agile evolution project, especially at the enterprise level, without respecting 
Euripides’s logic, defeat their own purpose. The consultant who disregards the 
unique circumstances of every enterprise, and brings out the same tools no 
matter the on-the-ground conditions, may have some success at the scrum-
team level, but evolving out across the enterprise requires mature observa-
tion and consultative skills, and the ability to inspect the situation and adapt 
to the culture, competencies, style, and boundaries that reality imposes. If 
you’re operating, as an agile consultant, at the accidental level of skill, don’t be 
surprised when you crash. 

Chapter 4 | Explore and Engage
60
 On the positive side, agile consultants who engage thoughtfully, observantly, 
and intentionally, and meet the enterprise where it is, in order to guide it to 
where it wants to be, have an excellent chance of starting off on the front foot 
and achieving breakthrough results for the enterprise and teams they have the 
privilege to advise.  

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_5
 C H A P T E R 
 Visualize 
Success 
 In an ideal world, all clients would be able to clearly articulate their busi-
ness objective, their success criteria, and the capabilities they expect to gain 
from any project. In reality, most can’t. Studies of software  development  1 show 
again and again that clients can’t articulate their needs, can’t communicate 
with specialists, and can’t define what success means.  Consultants  are usually 
called upon not just to deliver the client’s vision but to help define it.  Skilled 
consultants  can guide clients from a vague project concept to a clear, concise, 
and persuasive vision. 
 In the ideal  agile world, client participants have thought through their guiding 
vision of agility, phrased it in pithy and compelling language, and evangelized its 
benefits. In reality, most haven’t. They may see a version of an agile future, but 
every participant sees it through a different lens. Clients may desire the ben-
efits of agility without recognizing its inherent disruptiveness. Even if they have 
crafted a common vision, it’s often poorly composed and unpersuasive. And 
then, when they have a compelling message that they’ve agreed upon, they’ve 
probably not planned a campaign to communicate and evangelize it. 
5
 1 See the Appendix for insights from those studies.  

Chapter 5 | Visualize Success
62
 Why Visualize?  
 Our goal in Visualization is to build a consensus, at the highest level with 
which we’re engaged, on a vision of the future state, the capabilities that will 
be gained, and the challenges that will be addressed. If we’re engaged at the 
team level, we need a  team-level vision  built on participation and consensus. 
The same is true if we are engaged at the enterprise level. In either case, we’re 
encouraging ownership, buy-in, and enthusiasm. We’re trying to craft a concise, 
logical, positive, and persuasive message, aligned with the sponsor’s agile strat-
egy and the participants’ agile expectations. 
 John Kotter calls this vision “The Big Opportunity,”  and I prefer this to the 
common  “burning platform”  phrasing. Language matters, and I prefer a positive 
vision, not one that implies roasting to death. The threat of impending doom 
may be motivating, but it’s certainly not inspiring. It may be true that existential 
disruptions are on the horizon, and that current methods are broken; that’s an 
important part of the message. The  enterprise agility vision  , however, should 
emphasize the future capabilities and benefits awaiting the enterprise when 
it embraces agility, instead of focusing on fleeing the coming inferno. Part of 
our visualization work is to keep the enterprise focused on what it’s driv-
ing to, not what it’s running from. Many teams and enterprises are panicked 
enough about merely adopting basic agile practices. Ringing the fire alarm in 
the middle of that transition isn’t helpful. 
 During our exploration and engagement time, we’ve had some substantive 
conversations with sponsors about vision, expectations, and the problems 
they’re trying to solve. In the initial engagement cycle, however, we’ve only 
gone so far. Most clients aren’t prepared to reveal the depth of their dysfunc-
tion or poor performance, in fear of scaring you away. Most consultants can’t 
afford to spend many hours in initial  discovery  , especially in the sales cycle, 
before the meter is running; we need to bill hours. We’ve seen the outline, but 
we haven’t seen  the Big Opportunity  . And usually, neither has the client. 
 Acknowledging this reality, agile consultants must be prepared to guide the 
sponsor, and the  enterprise  , through some bare minimum elements of a 
Visualization exercise, including agreement on:
• 
 A guiding agile vision or “Big Opportunity,”  
• 
 A definition of success,  
• 
 A compelling message, and  
• 
 A plan to communicate it.  
 I emphasize the word  guide here; no consultant can build the vision for a spon-
sor. The client must own it, and, so should the teams. I differ here with Kotter; 
he still recommends that a leadership committee creates this vision. The com-
mittee may set the strategy, and have greater visibility into the enterprise port-

The Agile Consultant
63
folio, but I’m a proponent of a broad community participating in visualizing. 
That, in my view, is both consistent with the values of agility and likely to deliver 
a more persuasive message. This is a tightrope, as  “vision by committee”  can 
often mean long and impenetrable language, as the vision statement tries to 
address everyone’s input and interests. Agile consultants need to thread the 
needle between a “tablets from the mountaintop” vision, handed down from 
executives on high, and an endless cycle of word-by-word debate.  
 The  Enterprise Agile Opportunity  
 As  agile consultants  , we are initially engaging with a sponsor, or a committee, 
and not the entire enterprise. Sometimes that’s someone in the executive 
suite, sometimes a functional manager focused on a particular silo. I’m not 
a fan of top-down vision building, but there are advantages to starting the 
conversation at the top. Agile consultants that have the endorsement, and the 
attention, of influential leaders should take advantage of their strategic and 
portfolio  visibility  , to get a business-minded view of the opportunities agility 
presents. We’re starting from the core of information we gathered during our 
exploration activities, but, now that we’re engaged, sponsors will begin to be 
more candid about the challenges they face and the flaws in the system. 
 When we engage at the executive level, one of most important imperatives is to 
help leaders evolve from their strategic language to plain talk. “Increasing market 
penetration by 11% in Asia” is an example of a strategic objective, but few cod-
ers or testers are going to be inspired by it. That’s why I stay focused on capa-
bilities. In a vision of agility, I want the organization to articulate the capabilities 
it hopes to achieve, not the strategic objectives it wants to apply them to. As an 
agile consultant, I can guide the enterprise toward faster delivery cycles, a more 
intimate relationship with the business, and a more collaborative environment. 
I can’t help the enterprise achieve market penetration in Asia, except indirectly. 
 Another reason to focus on enhanced capabilities is that they’re less like to be 
controversial.  “Increasing market penetration”  can sound like a challenge to 
those responsible for achieving that goal, rather than a vision of future oppor-
tunities. It can cascade negatively across the organization, as every individual 
ponders the repercussions on his personal role, responsibility, and workload. 
 “Achieve faster delivery cycles”  can also be threatening, but, since it applies 
across the organization, it’s less likely to set off a reaction of dueling silos. 
 Most important, the agility guiding vision must be inclusive. The worst possible 
vision statement looks something like this:
 From the Executive Suite, we command that you achieve these goals. You 
didn’t participate in setting them, you don’t understand how they align, 
and we’re not going to tell you how to achieve them, but we  will  hold you 
accountable at review time if you fail. Now go forth and do! 

Chapter 5 | Visualize Success
64
 How do we help organizations migrate from a top-down, hierarchy based 
mandate to an inclusive, inspirational vision? First, we must acknowledge 
that, especially in enterprise-wide transitions, it’s difficult work. With all the 
strategic and technological variables, all the personal and cultural sensitivi-
ties, and all the individual agendas that arise, getting to a consensus, put-
ting it into persuasive  language  , and communicating it effectively can be a 
marathon. We’re trying to craft a concise, logical, positive, and persuasive 
message that is aligned with the enterprise strategy. At enterprise scale, this 
is obviously an iterative, incremental exercise, as the chance we will craft a 
message with all these attributes the first time through is nil. If we do it right, 
we’re using the agile practices we apply in product development to craft 
the vision. We start with a business need (in this case agility), articulate it as 
best we can, run that message through a feedback loop, and refine it until 
we have a potentially shippable product. In this case, of course, the product 
we ship is an  Enterprise Agile Opportunity that is clearly communicated 
and compelling. 
 Om the other hand, I’ve gone through successful visualization exercises 
with a single agile advocate over lunch. If the sponsor is a knowledgeable 
inside agile coach or advocate, it’s pretty easy to agree that “we want three 
teams, capable of applying the basic scrum practices consistently over three 
months of iterations, achieving stable velocity and quality.” It’s certainly not 
an enterprise vision, but it’s enough to work with if that’s the situation. The 
point is that, as with all agile projects, we can take a “barely sufficient” view-
point on visualization; if there’s no wider team to inspire, and a core team 
that gets it and is eager to proceed, a short agreement on intent is all we 
need to get started. Let’s maximize the work not done; I’ll lay out a lot of 
practices here, but in many grassroots adoptions, a simple, tactical statement 
can define the effort. 
 The visualization process requires  leadership  . As Jim Highsmith notes, 2 “This 
is one area where effective leaders lead—they help cut through the ambigu-
ity and confusion of creating an effective vision.” Whether we’re dealing with 
a single product owner trying to build a single scrum team or a leadership 
committee that is striving for full enterprise agility, we must have someone 
who owns the vision and brings the clarity required to avoid spiraling into an 
endless semantic debate. Leadership is also required to ensure that the teams 
participating in visualization do so in a productive manner, with an enterprise, 
strategic viewpoint, and avoid any parochial, siloed instincts that may have 
developed in their culture. We’ll look at an overview of the process I recom-
mend, and then decompose it for a bit more detail. 
 2 Jim Highsmith,  Agile Project Management: Creating Innovative Products, Second Edition (New 
York: Pearson Educational, 2010), pp. 91.  

The Agile Consultant
65
 Experience in building project  visions  , from the Project Charters of the water-
fall days to the Enterprise Agility Vision statements I’ve developed with clients, 
has led me to a process that is both rapid and inclusive. To perform inclusive 
visualization,  agile consultants  should:
• 
 Identify the Agile Opportunity product owner or 
committee.  
• 
 Craft a set of capability goals.  
• 
 Integrate feedback.  
• 
 Craft a Consensus Vision.  
• 
 Execute Their Communication Plan.  
 Identify the Agile Opportunity Product Owner 
or  Committee  
 While agility is an egalitarian movement, there are moments in a company’s agile 
evolution that require leadership. Whether the aim is agility across the orga-
nization or agile adoption at the team level, leader sponsorship and enthusi-
asm build the momentum that kick-starts agility. When the conversation starts 
at the executive level, I’m a proponent of the  Enterprise Transition Committee 
approach  recommended by both Ken Schwaber 3 and Mike Cohn. 4 An executive 
committee of agile proponents willing to craft a vision and evangelize it is obvi-
ously an enormous boost. Just by helping our executive sponsor build a small, 
 cross-functional transition team  , the savvy consultant can learn a lot about who’s 
trusted, who advocates agile, and who the messengers of change would be. As in 
any agile project, we want a clearly designated product owner as the representa-
tive of the business through whom business decisions flow. The  transition team  
owns the project, and must come to decisions and take actions depending on the 
product owner’s feedback. The agile consultant will often be called  into transition 
committee sessions  , both to facilitate and as a domain expert, but the designated 
 product owner  is accountable for driving business decisions and priorities. 
 In engagements starting at the grassroots level, the product owner is usually 
a functional manager, of, say, software development or project management. 
Whether executive-led or team-focused, the product owner is the resource 
with whom we visualize the outcome, and is the owner of the Agile Opportunity 
message. Agile  advisors  can begin the conversation by walking the product 
owner through a roadmap discussion that helps them articulate their high-level 
 3 Ken Schwaber,  The Enterprise and Scrum (Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 2007).  
 4 Mike Cohn,  Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum (Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2010).  

Chapter 5 | Visualize Success
66
expectations. The outcome of that conversation should be a graphic roadmap 
that then enables them to further articulate their more precise vision. The 
objective of the consultant’s initial conversations with the designated product 
owner is to agree on our capability objectives, our roadmap, and our roles. 
 When I begin any consulting engagement, I scrutinize and probe the enter-
prise’s structure, formal and informal, to see who should be included in the 
vision conversation. There are always technical specialists, business managers, 
and other domain experts who have a stake in the outcome of agile evolution. 
“Who else should I be talking to?” is one of the most useful questions for any 
consultant, and I ask it early and often. We must be judicious in how far we 
inquire, and how wide a circle we include, but representatives of key constitu-
encies will add both insight and momentum to the agile vision. 
 For the consultant, the value of correctly identifying product owners on the 
sponsor side is incalculable. In traditional consulting, we often had to ask the 
question, “Who is the client?.” We were engaged with executives, managers, 
contributors, and users, each of whom had different interests, expectations, 
and decision rights. This is the problem that the “ product owner  ” concept 
tries to solve. By designating an individual, accountable representative of the 
business, we’ve now guided the organization to grant ownership to the prod-
uct owner, who then is accountable for convening and caucusing the leader-
ship team, for coming to group vision for  agility  and for communicating the 
vision to the enterprise. At enterprise or team level, it’s in the consultant’s 
interest to have a single product owner who has the explicit decision rights 
for the Agile Opportunity, and selecting the right representatives is decisive.  
 Craft a Set of Capability  Goals  
 Why is the enterprise considering agility? Does it believe adopting agile will help 
it increase market penetration in Asia next year? Probably not. The enterprise is 
instead seeking enterprise or team-wide capability enhancements that will enable 
it to achieve its strategies. Agile, whether at the team or enterprise level, is about 
reducing waste, increasing responsiveness, and removing friction from the value 
stream. We strive to enhance the organization’s capability to execute efficiently. 
 Capability  planning  5 is a facilitative method that helps the organization iden-
tify gaps in its performance. This process generates capability goals, quanti-
fied objectives that describe business execution capabilities. The capabilities 
they describe are cross-functional and hierarchical lines. Rather than strategic 
goals, like “Sales will increase our reach in the generics market by 22%,” the 
enterprise capability goals we seek look more like “The Enterprise will be 
 5 See The Open Group Architecture Framework’s (TOGAF’s) in-depth description here: 
  http://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf9-doc/arch/chap32.html . 

The Agile Consultant
67
capable of identifying new target markets, and establishing measurable prog-
ress within six months.” Other examples of capability goals are:
 The Enterprise will provide a friendly, positive 
response to any inquiry or complaint within 24 hours.  
 IT Development will deliver a set of running, tested 
features for client review at the end of every iteration.  
 Marketing will be capable of designing an initial cam-
paign within 8 days of shippable product delivery.  
 Capability  planning is the essential building block of agile visualization. We 
must know, at whatever engagement level, the business capabilities our spon-
sors expect to enhance. The previous examples illustrate that, whether it’s the 
entire enterprise or one eight-member development team, there is a clear, 
concise, and measurable capability that the team can identify. 
 In the process I apply, I begin capability planning with a process-mapping  session  , 
so we have a visible model on which we can plot barriers and broken connec-
tions. Team or enterprise, every entity has an  input-process-output cycle  that can 
be mapped and analyzed. Simple process mapping is a great way to coach teams 
in thinking about process efficiency, and to help them visualize obstructions. This 
practice can be simple or complex, of course, depending on the scale of your 
transition and the enterprise business model. I’ve been in mapping sessions that 
lasted a half hour, and sessions that took four days. I want just enough visibility so 
they can walk me through the flow of their value stream and point out obvious 
pain points. As we discussed earlier regarding value streams, it’s hard to target 
high-impact improvements if we don’t understand how the enterprise works. 
 From  executive teams  to small  contributor teams  , my practice is to develop 
capability goals by convening a brief mapping session, getting the basic flow on 
a whiteboard, and then asking participants to point out blockers and enablers. 
With executives, the flow will typically be a high-level fly-by of their value 
stream. For  developer teams  , it might be “from software request to applica-
tion acceptance.” With the basic map in front of us, we can start to probe. 
Where do we get stuck, and where might added capability solve a problem? I’ll 
then ask participants to propose solutions to the obstructions they’ve identi-
fied. If the problem is “Too many defects get through unit testing and blow up 
integration efforts,” the solution might be to “Enforce completed-test stan-
dards on all code passed to integration.” The move from solution to capability 
is natural. The capability goal in this case might be to “integrate successfully 
with no passed defects 85% of the time.” 
 Size capability planning to the scale of your agile engagement. Capability  plan-
ning  in a small team can be an informal exercise; team members know where 
they’re stuck. You can generate a set of capability goals in a beginning rookie 
scrum team in an hour or two. Just ask them what’s broken, and steer the 
conversation to a positive scenario rather than the current negative situation. 

Chapter 5 | Visualize Success
68
Help the team articulate the solutions they envision for the broken places, and 
their capability goals will write themselves. 
 This list of capability objectives becomes our Agile Opportunity backlog, replac-
ing vague goals like “be more agile in responding to customers” with explicit 
improvement expectations. Capability planning should be run like any agile plan-
ning session, building consensus on a backlog, prioritizing backlog items, and solic-
iting commitments from team members. The agile consultant facilitates the team 
through capability planning, helps them frame the language for positive impact, and 
assists in consolidation and prioritization. When capability planning is complete, 
the agility product owner or committee will have accepted a prioritized backlog 
of measurable enhancements, upon which the Agile Opportunity can be based. 
 Capability planning has a lot of advantages for the agile  consultant  . It develops 
consensus around the agile capabilities the sponsor expects. It subdues the 
inter-silo debate, and focuses instead on cross-functional process innovation. 
It enables the consultant to probe disconnects and dysfunctions, since each 
capability goal recognized is also a gap identified. It takes the focus off subop-
timized, siloed improvement efforts and envisions enterprise capabilities that 
enhance results. Most important, it provides the raw material to be filtered 
down into a persuasive Agile Opportunity.  
 Integrate Feedback   
 Every lean and agile process has a feedback  loop  . Without feedback there is 
no kaizen. The creation of an  Agile Opportunity vision  must be inclusive if we 
want to avoid the dreaded executive proclamation. Leaders can shape the 
strategic direction of agile evolution, and be enthusiastic evangelists for the 
coming changes. What leaders  can’t do is create ownership and  commitment  . 
That requires participation and a responsive feedback loop. 
 The feedback mechanism for an Agile Opportunity  vision  is obvious, because 
it is a straight application of agile practices. We iterate through drafts of the 
Agile Opportunity, solicit feedback from our target audience, and synthesize 
that feedback, all within a defined time box. The first iteration of draft and 
feedback is often the raw capability goals we built in our mapping session. At 
the enterprise scale, the transition committee has probably ironed out a lot 
of the disputes and created a set of capability goals that are not controversial. 
At the team level, team members often have already agreed that they want to 
adopt these practices and enhance their capabilities. Still, the feedback process 
is designed to surface disagreement and innovation. Capability goals should 
cycle a few times, especially in politically charged environments. 
 The target audience for our Agile Opportunity communications must be, well, 
targeted. I wouldn’t advocate an enterprise-wide communique at this point, 
before we’ve crafted a complete vision. An individual team can have an all-
hands conversation and agree on the capabilities it is striving to achieve. At 

The Agile Consultant
69
an enterprise level, a small, thoughtfully selected, and representative sample of 
informed, influential, and interested stakeholders is a wise strategy. We want 
to include enough diversity of opinion for a meaningful dialog, while avoid-
ing a firestorm of confusion, resistance, and rumor in this initial stage of our 
agile journey. As we’ve emphasized, visualization of an agile outcome requires 
leadership, and, while the feedback loop is essential, it must also be prudent. 
Leadership still has a role to play in agility, and aligning the effort to strategic 
priorities is still leadership’s prerogative. 
 The time-boxed nature of the visualization effort is important, as a participa-
tive feedback cycle can be eternal, and agile enterprises can’t afford endless 
loops. Iterating through drafts, with a targeted feedback opportunity embed-
ded in the cycle, can take us from capability goals to a broad, consolidated, and 
compelling Agile Opportunity statement rather quickly. The development of a 
set of capability goals, even in complex enterprises, can be done in a day. The 
dissemination of them, by e-mail or survey, with request for comment, can 
have a two-day time box. Another few days to integrate commentary and start 
to wordsmith and condense it into an Agile Opportunity, and another round 
or two of draft and feedback, and you’re on the way to an integrated synthesis 
of the enterprise’s agile expectations and hopes. 
 Of course, inspect and adapt this  process ; some  Enterprise Transition 
Committees  can rocket through iterations and reach an Agile Opportunity 
statement quickly, and others are slow and deliberate. Some  team-level spon-
sors are agile  advocates  with a deep understanding of where they're headed, 
and some have been assigned agile transition from on high, and need education 
and guidance. If the agility  product owner  , with the agile consultant’s guidance, 
articulates a set of concise cross-function capability objectives and puts them 
out for comment, we learn what is important to the enterprise community, 
what motivates them and what concerns them. Just as in a software develop-
ment project, we allow the community to course-correct as we determine 
what agility means to the enterprise. What’s important to the agile consultant 
is that the  Agile Opportunity vision  we iterate toward is ultimately an elegant 
and urgent statement, and is owned by all the right participants.  
 Craft a Consensus  Vision  
 Building consensus is a core consulting skill, and it requires delicacy, diplomacy, 
and resolve in equal measure. In the pursuit of an agile vision, we’ll frequently 
have to condense and modify language, prioritize objectives, and, in the pro-
cess, strip out some group’s favorite phrases and descope someone’s urgent 
need. At the Visualization stage, the  agile consultant  hasn’t been around long 
enough to build much trust, and frequently applies collaborative, participa-
tive practices with which teams are unaccustomed. To evolve from capability 
goals to an Agile Opportunity statement will require us to refine a backlog 
of possible future outcomes into a crisp and compelling statement. Again, the 

Chapter 5 | Visualize Success
70
consensus we seek at this point is not across the enterprise; it’s among the 
agility product owners and the selected domain representatives. 
 The dangers of “vision by committee” are obvious. Every team has its own 
language, its own pet phrases, and its own strategic priorities. Our first job 
as consultants is to keep the team’s eyes on the prize.  Skilled consultants  can 
facilitate a conversation that focuses on enterprise value rather than narrow 
interests. We can help the team move from the specific to the general. A capa-
bility goal that we mentioned earlier, to “integrate successfully with no passed 
defects 85% of the time,” may have great urgency for the application develop-
ment team and be perfectly suitable if that’s the target. For impact across the 
wider enterprise, this might be better articulated as “Deliver running, tested 
applications, fit for use, within an agreed time box.” 
 Let’s recap. We’ve worked with the product owner of the agility initiative, 
whether executive committee member or team leader. We’ve done some pre-
liminary process mapping or walked through the value stream, identified barri-
ers, and derived a set of capabilities the business would like to improve. We’ve 
communicated these expected capabilities to a select group of domain repre-
sentatives, and integrated their comments and ideas into revised versions of 
those objectives. We’ve gone through that cycle some number of times, and 
our product owners are ready to start crafting an Agile Opportunity state-
ment. This statement will be the vision upon which we will build consensus 
and enthusiasm. It will be addressed to the enterprise at whatever level we are 
engaged, from the team to the entire organization. 
 The crafting of an Agile  Opportunity  may require us to broaden the circle 
of participation. Human resource experts, technical specialists, and additional 
domain representatives can often offer insights and help avoid landmines. 
Marketing specialists or technical writers can bring critical writing and per-
suasion skills. We still want to apply our “barely sufficient” discipline to team 
participation, but we need to be deliberate when developing a communique 
that broadcasts change and disruption. 
 The ideal team for crafting an Opportunity vision includes an executive spon-
sor or product owner, representatives of the critical teams within our engage-
ment scope, and the writing and marketing talent to compose a compelling 
vision. The consultant plays a facilitation role, and often needs to reel the 
conversation back to the work at hand. My practice is to convene a single 
facilitated work session, with the right participants and a strict time box, in 
which the team commits to producing a final draft of an Agile Opportunity 
vision. Final, because we don’t have the luxury of eternal iteration, and draft, 
because we acknowledge that there will be feedback when we communicate, 
and attempt to evangelize, the vision. 

The Agile Consultant
71
 To illustrate my view of compelling Agile Opportunity  statements  , here are 
three examples, from informal to enterprise scale:
 The RED user experience design team will pilot the 
application of agile methods. We’ll learn and apply scrum 
techniques in their pilot project, build a prioritized back-
log, and iteratively present a valuable package of design 
functionality for customer review at each iteration. We’ll 
achieve scrum proficiency, including a steady and consis-
tent velocity and the ability to manage a backlog, within 
the next three months. We’ll use the learnings from our 
pilot to migrate scrum to five additional teams this year.  
 The GOLD software development team delivers quality 
software to our customers rapidly and responsively. We 
help customers articulate their needs and expectations, 
collaborate with them to ensure they can guide our 
development, and respond to their changing business 
needs. We present complete transparency of our prog-
ress through big visible indicators, and we work in cross-
functional teams that focus on business value instead of 
activities. Our products add value across the enterprise, 
resulting in improved agility and responsiveness for our 
company. We apply continuous improvement to ensure 
we refine our practices with every iteration, and col-
laborate openly within our team and with our custom-
ers. We will achieve these capabilities by applying scrum 
practices with discipline and craftsmanship.  
 The Blue Corporation has a long history of meeting 
customer needs in personal care products. We recog-
nize that our customer’s needs evolve constantly, and 
that competitors are developing and marketing innova-
tive products faster than us, and threatening our mar-
ket share. We intend to protect and grow our market 
share by becoming a more agile and responsive orga-
nization. We’ll build a strong connection and feedback 
loop with our customers through social media. We’ll 
apply that feedback to developing innovative products 
within months instead of years. By applying agile meth-
ods, we will drive innovative new products through our 
R&D function at twice the current speed. We will cre-
ate an agile software development community that can 
deliver quality applications on a regular cadence, with 
predictable and consistent speed. Our marketing team 
will be capable of developing a new campaign within 
two weeks, and our logistics chain will be prepared to 
put our products on shelves within a week of launch.  

Chapter 5 | Visualize Success
72
 By transitioning the enterprise to agile mind-set and 
methods, we’ll be capable of changing products quickly 
to meet evolving expectations, of marketing and deli-
vering those products faster and better than our 
competitors, and developing the supporting software 
rapidly and accurately. We’ll build a collaborative, 
low-friction culture that empowers teams to make 
decisions and take ownership of their outcomes. By 
building agility and adaptability into our enterprise, 
we’ll have fun and dominate our market.  
 These are modified examples of agile  visions I’ve worked with in the past. They 
reflect my style of writing and persuasion. I’m sure yours is better, because you 
are collaborating with your client and adapting to the client’s unique situation. 
As an agile  advisor , you’ve led the client to reveal its hopes and flaws, develop 
its own solutions, and convert the client participant into concrete capability 
goals that will inform its agile vision. By facilitating the team or the enterprise 
through the creation of a compelling opportunity vision, it has told you what 
success looks like. You’ve prepared the team or enterprise for the heavy lifting 
of building enthusiasm and commitment.  
 Execute Your Communication  Plan  
 Ineffective communication is the root of most business evils. In the worst 
cases, the strategic plan is impenetrable, objectives are unconnected, expec-
tations are obscure, and direction is muddled. The culture is accustomed to 
long periods of silence, indecision, or controversy from leadership. The com-
munications that randomly cascade from executives to managers, and from 
managers to staff, all seem like disconnected mandates rather than a coherent 
strategy. The response is more likely to be “here we go again” than it is to be 
enthusiasm, much less commitment. 
 An  agile evolution program  must begin with a clear and persuasive communi-
cation campaign.  Organizational inertia  is weighty, and won’t be moved by the 
issuance of an e-mail. If our Agile Opportunity is truly a Big Opportunity, it 
must stand out from the reams of corporate proclamations, and inspire teams 
to action. We’ll get a range of responses, from cynicism of “another fine pro-
gram” to enthusiasm from agile advocates. The feedback is the point; it makes 
visible the fears, concerns, and hopes of the  community  , whether team or 
enterprise. In true agile form, it exposes the weak spots, so we know what to 
prioritize. The community transitioning to agility will tell you how to succeed 
through your interactive campaign of communication and persuasion. 
 Long before our  Agile Opportunity vision  is composed, we should be advis-
ing our clients to consider their communication and momentum program. 
Through what venues will we be communicating with our enterprise? Should 

The Agile Consultant
73
we go beyond e-mails and surveys and create a Facebook page, a series of 
training videos, an executive presentation, or a “big room” work session? 
Are we asking for understanding, compliance, or feedback (or a bit of each)? 
Persuasive communication of an Agile Opportunity is our chance to demon-
strate executive support, evangelize the benefits, acknowledge the challenges, 
and build some momentum. 
 As we’ve seen in the State of Agile Surveys,  organizational inertia  is the major 
factor in agile adoption obstacles. The management team isn’t ready for “ser-
vant-leadership,” the culture is change-weary and skeptical about another new 
program, and the “way we do things here” has encouraged and rewarded 
bad habits. Moving just one team to a new conception of work is a challenge. 
Moving the enterprise to a new mind-set is Herculean. 
 I use the word  evangelizing , but bluntly, this is a marketing effort. As in all such, 
we must think about our target market, our appeal to their interests, and the 
behavior we hope to influence. While I believe the Agile Opportunity vision 
addresses the entire enterprise audience, framing it will differ in IT, where the 
pilot will take place, and in accounting, which won’t be immediately affected. 
IT wants to hear, probably from a technical manager, that it will be supported 
through adoption, that there’s benefit to the department, and that there’s 
nothing to fear. Accounting, like all other functional departments and all indi-
viduals, wants to know how this affects its members. 
 At the enterprise level, my recommendation would be to select a small team, 
with representation from human resources (HR) and marketing, to build the 
campaign. The individual team can have this conversation over lunch, but once 
we grow beyond, we need to be sophisticated in our approach. HR will guide 
us to appropriate language, and marketing expertise can add flash that makes 
this more than just another e-mail or program. We’ve already derived an Agile 
Opportunity message, but to complete it, we need to answer the questions 
I posed earlier. A broad set of communication channels, from the executive 
presentation to the social media  campaign  , and from video tutorials to sched-
uled training sessions, will reach different audiences with different interests 
and learning styles. Executive support, through team visits and all-hands pre-
sentations, can be a burst of jet fuel to momentum, especially if the message is 
positive, honest, and passionate. 
 The Big Opportunity  is an opportunity lost if its communication is not compel-
ling. Consultants have a large role to play in the framing of the message, due 
to our agile domain expertise. Sensitivity to agile theory, practice, and language 
will be critical. Starting to acclimate the enterprise to a new language and a 
new mind-set begins here. Consistency is also important, as inconsistent delivery 
of the agile vision will lead to rumor, speculation and negative interpretations. 
Inconsistent messaging often occurs when the message is cascaded verbally from 
top down, as in “tell your teams that we’re going agile and it’ll be great!.” We must 
also campaign honestly. While I talk about this as a marketing campaign, there’s 

Chapter 5 | Visualize Success
74
a difference between manipulating and influencing. Agile is transparent, and our 
communication should be as well. Good agile vision messages emphasize the 
positives but acknowledge the challenges. We know this will be hard; we should 
tell them so. We also know that it works, and that teams and enterprises that 
adopt it are happier and more productive. If the agile consultant ensures that 
a compelling Agile Opportunity has been envisioned, articulated, and commu-
nicated, he’s done a service to the client. He’s also done himself a favor, having 
ferreted out the initial set of challenges, resisters, and advocates. 
 Some agile evolutions are team-focused, some are enterprise-wide. In either 
case, there is a natural progression from vision to roadmap to backlog. When 
the project is an agile evolution, the items that land in the backlog are improve-
ment features, elements of the value chain that we intend to enhance with 
agile practices. The enterprise can’t get to an improvement backlog without 
a vision, whether accepted over lunch or cascaded through a marketing cam-
paign. In Chapter   6 we’ll discuss the development of a roadmap, based on the 
vision we’ve just articulated and circulated. Without an overarching, vision, the 
roadmap is just a set of tasks. The  Agile Opportunity vision  opens the door for 
us to observe more directly, and to create a roadmap that reflects the client 
enterprise’s consensus on the capabilities they  expect .  
 Summary 
 Every agile project begins with a vision that defines the guiding goals and objec-
tives of the effort. The same must be true for an agile evolution project; the 
consultant and the sponsor must agree on the business reason for the effort, 
the results we’re expecting, and the path we choose to take. That path may be 
long and winding, and it may lead us to unexpected destinations, but the vision 
should be constant and consensual. Agile consultants help their clients under-
stand the strategic meaning of the evolution, and help them craft and execute a 
communication plan to build understanding and commitment across the enter-
prise. Organizational inertia is strong. Only a persuasive vision and communica-
tion program can turn inertia into momentum. Agile consultants omit this key 
activity at their peril, and at the peril of the client’s agile expectations.  

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_6
 C H A P T E R 
 Observe and 
Plan 
 Every agilist knows that, when developing products using agile practices,  plan-
ning  , design, development, and testing are no longer sequential, as in traditional 
waterfall methods, but are occurring in parallel and being refined incremen-
tally. The same is true for the visualization, observation, and planning work 
we’ve been discussing in these chapters. Although necessarily presented 
sequentially, in real client engagements we typically don’t have the luxury of 
completing a fully vetted agile vision or roadmap before we begin to engage in 
the development of agile teams. Although some agile transitions are driven by 
a clear strategic consensus at the executive level, in the majority of cases agile 
engagements start at the grassroots level. Agile consultants are more likely 
to be tasked with getting teams transitioned to agile and coaching them to 
consistent delivery and velocity than to develop strategic agility and respon-
siveness across the organization. Sponsors usually expect  agile consultants  , 
and especially agile coaches, to jump right in and start training, persuading, and 
guiding teams to adopt agile practices. Although I’ve broken out exploration, 
visualization, and planning into separate chapters for clarity, the reality is usu-
ally much different. Don’t misinterpret the serial order presented in this book 
as a sequence of start-to-finish events.  Agile consultants engage  with agility, 
which means that we’re refining our exploration, visualization, and planning 
incrementally as we go. 
6

Chapter 6 | Observe and Plan
76
 Figure  6-1 illustrates the idea of incremental refinement, from vision to 
roadmap to backlog. Whether the desired outcome is a software application 
or the introduction of agility to an organization, a guiding vision leads to 
the development of a product roadmap, which in turn is decomposed into 
the stories or features that make up the product backlog. As we progress 
through the iterative development of the product, we discover and experi-
ence circumstances that require us to loop back and revise the roadmap and 
vision. Ideally, the vision remains relatively constant, the roadmap is more 
fluid, while we expect the features and their priorities to change and evolve 
as we progress. All will evolve based on the reality we encounter, but when 
the vision changes radically it’s usually prudent to revisit the entire effort 
and make sure we still understand what we’re aiming for. Again, all is not as 
tidy as it is depicted; roadmaps breed epics (or the other way round), which 
are decomposed into features, and every element can change and evolve 
rapidly and continuously.  
Vision
Roadmap
Backlog
 Figure 6-1.   Agile roadmap sequence  
 Since agile consultants often begin at the team adoption level rather than 
the enterprise level, we have the opportunity to observe intimately both 
the enablers and the inhibitors of agility. The narratives we get from execu-
tive sponsors rarely disclose the tactical barriers we discover once engaged. 
After a few weeks of coaching teams to adopt basic agile practices, we often 
encounter disjointed or absent tool sets, counter-agile management behav-
ior, and ingrained waterfall thinking that constrains the enterprise’s ability to 
progress. Within the  teams themselves, the willingness and capability to adopt 
agile practices will vary widely. That’s why, although executive consensus is 
a significant enabler of agility by clearly demonstrating the support of man-
agement and the strategic results expected, it’s no substitute for team-level 
observation. 
 

The Agile Consultant
77
 Agile Exposes Obstacles  
 Agile methods are simple to learn but difficult to instill and sustain. Not only do 
the practices of daily stand-ups, iteration reviews, and retrospectives uncover 
dysfunctional practices within the team, they also expose weaknesses at every 
connection point. If the development team is working toward an iteration 
goal, but  information technology (IT)  operations is uncooperative or offering 
limited “sandbox” and deployment services, we’ll uncover that as soon as we 
try to develop, test, or promote a package. If the  Project Management Office 
(PMO)  is talking agile but still expects a task-oriented,  Gantt-style project 
plan  , we’ll have to deal with that obstacle soonest. If management is calling 
itself agile but refusing to let the team “waste time” on retrospectives, we risk 
losing the kaizen benefits of the agile feedback loop. If the project manager is 
now called a  product owner  but has none of the customer intimacy or busi-
ness knowledge required to play that role, then we are engaging in agile theat-
rics, with little chance for positive change. If our client enterprise is trying to 
force-fit agile development into a waterfall toolset, we’ll need to engage with 
the entire software selection, implementation, and support chain to encour-
age adoption of appropriate technology. All of these impediments are outside 
the team, but even the most eager and capable team can’t benefit from agility 
until we address these external obstacles. 
 For the agile consultant,  observation  is active, not passive. Even as we’re in 
the thick of daily coaching and consulting, we must be cataloging the obstruc-
tions thrown up by the enterprise environment. Daily stand-ups will quickly 
reveal impediments to the current iteration, but, more important for agile 
consultants, they’ll also tell us where we need to concentrate our advisory 
efforts. Scrummasters look for, and strive to solve, immediate impediments to 
the commitments of the current  iteration  . The wise agile consultant is building 
an improvement backlog that extends far beyond the team, and incorporates 
the cultural, historical, and technical issues that impede evolution. Addressing 
these externalities, rather than simply focusing on today’s deliverables, differ-
entiates the agile consultant from the adoption-focused coach. 
 We’ve reviewed many organizational change frameworks, from  Kotter’s accel-
erators  to  Cohn’s ADAPT (Awareness, Desire, Ability, Promotion, Transfer) 
structure  . I’m a fan of the ADKAR approach, from which Cohn built his ADAPT 
techniques. ADKAR, which is an acronym for Awareness, Desire, Knowledge, 
Ability, and  Reinforcement  , is a helpful way of thinking about agile evolution, at 
both the team and the enterprise level. It’s incumbent on the consultant, once 
she’s begun to observe obstacles like the ones outlined previously, to consider 
solving them by applying an ADKAR mind-set. For each interface, from man-
agement to IT operations, the consultant should walk through the ADKAR 
framework mentally and ask herself where the problem lies. 

Chapter 6 | Observe and Plan
78
 ADKAR serves as a  simple root cause analysis technique  which allows 
the consultant to consider the people, processes, and systems in question 
and develop a solution approach that is connected to the real issue. If, 
for instance, the  PMO is not aware that agility requires it to abandon the 
traditional Gantt chart, the consultant’s challenge is to raise awareness. 
This may be accomplished through conversation, education, or examples 
of previous projects that were planned to the most granular task level, 
yet still failed. If the PMO team is aware of the global migration to agile, 
and understands that agile is succeeding elsewhere, but lacks the desire to 
change, consultants must move from education to persuasion, by focusing 
on our compelling Agile Opportunity, by celebrating every win at the team 
level, and by motivating the PMO team with a team vision that addresses 
its fears and concerns, both organizational and personal. Lack of knowl-
edge is clearly a significant handicap, as it breeds rumor, mythology, and 
uncertainty. Consultants must engage in continuous education, from the 
executive to the individual level, both in formal training settings and in 
every one-to-one conversation. I find that I can do more to educate reluc-
tant executives or managers with a “chalk talk” on a whiteboard than in 
a crowded classroom. Face to face in front of a whiteboard, I can explain 
how agility affects their specific role, and help them understand the gen-
eral advantages of agility to the enterprise. 
 Mature  consultants  address the ability challenge, not only through coach-
ing and mentoring on agile practices but by observing how each individual 
affected is rising to the challenge of transition. Many developers, for example, 
have technical ability to spare, but have personal concerns with practices like 
pair programming or daily stand-ups. Managers may have outstanding leader-
ship skills but are reluctant to surrender their control over teams or their 
need for predictive plans and estimates. When we address ability challenges, 
we need to look beyond the questions of technical or management capabili-
ties and examine, with patience and compassion, the personal ability to share 
responsibility and to abandon false beliefs in prescience and predictability. Too 
many coaches operate solely at the practice-adoption level, and lack the con-
sultative skills to guide individuals and teams through the thickets of pride, ego, 
power, and insecurity. While a clear and compelling Agile Opportunity state-
ment is helpful, it takes delicacy, empathy, and individualized attention to guide 
each human being through the adjustments required for agility to take root. 
Coaches and consultants who preach the fiction that “just doing the practices 
will propagate change” are discounting the decades of research that illustrate 
the deep complexity of transitioning both organizations and individuals. Even 
teams that are following every letter and concept of agile practice will quickly 
find that team-based agility is not enough, if the enterprise that surrounds 
them lacks the attributes of  ADKAR  . 

The Agile Consultant
79
 We’ll talk about the Reinforcement element of ADKAR in later chapters 
when we address the challenges of sustaining agility. Suffice it to say here that 
many successful adoptions have “snapped back” to cultural norms swiftly once 
the consultant is gone, and that the sustainability of agile evolution is depen-
dent on the actions we take at the outset of our engagement to ensure that 
acceptance, desire, and ability are real and internally motivated, and not just a 
temporary response to external pressures and mandates.  
 Planning the Roadmap to  Agility  
 The roadmap to agility is one of the consultant’s most important tools. Not 
only does it position us to set expectations and begin to outline time boxes, 
it also sets big, visible goals for our teams. When the outcome expected is 
team adoption, the roadmap reminds the team of its commitments, time 
boxes, and the enterprise’s expectations. At the team level, a typical roadmap, 
as illustrated in Figure  6-2 , will present an iterative approach to adoption, 
proposing, for instance, that we’ll guide three teams to consistent quality, 
delivery, and agility within the first six months, and that we’ll propagate those 
learnings to four other teams over the following six months. This simple 
roadmap is honest but incomplete. A more definitive roadmap will include 
some of the connection points mentioned above, and remind the spon-
sor that guiding teams to successful adoption includes moving the enter-
prise, at least at the critical junctions, to understand, accept, and encourage 
agile methods. The epics that might issue forth from such a roadmap will, 
of course, include training, coaching, and measuring the team’s progress, but 
also might include epics such as “As an agile developer, I need an isolated 
development environment so I can develop and test my product without 
risk of interrupting production systems.” Roadmaps that don’t include any 
mention of enterprise obstacles create a false narrative, set the wrong 
expectations, and ignore the focus areas that will have the most impact on 
agile success. Of course, we can’t know every obstacle upfront, and so road-
maps and epics will necessarily evolve as we observe and experience. That’s 
a core concept of agility. We can, however, anticipate some of the more 
obvious impediments, such as reluctant PMOs and siloed functional teams, 
and ensure that we’re thoughtfully observing all the intersections so we can 
foresee some of the traffic jams we’re likely to encounter. Clients hire agile 
consultants because they assume we can, through our experience, anticipate 
and address some of the ubiquitous challenges they’re likely to face. Failing 
to advise clients about the challenges and disruptions ahead is, put simply, 
malpractice, as it would be if a doctor tells his patient that a heart transplant 
will be painless and risk-free.  

Chapter 6 | Observe and Plan
80
 At the enterprise level, developing a roadmap to  agility  is exponentially more 
challenging. The impediments at the management level are ingrained, historical, 
and cultural. The agile consultant engaged at this level must have the depth of 
business experience to grasp the client’s business model, its strategic advan-
tages, its processes and personalities. She must be able to follow the value 
stream, understand the legacy cultural remnants and artifacts that impede agil-
ity, and observe organizational disconnects, with neutrality and sensitivity. She 
must have the diplomatic skills required to tell senior executives that “they’re 
doing it wrong” without upsetting egos or losing support. Most important, she 
must be able to highlight dysfunctions and inhibitors at the management level 
in a persuasive manner, motivating leaders to listen and heed rather than to 
escort her out of the building. 
 Constructing an enterprise agility roadmap is an extension of the Agile 
Opportunity visualization exercise we examined earlier. The examples of 
enterprise visions that we reviewed in Chapter   5 are aspirational, inspira-
tional, and, frankly, ambiguous. They describe the attributes of an agile future, 
and some of the capabilities the enterprise hopes to gain but don’t present 
any details on how we’ll get there. The  enterprise-level consultant  who has 
assembled a guiding coalition, helped the enterprise develop an agile  vision  , 
 Figure 6-2.  Project roadmap  
 

The Agile Consultant
81
and helped communicate a consistent and persuasive message now has the 
responsibility to take that vision a step further and encourage the leadership 
team to build a roadmap of the features, time boxes, and investments associ-
ated with its agile journey. 
 Opportunity visions and roadmaps have very different purposes, and skilled 
consultants should help leaders turn their vision statements into epics that 
describe the outcomes and expenditures they envision. A vision statement 
may inform the enterprise that “BIG Corporation will be agile and responsive 
to user needs, based on feedback obtained from our markets and social media 
relationships,” but it gives no hint of how we’ll accomplish that. Agility epics, 
on the other hand, can state that “As a marketing manager, I want to see a 
summary of all social media interactions every morning so I can plan for mar-
ket and customer responsiveness.” Part of the complexity of enterprise-level 
migrations is that each department, silo, and function will have its own agile 
epics to tell and may need significant help to tell them. 
 Traditional PMO  s may know that agility is in their future, and may accept that 
their predictive methods aren’t working. That doesn’t mean that they’ll be able 
to articulate the changes required to get there without the consultant’s guid-
ance. It may be obvious to us, as experienced agilists, that the PMO may have 
an epic like “As a PMO leader, I need access to burndown charts and scrum 
boards so I can understand the team’s progress against commitments,” but 
agile rookies won’t come up with epics like this themselves. Functional depart-
ments, such as accounting or logistics, may be surprised to learn that changes 
to the software development function will affect them, and surely won’t know 
how to create epics illustrating that. The role of the consultant in guiding, 
mentoring, and coaching leaders in the development of an agile roadmap is 
essential, and we haven’t even mentioned the likely disputes or contradictions, 
in which one function’s aspirations directly collide with another’s. 
 Many consultants fall into the trap of concluding that the challenges, and the 
solutions, for every client will look like those of their previous clients. I’ve seen 
consultants “go on automatic,” or jump to solutions before they’ve thoroughly 
observed and analyzed the particular scenario in front of them. We can’t arbi-
trarily assume that the challenges we find in one organization will turn up in 
another. That’s why I named this chapter “Observe and Plan.” In agility transi-
tions, as in all agile projects,  planning is based on our experiences and learnings 
as we do the work. Consultants face a paradox; our clients expect us to bring 
the knowledge and experience we’ve gained in other engagements, yet to 
also honor their unique situation. They want us to have the foresight to help 
them avoid pitfalls, yet are rightfully touchy about “canned solutions.” Because 
we’re billable by the hour, clients often expect us to reach solutions quickly, 
but, especially in agile evolution projects, we can’t solve challenges we haven’t 
identified. Observation, and the ability to put those observations into context, 
is the agile advisor’s indispensable skill. 

Chapter 6 | Observe and Plan
82
 In the debate about “big bang” versus incremental agile evolution, I’m clearly in 
the incrementalist camp. Agile evolution is too complex, even at the team level, 
to expect the enterprise to migrate from a predictive mind-set, adopt a set 
of new practices, work through the initial bumps, and identify roadblocks and 
impediments in one fell swoop. Mike Cohn does a great job of outlining the 
pros and cons of each approach, 1 so I won’t recount them here. Many teams 
and organizations have already tried agile and failed, or have been through 
serial “change of the month” efforts, so, on top of the challenges I’ve laid out 
here, we often face a skeptical and weary atmosphere. Most clients want to 
see improvement on a very short time scale, and so part of our work is to 
instill patience in our sponsors and inform them of the realities of wading 
through the swamps of misperceptions and broken practices, which hamper 
the road to agility. Agile evolution is an iterative and incremental process, and 
is best run as an agile project itself, using the vision, roadmap, and backlog 
approach outlined above. 
 It’s no accident, in my view, that the lean practices that underlie agility were 
initially perfected in Japan. I see the agile journey as a  Zen exercise  , requiring us 
to shed the fictions of control and predictability and embrace daily adaptation 
to reality. This quality also applies to scrummasters and agile consultants; if we 
approach the agile evolution with a ticking clock in our heads, with frustration 
and irritation when the teams stumble over obstacles, or with a preconceived 
notion about the enterprise’s ultimate level of agility, we send the wrong mes-
sages to our teams, and we drive ourselves nuts. The proper attitude to agile 
 guidance  is patience, adaptability, receptiveness to reality, and empathy for our 
fellow voyagers. By observing the real conditions in the enterprise, adapting to 
them through our teaching and coaching, and mentoring our teams with com-
posure and compassion, we model the qualities that will help teams evolve to 
a better version of themselves.  
 Summary 
 Observation and analysis are the core consulting skills. Mature consultants 
understand that every enterprise, culture, and personality is unique, and that 
an ounce of observation is worth a pound of premature diagnosis. Experienced 
consultants are always in observation mode, listening more than they speak 
and allowing the organization to devise its own solutions and get out of its 
own traps. Assuming that all engagements will be the same, and will be subject 
to the same sets of practices and methods, is a rookie mistake that does dis-
service to the client and the consultant. 
 1 Mike Cohn,  Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum (Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2010). 

The Agile Consultant
83
 Every enterprise’s unique characteristics and challenges must be analyzed 
with care, and the plans that come from this diligent observation must fit the 
circumstances. In short, inspect and adapt. Guiding teams and organizations 
to agility is a Zen exercise, in which restraint, compassion, and patience pay 
off ultimately, even when the customer wants to “get agile now!” The devel-
opment of a broad overall roadmap to agility sets the proper expectations 
with the sponsor and, although it must change as we learn and adapt, serves 
as a guide to the agile journey and enables us to ensure that we’ve created 
a timeline that’s realistic and achievable based on the real conditions in the 
enterprise. 

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_7
 C H A P T E R 
 Lead Teams to 
Agility 
 “The team is always smarter than even the smartest individual.” We’ve heard this 
proverb so frequently that it’s become a cliché. But is it true? And, if so, why is 
that the case? Einstein had no team around him when he developed the general 
theory of relativity, nor did Newton when he discovered his fundamental laws of 
physics. From Galileo to Picasso, lone geniuses have advanced our knowledge and 
civilization through individual efforts. On the other hand, from The Manhattan 
Project 1 to the Beatles, and from Jobs and Wozniak to Watson and Crick, 2 the 
power of teamwork is undeniable. Even Newton, the typical example of the lone 
genius, stated that he “stood on the shoulders of giants” to make his calculations. 
 The Fundamentals of Teamwork 
 We’ve seen earlier the concepts of teamwork developed by Katzenbach and 
Smith. 3 To refresh, their study concluded that teams perform best under the 
following conditions:
• 
 Small number  
• 
 Complementary skills  
7
 1 The U.S. wartime effort to develop the atomic bomb.  
 2 The final discoverers of DNA.  
 3 Jon R. Katzenbach and Douglas E. Smith,  The Wisdom of Teams (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 1993).  

Chapter 7 | Lead Teams to Agility
86
• 
 Common, meaningful purpose  
• 
 Common set of specific performance goals  
• 
 Commonly agreed working approach  
• 
 Mutual accountability  
 These concepts, articulated by Katzenbach and Smith and confirmed by numerous 
studies since, back up the conclusion that teams with these attributes are more 
effective than lone geniuses in achieving their objectives. 4 Let’s examine how these 
characteristics apply in an agile context, and how they inform the behavior of agile 
consultants as they lead teams, and their managers, to embrace agility. 
 Small Number 
 Agile or not, small  teams have certain attributes that make them more conducive 
to high performance. Anyone who has tried to schedule a meeting with a large 
group of busy individuals knows that the simplest logistics become increasingly 
complex the bigger the group. While I’m a fan of big room planning, with repre-
sentation from across the enterprise, these large gatherings often require weeks 
of groundwork just to get the group into the same room. In a high-pressure, high-
expectation environment, we don’t have weeks to wait for the team to make a 
decision or allocate immediate tasks. Small teams can meet frequently and (rela-
tively) easily, and can convene emergency sessions to address the unexpected sit-
uations that arise every day in an innovative product development environment. 
 Communication  also becomes more challenging with larger  teams  . Two people 
have a direct link, three require multiple links, and six need a complex network 
of interactions just to ensure that everyone gets the message. Even in teams 
that small, the message often gets garbled, as each individual re-interprets and 
retransmits the narrative. A small team can gather in a room, and everyone can 
hear the issue and collaborate on the solution, while large, distributed teams 
require more channels of communication, often including e-mails, phone calls, 
web chats, and other communication avenues that are not suited for immediate 
action. These alternate channels reduce the team’s ability to interact, as anyone 
who has attended a web call can attest. The Agile Principles tell us that:
 The most efficient and effective method of conveying information to and 
within a development team is face-to-face conversation. 
 While today’s global, distributed teams can make face-to-face communica-
tion challenging, the ideal still stands. With the product owner in the room 
representing the client, and with a small, empowered, cross-skilled team, we 
 4 Michael Klug and James P. Bagrow,  Understanding the Group Dynamics and Success of Teams 
(Vermont: Department of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Vermont, 2016).  

The Agile Consultant
87
can usually solve problems rapidly and come to consensus efficiently, without 
weeks of back-and-forth debate across multiple, impersonal mediums. 
 In a large group, it’s common that many of the attendees, even if they come from 
the same enterprise, don’t know each other, and are unfamiliar with the roles, 
responsibilities, and personalities of the people in the room. Many such sessions 
require a round-robin, in which we go around the room and describe our roles, 
often with the most cursory overview. In small teams, we incrementally gain inti-
mate knowledge of our teammates’ skills, capabilities, and personal attributes. 
We progressively build trust, and migrate to openness and honesty as we work 
through challenges and triumphs together. We learn the habits and proclivi-
ties, the unique skills and deficiencies, and the human characteristics that define 
our teammates. After a while, especially in persistent teams, we can predict the 
responses to a particular situation around the room and adjust our communi-
cation to the various sensitivities of our comrades. By building this trust and 
openness, we can collaborate effectively to address challenges and obstacles 
without having to pussyfoot around each other or soften our messages to avoid 
offense. Avoiding offense, of course, is critical for trust, but in teams that know 
each other and have been through the fire together, we instinctively learn how 
to frame issues to encourage teamwork rather than set off emotions. 
 Once we’ve developed this level of trust and honesty, it becomes easier to 
determine if we have the right skills in the room, or if we need to reach out 
to other experts or specialists to help us deliver our commitments. We can 
openly state that Michele is not the database expert we need for a particular 
challenge without insulting her. We can come to the conclusion that our train-
ing commitments need augmentation from the Training Department without 
humiliating our teammate who “sort of” has training experience. More impor-
tant, the individuals themselves can volunteer that their skills or experience 
are not at the level required, thus sparing us the tiptoeing that this conversa-
tion would require in a large team of virtual strangers. 
 In an agile context, in which we have a defined  time box   in which we commit to 
specific deliverables, honesty, openness, and trust are indispensable. We simply 
don’t have the luxury of dancing around delicate feelings when we’re striving to 
develop innovative, emergent products. We never purposefully offend, but nei-
ther can we avoid issues that are impeding our progress. Small teams, with cohe-
siveness, collaboration, and trust, can call them as they see them, and uncover 
the flaws in our thinking and our process. Without that open exchange we’ll 
never approach kaizen, let alone the perfection for which we ultimately strive.  
 Complementary Skills 
 In the typical enterprise, skills are clustered in functional silos. The developers sit, 
and work, together. The operations team has its own responsibilities, and reports 
to an operations manager. The same holds true for database experts, network 

Chapter 7 | Lead Teams to Agility
88
teams, and quality assurance teams. Each functional, or component, team has 
its own chain of command, and its own goals and metrics. When a project is 
identified, temporary teams are pulled together across functions. They meet and 
collaborate on the project at hand, and then dissolve back into their respective 
silos until the next cross-functional project arises. This structure goes back to the 
industrial age, when individuals had very specific, repetitive tasks to perform, and, 
as long as each individual performed his task as expected, the final product rolled 
out the door. In fact, this separation of duties, along with interchangeable parts, is 
heralded as part of the industrial revolution that changed the world. 
 In the industrial  enterprise  , and in the administrative functions that grew to sup-
port it, this specialization made perfect sense. Specialist teams can be shared 
among multiple product lines, thus sparing the enterprise from hiring special-
ists for each product, increasing the expense and creating utilization problems. 
Specialists who work together can help each other, learn from and teach each 
other, and keep evolving efficiency within their speciality. As they enhance their 
capabilities, they can set standards of performance that lead to higher quality, eas-
ier handoffs, and more uniform practices and processes. All of these capabilities 
are focused on cost reduction. By carving out specialty, or functional, teams, we 
can keep the expertise in a controlled, closely managed team of shared resources 
that can be deployed as needed but kept together for ease of management, train-
ing, and cost control. We pay for this in the form of multiple handoffs, which 
decrease efficiency and increase the chances of miscommunication and error. 
 In the post-industrial age,  cost control  is still important but is trumped by 
innovation and customer responsiveness. Of course, costs need to be man-
aged, but, as the management axiom goes, you can’t cost-cut your way to 
product leadership. From Apple to Tesla, customers will pay a premium price 
for distinctive and unique products. The current marketplace values products, 
even if they are centered on hardware, that have a broad ecosystem of ser-
vices and applications associated with them. Building the best smartphone 
hardware is great, but it is useless without great services and apps on offer, 
and this trend will only accelerate as the Internet of Things takes off. When 
even the automobile becomes a platform for software, it’s clear that the pure 
hardware play is fading, to be replaced by physical products that are merely 
the platform for an array of additional, software-powered capabilities. 
 As hardware products become platforms, and as innovation and responsiveness 
become the differentiator, the industrial model of organization starts to show its 
age. The hierarchical, siloed structure is becoming obsolete as fast as the last gen-
eration of smartphones, and a more flexible, cross-functional, and self-managed 
workforce becomes the pathway to competitive advantage. Cross-functional 
teams, rather than silos of specialists, have been demonstrated to enhance the 
creativity and customer focus required in today’s marketplace. Lean manufactur-
ing practices have proven that those closest to the actual work have the most 
insight into efficiency and innovation. As firms experiment with this new cross-
functional structure, certain attributes become clear, as do certain challenges. 

The Agile Consultant
89
 Cross-functional, or complementary-skilled crews,  enable the enterprise to 
build high-performance teams that contain all the capabilities necessary to 
take product ideas or new features from inception to completion. A team that 
includes analysts, developers, testers, technical writers, and customer represen-
tatives can take a product from ideation through quality assurance, and deliver 
a running, tested feature set to the ultimate customer without having to beg 
for outside resources, wait for other specialties to become available, or accu-
mulate stores of work-in-progress while waiting for testers or documentation 
writers to be borrowed from functional silos. This is the ideal, of course, as 
most agile teams don’t have every specialty required, and still have to wait or 
borrow, but teams that can take ownership of the product development cycle 
and avoid the serial, assembly-line practices of the industrial age have been 
shown to be more creative and invested than those in disconnected silos. 
 When we discuss complementary skills, many people think only of the techni-
cal or specialty diversity described earlier, but it’s also important to consider 
interpersonal and collaborative skills as well. Some team members are great 
problem-solvers and decision makers, while others are stumped and frus-
trated by the smallest obstacle. Some are talkative and participatory, while 
others are timid and reserved. Some are argumentative and blunt, while oth-
ers are collaborative and discrete. The best teams have diversity of personality 
as well as technical specialty, as each of these personality types adds some-
thing useful to team dynamics. The opportunity to watch the diverse skills and 
attributes in action, to learn from those who see the problem at hand in a 
different light, is itself a key strength of agile teams, both in the technical and 
in the interpersonal realms. The agile consultant who advises the enterprise in 
the composition of agile teams does well to ensure that technical and inter-
personal diversity is encouraged, and that the ultimate objective for each team 
member is to develop a broader range of skills through exposure to her peers, 
and through the daily interaction of solving problems together. 
 Of course, most teams will need to reach out to other functional special-
ists to deliver a complete solution. Not many teams will have the luxury of a 
full-time technical architect, writer, or training specialist. Agile teams need to 
develop practices around coordinating with other specialists, who are often 
still working in functional silos, in order to fill team gaps and satisfy the cus-
tomer’s expectations. These interfaces can be fraught, as managers in silos 
attempt to ration their expertise or protect their positions. Agile leaders, such 
as  scrummasters   or product owners, often have to run interference in these 
situations, so team members can focus on their commitments without getting 
drawn into political disputes. Agile consultants should encourage teams to 
develop the required skills within the team when possible, and to reach out 
for expertise only when required. Teams that have grown up in functionally 
siloed organizations often stop forward progress as soon as they encounter 
an obstacle, before trying to design a creative solution within the team, a 
practice that only raises resistance and skepticism from functional managers. 

Chapter 7 | Lead Teams to Agility
90
Agile teams are often surprised at their ability to figure their own way out of 
the box, and guiding them to success in this is a major triumph for the agile 
consultant. Agile consultants should aim to develop “generalizing specialists,” 
team members who have distinct areas of competence but also, through inter-
action with their fellows and insight into other specialties on the team, build 
increasingly deeper understanding of the capabilities required to become self-
organizing and self-managing. 
 Common, Meaningful Purpose 
 We’ve devoted much space to discussing the importance of a guiding vision 
for the migration to agility, but each agile project we undertake must also have 
a clear and compelling vision of its own. Teams need a meaningful purpose big-
ger than themselves, bigger than the daily grind of paying the bills, to inspire 
them to persevere and collaborate. They need to feel that purpose in their 
hearts as well as their heads in order to achieve high performance. The Agile 
Opportunity vision we’ve discussed is an overarching, organizational vision, 
but teams need their own vision as well, one that suits their personalities 
both individually and as a group. As I illustrated above, roadmaps and back-
logs derive from a consequential vision, particularly one that is developed and 
refined by the team itself. Visions that are handed down from on high, with 
no input or participation from the team, are interpreted as marching orders 
rather than inspiration. If the organization's objective is to “develop a new 
platform for processing insurance claims,” the team can then derive a vision 
that articulates its aspirations for its role in achieving that mission. A cross-
functional agile team may aspire to deliver the most running, tested features 
in the least number of sprints possible, thus pushing itself to high performance 
while supporting the enterprise goal. 
 Words are slippery, with the possibility of each team member interpreting any 
vision statement differently and approaching the achievement of any objec-
tive in a different way. It’s important that the entire team creates and inter-
prets the project or product vision the same way. It’s also important that the 
vision is concrete and measurable, with a binary outcome of achieved, or not. 
Vague visions, like “be the best team” or “create superior products,” don’t 
lend themselves to objective measurement or a clear outcome at the finish 
line. An agile consultant can help by coaching the team to develop a product 
vision that defines a SMART 5  goal  that also contains both a hint of inspiration 
and a bit of a stretch. Ideally, I hope to see an agile team develop a product 
vision that its members can articulate and defend with passion, that they can 
refer to as a guiding principle, and that can drive them to greater achievement 
in their personal and professional goals. 
 5 Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, Time boxed.  

The Agile Consultant
91
 Common Set of Specific Performance Goals 
 In agile, the backlog is our version of the project plan, but, rather than recit-
ing a list of tasks and activities, it defines a set of features that add value for 
the client and can be articulated and committed to by the team. This product 
backlog is our set of specific goals, and the roadmap and release plan is our 
visible articulation of what we’ve committed to deliver, and on what schedule. 
This granular set of goals is not only  SMART  but is also customer-focused and 
value-based. The goals are defined in such a way that they enable the team to 
demonstrate progress incrementally to both the customer and the broader 
organization, so the team can celebrate “small wins” and demonstrate that 
agility works. 
 To create a true product backlog, some team attributes are required. The team 
members must agree on the features or stories that comprise the product, 
and they must phrase them in a way that expresses the specific customer 
they’re delivering value for, or the role or persona they address. The team 
must also agree, with the help of its product owner or business representa-
tive, on the relative priority of the backlog items, and on the level of effort 
required to achieve them. The practices of writing user stories, assigning them 
relative priority, and estimating the effort required, are clearly described by 
Cohn, Schwaber, and other authors I’ve cited, and I won’t repeat them here. 
These basic mechanics of agile practice should be well understood by any agile 
coach or consultant, so reiterating them here is not our goal. We are, rather, 
focused on their importance from a team perspective. Skilled agile consultants 
know that the process of defining stories or features, coming to consensus on 
the roles, actions, and results that they represent, and deciding how to groom 
them to acceptable length and clarity is where the team dynamic is built and 
solidified. When a team looks at a large product vision, and collaboratively 
decomposes that into epics, stories, and priorities, it builds its understanding 
of each other’s skills, personal  attributes  , and points of view that then enables 
its members to work in increasing harmony toward a common objective. As 
often stated, the plan is nothing; planning is everything. While I think this is an 
overstatement in the agile context, where the backlog is a critical artifact of 
our work that guides everything we achieve, I do believe that the act of plan-
ning is the element that solidifies the team and creates the knowledge, intimacy, 
and sense of shared purpose that creates a high-performance environment. 
 Those consultants who have coached a planning poker exercise have seen first 
hand what I mean. The story point estimating process is significant in itself, as 
it sets the expectations for effort required and gives us a quantifiable metric 
by which we can measure progress. Equally important is the team interaction. 
When one team member estimates a story as 5 points, and another estimates 
it as 40, it opens a dialog that enhances team understanding of the story, sur-
faces issues and technical challenges that may not be explicit, and teaches the 

Chapter 7 | Lead Teams to Agility
92
team how to reach a consensus without argument or drama. The agile con-
sultant should be a role model for neutrality, and for managing the emotions 
and egos of the team. The consultant who can guide the team to a productive 
discussion that uncovers the risks while acknowledging the expertise of the 
players leaves behind a team that can work through its disagreements in a 
productive manner. Once the team has reached consensus on the backlog, 
including features, roles, estimates, and priorities, it has achieved the clear set 
of specific performance goals that were  identified  as a critical success factor 
by Katzenbach and Smith back in 1993.  
 Commonly Agreed Working Approach 
 For teams adopting scrum, or  extreme programing (XP)  , or  test-driven 
development (TDD)  , the  commonly agreed working approach  should be 
obvious; we follow the rules of the agile discipline we’ve chosen. This, as any 
experienced agilist can attest, is a fantasy. I’ve never encountered a team, or 
an enterprise, that doesn’t have unique circumstances, unique personalities, 
and unique constraints. I’ve also never encountered two teams, or two enter-
prises, that apply their selected agile discipline in exactly the same way. A 
team building smartphones may require longer iteration lengths to develop a 
valuable product, as I encountered in my consulting relationship with a major 
manufacturer. A team first learning agile methods may need to be eased into 
the process, by, for example, using t- shirt  sizing before it evolves to story-
point estimating. Enterprises with strong traditions of predictive, sequen-
tial project planning and estimation techniques will not automatically adopt 
relative estimating or backlog-based planning simply because we advocate 
it. While scrum, or the other approaches I’ve mentioned, have clear sets of 
rules and practices, the likelihood of those being adopted wholesale without 
training and evolution is nil. One of the critical areas of value that skilled 
agile consultants can add is their ability to observe and grasp the unique 
characteristics of the players and the environment, and figure out how to 
help teams adopt a version of their agile discipline that reflects the reality on 
the ground. I’ve followed up on too many failed agile transitions in which the 
sponsor told me that the previous coach was too rigid. “All he cared about 
was a set of rules; he had no sensitivity to our unique circumstances.” To me, 
that description typifies a rookie just out of scrum training. Consulting is an 
exercise in observation, sensitivity, and adaptability. 
 This is not to say that the rules are to be wantonly abandoned or applied in an 
ad hoc manner. Agile advisors should have a clear vision of where they expect 
to land, and should have a roadmap for getting the organization there. The 
practices must be respected; they’ve been refined, over the many years since 
Kent Beck first applied XP at Chrysler, because they work, and because they 
inculcate a healthy, high-performance culture. This being true, agile consultants 
need to determine the best way to get teams to accept these practices and 

The Agile Consultant
93
internalize them. A book of rules, slavishly followed, is not an effective map for 
completing this journey. Teams must have input into the manner and speed with 
which these practices are shaped and adopted. They must own the process, it 
must reflect their opinions, personalities, and skills, and cannot be imposed. 
 This is an area in which I’m at odds with many agile experts, who advocate 
following the rules exactly before trying to introduce changes. My experi-
ence is that this rules-based approach often confounds the uninitiated, and 
discounts the enterprise history, culture, and business model. As I’ve noted, 
I’m an incrementalist, for many reasons. My overriding concern is that teams 
 understand   and own their version of agility, not that they get to agile adoption 
on the shortest possible timeline. By training on the meaning of the practices, 
their historical basis, and the successes they’ve achieved in other settings, the 
agile consultant can help teams develop the  desire to adapt, rather than fol-
low a “thou shalt be agile” dictum. I’ve consulted with teams that  benefited  
from incrementally adopting the practices, migrating from task-based backlog 
items to user-centered stories, or initially thinking in hours and activities 
rather than relative points and value. While we respect the practices, we can 
allow teams to absorb at their own pace the meaning, rather than merely 
the methods, of agility. Most critically, they invest in the creation of their own 
version of agile, and own it. Incidentally, I’ve found that this approach actually 
shortcuts the dissemination of agility in the enterprise, as you avoid having 
teams and individuals blindly following practices that they don’t understand 
or invest in. Instead of questioning every technique and resisting the imposi-
tion of unfamiliar methods, they see for themselves how the practices they’ve 
devised help them achieve. 
 Shu Ha Ri, 6 a martial arts philosophy that can be roughly translated as Imitate, 
Assimilate, and Innovate, 7 is often cited as a central technique for training 
agilists. Shu Ha Ri was designed, however, for a physical discipline like karate, 
in which the development of “muscle memory” by imitation is a precursor 
to success. It is much beloved by many agile coaches, as it allows them to 
focus on rote repetition of a set of rules. Unfortunately, my experience is 
that teams coached in this manner never reach the assimilation or innovation 
stage, because they never understood or absorbed the underlying principles in 
the first place. Agility is a philosophy, not a physical practice; it requires under-
standing and acceptance, not muscle memory. As should be clear by now, I 
scoff at rote repetition; if that’s all that is required, new agile teams don’t need 
a consultant; they can learn the practices from a book. The consultant  adds  
value through specificity; the ability to observe and absorb the unique circum-
stances at hand and guide the team to adoption of the practices in a manner 
and at a pace that fits their environment. 
 6 /   www.solutionsiq.com/shuhari-agile-adoption-pattern/  . 
 7  www.jazzadvice.com/clark-terrys-3-steps-to-learning-improvisation/  . 

Chapter 7 | Lead Teams to Agility
94
 Make no mistake; the ultimate  goal  is a disciplined adoption of standard agile 
practices, with only the modifications that absolutely fit the enterprise’s, and 
the team’s, distinct requirements. I’m not advocating assembling a random 
collection of agile techniques, cobbling them together, and calling it good. 
“Fractional agile” is no agile at all. The agile practices that the team adopts can-
not violate the spirit of lean, agile mind-set. It still must honor the basic tenets 
of the Agile Manifesto and the Agile Principles, as well as the kaizen nature of 
all lean enterprises. But Katzenbach and Smith use the language of “commonly 
agreed approach” for a reason. Agreement on a method that capitalizes on 
the team’s unique skills, requires measurable contribution by all participants, 
enables reality-based problem solving, and is unanimously accepted; these are 
the attributes that encourage team formation and results.  
 Mutual Accountability 
 When enterprises become  agile  , they abandon one thing that is precious in 
many cultures: the ability to hide. Many, perhaps most, organizations have a 
troubled relationship with truth. They tell themselves everything is fine when 
any outside observer can see massive dysfunction. They manipulate the num-
bers to misrepresent to the Wall Street analyst community, and to befuddle 
their own employees. They “work around” unproductive employees and bro-
ken processes to spare themselves the pain of decision, confrontation, and 
change. As we’ve seen, the speculators who caused the financial crisis through 
wild and self-dealing recklessness walk free. Management deals harshly with 
those who blow the whistle on unethical or dysfunctional behavior. In short, 
many enterprises lack accountability, transparency, and consequence. 
 In truly agile teams or enterprises, there’s nowhere to hide. Big, visible indica-
tors show every interested party the precise state of affairs at any moment. 
Visible scrum or kanban boards enable both the team and the enterprise to 
see the progress, or lack thereof, that the team is making on a daily basis. 
Velocity metrics and burndown charts clearly illustrate the capacity for creat-
ing value that the team has achieved over time. Iteration-based demos and 
retrospectives enable the team to show the value they’ve added on a regular 
cadence, and to quickly correct suboptimal practices. Every practice or cer-
emony of agility is specifically designed to make progress visible, and to bring 
commitment and accountability to all team members, from the developer to 
the executive. Agility is a disruptive practice precisely because it eliminates hid-
ing places and removes the ability to sweep broken processes under the rug. 
 Mutual accountability  relies on more than simple visibility. It requires that 
the team embrace both individual and team ownership of the final outcome. 
Every team member must accept that they succeed or fail together as a unit, 
and that each individual has a specific role to play in order to deliver. The 
entire team must commit and own every element, from vision to roadmap 
to backlog, and every work product that makes up the whole. Rookie agile 

The Agile Consultant
95
teams often struggle with the concept of collective and individual ownership. 
Agile consultants must define what commitment means, and help teams grasp 
the idea that they can’t passively accept roadblocks and challenges but instead 
must take action to achieve their goals, with the help of an active scrummas-
ter. Teams accustomed to waterfall processes often simply send an e-mail and 
wait, versus picking up the phone or walking across the hall. Members who are 
used to being judged as individual contributors have difficulty adjusting their 
mind-set to the “whole team ownership” concept. 
 Unfortunately, we’ve all encountered those colleagues who have made a living 
by either hoarding their specialties or specializing in work avoidance. Agility 
will make these folks extremely uncomfortable, whether teammates or man-
agers. That discomfort often spreads to their teammates as well; the “go along 
to get along” mentality is bred into many conflict-averse organizations. Agile 
teams tell the truth; that’s one of their defining features. If we don’t hold 
the non-producers, blockers, and hoarders accountable, kaizen is impossible. 
Helping teams change their accommodative behavior and start to expect 
higher performance from every member is one of the agile consultant’s most 
delicate jobs. Agile consultants need to role model honesty without encourag-
ing confrontational behavior. As skilled facilitators, mature consultants under-
stand how to avoid turning accountability into argument. By guiding teams 
to take the emotion out of the conversation, and to focus on work products 
rather than personalities, we can add value to the retrospective process with-
out becoming a blame agent when teammates feel threatened or exposed. 
The delivery of running, tested features is binary; it’s either completed and 
demo-ready or it’s not. Coaches and consultants can often have problems 
with their own emotions as well. It’s easy to get frustrated with the team 
member who consistently misses targets or hands off a poor-quality product. 
Mutual accountability includes us as well. We need to remember that mutual 
accountability lies within the team, not at the scrummaster or consultant level. 
We’re there to guide, not enforce, and we guide through influence alone. 
 I’ve been an advocate of team rather than individual  commitment   long before 
agility, for a simple reason. I’ve observed, in my corporate career, that individual 
contributors quickly become immune to the scoldings or poor performance 
ratings of managers. If I’m not bad enough to fire, and I’m not particularly 
ambitious, what do I care if I have to endure a periodic chastening from some 
remote manager? On the other hand, if the team looks around the room and 
focuses on me and my inability to deliver, that cuts to the bone. The likelihood 
of influencing behavior rises exponentially when the team chastises me, even 
gently and indirectly, than if some manager whose opinion I scorn gives me a 
lecture. Teams that can get beyond the discomfort of holding their teammates 
(and friends) accountable, without triggering argument and emotion, master 
the art of kaizen and quality delivery quickly.  

Chapter 7 | Lead Teams to Agility
96
 Self-Management and Self-Organization 
 Team  self-organization  is a central tenet of agility, but what exactly does that 
mean? In most large enterprises, the idea of allowing teams to self-select, 
self-organize, and self-manage is a non-starter. Teams are usually selected by 
a functional manager, assigned to projects based on availability and skills, and 
expected to work in the manner endorsed by existing processes and hier-
archical norms. The theory of self-organization is, in my experience, the idea 
most maligned and ridiculed by traditional managers when the concept of agil-
ity is introduced. “I can’t get these teams to perform when I’m micromanaging 
every step they take. How can I trust them to manage themselves?.” It takes a 
patient explanation of the meaning of self-organization by the agile consultant 
to help both managers and teams understand what it means for teams to own 
and manage their own commitments and performance. 
 One fallacy that many  managers  believe is that self-organized teams can be 
indiscriminately assembled from whatever staff members happen to be handy. 
As I learned early in my career, availability is not a skill set. I often say, when 
I train teams in agility, that “you wouldn't get on the New York City subway, 
randomly point at nine guys, and tell them they’re the New York Yankees.” You 
can, of course; just don’t expect them to win the pennant. The Agile Principles 
encourage us to “Build projects around motivated individuals.” As the enter-
prise migrates toward agility, management’s role shifts from telling teams what 
to do and how to do it, to selecting the right mix of talents and temperaments 
to work together successfully, motivating them with a meaningful goal, and 
then running interference for them so they can avoid obstacles. 
 This evolution is often more threatening to managers than it is to teams them-
selves.  Managers  might see their authority and prestige evaporating in a haze 
of “empowerment.” The teams themselves, especially if they are composed of 
self-motivated achievers, crave the opportunity to decide for themselves how 
they’ll divide and conquer the work ahead. For the agile consultant, educat-
ing and guiding both managers and teams toward self-organization requires 
the right mix of education, reassurance, and guidance. Skilled  agile consul-
tants help managers understand the concept of “servant-leadership,” a term 
that many command-and-control style leaders find demeaning and unrealistic. 
Hierarchical managers think of their teams as “my people.” That’s OK, but they 
need to migrate from “my people” as a term of ownership to “my people” as a 
term of ministry. When a pastor or rabbi thinks of his people, he thinks not of 
a pool of resources to command but of a congregation that he leads to grace, 
and guides to actualization. That’s the role of leadership in the agile enterprise; 
leading the team members to uncover their best selves, and guiding them to 
achieve the highest level of actualization possible. 

The Agile Consultant
97
 Teams that are at the beginning of the journey to agility are often reluctant to 
make their own decisions or to own their commitments. Years of having to go 
up and down the chain to make any decision, and of enduring long periods of 
latency before they get access to needed resources or discover the results of 
executive decisions, often suffer from a state of “learned helplessness.” Like 
mice in a scientific experiment that learn that, no matter how they behave, 
they still get the same punishment, they just stop trying and become passive. 
These teams reach out for management guidance every step of the way, afraid 
to set themselves up to be overruled or chastised. Helping these teams turn 
the corner to self-management requires the agile consultant to engage at both 
the management and the team level. 
 Managers  who wish to “go agile”   without relinquishing the role of task man-
agement must be led to acceptance of team empowerment. This is one reason 
why celebration and promotion of small victories is so important to agile 
evolution. With each deliverable completed, each customer satisfied, and each 
team that displays the advantages of agility, managers learn to let go of control, 
a bit at a time. Once managers experience the ability to let go of microman-
agement, they are usually delighted to find that they can start to focus on the 
strategic issues that they were hired to manage. Enlightened managers relish 
the idea of leading motivated, high-performance teams that make their own 
decisions, and find that the chance to lead and guide is more fulfilling than the 
responsibility to rank and chastise. 
 Of course, not every manager is enlightened in this way. We started this sec-
tion by noting that agility allows no hiding place. That is true also of managers, 
many of whom are not adding value, or are sometimes even impeding value, 
in their quest to make themselves relevant and indispensable. The path to 
servant-leadership for these managers is more fraught, both for them and 
for the agile consultant. I’ve emphasized repeatedly that the agile consultant 
is neutral; we’re not here to grade anyone, manage anyone, or enforce any 
change in behavior. Our role is to observe, inspect, and adapt, or help our 
sponsor adapt. When we observe that specific managers are clinging to hier-
archical, decree-based management styles, we can relate that to our sponsors 
and suggest mechanisms for helping overcome that resistant behavior, but, 
as hired coaches, we must tread lightly on rating both managers and their 
teams. Just as the mantra for a scrummaster is “take it to the team,” the agile 
consultant’s mantra, when encountering resistance at the management level, is 
to “take it to the management team.” Again, we focus on the behavior and its 
impact, not on personalities and names. As a blunt and forthright New Yorker, 
I’ve had a career-long struggle to keep myself from just saying “Mr. Jones is 
a knucklehead who is blowing up this project.” Over my career, I’ve finally 
learned to apply some Zen to these sorts of problems, after the painful lesson 
 that the blunt  approach   creates more animosity and resistance than a neutral, 
data-based, name-free observation. It’s not our role to “name and shame,” and, 
with an agile, kaizen mind-set, we shouldn’t want to.  

Chapter 7 | Lead Teams to Agility
98
 Summary 
 Agile methods are designed to develop the self-organization of teams. They 
enable teams to determine their own vision, roadmap, and backlog, to decide 
on the team’s commitments and their own. Agile practices provide the mark-
ers that inform teams and leaders on the progress, the capacity, and the con-
tributions of the team and its members. They reveal the dysfunctions and 
broken processes that can guide the scrummaster and the team to optimiza-
tion. Agile ideas of teamwork are based on sound and confirmed analysis and 
experience, and have been proven to benefit organizations and teams whether 
agile or not. Agility, applied correctly and fearlessly, both creates and relies 
upon the ability of teams to organize, motivate, and manage themselves.  

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_8
 C H A P T E R 
 Visible Results 
 Visible results, in a traditional enterprise setting, often refer to the promotion 
and marketing of successful efforts, in an attempt to persuade the organiza-
tion that new methods are working. When I was a traditional project man-
ager (PM), I frequently convinced clients to put up posters, place scrolling 
slide shows in prominent places, and stand up in front of audiences in various 
venues to publicize the great outcomes that the new system or process was 
producing. If a new process or system is reducing friction, improving quality, 
increasing throughput, and advancing worker satisfaction, it would be foolish 
not to use these positive outcomes as a key element in your change strategy. 
Enterprise inertia is strong; promoting visible results creates momentum. 
 Visibility Is Key 
 In a lean or agile environment, the concept of visible results goes much 
deeper.  Visual controls  , such as product roadmaps, scrum rooms with posted 
backlogs, kanban boards, burndown charts, and interruption or “detour 
buckets” are more than simple  promotion techniques  ; they are an integral 
element of the practice itself, and drive the improvements we seek. The 
visibility of the work the team has committed to, of feature cards as they 
move from “in progress” to “done,” and of accelerating velocity of teams as 
they gain confidence and skill, enables any interested party to see with her 
own eyes the advancement of agility. Comparisons between projected and 
actual performance are no longer buried in a complex set of spreadsheets 
or obscure earned value calculations; the facts are right there in front of the 
team and its leaders. 
8

Chapter 8 | Visible Results
100
 Visible results, in an agile context, are not simply celebrations and mar-
keting campaigns; they are tools for exposing broken processes, unmet 
commitments, inconsistent performance, and centers of excellence. This 
is not to discount their importance in building momentum. It is, instead, a 
reminder to the agile coach or consultant that, in our lean, agile domain, 
visible controls enable us to show, rather than merely tell, the success sto-
ries and challenges that the enterprise is experiencing in its agile journey. 
Visibility is a central ingredient in the transition to agility, and skilled agile 
consultants use its power to keep the thrust rising against the gravity of 
culture and tradition. 
 The migration to visible controls is a top priority of any new engagement I 
undertake. I’m often confronted, when starting up new agile teams, with an 
unstructured mess of tasks, project plans, and work streams that are discon-
nected and unprioritized, with no correlation between capacity and commit-
ment. Tasks, roles, and responsibilities are hidden and undecipherable. Team 
members are overcommitted and beaten down. Dependencies are either 
unknown or uncommunicated, and heroic efforts, like working all night and 
every weekend, are common. The basic task of explaining to me what they’re 
working on, and why, seems insurmountable. 
 In this scenario, my first action is to encourage the team to “throw it up on 
the wall.” If I can get the team to simply enumerate the tasks or features it 
has committed to deliver, even if they’re not formed as stories or features, to 
then categorize them roughly by customer, or project, or whatever grouping 
makes sense to the team, we’ve now got the foundation for the rest of our 
initial transition. Teams can learn, in a single backlog generation session, that 
their chaotic, overwhelming mess can, in fact, be sorted into something that is 
visible and structured. It will not, of course, look anything like a proper scrum 
backlog, but it is the beginning round in an evolution that can then take them 
to prioritization, to effort-based sizing, to release and sprint planning, and to 
individual and team commitments. 
 A “show up and throw up” session, which typically creates a wall filled with 
undifferentiated tasks, projects, and features, can now be used as the basis for 
some grooming sessions that give agile aspirants the opportunity to learn by 
doing, rather than by lecture, and to show them how quickly simple visibility 
can have an impact. My first question when confronting an unstructured back-
log with a new team is, “How can we sort and prioritize these?” Unfortunately, 
I frequently encounter teams whose work is so atomized that each member 
only sees his little piece, and the team has no visibility into the connection 
points, let alone the project vision. Including a product owner at this stage is 
critical. In many environments, only the business representative understands 
the vision of the overall product, and the manner in which the pieces integrate 
into a whole.  

The Agile Consultant
101
 Every Picture Tells a Story 
 Categorization schemes  can vary all over the map, but I’m primarily interested 
in how they fulfill a vision or roadmap. If time or feature commitments have 
been made to the business customer, the product owner can begin to articu-
late to the team how the pieces fit. A skilled product owner, whether her offi-
cial title is Sales Executive, Delivery Manager, or Business Technology Liaison, 
should be able to help teams understand not only what’s been committed but 
why. It seems like working backward, in the sense that agile teams will usually 
start with a vision, then create a roadmap, and build a backlog from there. In 
teams that are new to agile, however, it’s unlikely that the agile advisor will 
walk into a greenfield. Even if we select a pilot project, my experience is that 
the project selected often comes with preconceptions, precommitments, and 
historical baggage that require untangling before a real agile effort can begin. 
 We start with the understanding that the concept of visible results has two 
meanings in agile: the  visibility of success  , in order to build enterprise momen-
tum, and the visibility of the actual results of our work, so that accountability, 
status, progress, and value delivery are all evident in simple, readable form 
available to any interested party. The celebration and promotion of success 
lends credibility across the enterprise, but the  visibility of backlogs  , burn-
downs, “detour buckets” (lists of interruptions or other detours that impede 
the team’s progress), obstacles, and other visual controls, are the mechanism 
of change. Agile is reality-based, and when the reality is visible to all, hiding 
places and broken processes become, well, visible, and subject to improve-
ment. When the plan and progress are hidden in some spreadsheet or project 
plan that is available and decipherable only to a select few, we’re back in the 
world of a product priesthood, with supplicants begging for information about 
the status of their work. 
 In sophisticated lean manufacturing enterprises, like Toyota, the number of 
visual controls can become overwhelming. Lean manufacturing facilities make 
visual charts for everything from “job by job tracking” to “priority-based 
hourly status charts” to “visual control for progression of work through an 
office process.” When manufacturing intricate products with life-or-death 
implications, this granular tracking of everything from parts to documents 
makes sense. 1 
 In agile we try to “maximize the amount of work not done,” and so we tend 
toward the least number of visual controls required for the work at hand. If 
we’re developing software to control automated braking on an automobile, 
we may have to behave like a manufacturer and track every detail. If we’re 
building an app that lets users simulate tossing a wad of paper into a trash bin, 
 1 David Mann,  Creating a Lean Culture: Tools to Sustain Lean Conversions , Second Edition (New 
York: Taylor & Francis Group, , 2010).  

Chapter 8 | Visible Results
102
not so much. The level of visual control should adapt to the project at hand, 
but it should also reflect the maturity of the team. For beginning agile teams, 
visual controls that display the product and sprint backlogs, the blockages 
and impediments, the progress from work-in-progress to completion, and the 
beginnings of a burndown chart (even if we’re only counting items moved 
from backlog to done) are essential, but the visibility of a “detour bucket” 
of interruptions, or the introduction of individual kanban boards for certain 
members, might also be useful. As always, we inspect and adapt our use of 
visual controls to the situation at hand. 
 One of the traps of  visual controls  , especially in traditional or formal organi-
zations, is more emphasis on the look of the charts than on their utility. I’ve 
attended countless debates about whether charts should burn up or burn down, 
for instance, or whether all kanban boards in the organization should have the 
same columns. This misses the theme completely; visibility is designed to stimu-
late action, not to look pretty. Charts that demonstrate whether improvement 
and progress are being made are not ornamental; they expose action or inaction 
on the migration of culture and behavior. I don’t care if teams burn up or burn 
down. My question, especially with rookie teams, is whether they are burning at 
all. Detour buckets have no meaning if no effort is made to lessen and eventually 
end unscheduled interruptions that impede sprint progress. 
 In many enterprises that have yet to accept agility, a core problem is the discon-
nection between capacity and commitment. Sales teams and client managers are 
incentivized to go out and sell more and more, with ever-rising quotas and asso-
ciated compensation. This encourages the executive and sales teams to push 
product or projects out to customers, with no visibility or correlation to the 
actual capacity to deliver. Sales teams make commitments that have no relation-
ship to the delivery team’s capacity to deliver, and get rewarded for doing so. 
Because sales and delivery are often siloed, if not actively feuding, delivery objec-
tions to unrealistic commitments often sound like mere grousing.  Visual controls  
give product delivery teams the ability to come to the conversation with data. If, 
for instance, a long-term burndown chart demonstrates that teams have capac-
ity to burn through 200 story points in an iteration, and sales commitments add 
up to 500 story points in that period, the disconnection becomes visible and 
data-centered, rather than just some narrative that “we’re always overloaded.” 
“Complaint without data is whining” is a common management theory, which 
the adherence to a visual control discipline can disarm.  
 No Blame, No Shame 
 Traditional organizations are often prone to using data to chastise and pun-
ish, rather than to improve. Beginning agile teams are often reluctant to make 
their commitments and results visible, in fear that their managers will then use 
performance against plan as an opportunity to hector and scold rather than 

The Agile Consultant
103
as an indicator of process or management failures. In command enterprises, 
where dissent and “excuses” are discouraged or punished, the tendency to 
sweep issues under the rug, and to protect managers and blame employees, is 
ingrained and powerful. Agile consultants need to apply some of the Zen attri-
butes I’ve encouraged, and realize that these inclinations will not disappear 
overnight. We need to display the agile mind-set to which we hope to guide 
the enterprise. “No blame, no shame” must be our guiding principle in every 
interaction, and we must role-model thoughtful root cause analysis, and select 
appropriate improvement efforts based on the organizational reality. It’s easy, 
as an immature consultant, to get frustrated with broken processes, punitive 
managers, and “blaming and shaming” as a management technique. The simple 
discipline of visual control is the best mechanism for incrementally discovering 
and exposing counterproductive practices. By taking the emotion and specula-
tion out of the conversation, visual controls (eventually) make it obvious that 
improvements are necessary, even if they rub leadership the wrong way and 
discourage comfortable blindness. 
 With all the preceding warnings, it may sound like visual management is too 
much of a hassle to be worth doing. Despite all their possibilities for resis-
tance or misuse, visual controls, or, as they are often called in agile, informa-
tion radiators, are indispensable for true agility. Visual controls that are easily 
legible, even from afar, that use physical representations, like scrum cards, that 
use color to indicate different states, and that are as simple as possible to 
interpret, quickly establish their value. Most project or product teams are 
accustomed to tiny lines on a project plan, or to an unconnected series of 
e-mails instructing them to prioritize this task over that, rather than a shared, 
visual work control system. Managers also value detailed spreadsheets con-
taining hundreds of granular details that are usually privileged information, 
shared only within the executive suite. When these are replaced by multi-
colored scrum cards on a wall, it takes some getting used to. As Toyota and 
hundreds of other lean enterprises have demonstrated, physical tokens on the 
wall, easily read and interpreted, are much more likely to result in behavior 
changes and process improvements than are lines on a screen. 
 You may have noticed that I’ve stayed away from the term  metrics . That’s delib-
erate; metrics is old-school language, bringing up the ghost of punitive perfor-
mance reviews and unhelpful comparisons between teams and individuals. I 
prefer the language of visibility, by which we uncover and improve on defects 
and deficiencies in the process and culture, and celebrate successes that all 
can see, rather than dry measurements that threaten and divide. 
 Visualizing the queue of work that has been committed is the first key objective 
of visual management. Queues are often invisible, residing in a salesperson’s 
forecast or a “top secret” portfolio management system, until they suddenly 
become urgent as their due dates approach. Beginning agile teams consistently 
tell me that their queueing system is “the sales guy sells something, puts it into 

Chapter 8 | Visible Results
104
his forecast, and then runs down with his hair on fire when he realizes the 
date is near.” Delivery teams will frequently hear through the grapevine that 
some major project is on the horizon, but they won’t get the details until it’s 
too late for them to plan and prepare. In other words, the organization’s lack 
of a disciplined queueing and work control system creates a constant state of 
emergency for the delivery team. 
 By helping teams institute visual controls, we empower them to begin resist-
ing ad hoc requests, to stay focused on the commitments they’ve made for 
the current iteration, and to self-manage their work flow. From scrum cards, 
easy to move and reprioritize, to kanban boards that clearly illustrate the 
work-in-progress stream, teams have not only made their successes visible, as 
cards move to the “done” column, but they’ve also been empowered through 
visibility to make a data-centered case for resisting interruptions and distrac-
tions. “Your lack of planning does not make my emergency” is a cute saying 
I’ve seen on many office coffee cups, but, with information radiators, teams 
now have the capability to walk their colleagues up to the wall and help them 
understand why that is true. As usual in this book, I won’t be going into the 
technical details of how and when to apply visual controls, as any agile consul-
tant should be familiar with the mechanics. For a more detailed breakdown of 
the granular techniques of visual controls, or information radiators, there are 
plenty of resources online. 2 
 Every  organizational change  methodology emphasizes the importance of pro-
motion as a potent method of enhancing momentum. Way back in 1995, John 
Kotter called the lack of short-term wins, and of their visibility, one of the 
top ten reasons for failure in  organizational change  . Importantly, he stresses 
that we’re not just hoping for successes 3 ; we’re actively making the quest for 
short-term wins, and promoting them in a structured manner, like a campaign. 
This makes the quick development of visible controls critical; without data, 
success promotion is just talk. It also places the burden on agile consultants 
to be judicious in the selection of projects for pilots or first-time team efforts. 
Taking on behemoth, previously unsolvable problems the first time through an 
iteration is probably not wise. Agile advisors should make sure that the work 
teams take on early in the transition includes some “low-hanging fruit,” some 
elements that the team can deliver successfully, and that can benefit from an 
agile approach quickly. Prioritization of backlog items must be judicious, not 
only driven by the customer’s perceived urgency but also by size, complexity, 
and visibility. If the team has to work through a multitude of iterations before 
delivering anything of value, we’re not far from the dreaded “we tried agile; it 
didn’t work” conversation. 
 2  www.netobjectives.com/files/VisualControlsEnterpriseTeams.pdf  . 
 3 https://hbr.org/1995/05/leading-change-why-transformation-efforts-
fail-2  . 

The Agile Consultant
105
 A promotional campaign for  organizational   change should be structured 
and planned, and not consist of random acts of visibility. The successes 
we promote must have meaning to the organization; very few executives 
or associates will care that we ran regression testing on 49 new builds. If, 
however, that regression testing led to higher-quality products and deliv-
ered to customers faster and with higher satisfaction, that will garner some 
attention. I’m an advocate of a campaign that builds slowly, as the teams 
become more adept at agility, since early attempts will include as many 
failures as they do successes, and our visibility makes those apparent as 
well. As teams gain confidence and skill, the number and importance of 
our successes will grow, and the promotion of them will be increasingly 
persuasive. Persuasiveness is the key; the successes we promote would not 
just highlight the content of what we built but the importance of the agile 
practices we used to get there. 
 It’s great when leaders call out the successes of agile teams and practices, but 
it’s even better when the team stands up and describes its experience, from 
initial reluctance and trepidation to acceptance, mastery, and triumph. One of 
the indicators I like to track is simple team happiness, on a Likert scale. I ask 
team members to rate their happiness, not just with agile, but with their orga-
nizational life, on a whiteboard, with a simple 1-to-5 scale, and track that over 
time. Making increasing happiness visible is a powerful persuader. Everyone 
wants to be happier in their work, and every progressive manager should 
value team satisfaction. 4 
 Other  promotion techniques  include “ agile safaris  ,” as recommended by Mike 
Cohn 5 , in which teams that have not yet experienced agile sit in with an agile 
team and watch them work, and scrum room tours, in which agile teams walk 
their managers and associates through the scrum room and explain how the 
visible artifacts help them achieve their objectives. E-mails, newsletters, and 
banners are far down on my list; they smack of the multiple failed change cam-
paigns that every enterprise has experienced, and become mere background 
noise to already skeptical associates. In lean and agile, teams don’t want to be 
lectured or mandated; they want to observe, experience, and learn. They want 
to be persuaded, not hectored. 
 The obvious success of lean manufacturing and lean enterprises, with their 
abundant use of visual controls, illustrates beyond debate that these meth-
ods work. I want to emphasize that visual controls are only one element of 
the lean or agile enterprise. If they don’t stimulate corrective action, they 
are ornaments, destined to turn dusty and forgotten in some remote corner. 
The agile consultant has the unenviable job of highlighting the dysfunctions 
 4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likert_scale . 
 5 Mike Cohn,  Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum (Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2010).  

Chapter 8 | Visible Results
106
and disconnections that these visual artifacts expose, and guiding teams and 
leadership to act. The results of visibility are far reaching; they shine a light on, 
for example, broken sales intake processes, invisible queues of projects, absent 
or erroneous prioritization schemes, and myriad other flaws in the culture, 
value stream, and process chain. As noted previously, there are players in every 
enterprise who make their living hiding in the cracks and aren’t thrilled when 
those cracks are repaired. The skilled agile consultant doesn’t only encourage 
teams to use visual controls to track their own work; she also works across 
the enterprise to help the entire organization recognize and address the prob-
lems they reveal. This is a distinction between agile coaching and agile consult-
ing. Practice-focused agile coaches can help bring teams toward agile methods, 
while agile consultants focus on the holistic picture of the entire enterprise, 
and have the consulting skill and experience to diplomatically and persuasively 
propagate the agile and kaizen mind-set throughout the enterprise.  
 Summary 
 Visibility and transparency are central to lean philosophy, and drive many of 
our agile practices. The scrum board, with its categories of visible tasks, the 
burndown charts that show our progress as we go, the retrospective insights 
that we collect and post—all of these are visible so that action can be taken 
in real time and there’s no hiding place for dysfunction. We transition to agile 
when the hidden dysfunctions bred within our culture, processes, and rela-
tionships threaten to overpower our ability to succeed. By bringing failures 
and issues to the light, we drive improvement. By making success visible, we 
drive momentum toward agility. 

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_9
 C H A P T E R 
  Evolve the 
Enterprise 
 Agile evolution within the enterprise is often visualized as ripples in a pond. 
The agile champion, coach, or consultant throws a stone into the pond by 
assembling the initial agile teams and using agile methods to deliver a pilot 
project. The pilot teams start to experience improved results, and to make 
them visible. The successes and challenges of that initial pilot expose obstacles 
and broken processes. These discoveries cascade through the enterprise and 
focus improvement efforts on identified roadblocks. Incrementally, as each 
new challenge is uncovered, the ripples of change and agility reach into further 
corners of the organization, eventually washing across the entire enterprise 
and up to the executive level. Executives eventually acknowledge the power 
of agility, and change their mind-sets and their management techniques to 
employ agile practices across the enterprise. Lean, agile thinking permeates 
the organization. Productivity, innovation, and happiness multiply. The enter-
prise achieves the nirvana of agility. 
 That’s the “happy path,” as project managers like to say. But what is the “sad 
path,” and what can agile consultants do to steer their clients toward safe 
harbor and away from the shoals? Failed agile transitions abound. Many agile 
consultants make their living cleaning up after poorly executed agile migra-
tion projects. As with  Total Quality Management (TQM)  ,  Business Process 
Engineering (BPR)  ,  Six Sigma  ,  serial reorganizations  , and  myriad  other “pro-
grams of the month,” initial implementation may be challenging, but sustain-
ment is nearly impossible. The weight of history, legacy, culture, and personality 
9

Chapter 9 | Evolve the Enterprise
108
all conspire to pull the new initiative back to earth, and, when the consultants 
leave and the next big problem arises, the enterprise goes back to the “do 
whatever it takes” mentality, workarounds and shortcuts are applied, things 
drift back to the old ways, and skepticism grows while morale deflates. 
 I have a stack of books on agility a yard high, and each one has unique insights. 
They teach us how to follow an agile process, use visible charts, and help teams 
coalesce and perform. They offer guidance to coaches, developers, managers, 
and executives on the meaning and practice of agile. Scaling agile software 
development across the enterprise is a topic frequently raised, with varying 
degrees of formality, ranging from Dean Leffingwell’s highly structured  Scaled 
Agile Framework for the Enterprise (SAFe) 1 to  Scott Ambler’s Discipline Agile 
Delivery (DAD) 2 method, and from  Larman and Vodde’s Large Scale Scrum 
(LeSS)  3 to the common “Scrum of Scrums” approach found in Cohn’s 4 and 
Schwaber’s 5 works. 
 We’ll take a quick walk through some of these frameworks, and look at some 
of the adherents and critics of each. Whether, as an agile consultant, you agree 
or disagree with these methods, you must be aware of them. Each, either in 
part or in whole, has elements that you can adapt and apply to the enterprise 
situation you find on the ground. Your clients, if they’ve researched agility at all, 
will be familiar with these ideas, and therefore so must you, for credibility if 
nothing else. Different techniques fit different circumstances, and the broader 
your knowledge the more value you can add. 
 The debate over the scalability of agile software development is settled. Agile 
development has been scaled successfully in hundreds of enterprises world-
wide, and the techniques offered by these agile pioneers are prudent and 
proven. And, of course, these innovators and hundreds of their “certified” 
followers roam the globe, coaching teams and enterprises in the use of these 
techniques. Why, then, do so many agile transitions fail to evolve, or to stick? 
First of all, existing frameworks are almost primarily focused on software 
development. Ambler’s DAD framework and Leffingwell’s SAFe are explicitly 
information technology (IT)-centric. They present processes and practices 
that prescribe techniques for scaling agile IT, but they don’t address adequately, 
to my eyes, the deep and ingrained cultural and management barriers to their 
visions, let alone offer realistic goals and techniques for agile advisors to help 
leaders evolve. 
 1 http://www.scaledagileframework.com/ . 
 2 http://www.disciplinedagiledelivery.com/introduction-to-dad/ . 
 3 http://less.works/ . 
 4 Mike Cohn,  Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum (Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2010).  
 5 Ken Schwaber,  Agile Project Management with Scrum (Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 2004).  

The Agile Consultant
109
 Agile Management Required 
 The exclusive focus on rules, ceremonies, and rituals applied by many coaches 
is actually counterproductive. Adopting agile practices can result in such rapid 
local progress (in the software development function) that the enterprise 
doesn’t believe it needs to push further. What’s the missing piece that would 
enable these initial, local successes to permeate the enterprise? To answer 
this question, let’s go back to lean fundamentals. David Mann, 6 describes the 
missing element this way:
 Why is it that so many attempts to convert to lean end in retreat 
and disappointment? It is a paradox: So many lean implementations 
fail because lean is too easy! It’s too easy to implement the physical 
trappings of lean while failing completely to notice the need for a parallel 
implementation of lean management . 
 The basic practices of agile are simple to learn and implement. New scrum 
teams can often absorb these techniques, and begin to profit from them, 
in a few sprints. These teams are successful in implementing rudimentary 
visual controls, in uncovering wasteful practices and processes in their ret-
rospectives, and in developing long lists of blockages, detours, and wait-
states that are impeding their momentum. They remove the obstacles within 
their teams, and start to exhibit stable, or even increasing, velocity, as their 
collaboration and problem-solving skills mature. After a number of sprints 
or releases, however, they plateau; the systemic problems, entrenched dys-
functions, and flawed processes that are not easily solved within the team 
become increasingly intractable, and the obstacles, detours, and defects pile 
up on lists but are never addressed or repaired. As the challenges ripple 
through the enterprise, they bump up against vested interests and legacy 
procedures that reach into the management and executive level. Their com-
plexity and tenacity become unmanageable. Every process we touch affects 
dozens of others, with unpredictable results. Without the ability to improve 
the enterprise value chain, legacy processes, hierarchical organization struc-
ture, or the predictive, sequential mind-set of leaders, agile efforts lose their 
momentum, and gravity prevails. 
 In agile theory, as noted in the idealized example mentioned previously, scrum-
masters and agile coaches would guide teams to uncovering the obstacles 
and challenges that impede agility, leaders would use the big, visible controls 
and improvement backlogs to prioritize and enable change, and kaizen action 
would be taken every day to remove roadblocks and empower teams. Much 
 6 David Mann,  Creating a Lean Culture:  Tools to Sustain Lean Conversions , Second Edition (New 
York: Taylor & Francis Group, 2010), p. 5.  

Chapter 9 | Evolve the Enterprise
110
of the agile literature recommends that these things happen but doesn’t delve 
into the details of creating an agile leadership structure to ensure that they 
do. Again, from David Mann:
 Without a  lean management system  in place to support the new 
arrangements, people are left to rely on their old tricks for fooling the system, 
using familiar workarounds to get themselves out of trouble. It’s a path that 
leads swiftly away from a successful conversion. The promising lean system 
becomes one more sad entry in the roster of failed change projects. 7 
 This is where the role of agile consultant becomes arduous. It’s often great fun 
to work with teams on a grassroots agile adoption, as they learn new, power-
ful techniques and gain enthusiasm and confidence. As the visual controls and 
agile practices start to reveal difficult, politically charged obstructions, and the 
team looks to the scrummaster and agile advisor to help them clear their path, 
engagements swiftly shift from fun to funk. Complex structures, systems, and 
tools; intransigent and self-focused leaders; habits of evasion, avoidance, and 
blame—agile consultants must now bang their heads against all of these, and 
find a path through. If we expect to evolve the enterprise to agility, we’ll need 
to guide the organization through the fractious, controversial, and unyielding 
dysfunctions they’ve been avoiding for years. We’ll have to leave in our wake a 
robust agile leadership culture, not just a set of practices and charts. 
 This leads us to another paradox. The  Agile Manifesto  reminds us to value “indi-
viduals and interactions over processes and tools,” yet lean theory tells us that 
process focus is the pillar of lean management. To square that circle, remember 
that the lean processes referenced are those very practices that we’ve been 
instilling in our agile  teams  , namely, visual controls, accountability meetings, and 
kaizen reflection and action on obstacles, wait-states, and other forms of waste. 
These processes are miles away from the multistep, impersonal swim-lane pro-
cesses that have evolved over time in many organizations, based on the theory 
that if you document every possible step of a process even an unskilled worker 
with minimal oversight can walk through the steps and produce a result. This 
is called the “so simple a monkey can do it” theory of process management, 
and, of course, it produces the result intended: unthinking, uncritical and mind-
numbingly repetitive activities suited for monkeys but not for creative, intel-
ligent humans. Managers in these sort of process-driven organizations “manage 
by exception,” meaning that every error or missed expectation results in a 
reprimand to the team or individual, a heaping on of additional controls, or a 
public shaming for the team and manager that “missed their numbers.” 
 When agilists talk about creating a lean or agile leadership structure that 
focuses on process, we mean the exact opposite. Our practices, like the back-
log, the stand-up, and the retrospective, are the catalyst for collaboration, 
 7 Ibid. at 16. 

The Agile Consultant
111
analysis, and action, not blaming and shaming. The real-time focus on assessing 
the problems uncovered by agile methods, discussing them with openness and 
honesty, and solving them with courage, discipline, and urgency differentiates 
our style of process management. This kaizen process doesn’t violate the spirit 
of the Manifesto; it embodies it. 
 It also doesn’t happen automatically, and this is where many agile advisors lose 
the plot. In order to evolve to agility, the enterprise must embrace the challenge 
of discarding what’s broken and searching for new solutions. The development of 
an agile leadership culture that enforces improvement action, rather than mere 
list-shuffling, requires agile consultants to engage, and change behavior, across 
the enterprise. That takes many agile coaches and scrummasters out of their 
comfort zone, if not out of their level of competence. This is not a knock on 
anyone; engaging at the management and executive level requires a completely 
different skill set than guiding agile practices. Successful managers and execu-
tives have learned a set of beliefs and behaviors that have produced results and 
led them to their positions. The disruptive force of agility now requires them to 
modify, or even extinguish, the successful techniques of the past. This is a tough 
pill to swallow, and an even tougher one for the agile consultant to administer. 
 I don’t think anyone who has worked for a traditional corporate enterprise would 
argue that their  enterprise’s management systems  are lean or agile. Management 
decisions are made based on obscure reports, which often travel through mul-
tiple layers of the hierarchy before landing on the desk of the decision maker. 
These reports are often contradictory, as department managers massage their 
numbers to give the best impression. Meetings often devolve into either end-
less debates about which numbers are accurate or rote recitations of fictional 
outcomes that afford no questions or analysis. The rearview focus means that 
the problems addressed either have already been fixed by workarounds on the 
ground or have been repeatedly exposed in meetings spanning multiple years 
but have never inspired any action. Critically, from an agile perspective, these 
meetings are usually closed and exclusive, and both the results reported and the 
actions promised are often invisible to the rest of the organization. 
 One of the myths about agility is that it’s just a disguise for an undisciplined 
work environment, in which teams make it up as they go along, with no plan-
ning, tracking, or accountability, and then leave behind an unsupportable mess. 
While anyone who has worked in a well-functioning agile organization knows 
this is nonsense, we must also acknowledge that the potential for this out-
come is there. Every agile coach has encountered teams that believe that 
agility is an excuse for shedding discipline and resorting to “cowboy coding.” 
We’ve all encountered managers in whom the report-driven, management-
by-exception mind-set taught in their MBA programs are so familiar and 
comfortable that the idea of relying on visual controls scattered around the 
workplace, and on self-managed teams that make their own decisions, seems 
risky and unworkable. To delivery teams, discipline, even in an agile context, 
can feel like a brake on creativity. To managers, agile leadership looks like “the 

Chapter 9 | Evolve the Enterprise
112
inmates running the asylum.” Our primary task, as we take on the evolution 
to agility, is to reorient both groups to the real meaning and methods of agil-
ity. Our second task is to help them evolve to both a disciplined production 
process (like scrum) to deliver the product and an adaptive leadership culture 
to ensure that delivery processes are optimized, monitored, improved, and, 
most important, responsive. 
 To be clear, I’m not recommending that we replace one hierarchical, top-down 
management structure with another, “more agile” one. Agility requires adap-
tive leadership, not top-down management. Teams are self-managed, with the 
daily allocation, prioritization, and production work of traditional line manag-
ers now entrusted to teams, their scrummasters, and product owners. My 
thesis is simple: kaizen-style continuous improvement doesn’t happen in a 
vacuum, and, at the enterprise level, simply leaving improvement to each indi-
vidual team replaces hierarchical, process-bound management with a differ-
ent type of dysfunction, that of suboptimization. Each team optimizes for its 
own specific needs, whether by project, function, product, or client, with no 
connecting thread between these local optimizations. Without some form of 
overarching agile leadership structure, the enterprise is at risk of atomizing 
into an agglomeration of independent units, each of whose optimizations con-
tradict or even impede their colleagues’ ability to deliver. Suboptimization, or 
local “centers of excellence,” whose reforms are not guided by a vision for 
enterprise improvement, can be as disruptive to enterprise unity as the old, 
secretive, and hierarchical styles from which we’re trying to evolve.  
 Agile Scaling Frameworks 
 With all of this said, what are the practical, on-the-ground actions that agile 
consultants can take to guide the enterprise to their own optimized ver-
sion of agility? In summary, we need to create agile teams and visual controls, 
as we’ve discussed previously, and to encourage an agile leadership culture 
that ensures that those controls translate into quick exposure of issues, rapid 
and collaborative analysis, and immediate action to eliminate root causes, not 
just work around roadblocks. In-sprint burndown charts, for example, enable 
teams to spot production problems during the actual delivery cycle, not 
afterward, when the faulty product or missed deadline has already occurred. 
Retrospectives enable us to immediately apply the learnings of the iteration 
just completed, while they are fresh and their pain is still apparent, rather than 
waiting for eons while reports are generated, massaged, reviewed, analyzed, 
and then, in too many cases, ignored. 

The Agile Consultant
113
 The works of Cohn, Adkins, and many others have documented the roles and 
responsibilities of scrummasters and product owners. In short, the  scrummas-
ter is there to train, guide, and help the team to apply the agile processes prop-
erly, and to help them deal with roadblocks and impediments that might put 
their commitments at risk. The  product owner represents the interests of the 
ultimate consumer of the product, with the authority to guide the delivery team 
in building and prioritizing the backlog, to respond to changes and communi-
cate their implications to the client, and to help teams make decisions about 
the features and functions required to satisfy the client’s expectations. Here, 
we’ll address their place in an agile leadership culture, and emphasize why their 
 actions , rather than merely their roles, define the ability to extend agility across 
the enterprise. We’ll see how the command-driven management style of the 
20th century can evolve into an adaptive leadership style that suits agility and 
responsiveness. 
 As agility has progressed, the focus has shifted from team practices to enter-
prise scalability. When organizations first experimented with agility, scrum 
became the most popular agile framework. Similarly, Dean Leffingwell’s Scaled 
Agile Framework has become the de facto standard in enterprise-level agile 
scaling. As illustrated in Figure  9-1 , SAFe offers a structured, disciplined 
approach to scaling agility that defines roles and processes for four levels 
of the enterprise: the portfolio, value stream, program, and team levels. The 
diagram looks complicated, but, when decomposed, it presents a clear mecha-
nism for solving some of the problems of scaling, such as misaligned strategies 
and dependencies, unsynchronized schedules, and the coordination of mul-
tiple, independent backlogs. Firms like Lego, Intel, and Accenture have applied 
SAFe to their agile efforts with great success. 8 
 8 See their case studies, and many more, at    www.scaledagileframework.com/case-studies/  . 

Chapter 9 | Evolve the Enterprise
114
 Figure 9-1.  Scaled Agile Framework 4.0  

The Agile Consultant
115
 At the Portfolio level, SAFe describes a process that is triggered by the strate-
gic decisions made by enterprise leadership. As in most organizations, strate-
gic themes are then refined into a portfolio of programs designed to achieve 
the strategic objectives. Epic Owners and Enterprise Architects collaborate, 
based on their budgets and commitments, to create a portfolio backlog that 
then drives the program and team backlogs at the next levels. At the  value 
stream level  , firms organize their delivery of value into Agile Release Trains, to 
coordinate large sets of programs and deliverables into a synchronized and 
integrated stream of delivery. Enterprise roadmaps, metrics, release manage-
ment, and DevOps are managed at this level.  Program-level participants  , like 
the release train engineer, the system architect, and product management, 
focus on the features of the product, the epic-level components of that fea-
ture, and the synchronization of the architecture and the release schedule, 
while the teams perform the familiar scrum activities of iterating through the 
sprints to actually develop, build, test, and integrate the products that realize 
the strategic objectives set forth at the portfolio level. 
 SAFe has a large community of proponents and practitioners, and has been 
endorsed by many of the leading agile tool companies, like Rally and VersionOne. 
It’s easy to see why this framework is so appealing. It shows enterprises how to 
take their successes in agile at the team level and scale them to fit the strategic 
goals and initiatives that executives care about. It presents a coordinated, syn-
chronized, and disciplined approach that sets out clear roles, responsibilities, 
and time frames so that teams are not suboptimizing, improvising, or flounder-
ing. For executives who are accustomed to predictable, organized delivery, led 
by strategic decisions made at the leadership level, it offers an agile alternative 
that is comparable to existing portfolio-program-project hierarchies, and can 
correlate to the predictive models they’re used to. 
 For critics, that’s the rub. Many agile experts, including signatories of the  Agile 
Manifesto  , like Ron Jeffries 9 and Ken Schwaber, 10 have published critical reviews 
of the method. Most of the criticism revolves around a few ideas; that SAFe 
is not really agile because it imposes a top-down line-of-command structure, 
that its very structure and discipline make it less adaptable and agile, and that 
it assumes that big, portfolio-level programs should be tackled at all, versus 
breaking them down further and allowing teams to self-manage their division 
of work. I won’t try to adjudicate these questions here; I recommend espe-
cially Ron Jeffries article, as it presents a fair-minded appraisal of the good and 
bad elements of SAFe from his perspective. For a laugh, check out Mike Cohn’s 
lampoon of agile scaling frameworks, The LAFABLE (Large Agile Framework 
Appropriate for Big, Lumbering Enterprises)  process  . 11 As we’ve noted, this 
 9 http://ronjeffries.com/xprog/articles/safe-good-but-not-good-enough/ . 
 10 https://kenschwaber.wordpress.com/2013/08/06/unsafe-at-any-speed/ .  
 11  www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/blog/introducing-the-lafable-process-for-
scaling-agile   . 

Chapter 9 | Evolve the Enterprise
116
book is not intended as a tutorial to agile techniques, so I’ll refer you to the 
deep training material on the SAFe site, 12 or, if you’re so inclined, to the certi-
fication opportunities available there as well. 
 DAD 13 is another structured enterprise-scale framework. Intentionally IT 
focused, and promoted as more of a “process decision framework,” DAD is 
less prescriptive and hierarchical than SAFe, and is agnostic about the team-
level practices applied. Billing itself as a hybrid model, DAD advocates using dif-
ferent methods, from scrum to kanban, and from Lean Software Development 
to XP, to create the perfect mix for the situation. Scott Ambler, the force 
behind DAD, describes it as risk-focused, goal-driven and enterprise aware. 
DAD has gained some traction in the agile community, but has not achieved 
the acceptance of SAFe. 
 Craig Larman and Bas Vodde 14 have made the most explicit connection between 
agility and lean concepts. Focusing on the lean concepts introduced at Toyota, 
and the lean manufacturing ideas that sparked Japan’s rise as a quality leader, 
they bring us back to first principles in our agile thinking. They remind us that 
lean and agile are about different ways of thinking, not just different practices 
and behaviors. By reminding agilists that lean techniques are really intended 
to encourage us to apply systems thinking to the problems we encounter, 
and to learn a new, lean mind-set, they’ve developed a process for scaling 
agility that remains true to lean principles and doesn’t support predictive, 
framework-focused recipes for agility. The ideas they express in the book have 
been compiled into a scaling process they call  LeSS . Larman and Vodde empha-
size that LeSS is a scaled-up version of regular, one-team scrum, and doesn’t 
require lots of new processes or structures. Rather, LeSS recommends that all 
teams in an enterprise are working in a common sprint to deliver a common 
shippable product. LeSS adds a few more ceremonies—for example, breaking 
sprint planning into an enterprise-level “big room” session in which teams 
self-organize the entire product backlog—and a separate sprint planning ses-
sion for each team. More than practices, LeSS concentrates on applying the 
principles of lean mind-set, such as systems thinking, transparency, continuous 
improvement, and a whole-product focus. For those agilists who frown on 
the highly structured and somewhat hierarchical concepts behind SAFe and 
DAD, Larman and Vodde’s ideas are closer to the “Scrum of Scrums” concepts 
promoted by Cohn and Schwaber. 
 The Spotify scaling example, 15 the result of a long-term, experimental jour-
ney at the company, has become a model for scaling without an overarching 
 12  www.scaledagileframework.com/guidance/  . 
 13  www.disciplinedagiledelivery.com/introduction-to-dad/  .  
 14 Craig Larman and Bas Vodde,  Scaling Lean and Agile Development:  Thinking and Organizational 
Tools for Large-Scale Scrum (Boston: Pearson, 2009).  
 15 https://labs.spotify.com/2014/03/27/spotify-engineering-culture-part-1/  . 

The Agile Consultant
117
framework, based instead on clear definitions of principles, roles, and alignment 
strategies. By defining a unique set of roles and principles, Spotify has created 
an agile culture that addresses many of the difficulties of enterprise-level agil-
ity. Spotify has created new definitions of teams and their collaborative roles, 
and defined the interaction between leadership and those team structures in 
thoughtful and imaginative ways. Organizationally, Spotify has modified the typi-
cal scrum team and instead created agile squads, with the ability to select their 
own methods and practices rather than mandating all-scrum or all-kanban, for 
example. Squads, once they’ve demonstrated that they’ve grasped the agile 
mind-set and can self-organize, can adopt or reject any of the typical ceremo-
nies of scrum or XP. For example, some do daily stand-ups, some don’t. They 
focus on principles rather than practices: autonomy, alignment with company 
mission, high motivation, and community trust building are some guiding ideas. 
Each squad is focused on a particular feature or function of the Spotify plat-
form, like search or playlists, and so can build expertise in their area. 
 The next unit of collaboration at  Spotify  is the tribe, a collection of squads with 
a similar mission. Tribes periodically gather to discuss and minimize dependen-
cies, and to ensure that all squads are working toward the same mission. Most 
collaboration sessions are impromptu and situational, rather than enforced on 
a specific schedule. 
 To keep team members connected with their discipline, a capability that is 
often compromised when functional silos are replaced by cross-functional 
teams, Spotify introduced chapters and guilds. Chapters are cross-team groups 
of those within the same discipline, such as coders or testers, who meet regu-
larly and ensure that all are up to date on the latest techniques, that learnings 
are shared, and that nobody is reinventing solutions that already exist. A guild 
is a less formal and more inclusive group. A testing guild, for example, may 
include a wide collection of testers, but might also include coders who want 
to better understand testing or contribute to guild knowledge. 
 This is, of course, a brief fly-by of the concepts developed at  Spotify  .   To dig 
more deeply into this model, access the resources cited. 16 The cited refer-
ences go much deeper into the challenges of autonomy versus authority and 
the technical elements of this model, than I can include here. 
 My personal preference is toward the less prescriptive, less hierarchical mod-
els, like the Spotify or  “scrum-of-scrums” approach  . The prescriptive models, 
most notably SAFe, are easier to sell to command-based organizations, as 
they offer the perception of predictability and control, and seem like a one-
stop solution to the enterprise scaling problem. In exchange for that corpo-
rate comfort level, however, I believe enterprises sacrifice some of the core 
 16 https://ucvox.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/113617905-scaling-agile-
spotify-11.pdf  ; Henrik Kniberg’s “Crisp’s Blog”   http://blog.crisp.se/  is a great 
resource for keeping up with developments at Spotify and other enterprises using this model.  

Chapter 9 | Evolve the Enterprise
118
concepts of lean and agile. In high-structure models like SAFe, programs are 
defined at a high level and “roll downhill” to the teams, which start to resem-
ble, in my view, an agile assembly line of developers working to spec, with 
less autonomy and ownership of the outcomes they produce. Tightly defined 
release trains can drive teams to imposed deadlines and arbitrary time boxes, 
and budgets created at the portfolio level resemble, to me, arbitrary estimates 
defined before the understanding of the requirements are known and under-
stood. These models constrain the autonomy and creativity of the teams, and 
fail to acknowledge some of the hard-won lessons of agility, namely, that hier-
archical and predictive program management doesn’t work, and that innova-
tion occurs closest to the work. 
 In the  Spotify model  ,  principles, not practices, rule. Through the creative use 
of organizational structure, and enterprise acceptance and reinforcement of a 
few core principles, squads, tribes, chapters, and guilds retain their autonomy 
and collaborate to define their own methods of solving problems and deliver-
ing solutions. This model is necessarily evolutionary, as teams gain maturity 
in self-organization and collaboration. It’s also a more difficult sell to tradi-
tional hierarchical enterprises, as it requires executives to trust that teams will 
perform successfully and manage themselves to mission-based outcomes. The 
“high-autonomy, high-alignment” model at Spotify reflects the ideals of lean and 
agile most accurately, as it enables executives to set enterprise mission, goals, 
and objectives, and to focus on encouraging motivation and alignment, while 
allowing teams to organize, innovate, and manage themselves to come up with 
the best methods and practices to fit the mission and their team culture. 
 Opinions differ, of course, and I present all of these models so agile consul-
tants can draw their own conclusions. Different organizations, depending on 
the existing culture, the maturity of teams, the architecture in place, and the 
company’s business niche, will benefit from different scaling approaches. It’s 
obviously easier for a disruptive, innovative startup to embrace a Spotify model 
than it would be for a large bank or insurance company with dozens of proj-
ects in flight at the same time and regulatory compliance issues that require 
traceability and audibility. The ability and experience to discern the client enter-
prise’s legacy, culture, and marketplace, and recommend the appropriate scaling 
approach, is a consulting, not a coaching, skill. The further up the ladder we 
move, and the more we need to change executive mind-set and management 
styles, the more critical mature consulting and advisory skills become.  
 Evolving to Agile Leadership 
 Whether we recommend that enterprises adopt the SAFe framework or the 
Spotify model, we’re making big assumptions about the organization’s ability to 
adapt. SAFe requires managers to embrace disciplined portfolio management, to 
adopt a  kanban approach  to that portfolio, to invest in changes in the technical 

The Agile Consultant
119
architecture to enable agility, and to migrate to agile metrics and concepts. The 
Spotify model expects managers to step back from their traditional “how to do 
it” roles and apply a more hands-off, trust-based, mission-oriented management 
style, allowing autonomy at the producer level. Whatever enterprise scaling phi-
losophy we apply, we aren’t just touching some isolated groups of technicians 
in a small agile pilot team. We’re evolving way beyond the “Agile 101” activities 
of guiding and coaching individual teams, and instead tackling the entire edifice 
of management style, philosophy, and organization. We’re advising the enter-
prise on its entire structure, and asking managers and executives to migrate 
from the ingrained styles they’ve applied to a completely new set of beliefs and 
practices. Every experienced agile coach or consultant has seen the challenges 
and gyrations many teams go through to adapt to agility. Project managers, cli-
ent representatives, sales teams, operations teams, and developers, testers, and 
solution designers all initially struggle with their changing roles as agility evolves 
and they encounter unfamiliar territory. I’ve said before that agile practices, like 
scrum, can be taught in a day and start showing results in a few sprints, but that 
doesn’t mean that agile is easy. The deeper you go, the harder it gets, and the 
evolution to enterprise agility must go broad and deep to generate the results 
the enterprise expects. 
 The most important work on agile leadership comes, unsurprisingly, from Jim 
Highsmith at Thoughtworks. Highsmith’s paper on  Adaptive Leadership  , 17 and 
his associated talk on this topic, 18 are the most sophisticated representations 
of the challenges facing the executive and management layer of the enterprise 
as it transitions to agility. With a hat tip to Mr. Highsmith, I’ll outline and inter-
pret some of his key ideas, and then apply the unique perspective of the agile 
consultant to guide our advisory path at enterprise level. 
 Let’s start at the  strategic level  . What strategic questions should enterprise 
leadership contemplate in our increasingly turbulent and disruptive business 
environment? In the contest between efficiency, the holy grail of 20th-century 
business, and responsiveness, the mantra of the 21st, where should we focus 
our strategic intent? Efficiency and low cost are, of course, constant drivers of 
competitive advantage, but, for many firms, from Google to Amazon and from 
Gap to Ford, responding to the concerns and desires of the marketplace has 
become the key differentiator. Those retail stores, from Gap to Uniqlo, that 
can respond quickly to the trends on the street and keep pace with rapidly 
changing customer demand, use responsiveness as  the key attribute of suc-
cess. Internet-based businesses respond daily with new features, and quickly 
dispose of the ones that don’t work. Responsiveness is the key, and simply 
creating a few agile teams in IT can’t achieve that; only enterprise agility can. 
 17 https://assets.thoughtworks.com/articles/adaptive-leadership-
accelerating-enterprise-agility-jim-highsmith-thoughtworks.pdf  . 
 18 https://youtu.be/EEj6zVipqq0 . 

Chapter 9 | Evolve the Enterprise
120
 Every business leader should be considering the benefits that responsiveness 
can bestow in his particular marketplace. When organizations, from Salesforce 19 
to Capital One, 20 recognize and exploit the idea of agility as a business strat-
egy, not just a software process improvement technique, and disrupt entire 
industries by achieving enterprise agility, competitors and other businesses 
must take note. As difficult as enterprise transition may be, the benefits of 
applying an agile mind-set to the entire business are manifest. The difference 
between doing agile, following the practices in isolated product development 
teams, and being agile, enabling the entire organization to respond continu-
ously to changes in market needs and trends, is the foundational idea of enter-
prise agility. As Highsmith reminds us,
 Adaptive leadership  is the work of energizing, empowering and enabling 
teams to rapidly and reliably deliver business value by engaging customers and 
continuously learning and adapting to a continually changing environment.  
 Focus on value, rather than on tasks or activities, is a core lean and agile phi-
losophy. Executives and managers who aspire to agility must also make the tran-
sition from managing and monitoring activity to measuring, through customer 
feedback and collaboration, the value delivered. The Triple Constraint, or Iron 
Triangle, taught in traditional project management programs, consisting of scope, 
time, and budget, is still important in agile work, but it is viewed as a set of con-
straints and boundaries, not as the marker of success. All experienced project 
managers know that projects can deliver on scope, cost, and schedule and still 
deliver zero value to the customer, especially in these turbulent times. It’s a cen-
tral part of the agile consultant’s role to help leaders understand this concept, 
guide them through the change in mind-set, and persuade them that it’s value, 
not activity, that requires measurement and oversight. Agile consultants often 
encounter managers who continually refer back to the traditional management 
style, as in “agile doesn’t allow me to estimate like I’m used to” or “agile doesn’t 
fit into my traditional strategic plan process like traditional project manage-
ment.” They are presenting current conditions as if they are ideal, and it’s the 
consultant’s job to remind them that these techniques are not working, so we’re 
not contending with a comparison between a perceived ideal and an unsure 
and unfamiliar future. We must remind them that studies consistently show that 
half of the features they deliver are not valued or used by customers. We have 
to educate them on the success rates of agility versus predictive methods, as 
illustrated by the Standish Group studies cited earlier. When sponsors compare 
every aspect of agility to their traditional practices, the obvious question is 
 19 https://developer.salesforce.com/page/Transforming_Your_Organization_
to_Agile  . 
 20  www.capgemini.com/resource-file-access/resource/pdf/capital-one-doing-
business-the-digital-way_0.pdf   . 

The Agile Consultant
121
“How’s that working out for you?.”” Of course, experienced consultants will 
phrase it diplomatically and with sensitivity, but it’s important to remind them 
that these techniques, though familiar, are ineffective and uncompetitive. 
 Many executives seek to migrate to agile  due to a perception that “we’ll get 
stuff faster.” Speed-to-value is, of course, a desired effect of iterative, incremen-
tal refinement, but the perception of speedy delivery by the client is equally 
critical. Many leaders don’t realize that most customers would prefer a  mini-
mum viable product (MVP)  that meets their core needs in 3 months, rather 
than an omnibus, all-in project that delivers their entire visualized scope in 
12 months. They often assume that because the client delivered a 400-page 
Business Requirement Document (BRD), with field-by-field specifications and 
validations, they must deliver everything in the BRD exactly as specified. They 
don’t consider the possibility that clients don’t need, and frequently don’t even 
want, everything they’ve requested. Clients often throw everything they’ve 
ever dreamed of into the spec because they’ve been trained to believe that 
they have one chance only, and that, even if they don’t need specific features 
now, they better throw them in because there’s no “phase 2.” Agile consul-
tants need to walk enterprise leadership through this chain of logic explicitly, 
so they grasp that it’s OK, in fact it’s required, that we have an MVP conver-
sation with the ultimate customer and help the customer define the core 
problems the enterprise is hoping to solve, and the core features that will 
achieve that goal. Both the sponsoring executives and their customers require 
a transition to an agile mind-set, and only the agile consultant and her agile 
colleagues can guide them there. 
 In the evolution to agile, many consultants engage with teams that are run-
ning an endless race with commitments that exceed the capacity to deliver. 
Executives encourage sales teams to sell more and more, and then throw 
those commitments over the wall to already overloaded teams. This cycle 
of pressure inevitably leads to burnout and despair, which inevitably leads to 
poor quality, since something’s got to give. The agile terminology for this is 
technical debt, meaning we’ll hack though some parts of the product with less-
than-craftsman-like code, with the false idea that we’ll come back around later 
to repair the damage, or, in agile language, to refactor the code to repay the 
technical debt. Of course, in these pressure environments, day 2 never comes 
and product quality starts to impact the customer, creating an endless cycle of 
support, revision, repair, and patch. The lack of connection between commit-
ment and capacity is a common dysfunction in many enterprises, and is a large 
impediment for agile evolution. Quality declines, technical debt multiplies, and 
teams are detoured from their goals to support and maintain poor-quality 
products, leading to more pressure to deliver. As Highsmith  notes  , only man-
agement can solve this problem, and again it requires a mind-set change. One 
of the techniques I use for making this disconnection between commitment 
and capacity visible is Big Room Planning, in which every team exposes its 
portfolio of pending projects and available resources to the entire enterprise, 

Chapter 9 | Evolve the Enterprise
122
including leadership. When leaders have to make the uncomfortable priority 
decisions themselves, and are confronted with a quantitative analysis of com-
mitments versus capacity, they often begin to realize the conveyor belt of pain 
they are inflicting on their teams. Again, from Jim Highsmith:
 Do less: cut out or cut down projects, cut out overhead that doesn’t deliver 
customer value, cut out or cut down features during release planning, 
cut out or cut down stories during iteration planning, cut down work-in-
process to improve throughput. At the same time, focus on delighting the 
customer by frequent delivery of value. 
 Our goal as agile consultants is to ensure that the client understands the 
imperative for change, realizes that just because techniques are familiar and 
comfortable doesn’t mean they are adequate, and rises to the challenge of 
adopting an adaptive mind-set. It’s ultimately leadership and culture that will 
enable agile to stick, or to become unstuck. Agile consultants also need to help 
the leaders adapt, by assuring them that we’re not here to impose anything, 
that hybrid mixes of traditional, waterfall, scrum and other practices should be 
introduced if their environment calls for it, and that our goal is to help them 
inspect their current environment and challenges and adapt to the right mix 
of agility that addresses their unique situation.  
 Summary 
 There are many enterprise-scale agile frameworks available, from SAFe to 
LeSS, and each has features that can help organizations in their evolution. 
We’ve reviewed many of them, and addressed their benefits and drawbacks. 
Agile consultants must be familiar with these, as our work migrates from team-
level coaching to enterprise-level consulting. Ultimately, at the executive level 
as well as at the team level, achieving agility is a human exercise, and it requires 
that agile advisors can address the fears, myths, and dislocations that agility 
brings, and can persuade leaders and teams that the evolution, even with some 
associated pain, is worth the journey. From Spotify to Thoughtworks, agile 
advisory shops are looking beyond the “Agile 101” practices and considering 
the strategic and organization requisites for turning agility into a competitive 
advantage. To evolve from practice-based coaches to strategic advisors, agile 
consultants must take the next step beyond scrum or kanban and devise a 
strategy for persuading and guiding leaders to the adaptive mind-set that truly 
embodies the agile ideal.  

P A R T
 Engaging at 
Enterprise Level 
 
III

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_10
 C H A P T E R 
  Agile Strategy 
 Reasonable men adapt themselves to their environment; unreasonable 
men try to adapt their environment to themselves. Thus all progress is the 
result of the efforts of unreasonable men. 
 —George Bernard Shaw  
 Early in my consulting career, when I worked for one of the “Big 5” global con-
sulting firms, I was invited to attend a three-day Strategic Planning workshop. 
Consultants from around the world gathered in a ritzy hotel and worked 
through a proprietary planning methodology, with the expectation that we’d 
be selling lots of strategy engagements. The beginning phase of this planning 
process was titled “Planning to Plan.” We were instructed that consultants, 
upon engaging with a new client, should spend a few weeks doing a cultural 
analysis, performing individual interviews with key decision makers, assessing 
the organization’s readiness to plan, clarifying the goals for the planning pro-
cess, selecting a planning team, identifying stakeholders, and then producing a 
“ Planning to Plan Assessment  .” 
 In subsequent stages, we were taught to perform an Environmental Scan, 
a Values Scan, and a Mission Workshop, and use those findings as input to 
our  Strategic Business Model  . We were then advised to facilitate the client 
through a Current State Capabilities Audit and a Future Capabilities Analysis, 
and then use those learnings to develop a Capabilities Gap Analysis. The  Gap 
Analysis  would then be decomposed into a portfolio of Action Initiatives and 
run through a Risk and Contingency Scenario model. Finally, with all the action 
plans decomposed into projects and assigned to the appropriate department 
heads, we’d advise the client through the implementation phase. The leaders of 
10

Chapter 10 | Agile Strategy
126
our consulting organization were quite enthusiastic about this methodology, 
for a couple of reasons. First, it placed us in the “ strategic conversation  ,” as my 
manager repeated like a mantra. Second, every manager gushed, it would be 
a profit machine, as it would institute a multiyear “relationship” at “strategic-
level rates,” as we planned, analyzed, implemented, and then started all over 
again, conceivably for the rest of our lives. 
 You can tell from my tone, and the quotation marks I used, that I am now a 
skeptic. At the time, however, I couldn’t have been more enthusiastic. I was 
selected by my firm to engage at the executive level, strategizing my way 
through the Fortune 500 and making a positive impact on both the client and 
my firm! What could go wrong? 
 Then I went out into the world and tried to apply this model. What I quickly 
discovered was that, for most client firms, it was an exercise in futility. It 
typically consisted of weeks or months of preparatory activity, “planning to 
plan” and other discovery efforts, culminating in a leadership-only retreat for 
a couple of days to hammer out a draft of a Strategic Plan. That plan was then 
reviewed by stakeholders, the board, and other interested parties such as 
major stockholders, which then initiated a further round of debate and nego-
tiation, as each stakeholder tried to protect its silo from disruption and tilt the 
field in its direction. After weeks or months of to-and-fro, we produced a com-
promise document, often watered down to a thin soup so as not to offend or 
disrupt. This document was then passed out to managers to implement. Each 
manager, of course, interpreted the by-now ambiguous directions, and flew 
off on different paths, with little coordination or collaboration. The leadership 
team, the author of these plans, went back to the pressing demands of running 
the business, and provided little oversight or alignment. The enterprise spent 
tons of money on a set of disjointed initiatives, and delivered a fragmented and 
ineffective set of results. And then, of course, the consulting firm was waiting in 
the wings to develop a new and improved version of the Strategic Plan. 
 I’m not suggesting that strategic planning is useless, or that it can’t provide value. 
I’m also not implying that most firms still do it this way; this sort of planning is an 
artifact of a set of dead assumptions, and many enterprises have moved toward 
a leaner, more inclusive, and more  iterative model  . Remnants of this static style 
of rigorous strategic management still remain, however, and many firms I’ve 
advised still suffer from the “three-year-plan” model. This model assumes that 
the marketplace will wait for them as they work through their strategy. 
 It won’t. Turbulence in the marketplace invalidates the long-term strategy 
model, because there is no long term in today’s environment. In a few short 
years, Amazon killed Borders, Apple decimated Blackberry, Google hobbled 
Yahoo, and Uber upended the taxi business. The assumptions behind tradi-
tional strategic planning, that the past was predictive, that markets were sta-
ble, that competitive differentiation was lasting, that enterprises could conceal 
their “secret sauce” and profit on it indefinitely—all of these core strategic 

The Agile Consultant
127
ideas are now obsolete. Technology, globalization, instant communication, and 
universal Internet access are some of the forces that have changed business 
strategy forever, as we’ve discussed throughout. Static, exclusive, and long-
term strategic planning, like predictive project planning, is no longer relevant. 
 Instead, firms must evolve to lean, agile strategies in the executive suite, and 
migrate to an adaptive, change-friendly, and participative planning model. As 
in project planning, strategy must stop attempting to predict from the past, 
and instead adapt to the reality of the ever-changing now. In Chapter   2 , we 
reviewed the contrasts between the hierarchical command structures of the 
postwar period and the autonomous, adaptive, mission-driven enterprises 
that are arising in the wake of the Internet and technology revolutions. We 
identified the changes that are forcing organizations to rethink their business 
models, like rapid technological change, price and product transparency, and 
digital disruption. It’s one thing to identify the challenges of the new, unstable 
marketplace, and quite another to devise a planning process that can give 
managers a window into what might be coming, without committing to specu-
lative and unrealistic predictions. As agility is increasingly viewed as an enter-
prise-level initiative rather than simply a software process improvement, it 
behooves agilists to consider the ways in which strategic thinking must change 
to accommodate lean, agile practices and ideas. 
 Faulty Assumptions in Strategic Planning 
 When  I say that the assumptions of traditional strategic  planning  are obsolete, 
which beliefs am I talking about? There are quite a few premises that are no 
longer valid:
• 
 Managers know best : One of the key lessons that lean 
has taught us is that those closest to producing the actual, 
customer-facing value are most familiar with their con-
straints, struggles, and challenges, and are as likely as senior 
managers in the executive suite to have practical improve-
ment ideas. The exclusivity of the traditional strategic plan-
ning model is one of its fatal flaws. Disconnection from the 
teams in the enterprise, the customers outside, and the 
reality of the dynamic, disruptive marketplace killed Kodak, 
and tolls the bell for all those who only face inward.  
• 
 Strategies can be built without input and feedback 
from the customer : In the traditional planning model, 
the executive team members strategize in isolation from 
their own customers, proceeding under the assumption 
that the past is predictive, that their read on the mar-
ketplace is correct, and that they know better than their 
own customers what the market values. Rather than 

Chapter 10 | Agile Strategy
128
getting out of the building and collaborating with cus-
tomers, traditional strategic planning occurs in an off-site 
conference room or executive boardroom, with only 
internal players involved.  
• 
 Strategies can be long term: As noted previously, 
the long term gets shorter every year. As new entrants, 
new technologies, and new business models emerge on 
a faster cycle, plans become outdated quickly. As we’ve 
learned from waterfall software development, by the time 
the customer has a chance to react to the product, the 
market has evolved, and the product addresses last year’s 
needs. Adaptability trumps predictability every time. The 
idea that we can foresee the shape of our marketplace 
two years or even six months ahead is a fallacy.  
• 
 Experimentation and risk  are  dangerous and 
should be avoided: Traditional strategic planning, espe-
cially at old-line firms that believe new ideas will endan-
ger their brand image and reputation, often relies on 
“brand extension” rather than innovation. Cherry Coke 
is a brand extension, but Red Bull is an innovation. Cherry 
Coke may incrementally improve results, appealing to a 
narrow segment of cherry lovers, but Red Bull creates a 
whole new category. Innovative companies, like Google 
and Amazon, aren’t afraid to try new ideas, test them in 
the marketplace, and retain or discard them based on 
customer reaction. The failure of the Amazon smartphone 
didn’t damage its brand, and the resounding rejection of 
Google Wave didn’t stop Google from learning about its 
customer’s preferences and trying again with Google+. 
Experimentation and failure, as long as it’s not existential, 
is a learning experience, and learning from prototypes 
and customer feedback loops turns out to be less dan-
gerous than not venturing at all.  
• 
 It’s all about the data : The image of the 20th-century 
executive brings to mind a man in a mahogany-lined office, 
poring over a stack of green-lined computer paper and 
examining the data from last quarter, or last month. Sales 
numbers, year-over-year comparisons, competitive analysis, 
trend lines: these were the driving factors for the man in the 
gray flannel suit. Data was difficult to obtain, required large 
investments in computing power, and was thought to hold 
the key to competitiveness and success. Now data is ubiqui-
tous, much cheaper and easier to get, and instantaneous; the 
problem becomes separating and analyzing the meaningful 

The Agile Consultant
129
data from the dross, in real time. The “big data” problem 
is too much data, too fast, and too cheap, and competitive 
advantage is drawn from quickly figuring out which data to 
act upon. Google and Facebook give away the service to 
capture the data, and then build their strategies around what 
they’ve gleaned. Strategies based on last quarter’s data can 
only address last quarter’s problems.  
• 
 Stick to the plan : In the traditional model of project 
management, success meant on time, on budget, and 
within scope. Customer value wasn’t part of the equa-
tion, and the highest good was building a plan and sticking 
to it. Variance from the plan was a signal of failure. With 
the ascent of lean and agile thinking, we now understand 
that cost and schedule are constraints, but value is the 
goal. The same is true in strategic planning: those who 
stick to a plan are likely to be left behind in the value race, 
as customer needs and desires change. Adapting the plan, 
delivering minimum viable plans incrementally, getting 
rapid feedback, and letting that feedback drive your sub-
sequent iterations is the new normal in strategic thinking.  
 In short, most of the assumptions and beliefs that were handed down from the 
military strategies of World War II, and became the basis of corporate strategy 
during the 20th century, are in question in our current business environment. 
Everything we did to gain efficiency and guide execution in the command-and-
control organization is being challenged by the innovation and transparency 
brought by technology and the Internet. Migrating the dynamism of agility to 
the static domain of long-term, top-down strategic planning is the next step 
in enterprise evolution.  
 Adaptive Strategy 
 We’ve identified ideas and assumptions that no longer apply, which begs the 
obvious question, what does? What works in strategy today, and how is it 
related to the agility to which we’re guiding our clients? When the past is 
not prologue, and certainly not predictive, looking back on the successes and 
failures of the past loses its value. The deluge of data, generated in real-time 
by every transaction and every click, makes the selection and recognition of 
pertinent information more critical than trend lines and rear-view reports. 
The  hierarchic command structure  , with orders flowing down and compliance 
flowing up, does not result in the best outcomes. Each of these foundational 
ideas of strategy now must be questioned and adapted, based on the markets 
we play in and the customers we hope to attract. As in agile software devel-
opment, strategies emerge, as leadership engages with the marketplace, the 
customers, the technology, and its own teams. 

Chapter 10 | Agile Strategy
130
 In Chapter   2 , we noted that Alfred P. Sloan, the archetype of 20th-century man-
agement, believed companies would die if they didn’t “provide procedures for 
predicting change.” Venture capitalist  Maxwell Wessel advises  enterprises to 
“Predict the Future of Your Business.” 1 Wessel counsels businesses to ask three 
simple questions, and then, through  scenario planning  , think about how your 
answers to these questions change your markets, create new opportunities, and 
render old ideas passé. The questions are simple, but their analysis can reveal 
risks and options that smart,  innovative enterprises  can capitalize on:
• 
 What’s changed?  
• 
 What business assumptions become irrelevant?  
• 
 How could new models take advantage of the change?  
 Wessel then enumerates some examples of clearly visible changes on the 
horizon, and speculates on how their inevitable evolution might present risks 
and opportunities for those who look forward with foresight. Machine learn-
ing, for example, has obvious implications in the practice of  “big data” analysis  , 
but it also presents the risk of massive dislocation as machines learn to do 
the jobs of professionals and other knowledge workers. Current software 
can predict the actions of hackers, for example, in order to prevent fraud but 
can also predict the likelihood that an individual will become a hacker in the 
first place. Everyone from Google to the U.S. Government uses  algorithms  
to predict our predilection to purchase a product, or to engage in terrorism. 
How can enterprises steer their way through these scenarios, positive and 
negative, and navigate toward new business models that create value without 
unleashing chaos? From technology changes like the Internet of Things and 
Smart Cities, to cultural changes like resurging urban density or “the death 
of location” due to the ubiquitous grid, wise companies build future vision 
into their firms by asking, analyzing, and answering the three simple questions 
proposed by Wessel. This is an activity to which agile consultants can add sig-
nificant value; facilitating planning teams to consider  plausible future scenarios  , 
and their ramifications to the firm, enables agile consultants to migrate up the 
chain from practice-focused consulting to strategic value. 
 Scenario planning, or “ strategic foresight  ,” as it’s often called in the academic 
world, is not new. Back in 1967, Royal Dutch Shell began an experiment called 
”long-term studies." Ted Newland, a company veteran, describes the inauspi-
cious beginnings of this initiative. “I was placed in a little cubicle on the 18th 
floor and told to think about the future, with no real indications of what was 
required of me,” he reported to Angela Wilkinson and Roland Kupers for 
their  Harvard Business Review article. 2 
 1 Maxwell Wessel, “Predict the Future of Your Business,”  Harvard Business Review ,   https://
hbr.org/2015/04/predict-the-future-of-your-business  , April 13, 2015.  
 2 Angela Wilkinson and Roland Kupers, “Living in the Futures,”  Harvard Business Review , 
  https://hbr.org/2013/05/living-in-the-futures; May 2013  . 

The Agile Consultant
131
 A small team began considering alternative futures, from different oil-price 
scenarios and their implications to the firm to the analysis of various eco-
nomic and geopolitical shocks that could potentially impact the marketplace. 
This approach, according to Newland, helped to prepare the company to sur-
vive and prosper through the  OPEC  (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
 Countries  ) embargoes of the 1970s and the cataclysmic events of the 1980s 
such as the collapse of the Soviet Union. 
 It’s not only Shell that applies this future-planning practice; according to a 
2013 study, 3  scenario planning  adds to the innovation capabilities of firms, 
and helps firms avoid missed opportunities and unrecognized threats. Using 
interdisciplinary teams that are highly networked within the firm, and in the 
broader marketplace in which the firm competes, can help “spot signals that 
are relevant . . . explore them, filter out noise . . . pursue opportunities ahead of 
the competition, and recognize early signs of trouble.” 4 This sort of strategic 
thinking, according to the study, helps  enterprises achieve  some key aims:
• 
 Enhanced capacity to perceive change,  
• 
 Enhanced capacity to interpret and respond to change, and  
• 
 Enhanced capacity for organizational learning.  
 In the 2015 version of Bain & Company’s annual “Management Tools and 
Trends” report, 5 the top two findings, agreed upon by 75% of responders, 
were that the following:
• 
 Our ability to adapt to change is a significant competitive 
advantage. 
• 
 Innovation is more important than cost reduction for 
long term success.  
 Bain’s definition of Scenario Planning  tells us:
 Scenario Planning  allows executives to explore and prepare for several 
alternative futures. It examines the outcomes a company might expect under 
a variety of operating strategies and economic conditions. By raising and 
testing various “what-if” scenarios, managers can brainstorm together and 
challenge their assumptions in a nonthreatening, hypothetical environment 
before they decide on a certain course of action. 6  
 3 René Rohrbeck and Jane Oliver, “The Value Contribution of Strategic Foresight: Insights 
from an Empirical Study of Large European Companies,”   http://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2194787&download=yes  , December 30, 2013.  
 4 George S. Day and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, “Scanning the Periphery,”  Harvard Business 
Review , 83(11) (2005).  
 5 http://www.bain.com/publications/articles/management-tools-and-trends-
2015.aspx  . 
 6  www.bain.com/Images/BAIN_GUIDE_Management_Tools_2015_executives_guide.pdf   .  

Chapter 10 | Agile Strategy
132
 The advantages of this approach, according to Bain, is that it allows planners 
to challenge implicit and widely held beliefs, test the impact of key variables, 
and identify the key levers that can influence the company’s future course. The 
unfortunate news is that only 18% of Bain’s survey responders worldwide 
reported applying scenario planning as a key element of their strategic plan-
ning process. Maybe this is why Bain analysts report that the following:
 We see a significant risk in 75% of respondents believing that they have 
a competitive advantage relative to their peers. Statistically, it doesn’t add 
up. (A more realistic number is probably 25%.) Executives who believe that 
their companies are more competitive because sales and profits are rising 
in the midst of a recovery risk making wrong moves due to complacency. 
 The results of  scenario planning  , according to these surveys, illustrate its con-
nection to agility. Perceiving, interpreting, and responding to change is at the 
heart of agile development. The  scrum cycle of development  is specifically 
designed to respond to changes in a turbulent business environment; bringing 
that mentality to strategic planning through scenarios is a proven technique 
to enhance change readiness and responsiveness. When agile teams develop 
the solution to a customer problem, they engage in tactical scenario planning, 
in such conversations as the following: “If we change this, what happens to the 
rest of the product?” or “What’s the impact of moving this feature earlier in 
the release cycle?” This informal, tactical scenario planning is an implicit ele-
ment of innovation, as teams think through the implications of various deci-
sions. Evolving this sort of future thinking in the strategic process enables 
strategic planners to scan and evaluate the world outside their office, visualize 
the changing landscape, analyze the effects of various plausible future states, 
and make plans based on where the puck will be, not where it is now or was 
in the past.  
 Agile Strategic Thinking  
 Scenario planning is, of course, just one tool in a toolbox that includes other 
instruments like benchmarking, customer relationship management, and big 
data analytics. The tools applied are less important than the mind-set through 
which we approach strategy. Agile strategic planning accepts the foundation 
ideas that experimentation and innovation are more meaningful than predic-
tions based on past events, that recognizing and acting on patterns in the data 
is more helpful than looking at data in the rearview mirror, and that planning 
and execution are better served by inclusion, participation, and consensus 
than by top-down edicts from an exclusive team of executives. 
 Agile or adaptive planning is, of course, inextricably linked to the adaptive 
leadership we discussed in Chapter   9 . For adaptive planning to work, lead-
ers must shed their need for predictive plans and budgets and become 

The Agile Consultant
133
accustomed to the uncertainty and mutability of reality. The model of man-
agement before the advent of lean was based on executives dictating that 
certain projects be executed, in a prioritized order, connected to a set of 
static objectives negotiated behind closed doors and handed down in a long-
term plan. Budgets were assigned, completion dates were mandated, and 
any changes to date, budget, or scope were subject to lengthy negotiation 
processes, and seen as “deviations.”   
 When strategic planning is adaptive, and the enterprise embraces mutability, 
everything is a deviation. Scopes, dates, and budgets emerge from the cir-
cumstances we encounter by reading the market, reading our performance, 
reading the customer, and constantly deviating from our plans to create new, 
reality-based designs. Strategy becomes a series of 3, 6, and 12-month visions, 
each subject to many variables and open to changes based on the forces of the 
marketplace and the circumstances of execution. I’ll reiterate that this is far 
beyond the capacity of the practice-oriented coach; the capability to explain, 
persuade, and guide leaders to this new way of thinking about their business 
requires mature consultative skills. We must, as agile consultants, be able to 
persuade reluctant leaders and teams to let go of their comfortable habits of 
false predictability and ride through the waves of uncertainty and change that 
are the norm in today’s business environment.  
 An Agile Strategic Framework 
 Back in 2012, I had a lengthy conversation with Tom Conrad, a member of the 
founding team at Pandora. We chatted about agile development, and how that 
approach had influenced strategic planning at Pandora. I’ve included that full 
interview 7 at the end of this chapter. Here’s a quote from Conrad that outlines 
 Pandora’s current style  of strategic planning:
 Every 90 to 120 days, we’d build a list of new opportunities. . . . We’d 
generate a list of maybe 60 different product ideas. . . . Then we passed 
the list to the engineers who articulated the resources required to deliver, 
but certainly nothing like a full specification. Then we’d bring all the 
executives together, hang all the sixty or so ideas on the wall, and I’d give 
a walkthrough, describe who supported them and what revenue might 
be tied to them…the CEO, myself, every exec would walk around and 
vote for the ideas they supported…at the end we’d have about 10 to 15 
ideas that were fully supported…we’d hand off 10 or 15 initiatives to the 
engineering team and let them run with them for 90 days, and at the end 
of that time we’d go through the process again. 
 7  www.techrepublic.com/blog/it-consultant/agile-strategic-planning-and-
innovation-at-pandora/   . 

Chapter 10 | Agile Strategy
134
 Conrad illustrates a real implementation of some of the ideas I’ve been outlin-
ing here: short time horizons, inclusiveness, minimum viable plans, as opposed 
to the 152 objectives I’ve seen some organizations commit to (and never 
deliver), with the understanding that some of the initiatives might work and 
many might not, and the commitment to revisit the whole process on a quar-
terly basis to keep pace with the market reality outside their doors. 
 Many of these ideas have now migrated into a planning process known as 
“ big-room planning  ,” which, in many agile organizations, has all but supplanted 
the traditional executive off-site that was the accepted planning model. In 
both Pandora’s process, as described by Conrad, and in the big-room planning 
sessions that are becoming ubiquitous in agile enterprises, plans and ideas are 
made visible to the entire organization, priorities are set by consensus rather 
than edict (although executives still reserve the right to manage the priorities 
and flow of work), and, critically, a connection is established between commit-
ments and the capacity and capability to deliver. 
 I want to emphasize this element; many organizations accustomed to tra-
ditional planning often generate their  portfolio of projects  based on wish 
lists and political bargaining, with no thought to the teams’ actual capacity to 
deliver their dream list of projects. By focusing on the limited list of initiatives 
that the enterprise can actually deliver, minimum viable plans keep the focus 
on high-value efforts and avoid the trap of starting many projects and finishing 
none. 
 Tom Conrad’s description is a rough outline for a big-room planning ses-
sion, but the idea has evolved and become more consistently applied. 
These sessions typically include a representative selection of executives, 
managers, customer-facing experts, technical experts, and other leaders, 
managers and “do-ers.” They often cascade, from the full organization (if 
that’s reasonable based on size) to the individual program teams, and even 
to the actual delivery teams if their initiatives are broad enough to require 
a  strategic approach  . Every enterprise that decides to engage in  big-room 
planning designs its own participation program, with the caveat that we 
want to avoid exclusivity and make these as participative as is reasonable 
and productive. 
 In preparation for big-room planning, executives should understand their pri-
orities and expectations for the planning period but must also come prepared 
for surprises, adaptation, and negotiation. Managers and their teams should 
have thought about their real capacity and capability to deliver, and should also 
have their planned work mapped out and prioritized for the planning period, 
usually one quarter. It’s also critical that teams have thought about their risks, 
dependencies and resource gaps, as big-room planning is the perfect venue for 
negotiating and trading for resources and deliverables to ensure that commit-
ments that are made are feasible and properly resourced. Agile consultants 
should be adept at the planning and  execution  of big-room planning sessions. 

The Agile Consultant
135
Deep and careful planning is the key to emerging with a reasonable and valu-
able set of initiatives to which the enterprise can commit. 
 A typical agenda for a big-room planning session begins with an introduction 
by a  senior leader  , setting the stage for expectations from the session, and 
encouraging the teams to be open and collaborative. For  command-oriented 
organizations  evolving to agile, it’s important for executives to ensure that 
there will be no repercussions from conflict or debate, and that the session is 
reality based, even if commitments have been made. Each delivery team then 
has a short window, typically five or ten minutes, to present its current plan 
for the quarter, any new ideas or requests that have emerged this planning 
period, and any high-level risks or dependencies of which the entire popu-
lation should be aware. Teams are often encouraged to rank their projects 
in order of risk, with initiatives that have heavy external dependencies or 
resource needs listed in red. It’s typical, after these introduction presentations, 
to give the teams an hour or so to update their plans based on what they’ve 
heard, as this visibility into their peers’ plans can often trigger other questions, 
concerns or ideas. 
 The next stage is often called a “ marketplace  ,” in which all teams have 
an opportunity to meet with the other teams attending, to negotiate for 
resources, ensure that dependencies are considered and can be achieved, 
and generally to make sure that everyone’s plans and needs are synchro-
nized, and that commitments are made to satisfy requirements for deliver-
ables and resources. This session is the core of the exercise; it enables teams, 
which often work in isolation in large agile enterprises, to collaborate, not 
just within teams but across the enterprise to ensure that their planned 
work is feasible and resourced, and that risks are mitigated. It also gives, 
finally, a holistic view of the organization’s overall goals and priorities, both 
to the executive team and to the actual team members or their representa-
tive leadership. 
 Is this really strategic planning? Where are the long-term visions and objec-
tives? There’s a common misconception that objectives, like “Dominate the 
market in shoelaces” or “double our penetration of the robotic vacuum mar-
ket” are strategic, when, in fact, these are objectives only and don’t address the 
core elements of a  comprehensive strategy  . As in chess, saying “I want to win 
every game” is not a strategy, it’s an objective, and it misses the key element 
of a plan to achieve that ambitious and ambiguous goal. Strategy, in chess or 
in business, requires us to think about components such as timing, approach, 
where to compete, what our unique tactical advantages might be, and how 
we intend to sustain our execution. The beginning chess player won’t achieve 
her winning goals by competing with grandmasters, and the small enterprise 
won’t achieve its strategy by competing in saturated markets dominated by 
giants (unless they’re Tesla). These strategic ideas probably won’t emerge from 
a big-room planning session, although they will inform, and be informed by, its 

Chapter 10 | Agile Strategy
136
outcomes. There is still a place for executive vision in an agile strategic plan-
ning process, but without big-room planning as an input and output of that 
high-level strategizing, plans risk becoming disconnected from reality, from the 
market and the customer, and from the teams doing the work. Strategies tend 
to fail when the enterprise doesn’t understand both the holistic strategy and 
the means and tactics to get there, and are not bought in through participation 
in their framing. 
 The agile consultant engaging at the strategic level is undertaking a  monu-
mental task  , far beyond the practice-based coaching that occurs at the 
grassroots level. The concepts we’ve discussed essentially tell the execu-
tive team that everything they’ve learned, and practiced throughout their 
careers, is wrong. This message is difficult to transmit, and difficult to swal-
low, especially for hierarchical command organizations that are accus-
tomed to leading from the top and avoiding risk and experimentation. 
The ability to meet executive teams where they are, to avoid proselytizing 
and instead  persuade  through results and data, and to incrementally build 
the understanding of the benefits of the agile approach, are core compe-
tencies of the effective agile advisor. As we succeed in developing agile 
teams, and they begin to display their successes, the migration to agility 
across the enterprise becomes an imperative. Agile teams can’t survive 
if the enterprise, through stubborn adherence to outmoded techniques, 
works against them. No agile coach or consultant can be truly effective 
in creating an agile enterprise without understanding this strategic and 
human challenge, and devising strategies to guide the strategic process in 
an adaptive direction.  
 Summary 
 We’ve looked at the typical strategic planning processes of the 20th century 
and examined some of the outmoded beliefs that drove that approach. The 
speed of digital disruption and market change, the changing tastes and require-
ments of customers, and the visibility of formerly secret information are all 
drivers of a new approach to strategy. Those organizations that can let go of 
false ideas of predictability and sustainable advantage, and migrate to adaptive 
leadership and adaptive planning, are more likely to succeed in our turbulent 
environment, to innovate, and to foresee market challenges. We’ve reviewed 
some approaches to adaptive planning, such as the Pandora model and the 
big-room planning approach, and reviewed the importance for agile consul-
tants of engaging at the strategic level to ensure that agility at the team level 
is sustainable.  

The Agile Consultant
137
 Interview: Agile Strategic Planning and 
Innovation at  Pandora  
 Pandora’s CTO and VP Tom Conrad describes how the company’s 
agile strategic planning process diverged from the traditional, 
annual, all-hands product planning session. 8 
 I recently had an extended conversation with Tom Conrad, Chief Technology 
Officer and Executive Vice President of Product at Pandora, the Internet radio 
pioneer. Tom was a user interface designer for Mac OS at Apple, held posts at 
Pets.com and Documentum, and was the Technical Director for the You Don’t 
Know Jack line of video games before joining the founding team at Pandora. 
 My interest in chatting with Tom was not in the “so you’re doing agile develop-
ment” vein; rather, I’m interested in innovative companies that have migrated 
from agile development to agile strategy, and Pandora is a prime example of 
this wave of management philosophy. As many organizations have discovered, 
agile development can help add flexibility and responsiveness to their devel-
opment cycle, but these improvements only go so far when the rest of the 
organization has not evolved to a more agile approach. 
 Tom began our conversation by poking a hole in one of the foundation ideas of 
the IT revolution of the past few decades: the suggestion that the rapid changes 
we’ve seen have been due mostly to rapid technological advance. He said:
 If you’d asked me during the first 12 years of my career, what were 
the biggest innovations, I wouldn’t have said laptops, or the Internet, I 
definitely would have said that the massive changes in the way that we 
write software was the single most disruptive thing I’d seen to that point. 
 This is, in my view, an important insight; as critical as new hardware, software, and 
connectivity technologies have been to the IT revolution, none of these devel-
opments have been as meaningful as the migration to more iterative, collabora-
tive, and change-friendly development techniques. I’m in vehement agreement 
with Tom on this point; these new development approaches have enabled the 
rapid, responsive release of products that solve customer and consumer prob-
lems, and that have facilitated the evolutionary release cycle we’ve all become 
accustomed to, with new iPads and iPhones, new versions of cloud-based soft-
ware, and new generations of digital cameras and microprocessors every few 
months. While many of these new capabilities are delivered in hardware, they’re 
based on software, and iterative, incremental evolution focused on the needs of 
the marketplace has been the real enabling technology of the revolution.  
 8 Originally published on   TechRepublic.com   , by Rick Freedman, August 29, 2012. Used by 
permission.  

Chapter 10 | Agile Strategy
138
 Tom next reminded me of the restrictions of the "bad old days," even at a 
company seen as the poster-child of innovation:
 At Apple we couldn’t change a single byte without a year-long certification 
and release cycle. When I was there, that cycle was, pragmatically 
speaking, closer to two or three years. We did a little better than the 
automotive industry, in terms of innovating and getting to market quickly, 
but not much. 
 Tom and I chatted a bit about how these agile ideas have manifested at Pandora. 
He started by describing how traditional, multi-year strategic planning would 
handicap an innovative company like Pandora:
 Mobile systems, new advertising technologies, are all changing at a 
tremendous pace; we know more about the opportunities there today 
than we did 90 days ago. 90 days from now the world will be further 
fleshed out. It’s important for us to react to new information. If the iPhone 
SDK becomes available, and 90 days later the apps store opens, if you’re 
in a multi-year cycle, obviously you’ve risked missing an opportunity to 
react to critical new information. 
 Tom has defined in a brief comment the challenges that today’s innovative 
companies face that Westinghouse or Proctor & Gamble, for example, may 
not have faced 20 years ago. While innovation and new products have always 
been an element of strategy for leading companies, the marketplace was sig-
nificantly more stable and the product cycle much more deliberate and long-
term than it is now. Maytag may have had to release new features and functions 
in its household appliances, but it was unlikely that entire new markets and 
platforms for their products were opening up and mutating month-by-month. 
 Tom went on to describe how these new conditions influenced Pandora’s 
innovation cycle:  
 Everything we do here has been based on a 90 to 120 day calendar. I 
can tell you, based on the marketplace reaction to our products, where 
we might be 90 or 120 days out, but for each month beyond that it gets 
foggier and foggier. What that allowed us to do is be reactive to new 
opportunities as they come along. This planning philosophy informs how 
we perform all the way to the CEO level, and we have great support for 
this approach from the CEO. 
 I asked Tom how the strategic planning process at Pandora diverged from the 
traditional, annual, all-hands session that often ended up with a 100 item proj-
ect list of initiatives that never got prioritized or acted upon because it was 
so large and overwhelming.

The Agile Consultant
139
 For six of the years since we’ve launched, from 2005 to 2011, we used 
an agile version of the old-school, facilitated off-site approach. Every 90 to 
120 days, we’d build a list of new opportunities presented to the business. 
This was a product-management facilitated process, with the advertising 
team bringing in ad opportunities that had come along, and the product 
teams speaking with the voice of the consumer. We’d generate a list of 
maybe 60 different product ideas. There’d be a single PowerPoint slide 
for each opportunity with a few bullet points fleshing it out. The only 
requirement for getting on the list was that there was some stakeholder 
somewhere in the business that thought we’d be foolish not to pursue that 
idea in the next 90 days. Then we passed the list to the engineers who 
articulated the resources required to deliver, but certainly nothing like a 
full specification. Then we’d bring all the executives together, I’d hang all 
the sixty or so ideas on the wall, and I’d give a walkthrough, describe who 
supported them and what revenue might be tied to them. We’d hand out 
little sticky notes, and everyone would get the same number of votes, and 
the CEO, myself, every exec would walk around and vote for the ideas 
they supported. There’d be some horse-trading and some reconfiguration 
of some ideas, and at the end we’d have about 10 to 15 ideas that were 
fully supported and the rest with a few votes here and there. So at the end 
of the process we’d hand off 10 or 15 initiatives to the engineering team 
and let them run with them for 90 days, and at the end of that time we’d 
go through the process again. 
 I think that Tom’s description of the original Pandora planning process is 
instructive for a few reasons. Firstly, it’s more agile and iterative than most 
corporate planning processes I’ve experienced, and is a great fit with an agile 
software development approach. The number of projects generated by the 
process is small enough so that they can be tried and either accepted or 
rejected based on real-world engineering or market results, rather than on 
politics and positional jockeying. The cycle is quick enough to frequently con-
sider new developments in the marketplace or the technology. The realities 
of resource constraints are built in to the process, since under-resourced 
projects are bound to fail, and so will bubble up to the vision of the executive 
team at the next session.  
 

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_11
 C H A P T E R 
 The Leadership 
Commitment 
 Commanders know the objective; leaders grasp the direction. Commanders 
dictate; leaders influence. Controllers demand; collaborators facilitate. 
Controllers micro-manage; collaborators encourage. Managers who embrace 
the leadership-collaboration model understand their primary role is to set 
direction, to provide guidance, and to facilitate connecting people and teams  
 —Jim Highsmith (2000)  
 All of the agile practices we apply, from scrum and kanban to big-room plan-
ning, are just that—practices. They are the result of the incremental discovery, 
over decades, of challenges with prevailing methods, and of trying different 
solutions to address those challenges. As we’ve inched toward what we now 
call agility, we’ve tried, and accepted or discarded, many ideas that we thought 
might alleviate the issues we found with predictive, big, upfront plan tech-
niques. We’ve codified certain sets of practices, like scrum or XP, often as a 
set of rules to follow. We’ve come a long way from the faulty ideas that held 
us back, like the hubris to think we could predict the future and put a firm 
fixed price on it. Many enterprises have evolved substantially toward a lean, 
agile set of methods that, taken together, lead them to believe that they’ve 
achieved agility. 
11

Chapter 11 | The Leadership Commitment
142
 The application of methods and practices, even for teams that have evolved to 
 agile strategic and big-room planning  , is still “doing agile.” Our teams and lead-
ers have learned and internalized the techniques and tools of agility, and they 
are seeing results from their efforts. The enterprise is not truly agile, however, 
until both the leaders and the ultimate customers have made the transition 
from “doing agile” to “being agile.” Agile theorists, from Mike Cottmyer and 
Michael Sahota to Jim Highsmith, have addressed this issue of migrating to 
an agile mind-set across the organization, and thus enabling the enterprise 
to truly be agile. As with any transition that is about more than just follow-
ing a set of rules, and requires a change in attitude, behavior, and perspective, 
it’s easier to learn the moves than it is to become adept. We’ve heard, from 
second grade on, that we need to learn the rules before we know enough to 
break them properly. Learning the rules, however, is necessary but not suf-
ficient. To go beyond blindly following rules to the adaptive mind-set required 
for enterprise agility, executives and clients must abandon traditional ideas 
and embody a different approach to leadership. Leaders and customers, and 
the teams that deliver value to them, need to go beyond the “know how” 
and internalize the “know why.” For the agile consultant, the ability to both 
coach the enterprise in the know-how required to begin the agile journey and 
then embody and transmit the know-why that enables agility to permeate the 
enterprise is the ultimate challenge. 
 Lean Leadership Basics  
 When thinking about  guiding enterprises to agility, it’s always my inclination to 
go back to first principles. In agile, my first principles are based on lean think-
ing. One of the key elements of lean, which we rarely see addressed in agile 
discussions, is the idea of “ leader-standard work  .” While I don’t believe that 
all of the lean ideas and processes included in leader-standard work, heavily 
weighted to a manufacturing climate, are applicable in agile, a basic under-
standing of the concept can add significant value to our discussion of the 
leadership role in agility.  
 Leader-standard work  , in a lean manufacturing environment, is designed to 
solve a number of problems. In many organizations, every time a new execu-
tive, manager, or supervisor joins the team, his initial impulse is often to bring 
a new set of management techniques, new processes, new metrics, new team-
mates, and a new cultural style. David Mann, 1 whose work is the source of 
many of these ideas, calls this phenomenon the “new sheriff in town” mental-
ity, and, as anyone who has spent time in a corporate enterprise knows, it can 
be an extremely disruptive and confounding experience. As an agile consul-
 1 David Mann,  Creating a Lean Culture: Tools to Sustain Lean Conversions , Second Edition (New 
York: Taylor & Francis Group, 2010).  

The Agile Consultant
143
tant, I hear stories constantly about organizations that were in the midst of an 
agile transformation, only to be pulled back to waterfall when a “new sheriff” 
showed up in the executive suite. Thrashing back and forth from traditional 
to agile practices is common in many companies, as different leaders and dif-
ferent silos either embrace or resist agile methods, and as the difficulties of 
migrating to agility start to emerge.   
 Providing a standard set of expectations for leaders helps protect teams, and 
the organization, from this sort of thrash. When we define the leader’s set of 
responsibilities, from the immediate product owner and scrummaster to the 
executive suite, we set a baseline of behaviors and attitudes that are applied 
regardless of personality. One of the known wastes in any process is variability, 
which can subvert the gains made by lean and agile adoption. When new lead-
ers know that the option of throwing the cards up in the air and starting over 
is not available, the risk of disruptive variability is diminished. 
 Leader-standard work also has the advantage of making agile leadership quali-
ties visible. As with our big visible indicators in agile team practices, leader-
standard work provides transparency at the executive and management levels. 
Existing managers who are unwilling or unable to make the transition from 
predictive, hierarchical styles to adaptive, collaborative styles will be recog-
nized quickly, and can be trained, reassigned, or managed out as required. The 
whole point of agility is to evolve from a “hope and wish” corporate mentality 
in which we wait for leaders and teams to “get it”, to a transparent, reality-
based conversation that enables kaizen and action. The clear expectations of 
leader-standard work allow executives to make quick decisions about their 
talent, address them, and avoid the risk of delay and confusion that can result 
from active or passive resistance.  
 Leader-standard work  is based on a few foundation ideas. The first is that 
leaders work in a complementary fashion, with the leader at the team level 
managing execution of each task, the supervisor spot-checking work periodi-
cally throughout the day, the value stream manager managing daily account-
ability and managing resource capacity and issue resolution, and executives 
reviewing trends, performing Gemba walks (management walkthroughs of the 
work site), taking ownership of quality produced by the entire value chain, 
and leading kaizen efforts. The second key idea is that this work is driven by a 
neatly defined set of processes that drive the daily activities of each leader in 
the chain, with the intention of developing a set of best practices for leaders 
to follow. 
 The language applied in lean manufacturing differs greatly from the agile lexi-
con, but many of the basic concepts remain. Leader-standard work typically 
refers to supervisors, value stream managers, and plant managers, while we 
talk about scrummasters, product owners, and executives. Leader-standard 
work refers to things like shift changes, Gemba walks, and buzzer-to-buzzer 
spot-checks, while we use velocity, detours, blockages, and big-room planning 

Chapter 11 | The Leadership Commitment
144
sessions in agile leadership practices. Despite the differences in language, lean 
concepts still apply. We still measure daily progress, but instead of buzzer-
to-buzzer meetings we use stand-ups. We still manage progress across the 
iteration or cycle, but we do it in sprint planning and demo sessions instead 
of Gemba walks. We still collaborate to improve blockages and inefficiencies, 
but we do it through retrospectives and scrum-of-scrum sessions, rather than 
supervisor “tier 2” sessions. For more detail on the fundamentals of leader-
standard work refer to Mann. 2 
 From Lean to Agile 
 Lean thinking is the basis for agility, but agile was designed for software devel-
opment, and has mutated significantly from original lean concepts. While col-
laboration, customer focus, self-managed teams, and kaizen originate in lean, 
the Agile Manifesto and Principles originally evolved to correct deficiencies 
in  predictive software development  . Enterprises have now discovered that 
these ideas can go far beyond the software team, but the original principles 
addressed technical architecture, iterative development, working software, and 
changing requirements. Many of the artifacts of lean manufacturing don’t apply 
in agile, and agile has simplified lean practices significantly. While “simplicity”—
maximizing the work not done—came from lean, a walkthrough of many lean 
manufacturing enterprises can look anything but simple, with dozens of charts, 
checklists, sign-ins, and pitch charts scattered around the plant. While the same 
can be said of scrum rooms and kanban boards, the process focus of lean manu-
facturing has been replaced by a less prescriptive “ inspect and adapt  ” mind-set, 
less likely to focus on multiple daily quality and progress spot-checks, and more 
likely to vary widely in implementation based on local conditions and decisions. 
Agilists would much rather talk about the expected behaviors and mindsets of 
executives than about leader-standard work. So where does the twain meet? 
The opening quote from Jim Highsmith can be applied equally to lean or agile, 
but the practices required for effective agile leadership differ. Let’s take a look 
at the  roles and mindsets  expected of different leaders in the agile enterprise, 
and see how those can be both harmonious and divergent from lean practice. 
 Every agilist knows that scrummasters and product owners each have defined 
areas of responsibility, with the scrummaster owning the process of scrum or 
agile, and the product owner representing the client’s interests in developing 
the product. Undefined in the Scrum Guide or in most other agile litera-
ture is the equivalent of  leader-standard work  . We’ve looked at various  scrum 
scaling frameworks  , some of which, like SAFe (Scaled Agile Framework 4.0), 
attempt to address the question of leadership standards by prescribing a clear 
set of roles and responsibilities, from the Portfolio to the Team level. In this 
 2 Ibid.  

The Agile Consultant
145
 scaling strategy  , as illustrated in Figure 9-1, roles from Portfolio Manager to 
Epic Owners at the Portfolio level, through Value Stream Engineers, Solution 
Architects, and Release Managers at Value Stream level, Release Train Engineers 
and System Architects at the Program level, and down to the product owner 
and scrummaster at the Team level, are designated by the framework. As we’ve 
discussed, many agilists find this  prescriptive model  too similar to a corporate 
hierarchy for their taste. 
 On the other end of the spectrum, Ken Schwaber 3 describes an  organic scaling 
strategy  in which one agile team begets others, which then multiply and scale 
further, rearranging the product backlogs so that subsets can be assigned to 
new teams. The original team now becomes an  integration scrum team  , with 
the mission of taking responsibility for all the new scrum teams and integrating 
their efforts into a quality product. New scrummasters report to the original 
scrummaster, and new product owners report to the first product owner. This 
becomes a natural hierarchy, in which the original team spawns new teams, new 
scrummasters, and product owners, and those teams in turn generate additional 
teams, with responsibility for overall product conformance and quality reaching 
up the chain. Nowhere in Schwaber’s description is any role defined for execu-
tives, whom, it is assumed, focus on strategic direction, and on exhibiting the 
collaborative qualities outlined in Highsmith’s quote opening this chapter. 
 Somewhere on this spectrum lies the appropriate vision for leadership in a par-
ticular enterprise. It’s the agile consultant’s job to help the enterprise determine 
the suitable model for its unique circumstance. As noted in Chapter   9   , SAFe is 
a great choice for large, complex organizations migrating to agility from a pre-
dictive,  hierarchical model  , while still exercising some control from above, and 
still performing some predictive budgeting and strategy alignment. Enterprises 
that are already more focused on egalitarian, participative management, and 
have experienced some success with grassroots agility, might prefer  Schwaber’s 
organic model  . In either case, the mind-set and behavior of managers and execu-
tives will still need to evolve. Again, to go back to lean principles, let’s take a look 
at the criteria for lean leadership set by James Womack, the original popularizer 
of  lean ideas  through his bestselling study of Toyota lean culture 4 : 
 Lean leaders:
• 
 eagerly embrace the role of problem solver.  
• 
 realize that no manager at a higher level can solve a prob-
lem at a lower level—problems can only be solved where 
they live, by those living with them.  
 3 Ken Schwaber,  The Enterprise and Scrum (Developer Best Practices). Redmond, WA: Microsoft 
Press, 2007).  
 4 James P. Womack Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos,  The Machine That Changed the World: The 
Story of Lean Production (New York: Free Press, 1990).  

Chapter 11 | The Leadership Commitment
146
• 
 believes that all problem solving requires experimentation.  
• 
 understands that no problem is solved forever. The intro-
duction of countermeasures will create new problems at 
some other point in the organization. The critical, probing 
mind of the lean manager stays active in the pursuit of 
perfection.  
 These overarching principles apply in agile as well as lean. Let’s examine them 
with a bit more focus on agile language and practice. 
 Eagerly Embrace the Role of Problem  Solver  
 Too often, in my experience, managers and executives play the role of problem 
creator, rather than problem solver. They drive sales teams to sell more and 
more, while starving delivery teams of resources. They commit to unrealistic 
and overly aggressive dates and budgets, forcing teams into “death march” 
projects that sap morale and disappoint customers. They remain remote from 
their organization, hiding in mahogany suites on the executive floor with little 
contact or interaction with the enterprise. As noted in Chapter   2 manage-
ment resistance and cultural norms are often the key barrier to agile adoption. 
The traditional, hierarchical style of management we explored in Chapter   2 
often leads to counterproductive, adversarial relationships across the enter-
prise, as individuals jockey for position and hide bad news for fear of reprisal 
or corporate shunning.   
 The lean or agile leader displays the opposite of these behaviors. In agile, 
every bit of bad news is a lesson to learn and an opportunity for improve-
ment. Rewards and incentives are focused on team achievement rather than 
adherence to discipline and corporate conformance. Executives and managers 
exist to enable teams to achieve and to remove barriers to that success, not 
to manage the daily tasks of their teams. Teams self-manage the details of their 
work, and management creates the environment for them to perform to their 
highest potential. Leaders address broken processes, lacking skill sets, and inef-
fective leaders or employees, rather than kicking the can down the road. They 
manage intake, ensuring that the organization doesn’t commit to more than it 
can reasonably deliver. The concept of service leadership is key in this context. 
Agile leaders work for the team, not the other way around.  
 Problems can only be Solved where they Live 
 This may seem in conflict with the previous statement, but they’re actually 
complementary ideas. There are local problems and global problems within an 
enterprise. Agile leaders must be problem  solvers at the global level, working 
on the repair of broken corporate processes and norms, and must also have 

The Agile Consultant
147
the proper amount of Zen to leave the local problems to the local teams and 
resist the temptation to jump in and prescribe a cure. We’ve learned from 
decades of lean practice that only the local team has the intimate understand-
ing of the sources of their challenges and obstacles. We also know that own-
ership of those issues is a key component of team dynamics and enablement. 
I’ve advised too many teams, disheartened by repeated frustration, that have 
adopted a posture of “learned helplessness,” learning from repeated failed 
attempts that any ideas they come up with will be shot down or overruled by 
management. These demoralized teams will simply wait to be told what to do, 
and how to resolve their concerns, by managers, always staring upward in the 
hope that some direction will rain down. This learned passivity is a powerful 
obstacle to team empowerment, and is especially tangible in organizations 
that have run the cycle of organizational panaceas, only to repeatedly devolve 
to previous patterns. 
 While successful agile leaders want to avoid prescription, that doesn’t imply 
disengagement. Leaders can provide the forum for collective problem solv-
ing, applying  big-room planning sessions  and “ Gemba walks  .” The concept of 
Gemba walks, mentioned earlier, is a central element of lean, and is, I believe, 
a missing element in many agile transitions. By simply walking around, visiting 
teams and uncovering their concerns and challenges, executives can project 
an attitude of caring and concern and encourage teams to let go of the fear 
of reprisal and blame. They can gently remind team members of their com-
mitment to agility, and provide coaching and direction that improves strate-
gic alignment, without digging down into prescriptive management. MBWA 
(Management by Walking  Around  ) is an old idea, but it is institutionalized as 
the Gemba walk in lean organizations, and is an overlooked tool in enterprise 
agility.  
 All Problem Solving Requires Experimentation 
 The enterprise is, by its nature, a conservative entity, utilizing  proven methods  
and processes to achieve a consistent and repeatable result. Typical organiza-
tions have two key fears:  risk and change  . The transition to agility exacerbates 
both of these concerns. Agilists embrace disruption, while enterprises avoid it. 
Experimentation and emergent outcomes are key to agility; predictable results 
drive corporate planning, with experimentation confined to the research and 
development function. The continual feedback and improvement loop of any 
kaizen enterprise makes the basic assumption that feedback will result in 
change; otherwise, what’s the point? We also assume that we can speak freely 
and point out deficiencies and inefficiencies without censure. Many executives 
forget that the proven methods to which they cling became “tried and true” 
through decades of trying, and cannot be sacrosanct as markets evolve. Strong 
agile leaders also recognize that kaizen efforts can never reach their goal, 
which is perfection. Only consistent experimentation in an open, collaborative 

Chapter 11 | The Leadership Commitment
148
environment enables improvement. The hierarchical idea that only constant 
pressure from the top can motivate workers to achieve has been discredited 
for years, but it is still the ruling philosophy in many enterprises. Agile lead-
ers must be encouraged to drive fear and reprisal from their mind-set and 
behavior, and accept the reality that risk and change are essential elements of 
improvement and innovation.  
 No Problem is Solved Forever 
 Agile theorists often talk of enterprises as complex adaptive systems ( CAS ) . 
According to an MIT paper, 5 “Complex Adaptive Systems are dynamic sys-
tems able to adapt in and evolve with a changing environment.” In a CAS 
environment, everything we touch touches something else, and every change 
spreads across the system, creating unforeseen circumstances that we then 
need to iteratively adjust. Systems thinking, a core precept of both lean and 
agile, reminds us that, as with technology, the bug we fix here has the poten-
tial to blow up something there. This is one of the reasons that legacy-bound 
organizations fail; they fall in love with, and, worse, enforce their own history 
and culture while the world sweeps by at exponential speed. Those who favor 
stability over change make the fundamental flaw of believing that the universe 
cares what they want. Complex adaptability requires us to go beyond merely 
anticipating the implications of the changes and experiments we undertake. It 
also requires us to acknowledge that we’ll be wrong most of the time when 
we try to foresee unforeseen consequences. Kaizen is eternal and systemic. 
 The cited MIT paper also notes that “complexity results from the inter-rela-
tionship, inter-action and inter-connectivity of the elements within a system and 
between a system and its environment. This implies that a decision or action by 
one part within a system will influence all other related parts, but not in any 
uniform manner.” It’s this interactive influence that disrupts predictability, and 
upsets predictive managers. In the predictive corporate world, one of the worst 
things a manager can do is keep coming back to the same intractable prob-
lems. This is perceived as a sign of incompetence and failure, in the traditional 
view. Agile managers grasp the idea that yesterday’s solution will soon become 
tomorrow’s problem, and that challenges, especially in evolving complex enter-
prises, will circle back around numerous times as circumstances change.  
 Agile Leadership Responsibilities 
 The point of this discussion is clarity of roles and responsibilities. Agilists 
understand the accountabilities that product owners, scrummasters, and 
teams take on in agile practice, but more ambiguous is the commitment of 
 5 http://web.mit.edu/esd.83/www/notebook/Complex%20Adaptive%20Systems.pdf . 

The Agile Consultant
149
leaders. To ensure that clarity, I’ve assembled the following list that lays out, in 
my view, the actions and behaviors that leaders, from executives to managers 
and team leads, must assume: 
 Executives  :
• 
 Determine and communicate enterprise strategy.  
• 
 Empower and encourage team achievement and 
ownership.  
• 
 Ensure that enterprise-level commitments match capac-
ity and capability to deliver.  
• 
 Practice service leadership, understanding that they work 
for the teams and not vice versa.  
• 
 Leave the executive suite to go, see, encourage, and guide.  
• 
 Take on the hard challenges of enterprise improvement 
that create the environment for success.  
• 
 Encourage enterprise-level collaboration, and break down 
silos and barriers.  
• 
 Embody the Agile Principles.  
 Managers  :
• 
 Communicate corporate strategy and guide team align-
ment to strategic objectives.  
• 
 Understand their teams’ capacity and capability.  
• 
 Protect teams from unreasonable demands and expectations.  
• 
 Influence executive strategic planning by building a robust 
feedback loop.  
• 
 Create a kaizen atmosphere in which dissent, disagree-
ment, and concerns can be freely discussed and solved.  
• 
 Respect the autonomy of their teams while ensuring 
alignment with enterprise priorities.  
• 
 Be a leader and coach rather than a foreman.  
• 
 Embody the Agile Principles.  
 Team leads  , including scrummasters and product owners:
• 
 Respect the agile processes: don’t succumb to the temp-
tation to change the process rather than addressing the 
dysfunction.  

Chapter 11 | The Leadership Commitment
150
• 
 At the same time, inspect and adapt both the product and 
the process through kaizen methods.  
• 
 Encourage and sustain evolutionary gains in productivity 
and quality.  
• 
 Fearlessly call out unforced errors and gaps.  
• 
 Create a feedback loop to ensure leaders stay connected 
to customer-level realities.  
• 
 Take problems to the team rather than prescribing 
remedies.  
• 
 Encourage team-level collaboration, and break down silos 
and barriers.  
• 
 Embody the Agile Principles.  
 Of course, these lists are not complete; whole books can be written about the 
commitments of agile leaders. While not conclusive, agile leaders who exhibit 
these qualities will have a head start on evolving their organizations to agility, 
and to transforming themselves and their companies into open, fearless, hon-
est, responsive, and continuously improving enterprises.  
 Customers Are Leaders Too 
 After all this discussion about internal leadership, it’s important to remember 
that  customers  have leadership responsibilities as well. In the customer-centric 
world of agile, it is customers, and their representatives, the product owners, 
who determine what we work on, how we prioritize it, and whether or not 
we’ve achieved their vision of the product. When we evolve from an internal-
facing, product-led strategy to a customer-focused, market-led view, the role 
of the customer transitions from a passive consumer of new products, created 
based on internal needs, research, and metrics, to the central figure in the 
entire enterprise value chain. We move from the push of a marketing-led prod-
uct cycle to a customer-pull model, offering new versions and features based 
on feedback from our clients. We shift from an internal clock of product cycles 
and upgrades to a customer-focused and market-led cadence. “The customer 
is king” has been a business motto for 100 years, but in the agile world, the 
customer is more than king; he is collaborator, innovator, product designer, 
partner, and judge.  
 Many customers of information technology (IT), whether internal users of enter-
prise systems or external customers using technology systems or products, have 
adversarial relationships with their IT providers. Projects or products are late, 
buggy, unfriendly, and obsolete. IT support and delivery teams talk in technical 
jargon and don’t understand the business’s needs. Specifications are thrown over 
the wall, and are often incomplete and obscure. Expectations are missed, prom-

The Agile Consultant
151
ises aren’t kept, tempers are frayed, and mistrust escalates. The daily interactions 
between delivery teams and customers become tense, fraught, and unproductive, 
and the pressure mounts with each new defect or miss. The vicious cycle of tech-
nical debt leads to increased defects and support, which leads to further pressure 
and mistrust, and around we go with no exit in sight. 
 When the enterprise begins the journey to agility, it’s not uncommon for the 
customer to be negatively impacted. Their list of committed fixes, changes, and 
upgrades are often wildly out of sync with the team’s capacity to fulfill, sales teams 
are out selling more and adding to the pipeline of commitments, and executives are 
exerting pressure to fill the 200-pound bag of capacity with 500 pounds of work. 
The mandate to get things done does not change the capacity to deliver, except 
by forcing teams to sign up for death march projects, further sapping morale and 
quality. In the end, someone has to transmit the bad news to the customer that 
commitments previously made, totally out of whack with capacity, will need to be 
reprioritized, rescoped, and in many cases delayed or dropped. This is not a happy 
message, on either side of the conversation, which often leads product owners 
and executives to avoid it, thus exacerbating the vicious cycle even further. 
 Not a happy picture for anyone. Coaches can train small teams in agile prac-
tices all day long, but unless the ultimate customer is engaged in the con-
versation, and persuaded to adopt an agile mind-set that’s ready to accept 
experimentation and sustainable development, agility will falter and fail. As 
important as it is to guide teams and leaders to agility, failure to also guide the 
customer on this path will undermine our efforts. On the positive side, a cus-
tomer who grasps the advantages of agility, understands that change can mean 
disruption but can also drive improvement, and is willing to take the journey 
with us and accept the uncertainty and experimentation that come with agile, 
is an invaluable partner. These customers can back off the intransigent expec-
tations and relationship tensions and give the team some space to get itself 
sorted and try the agile approach.  
 For the agile consultant, the job of helping our sponsor’s enterprise bring its 
customers into the agile fold is decisive. We need to elevate our focus from just 
the team and its practices, and convince leadership, marketing, and sales teams 
that their customers are not only at the end of their value streams but also 
at the beginning, driving their product direction with their needs, desires, and 
expectations. We need to help them understand the difference between a push 
system, with its focus on ever-new methods of marketing and promotion, to a 
pull system, in which the focus is on responding to the market and partnering 
with the customer to understand their expectations and challenges. We must 
help sales teams learn to throttle commitments to fit capacity, a difficult chore 
when their compensation is based on selling more stuff. Finally, we need to 
convince leaders that the traditional metrics, like sales quotas and advertising 
impressions, must be combined with disciplined intake processes and customer 
feedback loops. These systemic organizational adaptations are as important as 
the agile behaviors of delivery teams, and far more difficult to coach. 

Chapter 11 | The Leadership Commitment
152
 It should be clear that, in addition to the grassroots activities we undertake 
with delivery teams, we must have a parallel top-down effort that persuades 
and educates. When I take on an agile evolution project, one of the first things 
I focus on is discovering an internal agile advocate at the executive level. 
Sometimes it’s the sponsor who engaged me, but often the directive comes 
from further up the leadership chain. Agility has been the subject of much pub-
licity lately, from the  Harvard Business Review to  Forbes and  Fortune magazines, 
and there often exists a level of curiosity, or even commitment, in the execu-
tive ranks. If we’re to change the attitudes and perceptions of the ultimate 
customer, we need to have sponsorship from the top, as all the incentives and 
metrics we’ve discussed run against the grain of the message we intend to 
send. As discussed previously, we first need to help leaders understand and 
embrace their roles before we can start realigning customer expectations.  
 How Agile Consultants Encourage Change 
 In Chapter   1   we discussed the change management techniques recommended 
by Mike Cohn and John Kotter. From Cohn’s ADAPT (Awareness, Desire,  Ability, 
Promotion, Transfer) framework to Kotter’s XLR8 principles, there are proven 
methods for guiding enterprises through major change. In simple terms, we 
educate and persuade, create awareness of the need to change, develop a sense 
of urgency through a Big Opportunity or idea, build a supporting coalition or 
team, and encourage an evolution of values, culture and practices across the 
enterprise. These theoretical ideas simplify into the techniques that I use when 
persuading both leaders and customers to work in a different way. 
 I’m a believer in social proof, the idea that it’s easier to persuade people and 
organizations to change when they see others successfully adapt. I therefore am 
an advocate of both evidence, like the Standish Group agile success metrics we 
saw in Chapter   2 , and anecdote, like the voluminous case studies available on 
the Web. I often start my engagements by compiling a bibliography of articles 
and studies that demonstrate the potential benefits of agility. While we can’t 
make anyone read a study, we can provide them for those who might want to 
dig deeper. I’ve developed many training programs, from “Agile Basics” for teams 
and product owners to “Agile for Executives” to “Agile for Customers,” and 
I’ve presented them worldwide to both sponsors and their clients. I’ve invited 
previous clients to recount their journeys, triumphs, and struggles, to help pre-
pare my new client for the road ahead. All of these methods of social proof can 
be helpful with both sponsors and customers, to allay their fears and truthfully 
prepare them for the challenge of wholesale transition. 
 Visibility is a key agile value, and also a potent change enabler. I’ve observed 
that it often takes beginning scrum teams a few months to grasp the basic 
practices and put them in motion, but, once my initial teams start to experi-
ence success and generate consistent velocity and quality, I want to make 

The Agile Consultant
153
them visible to both the leaders of the enterprise and its customers. I find that 
seeing a well-functioning team in the act of planning a sprint, refining a backlog, 
or presenting a demonstration can go a long way toward getting all parties on 
board with the migration. It’s important to wait until these practices are run-
ning well; we don’t want to expose too many warts in front of our audience. 
However, some challenges should be visible, such as the reality of the team’s 
capacity and the technical challenges that are holding the team back. “Waiting 
for customer” is an area of blockage that may be beneficial for the end client 
to see, and “stuck due to technical issues” might motivate leaders to put some 
urgency into those eternal system fixes.  
 In our discussion about Exploration and Engagement, in Chapter   4 , we empha-
sized the importance of knowing your sponsor and her organization. I begin 
engagements by seeking out the advocates of agility, from the executive to 
the business analyst, so that I know where the resisters and supporters might 
lie. Consultants with the persuasive and personal skills to build a supporting 
coalition of agile believers, to help guide and encourage the enterprise in its 
evolution, are more likely to lead a successful transition. When the team gets 
into the inevitable trouble, the teammate who encourages them to push on, 
who picks up the agile ideas and reinforces them with the team, is invaluable. 
Likewise at the executive level, the leader who understands that organiza-
tional transition is hard, and can send a positive message through the enter-
prise to keep the momentum going and allay fears, is an essential partner for 
the agile advisor. 
 The same is true on the customer side. The agile consultant who can edu-
cate the client, understand the history of the relationship, their concerns and 
disappointments, and can paint a compelling picture of benefits to come, has 
a greater chance of alleviating some of the pressure and mistrust that has 
built up over years. When agility starts to show some results that benefit the 
customer, it amplifies our message and begins to reform the adversarial rela-
tionship, slowly and over time, into one of enhanced trust and collaboration. 
  Summary 
The key, of course, to both executive and customer acceptance and partici-
pation in agility is successful results. Once we persuade sponsors and clients 
to trust us to make things better, we must do so. We must provide the met-
rics and visibility that illustrate our successes. We must truly collaborate, and 
hear the sponsor and customer when they are faced with challenges, or have 
improvement ideas. We must, as always, demonstrate our understanding that 
transition is difficult, and that there will be many bumps and detours before 
we reach agility, and that kaizen is eternal. We’re now on the hook to deliver 

Chapter 11 | The Leadership Commitment
154
the results that customers value and that our sponsors expect. Our skills as 
facilitators, persuaders, educators, advisors, guides, and mentors will be tested 
to their limits. Finally, we must embody the agile principles and model the 
behaviors so that we train, coach, and mentor through our own behaviors 
rather than simply with words and theories.  

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_12
 C H A P T E R 
 The Agile 
Enterprise                          
 As an agile consultant, it’s gratifying to see the evolution within teams under 
your guidance. Delivery teams begin to communicate and collaborate. Managers 
make the transition from foremen to leaders. Executives begin to understand 
that enablement, encouragement, and service leadership is more effective, and 
more human, than mere power. The  enterprise  begins to untangle some of its 
faulty processes and legacy dysfunctions, and begins to accept the simplicity 
and honesty of agility. The agile advisor who guides the enterprise to the edge 
of substantial improvement in process, culture, and leadership can rightfully 
have pride in that accomplishment. 
 It’s great to celebrate, but don’t revel in your success for too long. The evolu-
tion to a real-time, responsive, and agile enterprise is not complete. With the 
threats of  digital disruption and changing technology  always present, agile advi-
sors will have to dive even deeper to get to that ultimate goal. We’ll have to 
develop strategies to enable our sponsors to examine and improve their busi-
ness processes, their customer relationships, and their core business model. 
We’ll need to advise them on the  technical architectural enhancements  they 
may need to make, in order to provide a firm foundation for the responsive 
enterprise. They may have to change the way they store, disseminate, and 
analyze the reams of data that are thrown off by every transaction in the 
digital marketplace. Their “ innovation engine ” may be broken, or they may 
lack one altogether. Marketing, sales, manufacturing, distribution, customer 
interaction—all may need to evolve significantly for the enterprise to benefit 
12

Chapter 12 | The Agile Enterprise
156
from the agile ideas we’ve been championing. From the  business model  to the 
technical architecture to the way products are marketed, delivered, and sup-
ported, to reach true enterprise-level agility, the agile consultant must inspire 
the organization to push further, past team practices, past lean principles, and 
past executive behavior change, to an enterprise-wide transformation that 
touches every element of the business model. 
 Not every organization wants or needs to go this route. Many of our clients 
will be happy when they reach agility in their  product development function  , 
or when their executives migrate from hierarchy to collaboration. Many will 
be thrilled to do agile, and lack the desire or will to go through the disrup-
tion required to be agile. That’s fine; as consultants, we are servant leaders 
ourselves, and must put aside our personal preferences and desires in order 
to help the enterprise achieve its goals, not ours. Still, when agile coaches and 
consultants gather, I often hear the “one that got away” stories, of enterprises 
that made significant strides, which could have gained much more but decided 
that they had reached their limit of tolerance or aspiration. These rueful con-
versations of what might have been may be inherent in the consultant’s role, 
but they leave a tinge of regret all the same. “If only . . .” we consultants lament, 
trailing off with knowing looks. 
 I won’t extol the  benefits  of agility, or highlight the risks of the disruptive 
economy, any longer. Let’s focus instead on the destination of responsiveness 
and adaptability, and the traits and behaviors the enterprise needs to adopt, to 
evolve toward agility across the entire organization. 
 Agility = Responsiveness 
 According to a report by Tata Consulting Services ( TCS) , 1 the responsive 
enterprise can “shift rapidly to where customers want it to go next—the next 
buying experience they want, the new innovations they desire, or the new 
way they want to do business with your firm altogether.” My favorite defini-
tion, however, comes from Responsive.org, a member-run organization that 
believes the following 2 :
 Responsive Organizations  are built to learn and respond rapidly through 
the open flow of information; encouraging experimentation and learning 
on rapid cycles; and organizing as a network of employees, customers, and 
partners motivated by shared purpose. 
 1  www.tcs.com/consulting/related-insights/Pages/Responsive-Enterprise-
Operations-Evolution.aspx   . 
 2  www.responsive.org/  .  

The Agile Consultant
157
 The consistency with agile and lean principles is clear. We exchange infor-
mation quickly and openly, without regard to rank or title; we “fail fast” in 
order to learn what works and what the  marketplace values  ; we work as 
a collaborative network, including our customers, teammates, and part-
ners, to deliver the most value to the ultimate consumer as quickly as is 
feasible. 
 Responsive.org has, through experimentation, developed a simple set of slid-
ers that help enterprises diagnose their own level of responsiveness. 
 The elements of  responsiveness versus efficiency  depicted in Figure  12-1 
should be familiar by now. The beauty of this scale is that it simplifies the 
components of responsiveness to a few traits, and allows the enterprise to 
grade itself, rather than having some outside consultant come in and make a 
pronouncement. Clearly organizations that are still following the  Industrial 
Revolution model  , in which predictive planning, economies of scale, and 
risk avoidance drive the business, will, if they are truthful, place themselves 
on the left, efficiency-focused end of the spectrum, while enterprises that 
have adopted an agile model across the organization will trend toward the 
responsive side.  
 As an agile consultant, I’d use this scale to lead a facilitated session with the 
leadership of the organization, use a survey to gauge the opinions of the 
entire enterprise, and then compare the two. This simple consulting exercise 
will yield invaluable information. Is  leadership  deluding itself about their level 
of responsiveness, or are their views in concert with those of their employ-
ees? Do certain teams perceive different levels of responsiveness? Do agile 
teams score their company differently than waterfall teams? The discussions 
driven by this dialog may be fraught, especially if leaders are defensive and 
hierarchical, but they are important to the consultant who must devise a 
plan for evolution.  
Planning
Experimentation
Responsiveness
Control
Autonomy
Secrecy
Transparency
Efficiency
 Figure 12-1.  The Responsiveness  scale  (Source:   Responsive.org   ) 
 

Chapter 12 | The Agile Enterprise
158
 Zara: A Case Study on Responsiveness 
 To illustrate the elements of responsiveness, let’s look at  Zara  , a “fast fashion” 
company that has upended its market with a responsive model. Highlighted in 
Responsive.org’s video “The Responsive Organization,” 3 Zara focuses on one 
of the most competitive niches in the world, and one in which fashions and 
trends change and mutate daily. If a pop star wears a certain kind of leggings, all 
other leggings can go out of style in a week. I’m writing this chapter during the 
week that we learned of the death of pop star Prince, and I have no doubt that 
purple will be the color of the season, at least for a while. The typical fashion 
retailer has a six- to ten-month turnaround, from the catwalk or the street to 
the design, fabrication, and delivery of apparel to stores. By that time, sadly, the 
nostalgia and celebration of Prince will be over, and purple apparel will likely 
be overexposed and out of style. 
 Zara, on the other hand, has the unheard of turnaround of weeks, rather than 
months, to go through the entire cycle. As outlined in  The New York Times , 4 
Zara uses a combination of human interaction, technology, empowered teams 
of designers, and a sleek supply chain to deliver its designs to a worldwide 
network of stores. The human interaction comes in the form of store manag-
ers who are trained to initiate conversations with their customers about why 
they select certain items of apparel, and why they return or shun others. This 
information is widely and quickly communicated to autonomous teams of 
designers, empowered to change style elements, like zippers and lapels, as well 
as colors, and order them into production and delivery. 
 Although some proportion of its garments are made in typical low-cost coun-
tries like Bangladesh and India, all of its design, and most of its manufacturing, is 
done in Europe or nearby Turkey. This a critical element in its speed to market; 
rather than shipping designs to China and waiting months for the turnaround, 
Zara can design, ship, and test-market a limited number of items to its many 
stores and see how customers react. Only when its feedback loop confirms 
that each item resonates with customers does Zara move to bigger batches. 
 The trendier the  garment  , the closer to its Spanish headquarters it’s produced. 
Due to its agility and customer intimacy, Zara can ship out the right number 
of garments to fit the demand, thus avoiding the “specials” and sales that most 
retailers must resort to to get rid of unwanted merchandise. Because of its 
fast turnover, and its cheap prices, customers buy on impulse, thus challenging 
the high-price, high-street brands like Gucci and Prada. Masoud Golsorkhi, 
the editor of  Tank , a London magazine about culture and fashion, says, “With 
 3 https://youtu.be/jnmr8zvomE8?list=PLFPUGjQjckXFlCxcqpeWjbFd8BeKQ0-sn . 
 4 “How Zara Grew Into the World’s Largest Fashion Retailer,”    www.nytimes.
com/2012/11/11/magazine/how-zara-grew-into-the-worlds-largest-fashion-
retailer.html?_r=0   , November 11, 2012.  

The Agile Consultant
159
Zara, you know that if you don’t buy it, right then and there, within 11 days 
the entire stock will change. You buy it now or never. And because the prices 
are so low, you buy it now.” 
 A web search for “Zara responsiveness” will turn up thousands of master’s the-
ses, magazine and newspaper articles, and case studies, as well as the  New York 
Times article I cited. The reclusive owner, Amancio Ortega Gaona, is one of the 
world’s richest people, displacing Warren Buffet in the list. Zara uses no adver-
tising, marketing, or promotions to power its brand; it expects its customers, 
and its street presence, to speak for it. Zara has become the world’s largest 
fashion retailer by following an innovative business model that exemplifies all 
the characteristics that agilists esteem. Zara is not a technology company, but it 
uses technology to enable the high-touch, data-driven, team-autonomy model 
that every enterprise seeking responsiveness should emulate.  
 Moving Toward Responsiveness 
 A  business model  like Zara’s doesn’t evolve overnight. It requires a mission 
that generates enthusiasm in both customers and enterprise teams. It requires 
a firm technological foundation, simple and effective processes, and an ‘innova-
tion engine’ that enables the firm to refresh and adapt both the products and 
the business model. An  efficient supply chain  is also key. Zara moves the sliders 
away from predictive planning, hierarchical control structures, and secrecy or 
exclusivity of information. Experimentation, autonomy, and transparency are 
all inherent in Zara’s model, and agile consultants should be leading every will-
ing enterprise to evolve in that direction. 
 As an agile consultant, I’ve seen successful and failed transitions. Even in transi-
tions considered successful, each enterprise threw up unique challenges and 
deficiencies. One of the elements that  derails  many attempts at transition 
is disjointed, disconnected, and cumbersome technical architecture. I’ve lived 
through sprints in which every team member sincerely committed to deliver-
ing backlog items, and dove in head-first to create the promised products, only 
to be derailed by systems that were constantly failing. If the team can’t load its 
test cases because the  quality assurance (QA) server  is down, or can’t run its 
tests because the core database is not responsive, it’s pretty hard to commit 
to delivery. I’ve also seen organizations whose technical architecture is solid 
but which have so many process hoops to jump through, ostensibly to mitigate 
risk, that innovation, creativity, and speed are all discouraged. 
 The native Internet giants, like  Google and Facebook  , are in a constant devel-
opment cycle, rolling out incremental changes in a continuous stream. Google 
developers, during peak times, make a code change every second. 5 For this 
 5 YouTube, Tools for Continuous Integration at Google Scale,    www.youtube.com/watch?v=
KH2_sB1A6lA   , August 27, 2012.  

Chapter 12 | The Agile Enterprise
160
to occur, they need an IT architecture that enables the business, system 
development, and IT operations to partner, removing silos and providing an 
integrated, robust, and holistic technological foundation.  DevOps, 6 the effort 
to bring development and operations together, is a great start down this path, 
but, for many rookie agile organizations, it’s an ambitious goal. Even for those 
who realize this ambition, it only solves part of the problem. While developer 
and operations teams may achieve better collaboration and a more coherent 
vision and mission, the problems of architectural agility and business participa-
tion can be left out of the conversation. 
 Tata Consulting Services  , in the paper cited in footntote 1, recommends an 
approach it calls  “ BizDevOps  .” 7 This approach strives to include all corporate 
players in the IT development and rollout function, from business leaders to 
process designers, security experts, and quality assurance, as well as the devel-
opers and operations teams. In this scenario an agile enterprise transitions to 
an integrated approach along a path that TCS calls “Initiate, Walk, Run.” In the 
initial stage, teams adopt agile practices and some automated tools for testing 
and build environments. As the enterprise gets ready to “Walk,” teams have 
internalized the agile mind-set, and have developed their skills to the point that 
they can be the “generalizing specialists” that agility requires. They’ve begun on 
their  DevOps journey, and have built a robust toolset that enables quick build, 
test, and integration. When ready to “Run,” they’ve achieved integrated teams, 
blown up remaining silos, and adopted a kaizen attitude to improvement. Their 
technology is an integral element of their competitive advantage, and their 
processes evolve to meet the needs of the customer and market. 
 It should be obvious that guiding enterprises to the objective of a “BizDevOps” 
structure is an incremental, iterative project, and that the path will be long and 
daunting. Our previous discussions regarding the agile mind-set required of 
leaders and customers, and the differences between development and opera-
tions, should remind us that mind-set and practices come before enterprise 
agility but are not the end goal. Ever-closer collaboration and integration in 
the IT team, leavened with a kaizen attitude, is the destination.  
 Simplicity: Maximizing the Work Not Done 
 Most large enterprises with which I have engaged are anything but simple. 
From  complex and obscure processes  and overly broad product lines to com-
plicated organization structures, enterprises, as they grow, build empires that 
 6 For a tutorial on DevOps, see   www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?sub
type=BK&infotype=PM&appname=SWGE_RA_VF_USEN&htmlfid=RAM14026USEN&attachm
ent=RAM14026USEN.PDF  . 
 7  www.tcs.com/consulting/related-insights/Pages/Responsive-Enterprise-
Operations-Evolution.aspx   . 

The Agile Consultant
161
reinforce the siloed, process-bound hierarchies of old, and then add exten-
sions every time they sense an opportunity or detect a problem. Processes 
grow to encompass every move or error an employee could possibly make, 
entrenching a risk-averse culture that stifles innovation. New departments 
spring up to address every trend of the moment, from chief digital officers 
to chief social officers to chief innovation officers, and then each C-level hire 
proceeds to create his own empire and process rulebook. At the end of all 
this expansion, the company often can’t get out of its own way, as every deci-
sion needs to run up and down an endless flagpole, smothering morale and 
decision speed. 
 Surely the key driver in any movement to simplicity is the threat of small, 
nimble startups like  Uber or WhatsApp  that can gain billion-dollar scale with 
a few hundred employees and a smartphone app. Companies that are getting 
sucked dry by constant investment in legacy architectures, or by support and 
marketing of too many products across too many segments, are striving to 
simplify their operations by divesting certain assets and reinventing many of 
their processes. The last few years have seen a large uptick in corporate dives-
titures, 8 as companies from  Weyerhaeuser  and Roche to Proctor & Gamble 9 
and HSBC have decided to sell off brands. When Jack Welch,  celebrated chief 
executive officer (CEO)  of  General Electric (GE)  , took over the reins at that 
venerable company, one of the first moves he made was to sell off businesses 
in which GE could not compete. In January 2016, GE continued the trend 
started by Welch; it divested its $157 billion GE Finance business in what cur-
rent CEO Jeff Immelt called a “pivot” to a “simpler, more valuable GE.” GE 
also sold off $27 billion in GE real estate assets. Immelt also notes, as we’ve 
been arguing in this chapter, that “as we build the next industrial era, customer 
focus is more important than ever.” 
 Simplification is about more than divesting assets. For most  enterprises, pro-
cess and business model innovation  plays a larger role in simplification than 
do asset sales. Traditional functional departmentalization, designed to enhance 
industrial efficiency, now inhibits work flows and has become a barrier to 
responsiveness. This is the problem that the  Business Process Reengineering 
(BPR) movement of the 1990s 10 was trying to solve, but that was before the 
wholesale disruption brought by the Internet. Still, the base idea is the same: 
reduce costs and increase quality by radically rethinking the entire set of 
organizational structures, processes, and technologies that drive the business. 
Although the “radical”  element  of the BPR movement became self-defeating in 
 8 https://hbr.org/2008/10/how-the-best-divest . 
 9 Serena Ng and Ellen Byron, “P&G Faces Up to Mistakes in Beauty Business,”  The Wall 
Street Journal , July 9, 2015,   accessed from   www.wsj.com/articles/procter-gamble-
agrees-to-sell-beauty-businesses-1436444762  , July 13, 2015.  
 10 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_process_reengineering .  

Chapter 12 | The Agile Enterprise
162
many enterprises, some of the ideas are directly compatible with agility, such 
as customer focus, cross-functional teams with ownership of the complete 
product, and the use of IT to rebuild outmoded processes. These ideas, revo-
lutionary in their time, are now just a standard tool in the pursuit of a different 
objective, simplicity or, as Bain & Co. call it, “ complexity reduction  .” 11 
 Agile consultants who are engaged at the  enterprise level  often find that their 
sponsor companies are shackled by intricate processes, which often have 
evolved from decades of workarounds or process-checks that resulted from 
errors or personalities long gone. I engaged at a large bank that had built its 
reconciliation process around the skill set of one individual, relying on faxes 
and phone calls rather than technology because “Charlie’s not a technical guy.” 
 At Charlie’s inevitable departure, these inefficient processes lingered on 
because they became “the way we do it.”  Mature consultants  , with their objec-
tive eye, are in a perfect position to observe these legacy dysfunctions and 
diplomatically call attention to them. This, of course, is just the opening move 
in the drive to rethink the process and work flows of an organization. The 
consultant who can convince her sponsor to invest in a process management 
professional, or can herself map and optimize processes for responsiveness, 
can have a larger impact than simply building agile teams. Again, our intention 
is not to offer a tutorial, so check the bibliography for some great resources 
on BPR and process reengineering. 
 Moving from the theoretical to the pragmatic, the migration to simplicity 
requires the enterprise, and its agile advisors, to address four key elements of 
complexity:
• 
 Organizational : The complex organizational structures, 
siloed departments, and complicated value chains of many 
organizations must be analyzed and simplified. 
• 
 Product proliferation : The breadth of offerings, if too 
wide and varied for the enterprise to manage, and outside 
its core competencies, is a critical target for simplification. 
While agile consultants probably won’t have much influence 
in this area unless they’re engaged at the highest levels, our 
drive toward agility in the rest of the organization can make 
these challenges more visible and encourage lean thinking.  
• 
 Process Improvement :  The legacy processes, that 
attempt to standardize and channel work flows and 
actions, must be revisited to ensure that they aren’t sti-
fling innovation or treading worn cowpaths that exist 
because they exist.  
 11  www.bain.com/Images/BAIN_GUIDE_Management_Tools_2015_executives_guide.pdf  .  

The Agile Consultant
163
• 
 Leadership : Leaders are often enablers rather than 
resisters of complexity. Multiple detailed reports that 
require too much information and too much time, rather 
than simple dashboards that focus on the key indicators, 
can waste hours of time for employees who should be 
delivering customer value rather than digging out obscure 
numbers; agenda-less meetings that reach no conclusion; 
empire building rather than collaborative behavior. All of 
these managerial predilections must be driven out if the 
organization is to simplify.  
 For experienced consultants, the tools for these efforts are well known. The 
redesign of organizational structures is a common consulting practice, with 
principles, from the McKinsey “Seven S” organizational design framework 12 
to Jay Galbraith’s “ Star Model ,” 13 to guide us along the way. Process mapping 
and optimization tools, from simple flowcharts to swim-lane process mapping 
to task-on-arrow diagrams and other techniques, are all useful to help visual-
ize the bottlenecks that restrain effectiveness and responsiveness. The tools 
of lean, which we 14 ’ve been reviewing in regard to their relevance to agile, 
are also a set of diagnostic tools.  DMAIC (design, measure, analyze, improve, 
control), provides an improvement and simplification roadmap to start the 
journey away from complexity.  
 Innovation  : From the Product to the Business 
Model 
 Is innovation a flash of brilliance, a nagging idea that springs forth in a dream 
or a flash of insight, or is it the outcome of a process that can be defined and 
managed? Is it possible to create an enterprise “innovation engine,” an exten-
sion of the research and development department that encourages the entire 
company to develop new ideas for products, processes, and even new business 
models? Is innovation a core competency only of companies like  IDEO , the 
vaunted Silicon Valley design firm, or is it a value that can be instilled across an 
entire organization, or even automated? 
 When I think of innovation, the process that comes to mind involves a group 
of smart people in a room with a whiteboard, tossing ideas around to solve a 
specific problem or to improve a process or business model. The classic dem-
onstration of this type of interactive brainstorming is illustrated in this video 
 12  www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/
our-insights/enduring-ideas-the-7-s-framework   . 
 13  www.jaygalbraith.com/services/star-model  . 
 14  www.wikihow.com/Document-a-Process  . 

Chapter 12 | The Agile Enterprise
164
from Ted Koppel’s Nightline episode, 15 which examines the creative process 
employed at IDEO. In a large group setting, designers tackle the problem of 
creating a “new wave” shopping cart, defying all the common knowledge about 
what a cart is to completely revamp a familiar object. 
 Management theorists, from Joseph Schumpeter and his “creative destruc-
tion” 16 concept to Michael Porter and his theories of strategic advantage, have 
stressed the importance of innovation. Porter suggests that firms have two 
main mechanisms of competition: innovative differentiation or high efficiency. 
In our current business environment, many firms are looking for ways to sys-
tematize innovation, rather than the anonymous “suggestion box” of yore or 
hoping for the random brilliant insight. 
 The agile twist on innovation is that it’s neither a lone genius and her flash 
of insight nor an internal activity performed by a group of “creatives” but 
rather an interactive process that requires sensing the changing market, lis-
tening to customers, watching the competition, and then innovating toward 
a specific strategic goal. We all know the story of Post-it notes, the poster 
child for an innovative idea that came from a failed attempt to solve a com-
pletely different problem. In the new world of innovation, firms, like Apple 
with the iPod or Amazon with its cloud services, make a strategic decision 
to tackle a defined new market and then innovate deliberately to get there. 
The  ubiquity of data, and the analytic resources available, enable the respon-
sive enterprise to pay attention to signals emanating from its employees, its 
customers, and the social media channels that explode with valuable feed-
back all day. 
 I recently interviewed my friend Ludwig Melik, 17 who told me that he was 
investing in an innovation management software platform, Planbox. My 
immediate reaction was, “How do you automate innovation?” Innovation 
management software, Melik educated me, is not a replacement for the 
“team swarm” approach of brainstorming employed by  IDEO  and many 
other firms.
 Our client enterprises still want to meet in small teams, to innovate in 
many different ways, but if you don’t have a process and community 
to develop these ideas they just walk out the door. It’s not about some 
individuals submitting random ideas, but instead a sustainable source of 
great ideas that can transform the business. Innovation management 
is about creating a central repository where ideas are kept, and then 
developing a consistent process and community to test and execute the 
right ideas. 
 15  www.youtube.com/watch?v=taJOV-YCieI  . 
 16 http://economics.mit.edu/files/1785 . 
 17 https://dzone.com/articles/can-innovation-be-automated .  

The Agile Consultant
165
 Melik also made an explicit connection between innovation management and 
agility:
 There’s an obvious connection between innovation management and 
agility. Many of our corporate clients want to apply an agile process, 
iteratively prove out the concept, and fail fast, to ultimately become more 
successful and innovative. The output of the agile experimentation loops 
directly back into the innovation management tool, so you track the 
results and plan subsequent iterations and funding for the right ideas. If 
you don’t have a feedback loop that cycles from ideas to experimentation 
to iterative development, you won’t be successful in the turbulent market 
environment we live in. 
 The agile consultant  needs a special set of skills and experiences to advise 
the entire enterprise on these revolutionary practices. In Chapter   13 , we’ll 
explore the consulting skill set required to facilitate, persuade, and guide firms 
in their pursuit of the responsive, agile enterprise.  
 Summary 
 From product to business model innovation, the responsive enterprise is 
monitoring the signals from the entire environment, from internal teams all 
the way to the ultimate customer, and all the social channels in between. 
Responsive companies have the ability, from their IT systems to their supply 
chain, to respond to those indicators, innovate and develop new products, tar-
get unique niches, and stymie the competition. New business models, like Uber, 
or the improvement of existing models, like Amazon’s AWS self-provisioning 
cloud offering, are examples of strategic, targeted innovation that  promotes 
creative destruction, which pushes traditional businesses to  extinction but 
 creates valuable new enterprises that displace them.  

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_13
 C H A P T E R 
 The Agile 
Consulting Model 
 Evolving the client’s enterprise to agility is our mission as agile consultants. 
We help clients grasp the agile practices and mind-set, and, if we’re lucky and 
effective, we guide them to a leaner, more responsive, and more human way of 
working. Partnering with both the executive suite and the grassroots delivery 
teams, we help them transition from a predictive “big-bang”  approach  , to a 
nimble, iterative, and collaborative culture and value chain. Talented agile con-
sultants can have a significant positive impact on the client’s ability to shed 
the familiar tenets of predictability, risk aversion, and control and adopt the 
agile values of transparency, creativity, and empowerment. The belief that we 
can specify, predict, and estimate the scope, schedule, and cost of a complex 
project is discredited; in its place we can leave an enterprise that embraces 
change, risk, and openness. 
 Ironically, however, one of the last holdouts of the predictive mind-set is the 
consulting business. In my 15 years of advising professional services firms, I’ve 
seen every possible business model. The predominant model by far, even now, 
is based on a one-time-through, big, upfront plan methodology that mirrors 
the software development life cycles of old. This is the case for many reasons. 
Primarily, it’s because that’s what the consulting client wants. How nice for the 
client if the consultant is willing to take all the risk, presenting an “estimated” 
price and schedule based on a vague and indecipherable requirements document 
or, sometimes, just a conversation. 
13

Chapter 13 | The Agile Consulting Model
168
 The estimate, presented with many caveats and contingencies, becomes fixed 
and eternal in the client’s mind. Then, on beginning the work, the consultant 
discovers all the unseen complexities, personalities, and cultural obstacles, and 
learns to his dismay that his tentative “rough order of magnitude” estimate has 
been perceived as a firm bid. Clients have become accustomed to playing one 
firm against the other in order to get the best price, and to shift the risk of 
uncertainties and unknowns to the consulting firm. Some consultants even go 
so far as to sign up for the dreaded “not to exceed” price, in which the client 
gets the benefit if the project comes in underbid, and the consultant eats the 
overage when the inevitable risks manifest. 
 Prediction Is Unpredictable 
 The predictive planning model is dangerous when we’re doing a standard 
 consulting gig  , like installing packaged software or building a data center. The 
practice of analogous estimating, in which we look at similar projects of like 
duration and set a price with some built-in buffer, neglects the fact that no 
projects are alike. As all experienced consultants learn, it’s not the technol-
ogy that gets you, in most cases; it’s the humanity. Change resistance, difficult 
personalities, the unsaid and unknown make each engagement unique, no 
matter how “analogous” the specification may be. Engaging for a consulting 
gig is risky because the customer wants certainty and predictability in an 
uncertain and unpredictable domain. The client’s two big questions, how long 
and how much, are the exact questions we can’t answer in a predictive, big, 
upfront scope regime. 
 If estimating and planning a  packaged software implementation  is tricky, nego-
tiating a consulting engagement that applies agile techniques is downright 
treacherous. We don’t know, before we engage, the state of the client’s culture, 
business model, or value chain, let alone the personalities we’ll be dealing with. 
The depth of their dysfunction is purposely disguised, in order to entice, 
rather than repel, the consultant. We don’t know, until we explore, the enter-
prise’s familiarity with agility. As difficult as it is for the client to articulate 
expectations for  a  packaged software implementation, guiding the client 
through an iterative engagement in which requirements will be emergent and 
evolving is much more demanding. As the hype cycle around agility has acceler-
ated, many consulting firms claim the agile mantle, and many executives have 
formed their ideas about how agile works. Applying agility to the consulting 
relationship requires us to dispel myths and misconceptions, and employ all 
of our persuasive and educational skills to help our prospects understand 
how an agile consulting engagement would work, and why it would be to 
their benefit. 

The Agile Consultant
169
 Consider a typical Big 5 consulting project from just a few years ago. The pros-
pect sends out a number of requests for proposals ( RFPs ) to their vendor 
list of consulting firms, or calls in a sales rep. Through a mix of business and 
technical language, the client tries to articulate the current state, the desired 
state, and the solution it expects the consulting firm to deliver. RFPs are rarely 
phrased in a way that enables the consulting firm to apply creativity or innova-
tion; they’re more likely to state things like “the system shall have . . .” or “the 
end user will see . . .,” and the consulting firm becomes simply a fulfillment agent 
of a preconceived project, often with an preset due date. It’s not uncommon 
for the solution proposed to be unworkable, infeasible, or outright ridiculous. 
Even if prospects have actually devised an elegant solution, they rarely can 
communicate it precisely, thus leaving the consultant to make many assump-
tions, most of which will be wrong. The prospect, if we are lucky, will offer a 
“ bidder’s conference  ,” in which we get to ask a few questions along with all the 
other potential competitors. This often becomes, rather than an opportunity 
to uncover the devilish details, a jousting match between bidders, who strategi-
cally try to avoid giving away to their competitors either their solution ideas 
or their confusion. 
 After attending the bidder’s conference, most firms will huddle in a conference 
room and map out their reply. In responding to prospects, it’s common for con-
sulting organizations to amplify or even distort their experience and expertise. 
They usually don’t feel they’re being dishonest; instead, those around the table 
tell each other, “If we get the work, we’ll figure it out.” So the guy who goes out 
for coffee becomes a “Java expert,” and the intern who managed the school 
carnival becomes a “Senior Project Manager.” Even without these distortions, 
the  RFP  response process is risky; many experienced consultants won’t even 
bother with them, heeding the old adage that if you have to respond to an RFP 
you’re already too late. We’re typically developing a solution to an imperfectly 
stated and poorly understood problem, or the wrong problem altogether. 
Once the solution is devised, the consultant’s proposal is delivered to the 
prospect with a nice glossy cover, and then the firm sits back and waits. 
 If the firm loses the work, it has invested a significant number of potentially 
billable hours on a failed bid. This may seem an inseparable part of the business, 
but I’ve seen firms that jump at every opportunity, literally proposing themselves 
out of business as they devote all their hours to long-shot bids that never come 
through. Like a bad-luck gambler, they go into every roll of the dice thinking “this 
could be the one!” Failing to qualify opportunities leads to bad behavior such as 
inflating credentials, pulling in “talent” off the street without proper vetting, and 
grossly mispricing deals due to lack of experience, or desperation. 
 If the firm wins the work, it typically finds, once it engages, that the consultant 
and the client have very different ideas of what was signed up for. In the 
big, upfront plan model, the consultant and the client begin the first phase, 
Requirements Definition, and, as they dig into the details of the broadly 

Chapter 13 | The Agile Consulting Model
170
sketched scope outlined in the RFP, they find that each has visualized a com-
pletely different process and outcome than proposed, and that the boundaries 
of the project are far more elastic in the client’s mind than they are in the 
consultant’s. The consultant discovers first-hand all the ills of predictive plan-
ning that we’ve been discussing; the client has a vague and undefined vision of 
the outcome, and can’t articulate it in ways that we can decipher. Many stake-
holders believe that they can add or subtract features based on their role, 
rank, and perspective, regardless of the scope defined in the proposal. All the 
vagaries of human and cultural personality manifest themselves and resist or 
block progress. Many deals that were celebrated as save-the-company coups 
turn out to be profitless death marches. 
 In the  traditional consulting engagement  , both the client and the consultant 
are focused on the so-called  Iron Triangle  , the constraints of scope, budget, 
and schedule. The client, in a bid to limit risk, typically focuses on constraining 
the  schedule and cost by fixing the budget and timeline. Consultants, to protect 
their interests, concentrate on fixing the scope, to avoid the dreaded “scope 
creep” that plagues fixed-bid projects, thus constraining the customer to the 
features and functions they specified at the beginning of the engagement. 
Unfortunately, as we’ve learned from experience, neither of these strategies 
work. If consultants allow the client to fix the price and schedule, they often 
end up “eating” the overage, or disappointing on delivery date, when they 
discover the intricacies of delivering the client vision. If clients allow the con-
sultant to fix the scope, anything that changes their requirements, such as 
shifting market conditions or new ideas about the project, enters an onerous 
 change-control process  that is designed to protect the upfront specification, 
rightly or wrongly. We set up an adversarial relationship from the start, as the 
client maneuvers to get the most for the least and the consultant jockeys to 
give the least for the most. The predictive, big, upfront plan consulting model 
is death on the relationship, hitching the client to a rigid specification that has 
no flexibility to bend with the circumstances, and dooming the consultant or 
firm to eternal hostilities, with the customer serially disappointed and the 
consultant marching to an arbitrary and impossible cadence.  
 Moving to an Agile Consulting Model 
 It’s easy to delineate the failings of the  traditional consulting model  . Failed 
projects, consulting industry consolidation, plus the spectacular market flame-
outs of the many Internet consulting shops that exploded during the market 
euphoria of the late 1990s and fell to Earth in the dot-com bust of 2000, 
illustrate that success in the consulting industry is hard to achieve and dif-
ficult to maintain. Even with its failings, however, those left standing, from the 
prestige firms like Bain and McKinsey to the hundreds of small IT consulting 
shops scattered around the country, have the opportunity to earn substantial 
fees and deliver high-impact projects. Like those industrial firms that have 

The Agile Consultant
171
embraced lean and agile ideas to remain relevant, both the renowned global 
giants and the successful local players have revised their engagement models 
to leaner, more flexible, and more  client-focused methods  . 
 Search for “agile” on McKinsey’s 1 web site and you’ll find hundreds of thoughtful and 
valuable articles, case studies, and presentations that illustrate the  firm’s deep 
experience  , and deep thinking, on the agile transformation. Visit  McKinsey’s 
Digital Labs  2 site and you’ll see that the firm itself now engages using an agile 
model, touting its “app in a day” and “client capability” workshops that men-
tion agility as a key component of their offerings. Open the May 2016 issue 
of  Harvard Business Review (HBR)  , 3 and you’ll see an article on “Embracing 
Agile.” Look further in HBR’s archives and you’ll find dozens of articles on agil-
ity, including discussions of agile strategy, agile marketing, agile adoption, and 
agile workforce management. The management theory cycle, from the major 
consulting firms to the academic management journals, is in full swing around 
agility. Still, all of this talk is about using agility within the enterprise. In terms of 
migrating the consulting firm itself to an agile model, available advice is scant. 
 For consultants and firms that see the value of engaging in a new way, the 
migration to agility is not that mysterious. I’ve seen many consulting firms that 
make an  incremental evolution  toward agility, even if starting from a waterfall 
model. The traditional model, delivered incrementally rather than as a “big 
bang,” with separate scope, schedule, and budget for each phase, is the first 
step toward agility for many consultants. In this evolution, consultants, rather 
than proposing a once-through, all-encompassing omnibus project, propose a 
detailed discovery process first, with its own scope, time box, and “cost box” 
(or budget), and with a clearly defined deliverable consisting of a findings 
document and presentation that reviews the unique needs, constraints, and 
circumstances found through our exploration. I sell this discovery phase as 
a valuable outcome of its own, helping the firm understand the implications 
in terms of possible risks, inherent constraints, and stakeholder expecta-
tions. While still structured as a  traditional 4D engagement  , we now have the 
opportunity to assess for ourselves the circumstances we’re walking into, and 
we enable the client to cap its investment, mitigate the risks of a new project, 
and determine whether the project is worth the  investment  , disruption, and 
risk. While we’re not in the business of discouraging clients from hiring us, we 
should be in the business of avoiding work that adds no value or drags us into 
dangerous waters. 
 1  www.mckinsey.com/  .  
 2  www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/how-we-help-clients/
digital-labs   . 
 3 https://hbr.org/search?search_type=search-all&term=agile&loaded=1 . 

Chapter 13 | The Agile Consulting Model
172
 The same theory applies to the other phases of a  4D engagement model  . 
After completing the separately scoped discovery phase, we can propose a 
more informed design phase, present our solution ideas, and introduce our 
client to the concept of  collaborative participation  , and to its ability to make 
changes as its circumstances change. We can iterate through this phase until 
the client accepts a design, then scope and price the development and deploy-
ment phases in turn, each with an agreed timeline and budget. Each phase is 
entered with a more complete and realistic understanding of the situation, and 
each decision, for both the client and the consultant, is more informed and 
deliberate. We never get too far ahead of the planning horizon, and the client 
has the opportunity at every step to stop a low-value or problematic effort, 
thus avoiding the “project that wouldn’t die” scenario. 
 While not yet a true agile, iterative model, this  phase-by-phase approach  has 
many advantages for clients accustomed to the fixed-price, fixed-date, fixed-
scope approach. They can still  budget  for these individual phases as projects, 
and so not dramatically upset their  procurement and financial models  . They 
begin to understand that they must participate iteratively to ensure they get 
what’s needed, and we start to break them of the habit of “over the wall’ 
specification documents. They see incremental value and have the chance to 
redirect the project if it strays from their expectations or requirements. We 
grant them visibility into our consulting process, so we can mutually determine 
whether we’re a good fit. We can progressively advise them toward a minimum 
viable product, and so start to guide them to lean project thinking, and wean 
them from the kitchen-sink style of specification. As in an agile environment, 
we’re evolving from a one-pass, big, upfront  plan approach  to a collaborative, 
iterative, flexible, and transparent relationship, without blowing up either their 
existing mental models or their enterprise procurement processes. I’m often 
presented with this challenge to agile consulting; “How can I sell the engage-
ment without a project estimate?” With this approach, we can range-estimate 
each phase, stay within our planning horizon, and incorporate our learnings 
into each subsequent proposal. We’re constantly discovering and adapting as 
we go, thus giving us a better chance to estimate each phase from knowledge, 
and to propose a more suitable approach. This simple evolution from  big-
bang  to distinctly proposed phases integrates agile thinking and benefits into a 
waterfall-style methodology, without radically changing the consulting engage-
ment model. 
 Figure  13-1 is an example of a range  estimate  , by phase, for an actual merger 
project in which I engaged. Note that this is not a project about agility; rather, 
it’s a project in which I applied some basic agile ideas to executing a non-
technical project for a client with no agile experience. A quick glance reveals 
that this is an interim step between a big, upfront plan engagement and an 
iterative, incremental  project in which the client commits to a piece at a time 
and has the right to change, adjust, or stop that project at any phase. Notice 

The Agile Consultant
173
also that within each phase is a list of high-level features, each of which will 
have multiple tasks. This makes this sort of engagement amenable to an agile 
delivery approach, as we decompose features into epics and stories, and apply 
our agile practices to iterate toward an end result. While we are proposing to 
the client in the planning language the client understands, we’re also preparing 
ourselves to apply agile practices to the project, building a backlog and a series 
of sprints to incrementally deliver each phase.  
Assess
Assessment: Estimated Fee Range: $12,000-$15,000
•Review due diligence documents
•Assess current state in preparation for planning
•Explore and document all expectations for successful project
•Explore and document known challenges or obstacles
•Document our findings
•Develop timeline and estimated fees for Planning phase
At completion of Assessment, we’ll precisely estimate and schedule Planning Phase 
Plan
Planning: Estimated Fee Range: $17,000-$20,000
•Develop preliminary project plan
•Develop resource plan
•Develop communication plan
•Develop risk and contingency plan
•Review and gain consensus on all plans with client
•Sign off on accepted “plan of record”
At completion of Planning, we’ll precisely estimate and schedule ExecutionPhases. 
Execute I:
Readiness 
Execute: Readiness: Estimated Fee Range: $20,000-$23,000
•Based on our plans, prepare the organizations for merger
•Prepare for board, organizational reorganization
•Prepare for operational integration
•Prepare for policy integration (insurance, financial, mortgage, family services, etc.)
•Prepare for IT systems integration
•Prepare for all miscellaneous elements to be integrated
Execute II:
Merger 
Execute: Merger: Estimated Fee Range: $18,000-$22,000
•Based on our plans, perform the merger
•Integrate board, organization staff in merged organization
•Integrate operational functions
•Integrate policy functions (insurance, financial, mortgage, family services, etc.)
•Integrate IT systems
•Integrate all miscellaneous elements
 Figure 13-1.  An Agile consulting  engagement proposal  
 

Chapter 13 | The Agile Consulting Model
174
 Contracting for the Unknown 
 Let’s start this  conversation   by acknowledging that most consulting contracts, 
even if they explicitly agree to a fixed scope, budget, and schedule, are leaps 
into the unknown. We include the fixed elements for the convenience of the 
client, which wants to devote a specified budget to its project, have a guarantee 
of a complete deliverable, and know when its outcome will be ready. These 
are all reasonable goals, but their reasonability does not make them possible. 
One of our initial challenges as we migrate from these predictive, fixed con-
tracting models to an agile approach is convincing the client that the fixed 
approach doesn’t work, and, furthermore, is not in the client’s interest. The 
Standish Group statistics on failed waterfall projects versus successful agile 
projects may be persuasive but they are not usually convincing. The corporate 
client has great pressure to stay with the waterfall, fixed consulting  model  . The 
 strategic planning approach  , the procurement standards, financial processes, 
and the risk-management impulses of most corporate clients tether them to 
a fixed model that is perceived as enabling a predictive budget and schedule, 
thus protecting the enterprise from unforeseen costs and delays, and a fixed 
scope, preventing the consultant from deviating from the enterprise’s stated 
requirements. Our job becomes the exposure of the risks of this model, and 
the education of the benefits to a consulting client of a collaborative, incre-
mental, and change-friendly regime. 
 While citing the Standish statistics is  an  important part of the conversation, 
the real goal is to help clients grasp the benefit of embracing change as a com-
petitive weapon in our turbulent environment, and to educate them on the 
increased level of choice, input, and guidance they can exert on the project as 
the result emerges. Clients will often insist on the fixed-contract model from 
one side of their mouth and then decry the inflexibility and change-resistance 
of their consulting partners from the other side. It’s the consultant’s respon-
sibility to make the connection for them between the constraints of the fixed 
model they insist on and the ills they condemn. To migrate them to an agile 
engagement model, we need to connect in their minds their desire for a fixed 
scope with the change-avoidance regime that results. We need to remind 
them that the fixed budget and schedule that they insist upon rarely pro-
tects them from overages once they have sunk major investments into project 
development. Critically, we need to demonstrate to them that agility works, 
through an incremental exposure to the benefits of engaging collaboratively, 
with an exploratory mind-set and an eye to the real developments out in the 
world and the market. 
 It’s a fantasy to believe that an agile-naive client is going to contract for a 
“let’s see what happens” engagement with open budget and schedule. The 
consultant’s next challenge in migrating clients to an agile model is figuring out 
how to introduce them to the agile engagement without freaking them out. 

The Agile Consultant
175
I often offer to give away, or refund when engaged, the initial discovery 
element of the engagement, especially with clients new to agile consulting, 
to illustrate that we can discover in short iterations, demonstrate our find-
ings as we uncover them (with the caveat that further learnings may change 
our determinations), and add value immediately even in the discovery phase. 
Clients are often pleased to learn that, rather than waiting months for the 
outcome of our exploration, they can incrementally learn what we’re finding 
and then end up with a complete, contextual review based on our final deter-
minations at the end of the effort. 
 Rather than contracting  and   delivering the discovery, and the subsequent 
phases, as fixed bids or ranges, we can now take the additional step toward 
agile by proposing to bid actual time expended for the discovery phase, with 
frequent presentations, similar to iterative demos, that not only show what 
we’ve discovered but also keep the client informed on the expenditures to 
date and the expected schedule, which evolves as we proceed and learn. The 
same approach is, of course, also applied to the design, planning, development, 
and deployment of the project outcome. Our evolution from a predictive 
to an agile consulting model is itself iterative and incremental. We begin by 
transitioning from a complete, fixed bid for the entire engagement, to a set 
of smaller ranged bids for each phase of the 4D model, and then incremen-
tally move to decompose each phase into a series of iterative deliverables, 
with client collaboration and change-readiness built in. Eventually, of course, 
we hope that the client will completely adopt an agile model internally to 
correspond with the way we engage, and we dream that our example of agile 
engagement will awaken them to the benefits of agility. The rate of migration 
to this model, however, will be highly variable and subject, naturally, to the 
client’s culture, aspiration, and adaptability.  
 Summary 
 Helping our clients evolve from a predictive model to truly agile consulting 
engagements is an exercise in trust and relationship building. The separately 
phased approach, as noted, is not a true agile engagement. We can migrate 
even closer to an ideal agile relationship when the client is ready. This is a 
revolutionary transition for most corporate entities, as procurement, relation-
ship, and financial norms are overturned. When the client requires a new soft-
ware application, for example, we can apply an agile scrum process very similar 
to the one we utilize when we develop internal applications in an agile shop. 
We can collaborate with the customer to create a vision, a roadmap, and a set 
of features or epics to work from, and then decompose those epics into user 
stories that we can prioritize in a backlog. We can iterate through delivery as 
we’re accustomed to, demonstrating an incrementally advancing model of the 
client’s vision, modifying and reprioritizing as we go, and billing the client on a 

Chapter 13 | The Agile Consulting Model
176
strictly hourly basis. This, of course, is the ultimate level of collaboration and 
trust, and requires, in my experience, a history of migration from predictive 
planning to staged phases, and then to an increasingly agile engagement based 
on proven success and escalating trust. The path from predictive planning to 
a true agile engagement model can take years, as we illustrate through results 
that the enterprise will get what it needs without being gouged on price or 
compromised on schedule.  

P A R T
 Running the 
Agile Consulting 
Practice 
IV

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_14
 C H A P T E R 
 The Agile 
Consulting 
Skill Set 
 There’s a significant difference between a consultant and a contractor. While 
consultants may work on contract, their focus and intent should be distinct 
from that of a contractor. Contracting is transactional, while consulting is 
relationship-oriented. A technical contractor, such as a database expert, can 
come into an engagement for a few months, apply her technical expertise 
to a particular situation, and then go on to the next contract, with everyone 
satisfied. A consultant, on the other hand, must develop a relationship with 
the client to be effective. Experienced consultants understand that technical 
or domain expertise in their field is the price of admission, but mutual trust, 
respect, and honesty are the factors that enable impact. This is not a value 
judgement: both roles are important. The difference is in the mind of the cli-
ent; the client’s expectations of each role diverge. The difference is also in 
the way we engage; consultants are more likely to require a set of skills that 
go beyond the domain, and enter into the realms of facilitation, negotiation, 
persuasion, and strategic thinking. Consulting is an advisory relationship, while 
contracting is typically a  utilitarian transaction  . 
14

Chapter 14 | The Agile Consulting Skill Set 
180
 There are, of course, no absolutes implied. The spectrum from contractor to 
consultant is wide, and many domain experts also must diagnose problems, 
devise alternative solutions, and persuade their clients to adopt one course or 
another. Similarly, many who call themselves consultants are often just domain 
experts looking for a raise. For each of these roles, the attributes of mature 
players fall somewhere on the spectrum, with a mix of domain and advisory 
skills. I believe, however, that there is a distinct code of conduct, set of ethics, 
and expectation of results that define consulting. While a contractor can 
bring his skills and await direction from the client, a consultant must bring 
experience, initiative, creativity, problem solving, and executive relationship 
skills to the  engagement  . The contractor owns the outcome of his particular 
component, at the direction of the client; the consultant owns the business result. 
 Again, with no absolutes implied, this is the distinction I make between agile 
coaches and agile consultants. A gile coaching  is often transactional; “Come in 
and spin up these three scrum teams.” While many agile coaches defy this and 
engage at the enterprise level, I’ve seen dozens of situations in which a coach 
comes in, teaches and guides teams through agile practices, and then calls it 
good and moves on. Again, no value judgement implied; teams benefit from 
lean and agile practices, and  practice-focused coaches  have helped organizations 
make great strides toward efficiency and effectiveness. When we engage as agile 
consultants, however, we are signing on to a deeper level of commitment and 
relationship. We’re proclaiming ourselves as advisors to the enterprise, not agile 
domain experts addressing teams. We’re taking on the challenge of making dys-
function visible, and having the candor and gravitas to persuade organizations to 
evolve from long-honored practices. We’re looking at the enterprise holistically, 
and creatively inspecting and adapting to the prevailing conditions, personalities, 
and culture. We shouldn’t be satisfied to see some teams adopt agile practices. 
Instead we should be striving to make agility pervasive and sustainable. The 
clients, of course, will determine how far toward that goal they will evolve, but 
enterprise agility should be the agile consultant’s aspiration. 
 In Chapter   1 , I reprised my “five  fundamentals  ” for consultants, first presented in 
my 1999 book  The IT Consultant . 1 As a refresher, those five fundamental ideas are:
• 
 Focus on the relationship.  
• 
 Clearly define your role.  
• 
 Visualize success.  
• 
 You advise, they decide.  
• 
 Be oriented toward results.  
 1 Rick Freedman,  The IT Consultant: A Commonsense Framework for Managing the Client 
Relationship (San Francisco; Jossey-Bass, 2000). Available at: www.amazon.com/
Rick-Freedman/e/B000APKF5U/ref=dp_byline_cont_book_1.  

The Agile Consultant
181
 These are foundation ideas for the consultative mind-set but are not the specific 
skills that consultants must apply to fulfill these concepts. Let’s dig a bit further 
and uncover the capabilities that combine to make a competent agile advisor. 
 Foundation Skills for Agile Consultants 
 The skills of a mature consultant fall into three categories. Consultants require 
 advisory skills  : the capability to engage with the enterprise at all levels, diagnose 
problems, diplomatically and sensitively explore solution options, persuade cli-
ents to make informed decisions, and build a trusting relationship that enables 
productive interactions. This includes our ability to communicate effectively, 
facilitate teams and organizations to decisions, and influence decision makers 
to follow a fruitful path. We also obviously require the agile domain skills to 
lead clients to those informed decisions. The latest agile theory from a book 
or article is available to anyone; the experience and wisdom to fit the solution 
to the circumstances is a deeper level of advisory capability.  Business skills  are 
the final component. Every business model is not amenable to the same set of 
practices and techniques, and every enterprise has a distinct language, market, 
culture, and set of processes. Our agile mantra of “inspect and adapt” should 
make it clear that one size does not fit all, and that business context skills 
are a differentiating factor for consultants. We’ve addressed business skills 
throughout this book, and we’ll look at agile domain expertise in Chapter   15 . 
Here, we’ll focus on the advisory skills that ensure consulting competence. 
 Advisory skills  cover a wide gamut. Everything from communication to facilita-
tion, and from negotiation to persuasion and influence, falls into this category. 
Communication is at the center of this group of competencies. Our ability to 
understand what the client means rather than merely what she says, to listen 
with our whole mind rather than formulating our rebuttal while the client speaks, 
to speak in the client’s language and in the language of her business—these are 
the central skills that form the foundation for our advisory capabilities. 
 In the interactive and human framework of agility, the need for communication 
skills is elevated. The many different perspectives within our teams and the enter-
prise pose a challenge to our capabilities. Can we communicate with the product 
owner, who brings a business mind-set to the conversation, as well as the coder, 
who is thinking about the technical issues? Can we explain to the executive and 
client why they should adopt agility, and also stand in front of a team and train in 
user story writing or relative estimating? Can we engage in the give-and-take of 
a cultural evolution without expressing frustration, blame, or surprise when the 
client is resistant or its processes are clearly counterproductive? 
 Communication has long been a challenge for the information (IT) professional, 
and the jokes about the introversion and “geekiness” of computer specialists are 
legion. From the programmer hiding in the “glass house” of the 1960s data center 
to the Star Wars nerds of Silicon Valley, the stereotype of the  uncommunicative 

Chapter 14 | The Agile Consulting Skill Set 
182
techie is pervasive. The migration from the mainframes of the 1960s, hidden in 
the basement, to the computer on every desk of the  client-server migration  , 
required technical experts to learn how to listen to the client and help diag-
nose their problems and build the systems it required. The migration to agile 
has raised the communication stakes again. Now we must persuade our clients, 
and their customers, to speak in the language of user stories and to participate 
directly with our teams as they build and refine systems and products. We go 
from the remoteness of “over the wall” specifications and requests for proposal 
( RFPs ) to the direct communication of story workshops and client demonstra-
tions. We often have to bridge the gap from the project management language 
of  traditional predictive programs  to the agile language that rules today. Our 
tone and content must change as we navigate the enterprise, conversing with 
everyone from the chief executive officer (CEO) to the business analysts. From 
interviewing candidates to reporting on the team’s progress, sharp, concise, and 
clear communication underlies all of the advisory skills we’re advocating. 
 Discovery and exploration, for example, rely on our ability to ask the right 
questions, interpret the responses, and develop a theory based on what we 
hear. If we’ve been engaged to guide an enterprise or team through agile tran-
sition, we need to have clear and revealing conversations about their current 
practices, their exposure to agile, their organizational or team structure, and 
their pain points with their current methods. If we’re applying agile consult-
ing techniques to a technical project, the only way to understand the  client’s 
needs  is for the client to tell us, as the giant specifications documents of the 
past give way to user stories. These conversations require delicacy, as we 
don’t want to imply that the client is broken or “doing it wrong” before we 
understand the full circumstances. They require active listening, by which we 
 gauge inflection and body language  , and focus on the speaker to read between 
the lines of what we’re hearing. Fran Lebowitz, noted wit, has said that “The 
opposite of talking isn’t listening. The opposite of talking is waiting.” 2 I would 
submit that the opposite of listening is often formulating a rebuttal, and that 
the struggle for many rookie consultants is shutting off the internal dialog and 
just hearing what’s said. While I believe that every interview should be a con-
versation and not an interrogation, the consultant should be mostly listening, 
gently sparking the conversation rather than dominating or directing it. 
 In my years as a technical consultant (I managed global data center imple-
mentations for Intel) I witnessed many  ineffective solution presentations  that 
merely served to confuse the client and sabotage the sale or implementation. 
At Intel we called these  “speeds and feeds” presentations  . Of course, the 
domain specialists representing the client want to understand these technical 
details; executives, not so much. Solution definitions, pre-agile, were often 
communicated in the language of “Here’s what we geniuses came up with. 
 2 Fran Lebowitz,  Wikiquote,  https://en.wikiquote.org/w/index.php?title=Fran_
Lebowitz&oldid=2092360  , February 28, 2016.  

The Agile Consultant
183
If you’re smart, you’ll take it!” I’ve spent many hours mentoring and coaching 
technical specialists in the art of setting up the conversation by identifying the 
problem we’re solving and why it matters, including the client in the conversa-
tion, offering options rather than mandates, and, especially, taking the ego and 
emotion out of the response to the client’s decision. 
 The  emotional element  is often the hardest to overcome. Domain experts 
expend a lot of time and creativity developing elegant solutions to their cli-
ent’s problems. When the client questions or rejects them, immature advisors 
will often become defensive or demotivated. We become ego-attached to our 
own ideas, and then the client that rejects them becomes an enemy or a fool. 
Overcoming this emotional response and replacing it with a productive dialog 
is a crucial step in the journey to maturity for a consultant. In the agile envi-
ronment, where every solution is experimental, negotiable, and temporary, 
emotional attachment to our ideas is a real obstacle to progress.  
 The  Facilitative Mind-Set  
 Facilitation is a skill,  but it’s also a mind-set. Facilitative management rejects the 
concept that the best ideas come from the top down, from those in authority, 
or from appointed gurus. It’s a cliché to say that the intelligence of the team 
is better than that of the expert, but, in my experience, it’s accurate. The 
practice of facilitating teams to the most creative solutions, the best meth-
ods, and the appropriate adaptations to our practices is core to agility. The 
scrummaster is, essentially, a facilitator. She has no authority to order the team 
to any conclusion, and no power except that of the agile techniques. Every 
scrum ceremony is an exercise in facilitation. From the stand-up to the retro-
spective, the scrummaster is gently guiding the team members to their own 
conclusions. The facilitative role is one of neutrality, service, and clarity. Strong 
facilitators bring the Zen quality of emptiness to their practice. We have no 
stake in the outcome except to ensure that all voices are heard and that the 
team owns its decisions. We’re there to try and bring order to the turmoil of 
conflicting perspectives, points of view, and ideas. We can attempt to capture, 
record, and gain consensus on ideas that arise in our sessions, but we can’t 
prioritize or discard any ideas; that’s up to the team. 
 It may seem obvious to anyone with exposure to agility that facilitation is key, but 
in fact facilitative management can be a revolution in the traditional enterprise. 
Managers and executives accustomed to issuing mandates must now engage in 
facilitated deliberations across the enterprise, and must let go of the idea that 
they have the sole keys to wisdom. Team leaders must migrate from a foreman 
role, enforcing diktats, and embrace a collaborative role as a servant-leader 
facilitating the team’s own deliberations. Agile consultants must not only be 

Chapter 14 | The Agile Consulting Skill Set 
184
strong facilitators themselves, they must be prepared to train and mentor facili-
tative skills across the enterprise, and encourage the entire leadership structure 
to migrate from a culture of authority and directive to one of participation and 
group ownership. Facilitative skill is at the heart of agility, from the team to the 
executive level.  
 To perform as a strong facilitator, agile consultants must adopt more than the 
mind-set. They must strengthen their facilitation skills. The beginning facili-
tator works to master the skills of active listening, paraphrasing, summariz-
ing, and questioning. As the team begins to brainstorm or design a solution, 
the facilitator is ensuring that she is capturing the contributions clearly and 
accurately, consolidating ideas that coincide, and maintaining the momentum 
by following the flow of the conversation and gently probing to get to the 
underlying ideas. She must include everyone, even the back-row wallflowers, 
into the conversation, and respect the opinions of all. She must be completely 
focused on the entire room, noting expressions, silence, and enthusiasm level 
as well as verbal contributions. The skilled facilitator has a bag of tricks to 
apply in different situations, from brainstorming to matrix diagrams and from 
flowcharts to fishbone diagrams. She knows how to apply decision techniques 
such as multivoting, quadrant diagramming, and force field analysis.  
 As usual, I’ll remind readers that this is not intended as a tutorial. To sharpen 
your technique in these areas I strongly recommend the books of Ingrid Bens, 3 
the acknowledged expert in this domain. My intent is not to teach you the 
basic techniques but to make the connection between facilitation and agility. 
If the ideas and techniques I’ve described in this section are new to you, you’ll 
struggle as a scrummaster, let alone a coach or consultant. If you are already 
an experienced facilitator, you should seek to expand your skills to the realms 
of conflict resolution, complex group dynamics, and the design of facilitated 
sessions for controversial or complex situations. The stronger your skills in 
facilitation, the more impact you can have, from the team to the strategic level. 
I commonly facilitate executive strategic planning sessions as well as standard 
agile practices, and the lesson is that anything can happen, and the more pre-
pared we are with techniques and attitude, the more likely the success of the 
session. The ability to remain neutral, focus on your facilitation role, and avoid 
taking sides or allowing debate to degenerate into conflict or argument is a 
mature skill that requires experience and Zen. Like agility, the practices are 
easy to learn but hard to master, and similarly, as we advance our maturity the 
focus shifts from ceremonies to mind-set.  
 3  www.amazon.com/Ingrid-Bens/e/B001JRXBLS/ref=dp_byline_cont_book_1 . 

The Agile Consultant
185
 Agile  Negotiation  
 Agilists know that INVEST is the acronym that defines a well-formed user 
story: stories should be independent, negotiable, valuable, estimable, sized 
appropriately, and testable. In what ways is a user story, the atomic unit of 
agile requirements, negotiable, and in what other areas of agile practice is 
negotiation required? In any consultative engagement, negotiation is required 
throughout the process, from the initial rate and vision-setting conversations 
to the negotiation of a definition of done-ness. What’s unique about agile 
negotiation, and what is the negotiation skill set required for agile consulting? 
 We’re all familiar with the common ideas about negotiation; go for  win-win sce-
narios  , make sure all sides have a chance to express their needs and concerns, 
come in knowing your bottom line, iterate through a compromise process until 
all sides benefit, leave no “sore losers” in the aftermath. We’re also familiar 
with the dark side of negotiation; the “used car salesman” who tries to con us 
into a bad deal, the imbalance of information, the tricks like “he who speaks 
first loses” or “good cop, bad cop.” Negotiation can be a tool that ensures all 
parties exchange value and leave satisfied, or a scheme that manipulates us into 
a raw deal, triggering buyer’s remorse and bad feelings. It all depends on intent, 
of course, but technique also plays a role. Let’s leave the tricks of negotiation 
to the scammers and con artists. In the agile world, our intent is to ensure that 
all parties understand each other, achieve value, arrive on a solution that’s fair 
all around, and can continue to collaborate without hurt feelings. 
 For those who need a basic foundation in negotiating techniques, I recom-
mend reading  Crucial Conversations 4 or  Getting to Yes, 5 the classic primers on 
successful negotiating skills. These works focus on more than the “tips and 
tricks” of  negotiating  . They delve into the psychology of the negotiating pro-
cess, and discuss the emotional as well as the substantive content of this 
stressful process. To illustrate the high emotional and ego content of negotia-
tion, let’s examine a well-studied phenomenon known academically as “The 
Bidder’s Curse.” 6 In the influential paper cited, the authors analyzed data from 
eBay auctions and found that “in the majority of auctions, the final price is 
higher than a fixed price at which the same good is available for immediate 
purchase on the same webpage.” Why would buyers pay more at auction 
than they would to simply purchase the identical item? The answer, the paper 
suggests, is “competitive bidding, or ‘bidding fever.’” Overbidders become 
emotionally attached to the item they’ve bid on, even if an identical item is 
 4 Kerry Patterson, Joseph Grenny, Ron McMillan, and Al Switzler,  Crucial Conversations: Tools 
for Talking When Stakes Are High (McGraw-Hill Education, 2011).  
 5 Roger Fisher, William L. Ury, and Bruce Patton,  Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without 
Giving In , Second Edition (New York: Penguin Books, 2011).  
 6 http://eml.berkeley.edu/~ulrike/Papers/ebay15.pdf  . 

Chapter 14 | The Agile Consulting Skill Set 
186
available at a fixed price. They become ego-involved: “I’m not going to let bid-
der ‘USisBest479’ beat me for that guitar I want!” Even if the bidder on the 
other side is an impersonal Internet handle, our competitive instincts kick in, 
and those of us most inclined to be concerned about “winning” actually lose 
by competing ineffectively. This effect illustrates precisely the challenges of 
negotiation. Once emotion is riled up, and competitiveness and ego flare, our 
worst negotiating behaviors kick into gear, and cause us to lose by “winning.”  
 In agile negotiation, the only win is trust, collaboration, and mutual benefit. 
We negotiate to understand clients’ needs, not to sell them something, or sell 
them  on something. We negotiate to match our commitments to our capacity, 
so we can promote sustainable development. We negotiate to ensure that we 
are delivering what the client needs now, so that we can adapt as the market-
place changes. We negotiate to ensure that we are continuously improving 
both the product and the process. Most important, we negotiate with our ego 
and emotion in check, enabling us to reach mutual value without competitive 
instincts infringing on the process. 
 What do we mean, for example, when we say user stories must be negotia-
ble? User stories aren’t fixed, since we understand that, as we iterate toward 
a vision, that vision or the external circumstances will change. As these 
changes occur, we frequently renegotiate the meaning of individual stories, 
renegotiate the scope or backlog, and renegotiate the acceptance criteria 
to fit the new situation. While agilists agree that stories, once committed to 
a sprint, should remain constant, that doesn’t mean that, during the sprint, 
the team won’t discover new technical or functional obstacles or conditions 
that require internal negotiation to reallocate tasks and resources. Whether 
the agile team’s customer is an internal department or an external client, 
the entire purpose of constant collaboration is to keep the door open to 
renegotiating every aspect of the project to ensure that it meets the needs 
of today, not yesterday.   
 Negotiation is a key element of the agile concept of variable scope. If product 
backlog items fall below the prioritization line and will not be delivered, due to 
time box constraints, budget constraints, or new learnings, we need to negoti-
ate with the customer to ensure that we’re still delivering the highest-value 
product. Those very constraints can also be renegotiated, if, say, the customer 
agrees to extend the timeline or budget to ensure that new or low-priority 
items are included. As we walk through these scenarios it becomes clear that 
the agile principles point toward deep negotiation skills as a key success factor 
for coaches and consultants, as well as product owners.  
 The idea of constant negotiation, like that of constant collaboration, is disrup-
tive to many organizations. The common cry from the executive team is “I 
thought we landed on a solution. Why is this changing every time I look at 
it?” while the cry from the team is “scope creep.” The agile advisor must be 

The Agile Consultant
187
prepared to address these concerns, persuading executives on the benefits of 
participative decision making and change readiness, while helping teams under-
stand that the built-in constraints of time box and cost box, and the idea of 
variable scope, enable us to deliver high-value projects without gold-plating 
or “just in case” features. The workday of the typical coach or consultant is 
one of constant negotiation, making these skills a core competency of the agile 
consulting role.  
 Influence and Persuasion 
 The foundational work in the science of persuasion and influence is  Influence: 
The Psychology of Persuasion. 7 Dr. Robert Cialdini, a Columbia University-
trained Ph.D. in social influence, has written an accessible and fascinating study 
that combines research and anecdote to uncover the factors that make us 
both persuadable by others, and persuasive ourselves. His thesis is that we 
are programmed by evolution and social structures to automatically respond 
to certain influences, and that these influences can be used for good or ill, to 
persuade us to make healthy and productive choices, or to lure us into traps 
for the benefit of others. Let’s look at a list of these influencers, and then, 
rather than rehash the material from the book, we’ll review how these ideas 
relate to agility. 
 Cialdini’s six influential factors  are:
• 
 Reciprocation is the impulse to repay in kind what 
someone has provided to us, whether we asked for it 
or not. Cialdini cites the university professor who, as an 
experiment, sent Christmas cards to total strangers and 
received a reciprocal response from people who had 
never heard of him. He also cites a 1960 study by Alvin 
Gouldner 8 determining that all human societies follow 
this rule of reciprocity. From the free address labels in 
a charity solicitation letter, to the free samples at the ice 
cream shop, the expectation of reciprocity is built in to 
many of the conventional interactions of life.  
 7 Robert B. Cialdini,  Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion (New York: Harper Business, 
2006). Also available online  as Influence: Science and Practice at    www.cfs.purdue.edu/
richardfeinberg/csr%20331%20consumer%20behavior%20%20spring%202011/
cialdini/robert_cialdini-influence-science_and_practice.pdf   . 
 8 Alvin W. Gouldner, “The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement.”  American 
Sociological Review, 25: 161–178 (1960).  

Chapter 14 | The Agile Consulting Skill Set 
188
• 
 Commitment and consistency are powerful intrinsic 
motivators. Why do political attacks on “flip-floppers” work 
so well? For the same psychological reason as bettors at the 
race track become more confident in their horse’s chances 
after they bet. We have an innate desire to be consistent 
with previous decisions or behaviors, and we prefer those 
who honor their commitments. Once we make a commit-
ment ourselves, we’re reluctant to repudiate it, even if it’s not 
in our interests currently.  
• 
 Social proof is the psychological trigger that spawned 
the laugh track, the advertising meme “1 million clients 
trust our product,” and the salted “tip jar” found in many 
restaurants and bars. When we see (or hear) others per-
forming a behavior, like laughing at lame jokes on TV, we’re 
more likely to exhibit that behavior ourselves.  
• 
 Liking the influencer is, unsurprisingly, a strong motiva-
tor toward compliance with his persuasions. What may 
be surprising is how often this trigger is used in our daily 
interactions. Liking, for example is one of the success fac-
tors of social networking. When we see an advertisement 
on Facebook, or read an article posted by a friend, we’re 
more likely to click because we’re surrounded or encour-
aged by “friends” we know and like. From Tupperware 
parties to the “chain of friends” sales technique, we’re 
more likely to buy or comply when the influencer tells us 
“your friend Jim thought you might be interested in . . .”. 
We know Jim, we like him, so the influencer invokes Jim’s 
name in hope that some of that liking will stick to him.  
• 
 Authority as a motivator is familiar to every human 
being, from the first “because I said so . . .” response we 
get as kids to the “following orders” defense proclaimed 
in every war atrocity trial. The impulse toward respond-
ing to authority is inherent because it has worked for 
many species for millions of years. From the alpha dog to 
the silverback gorilla, and including the modern corpora-
tion, the variety of rewards, punishments, and incentives 
that authority figures can convey, and our inherent moti-
vations, drive us to comply with authority even when, 
absent that authority, we would find their orders abhor-
rent or ridiculous.  

The Agile Consultant
189
• 
 Scarcity is the persuader that leads to the perennial 
“going out of business” sales that have lasted many years, 
the velvet ropes at “exclusive” clubs, or the “Act now! 
Only 100 left!” ads that show up on late-night TV. It also is 
responsible for the propensity to keep old newspapers or 
record albums; they might be valuable someday because 
of their scarcity. Scarcity drives the club-goer seeking the 
status of exclusivity as well as the collector of baseball 
cards or comic books, because, especially when they are 
flawed and scarce like misprinted postage stamps or coins, 
their value soars without any intrinsic difference in value. 
 The triggers of  authority and consistency  are familiar to many consultants. 
Teams and individuals follow outdated and ineffective practices because they 
are told to, or because they always have. Command-and-control organizations 
use authority as the motivating factor to keep their employees compliant and 
obedient. “The way we do things here” is often cast in concrete by the desire 
to remain constant to the decisions we’ve already made, even when circum-
stances change drastically. These motivators have enabled the growth of 
the modern corporation and society, and contributed to some of the worst 
tragedies in human history. They also pose some of the biggest challenges 
to agile consultants as we encourage organizations to move away from com-
mand structures, with which humans are inherently comfortable, to partici-
pative cultures that seem fraught with uncertainty and risk. They challenge 
us to demonstrate the inconsistencies in seemingly consistent behaviors 
when they are counterproductive. Understanding the pull of these hidden 
motivators is a key differentiator for mature consultants. 
 Many of these persuasion factors are also immensely useful in agile consulting 
and agile practices. We work well as a team when we honor the idea of reci-
procity; if a team member helps us in this sprint, we have an obligation to help 
her the next time. Once our team commits to the agile framework, its initial 
resistance and hesitation is often allayed, like that of the bettor or speculator
who commits to a wager. The concept of visible success relies on social proof 
for its power; if those guys are doing it, and it works for them, maybe it’ll 
work for us too. Liking, of course, is an integral part of team “storming, form-
ing, norming and performing.” As we get familiar with our teammates, and as 
they display reciprocity and commitment, we learn to like them more, thus 
reinforcing our motivation to cooperate and succeed together. 
 The wise consultant uses these  motivators  for good, not ill. We renounce the 
manipulation of these triggers to persuade our clients to do what we want, 
and instead use the positive elements to encourage behavior that is positive 
and sustainable. Social proof, as noted, is a great way to use the successes of 
one team to spread enthusiasm and belief in the  power of agility  . Commitment, 
rather than  reward and punishment  , is the driver of agile performance. The 

Chapter 14 | The Agile Consulting Skill Set 
190
authority of the domain expert, earned instead of conferred by title, can be 
used to help teams push through technical challenges. The scarcity of accom-
plished agile consultants drives our rates to their market value, and our author-
ity as domain experts can persuade enterprises to follow our advice. 
 One  warning  : persuasion can be a slippery slope. Unlike the huckster or con 
artist who uses our impulses against us, we must maintain the purity of inten-
tion that lies behind lean and agile concepts. We’re not there, as scrummasters, 
coaches, or consultants, to persuade the client to do things our way (except 
for following the basic principles of agility). I’ve seen respected consultants 
become dictators, taking a  “my way or highway” approach to advising, so sure 
of their superior knowledge, and so competent in their use of persuasion that 
they leave behind solutions that are inappropriate and unsustainable for the 
client’s culture. We use our persuasive skills to help guide the client enter-
prise toward the right path for the client, not to demonstrate our mastery of 
manipulation or impose our own vision. 
 These advisory skills, mingled with the five fundamentals of consultative 
behavior, prepare us to navigate the tricky paths of agile evolution with the 
purity of intent and competence that encourages sustainable relationships. As 
our competence and maturity in these consultative behaviors grows, so will our 
usefulness to the clients and teams that engage us.  
 Summary 
 We’ve stepped out of the purely agile focus and looked at the consultative 
skills and behaviors that drive success. The advisory competence expected of 
a consultant must be applied to the benefit of the client enterprise, and not 
to impose the consultant’s vision or preferences. By gaining control of our 
egos and emotions, and by displaying the neutrality of the facilitator, we enable 
teams to make, and own, their decisions and commitments. We use the power 
of persuasion to guide teams and enterprises to adopt the agile principles, 
and adapt them for their best fit. The agile consultant must demonstrate the 
openness, candor, and respect that they encourage in their clients, and must 
model the Zen qualities of emptiness and empathy that agility requires. Agility 
is a mind-set, and so is consulting; together, they inspire consultants and their 
clients to achieve things they never thought possible.  

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_15
 C H A P T E R 
  Agile Domain 
Expertise 
 Necessary but not sufficient–that’s been our description of agile domain 
expertise throughout the book. We’ve explored all the components of agile 
consulting that augment our basic agile skills and enable us to bring more 
consulting value to our clients. Still, although not sufficient, agile domain 
expertise is necessary, and like the marketplace and the technology we’ve 
been describing, agile theory and practice is turbulent and constantly evolv-
ing. There was no Scaled Agile Framework for years after the Manifesto was 
written, no Spotify teaming model, no Project Management Institute certifi-
cation for agile. Agility evolves continuously, and, as agile advisors, we must 
evolve with it or risk obsolescence. As many consultants have found in the 
last decades, through the migrations from mainframes to minicomputers, 
minis to client-server, then to networks, to Internet, and to cloud, staying 
the same means falling behind. How many highly paid COBOL programmers 
failed to move to structured languages like Pascal, to function and object-
based languages, then on to Ruby, Python, and containers? Many of us chose 
this field specifically because there’s always more to learn, and room to grow. 
With agile, we’ve picked a rapidly evolving field with lots of opportunity to 
expand our knowledge and take on new ideas, techniques, and strategies. 
 For the coach or consultant who wants to develop his agile domain competency, 
the options are many. From local agile communities to myriad certifications, 
and from droves of  agile blogs  to mountains of agile books, we can enhance 
our understanding of lean, agile, and enterprise theories and strategies every 
15

Chapter 15 | Agile Domain Expertise
192
day. We’ll take a look at some of the global and local communities, the books 
I’ve found to be foundational reading and the ones that supplemented and 
expanded my knowledge, and the certifications that enhance our credibility 
and demonstrate our passion, and our depth of agile knowledge. We’ll talk 
about a development path for agile consultants and examine the levels of 
competence that mark the growth of our agile experience. 
 The Foundation 
 I learned most of what I know about agility from two sources:  reading and 
experience . As I noted in the Introduction to this volume, a chance encounter 
as a journalist with Jim Highsmith, one of the signatories of the Agile Manifesto, 
started me on my passage from gung-ho  traditional waterfall project manager  
to agile advocate. I started my journey by picking up Highsmith’s book  Agile 
Project Management , and then, as is my habit when an idea piques my interest, 
steamrolled though every agile book I could get my hands on. 
 At the beginning, since I was no longer a software developer, lots of the works 
out there that focused on agile as a development methodology didn’t move 
me and ended up in my discard pile. Slowly, I developed a foundational library 
that I considered my basis for agile theory and practice. All of the agile books 
I reference in this volume are cited in the bibliography that follows, but there 
are a handful that stand out as the cornerstones of my understanding, and that 
I recommend to both new agilists needing guidance and experienced agilists 
who want to fill gaps in their fundamental knowledge. 
 Here are some of my top recommendations. 
 Agile Project Management , by Jim  Highsmith  
 Highsmith's book lays out the agile case clearly, and helps us understand agile 
as a mind-set and a set of values, not just a set of practices and techniques. 
I'm thankful that I started here: I began my agile journey under the tutelage of 
the key original thinker in the agile world, and began from the correct place 
of mind-set and values.  
 Agile Estimating and Planning , by Mike  Cohn 
 Where Highsmith taught me agile values, Cohn’s book tutored me on agile 
reality. What do teams, coaches, and managers need to do every day to begin 
the agile transformation? How do traditional project managers and develop-
ers let go of the familiar practices of waterfall projects, functional silos, and 
magical belief in predictive estimation? If we acknowledge that we can’t know 
the route, how will we reach the destination? Cohn’s books guided me to 
the balance between a theoretical approach and a pragmatic, in-the-trenches 
understanding of how agile is really done.  

The Agile Consultant
193
 Coaching Agile Teams , by Lyssa  Adkins 
 Adkins has clearly lived the agile transition, and she talks about it with passion 
and clarity. She displays her hard-won migration, from a traditional project 
manager, thinking she owned every detail of the project, to an agile “adept,” 
so infused with the agile mind-set that rather than merely becoming a scrum-
master, Adkins became a Zen master of agility, helping coaches understand the 
personal voyage they must make before they can coach others.  
 Agile Project Management With Scrum , by Ken 
Schwaber 
 Schwaber, along with Jeff Sutherland, developed the scrum process, but this 
is not merely a methodology guide. Schwaber, like Highsmith, walks read-
ers through the evolution of ideas and challenges that development teams 
faced, when the traditional methods kept failing and development teams were 
mistrusted and miserable, unable to deliver valuable products. While scrum-
focused, this fundamental book helps scrum teams understand not just the 
methods but the evolution that brought us to agile.  
 Succeeding With Agile , by Mike  Cohn  
 Cohn has two books on the list, because it’s hard to become an effective agile 
leader or scrummaster without absorbing his step-by-step instructions for 
building, coaching, and mentoring teams, and sharpening their skills in an agile 
environment. Cohn has obviously encountered many permutations and com-
binations of challenges, issues, and resistors, and grants you the benefit of his 
experience in making the right choices on your agile path.  
 Other Books 
 There are tons, literally, of other agile books in which I've found great value, 
from Michelle Sliger’s  The Software Project Manager's Bridge to Agility 1 to Dean 
Leffingwell’s  Scaling Software Agility, 2 and specialized works focused on agile ret-
rospectives, metrics, or testing, but these five are my touchstones as I go about 
the challenge of guiding enterprises as they evolve toward agility. As noted, 
check the bibliography for the entire contents of my agile library.  
 1 Michele Sliger   and   Stacia Broderick   ,  The Software Project Manager’s Bridge to Agility Boston: 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2008).  
 2 Dean Leffingwell,  Scaling Software Agility: Best Practices for Large Enterprises (Boston: 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2007).  

Chapter 15 | Agile Domain Expertise
194
 Experience  
 I mentioned both books and experience as my teachers. Books are easy to 
get your hands on; experience, not so much. Especially in the early days, after 
the Manifesto and Principles were released, agile shops were few, far between, 
and brimming with controversy. Getting the opportunity to introduce or 
experience agile in the business world often required stealth efforts, in which 
the word  agile was never used, and we talked instead about “light” or  “low-
overhead” project techniques  . Once I absorbed the idea that reams of paper 
trails and stage gates did not protect us from failures and overruns, I became 
increasingly obsessed with simplifying the project process for the consultants 
on my team. I stripped every project technique to its bare essentials and then 
stripped it again. I wouldn’t call the project methods my teams employed at 
Entex 3 or Intel agile, but they were certainly leaner and more efficient than the 
17-binder methodologies I learned during my Big 5 residency. 
 I was lucky; my early columns on agility for TechRepublic 4 got some attention 
and burnished my credentials as an agile consultant. I began to be approached 
by clients large and small to help them understand and implement these new 
ideas, and I got the chance to see many different cultures, business models, and 
personalities, and to learn the value of adaptiveness and  empathy  . I recognized 
the revolutionary nature of this change, and realized it was about much more 
than methodology. From small local information technology ( IT  ) consulting 
shops to multinational companies, I was exposed to the myths, misconceptions, 
and concerns associated with migration to agility, and incrementally developed 
strategies to counteract resistance and fear (strategies I hope I have communi-
cated in this volume). Because I started early in the migration cycle, I watched 
agility go from revolution and controversy to standard practice and learned 
hard lessons about cultural inertia and the  momentum of new ideas. 
 Lucky for me, but what about the practitioner today?   How does an aspiring 
scrummaster, agile coach, or consultant go about getting the exposure required 
to become a proficient agile practitioner or advisor? I’m not talking about 
certifications here; we all know that many are certified but few are chosen. 
While the path through certifications is not to be disregarded, all the certs in 
the world do not make an adept, and, as we learned in successive generations 
of  certifications  , from PMP to MCSE, and from CCNE to CISSP, 5 many folks are 
great at taking tests yet lack the judgment and maturity to perform the work. 
The real test of capability is in the doing, and the real training ground is in the 
real world, not a training course. So how do aspirants get that chance? 
 3  www.nytimes.com/1997/11/23/nyregion/a-growing-market-in-computer-solutions.html   . 
 4  www.techrepublic.com/search/?q=rick+freedman  . 
 5 PMP: Project Management Professional, MCSE: Microsoft Certified System Engineer, 
CCNE: Cisco Certified Network Engineer, CISSP: Certified Information Systems Security 
Professional.  

The Agile Consultant
195
 Many agile aspirants start by simply introducing some of the  core agile ideas  
into their team, whatever their role. Project managers begin letting go of 
big, upfront plans and start inching toward a more just-in-time approach. 
Developers start working on what’s ready versus waiting for the complete, 
blessed specification. Teams start meeting daily to ensure that they’re on beam 
and uncovering issues as they arise. Unlike many agile purists, I’m not of the 
opinion that an official agile pilot needs to be proclaimed and the scrum guide 
must be followed dogmatically to start down the agile path. Agile practices are 
proliferating because they make sense, and because they work. Don’t wait for 
an Emancipation Proclamation from old methods; whether you call it agile or 
not, start to introduce the practices that make sense in your environment and 
reap the benefits of the latest thinking in product development. Even if your 
enterprise is resistant to an official agile migration, it’s hard to argue against a 
daily touch-base or an all-hands planning session. 
 The next logical step, of course, is to make it official. If you’ve successfully 
adopted some of the practices and seen benefits, start to make those benefits 
visible and attribute them to your team’s new approach. Lobby for a pilot, or 
a proclamation, or whatever fits in your enterprise. Get the certifications, if 
they make sense for your career development (although I’ve known many 
great coaches and consultants without any letters after their names, and many 
weak ones with certs galore). More important, begin to work the practices, 
not as a bunch of isolated process improvements but as a unified framework, 
like scrum or kanban, and start to socialize the language, the concepts, and the 
mind-set. You will find, if you’re successful at the team level, that agility will 
spread across the enterprise and give you many opportunities to expand your 
experience and learn the pragmatic lessons of agile evolution.  
 If you’re a believer in the agile mind-set, and your current employer is so set 
against it that you can’t even get a minimal pilot set up, move. There’s a whole 
universe of agile-enlightened organizations out there that will be glad to have 
your enthusiasm for agile methods, and give you the opportunity to learn at 
the feet of coaches, consultants, scrummasters, and the agile teams whose 
working lives have been improved by these techniques.  
 You’re Certifiable! 
 As with any new technology, especially in the IT field, there are plenty of orga-
nizations out there willing to grant you a certification in exchange for money. 
Most will also give you some meaningful insights and a chance to practice your 
craft. Some will be valued by employers as a token of your  knowledge and 
dedication  , and some will merely look nice on your wall. As technologies peak 
in the hype cycle, the for-profit certifiers start to come out of the woodwork. 

Chapter 15 | Agile Domain Expertise
196
 As you can tell, I’m a skeptic, but only to a degree. There are certifications 
that I’ve seen many employers value highly, such as the Project Management 
Institute’s Agile Certified Practitioner (PMI- ACP ) and the Certified 
ScrumMaster ( CSM  ) certifications. For those interested in Scaled Agile 
Framework (SAFe 4.0), the SAFe certification commands respect. There are 
a few private certification companies, like ICAgile, that have robust curricula 
and strong courseware (disclosure: I teach ICAgile courses through ASPE, the 
US-based training firm). There are also, unfortunately, lots of home-brew agile 
courses and trainers floating around, with courseware that may or may not be 
true to lean and agile principles. Some of these are lecture-based courses that 
fill you with slide-ware and then grant you a cert, with no chance to practice 
or experience the concepts. 
 My advice is simple; stick to the known entities. Between the agile books avail-
able, the acknowledged certifying bodies like PMI, SAFe, and Scrum Alliance, 
and private trainers like ICAgile, there are enough courses and certifications 
to fit any  agile ambition  . 
 Let’s quickly differentiate some of these certifications. PMI-ACP is the Project 
Management Institute’s exam, and that’s both good and bad. Many agilists have 
grown up with the idea of PMI as the opposite of agility, with its rigorous, 
 phase-gated approach  , and so they are reluctant to honor any certification 
that comes from that source. On the other hand, there has been for years a 
 PMI-based community of interest  focused on agility. The test was developed 
by well-respected agilists like Mike Cottmyer and Mike Griffiths, who have 
built an agile body of knowledge that suits PMI yet is true to agile concepts. 
 I myself am a certified PMI-ACP, although I resisted the traditional PMP certi-
fication for my entire career. After studying and taking the exam myself, and 
witnessing its wide acceptance in the business community, I count the PMI-
ACP as one of the most reputable agile certifications. Unlike the CSM, it’s not 
scrum-focused, and it tests a wide range of agile skills, from domain knowledge 
to change management and consultative skills. It’s not attached to a specific 
course like the CSM, but it’s a wide-ranging test based on acknowledged classics 
of agile theory, and, being from PMI, gets attention from agilists and traditional 
 Project Management Office (PMO)  managers alike. I also love the fact that PMI, 
after years of denying agile or crying “we’re agile too—we have rolling wave 
planning!”—has accepted the reality of agile and ratified it with this certification. 
 When I took the Certified Scrum  Master   class , there was no test associated 
with it at all—take the class, get the cert. Accordingly, the value received 
depended on the trainer, as many trainers had different material, different 
approaches, and, frankly, different skills and knowledge. The Scrum Alliance 
has since tightened up its act considerably, with a clear path through a series 
of standardized courseware, each culminating in an exam and leading to a logi-
cal next certification for the ambitious. We now have certified scrummasters, 
scrum trainers, product owners, coaches, and even agile leaders, each with a 

The Agile Consultant
197
distinct curriculum. For those who aspire to get a hands-on introduction to 
scrum, a  CSM certification  is the most accessible, foundational certification. 
The progressive curricula that lead to Certified Scrum Developer, Certified 
Enterprise Coach, Certified Scrum Product Owner, or Certified Scrum 
Professional certifications are well-designed, pertinent, and respected in the 
profession and the client base. 
 Among the “official” scrum certifications, the Professional Scrum series is the 
real competitor to the  Scrum Alliance’s CSM  . Offered by scrum.org, the orga-
nization established by Ken Schwaber, one of the originators of scrum, it also 
has a defined path for scrummaster, product owners, and developers, as well 
as a scaling course for enterprise-level professionals. This designation is not 
as well recognized as a CSM, with a fraction of the number of certified profes-
sionals, but it is quite rigorous and is preferred by many due to its association 
with Schwaber. It also has the advantage of requiring no renewals; certification 
is for a lifetime. Firms like Microsoft and Avenade (Accenture’s digital consult-
ing firm) prefer this cert, and have invested heavily in certifying their teams. 
 I’m a big fan of the  progressive agile certification paths  that organizations like 
the Scrum Alliance and ICAgile offer. From scrummaster at the team level to 
trainers, product owners and executives, these roadmaps can guide ambitious 
agilists through an entire career, as their skill and experience multiplies. While 
I’m not an advocate of certs for certs’ sake, for those who aspire to evolve 
throughout their careers to higher levels of competency and agile mind-set, 
these escalating pathways offer lifetime learning and an opportunity to stay 
engaged with the development of agile theory and practice. 
 I started by noting that I’m a bit of a skeptic, but these certifications are cer-
tainly worthwhile and I have no reservations recommending them. My many 
years as an  IT professional  have caused me to be a bit cynical about certifica-
tions in our field, as I’ve seen too many come and go with the fashion, and too 
many unqualified job-seekers clutching at straws in an industry for which they 
are poorly suited. For those of you with the temperament, skill, ambition, and 
desire to become a professional agile practitioner, however, these certifica-
tions and their associated training and study are a great way to enhance your 
understanding, practice your skills, begin to build a network of like-minded 
agilists, and illustrate to the world that you’ve done your homework. 
 Finally, of course, the consulting skills we reviewed in the previous chapter 
offer an entirely different set of challenges. Those who augment their agile 
certifications with study in facilitation, negotiation, persuasion, active listening, 
and other advisory skills clearly have an advantage in their ability to add value. 
Some agile coaches go on to study and gain certifications in coaching as a dis-
cipline. Others migrate into organizational development or  strategic planning  . 
As agility transcends software development and migrates across the entire 
enterprise, these advanced advisory skills become essential.  

Chapter 15 | Agile Domain Expertise
198
 The  Agile Community  
 The Scrum Alliance, 6 in addition to offering certifications, is also a global com-
munity of agile practitioners who gather frequently to evolve the practices 
together, and share knowledge about the development and real-world results 
of scrum. Their Global Scrum Gatherings are considered some of the best 
networking and learning events in the agile world, and the relationships a 
scrum professional can build are invaluable. The user group and AgileCareers 
sections of the community web site are important resources. Whether you’re 
a regular attendee of the conferences or an online participant in the webinars, 
the Scrum Alliance is a must-have membership for professionals in the scrum 
and agile world.   
 Less scrum-focused and more aligned with general agile principles, the Agile 
Alliance is also a global community that grants access to outstanding training 
materials, webinars, and global conclaves with top speakers and networking 
events. With active members like Steve Denning 7 and Ron Jefferies, 8 and a 
robust international group of user communities, distributed both geographi-
cally and by interest, membership in the Agile Alliance is another sign of com-
mitment, participation, and passion. You’ll find communities as diverse as the 
XP Forum of Johannesburg and the Agilni Srbija of Serbia, as well as communi-
ties across the United States.   
 PMI has its own agile community, which spawned the PMI-ACP exam and cer-
tification, as do the vendors of agile tools such as Rally, CollabNet, and Version 
One. A quick web search will uncover hundreds of local agile groups. There’s 
even an agile Internet radio station, Agile.FM, 9 for the insomniac agilists who 
can’t get enough. 
 Of course, agile communities of practice don’t have to be external entities. 
Every enterprise large enough to have multiple cross-functional teams should 
also cultivate internal communities of practice, focused on both agile and on 
the domain knowledge of members. So, for example, MultiCorp might have 
an agile, scrum or XP community and might also cultivate communities of 
developers, testers, or architects. Agile communities in the enterprise often 
use activities such as reading clubs, article exchanges, and community blogs to 
spread and share the knowledge. As we noted in our overview of the  Spotify 
model  , it’s important to keep teams connected to their domain disciplines 
as well as their cross-functional teammates, to keep knowledge current and 
 6  www.scrumalliance.org  . 
 7  www.stevedenning.com/site/Default.asp  . 
 8 http://ronjeffries.com . 
 9  www.incrementor.com/agilefm/  . 

The Agile Consultant
199
communal. The Spotify model codifies this practice in chapters and guilds, but 
every enterprise can help communities form by offering technical assistance 
and meeting spaces, and by granting some time for participation. After all, the 
company benefits as much as the members do, and keeping both domain and 
agile knowledge fresh is an important goal and a great retention strategy.  
 Summary 
 The IT and business landscape is littered with the bones of developers, con-
sultants, and leaders who were unable to stay current in their disciplines and 
management theories. Especially for the consultant, up-to-the-minute under-
standing of evolving trends and ideas in the agile discipline are essential. From 
the scores of books that make up the agile library to the study required to 
gain and retain certifications, the aspiring agilist and the agile professional have 
plenty of opportunities to expand and test their knowledge of this domain. 
Agilists can gain experience by bringing lean practices into their enterprise by 
stealth, by starting with a few ceremonies in a team or two, or by persuading 
the entire organization to embark on a declared agile voyage. If none of these 
work, the demand for agile professionals is now universal, and experience can 
be gained in many different settings. The agile community is robust, global, 
and welcoming, and agilists can join with like-minded practitioners around the 
world to keep growing their knowledge and network. By adding agile domain 
knowledge to subject matter expertise and consulting skills, we can multiply 
our effectiveness and our value to client enterprises.  

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_16
 C H A P T E R 
  Conclusion: 
Toward the Agile 
Enterprise 
 Back in 2007, James Shore 1 predicted:
 I fully expect the big consulting companies to start offering Certified 
Agile Processes and Certified Agile Consultants - for astronomical fees, 
of course - any day now.  
 He followed his prediction with this warning; “Please don’t get sucked into 
that mess.” 
 It’s not my intent with this book to suck agile advisors into that mess, or to 
focus on certifications, processes, or  practices  . Agilists will, in any event, natu-
rally resist any cult of experts, or any one “correct” path. My drive to write 
this book comes from a few simple observations from my 15 years as an agile 
consultant;
16
 1 James Shore and Shane Warden,  The Art of Agile Development (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly 
Media, 2008).  

Chapter 16 | Conclusion: Toward the Agile Enterprise
202
• 
 Agility will expand beyond the software development 
function to influence the nature of work and of the 
enterprise.  
• 
 There’s a significant difference in the skills required to act 
as a practice-focused coach and as an enterprise-focused 
consultant.  
• 
 As agility evolves, our skills, influence, and responsibility 
as advisors must mature and evolve as well.  
 Many of our clients are not truthful within the enterprise, denying dysfunc-
tion and relying on illusory plans and meaningless estimates to reinforce their 
magical belief in control and prediction. Many are not collaborative, instead 
competing between silos, managers, and teammates. Many don’t particularly 
care about sustainability, and are instead focused on maximum  productivity 
and profit  no matter the human cost. Lean and agile aren’t mere theoretical 
or methodological frameworks; they’re pragmatic responses to these reali-
ties, and the failures they’ve engendered, with the aim of accommodating and 
nurturing creativity, ownership, honesty, and teamwork. Reducing waste, pro-
moting collaboration, respecting truth and reality, and enabling sustainable, 
satisfying work practices are honorable pursuits, and most agile advisors engage 
from these motives, rather than the mere increase of profit and productivity. 
 For agile advisors, the purity of our intentions and the empathy we bring to 
our engagements are our governing success factors. Although we bring great 
enthusiasm to our efforts, we’re not here to guarantee a specific result or 
drive to our particular vision of agility. Enterprises become as agile as their 
potential allows, and we apply our  knowledge, skill, and compassion  to help 
them achieve that level within their constraints of will, desire, and legacy. Like 
kanban, agile consulting is a pull, not a push. The client brings us in because 
its leaders know the enterprise must change, and they engage us to help the 
enterprise achieve its goals. If we’ve prepared the engagement correctly, they 
recognize that there will be disruption, challenge, and conflict along the way. 
That doesn’t mean, however, that it’s our job to march them to the one true 
vision of agility. The opposite is true; each enterprise’s unique path doesn’t 
exist until we tread it together. Agile evolution is not a death march to agile 
purity; it’s an iterative,  pragmatic, and collaborative effort  to find each organi-
zation’s most efficient, lean, and sustainable nature. My recent encounters with 
many agile coaches have illustrated to me, again, that the rule book can be our 
worst enemy. Clients don’t care if they’ve achieved total compliance with the 
Scrum Guide. They want advisors who can accept them as they are and adapt 
their consulting advice to the client’s reality. 
 We’ve explored many factors, historical, cultural, and procedural. We’ve 
examined the evolution of the assembly-line,  command-and-control business 
environment  and explored the factors that made it successful, and have since 

The Agile Consultant
203
made it obsolete. We’ve looked at many different approaches to helping 
organizations evolve from unsuccessful and unsustainable practices to agile, 
responsive, and humane methods. We’ve outlined the skills and knowledge 
that agile consultants must bring to the advisory relationship to guide their 
clients to their utmost agility and creativity. We’ve emphasized that, although 
agilists believe these techniques go far toward the goal of a more human busi-
ness culture, clients don’t engage us to raise consciousness and promote hap-
piness but to help them gain and sustain concrete business results. 
 Agile is cascading from  information technology (IT)  into sales, marketing, analysis, 
and leadership. It’s influenced everything from the design of office space 2 to our 
relationships with customers and partners. A simple web search will uncover 
everything from agile ticketing solutions (whatever that means) to agile aero-
space design, and from agile guitars (!) to agile Australia (part of Prime Minister 
Malcolm Turnbull’s election platform 3 ). Of course, there’s a hefty dose of camp-
following here, as folks with little understanding of the agile mind-set tag along 
with the movement. Be that as it may, the widespread adoption of the agile lan-
guage can encourage understanding and adoption of the accompanying ideas. Or 
so we can hope. 
 If we ignore the hype and concentrate on the substance, however, we find a 
global IT community that has embraced agile ideas, and has become the van-
guard for a revolution across the business world. In IT, agile  development  has 
led to agile deployment in the form of DevOps and continuous integration. 
Agile infrastructure, through the flexibility and immediacy of the cloud, has had a 
significant impact on IT architecture and processes. Agile leadership has begun 
to replace the notion of an all-knowing leader, or a supreme project manager, 
with servant-leadership, participative decision making, and self-organization. 
As agile IT pushes against the constraints and boundaries of traditional manage-
ment, strategy, and budgeting, the extension of agility to these realms seems 
inevitable. My sincere hope, and my belief, is that, unlike some management fads 
of the past, the mind-set of agility, sustainability, collaboration, and value focus 
will transform our enterprises and interactions. 
 Agile consultants, and the coaches, scrummasters, teams, and leaders who 
embrace it, have a central role to play in this evolution. If we can apply a kaizen 
attitude to our own work, hone our skills, and guide clients faithfully through 
the challenges and opportunities of agile evolution, we will fulfill our roles as 
wise advisors and indelibly influence the world of work. Agilists believe that 
the virtues of honesty, trust,  teamwork  , service, and value can unleash creativ-
ity and community across the global workplace. May we be proven right.  
 2  www.agilealliance.org/wp-content/uploads/files/session_pdfs/Agile%20
Office%20Spaces%20Workshop.pdf   . 
 3  www.dpmc.gov.au/domestic-policy/more-innovative-and-agile-australia  . 

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_17
 A P P E N D I X 
 The Roots of 
Agile: History 
and Background 
 Take agility out of its product development context and think of it in its more 
familiar usage, as descriptive of a person or animal that has speed, grace, and 
flexibility. Agile  individuals  can bend and twist, turn on a dime, and switch on 
the speed when appropriate.  Speed  is one of many characteristics of  agility  , but 
certainly not the only one. The word   agile in the physical world indicates an 
organism that can adapt to its environment, not over eons but by its actions 
right now to suit the current circumstances. Those blessed with agility are 
more likely to escape the perils of the moment and land in a dominant position. 
 Agility is  defined  as 1 :
 1.  marked by ready ability to move with quick easy grace 
<an agile dancer>  
 2.  having a quick, resourceful, and adaptable character <an 
agile mind>  
A
 1 Merriam Webster Online Dictionary,    www.merriam-webster.com  . 

Appendix A | The Roots of Agile: History and Background
206
 If we move to a business context, the daily headlines illustrate over and over 
both the power of agility and the risks inherent in its absence. Those corpo-
rate giants, from  Citicorp  to  Chrysler  , that can’t transition from historic busi-
ness models and business cultures are at risk of extinction. Those, from  Apple 
to  Amazon , that reinvent themselves and respond to marketplace changes 
with urgency and innovation are the likely survivors. 
 Agility is an attribute that now ranks with stability and governance as indica-
tors of a well-run business. For the global consumer we all serve, the pace of 
change in technology and business models has been positive. New capabili-
ties at lower costs, as we see in the personal computer (PC) and cellphone 
markets, has now become an expected benefit of the migration to  digital 
technologies  . The life cycle of a  product is now measured in months, and this 
speed of product refresh has fueled a global market with high expectations 
and a short attention span, as new, science-fiction features like voice recogni-
tion quickly become old-hat. 
 The Agile Manifesto: Founding  Document 
 An understanding of the Manifesto for  Agile Software Development  is criti-
cal to anyone wishing to grasp the concepts of agility. The Manifesto is 
structured as a  simple value statement  , comparing one type of value with 
another. For example, the statement that “We value working products over 
 comprehensive documentation  ” has been interpreted to mean that agile 
teams disdain all documentation. In fact, agile teams, and most developers, 
resist useless documentation that will never be referenced, the sort of 
ritualized document production that’s become part of many  development  
life cycles. In my experience with  high-performing agile teams  , they’ll work 
hard to produce documents, like user stories or test scripts, that add value 
to the process. What they refuse is to spend time on  non-value-producing 
activities  like writing status reports that are never read. In this example, the 
key idea of the Manifesto is not that only “working products” have value 
and that “ comprehensive documentation  ” has none; rather, it challenges 
product developers and project managers to question, project by project, 
which processes, tools, documents, plans, and contracts add value to this 
particular effort, and which ones we might be doing out of habit, or to fulfill 
a bureaucratic requirement. 

The Agile Consultant
207
 
THE MANIFESTO FOR AGILE PRODUCT 2  
DEVELOPMENT
 We are uncovering better ways of developing products by doing it and helping others to 
do it. Through this work we have come to value: 
 The signatories included Kent Beck, the proponent of Extreme Programming, Alistair 
Cockburn, the developer of Crystal Methods and author of influential works on agile 
development, and Jim Highsmith, who has translated agile software concepts into an 
Agile Project Management methodology. 
 In product  development  , as in most other human endeavors, the pendulum 
keeps swinging, in this case from highly structured, prescriptive, and predictive 
methods to more loosely defined, adaptable, and flexible approaches. In my 
career as an information technology project manager, I’ve been around long 
enough to see the gyration from ad hoc unstructured “ cowboy coding”  by 
“super-programmers,” with no overall plan or project controls, to the tightly 
constrained and systematized practices of the  Capability Maturity Model 
(CMM)  and  Project Management Institute (PMI)  -sanctioned 3  “best practices” 
that require every step, action, and decision to be documented, traceable, and 
consistent project to project. We’ve now landed at a position in the contin-
uum that fits the moment: the quest for a specific product development model 
that suits the project, the team, the enterprise, and the culture. 
 In contrast with  traditional project methods  , agile methods emphasize the 
incremental delivery of working products or prototypes for client evalua-
tion and  optimization  . Traditional, “waterfall,” sequential project management 
assumes that, at the beginning of the project, stakeholders can know, articu-
late, and document their entire set of requirements. It further assumes that 
developers can review those documented requirements and accurately pre-
dict the activities required, the resources needed, and the time and cost of 
that development. Both real-world experience and academic research indicate 
that this is a mistaken belief. 
 2 As Highsmith has done in his book  Agile Project Management , we’ve replaced “software” 
with “product” in the Agile Manifesto, and throughout the book, so agility can apply to all 
types of product development efforts.  
 3 The  CMM is a development model created for the   U.S. Department of Defense  by 
Carnegie Mellon University, which created the   Software Engineering Institute   (SEI). The 
term  maturity relates to the degree of formality and optimization of processes, from   ad 
hoc   practices to formally defined steps to managed result metrics to active optimization 
of the processes. 
 The  PMI is the certifying body of the project management profession and the developer 
and publisher of the  Project Manager’s Body of Knowledge . 

Appendix A | The Roots of Agile: History and Background
208
 The famous Standish Group  CHAOS Studies,  4  familiar to project managers 
worldwide, studied thousands of IT projects for conformity with scope, time, 
and cost projections. Repeated about every four years, these studies consis-
tently show that about 40% of IT projects are in the “challenged” category, 
a polite way of saying “circling the drain.” At a Weapons Symposium in  1999 , 
the results of a  Department of Defense (DoD) software  spending study were 
presented. Of $35.7 billion spent by the DoD in 1995 for software, only 2% 
of the software was usable as delivered. 75% of the software was either never 
used or was cancelled prior to delivery. 5  
 Other academic research challenged project management methods in use, 
especially in an IT context. In a 1998  Harvard Business School  study of large 
software projects, authors Austin and Nichols challenged many of the funda-
mental ideas of IT project management. As they noted 6 :
 The f  irst flawed assumption is that it is possible to plan such a large 
project. 
 The second f  lawed assumption is that it is possible to protect against late 
changes. 
 A third f  lawed assumption is that it even makes sense to lock in big 
projects early! 
 At about the same time, Watts Humphrey, a respected IBM researcher, pub-
lished his  Requirements Uncertainty Principle 7  stating that,
 for a new software system, the requirements will not be completely known 
until after the users have used it. 
 Hadar Ziv of the University of California soon followed with his own   Software 
Uncertainty Principle 8 :
 Uncertainty is inherent and inevitable in software development processes 
and products. 
 4  www.standishgroup.com/services.php  . 
 5 Stanley J. Jarzombek, “The 5th Annual Joint Aerospace Weapons Systems Support, 
Sensors, and Simulation Symposium ( JAWS S3).” Proceedings, 1999.  
 6 Robert D. Austin and Richard L. Nolan, “How to Manage ERP Initiatives,” Working Paper 
99–024, 1998. 
 7 Watts S. Humphrey,  A Discipline for Software Engineering (SEI Series in Software Engineering) 
(Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1995).  
 8 Hadar Ziv, Deborah J. Richardson, and René Klösch, “The Uncertainty Principle in Software 
Engineering” (Technical Report 96-33), University of California, Irvine, 1996.  

The Agile Consultant
209
 In an influential article in 2001 that surveyed software development methods 
of innovative Internet companies, Alan MacCormack, assistant professor at 
the Harvard Business School, published a review of the history of software 
development  methodologies  . 9  
 MacCormack’s  “Evolutionary Model of Software Development Methods”  
illustrates the history of IT systems development methods:
 Waterfall Model  – sequential process, maintains a document trail 
 Rapid-Prototyping Model  – disposable prototype, helps establish customer 
preference 
 Spiral Model  – series of prototypes, identifies major risks 
 Incremental or Staged Delivery Model  – system is delivered to customer 
in chunks 
 Evolutionary Delivery Model  – iterative approach in which customers test 
an actual version of the software 
 These academic findings and observations from real-world efforts led many 
developers and project managers to question the assumptions of traditional 
product development methodologies. Recognizing problems with existing 
methods does not, however, solve the predicament of revamping, replacing, 
or enhancing those processes. In his article on IT project management for 
Internet companies, MacCormack recommended a set of practices that could 
begin to replace the traditional methods. These simple precepts have been 
cited as a central foundation of the movement toward Agile approaches:
 Early release of evolving design and code, 
 Daily build of code and fast turnaround on changes, 
 Deeply skilled teams. 
 Developments in  industry  , especially the  lean manufacturing systems  pio-
neered by Japanese firms like  Toyota  , validated many of the ideas brewing in 
the software and project management communities. The Standish Group find-
ing, that around 60% of features built in to IT projects are rarely or never used, 
was also noteworthy. Concepts like focusing on features the customer valued 
and specifically requested and building in quality upfront rather than “testing it 
in” later resonated with these communities. 
 9 Alan MacCormack, “Product-Development Practices That Work: How Internet Companies 
Build Software.” MIT Sloan Management Review, 42(2): 75–84 (Winter 2001).  

Appendix A | The Roots of Agile: History and Background
210
 The development of agile  methods accelerated in the 1990s, as  Scrum  was 
developed at  Easel Corporation  and Extreme  Programming  evolved at 
 Chrysler . In the mid-1990s  Dynamic Systems Development Method  was intro-
duced and quickly adopted in Europe. Finally, in 2001, the Agile Manifesto was 
created, and agile development methods were on their way toward main-
stream acceptance. 
 Agile methods assume that clients can’t know what they want in detail until 
they see a prototype. Agile assumes that, as we iterate toward a complete 
solution, small releases of functionality and value at a time, our stakeholders 
will guide us to a product that more closely fits their needs and expectations. 
Each iteration delivers a working product or prototype, and the response to 
that product serves as crucial input into the succeeding iterations. 
 Agile theory assumes that changes, improvements, and additional features 
will be incorporated throughout the product development life cycle, and that 
change, rather than perceived as a failing of the process, is seen as an oppor-
tunity to improve the product and make it more fit for its use and business 
purpose. 
 Let’s delve into each of these statements and clarify what they mean. 
 Individuals and interactions over  processes and tools  
 Process and tools don’t create results, or add value for the user: only skilled 
people can do that. Processes and tools, when selected and applied judiciously, 
can offer guidelines and best practices, and can improve productivity, but agile 
project managers understand that it’s the human interactions, within the team 
and with the users and customers of the desired product, that grant us the 
insight to deliver the right results. Many agile  advocates  look at the  Business 
Process Reengineering (BPR) movement  of the late 1990s as the culmination 
of a trend toward valuing processes over people, as if the perfect process 
alone could enforce success, and the skills and characteristics of the people 
were secondary.  Agile theory  asserts that even the most perfect process can 
do no more than guide and support skilled, motivated, and driven individuals 
focused on delivering value.  
 Working products over  comprehensive 
documentation  
 This is, as stated, one of the most frequently misinterpreted principles within 
the Agile  Manifesto  . The key idea it intends to convey is that a working prod-
uct or prototype can grant users insight into the actual status of development 
efforts far more clearly and realistically than any status report or  Gantt chart  
can. Experienced IT  consultants  know that every software product under 

The Agile Consultant
211
development is always proclaimed by the developer to be “90% done” until it 
either is delivered or fails and is discarded. This agile principle insists that the 
only way to know the real status of an effort, and to gauge the users’ satisfac-
tion and acceptance of the results, is to deliver something tangible that users 
can review and  assess . 
 This preference of working software or product prototypes over documen-
tation also serves to emphasize a key idea in agile development: documen-
tation is no substitute for collaboration and interaction. Status reports are 
distributed through e-mail,  Gantt charts  are posted on a wall in the project 
office, and requirements documents are approved via an e-mail chain rather 
than face-to-face: all of these are examples of the sort of interaction-free 
exchanges that agile methods are expressly designed to replace with vivid, 
intensive collaboration.  
 Customer collaboration over contract negotiation  
 Projects based on  contracts  have traditionally implied that the entire scope 
and range of features required are documented before any development 
begins, and that the scope, schedule, resources, and often the price, are fixed 
and unchanging throughout the life of the project. Sometimes these contracts 
and  scope documents  are not even created by the teams building the product. 
To make matters worse, in many projects the contract becomes a substitute 
for collaboration with the client, and complex or innovative projects often 
become adversarial wrangles over terms of the contract. 
 Agile methods aim to move focus from the contract, and from predefined 
planning documents, to collaboration, with the customer and other stakehold-
ers becoming a central element of the development effort. A key insight of this 
statement in the Manifesto is the idea that it’s only customers who can define 
the value of the features development teams deliver, and that they must take 
ownership of the output, and must be involved throughout the effort, not just 
at the beginning, when scope documents are developed, and at the end, when 
acceptance is required. 
 It’s important to note that this idea can create difficulties on both sides of the 
development effort. Project teams migrating from traditional to agile  methods  
are often startled by the degree of client interaction required in an agile envi-
ronment, and can often be troubled by the constant requirement to present 
their designs and prototypes to client review, and by the need to constantly 
incorporate changes and improvements as they work. Conversely, many cli-
ents, trained to “throw projects over the wall” to developers, often having 
little contact with the project team between specification and acceptance 
time, are often unprepared for the intensive interaction expected in an agile 
engagement. Preparation of teams, and expectation setting regarding this new 
way of engaging, is a key success factor.  

Appendix A | The Roots of Agile: History and Background
212
 Responding to change over following a  plan 
 Developers and project teams are asked to participate in many types of projects. 
Some are production-style, low-uncertainty projects, like installing a new server 
in an existing data center, for which there may be well-known, documented 
rules and procedures. Others may be innovative, high-uncertainty projects, like 
creating a new business based on a  web-based business model  that is untried 
and untested.  Agile theory  contends that it’s a fallacy to believe that all types of 
projects, from production to exploration, can be accomplished using the same, 
anticipatory, Plan-Do type of project approach, and that exploratory, innovative 
projects require a more experimental Envision-Explore approach. 
 Another key element of this philosophy is the changing nature of business 
itself. As global competition heats up, and the pace of change speeds up, driven 
by the Internet and our instant communication culture, the requirements of a 
project can change dramatically from conception to execution.  Project teams 
are no longer simply confronting a series of minor scope changes that can be 
handled with change control processes; they’re facing projects in which the 
entire set of business assumptions, technology, and infrastructure can change 
as the project is underway. Traditional measures of project success, such as 
compliance with an anticipatory plan and strict control of change requests, are 
a poor fit for this type of engagement. 
 Every project is not a candidate for an agile approach. Agile methods and 
approaches are uniquely suited for innovative, experimental, “never-been-
done” projects, and are probably not the best fit for well-documented, low-
variability  projects  . Projects like the 20th implementation of a bottling plant, 
or the 8th installation of an off-the-shelf software product, while having unique 
characteristics, probably don’t call for the exploratory, learn-as-we-go attri-
butes in which agile methods excel. Projects such as an  innovative software 
application  , with requirements emerging as development proceeds, or a new 
product development effort for a quick-moving marketplace like consumer 
electronics, are probably better fits for the methods we are discussing. 
 In biology, organisms that are dynamic, evolving over time, and adapting to the 
environment in which they dwell are known as “emergent”  organisms  . This 
concept of emergence is frequently discussed in agile documents, applying 
this biological meaning to the group interaction of a project team, and to the 
evolving requirements and expectations of the customer. New software, or 
new products in general, are subject to changing business conditions, chang-
ing technologies, changing end-customer expectations, and changing economic 
conditions, and so are not well-matched with static, predictive methods. These 
innovative products or services invite the exploration, experimentation, and 
creativity that are enabled by iterative, incremental, time-bound methodologies. 

The Agile Consultant
213
 In addition to the innovative, emergent qualities we’ve discussed, agile projects 
also require an actively engaged, available customer. Common to most agile 
methods is the requirement for the customer to be a constant participant in the 
work sessions, daily meetings, iteration reviews, and brainstorming that exem-
plify the agile approach. Unlike  traditional project methods  , the entire require-
ment and work plan is not derived upfront, and so the customer is not free to 
participate in a requirements workshop and then disappear until acceptance 
time. Since agile methods assume that customers can’t know what they want 
until they see a working example, the customer clearly needs to be there to 
review the deliverables and comment. The ultimate goal is to deeply integrate 
the customer into the process as a central member of the development team. 
 Projects with high regulatory compliance requirements are probably not a 
great fit for agile methods. Customers whose industry or culture requires 
that every change go through a formal committee, that every conversation 
be documented with detailed minutes, and that every new direction, taken 
in a speculative manner to improve the product, must go through a lengthy 
approval process, will probably lack tolerance for the lean, nimble, artifact-light 
approach that agile advocates. 
 Other important considerations when determining whether to adopt an agile 
 approach relate to skills and culture. It’s inherent in  agile theory  that the 
teams being led by these methods are composed of skilled, motivated, driven 
professionals. In agile environments, leadership and management are focused 
on serving the team, removing barriers, and fostering a creative environment, 
not on managing individual granular tasks. 
 Methods like Extreme  Programming  explicitly call for highly skilled team mem-
bers, and explicitly state that they are not suited for large teams. This creates 
difficulty in many environments, where the staff is composed of a mixture of 
seasoned veterans and less-experienced journeymen. Most agile advocates 
would caution against assigning rookies to a key role in an agile team, although 
bringing them in to observe the process is encouraged as a training tool. 
 The question of dispersed and virtual teams in agile environments is hotly 
debated. Since many of the agile methods require attendance at a daily ses-
sion, there’s been some controversy about whether these can be held through 
video, collaboration tools, or other virtual techniques. Communication, collab-
oration, and customer interaction are key tenets of agility, so these concerns 
can’t be simply discounted. Teams in which project managers and developers 
are working on many projects at once add to these concerns. There has been 
effort by members of the agile community to address both scaling and virtual 
teaming; Jim Highsmith has proposed both scalable agile team compositions 
and hub-spoke team configurations to address these concerns. 

Appendix A | The Roots of Agile: History and Background
214
 Finally, some industries, and some corporate cultures, may not be suited for 
agile approaches; highly regulated industries like pharmaceuticals, and safety-
conscious industries like transportation, may be wary of shedding the docu-
mentation and process associated with traditional methods, for example. 
 The developers who gathered to develop the Agile  Manifesto  were more 
than theorists; they were dedicated practitioners who went on to develop 
pragmatic development systems based on the agile principles. Kent Beck, 
Ward Cunningham, and Ron Jefferies, all signers of the Manifesto, are also the 
co-developers of Extreme Programming, the agile method that attracted the 
most attention at the time. Alistair Cockburn, another signer, is the architect 
of the  Crystal methods  , as well as an author of influential works on use  cases  . 
Manifesto signer Jim Highsmith has been the chronicler of the agile movement, 
and he has done the most to migrate agile concepts from the software to the 
project management community. Ken Schwaber and Jeff Sutherland, also sign-
ers, were the originators of the Scrum methods. We’ll explore each of these 
variants of agile methods, and discuss criteria for selecting one approach or 
another based on project specifics.  
 Extreme  Programming  
 Often known simply as XP, Extreme  Programming  has gotten an outsize 
share of interest among agile methods. Extreme Programming drew atten-
tion because its audience of software developers was discovering many of 
its practices in real project work, and because its initial successes, including 
the well-known  Chrysler Compensation project  , coincided with the  Internet 
movement , with its need for an approach geared to speed-to-value and explor-
atory, innovative projects. 10  
 XP has some unique features among the agile methods surveyed here. It is 
focused on software development and is not touted as a project methodology. It 
explicitly admits that it doesn’t scale to teams larger than ten or so, and that it’s 
not well suited to virtual or dispersed teams. Like the Agile Manifesto itself, XP is 
presented as a series of principles. These include elements such as the following:
• 
 The planning game: A recurrent workshop in which 
developers and customers interact in order to create and 
refine the “stories” that describe their project.  
• 
 Small releases: “Every release should be as small 
as possible, containing the most valuable business 
requirements.” 11  
 10 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chrysler_Comprehensive_Compensation_System  . 
 11 Kent Beck,  Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 
2000), p. 56. 

The Agile Consultant
215
• 
 Metaphor: The overall idea of the project; the broad goal 
told as a narrative or story, to keep the technical jargon 
to a minimum and build a collaborative vision between 
developers and  customers  . 
• 
 Simplicity: The ideal of simplicity is central to XP. The 
delivered product itself should be simple, delivering the 
needed features in the simplest manner without trying to 
speculate about the bells and whistles that might be useful 
sometime in the future. The use of methodology and tech-
nique should be simple too; XP developers avoid docu-
mentation, other than stories and test cases, unless there’s 
a convincing demonstration of their value to the customer. 
Finally, XP practitioners strive for elegance and simplicity in 
their actual coding practices, which leads us to refactoring.  
• 
 Refactoring: Refactoring is the optimization of the 
internal code and architecture of software, and it’s a key 
element of XP. It’s also a response to one of the hazards 
of iterative design, the danger that the separate iterations 
will be poorly integrated and internally incompatible. 
Refactoring is a disciplined approach to rebuilding system 
internals to ensure simplicity, elegance, and compatibility.  
• 
 Pair programming: Pair programming takes the con-
cept of software inspections and walkthroughs to the 
next level. Rather than periodic reviews, the key insight 
of pair programming is that two skilled practitioners can 
review and optimize each other’s code, and each other’s 
coding practices, as they work toward the customer’s goal.  
• 
 Testing: The vital difference between XP testing prac-
tices and traditional practices is that XP insists that test 
cases for all features be developed upfront, with the 
stories.  
• 
 Continuous builds : Going beyond the “daily build” 
that’s a common practice in many commercial software 
companies, XP practitioners prefer the continuous build, 
ensuring compatibility and functionality continuously as 
the product is created.  
• 
 Sustainable development: A reaction to the 70-hour 
week, “death march” project that many developers 
have experienced, the 40-hour-week standard that XP 
espouses is consistent with the agile philosophy that cre-
ative developers do their best work when they’re com-
mitted, energized, clear, and focused.  

Appendix A | The Roots of Agile: History and Background
216
• 
 Available customer: XP calls for the customer to be 
completely integrated with the development team, avail-
able to review features, builds, and tests and to review, 
assess, and optimize the product as it  evolves  . 
 XP’s broad exposure, and the debate it has engendered, has given the project 
management and software development communities the chance to consider 
these ideas and to explore their applicability to their work.  
 Scrum  
 Ken Schwaber, who, along with Jeff Sutherland, developed the Scrum Process, 
states that “the core of the Scrum approach is the belief that most systems 
development has the wrong philosophical basis . . . you can’t predict or definitely 
plan what you’ll deliver, when you’ll deliver it, and what the quality and cost will 
be.” 12  Schwaber declares that development is not a defined process, which can 
be repeated time after time, like the implementation of a well-known system, 
but is instead an  empirical process  , in which each project is fundamentally dif-
ferent, in which new discoveries must be made every time, and which unfolds 
differently each time based on the findings of each unique project. 
 It’s important to distinguish the process from the content of the project in 
thinking about Scrum. While the Scrum process can be consistent from project 
to project, the content to be developed, whether a new bit of software, a new 
system, or a new product, will be sufficiently innovative and unique that the 
team will discover and integrate new ideas within each project as they work, 
create, and discover. 
 Unlike XP, which is designed to be a  programming-centric approach  , Scrum 
has more of a project management focus. With the uncertainty of predicting 
the outcomes quoted above, Scrum instead concentrates on creating a sup-
portive environment for creative development, on close examination of fea-
tures delivered, and on constant fine-tuning of the product as it is iteratively 
delivered. As in all agile methods, the supportive environment emphasizes col-
laboration, constant customer involvement, and the drive toward iteratively 
delivering real working features. 
 12 Quoted in Jim Highsmith,  Agile Project Management: Creating Innovative Products, Second 
Edition (New York: Pearson Educational, 2010).  

The Agile Consultant
217
 The Scrum process has three  activities  :
• 
 Pre- sprint , in which the team, in collaboration with the 
client (known in Scrum as the “product owner”)  , creates 
a set of three “backlogs” that catalog the features visual-
ized for the product under development. The product 
backlog is the “master” list of features discovered so far, 
which in turn divides into a release backlog and a sprint 
backlog. Also defined in the pre-sprint planning is the 
sprint goal, a business result for the sprint to come. 
• 
 Sprint , strictly defined in Scrum as a 30-day work cycle 
in which team members sign up for tasks on the back-
log, work with the sprint goal in mind, and participate in 
daily Scrum sessions. The sprint is the fixed center of the 
Scrum method, in which the features accepted into the 
sprint backlog remain constant during the sprint. Product 
owners can make changes or discard the entire effort 
once the product of the sprint is displayed for review, but 
during the sprint the scrummaster manages changes and 
suggestions to keep the team focused while “sprinting.”  
• 
 Post- sprint  , when the product is displayed to the product 
owners for review and optimization. At the end of this 
session, if the project is not complete, the Scrum cycle 
begins again with a new pre-sprint planning session.  
 In order to grasp Scrum, it’s critical to understand the backlog concept, as 
illustrated in Figure  17-1 . The entire product, to be delivered when the project 
is complete, is defined by the features and functions captured in the prod-
uct backlog. Those features are then categorized by the collaborative team 
and product owner to determine which features will be included in the next 
sprint. Those selected features compose the sprint backlog. Not pictured in 
the diagram but also used in some Scrum projects is the release backlog, for 
products that envision multiple releases leading up to a final product release.  

Appendix A | The Roots of Agile: History and Background
218
 The  philosophy of Scrum centers on a few simple ideas: that predicting the 
outcome of innovative, creative projects is folly, that dedicated, talented teams 
have the initiative and creativity to build the requested features and functions 
if enabled to do so by a supportive environment, and that delivery of work-
ing functions and constant oversight of the content (rather than the process) 
makes successful development of inventive products possible.  
 Lean  Development  
 In 1989, Professor James Womack and consultant Dan Jones published   Lean 
Thinking , 13  a survey of the lean manufacturing techniques that helped create 
the “Japanese miracle” of the late 1980s and early 1990s. They chronicled the 
ideas of lean manufacturing, with their focus on eliminating waste, creating a 
smooth “flow” of work on the factory floor, and expecting workers to con-
tribute high skill levels and an ownership mentality. These concepts helped 
 Toyota , the exemplar of these techniques, vault over the traditional giants of 
the automotive industry. Lean manufacturing theories were highly influential 
in the creation of lean development (LD). Robert Charette, while not a sig-
natory of the Agile Manifesto, has developed a methodology that has many 
 Figure 17-1.  Scrum process  diagram  
 13 James P. Womack and Daniel T. Jones,  Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in 
Your Corporation , Second Edition (New York: Free Press, 2003).  
 

The Agile Consultant
219
commonalities with those mentioned so far. Similar, though distinct, ideas have 
also been put forward by Mary Poppendieck and Tom Poppendieck in their 
book  Lean Software Development 14  (we focus on Charette’s version here)  . 
 LD emphasizes four key success factors that clearly illustrate LD’s compat-
ibility with other agile methods:
• 
 Create visible customer value rapidly,  
• 
 Build change-tolerant software,  
• 
 Create only necessary functionality and no more,  
• 
 Aggressiveness, stubbornness, and belief in meeting 
stretch goals. 15  
 Like Scrum, LD is more of a project management environment than simply a 
software development one; it consists of three distinct phases, startup, steady-
state, and transition/renewal. Rather than the daily “scrum,” it recommends 
a  time-boxed “whirlpool”  that, like all agile methods, includes the analysis, 
design, test, and build activities in each iteration. 
 Lean development is important not just for its conformance to the ideals of 
agile development but because the underlying philosophies of lean manufac-
turing have been accepted by business leaders worldwide, and so come with 
existing acceptance. This makes the introduction of agile methods in a lean 
framework more easily accepted, and presents a strategic framework that 
executives are likely to accept with less resistance. 
 There are, of course, other variants we haven’t explored here, including  Feature 
Driven Development  and Jim Highsmith’s  Adaptive Software Development  . 
 Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM)  , for example, is a software 
development life cycle that embraces many of the foundation ideas of agile 
development, such as business value focus, iterative release, deep collabora-
tion, and time-boxed delivery. 16  Some, like Scrum, are primarily focused on 
the project management element of product development, while others, like 
Extreme Programming, are software-centric. The agile ideas outlined here, 
from the early theoretical findings to the Agile Manifesto, have not just created 
debate and discussion but have led to the crafting of a variety of disciplined, 
complete methodologies that bring the  theories  into real-world practice.   
 14 Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your Corporation, Revised and 
Updated Hardcover – June 10, 2003.  
 15 Robert Charette,  Foundations of Lean Development (Spotsylvania, VA: ITABHI Corp., 2002). 
 16  www.dsdm.org/  . 

© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0_18
  Bibliography 
 While there are hundreds of agile titles available, these are the volumes that 
have an honored place in my personal library, and the ones I recommend to 
agilists hoping to begin their agile apprenticeship or enhance their skills. I tried 
to cover a wide range of topics, from software development and testing to agile 
scaling and leadership. Many of these titles are cited by Project Management 
Institute (PMI) as the basis for its PMI-ACP exam 1 and are acknowledged classics 
in the agile canon. 
 Adkins, Lyssa.  Coaching Agile Teams: A Companion for ScrumMasters, Agile Coaches, 
and Project Managers in Transition . Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2010. 
 Ambler, Scott.  Disciplined Agile Delivery: A Practitioner’s Guide to Agile Software 
Delivery in the Enterprise . New York: IBM Press, 2012. 
 Anderson, David.  Kanban: Successful Evolutionary Change for Your Technology 
Business . Sequim, WA: Blue Hole Press, 2010. 
 Beck, Kent.  Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change . Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2004. 
 Beck, Kent.  Test Driven Development: By Example . Boston: Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 2002. 
 Cohn, Mike.  Agile Estimating and Planning . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
2005. 
 Cohn, Mike.  Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum ; Boston: 
Addison-Wesley, 2009. 
 1  www.pmi.org/Certification/~/media/Files/PDF/Agile/PMI000-GainInsights
AIGLE418.ashx   . 
 B

222
Bibliography
 Cohn, Mike.  User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development . Boston: 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004. 
 Crispin, Lisa, and Janet Gregory.  Agile Testing: A Practical Guide for Testers and 
Agile Teams . Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2009. 
 Denning, Stephen.  The Leader’s Guide to Radical Management: Reinventing the 
Workplace for the 21st Century . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2010. 
 Derby, Esther, and Diana Larsen.  Agile Retrospectives: Making Good Teams Great . 
Location: 9650 Strickland Rd, #103-255 Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2006. 
 Galen, Robert.  Scrum Product Ownership: Balancing Value from the Inside Out. 
Location: RGCG, LLC; 2 edition (March 2, 2013). 
 Griffiths, Mike.  PMI-ACP Exam Prep, Second Edition: A Course in a Book for 
Passing the PMI-ACP Exam . Location Kansas City MO: RMC Publications, 2015. 
 Humble, Jez.  Continuous Delivery: Reliable Software Releases through Build, Test, and 
Deployment Automation . Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2010. 
 Jim Highsmith,  Agile Project Management: Creating Innovative Products, Second 
Edition  (New York: Pearson Educational, 2010). 
 Larman, Craig, and Bas Vodde.  Practices for Scaling Lean & Agile Development: 
Large, Multisite, and Offshore Product Development with Large-Scale Scrum . Boston: 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2010. 
 Larman, Craig, and Bas Vodde.  Scaling Lean & Agile Development: Thinking and 
Organizational Tools for Large-Scale Scrum. Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2008 Addison-Wesley Professional; 1 edition (December 18, 2008). 
 Leffingwell, Dean.  Scaling Software Agility: Best Practices for Large Enterprises . 
Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2007. 
 Patton, Jeff.  User Story Mapping: Discover the Whole Story, Build the Right Product . 
Location: 1005 Gravenstein Highway North O'Reilly Media, 2014. 
 Pilcher, Roman.  Agile Product Management with Scrum: Creating Products that 
Customers Love. Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2010. 
 Poppendieck, Mary, and Tom Poppendieck.  Implementing Lean Software 
Development: From Concept to Cash Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2006. 
 Rubin, Ken.  Essential Scrum: A Practical Guide to the Most Popular Agile Process . 
Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2012. 
 Schwaber, Ken.  Agile Project Management with Scrum . Redmond, WA: Microsoft 
Press, 2004. 

223
Bibliography
 Schwaber, Ken.  The Enterprise and Scrum . Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 2007. 
 Shore, James, and Shane Warden.  The Art of Agile Development . Location: 1005 
Gravenstein Highway North O’Reilly Media, 2007. 
 Sliger, Michelle, and Stacia Broderick.  The Software Project Manager’s Bridge to 
Agility . Boston: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2008. 
 Wysocki, Robert.  Effective Project Management: Traditional, Agile, Extreme . New 
York: Wiley, 2013.  

I
 A 
 “Achieve faster delivery cycles” , 63 
 Adaptive leadership , 119, 120 
 Adaptive software development , 219 
 Adaptive strategy 
 algorithms, predict predilection , 130 
 Bain’s definition of scenario 
planning , 131  
 “big data” analysis , 130 
 enterprises achieve , 131 
 hierarchic command structure , 129 
 innovative enterprises , 130 
 Maxwell Wessel advises , 130 
 OPEC , 131 
 plausible future scenarios , 130 
 scenario planning , 130–132 
 scrum cycle of development , 132 
 strategic foresight , 130 
 Advisors, agile , 47, 53, 65, 72 
 Advisory skills , 181 
 Advocates, agile , 69, 210 
 Agile adoption barriers , 20 
 Agile change models 
 ADAPT method , 13, 16 
 ADKAR model , 13 
 barriers removal , 15 
 ‘big opportunity’ , 14 
 BPR , 16 
 eight-step model , 14 
 ERP , 16 
 guiding coalition , 14 
 strategic vision and initiatives , 15  
 TQM , 16  
 Agile community , 198  
 Agile consultants , 42, 63  
 business-oriented language , 4 
 commercial challenge , 7 
 engage with agility , 75  
 at enterprise level , 41  
 gap analysis , 5 
 to guide sponsor and enterprise , 62  
 observation , 77  
 to perform inclusive visualization , 65  
 sponsors expectation , 75  
 step process , 5 
 traditional consulting model , 4 
 into transition committee sessions , 65  
 visualization stage , 69  
 Agile consulting model 
 “big-bang” approach , 167, 172  
 client-focused methods , 171  
 collaborative participation , 172  
 contracting, unknown , 174–175  
 4D engagement model , 172  
 engagement proposal , 173  
 firm’s deep experience , 171  
 incremental evolution , 171  
 investment, project , 171  
 iterative and incremental project , 172  
 McKinsey’s Digital Labs , 171  
 phase-by-phase approach , 172  
 plan approach , 172  
 procurement and financial models , 172  
 project budget , 172  
 Index 
© Rick Freedman 2016 
R. Freedman, The Agile Consultant, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-6053-0

226
Index
 range estimate, phase , 172 
 traditional 4D engagement , 171 
 traditional consulting model , 170 
 Agile consulting principles 
 decision process , 11 
 focus on the relationship , 8 
 result oriented , 11–12 
 role definition , 9 
 visualization of success , 10 
 Agile domain expertise 
 agile blogs , 191 
 agile community , 198 
 certification 
 agile ambition , 196 
 CSM certification , 197 
 CSM class , 196 
 IT professional , 197 
 knowledge and dedication , 195 
 phase-gated approach , 196 
 PMI-ACP , 196 
 PMI-based community 
of interest , 196 
 progressive agile 
certification paths , 197 
 Scrum Alliance’s CSM , 197 
 strategic planning , 197 
 foundation 
 adaptiveness and empathy, 
value of , 194 
 Agile estimating and planning, 
Mike Cohn , 192  
 Agile Project Management, Jim 
Highsmith , 192 
 Agile Project Management With 
Scrum , 193 
 certifications , 194  
 Coaching Agile Teams, 
Lyssa Adkins , 193 
 core agile ideas , 195 
 cultural inertia and momentum , 194 
 experience , 194–195 
 IT , 194 
 reading and experience , 192 
 Succeeding With Agile, 
Mike Cohn , 193 
 traditional waterfall 
project manager , 192 
 Agile enterprise 
 benefits , 156  
 business model , 156  
 certifications and processes , 201  
 command-and-control 
business environment , 202  
 development , 203  
 digital disruption and 
changing technology , 155  
 enterprise , 155  
 information technology (IT) , 203  
 innovation , 163–165  
 innovation engine , 155  
 knowledge, skill, and compassion , 202  
 pragmatic and collaborative effort , 202  
 product development function , 156  
 productivity and profit , 202  
 responsiveness 
 BizDevOps , 160  
 business model , 159  
 derails , 159  
 DevOps , 160  
 efficient supply chain , 159  
 Google and Facebook , 159  
 leadership , 157  
 marketplace values , 157  
 quality assurance (QA) server , 159  
 responsiveness  vs. efficiency , 157  
 responsive organizations , 156  
 scale , 157  
 TCS , 156  
 Zara , 158  
 simplicity 
 complex and obscure 
processes , 160  
 complexity reduction , 162  
 DMAIC , 163  
 enterprise level , 162  
 enterprises, process and business 
model innovation , 161  
 leadership , 163  
 mature consultants , 162  
 organizational , 162  
 process improvement , 162  
 product proliferation , 162  
 radical element , 161  
 Star Model , 163  
 Uber/WhatsApp , 161  
Agile consulting model (cont.)

227
Index
 teamwork , 203 
 technical architectural 
enhancements , 155 
 Agile evolution , 42, 57 
 Denier in , 49 
 Agile evolution program , 72 
 Agile leadership , 121  
 strategic level , 119 
 Agile leadership responsibilities 
 executives , 149 
 managers , 149 
 team leads , 149 
 Agile Manifesto , 110, 115 
 Agile Manifesto, founding 
document , 206–207, 209–210 
 comprehensive documentation , 210–211 
 customer collaboration, contract 
negotiation , 211 
 processes and tools , 210 
 responding to change, plan , 212–214 
 Agile negotiation , 185–186 
 Agile opportunity vision , 68–69, 72, 74 
 crafting , 70 
 feedback mechanism for , 68 
 Agile roadmap sequence , 76 
 Agile safaris , 105 
 Agile scaling frameworks 
 DAD , 116 
 LeSS , 116 
 product owner , 113 
 program-level participants , 115 
 scaled agile framework 4.0 , 114 
 scrummaster , 113 
 Spotify , 117–118 
 value stream level , 115 
 Agile Software Development , 206 
 Agile strategic thinking , 132–133 
 Agile strategy 
 faulty assumptions, 
strategic planning , 127–129 
 gap analysis , 125 
 iterative model , 126 
 planning and innovation, 
Pandora , 137–139 
 Agile teams , 40  
 Agile theory , 210, 212–213  
 Agility 
 characteristic of , 205  
 defined , 205  
 organizational flexibility , 27  
 price and product transparency , 31–32  
 strategic responsiveness , 27  
 Agreeableness, traits in FFM model , 50  
 Amazon , 206  
 Anecdotal analysis , 48  
 Apple , 206  
  Atomic unit , 42  
 Awareness, Desire, Ability, Promotion, 
Transfer(ADAPT) , 35  
 framework , 17  
 method , 16  
 Awareness, Desire, Knowledge, 
Ability, and Reinforcement 
(ADKAR) , 13, 35, 77, 78  
 B 
 Big-bang approach , 167  
 Big-bang disruption , 30  
 Big-room planning , 134  
 BizDevOps , 160  
 BPR . See  Business process 
reengineering (BPR)  
 “Burning platform” , 62  
 Business process engineering (BPR) , 107  
 Business process reengineering 
(BPR) , 6, 29, 161, 210  
 Business skills , 181  
 C 
 Capability maturity model (CMM) , 207  
 Capability planning 
 advantages for agile consultant , 68  
 Capability planning method , 66–67  
 in small team , 67  
 Capitalizing on Complexity , 22  

228
Index
 CAS . See  Complex adaptive systems (CAS)  
 Categorization schemes , 101 
 Celebrated chief executive 
officer (CEO) , 161 
 Certified Scrum Master (CSM) class , 196 
 CHAOS Studies , 208 
 Chrysler , 206, 210  
 Chrysler Compensation project , 214 
 Cialdini’s six influential factors , 187–188 
 Citicorp , 206 
 Cohn’s ADAPT (Awareness, Desire, Ability, 
Promotion, Transfer) structure , 77 
 framework , 35 
 model , 41 
 Cohn’s analysis , 48 
 Collaboration culture , 24, 25 
 Command-and-control 
business philosophy , 28–29 
 Commonly agreed working approach , 92–94 
 Communication , 86 
 Communication plan, visualization , 72–74 
 Communication scheme , 38 
 Competence culture , 25 
 Complex adaptive systems (CAS) , 148 
 Comprehensive documentation , 206 
 working products over , 210–211 
 Conscientiousness, traits in FFM model , 50  
 Consultant-led change programs , 42 
 Consultants, error , 56 
 Consultative skills 
 advisory skills , 181 
 agile coaching , 180 
 business skills , 181 
 client-server migration , 182 
 client’s needs , 182 
 emotional element , 183 
 engagement , 180 
 facilitation , 183–184 
 fundamentals , 180 
 gauge inflection and body language , 182 
 ineffective solution presentations , 182 
 influence and persuasion 
 authority and consistency , 189  
 Cialdini’s six influential 
factors , 187–189  
 motivators , 189  
 “my way or highway” approach , 190  
 power of agility , 189  
 reward and punishment , 189  
 warning , 190  
 negotiation , 185–186  
 practice-focused coaches , 180  
 RFPs , 182 
 “speeds and feeds” presentations , 182  
 traditional predictive programs , 182  
 utilitarian transaction , 179  
 Contracts, projects based on , 211  
 Contributor teams , 67  
 Control cultures , 24, 26  
 Cost control , 88  
 Cowboy coding , 207  
 Cross-functional transition team , 65  
 Crystal methods , 214  
 CSM . See  Certified ScrumMaster (CSM)  
 Cultivation culture , 25  
 Cultural change imperative , 21–22  
 Culture 
 agility adaptation , 23–24  
 definition , 20  
 types 
 collaboration , 24  
 competence , 25  
 control , 24  
 cultivation , 25  
 Customer intimacy , 32–33  
 Customer-value focus , 56  
 D 
 Denier, personality , 49  
 Department of Defense (DoD) 
software , 208  
 Designated product owner , 65  
 Developers, Agile Manifesto , 214  

229
Index
 Developer teams , 67 
 DevOps , 160 
 Diehards , 48 
 Digital technologies , 206 
 Disruptive change program , 57 
 Drive-by engagement , 42 
 Dynamic Systems Development 
Method (DSDM) , 210, 219 
 E 
 Easel Corporation , 210 
 Eight-step model , 13 
 Emergent organisms , 212 
 Empirical process , 216 
 Engagement, framing , 57–59 
 Enterprise agile opportunity , 63–65 
 Enterprise agility vision , 62 
 Enterprise clients , 36 
 Enterprise-level consultant , 80 
 Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) , 16 
 Enterprise’s management systems , 111 
 Enterprise Transition Committees , 65, 69 
 Evolutionary delivery model , 209 
 “Eternal engagement” business model , 56 
 “Evolutionary Model of Software 
Development Methods” , 209 
 EVOLVE consulting framework , 17 
 EVOLVE framework for agile evolution 
 Explore and Engage , 37 
 lead teams to agility , 40–41 
 observe and plan , 39, 75–76 
 agile exposes obstacles , 77–78 
 planning roadmap to agility , 79–82 
 overview , 35–37 
 step of , 36 
 visible results , 41 
 visualize success , 38  
 Executive teams , 67 
 Experienced consultants , 38, 50, 59 
 Exploration process , 51 
 Explore and Engage 
 engaging with trust , 55–57  
 EVOLVE framework , 37  
 explore environment , 47, 49–51  
 framing engagement , 57–59  
 mapping explore incentives , 53–54  
 mapping value chain , 51–52  
 Extreme Programing (XP) , 92, 210, 213–216  
 F 
 Facilitative mind-set , 183–184  
 Feature Driven Development , 219  
 Feedback loop, agile process , 68  
 Feedback mechanism for Agile 
Opportunity vision , 68  
 Five Factor Model (FFM) , 50  
 Ford Motor Company , 53  
 Function-centered technology , 39  
 G 
 Gantt chart , 210–211  
 Gantt-style project plan , 77  
 Gemba walks , 147  
 General electric (GE) , 161  
 Google , 53  
 H 
 Harvard Business Review (HBR) , 171  
 Harvard Business School , 208  
 High-performing agile teams , 206  
 Holistic optimization , 53  
 I, J 
 IDEO , 163–164  
 Incentives, explore , 53–54  
 “Increasing market penetration” , 63  
 Incremental or staged delivery model , 209  
 Individuals, agile , 205  
 Industrial Revolution model , 157  
 Industry, developments in , 209  
 Information technology (IT) , 37, 49, 77  
 Innovative software application , 212  

230
Index
 Innovator, personality , 49 
 Input-process-output cycle , 67 
 Internet movement , 214 
 IT consultants, experienced , 210 
 K 
 Kanban approach , 118 
 Kotter’s accelerators , 39, 41, 77  
 L 
 Large Agile Framework Appropriate for Big, 
Lumbering Enterprises (LAFABLE) 
process , 115 
 Larman and Vodde’s Large 
Scale Scrum (LeSS) , 108 
 Leadership commitment 
 agile consultants encourage 
change , 152–154 
 agile strategic and big-room 
planning , 142 
 customers, leadership 
responsibilities , 150–152 
 lean leadership basics , 142–143 
 lean to agile 
 big-room planning sessions , 147 
 CAS , 148 
 Gemba walks , 147  
 hierarchical model , 145 
 inspect and adapt , 144 
 integration scrum team , 145 
 leader-standard work , 144 
 lean ideas , 145 
 organic scaling strategy , 145 
 predictive software 
development , 144 
 prescriptive model , 145 
 problem solvers, 
global level , 146 
 proven methods , 147 
 risk and change , 147 
 role of problem solver , 146 
 roles and mindsets , 144 
 scaling strategy , 145  
 Schwaber’s organic model , 145 
 scrum scaling 
frameworks , 144 
 Leadership, visualization process , 64  
 Leader-standard work , 142–143  
 Lean development (LD) , 218–219  
 Lean leadership basics , 142–143  
 Lean management system , 110  
 Lean manufacturing systems , 209  
 Lean thinking , 218  
 LinkedIn , 53 
 “Low-overhead” project techniques , 194  
 M 
 Management by objectives (MBO) , 54  
 Management by Walking 
Around (MBWA) , 147  
 Managers role , 96–97  
 Managing expectations , 57  
 Manifesto for Agile Software 
Development , 206  
 “360 Measurement” approach , 54  
 Meyers-Briggs model , 50  
 Mike Cohn’s resistor spectrum , 49  
 Military-style command-and-control 
management , 54  
 Minimum viable product (MVP) , 121  
 Misinterpreted principles, 
Agile Manifesto , 210  
 Mutual accountability , 94–95  
 Myriad , 107 
 N 
 Nimble consultants , 59  
 Non-value-producing activities , 206  
 O 
 Omnibus fixed-scope project , 7 
 One-size-fits-all approach , 50  
 OPEC . See  Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries (OPEC)  
 Optimization , 53  
 Organisms, emergent , 212  

231
Index
 Organizational change , 104–105 
 Organizational inertia , 72–73 
 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC) , 131 
 P, Q 
 Passive participants , 48 
 Personalities, team members , 49 
 Planning to Plan Assessment , 125 
 PMI-ACP  . See  Project Management 
Institute’s Agile Certified 
Practitioner (PMI-ACP)  
 Post-sprint, Scrum , 217 
 Precept of agile theory , 58 
 Predictive plan approach , 58 
 Predictive planning model 
 bidder’s conference , 169 
 change-control process , 170 
 consulting gig , 168 
 Iron Triangle , 170 
 packaged software 
implementation , 168 
 RFPs , 169 
 schedule and cost , 170 
 traditional consulting engagement , 170 
 Pre-sprint, Scrum , 217 
 “Primary activities” , 52 
 Process-mapping session, 
capability planning , 67 
 ProcessTriage , 51 
 Product development, agile , 207 
 Product, life cycle of , 206 
 Product owner , 65–66, 77 
 agility , 69 
 Programming-centric approach , 216  
 “Program of the month” efforts , 42 
 Project Management Institute (PMI) , 207 
 Project Management Institute’s 
Agile Certified Practitioner 
(PMI-ACP) , 196 
 Project Management 
Office (PMO) , 6, 27, 39, 77, 78, 196  
 traditional , 81 
 Project roadmap , 80  
 Project teams , 212  
 Promotion techniques , 99, 105  
 R 
 Rapid-prototyping model , 209  
 “Real teams” , 40  
 Requests for proposals (RFPs) , 169  
 Requirements Uncertainty Principle , 208  
 Resistance camp , 48  
 RFP’s  . See  Requests for proposals (RFP’s)  
 S 
 Scaled Agile Framework 4.0 , 114  
 Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe) , 108  
 Scenario planning , 131  
 Scope documents , 211  
 Scott Ambler’s Discipline Agile 
Delivery (DAD) , 108, 116  
 Scrum approach , 41  
 “Scrum-of-scrums” approach , 117  
 Scrum process , 210, 216–218  
 activities , 217  
 diagram , 218  
 philosophy of , 218  
 Self-organization , 96  
 Serial reorganizations , 107  
 Simple root cause analysis technique , 78  
 Simple value statement , 206  
 Six Sigma , 107  
 Skeptics , 48  
 Skilled consultants , 38, 61, 70  
 Software Craftsmanship Manifesto , 26  
 Software development process , 53  
 Software development, studies of , 61  
 Software Uncertainty Principle , 208  
 Speed, agility , 205  
 Spiral model , 209  
 Sponsor, educating , 58  
  Spotify model , 117–118, 198  

232
Index
 Sprint, Scrum , 217 
 Strategic Business Model , 125 
 Strategic conversation , 126 
 Strategic framework, agile 
 big-room planning , 134 
 command-oriented organizations , 135 
 comprehensive strategy , 135 
 marketplace , 135 
 monumental task , 136 
 Pandora’s current style , 133 
 planning and execution, big-room 
planning sessions , 134 
 portfolio of projects , 134 
 proselytizing and persuade , 136 
 senior leader , 135 
 strategic approach , 134 
 Strategic planning approach , 174 
 Suboptimization , 53 
 Succeeding with Agile , 35 
 “Support activities” , 53 
 Systems development life cycle (SDLC) , 39 
 T, U 
 Tata Consulting Services (TCS) , 156, 160 
 Team-level sponsors , 69 
 Team-level vision , 62 
 Team members 
 evaluation , 53 
 personalities , 49 
 Teamwork 
 commonly agreed 
working approach , 92–93 
 communication , 86 
 complementary skills , 88–89 
 cost control , 88 
 mutual accountability , 94–95 
 performance goal , 91–92 
 self-management , 96–97 
 self-organization , 96 
 small number , 86–87 
 SMART goal , 90 
 Test-driven development (TDD) , 92 
 The Agile Journal , 48 
 “The Big Opportunity” , 62, 73 
 Time box , 87  
 Time-boxed “whirlpool” , 219  
 “Tips and tricks”, negotiating , 185  
 Total quality management (TQM) , 6, 29, 107  
 Toyota , 209, 218  
 TQM  . See  Total quality management (TQM)  
 Traditional consultants , 59  
 Traditional consulting business model , 6 
 Traditional consulting engagement model , 5 
 Traditional consulting model , 170  
 Traditional project 
management techniques , 58  
 Traditional project methods , 207, 213  
 Traditional strategic 
planning assumptions , 127–129  
 Traits in FFM model , 50  
 Transition team , 65  
 “Trust curve” , 55  
 “Trusted advisor” , 55  
 Trust, engaging with , 55–57  
 V 
 Value chain , 51–53  
 Value chain analysis (VCA) , 52, 53  
 VersionOne software , 19  
 “Vision by committee” , 63  
 Visual controls , 102  
 organizational change , 104–105  
 promotion techniques , 99  
 visibility of backlogs , 101  
 visibility of success , 101  
 Visualize success 
 craft consensus vision , 69–72  
 craft set of capability goals , 66–67  
 enterprise agile opportunity , 63–65  
 execute communication plan , 72–74  
 identify agile opportunity product 
owner or committee , 65–66  
 integrate feedback , 68–69  
 reason to visualize , 62  
 Visualize success, 
EVOLVE framework , 38  

233
Index
 W 
 Wal-Mart , 53 
 Waterfall and fixed 
consulting model , 174 
 Waterfall model , 209 
 Waterfall/systems 
development cycle 
(SDLC) processes , 19 
 Weapons Symposium , 208, 1999 
 Web-based business model , 212 
 Weyerhaeuser , 161  
 Win-win scenarios , 185  
 Wise agile consultant , 38  
 X, Y 
 XLR8 model , 17  
 XP  . See  Extreme Programming (XP)  
 Z 
 Zen exercise , 82  

