
The Basics of
Digital Privacy

This page intentionally left blank

The Basics of Digital
Privacy
Simple Tools to Protect Your
Personal Information and Your
Identity Online
Denny Cherry
Technical editor
Thomas LaRock
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier

Acquiring Editor: Chris Katsaropoulos
Editorial Project Manager: Benjamin Rearick
Project Manager: Priya Kumaraguruparan
Designer: Matthew Limbert
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
Copyright # 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information
about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright
Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/
permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods or professional practices, may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating
and using any information or methods described here in. In using such information or methods they should
be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional
responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume
any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability,
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas
contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Application Submitted
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-12-800011-3
Printed and bound in the United States of America
14
15
16
17
18
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
For information on all Syngress publications, visit our website at store.elsevier.com/syngress

Dedication
This book is dedicated to my lovely wife Kris, who is gracious enough to allow me to
spend every waking moment working on this and to spend countless nights, week-
ends, and entire weeks traveling in support of the Microsoft SQL Server community
and my day job, which I enjoy to a level that probably isn’t normal.
v

This page intentionally left blank

Acknowledgments
I’d like to thank everyone who was involved in putting this book together (if I forgot
you on this list, sorry). This includes my editors Ben, Chris, and Heather, and my
friend and technical editor Thomas LaRock, all of whom helped me out greatly in
the development process.
vii

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Dedication..................................................................................................................v
Acknowledgments .................................................................................................. vii
Author Biography.....................................................................................................xi
Introduction............................................................................................................ xiii
CHAPTER 1
Storing Your Personal Information Online.................................1
Storing your personal information online......................................1
How much information you share with companies ................. 2
Risks of sharing too much information online......................... 3
Knowing how companies protect your information ................ 5
Cookies and websites................................................................ 6
Summary.......................................................................................17
CHAPTER 2
Usernames and Passwords for Websites................................ 19
Picking a username.......................................................................19
Picking a password.......................................................................21
How passwords are figured out.............................................. 22
Unique passwords ................................................................... 23
Passphrases.............................................................................. 26
Two-factor authentication ............................................................27
Using fob-based systems ........................................................ 27
Using software-based two-factor authentication systems...... 28
Using a text-messaging-based system.................................... 29
The more important the longer they should be ...........................30
Summary.......................................................................................31
CHAPTER 3
Your Home Network.............................................................. 33
Securing your home network .......................................................33
Securing your router ............................................................... 34
Securing your Wi-Fi network................................................. 38
Letting others onto your Wi-Fi network ................................ 52
Other devices on the network.......................................................53
Summary.......................................................................................55
CHAPTER 4
Securing Your Home Computer.............................................. 57
Data encryption for the home user...............................................58
Native Windows data encryption ........................................... 59
What do those website security logos mean?..............................66
When Tech Support calls you......................................................69
Internet games and downloads.....................................................71
ix

Application stores ................................................................... 72
Windows antivirus software ................................................... 72
Apple computers need antivirus software.............................. 73
Cell phones and tablets........................................................... 74
Summary.......................................................................................76
CHAPTER 5
Posting Information Online.................................................... 77
Kinds of information that shouldn’t be posted online.................77
How to protect information that is posted online........................82
Twitter..................................................................................... 82
Facebook ................................................................................. 83
Flickr ....................................................................................... 88
MySpace.................................................................................. 93
Summary.......................................................................................95
CHAPTER 6
Who’s Watching What You Do? ............................................. 97
How can someone watch what I do? ...........................................97
E-mail...................................................................................... 98
Web browsing traffic............................................................ 101
How can a government watch what I do? .................................103
SSL versus the NSA ............................................................. 104
How can I stop people from watching what I do? ....................105
E-mail.................................................................................... 105
Web browsing....................................................................... 113
Consequences........................................................................ 117
Summary.....................................................................................121
CHAPTER 7
Laws and Internet Privacy................................................... 123
The law and changing technology .............................................123
PRISM................................................................................... 123
Canadian version of PRISM................................................. 126
Is all this legal?...........................................................................127
Is all this moral?.........................................................................128
Summary.....................................................................................128
Index ......................................................................................................................129
x
Contents

Author Biography
Denny Cherry is the owner and principal consultant for Denny Cherry & Associates
Consulting and has over a decade of experience working with platforms such as
Microsoft SQL Server, Hyper-V, vSphere, and Enterprise Storage solutions.
Denny’s areas of technical expertise include system architecture, performance
tuning, security, replication, and troubleshooting. He currently holds several of
the Microsoft Certifications related to SQL Server for versions 2000 through
2008 including the Microsoft Certified Master as well as being a Microsoft MVP
for several years. Denny has written several books and dozens of technical articles
on SQL Server management and how SQL Server integrates with various other
technologies.
xi

This page intentionally left blank

Introduction
This book looks at the problems associated with data privacy and specifically how we
keep our data private from others who shouldn’t be accessing the data.
In the first chapter, Chapter 1, we look at how much information you should be
storing online and the risks of storing that information online.
In Chapter 2, we review the guidelines for selecting usernames and passwords as
well as options for two-factor authentications.
In Chapter 3, we look at the home computer network. The home computer
network has many weak points such as the router, the Wi-Fi network, and the
devices on the home network.
Chapter 4 looks at the weaknesses within the home computer as well as how to
encrypt all the sensitive data that is stored on your computer.
Chapter 5 talks about how to limit the information you post online.
Chapter 6 reviews the various ways that people and governments are able to
watch what you do online.
The final chapter, Chapter 7, looks at the specific laws and programs that have
been discovered around the spring and summer of 2013 that various governments are
able to use to monitor what people around the world do.
xiii

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
Storing Your Personal
Information Online
1
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
How much information you should share with companies
•
Risks of sharing too much information online
•
Knowing how companies protect your information
•
Cookies and websites
This chapter talks about the risks of storing information online and how we can
mitigate some of those risks.
STORING YOUR PERSONAL INFORMATION ONLINE
In the modern world, we all end up storing information online, even if we don’t know
that we are. Every company that you do business with stores information about their
customers, including you, in a computer on their network. Every website that you
visit on the Internet be it from your desktop computer, laptop computer, cell phone,
library computer, and Internet cafe´ is storing information about you in some form or
another. That computer or system of computers in some cases runs a database that
allows the customer service, sales, marketing, etc., staff to find customer informa-
tion, run reports on purchase history, etc. Even when you do business with companies
in person and not via the Internet, you will have information stored about your
purchases within their systems.
The perfect example of this is the customer loyalty cards that are given out by
grocery stores. These cards are very useful for us the customers because it gives
us access to discounts that we wouldn’t normally have access to without having
to cut coupons and remember to bring them in. The information that the store
gathers via these loyalty programs tells them everything about their customers, their
shopping habits, and so on.
NOTE
What companies can do with this information
One of the most famous problems that has become visible to the general public happened with
the large retailer. Target started sending coupons based on personal shopping habits that they
tracked via their loyalty program. One specific customer, who lived with her father, began
receiving coupons for prenatal vitamins and baby supplies. The father was quite upset that
1

Target was sending his daughter, who was under the age of 18, these coupons so he went to
the local Target store and complained to the store manager. The daughter then had to explain
to her father that she was indeed pregnant.
The way that Target had been able to figure this out was by analyzing her store purchases
on her loyalty program card called data analytics.
You can read more about this use of data at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/target
Understanding just how much information companies track about their customers,
both their online customers and their offline customers, is critical to understanding
how you as the customer can protect yourself against data and identity theft. Under-
standing how the companies collect and use the information about you the customer
allows you to make informed decisions about what information to give companies
and when. In a lot of situations, you can just give the company false information to
get through the process without giving them a way to track you. A perfect example
is when asked for your phone number at checkout, give them all zeros, or when asked
for your zip code, give them the zip code of the store instead of your home.
The problem with it comes to protecting our own privacy is that we as people by
our nature want to be friendly and accommodating. Companies are able to take
advantage of this by asking for information that we are usually all too willing to give
away, even if we shouldn’t be. Companies may not always make it very obvious that
they are collecting this sort of information. Often, they will get you to give the com-
pany this information as part of the security questions that are used to later verify that
you are you when you forget your password. However, many of the questions that
companies use can be easily enough found by simply looking at social networking
sites (which we will be talking about in this chapter and Chapter 5).
How much information you share with companies
The companies that we do business with on a daily basis are collecting massive
amounts of information about us on a regular basis. As of the writing of this book
in the summer of 2013, there are no laws or regulations about how much information
a company can collect about their customers.
The reason that companies collect all this information about their customers is for
a couple of different reasons. The first, and the most common, is so that they can
better target advertising so that there is a better chance of selling their customers
additional products at a later date. This reason makes total sense when you think
about it: companies make their money by selling us products. If they can figure
out what products we want to buy before we know that we want to buy them, they
have a better chance of selling us the products than their competitor does.
For example, if Best Buy is able to figure out that I need to buy a new Blu-ray
DVD player before Target is able to figure out that I need to buy a new Blu-ray DVD
player, and Best Buy is able to get me an ad for their new Blu-ray player that is avail-
able in the stores, then odds are that I will end up purchasing the Blu-ray DVD player
from Best Buy and not from Target.
2
CHAPTER 1 Storing Your Personal Information Online

The second reason that companies collect information about their customers is
much less likeable and enjoyable for their customers. This is when companies collect
and store information about their customers so that the information that is collected
can be sold to other companies so that the other companies can advertise to us. The
easiest example of this practice is Facebook. With Facebook, we willingly give all
our information over without any thought about it. Facebook then uses that informa-
tion to more easily enable advertisers to display us ads on the Facebook website. In
this case, we are no longer the customer, we become the product that is being sold.
Risks of sharing too much information online
When companies collect and store large amounts of information about us, that infor-
mation becomes more at risk of being stolen by other people. The biggest threat to
consumers when it comes to identity theft is that the information needed to steal
someone’s credit card information or their entire identity can be found in the com-
puters of companies that those consumers do business.
Giving attackers the information that they need
As we share more and more information online about our lives on social networks
like Facebook and Twitter, it becomes easier and easier for identity thieves to find
out the information that they need to break into our accounts and take over our iden-
tities; we will be talking more about social networks in Chapter 5.
When we set up accounts with companies such as our banks, we set up a username
and a password. When we do this, we keep these items secret so that no one else
knows what these items are. However, there is a weakness with this system that
becomes painfully easy to exploit and that is the fact that all of these accounts are
set up to go with a specific e-mail address. That e-mail address is your e-mail address
and is used to send you information about the bank and your electronic statements
and to allow you to gain access to your account in the event that you forget what your
password is. By their nature, e-mail addresses are not secret and are known by all our
friends and family and may even be published on the Internet so that customers, old
friends, and so on can contact us. The e-mail address that is posted online can also be
used by attackers as the first step in gaining access to our bank accounts.
Once an attacker has figured out what your e-mail address is, finding out the web-
site where your e-mail can be accessed usually isn’t all that hard. For example, if you
have an e-mail address that ends in @earthlink.net, your e-mail can be accessed via
the website webmail.earthlink.net. If your e-mail address ends in @gmail.com, then
your e-mail can be accessed via the website www.gmail.com. Figuring out the
website to access even rare domains is usually very straight forward.
On most public website sites, there is going to be a link that can be used to allow
the customer to figure out or reset the password in the event that the password has
been lost. Usually, this is done by asking a series of questions that only the owner of
the account would know the answer to. When the Internet was first being used and
this sort of challenge and response question concept was put together, this worked
3
Storing Your Personal Information Online

very well as no one was posting personal information online. However, as time has
moved forward and social networking has continued to grow in popularity, the idea
of challenge and response questions hasn’t really changed. Now, instead of the infor-
mation to answer these questions being something that only the account owner would
know, it’s a real possibility that the answers to these questions has been shared online
on social networking sites.
NOTE
Challenge questions should be challenging
Recently, I was setting up a new bank account at one of the major banks in the United States.
As a part of the process, they help you set up your username and password for the online bank-
ing system. While going through the process, the challenge and response questions were
shown so that I could pick the questions that I wanted to use for my online access to the bank.
Every one of the questions that was shown was information that most people would share
on Facebook, Twitter, or any other social network without thinking twice about it. Some of the
questions that were on the list included questions like what city you met your spouse in.
Telling thieves when to break into your house
While social networks are great for telling our friends and relatives what is going on
in our lives, our friends and family aren’t the only people that can view the informa-
tion that we post on social networking sites. Most social networking sites are wide
open by default meaning that anyone who looks at the site can find the information
that you post on the site (we will talk more about how to set up security on social
networking sites in Chapter 5).
As we post more and more information on social networking sites, we become
more and more used to posting everything that we are doing online. However, when
it comes to traveling, for business or pleasure, we need to be very careful how much
information we post online. Likewise, we need to be very careful about posting our
actual home address online. If we have posted where we actually live, and we also
post when we are on vacation out of town, we have just told any potential burglars in
our home area where our house is and the fact that it’ll be empty. If we post online
that we are going to Hawaii for vacation as an example, a potential burglar can
assume that the house will be empty for at least 4-5 days if not for a full week.
NOTE
Me and my social networking
Personally, I love using Foursquare when I’m traveling on business trips or on vacation. It lets
my friends know where I’m at, and if I go back to a city later, it tells me where I’ve been so that
I know if I want to go back or if it is somewhere that I can skip.
When at home, however, I reduce my use of services like Foursquare as I don’t want just
anyone knowing my home address and when I’m at home and when I’m not. So while I may
check into restaurants when I’m at home, I never check into my actual home or my local super-
market, etc.
4
CHAPTER 1 Storing Your Personal Information Online

There are a several location services that have become popular online. The first is
Foursquare and the second is Facebook’s location service. When using either one of
these services, it is important to not check in at your actual home as this gives away
the exact location of your home, your family, and all your stuff. While finding some-
one’s home address isn’t all that hard if you know where to look online, the goal of
masking yourself on social networking just a little bit is to make it a little harder to
find out information like where you live and when you aren’t there. If you are a big
fan of using these location services, picking a location in the general area of your
home is generally safe enough for most people; however, for those people who work
in a high security field, they should avoid these sorts of services. This includes people
who work in law enforcement, for security companies, banks, and doctors, basically
anyone who works with the public or a segment of the public and doesn’t really want
to have people.
Knowing how companies protect your information
A big problem when it comes to giving information to companies online is knowing
how the company is going to protect the information that you give them. Many com-
panies will post information on their website that will give you basic information
about what the company will be doing with your information and how they will pro-
tect it. While some basic information may be provided, there won’t be any details
such what information is being encrypted or how employees are trained to ensure
that personal data aren’t printed and lost that way. The reason that such information
isn’t available to the general public is that it gives attackers more information about
the company and what sorts of gaps the company has in their data protection policies.
With websites like Facebook and Twitter, these companies while holding lots of
personal information, aren’t really holding lots of your confidential information.
However, other companies such as insurance companies, doctors’ offices, credit card
companies, payroll services, or even your employers’ human resources and payroll
departments all hold massive amounts of information about you, much of which you
don’t want anyone else to find out about, while some of which is protected informa-
tion according to many countries’ data protection laws, including the United States.
In the United States, all medical data are protected by a federal law called HIPPA
or the Health Information Patient Protection Act. This law that was passed and signed
into law 1996 requires that all companies that handle medical information (insurance
companies, doctors’ offices, medical billing companies, etc.) take precautions to
ensure that the medical data that they store either on paper or in a computer system
are protected so that only the people who should have access to the information actu-
ally have access to them. While this all sounds great in principal, the reality is that it
is very easy for the employees at these healthcare companies to lose confidential data
in the course of their normal job activities.
For example, a medical auditor could be reviewing medical records at a medical
insurance company to ensure that doctors aren’t overbilling the insurance company.
While the auditor is reviewing these records, they may end up printing up a copy of
5
Storing Your Personal Information Online

the data to make reviewing the information easier. Once that audit is complete, the
auditor is supposed to shred the printouts. However, they could end up lost in the
person’s desk or dropped on the floor. While lost in the auditors desk isn’t the worst
thing, if the papers were dropped on the floor, the cleaning person who comes
through at night emptying the trash may throw the papers on the floor away without
knowing what they are or that they are supposed to be shredded. This means that
there are now medical data on printouts sitting in the trash without being shredded
that could be pulled from the trash by anyone who is walking past the trash dumpsters
and who knows what they are looking for or who finds the papers when they make
their way to the city dump.
Even if in our example, the auditor doesn’t print the information, but instead, they
access the information from their company laptop that they then put in their trunk as
they head home for the day. On the way home, the auditor heads to the supermarket to
pick up dinner for the family. While in the supermarket, the employee’s car, with the
laptop still in the trunk, is now stolen by a car thief. The car thief now has the
employee’s laptop as well. The hard drive within the laptop can be easily enough
installed in another computer so that the information from the laptop can be down-
loaded and sifted through. There are data encryption options available that would
prevent the data on the hard drive from being read, which are talked about in detail
in Chapter 4. If the company policy says that the laptop hard drive is encrypted and
that it is actually encrypted using a high security encryption process, then the infor-
mation can’t be viewed by the car thief. But if the company has no requirement to
encrypt the data of the laptop’s hard drive, then it won’t be protected. In any case, the
company won’t be posting on their website the kinds of protection that they have in
place to protect their customers’ information.
The main reason that companies don’t broadcast this information isn’t to keep
their customers in the dark, but to help protect the customers’ information. If the
company doesn’t tell people how the data are protected, then attackers don’t know
how the data are protected, which means that the attacker doesn’t know how the data
are protected, which means that getting access to the data takes longer and is harder.
One of the goals of data security is to make breaking through the security so hard and
take so long that it isn’t worth the time and the trouble to attempt to break through the
data security. While it probably seems like I’m disagreeing with myself in this sec-
tion, I kind of am. This is one of those times where companies and their customers
don’t have the same interests in mind. The companies want to keep their practices
secret, while the customers want to know how their data are being protected.
Cookies and websites
Most websites in the modern times of the Internet use cookies to store information
about the user and how they use the website on the user’s computer. These cookies
can store a variety of information within them, with the user of the website having
little if any control over what information is stored within the cookie. Cookies are
created per website meaning that different websites cannot read each other’s cookies.
6
CHAPTER 1 Storing Your Personal Information Online

As an example, if you were to go to www.google.com and www.yahoo.com, both of
these websites would create their own cookies on your computer. This cookie will
contain some basic information about you, not necessarily your name or your e-mail
address, but there will be at the minimum a specific identifier that is unique to your
computer so that these sites can track your interactions with their respective proper-
ties. However, Google’s website has not access to Yahoo’s cookie, and likewise,
Yahoo has no access to Google’s cookie.
That being said, there are risks to cookies when it comes to online privacy. The
first one being that these cookies allow the website to track you as you move around
on their website. At first, this doesn’t sound all that bad, but when it comes to the
major Internet companies like Google, their website isn’t confined to just their web-
site. This is because Google controls the largest advertising network on the Internet
called Google AdWords. This advertising platform is used by the majority of web-
sites to display all manner of advertisements on all manner of websites. As you
move from website to website, not only the websites that contain the advertise-
ments will display advertisements on the website that you are viewing but also
the advertising system will also track that you visited that website. Then, when
you browse other websites using this tracking data, the advertising system would
then display advertisements that are similar in nature to the sites that you have
visited.
REAL-LIFE EXPERIENCE
Watching the ads become more relevant
In my line of work as an IT consultant, I end up doing more than my fair share of traveling.
Every time I travel, I use the same few companies, United Airlines to book the flights, Hilton
Hotels to stay at, and Avis to get my rental car. During my normal day, I see all manner of
advertisements online. As soon as I book my flights, I begin seeing advertisements for United
Airlines on all the other websites that I visit. Once I book my hotel, I’ll begin to see ads for
either Hilton or one of their competitors such as Hyatt or Marriott. Once I book my rental
car through Avis, I suddenly begin seeing advertisements for Avis’s competitors such as Hertz
and Enterprise.
The way that the Google advertising system knows that I’ve just been looking at the United
Airlines website and that it should show me advertisements for United Airlines is because the
Google advertising website, which is used to display the ads on the www.united.com website,
has tracked the fact that I was just browsing the United Airlines website. It knows that I’m me
on both the United Airlines website and the other websites that are using the Google adver-
tising system because of the cookie that exists on my computer that was placed there by the
Google advertising system.
You may be asking yourself why I would see advertisements from the United Airlines after
viewing the United Airlines website, but when viewing the Hilton Hotels website, I see ads
from other hotel chains. The reason for this is because United has bought all the ads that
are triggered by being shown after viewing their website, where Hilton hasn’t done this. This
tells the Google advertising system that after I view the United Airlines site, I shouldn’t see any
other advertisements for other companies in the same category as United Airlines, in this case
airlines. Hilton and Avis haven’t set up this same agreement with Google, which is a quite
expensive advertising purchase to make but worth it according to United Airlines.
7
Storing Your Personal Information Online

Many people consider this tracking across the Internet to be quite intrusive as it
gives one company, specifically a company that you may not be doing business
with, access to basically your entire browsing history that they can data mine
and use this to serve up advertisements that are reliant to you the user. And frankly,
I have to agree with those people. Many people wonder how this sort of Internet
tracking is legal. The most basic reason why this sort of thing is allowable is
because every website that you visit is going to have some sort of End User License
Agreement (EULA) that specifies the terms that you must agree to in order to use
the website. Buried somewhere in that user agreement, which it is assumed that you
have agreed to by using the website, is something that will give the website and its
partner websites, which would include the advertising systems, the right to track
you via cookies.
There are a few ways to solve this.
InPrivate Browsing
The first is to enable a feature in most web browsers called “InPrivate Browsing.” In
Internet Explorer, this can be enabled by opening Internet Explorer, then clicking on
the Tools menu icon (the gear in the upper right-hand corner of modern versions of
Internet Explorer), then clicking on the menu that says “Safety,” and then selecting
“InPrivate Browsing.” This will open a new Internet Explorer window and this new
window will be running in private browsing mode. Any websites that you view when
working within the InPrivate Browsing window will not be saving any cookies,
temporary Internet files (also known as cache), browsing history, etc.
NOTE
Porn mode?
When “InPrivate Browsing” was first introduced, it quickly earned the nickname “Porn Mode”
or “Pr0n Mode.” The reason for this is that many people don’t want their spouses to know that
they are browsing adult content. It was assumed that this would be what the bulk of people
who were using “InPrivate Browsing” would be using it for, as for the bulk of people not track-
ing their adult browsing history is the most important thing that they don’t want other people
seeing.
The reality is that “InPrivate Browsing” is much more valuable than this as it can be used
to protect Internet users from the prying eyes of companies who want to do nothing more than
sell advertisements on behalf of other companies so that you’ll click on the ads.
Turning cookies off in Internet Explorer
The second method that can be used to prevent cookie tracking by the advertising
company is to disable cookies within the web browser. This is a very easy thing
to do. In newer versions of Internet Explorer, click on the gear icon in the upper
right-hand corner of the Internet Explorer application. In older versions, click on
the Tools drop-down menu. In either case, click on the “Internet Options” menu item.
On the Privacy tab at the top of the window, there are settings for configuring the
cookie usage as shown in Figure 1.1.
8
CHAPTER 1 Storing Your Personal Information Online

Clicking the Advanced button will allow you to override the default handing of
cookies. Checking the checkbox allows the configuring of first-party cookies and
third-party cookies as shown in Figure 1.2.
From this screen, you can configure Internet Explorer to Accept, Reject, or
Prompt for cookies. The default for Internet Explorer is to accept all cookies. By
rejecting cookies, the website would attempt to create the cookies, but the web
browser would simply ignore the request to create and save the data to the cookie.
FIGURE 1.1
Internet Explorer’s privacy settings.
9
Storing Your Personal Information Online

By setting the settings to prompt, this would prompt you each time the web browser
requested to create, update, or read a cookie. While this will slow down the web
using experience by prompting over and over to use the cookie, it will give you
the ability to control exactly which cookies are used and which ones aren’t. This
can be important as you may wish to store login information for a website and only
deny the website the ability to store the advertising cookies.
If there are specific websites that you wish to prevent from ever saving a cookie
on the system, this can be done through the Privacy tab of the Internet Options win-
dow as well. On the top half of the screen, there is a section labeled “Settings,” and
within that section, there is a button labeled “Sites.” Clicking on that button will
bring up a screen similar to that shown in Figure 1.3.
By adding a site to the screen shown in Figure 1.3, the specific site can be pre-
vented from using cookies at all on the site. For example, to block Google’s
AdWords system, enter the URL www.googleadservices.com and then click the
block button. Clicking OK all the way out will enable this setting so that the next
time you view an advertisement that has been served by the Google advertising sys-
tem, the Google advertising system will not be able to track the data.
FIGURE 1.2
Advanced cookie configuration.
10
CHAPTER 1 Storing Your Personal Information Online

Turning cookies off in Firefox
Internet Explorer isn’t the only web browser that allows for turning off cookies, and
this can also be done in Mozilla’s Firefox web browser as well. In Firefox, to turn off
cookies, click on the Tools drop-down menu at the top of the Firefox application. If
you don’t see any of the drop-down menus, click on the key labeled “Alt,” which
should make the menus at the top appear. After clicking on the Tools drop-down
menu, select from the “Options” menu option. On the Options window that appears,
select the “Privacy” page as shown in Figure 1.4. On the “Privacy” page within the
“History” section within the “Firefox will” drop-down menu, change the setting from
“Remember History,” which is the default to “Use custom settings for history” as
shown in the middle of Figure 1.4.
FIGURE 1.3
Per Site Privacy Actions screen.
11
Storing Your Personal Information Online

To completely disable all cookies, uncheck the check box next to “Accept cook-
ies from sites.” You can optionally leave cookies enabled but disable cookies, which
are created by what are called third parties. Third-party cookies are cookies that are
created by one website and are used by another website. An example is the Stack
Exchange family of websites such as games.stackexchange.com and program-
ming.stackexchange.com, among other websites within the family. Along with the
Stack Exchange websites, there are other sites within the network of websites called
Server Fault (www.serverfault.com), Stack Overflow (www.stackoverflow.com),
and User “Something” (www.userflow.com). Because the main pages of the website
names “stackexchange,” “serverfault,” and “stackoverflow” are all different, they
are considered to be different sites; however, they are configured to share a username
and password for all the sites, and when you sign into one website, www.serverfault.
com, for example, and then view the www.stackoverflow.com website, the second
site will know automatically that you are logged in and who you are.
FIGURE 1.4
Firefox cookie settings.
12
CHAPTER 1 Storing Your Personal Information Online

NOTE
How much of a risk are third-party cookies?
The risk that comes with third-party cookies all depends on what sites you use that use third-
party cookies and the sites that you use that attempt to read those third-party cookies. If you
don’t use any sites that use third-party cookies, then there is no risk as by default when web-
sites create cookies they are only available for use by that specific website. In order for a
cookie that was created by one website to be accessible by another website, the website that
creates the cookie must specify that the cookie be created as accessible by other websites.
If you wish to configure specific websites to not support cookies within Firefox,
this can be easily enough done via the “Privacy” tab shown in Figure 1.4. When the
“Privacy” tab is open, clicking the “Exceptions” button will allow you to configure
that specific websites will be configured to either allow or block the use of cookies as
shown in Figure 1.5.
Within the Exceptions page, simply enter the address of the website as shown
such as www.yahoo.com and click either the “Block,” “Allow for Session,” or
FIGURE 1.5
Specific cookie exceptions in Firefox.
13
Storing Your Personal Information Online

“Allow” buttons. Using the “Block” button will prevent Firefox from ever accepting
a cookie from the specified website. Using the “Allow” button will always allow the
website to create and use its cookies. Using the “Allow for Session” button will allow
the website to use cookies but only while the web browser is open. When Firefox is
closed and reopened, the website will no longer be able to use cookies.
Within the Options window on the “Privacy” tab you can configure how long
Firefox should keep the cookies. By default, the cookies will be kept until they
expire, typically for 2 weeks or longer depending on how the website has been con-
figured. The other options for how long to keep the cookies are “I close Firefox” and
“ask me every time.” By selecting “I close Firefox,” the cookies will be kept until the
Firefox web browser is closed, at which time, all the cookie files will be deleted. By
selecting the “ask me every time,” the user will be prompted to select how long the
cookie should be saved for each time that a new cookie is created.
Turning cookies off in Chrome
Much like the other major web browsers, the Chrome web browser made by Google,
Inc., can be configured with various cookie settings. In order to change the cookie
settings within Google Chrome, click on the menu button at the upper right of the
Chrome web browser as shown in Figure 1.6.
Once the menu has opened setting the “Settings” option from the context menu.
Scroll to the bottom of the page that is shown and click the “Show advanced
settings. . .” link that is typically shown in blue. When the additional menu options
appear within the “Privacy” section, click the “Content settings. . .” button. Within
the Cookies section, shown in Figure 1.7.
Google Chrome allows for much the same set of settings as Mozilla’s Firefox
browser. By default, Google Chrome uses the setting “Allow local data to be set.”
This setting allows the Chrome web browser to save cookies to the computer.
The setting “Keep local data only until I quit my browser” allows the application
to save the cookie but only until Chrome is closed. Once Chrome is closed, it will
automatically delete all of the cookies.
The setting “Block sites from setting any data” will prevent Chrome from using
any cookies. The check box “Block third-party cookies and site data” will allow sites
to use cookies but not third-party cookies.
FIGURE 1.6
The menu button within Google Chrome.
14
CHAPTER 1 Storing Your Personal Information Online

By clicking the Manage Exceptions button, the option to configure exceptions to
these rules is set. This screen is shown in Figure 1.8. To add an exception, enter in the
site that you wish to set the exception for, and select the kind of exception from the
“Behavior” drop-down. When you are done entering the needed exceptions, click the
“Done” button to save the settings.
Turning off cookies in Safari
Turning off the cookies in Safari on the Mac operating systems is just as easy as
using the Windows web browser, which were discussed previously in this chapter.
To make the change, simply open the Safari web browser. Then, click the Safari
FIGURE 1.7
Cookie settings within Google Chrome.
FIGURE 1.8
Chrome’s cookie setting.
15
Storing Your Personal Information Online

drop-down menu at the top of the screen and click on Preferences from the drop-
down menu as shown in Figure 1.9.
When the Settings window opens, select the Privacy button at the top of the
window that will open a window similar to the one shown in Figure 1.10.
FIGURE 1.9
Safari drop-down menu.
FIGURE 1.10
Safari privacy settings.
16
CHAPTER 1 Storing Your Personal Information Online

From the privacy settings page shown in Figure 1.10, you have the option to block
all cookies from third-party websites by selecting the “From third parties and adver-
tisers” option. You can prevent all cookies from being used by selecting to “Always”
block cookies, or you can allow the use of cookies by all websites by selecting the
“Never” option.
SUMMARY
Protecting your information and your privacy, which really go hand in hand, starts
with knowing how much information you should be giving to companies on the Inter-
net. The more information you give to these companies, the more information that
will be available for these companies to sell or trade to other companies. As you give
away information to companies, you lose control of the information, leaving it up to a
company that doesn’t have your best interest at heart to decide what to do with infor-
mation about you.
When it comes to browsing the web, understanding the technology that drives the
web, specifically within the web browsers that we use to browse, the Internet, and the
cookies that are used to track us is key in keeping your personal information,
personal. Only allowing companies that you trust to use cookies can make your
web browsing experience a little less seamless at times, but the trade-off is well worth
it in regard to data privacy.
17
Summary

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
Usernames and Passwords
for Websites
2
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Picking a username
•
Picking a password
• “Strong” passwords
•
Unique passwords
• Remembering all your passwords
•
Two-factor authentication
•
The more important, the longer they should be
This chapter talks about how to select usernames and passwords that are easy to
remember while being hard for someone else to figure out so that people can’t easily
get into your accounts.
PICKING A USERNAME
When getting signed up for a website, you are asked for a variety of information such
as your name, address, phone number, e-mail address, and, most importantly, a user-
name and password. Selecting the username and password is very important. This is
especially true of the username as often you can’t change the username once you
have signed up for the service.
When picking a username, it is important to select a username that is easy to
remember but isn’t going to be all that easy for someone to guess. If the username
is displayed, on a chat forum website, for example, then this obviously becomes much
less important as the username will probably be displayed on the website for all the
users to see. At the very least, when selecting usernames for use on Internet websites,
you want to have two different usernames, one for casual use websites like Twitter,
Facebook, and any other sites that you use and a second username for use on sites that
would include your banking websites and any other sort of financial institution’s web-
sites. The reason for this is that while many websites out there take a lot of care in
ensuring that their customers’ information isn’t going to be compromised, it isn’t
worth the risk of using the same username for multiple websites. There have been
several data breaches that have happened over the years. One in particular
19

affected people across the widest range of social factors because the data breach
happened to users of the website eHarmony.com. You can read more about this data
breach at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/eharmony. When part of the user list
for eHarmony was leaked, this was a wake-up call to a lot of people about how they
should be setting up usernames and passwords for websites as anyone who was using
the same username and password for their eHarmony account and for their banking
information had just had someone else have access to their banking username and
password.
Many people like to use their e-mail address for their banking website or credit
card company website. Doing this is very convenient as it is very easy to remember
your own e-mail address. However, if the attacker is able to figure out your e-mail
address, which really isn’t all that hard most of the time, you’ve now given the
attacker one of the two pieces of information required to get into your bank account.
Because of this, it is recommended that you use a username that is not an e-mail
address for all banking and financial websites. This way, if someone was going to
attempt to break into your online banking profile, they wouldn’t have access to your
username just by knowing what your e-mail address is. If you have multiple e-mail
accounts using one for social networking and friends to contact you on and a second
e-mail address that is used only for banking information, then using the e-mail
address that you only use for banking information should be a fairly safe practice,
but only if that e-mail address is never given out to anyone other than the bank.
NOTE
Usernames in the real world
It is all well and good to tell people to pick a username that is hard for others to figure out. In
reality, this usually doesn’t work out all that well. Many websites that have any sort of chat
board or social networking aspect to them will publically display the username on the website.
For websites that have a chat feature or a social networking component and that show the user-
name on the site, make sure that you select a username that is different from the username
that you use on sites such as banking websites and other websites that handle your financial
data.
When selecting the username, make sure that you don’t include any sort of
descriptive information in the username. Specific things to avoid include where
you live or were born, your birthdate, or any information beyond your name that
could be used to identify you other than your name. Beyond these simple rules, your
username can be just about anything that you want. The reason that we don’t want to
include any sort of additional personal information in the username is that this per-
sonal information will probably be used as the answers to the security questions that
you would need to answer if you forgot your password. While putting something like
the year of your birth into the username, marks1972, for example, will probably
make it more likely that the username is available, you’ve just told a potential
attacker what one of the answers to the security question is. A perfect example of
figuring this information from someone else is shown during a video that was
20
CHAPTER 2 Usernames and Passwords for Websites

recorded during the Defcon conference in 2010. You can watch this video at http://
basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/StolenComputer. This video does have some lan-
guage that one might find offensive, be warned. The presentation starts about
3 minutes into the video, and the part where the presenter talks about using the user-
names to figure out the birthdate of the person who stole his computer starts about
13 minutes into the video.
NOTE
Where “mrdenny” came from
•
I often get asked how I came up with the handle and username “mrdenny.” The story is
actually shockingly boring. When I begin working for the Internet Service Provider (ISP)
EarthLink Network in Pasadena, CA, we had to select e-mail addresses for our personal
accounts, which we got as part of working there. The e-mail address denny@earthlink.
net had already been taken by another person, which really surprised me, and at the time
we couldn’t reuse e-mail addresses, even if we worked there.
•
The instructor in the training was named Don Taylor and when we started he choose
mrdontay as his e-mail address. So I decided that was a good idea and went with
mrdenny@earthlink.net figuring that I could always change it later. Well it turned out that
I ended up liking the username and it ended up sticking with me. Sadly I don’t own that
first e-mail address anymore from EarthLink Network (now known as EarthLink, Inc.) but
the handle mrdenny has stuck around for the last 15 years or so. Because I’ve been using it
for so long, people know that they can find me on Twitter, Facebook, and lots of other sites
using the username.
•
While you may not have a similar story for selecting your username, having a handle that’s
easily recognizable as you makes it easier for people to figure out if it’s you or not.
•
Of course, I only use the username “mrdenny” for my public persona; for things like bank-
ing, I use a completely different username, which I’m the only one who knows.
PICKING A PASSWORD
Picking a password requires much more care than picking your username. Passwords
should be strong and unique for each website. Passwords that are strong have very
specific characteristics. There are four groups of characters on the standard key-
board: lowercase letters, uppercase letters, numbers, and special characters (typically
found on the number keys when you hold the shift key down). For passwords to be
considered strong, they need to contain at least three of those four types of characters.
If you use all four of types of characters, that is even better. In addition to using at
least three of the character types, the password should be at least eight characters
long. The reason that we want to have passwords to be long is to increase the com-
plexity of the password. The more complex the password is, the harder it will be for
someone to brute-force attack the password. This is talked about more in the follow-
ing section. The end result of a password that is very long is that it takes someone so
long to attempt to guess the password by using a brute-force method that they simply
give up and move on to another person to attempt to attack.
21
Picking a Password

How passwords are figured out
There are a variety of ways for an attacker to figure out what the password for an
account is. The first way is the one that is specifically related to having a long
and strong password and is the only method of attack that you, the account
owner, can help prevent. This attack method is called a brute-force attack. In this
kind of attack, the person who is trying to figure out the password basically tries
every password possible starting with just a single character up to a password
as long as is needed. This is done with scripts and applications that are specif-
ically designed to try the same username with different passwords over and over
very quickly. These applications can try usernames and passwords basically as
quickly as the website or the application can try the username and password.
Websites that are properly built will have protection for a brute-force attack built
into the website. This protection will be to only allow a specific number of failed
log-in attempts before the user’s account is locked so that no further attempts can
be tried. You may have run into this sort of protection on the website when
attempting to log into the website and you can’t remember the password. After
a few tries (the specific number of tries is completely up to the website devel-
oper), the account is locked and you have to either call their customer support
department or go through the forgot password process in order to get the account
unlocked.
The longer the password is, the longer it will take for the password to be figured
out. Just a few years ago, it could take months or years to figure out a password.
While just a few years later, a password can be figured out in just days and for just
a few dollars. The reason that this is the case is because of the power of cloud com-
puting. Back in the olden days of technology, also known as the mid-1990s, if some-
one wanted to break into an account, the person trying would typically only have one
or two computers at their disposal. In today’s world of cloud computing, hundreds or
thousands of computers can be rented from various cloud computing providers for
just a few dollars, and all of these computers can be used all at once to try all the
various options of passwords all at once. The economics of the cost to brute force
a password are changing very rapidly. However, a great article was put together
in October of 2009 by a company called Electronic Alchemy and can be read at
http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/passwordcosts.
Other attack methods involve the attacker breaking into the website through other
methods that aren’t anything that we, the end users of the applications, can do any-
thing about. In these attack methods, the attacker downloads the usernames and the
encrypted passwords from the website’s database. The attacker then attempts to
break the encryption on the passwords. Unfortunately, there is nothing that you as
the end user can do to prevent this sort of attack. You as the user of the website need
to trust that the website is encrypting the passwords with a strong level of encryption
so that if the passwords are attacked, it takes as long as possible to get through the
encryption. This leads directly into our next section.
22
CHAPTER 2 Usernames and Passwords for Websites

Unique passwords
Every website and application that is used should have a different password setup for
it. This makes figuring out which password is used for each application difficult, but
it makes the passwords much more secure. The reason that we want to use different
passwords for each website is so that if one password is compromised, the attacker
doesn’t get access to every website that you use.
When setting up unique passwords, do not include the name of the website as the
unique part of the password. Doing so is basically the same as not putting any sort of
unique value into the password field as the attacker will easily enough know what the
unique value is in your other passwords. For example, if the part of the password that
doesn’t change was “password” using this format we could put the website name
after the password. So if the website that the account was being set up for was
www.bestbuy.com, having the password of “passwordbestbuy” would tell the
attacker that your password for www.target.com would be “passwordtarget” and
the password for www.ebay.com would be “passwordebay,” and so on.
Creating unique passwords
There are a variety of applications that can be used to help you create passwords that
should be totally unique for each website. None of these applications are really any
better or worse than others. The important thing is that an application is used as they
will create passwords that are very random. Different password-generating applica-
tions do this in different ways.
NOTE
Very random is not truly random
If you are a mathematician or other scientist, you are probably looking at the output from
your favorite password generator and about to send me an e-mail that they aren’t truly random.
Yes, I’m aware that password generators aren’t actual random as they use random number
generators within the software in order to create the password. While they aren’t truly random,
they are close enough to truly random for the general public to understand that they are
random.
While the software does use a predictable algorithm to create the random password, this is
ok. In order for someone to be able to recreate the password, using the password generation
software would require that they use the same software and the same exact computer and the
password will need to be generated at the exact same moment in time. The reason for these
requirements is that each piece of software that generates passwords will have its own algo-
rithm that is used to create the password. These pieces of software use the internal device IDs
from the computer that they are installed on as well as constantly changing values, such as the
date and time, as parts of the algorithm that is used to create the password. This allows for
many passwords to be created in a short period of time while having them all be totally random
from each other.
One of the password-generating applications is called KeePass. KeePass does a
few things for you as the user. The first thing that this application does is create new
23
Picking a Password

passwords that are very long and very strong. This allows you to have a truly random
and very long password for each unique website that you use. The second thing that
the application does is store the passwords in an encrypted database that makes it so
that you don’t need to memorize all of these long and strong passwords that are basi-
cally impossible to memorize. The passwords within KeePass are stored with user-
names as well as the website that the username and password are for, making it very
easy for you to copy and paste the information from the KeePass application into the
web browser when you need to log into the website.
Using KeePass to create these unique passwords and store them is quite easy.
After downloading the KeePass application from www.KeePass.org and installing
the application, open the application and you should see a screen similar to the
one shown in Figure 2.1.
Select the menu item on the left where you want to save usernames and pass-
words; typically this would be under the Internet option. Right click on the white
area on the right-hand side of the screen and select “Add Entry” from the context
menu that appears. This will open a window similar to that shown in Figure 2.2.
FIGURE 2.1
KeePass home screen.
24
CHAPTER 2 Usernames and Passwords for Websites

In the title field, enter a title of the entry; typically this would be the URL for the
website, for example, www.basicsofdigitalprivacy.com. In the username field, enter
the username for the website that you will be using. The password field and the repeat
field are already filled out. Clicking the button with three dots on it will show the
generated password. If a more secure password is desired, click the button below
the button with three dots, then select “Generate Using Profile,” and then select either
the 128-bit profile or the 256-bit profile as shown in Figure 2.3.
FIGURE 2.2
Add Entry screen within KeePass.
FIGURE 2.3
Profile Generation Drop-down Menu.
25
Picking a Password

In the URL field, enter the URL for the website. Clicking the OK button saves the
setting into the KeeSave application’s database.
NOTE
When setting up KeePass or any other password database like KeePass, there is one password
that is very important to always remember, that is, the password to the KeePass database.
Without this password, you will lose access to all the passwords that were saved within the
application. The password that is used for the KeePass application should be a secure pass-
word and should not be written down anywhere that anyone can find it. Putting a copy of it in a
safe deposit box at the bank would be an acceptable place to store a copy of it; however, you
wouldn’t want to keep a copy of it within your home unless you have a wall safe or some other
very secure place where it can be stored.
Somewhere that some people like to store the written down version of their KeePass pass-
word is in the freezer. Now don’t just stick the piece of paper in the freezer; that won’t do you
much good as the moisture within the freezer will destroy the paper pretty quickly. Instead,
you’ll want to put the paper into a ziplock bag or better yet a suction bag where you can remove
all the air from the bag. Then put the bag with the paper inside it at the very back of the freezer
or under all the stuff in the freezer. To make the password more secure, you can get a small
cookie tray that is just a little bigger than the paper. Freeze a small amount of water in the
bottom of the tray. When it is mostly frozen, put the bag with the paper in the tray, then cover
the bag with more water, and put it back in the freezer. The next day you’ll have the bag with
the paper in it suspended in ice. Remove it from the tray and put the block of ice in the back of
the freeze of under everything. This give you access to the password, but you’ll have to wait a
while before you can get to it without damaging the piece of paper.
Modern web browsers can all store usernames and passwords in a secure manner
so that you don’t have to type in the username or password or to copy and paste from
the password application. The passwords are stored within the web browser setting as
encrypted values so the risk of the values being stolen from the web browser settings
is very low. That being said, most web browsers make it very easy, sometimes too
easy, to view the passwords on the screen. Usually, you just need to go into the set-
tings screen for the various web browsers and there will be a button somewhere
where you can view the passwords that are saved. This protects your passwords from
being downloaded by someone, but not from someone who sits in front of your com-
puter and has access to view the screen.
Passphrases
A great option when picking a new password is to instead use a passphrase. A pass-
phrase is a normal English (or other language) phrase that you use as your password.
An example of a great passphrase to use could be a quote from the Beatles song
“A Hard Day’s Night” such as “Itsb3enaharddaysn!ght” which takes the phrase
“It’s been a hard day’s night” from the song, removes the spaces, and changes a cou-
ple of characters from letters to numbers and characters. Normally, passwords which
are considered to be strong are very hard to remember because they are long and have
numbers and characters placed throughout the password. Normal passwords are
often hard to remember while passphrases which are based on songs, TV shows,
movies, famous quotes, etc., are very easy to remember.
26
CHAPTER 2 Usernames and Passwords for Websites

TWO-FACTOR AUTHENTICATION
Another fantastic way to ensuring a unique password for websites is to use a system
called two-factor authentication. With two-factor authentication, there are two pieces
of information that are required. The first is a code that you as the user know and the
website stores in their system. The second piece of information is a randomly gener-
ated number that is generated by either a key fob, an application on your phone, an
application on your computer, or a text message sent to your cell phone. Both pieces
of information are put into the website’s password field when logging into the website.
Two-factor authentication is nice because the passwords can only be used once,
and the random values are only valid for a short period of time. For example, if using
a key fob, the key fob generates a new value every 60 seconds and if the password
isn’t used within the 60-second window, the password becomes invalid and not able
to be used.
As of the time of the writing of this book, in the summer of 2013, there were a
wide variety of companies who have made two-factor authentication systems. How-
ever, most if not all of these applications are specific to just one or two companies
with few companies making their two-factor authentication systems available to
other websites or applications. This means that when using two-factor authentication
via your phone, you may end up having to have several applications installed on
your phone.
Using fob-based systems
Fob-based two-factor authentication systems are probably the oldest example and the
easiest to use. The fob, shown in Figure 2.4, doesn’t require any user interaction to use
other than to enter the information into the website or application when prompted.
These fob-based systems require that you have two pieces of information when
using the fob. You need to have the actual device that has the changing number on it
as shown in Figure 2.4, but you also need to know a static value that doesn’t change.
When logging in with the fob, you take the static value that you know, for example,
1234, and then put the value from the fob after it. Using the value from Figure 2.4,
this would mean that the password that would be used to log into the website or appli-
cation would be “1234497364.”
FIGURE 2.4
Picture of a fob used for two-factor authentication.
27
Two-factor Authentication

Using software-based two-factor authentication systems
Software-based two-factor authentication systems, shown in Figure 2.5, work in a very
similar method to the fob. The big difference between using the fob-based method and
using a softwareapplication-basedmethodis thatinstead ofneeding a fob for eachweb-
site that you wish to use, you simply use a single application (or two applications if
some websites using Apple’s system and others use Google’s system). This also pre-
vents you from having to carry and track these additional physical fobs instead of put-
ting the two-factor authentication within a device that you are already going to carry
with you at all times anyway. Whenever you are using two-factor authentication on
yourcell phone,besuretosecureyourcellphone withthe mostsecuremethodavailable
on the phone. If you don’t and the phone is lost or stolen, then whoever has the phone
also has all of your two-factor authentication codes as well.
In order to use either Apple or Google’s system when prompted, simply bring up
the application on your mobile device and select the site that you wish to use. Then,
enter the number as prompted.
FIGURE 2.5
Showing Google’s two-factor authentication program.
28
CHAPTER 2 Usernames and Passwords for Websites

Using a text-messaging-based system
Using a text-messaging-based system is just about as easy as using the other systems
that have been discussed in this chapter. When using a text-messaging-based system
when beginning the log-in process, the website requests a username and a password.
Upon entering the correct username and password, the cell phone that is tied to the
account is sent a text message that includes a pin code, which can only be used once
to log in. The webpage then prompts you to enter this pin number into the website.
Typically, when using these pin-based systems, a wrong pin number can only be used
three to five times at which point a new pin number is needed. This prevents someone
from simply trying all the possible pin numbers to find the correct one.
These text-message-based systems are considered to be pretty secure. One of the
reasons for this security is due to the fact that with text messaging, the text message is
only delivered once. Even if someone took a SIM card from one cell phone and
inserted it into another cell phone, the old text messages wouldn’t be downloaded
again. Even if someone was able to gain access to the older codes that had been texted
to someone, those codes shouldn’t be valid codes anymore. While it is up to the com-
pany that sends the text message to determine how long the codes are valid for, it is
usually a short window of time usually just a few minutes or up to an hour.
NOTE
Not all two-factor authentication is created equal
While one hopes that all the companies that are using two-factor authentication are doing it
correctly, this sadly isn’t the case. One prime example is on the Bank of America website.
When Bank of America first introduced their two-factor authentication, they did a very, very
poor job implementing it. The Bank of America two-factor system is only used to protect the
wire transfers and bill pay sections of the website. So far, this sounds like it is set up correctly.
While the main part of the password is only protected by the user’s password (which isn’t great
but it’ll do), you have to use the two-factor authentication in order to actually get money out of
the account.
The problem with Bank of America’s implementation is that to add a cell phone as a two-
factor device all, you have to do is log onto the Bank of America website and add the phone to
the account. While I’m sure this was done to make it more convenient for their customers, it
shows a lack of understanding on the part of the bank on how these systems should work.
The problem with this implementation is that the two-factor authentication is only pro-
tected by the primary authentication method, in this case the user’s password. For this system
to be done truly properly, adding a phone device would require going into one of Bank of Amer-
ica’s branches and presenting them with proper identification to prove that you are the owner
of the account and that the phone number that you wish to use does in fact belong to you.
With the system as it is (as of the writing of this book in the summer of 2013), anyone who
has the password for the account has the ability to add a phone to the account; then using that
phone, transfer all the money to another account or to an account at another branch.
These text-message-based two-factor authentication systems work fairly well for
most people and are typically very secure as the odds of someone who is attempting
to break into your account having physical access to your cell phone is minimal.
However, these systems are not perfect. The biggest problem with them is that they
typically require that you are physically located in your home country. While this
29
Two-factor Authentication

isn’t an issue for many people, for those that travel internationally on business, this
prevents those customers from having access to the account while they are outside
the country. The reason for this is that most international travelers do not use Inter-
national Roaming on their cell phones when in other countries. The first reason is the
cost as cell phone companies charge incredibly high rates when traveling in other
countries. The second is that in a lot of cases, the needed cell phone network simply
isn’t available in other countries. The perfect example for this is the CDMA network
that Verizon’s cell phones use. As of the writing of this book in the summer of 2013,
there was little to no CDMA network in Europe, so if a traveler needed to receive a
text message via their cell phone and they were a Verizon customer with their normal
cell phone in Europe, there would be no way to receive the text message.
NOTE
Installing Windows 8 and two-factor authentication
I recently had a chance to install the new (as of the writing of this book in the summer of 2013)
beta version of the Windows 8.1 operating system on a new computer that I had purchased.
Before installing Windows 8.1 on this computer, I had been using the Windows 8 operating
system on all of my computers and all of my computers were using the Microsoft account
(formally called a Windows Live account) to log into all my computers. As part of using your
Microsoft account, you configure a cell phone number so that you can approve adding new
computers to your Microsoft account for authentication.
As part of the installation process for Windows 8.1, I was prompted for my Microsoft
account information just like before, but during the installation process right after specifying
my Microsoft account information, I was prompted on the computer screen to enter a confir-
mation code. Before I could finish reading the instructions on the screen that told me that
Microsoft would be sending me a text message, my phone had already beeped telling me that
a new text message had been received. I entered the text message and moved on with the
installation.
This was frankly one of the easiest two-factor authentication processes that I had seen in
quite a while.
THE MORE IMPORTANT THE LONGER THEY SHOULD BE
The usernames and passwords for some websites have become more important than
others in recent years. This isn’t because of the information that the website contains
but instead because the website grants you access to other websites. This is done
through a system called OAUTH (pronounced o-auth) where a website allows its
username and password system to be used by other websites. This is good for the
website that allows its username and password system to be used via OAUTH
because it makes the OAUTH website more important in the global Internet system.
This is also good for the websites that are using the OAUTH service on the other
website because the website that is using the OAUTH service doesn’t need to store
their own username and password.
Due to the fact that the website that has the OAUTH service can be used to sign
into many other websites, the password that is used for these websites should be the
30
CHAPTER 2 Usernames and Passwords for Websites

strongest password possible. There are many different websites out there that can
serve as OAUTH providers. This includes websites like openid.com, myopenid.com,
Verisign.com, and other sites like google.com and facebook.com. It doesn’t matter
which of these sites is used to sign into the various other websites, but whichever
one (or ones) is used, the password that is used should always be the strongest
possible password. Using the techniques like the ones talked about in the “Picking
A Password” section earlier in this chapter will help you to ensure that you have a
strong password that is secure and will prevent others from gaining access to all the
other websites that you use.
SUMMARY
Having strong and unique passwords is key to protecting yourself in today’s world on
the Internet. While we like to think of the Internet as a nice peaceful place where
everyone can get along, the reality is that the Internet is more like the Wild West
than a peaceful place. There are lots of people out there who want to take your money
and your identity and use it for their own purposes, which usually aren’t going to turn
out well for you. Protecting yourself proactively is the only way to ensure that you
aren’t taken advantage of online.
31
Summary

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
Your Home Network
3
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Securing your router
•
Securing your Wi-Fi network
• Wi-Fi encryption options
• Hiding your wireless network
• MAC address filtering
•
Letting others onto your Wi-Fi network
•
Other devices on the network
In this chapter, we will be discussing proper ways to secure your home network so
that people aren’t able to get onto your wireless network without your express
permission.
SECURING YOUR HOME NETWORK
A shockingly easy way for people to access your home computer is via your home
network. An improperly configured home network would allow any attacker on the
public Internet to contact your home computer and attempt to install a virus or key
logger on it. Another potential point of vulnerability for many home networks is the
Wi-Fi network. An incorrectly configured Wi-Fi could, while appearing to be secure,
actually be completely insecure. Using someone’s incorrectly secured Wi-Fi to gain
access to their files and information does require that they are close to your home,
typically within just a few hundred feeds. This doesn’t however give any level of
protection because people often do “war driving” where they simply drive around
a neighborhood looking for unsecure Wi-Fi networks that they can use. Once gaining
access to an unsecured Wi-Fi network, the person could be attempting to break into
the owner’s computer remotely, or they could use the Wi-Fi connection to perform
some sort of illegal act such as viewing or downloading child pornography, hacking
into a company or government computer network, stealing music or software, or any
number of other activities.
33

NOTE
You may be legally responsible for what others do on your computer network
The law on this varies from country to country, state to state, and in some cases city to city. In
some jurisdictions, judges are ruling that the owner of the Wi-Fi is responsible for properly secur-
ing the Wi-Fi and ensuring that everyone who is using that Wi-Fi is doing only legal operations.
This means that if you haven’t taken the proper steps to properly secure your home network and
someone uses your home network to steal music, you could be held financially liable when the
music industry association (RIAA in the United States) attempts to sue the music pirate.
The same goes for if someone was to connect to your Wi-Fi network and download child
pornography. You could then be charged as an accessory after the fact for the main crime
of child pornography. This would carry a heavy fine and possible jail time, and depending
on the judge and the sentencing requirements, the Wi-Fi network owner could end up being
required to register as a sex offender for in the end having Wi-Fi at home and not setting it
up correctly.
While the odds of this happening are slim, it is certainly possible, and that should be
enough to scare anyone into correctly setting up their Wi-Fi to prevent people they don’t know
from getting on the Wi-Fi at their home or office.
Securing your router
When you have high-speed Internet access such as cable Internet or a DSL service,
you will have some sort of router. The router may be a device that was purchased by
you or it could have been provided by your Internet service provider. Routers come in
a variety of shapes and sizes, a variety of which are shown in Figure 3.1.
If the router is not properly secured, it could leave the home network vulnerable
to attack from an outside attacker via the Internet. The first thing to ensure that the
home network is protected is by having a home router. Most (but not all) home Inter-
net service will provide two devices that are used to connect the home computers to
the Internet. Cable Internet services will typically provide a cable modem and a
router, while DSL services will typically provide a DSL modem and a router. Some
of these services such as the AT&T U-verse service will provide you only with a
single device that serves as both the DSL modem and the router in a single device.
FIGURE 3.1
A sampling of home routers.
34
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

There are a couple of different software components within the home router that
help secure the home network from the potential hackers who are on the Internet.
These two main components are the use of a technology called network address
translation (NAT) and the network firewall.
NOTE
What are the odds that someone will attack my home network?
A question that gets asked a lot when talking about home network security, specifically with
regard to securing the home network from Internet attackers, is what are the odds that some-
one is going to try to attack my home network from the Internet? The answer is a pretty basic
one, 100%. Attackers are constantly looking for open computers and networks to attack. Sev-
eral studies have been done over the years where brand new computers are placed on the Inter-
net and left there to see how long it took for people to begin attacking the computer, and then
how long it would take to compromise the computer by getting viruses installed on it. Within
one hour’s time, not only had the attacks started but the computer also had several viruses
installed on it that were all competing for resources. One of my favorites can be read about
at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/honeypot.
How each of these routers is configured will vary depending on the router and the
version of the software that is installed. Many of these routers ship with older software
than is currently available for these routers. Updating the software on the router
requires logging onto the router itself using a web browser. There will be instructions,
which came with the router, that tell you how to connect to the router and what the
default username and password are if you haven’t changed it. If you don’t have that
documentation handy, a quick Internet search for “{your router model} documenta-
tion” where {your router model} is the actual model number found on the back or
bottom of your router will usually find the documentation. Once you are logged onto
the router, you’ll need to find the firmware page. This will usually have some sort of
way to check if the firmware is up-to-date, or at least it will have a link to the man-
ufacturer’s website so you can manually check that the firmware is up-to-date. You
can see the firmware page for a D-Link router in Figure 3.2 and the router update page
for a NetGear router can be found in Figure 3.3.
Not all routers can be updated manually. An example of this is the router that the
AT&T U-verse service ships to you. The reason that this router can’t be updated man-
ually is because AT&T pushes new firmware to the router automatically when there
are updates available so the router is always current. They can do this because the
router is provided as a part of the service and it is partially managed by AT&T as a
part of the U-verse service. Some providers offer this level of services but many do
not. You’ll need to check with your service provider to see if they handle this for you.
Network address translation
NAT is used for a couple of different reasons within home routers. The first reason is
due to the fact that Internet service providers typically only issue one public IP
address to home network customers. IP addresses are the way that computers talk
to each other over the Internet. Every computer or device on the Internet needs to
35
Securing Your Home Network

have an IP address, and with the Internet service provider only providing a single IP
address, a way is needed to give multiple computers and other devices within the
home network access to the Internet by sharing that one IP address.
NOTE
How NAT works?
At a high level, NAT works by doing a one too many mapping between the public IP address
that the Internet service provider gives us to use and the private IP address that our home
network uses. The NAT service, which runs within the router, handles this conversion and
mapping without any changes or special configuration on the computers.
FIGURE 3.2
D-Link firmware update page.
36
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

Because of the mapping that NAT does, which is typically turned on by default,
it makes it very hard for potential attackers on the public Internet to access the
computers within the home network. This is because network address translation
is a one-way process where computers and devices on the home network can talk
to the Internet, but a computer or device on the public Internet, a website, for example,
cannot connect to a computer on the home network. This feature alone helps protect
the home network from an attacker who is trying to access the home computers and
the home network.
Network firewalls
Network firewalls are used to ensure that no one is able to connect to the home router.
The router will have a variety of management services running on it such as the web-
site that is used to configure the router among other services. Because the router is
connected to the public Internet, we don’t want anyone being able to connect to the
router and make any changes on it from the public Internet. Because of that, the
router should be configured with the firewall on the router preventing any sort of
network access to the router itself, which will typically be configured by the man-
ufacturer of the router before the router is sold. Without having the firewall in place,
an attacker could attempt to break into the router, and if they were successful, they
would then be able to reconfigure the router to allow themselves access to one or
more of the computers or devices on the home network.
FIGURE 3.3
NetGear router update page.
37
Securing Your Home Network

Securing your Wi-Fi network
Incorrectly configured Wi-Fi networks are an extremely easy way for attackers to
gain access to personal information, which is being transmitted over the Wi-Fi net-
work, even when the Wi-Fi network is configured to use some of the available forms
of encryption. This is because the older encryption standard, called WEP or Wired
Equivalent Privacy, is considered to be extremely insecure. There are several flaws
in the design and implementation of the WEP encryption system, so any network that
is configured to use WEP should be considered to be just as insecure as a Wi-Fi net-
work that doesn’t have any data encryption configured at all. In fact, in 2004, the
IEEE standards committee, which is the committee that decides what versions of
what protocols make it into the final Wi-Fi specifications, had declared that WEP
was to be removed from the Wi-Fi specification.
NOTE
This all sounds very technical
Much of that last paragraph may sound very technical to you if you don’t work in the informa-
tion technology field or a related field, and that’s OK. While I really have no desire to go into
the history of WEP within this book nor do I really want to dive into all the technical problems
with WEP, if you want to read up a little more about WEP, I would recommend starting with the
Wikipedia page for WEP, which you can find at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/wep.
After WEP was introduced, but before it was declared as not worth using, a sec-
ond set of encryption protocols was introduced into the Wi-Fi specification. This new
encryption specification is called WPA or Wi-Fi Protected Access and comes in two
different versions, WPA and WPA2. WPA was first ratified in 2003, while WPA2
was first ratified in 2004, so they should be available in every modern Wi-Fi router
created since then and all modern operating systems. Even older operating systems
such as older versions of the Microsoft Windows operating system, which were cre-
ated before 2003 and 2004, have had patches created that should be installed so that
WPA and WPA2 are available on these older computers. Given the option between
WPA and WPA2, WPA2 should be the version that is used as it is more secure than
the older WPA specification.
Setting up these settings requires configuring the Wi-Fi access point or router
with the specified setting. Many of the newer home routers come preconfigured
using the WPA2 setting, while older routers did support these secure settings and
came with the security settings disabled by default.
AT&T U-Verse router
Securing your Wi-Fi router requires connecting to the router’s webpage. As stated
earlier in this chapter, you’ll find the information on connecting to your router in
your router’s documentation. For the AT&T U-verse router as an example, this is
changed on the Settings page, then the LAN tab, and then the Wireless subtab.
38
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

On this page, there are several settings that can be adjusted shown in Figure 3.4 and
specified later:
•
The wireless can be enabled or disabled.
•
The wireless network name (SSID) can be set manually or the default can be used.
•
Authentication and encryption settings can be set.
•
The encryption key, which can be either the default one that is on the sticker on
the back of the router or your own wireless password.
FIGURE 3.4
AT&T U-verse-provided router’s wireless network configuration.
39
Securing Your Home Network

D-Link router
For the D-Link routers, the Wi-Fi settings are found by clicking the Setup tab at the
top and then the “Wireless Settings” tab on the right. Then you can either go through
the provided wizard or click on the “Manual Wireless Network Setup” button, which
you can see in Figure 3.5.
Selecting the “Manual Wireless Network Setup” button will show you several
settings that you can configure, some of which are shown in Figure 3.6 and upon
scrolling down the security settings shown in Figure 3.7.
As shown in Figure 3.6, you can see the wireless network name (called the SSID)
if you want to use 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz wireless frequency, the Wi-Fi modes that will be
used, and the other basic Wi-Fi settings. There is no difference from a security per-
spective between the two frequencies. Selection of one of the other is simply a pref-
erence depending on what other devices you have in your home, which use the same
frequencies.
In the security section shown in Figure 3.7, you’ll see the security mode, which in
this case is set to WPA-Personal. The WPA section is shown because the mode is set
FIGURE 3.5
D-Link wireless settings menu.
40
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

FIGURE 3.6
Wireless network settings for a D-Link router.
FIGURE 3.7
Security settings for a D-Link router.

to WPA. This router in this case is allowing for both WPA and WPA2, using TKIP
and AES, and the key is updated every 3600 seconds, which is the default setting. At
the very bottom of the screen and in Figure 3.7, you’ll see the preshared key, which is
set to the password that is used to connect to the Wi-Fi network.
NOTE
what is the difference between 802.11n, 802.11g, and 802.11b?
In Figure 3.6, you see that this router is configured for 802.11n, 802.11g, and 802.11b.
These are different versions of the wireless protocol called 802.11. From a security perspec-
tive, these different versions are all exactly the same. The first published protocol was
802.11a, the second was 802.11b, and so on. The most commonly used Wi-Fi protocols
are 802.11a, 802.11b, 802.11g, 802.11n, and the newest 802.11ac. Each of the newer
protocols starting with b, then g, then n, and then ac is faster than the prior versions. Tech-
nically, the 802.11a version was faster than the 802.11b version, but the 802.11a version
used a different frequency than the 802.11b-802.11n versions. The 802.11ac version is fas-
ter than the prior versions but is also using the 5 GHz range much like the 802.11a frequency
used. The 802.11n version of the Wi-Fi protocol used both 2.4 and 5 GHz ranges.
While this information isn’t specific to security, having this information is important to
properly setting up your home Wi-Fi network for maximum efficiency.
NOTE
2.4 GHz versus 5 GHz?
In Figure 3.6, you’ll see something that you don’t see in Figure 3.4, which is the ability to
select the frequency (called band by D-Link) that the Wi-Fi network can use. Traditionally,
Wi-Fi has used the 2.4 GHz range of the wireless spectrum. This is the same part of the wire-
less spectrum that is used by cordless phones and some other home devices. Because of this
and in order to increase speeds, some routers support the use of the 5 GHz range as well. Older
routers and older computers won’t support this 5 GHz range as it requires different transmit-
ters and receivers.
NetGear routers
For NetGear routers, there are two different wireless network settings that are con-
figured, which are accessed via the Advanced tab after connecting to the router and
then selecting Setup and then “Wireless Setup.” This is because the NetGear router is
a brand new device as of the writing of this book in the summer of 2013, and it has
both 2.4 and 5 GHz transmitters. The two networks have different names so that
the user can identify which network he or she wishes to connect to as shown in
Figure 3.8.
Each of these wireless networks shown in Figure 3.8 is configured independently
from each other and should only be enabled if they will be used.
42
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

NOTE
My experiences with a new Wi-Fi router
Recently, I needed to purchase a new Wi-Fi router. My old Wi-Fi router, which was provided by
my Internet service provider, hadn’t been upgraded in 5 or 6 years, and the Internet service
provider didn’t even have an upgrade available. From a security standpoint, the router was just
fine; however, because it was an older router, it didn’t support the newer faster Wi-Fi speed
standards. Specifically, it only supported the 802.11a, 802.11b, and 802.11g standards.
The bulk of our home devices support the 802.11n and some are now supporting the new
802.11ac standard, but because the router didn’t support these newer standards, we weren’t
able to take advantage of the faster networking speeds. When I purchased the new NetGear
router, I was pleasantly surprised to find out that the new router was configured with WPA2
enabled as the default security level for the Wi-Fi connections on the router instead of having
no encryption configured on the Wi-Fi connection, which was the default until just very
recently.
FIGURE 3.8
NetGear Wi-Fi settings page.
43
Securing Your Home Network

The process to change the Wi-Fi protection varies for each Wi-Fi router out there.
No matter what kind of router you have, you’ll need a username and password to
connect to the management webpage. Most if not all routers can be configured by
going to the router’s IP address from a web browser on any computer within the home
network. Finding out what the IP address of the router is can be a little tricky if you
don’t have the documentation that came with the router handy or if the IP address of
the router has been changed. There are a few different approaches that can be taken.
On any Windows computer, it can be found by looking at the Wi-Fi Network Con-
nection from within the Network Control Panel. One way to get into the Network
Control Panel is to right click on the network icon next to the clock in the task
bar, typically located at the bottom right corner of the screen as shown in Figure 3.9.
In this case, I’m connected to a Wi-Fi network so the network icon (the one in the
middle of Figure 3.9) shows the Wi-Fi signal strength. If I was plugged into the router
via an Ethernet cable, then the icon would look like a small computer instead. In
either case, right click on the menu and select “Open Network & Sharing Center”
from the context menu that appears. This will open a window similar to the one
shown in Figure 3.10.
If you are using an older version of Windows such as Windows XP, then you may
not see an icon similar to that shown in Figure 3.9. This is because in older operating
systems like Windows XP, the icon wasn’t shown by default. To locate the network-
ing icons in Windows XP, click on the Start button, then select Control Panel, and
then double click on the “Network Connections” icon within the Control Panel. This
will show you a window similar to that shown in Figure 3.11.
Once the Network and Sharing Center is open, click on the link to the left that
says “Change adapter settings.” This will open a window similar to that shown in
Figure 3.11.
Once the window similar to the one shown in Figure 3.11 appears, you’ll need to
identify the Network Connection that is being used. Odds are that you’ll only
have one or two icons in here at the most, and if there are extra ones, they will prob-
ably be grayed out and says “Disabled” like the one on the right of Figure 3.11. Find
the one that is connected; it will probably have a network name of some sort under the
network adapter name. In the case of the window shown in Figure 3.11, this would be
FIGURE 3.9
Network icon in the system tray of a Windows 8 computer.
44
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

FIGURE 3.10
Network and Sharing Center.
FIGURE 3.11
Network Connections window.
45
Securing Your Home Network

the icon labeled “Wi-Fi”; then under that, it says “united_club 4” and then under that,
it says “Marvell AVASTAR 350N Wireless . . . .” This information tells me that the
Wi-Fi Network Connection within Windows is called “Wi-Fi,” that I’m connected to
a network called “united_club” (the 4 tells me that it’s the fourth network called “uni-
ted_club” that I’ve connected to on this machine), and that the network card is a
“Marvell AVASTAR 350N Wireless Network Adapter.” This window on your
machine will say something different depending on your Network Connection name,
network name, and the brand and model of the network card you are using. The
important part on this window is to find the correct icon, which will probably be
the only one in color. Once you have identified the correct Network Connection, dou-
ble click on that Network Connection and you should see a window similar to
Figure 3.12.
Once the window shown in Figure 3.12 is visible, the final thing to do is to click
on the “Details button” in the middle of Figure 3.12. This will bring up a window
similar to that shown in Figure 3.13.
FIGURE 3.12
Properties window of a specific Network Connection.
46
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

As you can see in Figure 3.13, there are several IP addresses listed; the important
one in this case is the “IPv4 Default Gateway,” which is 172.16.32.1. The default
gateway, which your home network uses, will probably be different from this net-
work and will probably be 192.168.0.1 or 192.168.1.1 or 192.168.1.254 or
192.168.0.254, but in reality, it could be just about anything.
By entering this IP address, you should have access to the management web-
page for the home router. Use the username and password, which were configured
when the router was first configured. If you don’t have the username and pass-
word, you’ll need to contact the company that made the router to get the default
username and password or to get assistance in resetting the username and pass-
word to something that you can remember. From here, follow the instructions pro-
vided by the company that made the router on how to configure it for WPA2
connections.
FIGURE 3.13
Details window of the Network Connection.
47
Securing Your Home Network

Hiding your wireless network
One of the features that people like to turn on in order to protect their Wi-Fi networks
is the option to hide the Wi-Fi network. Normally, Wi-Fi networks broadcast their
network name in order to make it easy for people to locate the network and connect to
it. Figure 3.14 shows the network screen from a Windows 8 computer, which I was
using while at San Francisco International Airport. You can see several networks
available including the “united_club” network, which I was connected to at the time.
The theory that people use when configuring their Wi-Fi router to be hidden is
that because people can’t see the network when they open the connection window,
this makes the network more secure. In reality, this isn’t the case. It is in fact very
easy to find “hidden” networks. There are a variety of programs that can be down-
loaded, which will show you the various hidden network, and a variety of informa-
tion about those Wi-Fi networks. Using an application called inSSIDer, I can quickly
and easily see all the hidden networks in the area. After launching inSSIDer and tell-
ing the application to scan the Wi-Fi networks, it quickly shows me several hidden
Wi-Fi networks including the one shown in Figure 3.15.
FIGURE 3.14
Wi-Fi networks available at San Francisco International Airport.
48
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

While hiding Wi-Fi networks will keep the casual person from finding a Wi-Fi
network, it won’t stop someone who actually wants to find the hidden networks, and
hiding the Wi-Fi network shouldn’t take the place of properly securing the Wi-Fi
Network Connection via WPA2.
One of the reasons that hidden Wi-Fi networks are so easy to findis that just because
the Wi-Fi router or access point isn’t broadcasting the network name, the machines that
are connecting to the hidden network will need to broadcast the network name so that
the Wi-Fi router or access point can accept the connection. So while a normal user
wouldn’t be able to see the hidden access points, someone with some experience in
looking for hidden networks just needs to sit and wait for a computer to attempt to talk
to the hidden network and capture the hidden network’s network name.
If you are going to choose to hide the network to keep random neighbors from
attempting to connect to it, that’s a good idea in a lot of cases, especially when there
are lots of people in the area with Wi-Fi access points. However, this must be teamed
up with WPA2 network security to ensure that when people that you don’t want find-
ing your Wi-Fi access point do find it, they still can’t get connected easily.
MAC address filtering
Most, if not all, Wi-Fi routers include a feature called MAC address filtering. MAC
address filtering allows you to specify the exact computers that are going to be
allowed to access the Wi-Fi network. In theory, this is a very sound idea in that only
the computers with the correct MAC addresses would be able to connect to the net-
work. The reality is that it isn’t all that hard to pretend to be using a different MAC
address when connecting to a Wi-Fi network.
FIGURE 3.15
Screenshot of inSSIDer showing a hidden network.
49
Securing Your Home Network

NOTE
What is a MAC address?
A MAC address is the physical ID number that is assigned to every network card on every com-
puter. Every network card in the world has a MAC address, and every MAC address is unique to
that specific network card. If your computer has multiple network cards, such as a wired Net-
work Connection and a Wi-Fi network card, then your computer will have two MAC addresses.
To find your MAC address, follow the directions in the section of this chapter called “Securing
Your Wi-Fi.” On the window shown in Figure 3.13, the MAC address is labeled as the “Physical
Address.” In the case of the computer that I took, the screenshot on the MAC address is
60-45-BD-E7-58-C6.
There is a variety of software out there, which will let someone scan for all the
MAC addresses currently in use in the area (remember we are talking about wireless
networking so all this information is simply being broadcast by all the machines in
the area). Once an attacker has the MAC address of a computer that is allowed to
connect, it is a simple job to temporarily change the MAC address of the computer
that they are using so that they can get past the MAC address filter.
NOTE
MAC filtering is not good for allowing access or blocking access
Some of you readers may be parents who have configured their home Wi-Fi to prevent the kids
from using the Internet during certain hours or the night or to prevent them from using the
Internet altogether. And these systems work great, until the kids figure out that they can sim-
ply change the MAC address of their computer, which lets them bypass the restrictions. This
happens because these time-limiting systems all rely on using the MAC address of the com-
puter that is being blocked from having access during specific times. By simply changing the
MAC address, which is shockingly simple to change, all the restrictions simply go away as the
MAC address doesn’t match anymore.
Changing the MAC address in Windows
Changing the MAC address of a Wi-Fi card in Windows is surprisingly simple.
The first step is to open the Control Panel. The version of Windows you are using
will determine how this is done. In Windows 7 and below, click on the Start menu
and then click on the Control Panel option from the Start menu. In Windows 8 or
Windows 8.1, bring up the Start menu and then type “Control.” The Control Panel
option will be on the list. Clicking the Control Panel option from the list will bring up
the control panel. At this point, the instructions are the same. At the top right of the
control panel, you’ll see a drop-down menu that probably says “View By: Category.”
Change this dropdown to say “View By: Small Icons.” In the new list of icons, find
and open the icon labeled “System.” From here, click on the link in the upper left that
says “Device Manager.” In the Device Manager window that opens, find the
“Network Adapters” menu and expand it as shown in Figure 3.16.
50
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

After the Device Manager opens, double click the Wi-Fi Network Card. On the
new window that opens, select the Advanced tab. From there, find the MAC address
option if available and simply change one character of the MAC address (only using
the numbers or the letters A-F). When you click OK, the MAC address has been
changed. Not all network cards allow for the MAC address to be changed, but with
a little searching around, any determined teenager would be able to find the infor-
mation to change their MAC address.
Changing the MAC address in Apple OS X
Changing the MAC address on an Apple computer is slightly harder, just because it
requires the use of the command prompt. To change the MAC address on your Apple
OS X or newer machine, start by opening a command prompt window on the
machine. From there, run the command “ifconfig” to see what the current MAC
address is. If you combine the ifconfig command with the grep command, this will
be easier to find.
ifconfig en1 | grep ether
Using ifconfig with the grep command.
FIGURE 3.16
The Device Manager with the network adapters menu tree opened.
51
Securing Your Home Network

Use of the ifconfig and the greg commands should return something that contains
the MAC address of the computer. Changing the MAC address is pretty straightfor-
ward. We need to use the sudo command so that the ifconfig command that we are
using is run with root (or administrative) permissions.
sudo ifconfig en1 ether 00:a1:a2:a3:a4:a5
Using ifconfig to change the MAC address.
Once the MAC address has been changed, it can be verified using the ifconfig
command shown earlier.
Letting others onto your Wi-Fi network
Friends and Wi-Fi networks are a dangerous combination. Having your friends
have access to your Wi-Fi network isn’t all that dangerous; it’s the fact that letting
your friend’s computers onto your Wi-Fi network now gives your friend’s com-
puters direct access to your computer, meaning that any software installed on their
computer, such as a virus, for example, would then have access to your computer
and the virus may try and install itself onto your computer. Given that viruses are
one very common way for personal information to be compromised on home com-
puters, having someone else have access to your home computer network with a
laptop, phone, tablet, etc., which may or may not have a virus on it, isn’t the great-
est of ideas.
There are a couple of options to solve this problem. The first is to create a pocket
network that is a different Wi-Fi network from the Wi-Fi network that you put your
computers onto. This second network would still give them Internet access, but it
wouldn’t let them connect to your computers or have any software that was installed
on their computer such as viruses have access to attempt to install themselves on your
computer.
Another option that is available in some home routers, which have the ability to
create a guest network, for just this specific reason. The guest network would be a
totally separate network name; I might call my home Wi-Fi network “Cherry Home”
while the guest network would be called “Cherry Guests” as shown in Figure 3.17.
These guest networks are a little different from the normal Wi-Fi networks that we
connect to when it’s our home network. The Wi-Fi router knows that anyone on the
Guest network should be isolated from the normal network. This keeps anything that
is installed on our friend’s computer from having access to our home computer net-
work. We don’t want the Guest network to be wide open to the outside world. We
want this network to be secured with WPA2 just like our network, just using a dif-
ferent password, one that we are OK with giving to our guests. The reason that we
don’t just want this guest network open to the entire world is because if someone was
going to drive past our home and see the open network, we wouldn’t want them doing
something on our home Internet connection that might not be legal as that activity
might be traced back to our home (don’t forget the sidebar earlier in this chapter titled
“You may be legally responsible for what others do on your computer network”).
52
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

OTHER DEVICES ON THE NETWORK
The home network has a large number of devices connected to it, usually over Wi-Fi.
These can include devices that you would expect to find on the network such as your
desktop and laptop computer, which are hopefully all running with firewalls and the
accounts have passwords on them. However, there could be a lot of other devices
connected to your home Wi-Fi network as well. This could include your cable
box, DVD player, TV, burglar alarm, home automation devices (which could control
things like light switches, power outlets, garage door openers, and holiday lights),
stereo systems, door locks, baby monitors, security cameras, refrigerators, and prob-
ably many other devices.
FIGURE 3.17
Guest Network Settings from a NetGear router.
53
Other Devices on the Network

NOTE
You’d be amazed at all the devices on your network
The number of network-connected devices found on the typical home network is staggeringly
high. Just looking around my own home, I can count at least 17 devices on my home network,
before I count a single laptop computer, desktop computer, or tablet such as an Apple iPad,
HP TouchPad, or Microsoft Surface. These include three televisions, three cable boxes, three
Wi-Fi-enabled remote controls, three X-Box 360s, three Blu-ray DVD players, burglar alarm,
and the printer.
These extra devices all can pose a risk of a privacy breach within the home.
Where someone is able to get into the home network and be able to access these
devices, it would become potentially very easy for someone to begin to learn
much more about you and your life than you probably want exposed. For exam-
ple, if someone was able to gain access to your alarm system through your home
Network Connection, they could very easily figure out when you are away and
when you aren’t making it very easy to figure out when to break into your house.
They might even be able to disable your alarm remotely or just power it off so
that it can’t send a signal to the alarm company when the break-in is going to
happen.
The devices that just sit on your home network don’t pose the most risk; the
devices that publish the information so that you can view it from anywhere are
the most dangerous. The perfect example for this are the new baby monitors that
can stream a video and audio feed to the Internet so that parents can keep an eye
on the baby from another room, the neighbors’ house, or even their office miles
away. Some of these include the ability to use speakers on the baby monitor so that
you can talk to the baby if they wake up and just need to hear your voice in order to
calm down and go back to sleep. Many products like this are designed for conve-
nience and not with any sort of security in mind, often not requiring any password
or that the default password be changed. With these devices publishing the data to the
Internet where basically anyone can view the feeds is a major data privacy risk. By
using a variety of easy-to-find tools, or sometimes even a quick search on Google,
dozens or hundreds of openly accessible video devices can be viewed and sometimes
controlled via the public Internet without the device owner being aware that someone
is viewing their device.
All this sounds pretty scary and farfetched. We’ve all seen these sorts of things
in TV shows like CSI, NCSI, and Law & Order and assumed that this sort of thing
is totally impossible to actually happen. In reality, this is actually very possible
and in fact has actually happened to a family with a baby monitor in Houston, Texas.
In this case, the baby monitor has speakers, a microphone, and a video feed and is
remote controllable. Someone was able to break into the remote feed of the baby
monitor, likely through a poorly configured password or lack of password, and
see into the baby’s room and talk to the baby, even going so far as to try and wake
the child up.
54
CHAPTER 3 Your Home Network

NOTE
Sadly this isn’t fiction
Everything that I’ve just talked about we’ve all seen on television over and over on just about
every cop crime drama out there. Even Dr. Who has seen people talking through the baby mon-
itors once or twice (that’s totally different and is for a totally different kind of book), but
the sort of situation that I have just talked about with people looking in on other people’s
baby monitors and taking them over and talking to the kid can and has actually happened.
I won’t go into the gritty details, instead leaving that for you to read online at http://
basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/baby, but this is an actual home privacy threat that is some-
thing that does in fact need to be dealt with both by the people that buy these devices and
by the people that make these sorts of devices.
The easiest way to make sure that devices you purchase will support proper
log-ins is to only purchase new devices (used devices from family, friends, and yard
sales should be avoided whenever possible). When purchasing the new devices, read
the box and it should say something about authentication and that it supports SSL
(Secure Socket Layer), which is the same data encryption that you use when doing
online shopping on websites like Amazon and eBay.
SUMMARY
A properly configured home network is very important when it comes to protecting
yourself. While the chances of someone driving by your home network and attempt-
ing to gain access to it aren’t that high, it is very possible that a friend or neighbor
could have a virus on their computer that they don’t even know about. If that friend or
neighbor were to put their computer on your home network, any virus that they had
on their computer could attempt to access your computer. Once installed on your
computer, that virus would do whatever it was programmed to do, which oftentimes
these days involves looking for your personal information and sending it to some sort
of criminal.
55
Summary

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
Securing Your Home
Computer
4
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Data encryption for the home user
•
Why you should be encrypting data
• Native Windows data encryption
• Native Apple data encryption
• Other companies data encryption
•
What do those website security logos mean?
•
When Tech Support calls you
•
Internet games and downloads
While we hope that no one will steal our home computer and that we will never lose
our laptop, the reality is that at some point, we will end up losing a computer some-
how. A study done by Intel, available at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/
oneinten, found that 10% of laptops purchased will be lost or stolen within the first
year of ownership. Of those laptops stolen, only 3% of those laptops will ever be
recovered and returned to their owners. That means that 97% of the laptops that
are stolen and the data that they contain remain with the thief or the person that
the thief sells the laptop to.
Where laptops are stolen is an interesting set of numbers to review. It is assumed
that most laptops are lost or stolen at airports. The reason behind this though is that
airports are busy places and the last thing that most people want to worry about at the
airport is the location of their laptop at they run from flight to flight. While there are
many laptops left at airports every year, the reality is that not that many laptops
are actually stolen at airports, due mainly to the fact that there is a high degree of
security at the airport compared to everywhere else that we travel. Since not just any-
one can walk into an airport and get past the security checkpoint, given that you have
to have a valid boarding pass to get past the airport security line, the odds of someone
within the airport being there just to steal someone’s laptop is pretty slim. According
to the Intel-funded study, available at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/oneinten,
the places that we consider the safest would be where the most laptops are actually
stolen from, with homes and hotel rooms accounting for over 40% of laptop
thefts. Additionally, another 33% of laptops, which are lost, are lost while in transit
(taxis, trains, subways, airports, etc.). Another 12% of laptops are lost within our
57

workplace, in other words, taken by a coworker or other person who has access to our
place of business, with the remaining laptops being taken at an unknown location or a
location that couldn’t be identified by the study participants.
NOTE
Why the focus on laptops?
This introduction focuses on laptop computers because they are much more likely to be stolen
than desktop computers. The primary reason that they are more likely to be stolen than desk-
top computers is that they are portable so they leave the house. Even within the home, during a
break-in, a thief will take a laptop over a desktop as the laptop is much lighter and easier to
carry and easier to take into a shop to get into the operating system so that they can use the
laptop or sell the laptop as their own.
DATA ENCRYPTION FOR THE HOME USER
The best way to prevent your personal information from being exposed to someone
who has taken or found your computer is to encrypt the information within the com-
puter. This will protect the information in such a way that if someone who doesn’t
have the password or key for the encryption system attempts to gain access to the
information, they won’t be able to. Within the information technology industry, data
encryption is considered to be the gold standard when it comes to protecting infor-
mation from access by unauthorized people. This trust in data encryption comes from
the fact that the strongest levels of data encryption, which are commercially available
today, are considered to be virtually unbreakable.
QUESTION
What is “Virtually Unbreakable”?
Unfortunately, no data encryption is totally unbreakable. Any level of data encryption, no mat-
ter how complex and how well designed, can be broken eventually. The protection provided by
data encryptions comes from the amount of time that it takes to break the encryption and gain
access to the information that has been encrypted.
When it comes to companies, they will attempt to mitigate the risk of encryption being
broken by changing the keys that protect the data on occasion so that if someone breaks into
the system today and gets a copy of the data, then they get a copy of the data 6 months from
now and they would need to break both encryption systems independently, making it harder to
get access to the newer data. For the home user, this typically isn’t needed as the data will only
be taken once, when the actual computer is stolen.
As mentioned, data protection through data encryption is determined by the amount of
time that it will take to break the data encryption. The first data encryption algorithm, which
was widely used, was called Data Encryption Standard (DES) back in 1975 and was approved
for use by US federal agencies by the US government in 1977. At that time, many people were
critical of the usefulness of the DES algorithm because of the relatively short key, which is
used to encrypt the data, which were 56 bits or 7 characters. Despite this short key length,
the DES algorithm was still safe to use until the mid-1990s at which time it became possible
to build computers powerful enough to figure out the key in a short enough time frame that
breaking the key would be considered useful. In 1998, the Electronic Frontier Foundation
58
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

(EFF) built a computer for $250,000, which was able to figure out the key for some data that
were encrypted by DES in just 56 hours. The next year, in 1999, another system was assem-
bled, which was able to perform the same test against a similar piece of data in just 22 hours.
Today, DES isn’t used to encrypt any information, which must remain secret for very long as
even a modest home computer has the CPU power to figure out the key for data encrypted by
DES within a very short period of time.
For modern data encryption, an encryption algorithm called Advanced Encryption Stan-
dard (AES) is used. AES supports several different key lengths depending on how strong the
encryption should be. These key lengths are 128 bits (16 characters), 192 bits (24 charac-
ters), and 256 bits (32 characters). In the corporate world, decisions need to be made as to
what key length should be used. Different key lengths are used when cost-benefit analysis is
performed between the CPU processing power required to use the longer key length and the
risk that the data are left open to by having the data encrypted by the lower levels of encryp-
tion. This is because the longer the encryption key, the more CPU processing power is required
to encrypt and decrypt the data. In the consumer world of home computers typically, we use
the strongest layer of encryption as only a single user will be accessing the data on the com-
puter at any one time so the cost of accessing the data is minimal when using the strongest
levels of encryption.
Going into the more advanced differences between the different key lengths of AES data
encryption is beyond the scope of this book. Some of this information has been documented
within the latest edition of Securing SQL Server written by Denny Cherry and published by
Syngress.
As home users, we need to know how to set up and use the data encryption options
within the devices that we use, as these devices can be easily lost or stolen, so that if
our device falls into the hands of someone who shouldn’t have them, our data can’t be
easily accessed and used by them to steal our identity, blackmail us, or release infor-
mation, which we wouldn’t want to be released to the public.
Different operating systems such as Microsoft Windows and the Apple operating
system have different processes for setting up data encryption on the disks, and dif-
ferent versions of these operating systems have different features and configuration
options. Understanding how data encryption can protect your data from being taken,
and what sort of threats data encryption protects you against is very important when
configuring data encryption.
Native Windows data encryption
When using a computer running the Microsoft Windows operating system, which is
running Windows Vista or newer versions (including Windows 7 and Windows 8),
there is a feature called BitLocker, which will encrypt the data on the hard drive. When
using Microsoft’s BitLocker, there are a few data encryption options available to you
and a couple of different options that you need to be aware of. Microsoft’s Windows
Vista and Windows 7 support the use of BitLocker for the entire disk only. This means
that the entire disk needs to be encrypted, which can take quite awhile to configure.
Starting with Microsoft’s Windows 8, the BitLocker application supports encrypting
the contents of either the entire hard drive or just a folder within the hard drive.
59
Data Encryption for the Home User

Encrypting a disk in Windows
Turning on data encryption for an entire disk is very easy to do. The first step is to
open the control panel. On Windows Vista and Windows 7, this is done by clicking
on the Start menu button on the task bar, typically found at the bottom left of the
screen, and then clicking on “Control Panel.” On Windows 8, the Control Panel
can be opened by bringing up the Start menu. This is done by putting the mouse
in the lower left corner until the Start menu button appears as shown in
Figure 4.1. On Windows 8.1, click the Start button, which is typically found in
the lower left-hand corner of the screen, and then follow the rest of the instructions
below of Windows 8.
Once the Start button shown in Figure 4.1 appears and the button is clicked, the
Start menu appears. Once the Start menu appears, type the word “control” and the
search menu will appear along with the search results as shown in Figure 4.2. Click-
ing on the “Control Panel” button will open the “Control Panel.”
No matter which version of the operating system being used, at this point, the
Control Panel should be shown on the screen, similar to that shown in Figure 4.3,
which is from Windows 8, but other versions of the Microsoft Windows operating
system will look very similar.
Within the Control Panel, click on the “System and Security” link at the upper left
of the Control Panel. This will open the System and Security menu of the Control
Panel, which shows a variety of options similar to the options shown in Figure 4.4.
FIGURE 4.1
Windows 8 Start button.
FIGURE 4.2
The Windows 8 Start menu after searching for the word “control.”
60
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

FIGURE 4.3
The Windows Control Panel.
FIGURE 4.4
The System and Security menu of the Control Panel.
61
Data Encryption for the Home User

From within the System and Security submenu of the Control Panel, you’ll see
the BitLocker Drive Encryption menu option circled in Figure 4.4. Clicking the Man-
age BitLocker menu link from within the System and security menu of the Control
Panel will launch the BitLocker Drive Encryption menu shown in Figure 4.5. From
this window, data encryption can be configured for each drive on the system. Each
disk can have BitLocker enabled separately from the other drives on the system.
This allows you to configure BitLocker on only the drive, which contains your
sensitive data, without needing to enable BitLocker on the disks that contain less
sensitive data.
As an example, if your personal data was stored within the My Documents folder
on the C: drive and your MP3 collection was installed on a different drive such as the
D: drive, you would want to encrypt the data on the C: drive but not the data on the D:
drive.
To enable BitLocker on the drive, simply click the “Turn on BitLocker,” which
can be found on the right-hand side of the window shown in Figure 4.5 in the middle
of the window.
When you turn BitLocker on for one of the drives for the first time, you will be
prompted to specify how the recovery key should be saved. The recovery key is used
to allow you to access your files in the event that BitLocker has data decryption prob-
lems. It also allows you to take the hard drive from this computer and insert it into
another Windows computer running the same version of Windows or newer and still
FIGURE 4.5
The BitLocker Drive Encryption feature within Windows.
62
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

be able to access the files on the hard drive. The screen to save the recovery key will
look similar to that shown in Figure 4.6. From this screen, shown in Figure 4.6 on a
Windows 8 computer, allows you to save the key to your Microsoft account, to a file
on your local computer or to print a physical copy of the key on your printer.
Saving the password to your Microsoft account requires that you are using a
Windows 8 or newer computer and that you log in to the computer using your Micro-
soft account (formerly called a Windows Live account). Using this option will
upload the key to the Microsoft servers where it will be securely stored. Doing this
is only a good idea if your Microsoft account is secured using a strong password
(password policies are discussed in Chapter 2). If your Microsoft account is not
secured using a strong password and your Microsoft account were to become com-
promised, then the person who accesses your Microsoft account could gain access to
your recovery password.
Saving the recovery password to a file is typically a good idea, provided that the
file is then removed from the computer and stored on a CD, DVD, or USB drive,
which is then stored in some sort of secure location such as a wall or gun safe or
a safe deposit box at your local bank. The same applies if you choose to print the
FIGURE 4.6
The recovery key window of the BitLocker wizard.
63
Data Encryption for the Home User

recovery key to your printer in order to store a hard copy of the key. You wouldn’t
want to store either the file with the key or the printed copy of the key with or near
the computer that the key protects because if someone steals the computer or the
computer is lost in some other way, you wouldn’t want the person who has the
computer and isn’t supposed to have the computer to have the key to access
the data either. When saving the recovery key to a local file, the file must be cre-
ated on a disk, which isn’t an encrypted disk. If you only have a C: drive like the
computer that was used to take the screenshot in Figure 4.6, you will need to have
a USB drive to connect to the computer that you can save the key to in order to
back up the key.
Without saving the backup of the BitLocker key, you will not be able to continue
through the wizard. The next screen of the wizard will be asking you how much of the
disk to encrypt. The options are to encrypt only the disk space that has been used or to
encrypt all the disk space. The difference between the two is that the latter option will
encrypt what is called the white space or the space on the disk that doesn’t have any
data written to it yet. The former of the two options will be faster but will leave any
files that you have deleted but that still exist on the disk unencrypted. The latter
option will encrypt everything even the files that have been deleted.
The next screen asks you if you are ready to encrypt the drive and if you want to
run the systems check. The system check, which BitLocker runs, will ensure that
BitLocker is able to read the recovery keys and the encryption keys, and then, it will
begin the process of encrypting the entire hard drive of the computer. At this point,
after the “Start Encryption” button, which can be seen in Figure 4.7, is clicked, the
computer is rebooted automatically and the BitLocker system will encrypt the hard
drive after the reboot is completed.
Encrypting a disk in Mac OSX
Much like the Windows operating system, the Apple OSX operating system also
includes a way to encrypt the entire disk. While the Windows operating system
has the BitLocker system, the Apple OSX operating system has a software package
called FileVault. As Apple talks about in their Knowledge Base article number
ht4790, which you can review at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/ht4790, you
need to be running Apple OS X Lion or Mountain Lion and you’ll need to have
“Recovery HD” installed on your startup drive.
FileVault is enabled and configured from within the System Preferences. Within
System Preferences, open “Security & Privacy” and then click the FileVault tab as
shown in Figure 4.8. From here, you can set the master password, which allows you
to unlock any account on the computer even when it has been encrypted. You can
also turn FileVault on by clicking the “Turn On FileVault” button.
After clicking the “Turn On FileVault” button, all the users of the computer will
need to enter their password if you want them to be able to turn on the computer. If
the users don’t enter their password, they won’t be able to turn on the computer or
wake up the computer when it is sleeping or hibernating.
64
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

FIGURE 4.7
Final screen of the BitLocker wizard.
FIGURE 4.8
FileVault tab within the Security & Privacy section of System Preferences.

Next, you will be shown your recovery key, which will be different for each
computer. Be sure to write down this password and store it in a safe place as this
password will be needed if you lose access to your data. The copy of the key that
you keep should not be stored on the computer that you are encrypting as if you lose
your password, you won’t be able to access the key, so you will have lost every-
thing on the computer. You will at this point be given the option to store the
recovery key on Apple’s servers. This protects you from losing the encryption
key. Apple will secure the encryption key with a series of questions and answers
based on personal information about you. When putting these answers in, make
sure that you remember exactly how you put them in because if the answers are
even slightly wrong, Apple’s applications won’t be able to decrypt the key and
allow you to use it.
At this point, the computer will reboot pretty quickly. When it does, log in to the
computer like normal. This will allow the FileVault application to continue encrypt-
ing the hard drive. Normally, this initial encryption process takes a few hours to
complete.
Additional information about changing your key and decrypting the drive can be
found in Apple’s Knowledge Base article ht4790, which you can review at http://
basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/ht4790.
WHAT DO THOSE WEBSITE SECURITY LOGOS MEAN?
Lots of websites out there have security logos on them. They are there to make you
feel better about purchasing products from them or to make you feel better about
uploading personal information to them. There are a variety of websites that provide
these security logos, and they all mean basically the same thing—nothing. That’s
right; these logos that we want to see to ensure that the websites are providing a
secure environment for doing business with the company that has the logo doesn’t
mean anything at all.
These logos usually mean that the website does meet some very basic security
requirements when it comes to browsing the secure website, but they don’t actually
mean all that much security has been put in place. Just because the website has these
logos doesn’t mean that the data is stored in an encrypted format, or that the company
is doing any auditing of what data the employees access in the system, or that there
aren’t any security patches that haven’t been installed on the web servers or the data-
base servers.
NOTE
Don’t trust everything you read on the Internet
The sad reality about these logos is that they really cannot be trusted. There is nothing stop-
ping someone who runs a website from simply downloading these logos from the Internet and
uploading them to their website and posting them for all to see. This would be the same way
66
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

that the Norton logo was placed into this book in fact. There was no review of this book before I
put the Norton logo shown in Figure 4.9 into this book, but the logo is sitting right there. I
could easily put that logo on my websites and there wouldn’t be anything that Norton could
do to stop me.
The logos, which I’m talking about, are the ones similar to the ones shown in
Figure 4.9, which are available from a variety of companies such as Norton, Veri-
Sign, Trustwave, and McAfee, among others.
The first problem with these sorts of logos is that they are pretty simple to simply
copy and paste into your website. The perfect example is this book; this book obvi-
ously hasn’t been vetted by VeriSign or Norton as being properly secured, but there is
their logo right there as Figure 4.9. I could easily place the graphic, which is this logo,
and upload it to my website, and suddenly, the website looks like it is secure but it
doesn’t actually have to be.
As pointed out by Troy Hunt in his blog post, which you can read at http://
basicsofdigitalprivicy.com/go/troypost, websites aren’t secure just because they
have logos on them. My favorite piece from Troy’s post is shown in Figure 4.10
where the website “Top Cashback” talks about how secure their website is.
Just because they have these logos doesn’t prove that the website is doing every-
thing possible to secure their information. The reason that this is such a problem is
because of the trust that the general public has with these logos. According to the
Norton website (as of the writing of this book in the summer of 2013), which is
owned by Symantec,
1. 77% of consumers recognize the Norton Secured Seal,
2. 65% of consumers agree that a website displaying the Norton Secured Seal is safe
to browse and won’t give them a virus,
3. 55% of consumers agree that a website displaying the Norton Secured Seal means
that the website protects their online privacy.
FIGURE 4.9
The logo from Norton, which shows that a website is “secure.”
67
What Do those Website Security Logos Mean?

I’ve got issues with every one of these sales points that are listed here and broken
down one by one:
#1 People have been taught and trained to think that these logos are important and
that it’s all they need to look for.
#2 There is no guarantee that having the Norton Secured Seal shown in
Figure 4.9 guarantees that the website won’t give you a virus. Over the years, there
have been several occasions where the banner ad services that most of the websites
use have served out viruses with the ads either because the banner ad website got
a virus or because the person who created the virus was able to sneak an ad into
the system, which has a virus as a part of the ad. No matter how the virus gets
into the ad network, it’s the website that’ll be serving the ad with the virus in it
to the end user.
#3 These logos don’t mean anything about protecting their online privacy. It
doesn’t mean that the website is securing your data on their servers. It doesn’t mean
that the company is protecting its end users from Internet attacks like cross site script-
ing errors or that all the communications between the web browser and the server are
being done through the most secure possible levels of communication or that the
website requires that you use a fully secure password. In fact, having these logos
don’t actually mean that the website is even using any encryption between the
web browser and the web server as shown in Figure 4.11.
You’ll see that the site rarefile.net, as of the summer of 2013, has both the Norton
and McAfee logos, but the URL in the URL bar at the top starts with http:// instead of
https://, which tells us that the data aren’t being encrypted between the web browser
and the web server.
FIGURE 4.10
A website telling you that their site is secure because it has logos on it.
68
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

What all this means is that when you see these logos, you need to still be just as
careful when using these websites as these logos are basically meaningless when it
comes to proving that a website is secure and safe to use.
WHEN TECH SUPPORT CALLS YOU
There are variety of companies and people out there that want your money. Some of
them will buy your identity online for a few dollars, some of them will dig through a
company’s trash to find your personal details, and some of them will simply call you
and ask you for your money, and a large number of people will simply hand it over.
A popular scam at the time of writing this book in the summer of 2013 is for
someone to call you up and tell you that they are from large companies’ technical
support department and that they are calling to tell you that you have a virus and that
they will help you get the virus off of your computer. They’ll start off helping you for
free, usually by having you install some software on your computer. Then, they will
tell you that you need to pay them to complete the support. At this point, the software,
which they have installed on your computer, probably includes something called a
key logger. A key logger is designed to keep track of every keystroke that you enter.
The more complex of them will watch for specific strings such as typing in 16 num-
bers in a row followed by four more numbers and then three more numbers. You’ll
probably recognize this pattern as being a credit card number (16 digits, 15 for
FIGURE 4.11
rarfile.net with security logos and no data encryption.
69
When Tech Support Calls You

American Express), the expiration date (4 digits), and the security code on the back
of the card (3 digits). They will also watch for things like common tax numbers such
as the 9 digits numbers we use here in the United States as Social Security or Tax ID
Numbers. When you give them your credit card number, they’ll charge a small
amount of money to the card usually a couple of hundred dollars telling you that
it is the fee to remove the virus. Sometimes, they will tell you that the fee is to give
you a proper license of Windows for your computer because your license was stolen
(also called pirated).
No matter how much these people charge you, they aren’t selling anything that
is legitimate. The virus removal wasn’t real, and in fact, they probably installed a
virus on your computer as a part of the process. If they sold you a Windows license
or a Microsoft license (or really a license of any kind), that isn’t real either. They
have no way of knowing if your license for Windows is real or not, and they have no
ability to sell you a Windows license. The people who are running this scam are
very good at it, and this scam is very inexpensive for them to run. With a few
Google Voice accounts or using some other forms of free Voice over IP (VoIP)
technology, they can call anyone from anywhere and look like they are calling from
anywhere that they want to be calling from. If you are in the United States, they
will appear to be calling you from the United States. If you are in England, they
will call you from an English phone number, the same goes for France, Germany,
Australia, etc.
Dealing with these scammers is very simple. As soon as they tell you that they are
from Microsoft’s Tech Support and you didn’t call Microsoft’s Tech Support, just
hang up the phone. Odds are they will just move on to someone else. If you made
the mistake of giving them your credit card number, it is OK; things can be done
to fix this. First, call your credit card company and explain what happened and tell
them how much they said that they charged you and that you got scammed. The
credit card company can simply reverse the charge. This shouldn’t cost you anything
as they will simply take the money back from the account that charged your credit
card (this may vary depending on your credit card company and your card member
agreement as the country or state that you live in). You’ll also want to have the credit
card company cancel that card number and issue you a new one. The worst part of all
this is that you won’t have access to the credit card for a few days, while you wait for
the new card to be e-mailed to you.
A large number of people that are taken by this scam don’t call the credit card
company because they don’t want to admit that they got scammed. DO NOT be
one of these people. These scammers have been running this scam for a long time,
and they are very good at it and very convincing with their sales pitch. By not report-
ing it, you are putting money directly into their pockets and encouraging them to
continue with the scam against other people. If required by your credit card company,
contact the police and report the scammer and get a police report. In reality, this prob-
ably won’t do anything to the people running the scam as odds are they aren’t in your
country or even in a country that your law enforcement could get to them in. The
police won’t laugh at you and they won’t embarrass you when you report it. They
70
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

understand that there are lots of people running these scams and that lots of people
get caught up in these scams. Get the police report, get the charges refunded, and get
a new card number. No harm, no foul.
NOTE
Some people are getting even
These scammers who pretend to be from Microsoft’s Tech Support call as many people as
possible. However, sometimes, they get someone who works in the IT field, and sometimes,
they get someone who works in Security within the IT field. A perfect example of this is my
friend Troy Hunt (www.troyhunt.com) who does a lot of work in IT Security. In one instance,
the scammers called Troy and Troy recorded the call, during which he attempted to scam the
scammer back by wasting as much of the scammers time as possible. Troy wrote a blog post
about the call and posted the video that you can watch at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/
scammervideo.
This sort of stunt shouldn’t be tried by someone who isn’t experienced in dealing with
scammers as Troy is. He lets the scammer connect to a virtual machine, which is a computer
that is configured specifically so that he can have a little fun with the scammer without putting
his actual computer at risk.
INTERNET GAMES AND DOWNLOADS
Things, which are downloaded or run from the Internet, are one of the many ways
that a virus can get on to your computer. There are currently over 100,000 different
computer viruses in existence, although most of those aren’t actually found in the
wild on the Internet. For the most part, there are about 300 or so viruses that you
really need to worry about at any one time; however, each of those base viruses could
have dozens of variants, which are all slightly different from each other.
For a computer virus to attack your computer, it needs to have access to your com-
puter. The easiest way for it to get access to your computer is for you to download it
either via an application such as a computer game; a flash game, which you play on a
website; or an ad, which you view on a webpage. When you install an application, you
assume that the application doesn’t have any malicious code within it. An application
can be written to do just about anything with your computer that the developer wants
to do, and you don’t have to be aware of what the application is doing. As an example,
just because you are playing a card game on the screen doesn’t mean that the appli-
cation isn’t also going through all your files on your computer looking for credit card
numbers and e-mailing any that it finds to the application’s creator.
When it comes to downloading games from the Internet or playing games
online, only use trusted sources to download the games and applications from. Some
places, which are typically safe to download games from, include websites such as
msn.com, download.com, FaceBook.com, and games.yahoo.com to name just a few.
Random websites, which are publishing just a couple of games for download and
aren’t major publishers, should not be taken at their word that they are safe to down-
load from.
71
Internet Games and Downloads

Application stores
With the introduction of Windows 8, you now have the Windows Store, which is
available through the Store button on the Windows 8 Start menu as shown in
Figure 4.12.
The Windows Store is a great place to download applications and games as those
games and applications have been reviewed by Microsoft. This review process
ensures that the games follow Microsoft’s terms of service and that the application
isn’t being published by a computer that Microsoft knows as a scammer. While
Microsoft doesn’t inspect every line of code within the applications, they do check
to make sure that the application isn’t doing things that the developer says that it
shouldn’t be doing by using some automated testing processes during their review
process.
This goes right along with the Apple Store on the Apple operating system. Apple
does an excellent job making sure that the applications, which are hosted within the
Apple Store, are free from viruses and malware and are safe to install on your computer.
In either case, Windows or Apple, this doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t have an
antivirus installed on your computer. There are a wide variety of antiviruses out there
and many of them do a very good job. Some are better than others and some cost
more than others.
Windows antivirus software
For the Windows operating system, Microsoft has an antivirus application called
Microsoft Security Essentials, which they have released for free on their website
at www.microsoft.com/security_essentials. There are also several other very good
products out there such as Sophos (www.sophos.com), McAfee (www.mcafee.
com), Norton Security Essentials (www.norton.com), and Trend Micro (www.tre
ndmicro.com). Some of these take less memory than others, while some cost less
than others.
FIGURE 4.12
The Windows 8 Store icon from the Windows 8 Start Menu.
72
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

NOTE
Antivirus application suggestions are a religious debate
While the use of antivirus applications is pretty much accepted by everyone, which antivirus
application to use is a hot topic. Everyone in the IT field and many home users have their favor-
ites that they recommend to anyone around. Personally, I’m a big fan of the Microsoft Security
Essentials for myself and most of the members of my family. This is because Microsoft Secu-
rity Essentials does a pretty good job and it is updated fast enough by Microsoft for the low-risk
Internet browsing habits of myself and most of the members of my family. For the family mem-
bers who have what we’ll politely call less safe Internet browsing habits, they have either a
second computer specifically for those unsafe habits or an antivirus that is a little more robust
such as Sophos that I mentioned earlier.
I don’t really want to start a fight between you and the members of your family, which have
an opinion on the topic; if someone in the family or a friend strongly recommends a specific
product and you trust their opinion (and especially if they work in the IT field), then take their
recommendation. When deciding on a specific antivirus software for your computer, here are a
few things to look at:
•
How often do they update their virus definitions?—More often is better.
•
How often do they update their software?—More often is better.
•
Do they offer free upgrades?—Yes is better.
•
Do they work with other companies to ensure that virus threats are found faster?—Yes is
better.
That said, we aren’t good enough friends for me to come over and fix your computer, so if
you end up having problems, try one of the other ones that I mentioned in this section; they all
have a free trial.
Apple computers need antivirus software
There is a long-held belief that because you are using a Mac, you can’t get a virus on
your computer. This couldn’t be further from the truth. While it is true that there are
less viruses running around the Internet that attack the Apple operating systems,
there are plenty of them out there, and without an antivirus installed, you’ll have
no idea that one has tried to install itself on your computer.
Back in the day (the day being the late 1990s), there weren’t any viruses for the
Mac computer. This wasn’t because the Apple operating systems of the day were
more secure than the Windows operating systems of the day. It was purely a numbers
game for the virus writers; in the late 1990s, there weren’t enough people using
Apple computers compared to the number of people using Windows computers.
Back in the late 1990s, Microsoft had well over 90% market share with Apple having
between 5% and 8% market share. This means that as a virus writer, if you are going
to spend money writing a virus and you want to make the most money possible off of
that virus, then you want to target most computers possible, which are Windows
computers. Today, the market has changed and Microsoft’s Windows operating sys-
tem no longer has such a strong market share position with the Windows operating
system now having less than 90% market share. This means that it is starting to
become profitable for people to make viruses for other operating systems including
the Apple operating system.
73
Internet Games and Downloads

NOTE
Not all viruses are for profit
While a large number of viruses are written for profit, there are some viruses that are written
simply to show off to other virus writers just how cool the virus they have written is. Back when
viruses were first coming out, there were a lot more viruses, which were written just for the
“sport” off it. In more modern days, most viruses are written to steal data and/or make some-
one money, either the virus writer or the person who hired the virus written, usually by stealing
your money.
Cell phones and tablets
Cell phones are the newest attack vector for viruses as there are now cell phone-
specific viruses out there. These viruses can be installed just like any normal appli-
cation on the cell phone, often installed as a part of another application, which
looks like another popular application. There are other ways to get a virus on cell
phones. There have been flaws out there in some cell phones, which have allowed
viruses to spread from phone to phone via text and picture messaging. You can read
more about the specifics of the history of these mobile viruses at http://
basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/mobile_virus. The official application stores such
as the Android Market, Apple App Store, and Microsoft Store are the safe places
to install applications from. Other application stores such as the Amazon Appstore
are usually safe, but there are no guarantees. Other market places out there aren’t
considered safe at all. They claim that they are safe, but they aren’t considered safe
by the companies who make the phones or the companies who run the antivirus
companies.
The Windows and Android mobile operating systems both have antivirus appli-
cations available for them. These antivirus applications can help ensure that there is
nothing running on the phones, which there shouldn’t be. For Android phones, the
best way to ensure that there are no viruses installed is to make sure that the phone is
configured to only allow installation of applications from the Play Store. Where you
configure this will depend on the version of the Android operating system. Typically,
it will be found within the Security section of the Settings icon. If the “Unknown
sources” check box is unchecked, then the phone will prevent the installation of
applications from third-party application stores as shown in Figure 4.13. When this
setting is disabled, any application store such as the Amazon Appstore won’t be
available.
The recommendation is that if you are using another well-known application
store such as the Amazon Appstore that you enable the “Unknown sources” setting
each time you plan to install an application, then disable the setting as soon as the
application has been installed. It is also recommended that you install an antivirus
on the phone to ensure that you are protected from every application that is installed
and updated no matter which application store the application is installed from.
With the iOS for the iPhone, there are antivirus applications available but they
require that the phone be jail-broken so that the antivirus can be installed. This breaks
74
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

Apple’s security model for the iOS operating system, which is a pretty locked down
operating system. While jailbreaking, the phone is a whole different conversation; if
the iPhone (or iPad or iPod) is jail-broken, it is still recommended that an antivirus is
installed.
NOTE
Why all the attention to Android
Have you noticed that of the three major platforms, Android, iOS, and Windows Mobile,
Android gets the most information in this section? That’s because Android is the most open
platform of the three, which means that it is the most susceptible to a virus.
FIGURE 4.13
Security section of the Application settings with the Unknown sources setting disabled.
75
Internet Games and Downloads

Viruses for cell phones typically do two different things. The first thing they do is
monitor your keystrokes and attempt to capture the usernames, passwords, credit
card information that you enter for websites like Amazon and eBay, and your appli-
cation store (or marketplace, etc.) account information. The other thing that these
viruses will attempt to do is spread to everyone that you know. This is done via
the phone numbers and e-mail addresses in your contact list. Your contacts will
all get a text message and/or an e-mail that will have an attachment or a link, which
will attempt to install the virus on their devices.
One last thing that these viruses may attempt to do is to dial phone numbers with
specific US area codes, which charge you money just for making the phone call with
the profits of these numbers being paid to the virus writers. These area codes include
809, 284, or 876 and a few others. The reason that these US area codes can charge
high rates per minute is because these aren’t actually in the United States. These
numbers are actually based out of the Caribbean Islands so US billing laws don’t
apply as the Caribbean Islands aren’t a part of the United States. The charges for
these calls simply show up on your cell phone bill.
If you get hit with one of these viruses, contact your cell phone provider if you see
calls on your cell phone bill to these area codes that you didn’t make. The cell phone
providers will work with the phone company where these numbers are based to
attempt to get your charges reversed. This does require that your cell phone company
will work with the offshore phone company as the charges are billed from the off-
shore phone company and your cell phone company can’t refund the charges directly
on their own.
SUMMARY
When it comes to protecting the information on your computer from being viewed
after a computer theft, data encryption is your best bet. Data encryption will force the
person who is trying to read your data to have your password in order to get access to
that data. When protecting yourself from a virus, an antivirus product installed on
your computer and cell phone is critical in ensuring that the information that you
place on the computer or cell phone isn’t going to anyone but the people that are
supposed to get the information.
76
CHAPTER 4 Securing Your Home Computer

CHAPTER
Posting Information Online 5
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Kinds of information that shouldn’t be posted online
•
How to protect information that is posted online
This chapter talks about what you really shouldn’t be posting online and how to
protect what you do post online.
KINDS OF INFORMATION THAT SHOULDN’T BE POSTED ONLINE
These are the kinds of answers that you’ll typically hear when it comes to what you
shouldn’t be posting on the Internet on social media websites:
•
Anything personal
•
Anything you wouldn’t want your grandmother and/or grandfather to see
•
Anything you wouldn’t want your parents to see
•
Anything you wouldn’t want your kids to see
•
Anything you wouldn’t want your boss to see
•
Anything you wouldn’t want your insurance company to see
•
Anything you wouldn’t want the government to see
A lot of this comes down to personal embarrassment at family gatherings (see the
statements with grandparents, parents, and kids), getting fired (see the statement
about your boss), losing your insurance (see the one about your insurance company),
or getting arrested (see the one about the government). If you post something online,
then odds are that someone that you don’t intend of seeing it will see it. A perfect
example is shown in Figure 5.1.
NOTE
Where did Figure 5.1 come from?
You may be asking yourself “If people aren’t supposed to be posting pictures of themselves
online, how did you get this picture of someone in a bar bathroom?” That’s a fair question.
Thankfully, the answer wasn’t very far away. The person in the picture isn’t me (thankfully)
77

but a friend of mine who was willing to have the picture included in the book as a fine example.
Thankfully, many of my friends have no shame and are willing to do just about anything if it will
help another friend get a point across.
And yes, this really is a picture of a couch in a men’s room. It’s from a small bar called
Busch Garden (there’s no “s” at the end) in Seattle, Washington, that some of us like to fre-
quent when we are in town.
Anything that is posted online, be it text, photo, video, or anything else that we
come up with in the future should be assumed that once it is online it will be online
forever. Even if information is deleted from an online service such as flickr.com,
twitter.com, and facebook.com, there is no guarantee that the information that
you try to delete will actually be deleted. First of all, it’s likely that the site that hosts
it won’t be deleting the files right away, if at all. In many cases, the End-User License
Agreement (EULA) usually says that anything that is posted on these sites legally
becomes their property and they can use them as they see fit.
For example, looking at the Facebook license agreement as of the summer of
2013, Facebook specifically says in the End User License Agreement (EULA) in
Section 2.2, shown in Figure 5.2, that “. . .removed content may persist in backup
copies for a reasonable period of time (but will not be available to others).” There
is nothing in the agreement that says what a “reasonable period of time” will be.
It could mean days, months, or even years depending on how long Facebook decides
FIGURE 5.1
Example of someone doing something that they probably wouldn’t want posted online in a bar
bathroom.
78
CHAPTER 5 Posting Information Online

how long they should keep copies of their backup tapes. While Facebook doesn’t
publish their backup policies, there are many companies who keep backups for
several years and others who keep a periodically taken backup forever.
NOTE
Define periodically
Reading the prior section, I’m using some incredibly vague words to describe vague situations.
Let me be a little more specific with an example. A company that I worked for several years ago
had a policy for keeping backups forever. In this case, backups were taken daily and were kept
for 2 weeks. On Sunday, there was a weekly backup that was taken and was kept for a month.
On the first of each month, there was a backup taken that was kept for 7 years. On the first of
January, a backup was taken and that backup was kept forever. This would mean that if you
uploaded a file to their service in March then deleted it on January second the file would be
kept on their tape backups forever.
We can learn more about how Facebook deals with deleted data when we look at
Section 2.1 of their license agreement (as of the summer of 2013) that states that you
give Facebook a license to use your intellectual property (your photos and videos) for
no cost until you delete the content as shown in Figure 5.3. However, if a friend on
Facebook shares your Intellectual Property (IP), then Facebook continues to have the
license to use your IP until everyone that shares the photo or video has also deleted it.
FIGURE 5.3
Section 2.1 of Facebook’s EULA as of the summer of 2013.
FIGURE 5.2
Screenshot of part of the Facebook EULA.
79
Kinds of Information That Shouldn’t be Posted Online

This tells us that when you upload a picture and someone you are friends with shares
it and you then delete the file, it won’t be deleted because others will still have shared
it. So if you delete it, it isn’t actually deleted. It could live on Facebook’s site without
you having control of the file that you uploaded.
Reading the Flickr End User License Agreement, we first see that because the site
is owned by Yahoo, we are bound by the Yahoo agreement. The Yahoo agreement as
of the summer of 2013 doesn’t specifically mention what happens when you delete
specific content. The only reference talks about the fact that if you delete your
account, your information may be retained in their archived records after your
account has been deleted as shown in Figure 5.4.
Based on the fact that Flickr is all about posting images online and people being
able to download those photos, we need to be really sure that anything that we upload
to Flickr is safe to be seen by others, forever. Because of this, if you post something to
Flickr, you should expect that even if you go and delete that image, you could easily
expect to see that picture come back online somewhere else.
There are some SD cards that you can purchase for camera that allow the
camera to automatically upload the photos that are taken with the camera to the
sites such as Flickr automatically. These include cards like the Eye-Fi cards. It’s easy
to forget that you have a card such as the Eye-Fi card installed in the camera, so
you could end up taking pictures that you don’t necessarily want uploaded to the
Internet.
When it comes to the Twitter Terms of Services (TOS) as of the summer of 2013,
there is nothing listed in the terms of services at all about what happens to tweets
that are deleted. This lack of information extends to pictures that are uploaded to
the Twitter photo-sharing service. Part of this may be because there is a feed from
Twitter to the United States Library of Congress. This feed is allowing the Library of
Congress to archive every tweet that has been posted to the Twitter service. What
happens to these archived tweets when the user that posted the tweet deletes it isn’t
explained.
We can assume that tweets aren’t actually deleted from Twitter’s database. This
is shown a little bit on the Twitter Support site under the topic of Deleting a Tweet
that is available at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/DeleteTweet and is shown in
a note on the page as of the summer of 2013 as seen in Figure 5.5. This tells us that the
Tweets that you delete aren’t actually deleted since they will show up in Twitter
Search. Search data on Twitter are only available for a small period of time so at
the longest, the tweets will fall out of search when they simply expire from the search
window.
FIGURE 5.4
Account deletion section of Yahoo’s EULA.
80
CHAPTER 5 Posting Information Online

NOTE
Why am I bringing this up?
You may be asking yourself why I’m talking about all these legal stuff on these specific sites.
The reason that I’m bringing this up is because you need to know what these sites are doing
with all the information that you have uploaded. If you end up posting something that you
don’t want other people to see, such as something you regret posting the next day, deleting
may not remove it because there is no guarantee that what was posted is actually going to be
deleted.
Most of the time, people post things that they end up regretting the next day because
drinking (or other recreation) is often involved. At these times, people tend to make poor deci-
sions about what they should be posting online. Unfortunately there isn’t any sort of filter on
cell phones or computers to prevent people from doing stupid things online. This sort of thing
takes the old problem of drunk dialing old boyfriends or girlfriends to an all new level. With
drunk dialing, the only person that you’ve shown the stupidity to is the person on the other end
of the phone, assuming that they even answer. Now with social networking websites, you’ve
got the ability to tell the entire world what sort of stupid thing you’ve been doing.
Posting information online can have actual major consequences for the people
that post them. CNN and BuzzFeed have put together a great montage about 10 peo-
ple who posted online stupid things that they have done that have ended up getting
them fired. You can find the CNN article and video at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.
com/go/CNNFired. This includes the Taco Bell employee who licked taco shells, a
teacher who thought that her male students were attractive and how much she liked
smoking weed (the mostly naked pictures that her students could easily enough find
probably didn’t help either), the Australian miners who did the “Harlem Shake” and
posted it online, among several others.
NOTE
More about the teacher
Of the 10 people highlighted in the CNN and BuzzFeed article and video that are posted
earlier, I’d have to say that the dumbest of all was the teacher. Teachers are often held to a
higher standard than others because they deal with kids as a part of their job. This isn’t anything
new and has gotten a lot more lax over the years. All that said if you’d like to see exactly what
it’ll take to get yourself fired from a teaching position, you can read the details at
http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/teacher.
It should be noted that she has denied doing anything wrong, but in the end, she still lost
her job over her Twitter account.
FIGURE 5.5
Note showing that tweets aren’t deleted right away.
81
Kinds of Information That Shouldn’t be Posted Online

HOW TO PROTECT INFORMATION THAT IS POSTED ONLINE
Most if not all of the social networking services allow you to protect information that
you post online so that you can control who sees the information that you post online.
It is very much recommended that you protect the information that you post online so
that people that you don’t want seeing your social networking posts can’t see them.
Just keep in mind that these protections only apply to new items that you post and not
to items that were already posted online.
NOTE
Things change online
With everything being talked about in this section, please keep in mind that the functionality
available from these services may be different from what is listed in this book. The reason for
this is that services like Twitter and Facebook are always changing as they attempt to improve
their services. Because of this, the settings may not look exactly like the examples shown in
the book and where you click might be a little different. All these settings and instructions are
current as of the writing of this book, which was in the summer of 2013.
Twitter
Twitter offers you the ability to protect your tweets by protecting your account. When
you protect your tweets on Twitter, this prevents anyone from seeing your Tweets
until you approve them to be able to follow your account. This prevents your tweets
that you made after making your account protected from showing up in Search.
You can change your settings by logging into the Twitter webpage on a computer
and click on the gear icon at the top right of the screen that looks something similar to
that shown in Figure 5.6.
On the setting page, scroll down to the Tweet Privacy setting that should be
around halfway down the page. Checking the box next to the in the Tweet Privacy
setting, shown in Figure 5.7, will turn your account into a protected account and only
your followers will be able to view your tweets.
Keep in mind that there are still ways that tweets from a protected account can be
shared and therefore viewed by others. The first way would be by a follower doing an
“old style” retweet. This is where someone takes a tweet that is a protected tweet,
which can only be seen by the person’s followers, and is then tweeted by someone
with “RT” in front of the tweet. Now everyone who follows the second person can
see the tweet that the first person posted.
FIGURE 5.6
Twitter settings button.
82
CHAPTER 5 Posting Information Online

To spell this out a little easier, let’s assume that we have a person named Kris who
has protected her tweets because she doesn’t want people that she doesn’t know to
see her tweets. She tweets something that Steve sees that he wants to share with his
followers. Steve then retweets the tweet that Kris posted making it so that people who
follow Steve but not Kris can now see Kris’s tweet.
Unfortunately as long as you are using Twitter, there is no way to prevent this sit-
uation from happening as you can’t prevent another user from retweeting your tweets.
Facebook
When posting something on Facebook, there are a couple of ways to limit the people
who can view your posts.
Securing a specific Facebook post
The first is to secure the actual post itself. When writing up a new post on Facebook,
you’ve probably seen the little grayed out drop-down menu next to the post button as
show in Figure 5.8.
Normally when things are grayed out, they are disabled but this isn’t the case with
Facebook. When you click on the drop-down menu shown in Figure 5.8, you’ll get a
drop-down menu that will look similar to the one shown in Figure 5.9. This drop-
down allows you to configure who has the ability to see this specific post. You
can leave the setting at Public that is the default that will allow everyone on Facebook
to see the post if they went to look at your wall.
FIGURE 5.8
Facebook new post dialog.
FIGURE 5.7
The Tweet Privacy setting from the Twitter settings page.
83
How to Protect Information That is Posted Online

By selecting “Friends” from the menu shown in Figure 5.9, only people who are
your friend on Facebook would be able to see the post. By selecting “Only Me” from
the menu shown in Figure 5.9, you are the only person who can see the post. The most
powerful option on the menu shown in Figure 5.9 is the “Custom” option. By select-
ing this option, another menu is shown that allows specific people or groups of peo-
ple that you have set up within Facebook to see or not see the post. This new menu
shown in Figure 5.10 allows you to specifically list out people that you do or do not
want to be able to see the post.
FIGURE 5.9
Facebook permissions menu.
FIGURE 5.10
“Custom Privacy” menu in Facebook.
84
CHAPTER 5 Posting Information Online

The screenshot shown in Figure 5.10 shows the default version of this screen
where you can select a specific group of people to allow to see the post then the
“Don’t share this with” section where you can exclude people from this list.
As shown in Figure 5.10, there is a dropdown in the “Share this with” section.
This defaults to “Friends” when opened. The other options on this list are “Friends
of Friends” that would allow your friends as well as their friends to be able to see the
post. The other option of note is the “Specific People or Lists. . .” option that allows
you to specify that the post should only be visible to the specific people that are put
into the dialog box that appears when “Specific People or Lists. . .” is selected as
shown in Figure 5.11.
If, for example, I wanted to post a message on Facebook where I complained
about the work that my friend Thomas LaRock was doing while working at the tech-
nical editor of this book (he did a fantastic job, it’s just an example), I probably
wouldn’t want him to see that post on Facebook. So in order to do this, I would select
the “Share this with” setting to Friends so that only my friends can see the post, and
then in the “Don’t share this with” section, I would put Tom’s name as shown in
Figure 5.12.
After making the changes and clicking the “Save Changes” button, you’ll be
shown something similar to that shown in Figure 5.13. The post can then be written
and posted as normal with only the limited people being able to see the post.
Setting Facebook privacy settings
One place where Facebook is doing a better job than some of the other social net-
working websites is in the privacy settings. The Facebook privacy settings allow
you to configure who by default can see your new posts, who can contact you,
FIGURE 5.11
The “Custom Privacy” dialog box with the setting changed to “Specific People or Lists . . .”
85
How to Protect Information That is Posted Online

and who can search for you using your e-mail address or phone number. The privacy
settings can be found by clicking the little light blue gear on the upper right-hand side
of the Facebook webpage shown in Figure 5.14.
Once clicking on the icon shown in Figure 5.14 a menu similar to the one shown
in Figure 5.15.
FIGURE 5.12
Facebook’s “Custom Privacy” screen filled out.
FIGURE 5.14
Facebook settings icon.
FIGURE 5.13
Facebook new post dialog with the viewing of the post limited.
86
CHAPTER 5 Posting Information Online

By clicking on the “Privacy Settings” option in the menu shown in Figure 5.15,
the actual screen that allows you to change the privacy settings will be shown, which
will look similar to what is shown in Figure 5.16.
The first section shown in Figure 5.16 allows you to change who can view your
posts. By clicking on the “Edit” link next to “Who can see your future posts?,” the
screen will be changed to look something like what is shown in Figure 5.17.
By clicking on the “Public” drop-down menu, you can customize the permissions
much like when a new post is being written as shown in Figures 5.10–5.12.
FIGURE 5.15
Facebook settings Menu.
FIGURE 5.16
Facebook Privacy settings.
87
How to Protect Information That is Posted Online

When making changes to permissions via the “Who can see your future posts?”
setting, these changes only affect new posts. If the permissions for older posts need to
be changed, the only option for changing the permissions in bulk is to limit the past
posts to only being visible to your friends. This is done by clicking the “Limit Past
Posts” link to the right of “Limit The Audience for Old Posts on Your Timeline”
option shown in Figure 5.16.
If permissions from older posts need to be changed one by one, this can be done
by going to your wall on Facebook and locating the specific post that you wish to
edit. Once the post has been located, click on the small gray gear next to the time
when the post was made as shown in Figure 5.18.
After clicking on the gray gear shown in Figure 5.18, a menu will be shown that
looks similar to the one shown in Figure 5.9. The settings can then be changed using
the screens shown in Figures 5.10–5.12.
With these various settings, you’ll be able to prevent people who you don’t want
to see specific posts from being able to see them. This same technique is used to
secure pictures, videos, etc., on Facebook.
Flickr
Like Facebook and Twitter, the other social networking websites that have been
mentioned in this chapter, Flickr includes some privacy settings that can be used
to keep the pictures that are being posted online from being viewed by people that
you wouldn’t want them viewed by. There are a variety of settings available to you
and understanding each one and what exactly it controls is key to keeping your
personal data on Flickr private.
FIGURE 5.17
Customizing the future posts permissions on Facebook.
FIGURE 5.18
Sample Facebook post.
88
CHAPTER 5 Posting Information Online

Accessing the privacy settings on Flickr is quite easy. Simply go to the Flickr
homepage www.flickr.com and log into the site using your normal username and
password that you use for the site. After logging in put your mouse on the small ava-
tar icon in the upper right corner of the screen as shown in Figure 5.19. In this exam-
ple, the avatar is the default avatar that yours should look similar to.
When your mouse has been placed over the avatar, a menu should appear similar
to the one shown in Figure 5.20. If the menu doesn’t appear, click on your Avatar that
should cause the menu to appear as well. Once the menu has appeared, click on the
settings link shown at the bottom of Figure 5.20.
The settings page has four tabs with all the privacy settings being shown on the
“Privacy and Permissions” tab. Clicking on this tab will show you the various
settings.
FIGURE 5.19
Example of an Avatar on Flickr’s homepage.
FIGURE 5.20
Pop-up menu on Flickr’s site.
89
How to Protect Information That is Posted Online

The first permission shown on the Privacy and Permissions tab, partially shown in
Figure 5.21, is the ability to control who has access to all your original picture files
that have been uploaded.
By default, this setting is configured to allow anyone to download the original
files as shown in Figure 5.22. There are four other options available with this setting:
“Only you,” “Your friends and family,” “Your contacts,” and “Any Flickr member.”
FIGURE 5.21
Partial view of the “Privacy and Permissions” settings.
FIGURE 5.22
Settings options for who should be able to access the original files on Flickr.
90
CHAPTER 5 Posting Information Online

The “Only you” setting prevents any other member from seeing your pictures. The
“Your friends and family” setting allows anyone who you have configured as being a
friend or a member of your family to be able to see your pictures and no one else. The
“Your contacts” setting allows anyone who is configured on Flickr’s website as a
contact to be able to see the setting. The final option “Any Flickr member” allows
anyone who is signed into the Flickr website the ability to view the pictures that have
been uploaded.
The next setting down the list shown in Figure 5.21 is “Who can add you to a
photo?,” which is a very important setting when it comes to ensuring that you main-
tain the most possible control over your online presence. When others are allowed to
tag you in pictures that they have posted on Flickr, these pictures can impact both
your online and your off-line reputation. At the beginning of this chapter, we learned
about the fact that we need to ensure that we don’t post information online that we
don’t want others to see online. Well what happens when someone posts information
about us and we can’t control it? This setting gives us the ability to control that, at
least on the Flickr website. The “Who can add you to a photo?” setting is the most
detailed setting we have control of so far as shown in Figure 5.23.
The six options that are shown in Figure 5.23 are not set with the best possible
privacy option configured by default. By default, Flickr is configured to allow any-
one who uploads a photo with you in it to be able to tag you in the photo. While Flickr
recommends this setting to be the default setting, this is for their benefit, not yours.
They benefit from this setting being enabled by making a more dynamic platform
that allows for the easiest sharing of photographs and videos possible. However, this
is purely in their best interest and not in yours. Your best interest as the user of Flickr
(and other social networking sites in general) is to ensure that while using the service,
you have as much control over your data as possible, which isn’t going to work well
with the social networking sites’ best interest. The setting that should be used, which
is in your best interest, is to select the “Only you” option shown in Figure 5.23. This
way, you maintain complete control over what pictures can be assigned to you.
FIGURE 5.23
“Who can add you to a photo?” setting options.
91
How to Protect Information That is Posted Online

An acceptable setting from a personal data privacy perspective would be to allow
people that you trust to be able to tag you in pictures, also known as your family,
which is one of the available options. The other options such as “Your friends,”
“Your friends and family,” “Your contacts,” and “Any Flickr member” settings
allow people who probably aren’t in your most-trusted circle to be able to tag you
in pictures.
The next setting with regard to privacy to adjust is the “Who can see your
EXIF data?” setting. Before we can decide if we want to allow others to see
our EXIF data, we need to know what the EXIF data are. The EXIF data are infor-
mation that is stored within the photograph and stores a variety of information
about the photograph. This information includes information about the camera,
the lens, the shuttle speed, the date and time the picture was taken, and, in a
lot of cases, the GPS location of the picture. Having the GPS information avail-
able to anyone on the Internet tells people potentially where your home is, where
your office is, where you’re, where your friends live, where you vacation, etc.
You can turn this feature off within the camera or camera phone. Check with
the technical support department for your camera for more information about
how to disable this feature. Based on all this information turning off the EXIF
data from bein available to people who are viewing your photographs online
may be a good idea for many people. The EXIF setting only allows to be turned
on or to be turned off. For the sake of personal privacy, the setting of “Hide my
EXIF data?” should be set to “Yes” as shown in Figure 5.24.
The next setting on Flickr’s privacy settings page that we need to worry about is
the “Who can see what on your profile” setting as shown in Figure 5.25. This allows
various groups of people to see the four settings that this setting controls. These four
settings are “E-mail address,” “Instant messaging names,” “Read name,” and “Cur-
rent city.” By default “E-mail address” and “Instant messaging names” are available
only to people who are your contacts while “Real name” and “Current city” are avail-
able to anyone.
Again, like with the EXIF setting, the settings shown in Figure 5.25 are not set
with your best interest in mind. This is because it allows anyone to see where you
most recently uploaded pictures from. Like with the settings discussed earlier in this
section, these settings, specifically the “Current city” setting, should be set for trusted
people only such as the option from the list “Family and Friends.” This setting is the
most restrictive of the available options for these settings.
FIGURE 5.24
Flickr’s EXIF setting.
92
CHAPTER 5 Posting Information Online

NOTE
The most restrictive isn’t always restrictive enough
While it is good that Flickr gives you the ability to control these settings, in my opinion, these
settings aren’t restrictive enough. In today’s always on, always online, social media world, the
concept of friends in the online world and the concept of friends in the off-line world aren’t
always the same. When using this setting, it is important to remember that you are only mark-
ing people who are actually friends or family members as friends or family, respectively, so
that people that shouldn’t have access to this sort of information don’t get it by accident.
MySpace
Privacy settings on the MySpace website are probably the least flexible of all the
social networking sites that I have seen. The only option that MySpace gives you
is the ability to configure a profile as a “Restricted Profile.” Having a restricted pro-
file means that you have to approve all connection requests before they will be con-
nected to you. A restricted profile also limits “certain content is limited to profiles
you have allowed to connect to you” according to the MySpace webpage.
Changing the profile setting from a public profile to a restricted profile is a pretty
basic process. First, log onto the MySpace website at www.myspace.com. Then click
on the settings button on the main menu, shown in Figure 5.26, typically shown on
the left of the webpage.
Once the settings menu has opened, as shown in Figure 5.27, several additional
options become available including the Privacy Settings option. Selecting the Pri-
vacy option from the menu allows you to view the full privacy settings menu.
As stated, the MySpace website only has a single privacy setting. This setting,
shown in Figure 5.28, allows you to change your profile from public to restricted
and back as needed.
FIGURE 5.25
Flickr’s “Who can see what” setting.
93
How to Protect Information That is Posted Online

FIGURE 5.27
Settings menu selected.
FIGURE 5.26
MySpace home menu.

SUMMARY
As we’ve seen in this chapter, there is a variety of information that simply shouldn’t
be posted online. While it may seem like a good idea to post your entire life online,
there are people out there who can use the information that you post online against
you. This includes family members, employers, bosses, potential employers, and law
enforcement. Many of the social networking sites include some sort of privacy set-
tings, as shown throughout this chapter where you have been shown how to change
the privacy settings of Twitter, Facebook, Flickr, and MySpace.
Not all of the social networking sites include privacy settings, and not all of the
privacy settings are created equal some sites giving much more fine-grained control
than other sites give. When selecting the social networking site to use, be sure to
select social networking website that provides the level of privacy over your personal
data that you want to give.
FIGURE 5.28
Profile Privacy setting on the MySpace homepage.
95
Summary

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
Who’s Watching What
You Do?
6
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
How can someone watch what I do?
•
How can a government watch what I do?
•
How can I stop people from watching what I do?
This chapter talks about how others including other people and various governments
are able to see what you are doing online. We will also talk about some of the things
that you can do to prevent others from watching what you do online and why you may
or may not want to do these things.
HOW CAN SOMEONE WATCH WHAT I DO?
When it comes to what people can see you are doing on the Internet, the amount of
what they are watching will totally depend on how secure you have made your online
life and how determined they are to see what you are doing. There are two basic tasks
that you do on the Internet, sending and receiving e-mail and browsing the web.
NOTE
Some assumptions
For the purposes of this chapter, there are a few assumptions that are going to be made. The
first one has to do with sending and receiving e-mail. When talking about sending and receiv-
ing e-mail, it is assumed that you are using an e-mail client such as Microsoft Outlook, Eudora,
OSX Mail, and Windows 8 Mail. This includes using the e-mail app on your phone like the
“Mail” app on Android, Apple, Windows Mobile, and BlackBerry phones.
Many of the solutions to preventing people from viewing what you are doing online
will be rather technical. Throughout this chapter, they will be broken down into the
most digestible parts possible. One of the problems with a lot of these sorts of highly
technical solutions is that they are made by IT professionals for IT professionals with-
out very much thought being given to how to make these solutions more accessible to
the general public at large who doesn’t necessarily have the technical experience or
knowledge to configure these solutions. Most if not all of these solutions have docu-
mentation, but often, this documentation is written for IT professionals and often
makes a lot of assumptions about the technical experience of the reader.
97

E-mail
When it comes to monitoring e-mail that someone sends and receives, there are a
couple of different methods that someone can use. The easiest is going to be to install
something on your computer that tracks all the e-mails that are received by you and
sent to you. There are a variety of applications out there that can do this. Some are
easy to detect and others are much harder to detect, with some being detected by anti-
virus software and some not being detectable by antivirus software. While you might
consider all of these sorts of applications as viruses, some applications in this cate-
gory are actually legitimate software packages out there that do the sort of things that
are being talked about in this section.
NOTE
Full disclosure
Some full disclosure here. I’ve got quite a bit of experience working in this sort of space. Sev-
eral years ago, I worked for a company that made a desktop monitoring application that could
capture e-mails that you received or that you sent. That software was sold just like any other
software that you could purchase with the basic idea for the home user product being that you
could monitor what your kids were doing on the Internet to ensure that they weren’t doing
something online that they shouldn’t be doing. In the business version of the product, we were
monitoring to make sure that employees were doing things that they should be doing and that
they weren’t sending out customer information out via e-mail.
When monitoring software is installed on the computer that they are monitoring,
the software works in few different ways. One option is to monitor the network pro-
tocol that is used by all e-mail clients to talk to the e-mail servers. In the past, this
method would have been mostly useful, but over the past few years, most e-mail
servers today require encrypted connections so monitoring the network ports isn’t
all that effective.
The second option that is available to the software developer who creates the
monitoring software is that he or she can talk to the e-mail software using the appli-
cation programming interface (API), which has been published by the e-mail soft-
ware developer. This API would allow the person who is writing the monitoring
software to read any e-mails that the software sends or receives. Because the mon-
itoring software is asking the e-mail software for the e-mails after they have been
received from the server, any encryption that is used in the communication process
between the server and the user’s computer would be bypassed.
A third option that would be available to companies such as the Internet backbone
providers would be to monitor the network traffic at the e-mail server side. While the
network traffic between the e-mail application and the e-mail server is most likely
encrypted, odds are the network traffic between the e-mail server that you use and
the e-mail server that the person you are e-mailing uses isn’t encrypted as shown in
Figure 6.1. While some e-mail servers are configured to communicate with other e-mail
servers using an encrypted connection, this is not the default communication method.
98
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

Communication between e-mail servers is not encrypted by default. However, it
is possible that e-mail servers can be configured to request encrypted connections
when transmitting from one e-mail server to another, but since it is not a default set-
ting, this configuration is often skipped. Unfortunately, there is no way as a user of
the e-mail server to see if the server is configured to request an encrypted server to
server connection.
Another way that e-mails can be viewed is by the Internet service provider that
owns the e-mail server that the mail is delivered to. Employees at the Internet service
provider such as the technical support department and the systems administration
team would have access to view the e-mails within the customers e-mail box.
Depending on how the security at the Internet service provider has been configured,
these employees may only have access to view the header information of the e-mails
that would include who sent the e-mail, who received the e-mail, the subject of the
e-mail, and when the e-mail was sent and when it traveled through each of the e-mail
servers that handled the e-mail.
NOTE
Having access to e-mail
Back in my late teens and early 20s, I worked for a large Internet service provider in Southern
California starting in their technical support department. As a routine part of our job as tech-
nical support representatives, we would deal with helping people troubleshoot problems with
their e-mail. At this time, over 99% of the home Internet users were using dial-up Internet.
This meant that e-mails needed to be small in order for users to download them. The large
majority of e-mail problems that users would call up about were because they weren’t able
to download their e-mail because it would time out when attempting to download the e-mails.
The first step in troubleshooting this problem for customers would be to log into the users
mailbox. We could then view the list of e-mails that were in the user’s mailbox. We could then
view the contents of the message and tell the customer what the contents of the e-mail were
before deleting the e-mail. Once the e-mails that were too large were deleted, the customer
would be able to download their e-mail.
Now in this case, the system was set up in such a way that the user’s username and
password were required in order for the technical support rep to access the user’s mailbox.
The members of the systems administration team did not have this same restriction. They
Continued
Your E-mail Server
Friends E-mail Server
Your Computer
Friends Laptop
Encrypted
Connection
Unencrypted
Connection
Encrypted
Connection
FIGURE 6.1
Diagram showing which connections are typically encrypted and which connections are not
typically encrypted.
99
How Can Someone Watch What I Do?

could, if needed, access a user’s mailbox directly and delete specific e-mails as needed as
well as delete e-mails if needed, and the customer would never know that the e-mails had been
deleted.
The same applies to company e-mail systems at most companies. The systems admin-
istration team can access the e-mail of every employee in the company if needed without
the person, whose mailbox it is, knowing that the systems administrator had accessed
the e-mail.
In addition to the servers that are used to send the e-mail and the server that receives
the e-mail as shown in Figure 6.1, there could be any number of e-mail servers between
the two servers that we can see in some sample e-mail headers in Figure 6.2.
FIGURE 6.2
E-mail headers from a sample e-mail.
100
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

The e-mail headers shown in Figure 6.2, which are from an e-mail that I received
from a mailing list that I’m subscribed to, are read from bottom to top with each
server that receives and processes e-mail starting with “Received:”. In the case of
this example, we can see 16 different servers that the e-mail past through from
the person who sent the e-mail until it was received by my mailbox. The e-mail
headers show that the e-mail passed through a variety of servers each with their
own domain name and appearing to be from a few different companies. There are
a variety of reasons why different companies handled this e-mail. The sending
company could have some of their antivirus services outsourced to another company
that would mean that this additional company would need to receive the e-mails, or
the third company could be used to help manage outbound e-mail routing, or it could
simply be that the company has a very large e-mail sending infrastructure because
they have to be able to handle billions of e-mails per day, and so they have configured
a large complex system to assist them in the handling of these e-mails.
All these servers that are processing this e-mail as it was moved from the sender
to my e-mail box could have been configured to store this e-mail for any period of
time, allowing the administrator to view the e-mail without the knowledge of the per-
son that sent the e-mail or from me the receiver of the e-mail.
Web browsing traffic
Viewing the web traffic or someone who is browsing the Internet isn’t quite as easy as
viewing their e-mails. The primary reason for this is that e-mails sit on servers and can
be viewed at any time that they are sitting on the server so long as the person trying to
view them either has the username and password for the e-mail account or has the
needed rights to the e-mail server by working for the company that owns the server
that the e-mails were received by or the server that they were transmitted through.
With web browsing, the network traffic isn’t being processed through a large
number of servers. Network traffic from browsing the Internet also happens in real
time. After the webpage has been requested and transmitted from the server to the
user’s computer, there’s no trace of the specific data that were transmitted between
the user and the server.
Intercepting traffic directly on your machine
The easiest way for someone to track the specific webpages that a specific person is
looking at online is to install software on the user’s computer that tracks the URLs
and to capture a full copy of the webpages that the user is looking at. The biggest
reason that this is the best solution for tracking a user’s online activity is because
many websites on the Internet require a secure connection between the user’s
computer and the web server. This secure connection means that the web server
encrypts the network traffic before it is sent to the user’s computer, and if it is inter-
cepted before being relayed to the end user, the certificate will not match correctly
and the user’s web browser will inform them that the certificate does not match the
web server correctly.
101
How Can Someone Watch What I Do?

Like capturing e-mail on a user’s computer, there are a wide variety of software
packages that are available to capture web browser traffic. Some of these are
legitimate software packages that can be used by parents to monitor what
websites children are visiting and who they are talking with in forums and on
Facebook, etc.
Intercepting traffic on the Internet
Capturing people’s network traffic as it is transferred between the web server and the
user’s computer is quite a complex task. The reason that this task is so complex is
because of the massive amount of data that are transferred across the Internet at any
given time and the fact that capturing a user’s specific network traffic requires cap-
turing that network traffic on one of the routers between the web server and the user’s
computer. These routers are very secure and managed by large Internet service pro-
viders who specialize in managing these routers. Each website that is accessed by a
user has a different set of routers between the user and the website. We can see the list
of routers or at least some of them by using the “tracert” command on Windows com-
puters or the “traceroute” command on Linux and Mac OS X computers. The output
from the tracert command is shown in Figure 6.3.
FIGURE 6.3
Output from the tracert command.
102
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

Some of the routers between the user and the google.com website are configured
to not show themselves. This is why those servers report back a “Request timed out”
instead of responding with their name and IP address.
In order to capture the most network traffic possible that was being transmit-
ted to the user’s computer, monitoring closer to the user would need to happen.
In this case of this sample user shown in Figure 6.3, this would mean capturing
the data from the router in the sbcglobal.net datacenter (which is also known
as AT&T). Assuming that these data could be captured by someone, much of
these data would be encrypted. Websites such as banking websites, shopping
websites, and even many social networking websites all secure the data
using Secure Socket Layer (SSL) encryption. This means that the data that
are captured from the network would be encrypted and unreadable by the person
that captured it, unless they were able to break through the encryption that
was used.
HOW CAN A GOVERNMENT WATCH WHAT I DO?
Governments are the biggest threat when it comes to monitoring data on the Internet
as a whole. This is because they have massive resources available that they can call
upon either by normal monitoring means like monitoring data via network routers as
discussed earlier, by inserting rouge code into the operating systems of routers, or by
having companies insert backdoors into data encryption code through threats or legal
mandate.
The chances of a government putting rouge monitoring code into network routers
are a minimal risk. The companies that run the public Internet are very careful when
it comes to where they purchase their routers and other networking equipment from.
Because the supply chain is ensured, with these companies typically purchasing their
equipment directly from the companies that build the hardware, there is very little
risk of the equipment being compromised.
In late 2006, the companies that run the public Internet were found to be
capturing all of the Internet traffic that passes through their networks for the US
government. The most well-known example of this was AT&T’s monitoring of
their Internet traffic via room 641A in their facility at 611 Folsom Street in San
Francisco, CA, which was at the time owned by SBC and rented to AT&T. The
existence of this room within this facility and its use were revealed by an
AT&T employee and were the subject of a 2006 class action lawsuit against
AT&T. Rumors of other rooms such as this one at other facilities exist, but the
existence of other capture rooms like this has not been confirmed. Even though
a lawsuit was filed, no information about room 641A or the other rooms like it
that may exist was ever brought to light. This is because during the course of
the legal proceedings between the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) and
AT&T, the US Congress granted the Internet service providers that were
103
How Can a Government Watch What I Do?

involved in this wiretapping program retroactive immunity from for their involve-
ment. More details can be read about this room and the resulting law suits at
http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/room_614a.
The data encryption that is used to secure basically everything important that
we do on the Internet was not designed by any specific government or government
agency. Because the data encryption wasn’t designed or built by any specific
government or their agencies, they were not able to directly insert any backdoors
into the data encryption process. However, it appears as of the writing of this book
in the summer of 2013 that the National Security Agency (NSA) has been able
to get some the technology companies that have built a lot of the data encryption
that is in use today to install some sort of backdoor into their data encryption
technologies.
There are several excellent articles on the Internet. Two of the most
accessible that include links to several other articles can be found at http://
basicsofdigitalprivacy/go/nsa1 and http://basicsofdigitalprivacy/go/nsa2.
SSL versus the NSA
The NSA has been working hard to break the encryption called SSL, which is
used to secure all encrypted Internet traffic. The reason that they want to break
the protection that is provided by SSL is so that they can monitor and track
those who wish to attack the United States. The side effect of their attempts
to break SSL encryption is that they would be able to record and view the
web browsing of American citizens, which, as of the writing of this book, is
questionably legal at best. By breaking the SSL encryption, not only online shop-
ping but also the secure virtual private networks, which are used to encrypt
corporate communications between company offices and for remote workers,
are compromised.
According to reports available in the summer of 2013, the NSA has devoted large
amounts of money and computing power to the task of breaking SSL encryption
algorithms. This is being done by the NSA by building very large and powerful
supercomputers which they use to attempt to break the encryption on the data which
has been encrypted via the SSL specification.
Through various methods, the NSA has built up a huge collection of encrypted
data. Through documents that were released in the summer of 2013, some of which
can be read at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/nsa3, it has been exposed that
starting in 2010, the NSA made breakthroughs in breaking the SSL encryption,
allowing them to access “vast amounts” of data that have been collected over
the years.
According to documents that have been released around the summer of 2013, the
NSA does have some policy data collection. According to these policies, available
for viewing at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/nsa5, data collected on US citi-
zens can only be kept for up to 5 years or until such time that the communication is
found to be not relevant to the original basis of the data collection. This policy
104
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

however only applies to unencrypted information. Data, which are encrypted, that
the NSA has collected can be kept indefinitely until the time that it can be decrypted
and analyzed. Depending on how well the NSA has done with breaking the entire
SSL encryption standard, this means that encrypted data could be kept on servers
operated by the NSA for years or decades.
NOTE
Five years from when?
In the prior paragraph, I state that the data that are captured can only be retained for
5 years, but I don’t specifically say when that 5-year clock starts. The reason that I’m specif-
ically vague here is because the law doesn’t specifically say when that 5-year clock
starts either. The assumption is that it is 5 years from the time that the data are collected,
but that is just an assumption.
HOW CAN I STOP PEOPLE FROM WATCHING WHAT I DO?
Now that you’ve read about how easy it is for others to monitor your online activities,
your next question should be how to prevent people from monitoring Internet
activities.
NOTE
This is scary stuff
If reading this section of this chapter and the various articles that have been referenced
(http://basicsofdataprivacy.com/go/nsa1,
http://basicsofdataprivacy.com/go/nsa2,
http://
basicsofdataprivacy.com/go/nsa3,
http://basicsofdataprivacy.com/go/nsa4,
and
http://
basicsofdataprivacy.com/go/nsa5)
hasn’t
scared
you
away
from
posting
sensitive
information that you don’t want others to see online, it should have. Assuming that
everything that has been posted about the NSA’s ability to break the SSL encryption is
true, it means that either there are backdoors in the encryption protocols or, with enough
CPU power, the encryption can be broken.
If there is a backdoor in the SSL encryption that the NSA is able to use to get through
the SSL encryption, then it stands to reason that someone else will be able to make use of
that backdoor at some point in the future. If the NSA was able to brute force their way
through the SSL encryption protocols, then that means that they are breakable and that some-
one else can break through them as well; it’s just a matter of time.
E-mail
Preventing people from viewing e-mails that you are sending requires a two-phase
approach. The first is to properly secure your computer as discussed in Chapter 4
and your home computer network as discussed in Chapter 3. This is your best
chance of making sure that no one is able to install anything on your computer that
can capture your e-mails. When it comes to the people who receives the e-mails that
you send or the people that e-mail you, there’s nothing you can do about their
computers.
105
How Can I Stop People From Watching What I Do?

NOTE
Helping others secure their computers
It’s time for a quick sales pitch here, which I feel really bad about putting in here, but the
nice thing about being the person who writes the book is that you get to decide what goes
into the book.
If you’ve found the information in this book useful when it comes to securing your
computers and helping you to protect your personal privacy, which I hope that it has (if it
hasn’t, please go to http://basicsofdigitalsecurity.com/go/feedback and let me know), please
let the people that you send sensitive data to know about the book so that they can secure their
computers in order to protect themselves and to help protect you as well.
As for preventing people from intercepting e-mails in transmit, this is something
that we can do something about quite easily. When possible, we want to be sure that
we are using secure encrypted communications to communicate between the e-mail
application and the e-mail server. When using mail services like Gmail or Yahoo!
Mail and accessing the e-mail’s webmail application, the connection is going to
be secured by default using the SSL protocol. If you are using a third-party e-mail
client such as Outlook and Eudora, the use of the SSL protocol is required when send-
ing and receiving e-mail. The instructions for setting up e-mail clients securely are
fully documented on the Internet and can be found at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.
com/go/yahoo_mail
for
the
Yahoo!
Mail
instructions
and
at
http://
basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/gmail for Google’s Gmail service. For other services,
you’ll need to check with the technical support department of your e-mail service.
Securing the communication between the e-mail client and the e-mail server is
only half of the work. We still need to ensure that the e-mails are encrypted as they
travel from server to server over the Internet. This is done with an encryption pro-
cessed called Pretty Good Privacy (PGP). Using PGP in order to secure your e-mails
requires both doing some prep work on your computer and giving people that you
will be e-mailing some information so that they can read your e-mails.
The first step in setting up PGP is to ensure that your e-mail client supports PGP.
In order to do this, you’ll need to check with the manual that comes with your e-mail
software or contact their technical support department.
Setting up PGP on Microsoft’s Outlook 2013
The first step to getting PGP setup and configured in Microsoft’s Outlook 2013
e-mail client is going to be to install some additional software on your computer.
You’ll need to download and install two specific pieces of software. The first is
the Outlook Privacy Plugin that can be found at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/
go/outlook1 and a piece of software called Gpg4win that can be found at http://
basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/outlook2. Make sure that Outlook is closed when
installing these two applications.
After installing the Outlook Privacy Plugin and Gpg4win open Outlook, you
should then be prompted with a dialog box that asks you to locate the gpg.exe
106
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

application that should be similar to Figure 6.4. By default, the GPG application will
be located in C:\Program Files\GNU\GnuPG\pub.
NOTE
Windows 8.1 support
As of the writing of this book in the summer of 2013, the Outlook Privacy Plugin does not work
correctly on Windows 8.1. While this will change at some future date, there is no way of know-
ing if this support will change between the writing of this book and the printing of this book,
much less your reading of this book.
As this section of the book was written just days after Windows 8.1 was officially released,
not all software available on the market has been updated to support Windows 8.1, so some
things aren’t working just yet, and this is one of those things. As the Outlook Privacy Plugin
is an open-source community-built project, it will be updated in the near future to support Win-
dows 8.1. Until then, either another plug-in to support PGP e-mail encryption would be needed
to encrypt e-mails in Outlook 2013 on Windows 8.1 or you’ll have to wait for this plug-in to be
upgraded. As ofthe writingof thisbook,the newestversionof theOutlookPrivacyPluginis Beta
34. If there is a newer version available for download from http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/
go/outlook1, this may have the support for Windows 8.1 that you need.
The next step in the process is to include a public and private key pair. These
public and private keys are what are used to secure the e-mails. The private key
is used by the sender to encrypt the e-mail, while the public key is used by the
receiver to decrypt the e-mails. Generating these keys requires that a command line
application be used to create these keys. This is done with the GPG application. To do
this in Windows XP and Windows 7, click on the Start menu, select “All Programs,”
and then select Accessories. If using Windows XP, select the “Command Prompt”
option as shown in Figure 6.5. If using Windows 7, right click on the “Command
Prompt” option and select “Run as administrator” as shown in Figure 6.6.
FIGURE 6.4
GPG location dialog.
107
How Can I Stop People From Watching What I Do?

If using Windows 8, bring up the Start menu by placing your mouse cursor in the
lower right-hand corner until the Start menu button appears as shown in Figure 6.7
then click on the Start button.
If using Windows 8.1, click on the Start button usually located in the lower right-
hand corner of the screen, shown in Figure 6.8.
When using Windows 8 or Windows 8.1, the Start menu will have now appeared.
At this point, simply type “cmd” and the Command Prompt icon will be shown on the
screen that will be similar to Figure 6.9.
With the Command Prompt icon from Figure 6.9 visible, right click on the
Command Prompt icon and then select the “Run as administrator” option from
the menu that appears at the bottom of the screen as shown in Figure 6.10.
From here, the instructions for Windows XP, Windows 7, Windows 8, and
Windows 8.1 are the same.
FIGURE 6.5
Windows XP Start menu.
108
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

FIGURE 6.6
Windows 7 Start menu.
FIGURE 6.7
Windows 8 Start button.
FIGURE 6.8
Windows 8.1 Start button.
109
How Can I Stop People From Watching What I Do?

Within the command line window that has opened change to the directory that has
the GPG application. This is done with the CD command as shown in Example 6.1
and pressing the Enter key.
cd "c:\program files\gnu\GnuPG\pub"
Example 6.1: Changing the directory to the GPG folder
After changing into the correct directory, run the gpg command and specify the –
gen-key command as shown in Example 6.2. Note that there are two dash marks in
front of the gen-key switch.
gpg --gen-key
Example 6.2: Command to generate new public and private key
A menu will now appear that gives four different options as shown in Figure 6.11.
Option 1 allows you to create RSA keys, which is the recommended option. Select
this option by pressing the number 1 and pressing the enter key.
FIGURE 6.9
Windows 8 and 8.1 Command Prompt icon.
FIGURE 6.10
Windows 8 and Windows 8.1 “Run as administrator” menu option.
FIGURE 6.11
Menu shown by the GPG application.
110
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

The next step is to enter the key size that you would like to use. The default is a key
size of 2048 bits. The higher the number that is used for the key length, the harder it
will be for someone to break through the encryption. The trade-off between high levels
of encryption is that they require high amounts of CPU power to encrypt and decrypt
the data. For maximum protection, a key length of 4096 bits is recommended.
The next step asks how long the key should be valid for. The default is for the key
to never expire that requires an input value of 0. To specify expiration of the key in
a number of days, enter a number. To specify the key expiration in a number of
weeks, enter a number with a “w” after it. To specify the key expiration based on
months, enter a number with an “m” after it. To specify the key expiration based
on years, enter a number with a “y” after it. If the key is set to expire, that means
that e-mails won’t be readable after the key expires. This means that as the key is
preparing to expire, a new key would need to be generated so that e-mails could con-
tinue to be secured. Each time a new key is created, the people who receive e-mails
will need to receive a new copy of the public key.
At this point, in the process, you will be prompted to enter your name and e-mail
address. This key will be used with and any comment that you wish to specify. After
entering this information and confirming that it is correct, you’ll be prompted to enter a
new password for the key twice, and then the key will be generated. As it prompts you
on the screen, you’ll want to type on the keyboard and/or move the mouse around ran-
domly in order to help randomize the information that is used to create the key.
Next, we need to export the public key so that we can give it to the people that we
will be e-mailing encrypted e-mails to. This is done in the command window again
using the gpg program as shown in Example 6.3, replacing the example e-mail
address with the e-mail address specified when creating the key.
Gpg –export –a "mrdenny@dcac.co" > public.asc
Example 6.3: Code to export your public key
Within Outlook, you’ll need to tell the Outlook Privacy Plugin to use the key.
This is done within Outlook by clicking on the Add-Ins tab and then clicking Set-
tings. This will open a new window from which on the “Compose” tab, you’ll need
to select the PGP key that should be used when sending e-mail.
Sending encrypted e-mails
E-mails are not sent as encrypted e-mails by default within Outlook. You have to spe-
cifically tell Outlook that you want the e-mail to be signed and encrypted. To do this
within the compose e-mail window, select the Sign and Encrypt options within the
OpenPGP section of the ribbon at the top of the window as shown in Figure 6.12.Once
these options are selected, the e-mailwill be encrypted when itissent, which means that
the person receiving the e-mail will need your public key in order to open the e-mail.
NOTE
Supported e-mail types
As of Outlook 2013, only plain text e-mails are supported for encryption and signing. This
means that no graphics, fonts, or colors can be specified within the e-mail body.
111
How Can I Stop People From Watching What I Do?

Importing a public key from another person
The preferred method of giving out the keys is to give the key to someone on a thumb
drive or another secure transfer method. Some people will e-mail out the key, but this
means that anyone to intercept the e-mail with the public key would then be able to
decrypt the e-mails that are later sent.
Anyone who is receiving your e-mails will need to import your public key into
their computer. Gpg4win includes an application called Kleopatra, which will allow
them to import this public key. To find Kleopatra, they will need to first install
Gpg4win, which they will need in order to send secure e-mails, as well as any
plug-ins, which are required for their e-mail client. After Gpg4win is installed, Kleo-
patra can be found in Windows XP and Windows 7 by clicking on the Start menu
then All Programs, then selecting the Gpg4win program group, and then selecting
Kleopatra. In Windows 8 and Windows 8.1, click the Start menu and type in Kleo-
patra to locate the application. To import a public key, simply click on the “Import
Certificates” button in the upper left-hand corner of the application as shown in
Figure 6.13.
FIGURE 6.12
OpenPGP menu options from the Outlook ribbon.
FIGURE 6.13
Kleopatra main screen.
112
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

When you send someone an e-mail, which is encrypted and they have your public
key imported into their system, the e-mail will be shown just like it normally would
be. If the person receiving the e-mail does not have your public key imported into
their system, then the e-mail either will not show or it will show as scrambled text
that is totally unreadable. The same applies when someone e-mails you an e-mail that
is encrypted with this private key.
NOTE
Why aren’t instructions for my e-mail client shown here?
There are dozens if not hundreds of e-mail clients out there, some more popular than others.
For simplicity sake, I’ve opted to show the steps for setting up Outlook 2013 (which should
basically be the same as for Outlook 2010). These steps should be fairly close to some of the
other e-mail providers out there. If they aren’t, a search on the Internet for “{My Email Appli-
cation} PGP Setup” where {My Email Application} is the name of your e-mail client should find
you the specific instructions for your e-mail application. If you can’t find the specific instruc-
tions online, contact the technical support department or ask for assistance online at one of
the technical forums such as http://superuser.com.
Web browsing
One of the ways that web browsing traffic is tied to a specific person or more
specifically to an account with an Internet service provider is by tracking the data
from an IP address.
NOTE
What is an IP address?
Much of this section is going to resolve specially around IP addresses, so a little background
on what IP addresses are and how they work should be useful here.
Every device on the public Internet has a public IP address that allows computers on
the Internet to talk to each other. IP addresses come in two versions that are used on the
public Internet, version 4 and version 6. Version 4 IP addresses (IPv4) are made up of four
numbers with each number between 0 and 255 with a period between each number, for exam-
ple, 213.17.28.19. Version 6 IP addresses (IPv6) are made up of five groups of characters
with four characters in each group and a semicolon between each one, for example, fe80:
ad17:6915:8438:c088. IPv4 has been in use since the Internet was first used by the public,
while IPv6 has first been introduced in the late 2000s. IPv6 has gotten very little traction with
Internet service providers or with customers due mostly to the huge amounts of money that
Internet service providers will need to pay to upgrade older hardware so that it can support
the new IPv6 standard.
The original concept of an IP address is that it uniquely defines a computer on the net-
work, with the Internet simply being the largest network of computers in the world. However,
because of the massive number of devices on the Internet, IP addresses are not tied to any one
specific computer. A networking protocol called Dynamic Host Control Protocol (DHCP) is
used to assign IP addresses to end users’ systems such as your broadband router if you have
a high-speed Internet connection or to your computer directly if you have dial-up Internet
access. DHCP is used so that you are connected, but when you disconnect from the Internet,
Continued
113
How Can I Stop People From Watching What I Do?

by tuning off your router if you have a high-speed connection or by disconnecting the dial-up
connection if you have dial-up Internet access, the IP address can then be used by another
user. This allows the Internet service provider to have higher utilization numbers for their IP
addresses as getting IP addresses from the international association that assigns IP addresses
to Internet service providers requires that Internet service providers have 90% of their IP
addresses in use before they can request more IP addresses.
Typically, each home Internet connection has a single IP address assigned to it, with
each computer on that home network sharing the single public IP address as discussed in
Chapter 3. This is how companies and/or government agencies are able to tie a specific
IP address to a specific person.
One of the ways that we can prevent people from watching what you do on the
Internet is to mask the IP address that your network traffic is actually coming from.
There are two basic ways of doing this. The first is by using an anonymizer, which
makes your network traffic appear to come from a variety of different places
throughout the world. A very well-known anonymizer is called Anonymouse and
is available from http://anonymouse.org/. By using Anonymouse or one of the other
anonymizer services, you simply type in the URL that you wish to browse to, and
your web browsing connection is routed through the Anonymouse servers.
The Anonymouse website shows specifically what information they are masking
when you use their service. When browsing from an example computer, the infor-
mation returned by the Anonymouse server is shown in Figure 6.14.
The information shown in Figure 6.14 provides a surprising amount of informa-
tion when you know how to read it. The IP address is a pretty straightforward piece of
information as that is the IP address of the router that the sample computer was con-
nected to. The second line, which is labeled as the host, provides us with some
location-based information and tells us who the Internet service provider is. In this
case, the Internet service provider is sbcglobal.net, which is one of the domain names
that belongs to AT&T. The second thing that we can see is some basic information
about where the IP address is used. The part of the hostname, which says sndgca, is a
telecommunication industry abbreviation for San Diego, CA. Looking at the third
line, which is labeled “Browser & OS,” this gives us a good deal of information about
the computer and the web browser that is being used. The web browser that is being
used is a Mozilla 5.0 compatible web browser. Specifically, the web browser is MSIE
10.0 or Microsoft Internet Explorer 10.0. The operating system is Windows NT 6.2
or Windows 8. WOW64 tells us that this is a 64-bit operating system running a 32-bit
web browser. The “Touch” tells us that this is a touch enabled computer.
FIGURE 6.14
Information reported to websites from a sample computer when not using an anonymizer
service.
114
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

The hostname, which is assigned to the IP address, is not something that can be
controlled by the end user whose computer the IP address is assigned to. This is
assigned by the company that owns the IP address and is configured by them.
When using the Anonymouse service, this information is changed quite a lot as
shown in Figure 6.15.
The biggest downside to using the Anonymouse service or really any of the other
anonymizer services is the fact that you have to go to the anonymizer’s webpage for
each new webpage that you want to browse to. For example, instead of being able to
go directly to this books website www.basicsofdigitalprivacy.com, you instead have
to first browse to www.anonymouse.com and then you put the URL www.
basicsofdigitalprivacy.com into the text box on the Anonymouse website, as shown
in Figure 6.16. Realistically, this isn’t that big of a problem if the goal is to only
FIGURE 6.15
Information reported to websites from a sample computer when using the Anonymouse
service.
FIGURE 6.16
The Anonymouse website prepared to browse anonymously to www.basicsofdigitalprivacy.
com.
115
How Can I Stop People From Watching What I Do?

browse to some websites anonymously. If however every website that you browse to
should be done anonymously, this isn’t the easiest solution to use; this however is
where VPN solutions come into play.
There are a number of VPN solutions that can be used to give yourself a measure
of privacy so that websites that you are visiting have no way of knowing your actual
home IP address. Where an anonymizer will mask your IP address, hostname as well
as the browser and operating system a VPN provider will only mask the IP address
and hostname.
VPN services give you a couple of additional perks beyond just changing the IP
address that your web browser traffic appears to come from. Depending on the service
that you use, this could also change the country that it appears that your web traffic is
coming from. This includes not just normal web browsing traffic but also e-mail traf-
fic, online video streaming traffic, and anything else that is done on the Internet.
NOTE
Some services work differently depending on what country you are in
There are many services out on the Internet that work differently depending on what country
you are in. Some example of this, including BBC’s iViewer, which allows you to watch TV
shows on the BBC website, only works in the United Kingdom. Another example is Netflix that
has very different content catalogs available depending on what country you are located in,
depending on the agreements that Netflix has with the content publishers. Other services that
are used when connected to via a VPN connection may not respond as expected and may
require a different VPN connection or that the VPN isn’t used at all.
There are VPN services that are free to use and there are other services that are
pay services. Some of the free services include both free and paid services that give
you the ability to try the service for free before paying for the higher-end service. In
order to keep costs down, many of these services limit the amount of data that you
can transfer on a daily or monthly basis. Upon reaching the data transfer limits, these
services simply disconnect you from the service until the next month.
How each of these VPN services works depends on the specific service. Some are
configured much like a normal corporate VPN connection, while others use a
browser plug-in.
The list of available VPN services changes often. As of the writing of this book,
some of the VPN services include GPass, which is at http://www.gpass1.com/gpass,
which provides free VPN services. Another option is CyberGhost, which is at http://
cyberghostvpn.com/. CyberGhost provides a free service that allows for up to two
hours of Internet traffic at once before forcing you to disconnect and reconnect.
Additionally, CyberGhost offers paid-for services, which include more servers to
route the connection through and does not have any limits on how long you can stay
connected for. Another free VPN service is called SecurityKISS, which is available
at http://www.securitykiss.com. SecurityKISS offers both free and paid-for services.
The free service allows for 300 MB of data transfer per day, while the paid-for
services include data transfer from 20 GB up to an unlimited amount of data transfer.
116
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

When using these VPN connections to hide or mask your network traffic, keep in
mind that the network traffic isn’t going to be completely invisible. Only the network
traffic between your computer and the VPN provider isn’t going to be easily visible to
anyone who is looking for it. However, any network traffic that isn’t otherwise encrypted
would be visible to someone who is watching for the traffic that is coming from the
VPN service provider to the web server that is being viewed as shown in Figure 6.17.
Another option available to you is to use a system called Tor. When the Tor pro-
tocol was first written, it was designed and deployed as what is called an onion rout-
ing project for the US Naval Research Laboratory. However, the project was released
to the public and is used today by large numbers of people to communicate securely
over the Internet.
According to the Tor website (http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/tor), “Tor is a
network of virtual tunnels that allows people and groups to improve their privacy and
security on the Internet. It also enables software developers to create new commu-
nication tools with built-in privacy features. Tor provides the foundation for a range
of applications that allow organizations and individuals to share information over
public networks without compromising their privacy.”
Tor works by bouncing a person’s web traffic requests through a variety of servers
called nodes. Each node between the client computer and the server only knows about
the prior machine in the chain, and the next machine in the chain, meaning that no
single machine in the chain, including the person’s computer and the server at the
end of the chain, has no way to know the entire chain process.
There are a variety of applications that can be configured to use Tor, but not all
applications can. While the Tor website does not contain a complete list of applica-
tions that can be used with Tor, it does have a variety of settings and instructions for
popular applications so that you can use many applications over the Tor network.
Consequences
There are a few consequences when it comes to using an anonymizer service or a
VPN solution to mask your actual IP address. The first of these consequences is
the ease of use, and the second consequence is increased government scrutiny from
various government agencies.
Website
Users Computer
VPN 
Service Provider
Encrypted Connection
Unencrypted Connection
FIGURE 6.17
Diagram of encrypted and unencrypted connections.
117
How Can I Stop People From Watching What I Do?

Ease of use
Anytime we add security, we add complexity to the process. In the case of browsing
the web using an anonymizer service, we add to complexity of needing to ensure that
each new website that we browse to is done via the anonymizer. In some cases,
depending on what web browser you are using, there may be plug-ins to help ensure
that this is happening. You would need to check with the specific anonymizer, usu-
ally in their Frequently Asked Questions or their forum to see what assistance they
can provide with regard to getting a plug-in. Typically, these sorts of plug-ins are
available for Firefox and/or Chrome web browsers.
NOTE
Security usually isn’t easy
There’s an old adage when it comes to security. If it’s easy, it probably isn’t secure.
The same applies here as well. The more we want to ensure that our data are kept private,
the more work we have to do to do that.
Using a VPN connection to ensure that our data are secure while being a little
easier to deal with than simply an anonymizer, there are still things that you need
to do to ensure that your connection is secure. The first thing that you need to do
is make sure that your VPN is connected before opening any applications that are
Internet-connected. In the world of applications that check in automatically with
the companies that developed them when the computer boots up, this can be quite
hard to do to say the least. Depending on the type of VPN connection software that
is being used, it may or may not be possible to have the VPN connect before logging
into the computer so that by the time that you are logged into the computer and your
desktop is visible, the VPN connection has already connected and is routing all of the
network traffic across the encrypted connection.
VPN connections can sometimes drop and need to be reconnected. When
using a VPN connection to encrypt all network traffic between you and the
Internet to ensure that someone isn’t monitoring your network connection, you
will need to keep an eye on the status of the network connection to ensure that
you are always connected. How you do this will depend on the VPN connection
software that you are using. The Cisco AnyConnect VPN software, for example,
shown in a disconnected state in Figure 6.18, sits in the system tray and doesn’t
provide much of an interface to tell you that it has become disconnected. As the
state of the VPN connection changes, there is a small pop-up that appears, but
it disappears rather quickly, and if you happened to not be looking at the screen
when the connection dropped, then you might not notice that you were in a discon-
nected state.
The Windows VPN connection can be checked in a couple of different ways. The
first is within the “Network Connections” icon with the control panel. If the connec-
tion is disconnected, it will be labeled as such, as shown in Figure 6.19.
118
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

Another way to verify if the Windows VPN is connected is to simply place your
mouse over the network connection icon in the system tray next to the clock. When
you place your mouse over the icon, shown in the lower left of Figure 6.20, the status
of each network connection being used is shown. In this case, the computer has two
different networks configured and the VPN connection that is connected. Upon the
VPN being disconnected, the VPN would no longer be visible in the dialog box.
FIGURE 6.19
Windows VPN connection in a disconnected state.
FIGURE 6.20
Windows Network Status dialog.
FIGURE 6.18
Cisco AnyConnect VPN software in a disconnected state.
119
How Can I Stop People From Watching What I Do?

These VPN connections are just a couple of the wide variety of VPN software
packages that are available. Check with your VPN provider or the VPN software ven-
dor for specific details if a different VPN software package is being used.
Government scrutiny
Using data encryption techniques such as those shown in this chapter can have some
unintended consequences when it comes to government scrutiny. When it comes to
programs like the PRISM program within the United States, the specifics of which
were leaked to the press and can be read at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/
nsa4, when you are a person who the government thinks is currently outside of
the United States, the NSA, according to Section 1, paragraph 2, of Exhibit A
(http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/nsa_a), can collect your Internet usage infor-
mation. With many of these services, the specific point is to make it appear like
you are outside of the United States, so as far as the PRISM data collection is con-
cerned, you are outside of the United States and therefore they can collect your data,
even if you are inside the United States. To make things even worse for encrypting
your data, if the NSA isn’t able to figure out where you physically are, the assump-
tion is that you are not within the United States.
Looking at Exhibit B (http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/nsa_b), Section 5
talks specifically about domestic communications, or communications that the
NSA knows to be within the United States. According to this section, “communi-
cations identified as a domestic communiation will be prompty destroyed upon
recognition unless the Director (or Acting Director) of NSA specifically deter-
mines in writing that” “the communication is reasonably believed to contain tech-
nical data base information” where technical database information is defined
as “Technical data base means information retained for cryptanalytic, traffic ana-
lytic or signal exploitation purposes.” What that means in a slightly easier to read
version is that if the data are encrypted and the NSA hasn’t broken the encryption
when they realize that you are within the United States, the director of the NSA
can order that the information be kept so that they can continue to attempt to break
the encryption.
A little further down the document in Section 5(3)(a), we see that “In the context
of a cryptanalytic effort, maintenance of technical data bases requires retention of all
communications that are enciphered or reasonably believed to contain secret mean-
ing, and sufficient duration may consist of any period of time during which encrypted
material is subject to, or of use in cryptanalysis.” In other words, if they have cap-
tured encrypted data, they can keep these data forever and use it to continue to
develop software that attempts to break the encryption.
When using systems like Tor to attempt to protect your network traffic from
snooping by groups like the NSA, keep in mind that odds are this will be pushing
your network traffic to a node in another country making your now encrypted traf-
fic collectable by the NSA where they are able to keep your network traffic
forever.
120
CHAPTER 6 Who’s Watching What You Do?

SUMMARY
As we have seen in this chapter, there are ways of encrypting network traffic so that
you can do the best possible job ensuring that the information that you send out over
the Internet isn’t visible by data thieves or by government agencies. However, when
doing so, this may have the unintended consequence of closer government scrutiny
because the government wants to know that you aren’t talking about something that
may be of interest to them, and because they don’t technically know for sure where
in the world you are at that moment, they make the assumption that it is OK for them
to monitor you, potentially storing the captured information for as long as they
would like.
There are a variety of ways to encrypt data as it flows over the Internet including
PGP, VPN connections, and Tor, among others, which were not discussed here. Each
one of these methods has upsides and downsides to them, and the goal when review-
ing the various options is to find a solution that works for you, the user of the
computer. You want a solution that will provide you with a level of data and privacy
protection without being such a cumbersome solution that it isn’t feasible for you to
use on a daily basis.
121
Summary

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
Laws and Internet Privacy 7
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
How much information you should share with companies?
•
Risks of sharing to much information online
•
Knowing how companies protect your information
This chapter talks about how the Internet and the various laws around the
world apply.
THE LAW AND CHANGING TECHNOLOGY
When it comes to technology, in general, the legal system (regardless of what coun-
try you are in) can’t keep up. New services and technologies change at a much faster
pace than the legal systems can keep up with. Often, they end up being laws that
directly conflict with technology, or we could even end up with different laws, some
allowing the new service or technology and others that prohibit it.
When it comes to data privacy and specific government regulations, there are
often large gaps between when a specific technology becomes available and when
laws come into effect regarding that technologies use. In the United States, for exam-
ple, there are no laws that tell companies what they are allowed to do with personal
information that they collect from customers online even though companies have
been collecting information from customers on the Internet for over 10 years. There
are a variety of laws that have to do with electronic communications such as the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA, codified at 18 U.S.C. }}
2510-2522) that you can read the text of at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/ecpa.
This law is one of the primary laws used to govern electronic communications, which
includes Internet access, but it was written before what we consider to be the Internet of
today was created.
PRISM
In the spring of 2013, it was revealed that the US National Security Agency (NSA)
Internet has a monitoring program called PRISM. With this system, the NSA is able
to monitor a huge amount of information and much of that information can be stored
forever. With the NSA’s PRISM program, the basic goal was to gather Internet
123

communications data of anyone who isn’t inside the United States in an attempt to
figure out who is talking to terrorists so that they can use the information gleaned
from this work to stop a future terrorist attack.
This means that the NSA has data collectors on the Internet backbones around the
world. These Internet backbones are simply fiber optic cables, which run from data-
center to datacenter moving everyone’s Internet traffic around the world. These fiber
optic cables in many countries do not belong to the government but instead to private
companies. The NSA would have needed to get the companies who own these back-
bone lines to work with them to give them access to the data. For the countries that do
regulate Internet access within their national borders and where the countries’
government owns the Internet links, the NSA would need to have a deal in place with
that government that would allow it to monitor all this Internet traffic. The question
becomes why would another country’s government want to provide the NSA access?
There could be a variety of reasons, all of which one can assume would be classified
by both governments, those we can assume that helping the NSA would carry some
favor with the US government at some point. The assumption exists that a data shar-
ing policy would be in place for the data that the NSA gets from that country as it is
processed. An example of this can be found with the Dutch spy agency called AIVD,
which can be read about more at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/aivd, where,
according to the article, which references a Dutch newspaper article, AIVD agents
have access to data that have been captured and analyzed by PRISM within just
5 minutes or less of a request for the information.
The way the PRISM system works in some cases is that the system doesn’t actu-
ally track information as it travels across the Internet backbone. Instead, the NSA
demands that companies such as Google, Microsoft, and Verizon hand over the data
that they need on a regular basis so that they can go through this information. One of
the key reasons that the NSA likes gathering the data from these large companies is
that even if the network traffic between servers is encrypted when that data is stored,
it will be stored with headers in plain text so that the NSA can just read the headers.
Even if the data were stored by these companies using some sort of data encryption,
because these companies have the encryption keys, they are able to simply decrypt
the data when handing it off to the NSA.
NOTE
Corporate responses
The companies listed may or may not actually be handing over information. According to state-
ments that many companies have released while newspapers were doing research into the
PRISM program, these companies do not, in many cases, simply hand over data to the
NSA (unless the NSA has gotten really good about breaking into datacenters).
Facebook
We do not provide any government organization with direct access to Facebook servers. When
Facebook is asked for data or information about specific individuals, we carefully scrutinize
any such request for compliance with all applicable laws, and provide information only to the
extent required by law.
124
CHAPTER 7 Laws and Internet Privacy

Google
Google cares deeply about the security of our users’ data. We disclose user data to government
in accordance with the law, and we review all such requests carefully. From time to time, peo-
ple allege that we have created a government ‘back door’ into our systems, but Google does not
have a backdoor for the government to access private user data.
Apple
We have never heard of PRISM. We do not provide any government agency with direct access
to our servers, and any government agency requesting customer data must get a court order.
Microsoft
We provide customer data only when we receive a legally binding order or subpoena to do so,
and never on a voluntary basis. In addition we only ever comply with orders for requests about
specific accounts or identifiers. If the government has a broader voluntary national security
program to gather customer data we don’t participate in it.
Yahoo!
Yahoo! takes users’ privacy very seriously. We do not provide the government with direct
access to our servers, systems, or network.
Dropbox
We’ve seen reports that Dropbox might be asked to participate in a government program called
PRISM. We are not part of any such program and remain committed to protecting our users’
privacy.
Paltalk
We have not heard of PRISM. Paltalk exercises extreme care to protect and secure users’ data,
only responding to court orders as required to by law. Paltalk does not provide any government
agency with direct access to its servers.
AOL
We do not have any knowledge of the Prism program. We do not disclose user information to
government agencies without a court order, subpoena or formal legal process, nor do we pro-
vide any government agency with access to our servers.
The statements from these companies were given to TechCrunch, which it posted at
http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/techcrunch. These specific companies release state-
ments about the PRISM program because they are specifically named in the documents that
were released about the PRISM program. Specifically, they are mentioned in a PowerPoint
slide deck that was used to bring new NSA analysts up to speed on the program that can
be found at the mentioned TechCrunch article and in Figure 7.1.
Why then would companies outside of the United States want to get into bed with
the NSA? There are a few possibilities:
1. The NSA is able to convince these companies that they have to follow US law
becausetheymayormaynotbedoingbusinesswithpeoplewithintheUnitedStates.
2. The NSA is able to get the government of the other country to force the
companies within their country to do what the NSA wants.
3. The NSA uses operatives from either the NSA or the CIA to force the companies
to do what they want, probably without the company’s knowledge.
4. Good old-fashioned threats.
125
The Law and Changing Technology

No matter how it happens, the fact is that it is happening, and if you talk to people
in other countries, those data are being captured somewhere and handed off to the
NSA in some way.
Canadian version of PRISM
According to the Toronto Globe and Mail, the United States isn’t the only county
where its citizens need to worry about the government tracking everyone that you
talk to. In Canada, there is a program that sadly doesn’t have a name as great as
the US NSA program called PRISM (at least as far as we know as of the writing
of this book in summer of 2013). This program, which you can read more about
at http://basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/Canada, works in much the same way as
the US program capturing what the mass media and press calls the metadata about
the conversation. These metadata include things like who is talking to who online,
when the conversation happened, and for how long, without tracking the actual
conversation. When dealing with phone calls, the same sort of metadata are captured
with the data being captured being the phone number who made the call, the phone
number that was called, the date and time of the call, and the duration. It isn’t a
stretch to assume that GPS location is also included if the call is made to a cell phone
as that information would be available to the cell phone company.
2010
2009
2008
2007
Microsoft
9/11/07
Yahoo
3/12/08
Google
1/14/09
Facebook
6/3/09
PalTalk
12/7/09
YouTube
9/24/10
Skype
2/6/11
AOL
3/31/11
Apple
(added
Oct
2012)
2011
2012
PRISM Program Cost: ~
$20M per year
Dates When PRISM Collection
Began For Each Provider
(TS//SI//NF)
2013
FIGURE 7.1
Slide reported to be from a PowerPoint slide deck about PRISM.
126
CHAPTER 7 Laws and Internet Privacy

This program that is run by the Communications Security Establishment Canada
was first approved by the elected government in 2005 by then Defense Minister Bill
Graham. According to the Globe and Mail article, which you can read in full at http://
basicsofdigitalprivacy.com/go/globe, this program was shut down for a period of
time starting in 2008 and was restarted in 2011 when then Defense Minister Peter
MacKay signed a new order allowing the program to be restarted and starting other
classified espionage programs.
IS ALL THIS LEGAL?
When it comes to monitoring programs like PRISM and the Canadian version that we
don’t know the name of or versions of this program run in other countries, a big ques-
tion tends to be, how are these programs legal?
Well the frank answer is that they might not be, but that’ll depend on who you ask
and how you ask the question.
Focusing on the United States for a minute, as that’s where I live so those are the
laws that I know the best, the law is murky on this at best. Here in the United States,
we have the constitutional right against self-incrimination. However, the courts have
ruled recently that communications that are heard by a third person aren’t private,
and if that third person wants to tell the government about the conversation, they
are allowed to. Along with that, the courts have ruled that the fact that a conversation
itself between two people while being privileged, the fact that the conversation hap-
pened isn’t privileged. This is how the NSA program that may catch communications
of people within the United States gets through. All they are capturing is the fact that
it happened and who it was with.
Let’s compare an online situation with an off-line situation. In the off-line world,
if two people are sitting in a park having a conversation, a government employee,
most likely a city police officer, can make note of the people sitting next to each other
talking without any legal issues. However, if he pulls out a long range microphone to
listen in, odds are, he’ll need a warrant. In the online world of voice over IP (VoIP)
communications, the same rules apply. The government is able to get the status of the
call from the VoIP provider without issue, but if they want the contents of the VoIP
call, they will need a warrant before the VoIP provider is required to record the call
for them.
At some point, I would imagine that the courts will rule on the issue of needing a
warrant just to get the metadata of the call, but as of the summer of 2013, the issue
hasn’t been brought before any court that has been able to strike it down.
NOTE
I’m not a lawyer
While reading through this section, keep in mind that I’m an IT professional, not a lawyer. My
understanding of the law is by that of a layman, not a professional lawyer.
127
Is All This Legal?

IS ALL THIS MORAL?
The answer to this one is a lot easier than the “is this legal” question. The answer here, in
my mind, is no, but please don’t take my word for it. Every person has to make this
decision for themselves, and there really is no right or wrong answer here. A govern-
ment that tracks the technology usage of everyone on the planet is really not at all moral.
Could a system like this do what it’s supposed to do, which is to stop a terrorist attack?
The answer there is possibly. But is it worth the invasion of people’s privacy that it takes
to gather data at this level? The answer there is a personal answer, but my answer is no.
NOTE
Everyone has their own opinion
In order for us to consider ourselves a civilized society, we have to draw a line in the sand of
what we will and won’t do, with a good litmus test being would we want another to do this to us.
For me, this line, or at least one version of it, would be that we don’t invade the personal lib-
erties of people around the world just so that we can attempt to prevent a terrorist attack that
may or may not be about to happen.
I have no problems with targeted tracking of people based on other evidence that has been
gathered through boots on the ground style of spying at all, because, in my opinion, that’s how
we gather useful, actionable intelligence.
I’ll do my best to make this the end of my personal rant, and I’ll leave my soapbox in the
closet where it belongs.
SUMMARY
As of the writing of this book in the summer of 2013, we don’t know much about
these data collection systems. We have to make a lot of assumptions about them
and how we should be protecting ourselves from gathering up data that we don’t want
the government knowing about. There is a theory that if you have nothing to hide,
you shouldn’t mind the government knowing what you are doing. However, your
information is yours and you shouldn’t be forced to hand over the information with-
out having the option to keep it to yourself. With much on this information, it is easy
to control who gains access to it. If we don’t give up the information to a company,
then we don’t have to worry about a government gaining access to that information.
We make this decision by simply not using some services that are out there. When we
use some of these services, we need to understand that information is being collected
by these companies that we are using and that these companies can be handing this
information over to government agencies.
With encryption systems like we learned about in Chapter 6, we can do our best to
prevent the government from viewing or tracking what we are doing online. How-
ever, this only works when these monitoring systems are capturing data during trans-
mission, not when they are capturing data at the source or destination servers.
The worst part about these systems is that the information about them is often
highly classified, which means that we won’t get to know anything about these sys-
tems until long after changes to the systems.
128
CHAPTER 7 Laws and Internet Privacy

Index
Note: Page numbers followed by f indicate figures.
A
Amazon Appstore, 74–76
Android market, 74
Anonymouse website, 114, 114f, 115–116, 115f
Apple OSX
app store, 74
decryption key, 65
FileVault tab, 64, 66f
MAC address filtering, 51–52
password, 64
recovery key, 65
Application programming interface (API), 98
B
BitLocker, 59, 62, 62f
Brute-force method, 22
BuzzFeed, 81–82
C
Cable News Network (CNN), 81–82
Cookies
EULA, 8
Firefox
exceptions page, 13–14, 13f
privacy settings, 11, 12f
third-party cookies, 12–13
Google AdWords, 7–8
Google Chrome, 14–15
InPrivate Browsing, 8
internet explorer
accept, reject/prompt, 9–10
advanced configuration, 9, 10f
Per Site Privacy Actions screen, 10, 11f
privacy settings, 8, 9f
Safari, 15–17
CyberGhost, 116
D
Data encryption
Apple OSX
decryption key, 65
FileVault tab, 64, 66f
password, 64
recovery key, 65
BitLocker, 59
gain access, 58–59
internet games/downloads
application stores, 72
cell phones, 74–76
flash game, 71
Mac, 73–74
random websites, 71
tablets, 74–76
windows antivirus software, 72–73
laptops, 57–58
technical support, 69–71
website security logos
McAfee logos, 68, 69f
Norton, 67, 67f, 68
online privacy, 68
requirements, 66–67
risks, 67
secure environment, 66
Symantec, 67–68
Troy’s post, 67, 68f
Windows
BitLocker, 62, 62f
C/D drive, 62
control panel, 60, 60f, 61f
disk space, 64
password policy, 63
recovery key window, 62–63, 63f
recovery password, 63–64
start button, 60, 60f
Start Encryption button, 64, 65f
system and security link, 60, 61f
D-Link routers, 35, 36f, 40–42
E
E-mail
access, 99–100
antivirus software, 98
API, 98
network protocol, 98
network traffic, 98, 99f
prevention
encrypt options, 111
PGP setup, 106–111
public key, 112–113
SSL protocol, 106
sample e-mail headers, 100, 100f, 101
sender/receiver, 101
server encryption, 99
End user license agreement (EULA), 8, 78–79, 79f
129

F
Facebook, 3, 79–80, 79f
custom privacy option, 84, 84f, 85, 85f, 86f
drop-down menu, 83, 84f
post dialog, 83, 83f, 85, 86f
privacy settings
future posts, 87, 88f
limit past posts, 87f, 88
menu option, 86, 87f
picture security, 88
sample post, 88, 88f
settings icon, 85–86, 86f
tools, 87, 87f
screenshot, 84f, 85
FileVault tab, 64, 66f
Firefox
exceptions page, 13–14, 13f
privacy settings, 11, 12f
third-party cookies, 12–13
Flickr
avatar, 89
EXIF data, 92, 92f
personal data privacy, 92
pop-up menu, 89
privacy and permissions tab, 90, 90f
profile setting, 92–93, 93f
settings option, 90–91, 90f, 91f
Fob-based system, 27
G
Google, 123–124
Google AdWords, 7–8
Google Chrome, 14–15
Government scrutiny, 120
Gpg4win, 112
H
Health Information Patient Protection Act
(HIPPA), 5
Home network security
description, 33–34
network firewalls, 53–55
router
AT&T U-verse service, 35
cable internet services, 34, 34f
components, 35
D-Link firmware, 35, 36f
DSL services, 34, 34f
NAT, 35–37
NetGear router, 35, 37f
network firewalls, 37
Wi-Fi network
AT&T U-Verse router, 38–39
D-Link routers, 40–42
friends, 52
guest network, 52, 53f
NetGear routers (see NetGear Wi-Fi routers)
pocket network, 52
WEP, 38
WPA, 38
Home Wi-Fi network security
AT&T U-Verse router, 38–39
D-Link routers, 40–42
friends, 52
guest network, 52, 53f
NetGear routers (see NetGear Wi-Fi routers)
pocket network, 52
WEP, 38
WPA, 38
I
Information online
cookies/websites (see Cookies)
customer loyalty cards, 1–2
data protection policies, 5–6
Facebook, 3
product selling, 2
risks of sharing
attackers, 3–4
social networking sites, 4–5
target store, 1–2
zip code, 2
InPrivate Browsing, 8
Internet explorer
accept, reject/prompt, 9–10
advanced configuration, 9, 10f
Per Site Privacy Actions screen, 10, 11f
privacy settings, 8, 9f
K
KeePass
Add Entry screen, 24, 25f
creation, 23–24
home screen, 24
profile generation drop-down menu, 25, 25f
URL field, 26
web browsers, 26
Kleopatra, 112, 112f
L
Laws and internet privacy
legal issues, 126
morals, 127
PRISM
AIVD agents, 123
130
Index

Canadian version, 125–126
data communication, 122–123
Google, Microsoft, and Verizon, 123–124
internet backbones, 123
NSA, 124–125
TechCrunch article, 124, 125f
M
McAfee, 68, 69f
Media access control (MAC) address filtering
Apple OSX, 51–52
definition, 49–50
in Windows, 50–51
Microsoft, 123–124
Microsoft store, 74
MySpace, 93–94
N
NAT. See Network address translation (NAT)
National Security Agency (NSA), 124–125
NetGear Wi-Fi routers
connections window, 44, 45f
details window, 46, 47f
hidden network, 48–49
IPv4 Default Gateway, 47, 47f
MAC address filtering
Apple OS X, 51–52
definition, 49–50
in Windows, 50–51
network icon, 44, 44f
network/sharing center, 44, 45f
properties, 44–46, 46f
settings page, 42–44, 43f
Windows XP, 44
Network address translation (NAT), 35–37
Network firewalls, 37
Norton, 67, 67f, 68
NSA. See National Security Agency (NSA)
O
Online monitoring
consequences
ease of use, 118–120
government scrutiny, 120
e-mail (see E-mail)
governments
AT&T, 103–104
data encryption, 104
rouge monitoring code, 103
SSL vs. NSA, 104–105
IT professionals, 97
web browsing traffic (see Web browsing traffic)
P
Password
brute-force method, 22
character types, 21
KeePass
Add Entry screen, 24, 25f
creation, 23–24
home screen, 24
profile generation drop-down menu,
25, 25f
URL field, 26
web browsers, 26
OAUTH service, 30–31
setting up, 23
two-factor authentication
application, 26
codes, 26
fob-based system, 27
random values, 27
software-based system, 27–28
text-messaging-based system, 28–30
Porn Mode, 8
Posting information online
BuzzFeed, 81–82
CNN, 81–82
EULA, 78–79, 79f
Eye-Fi card, 80
Facebook, 79–80, 79f
Flickr, 80
information security
Facebook (see Facebook)
Flickr (see Flickr)
MySpace, 93–94
Twitter, 82–83
personal embarrassment, 77–78
social media websites, 77
Twitter services, 80–81, 81f
Yahoo agreement, 80, 80f
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
administrator option, 108, 110f
command prompt icon, 108, 110f
compose tab, 111
gen-key command, 110
GPG location dialog, 106–107, 107f
Gpg4win, 106–107
key expiration, 111
outlook privacy plugin, 106
public/private key pair, 107, 108f, 109f
RSA keys, 110, 110f
trade-off, 111
Windows 8 Start button, 108, 109f
Windows 8.1 Start button, 108, 109f
131
Index

PRISM
AIVD agents, 123
Canadian version, 125–126
data communication, 122–123
Google, Microsoft, and Verizon, 123–124
internet backbones, 123
NSA, 124–125
TechCrunch article, 124, 125f
R
Router security
AT&T U-verse service, 35
cable internet services, 34, 34f
components, 35
D-Link firmware, 35, 36f
DSL services, 34, 34f
NAT, 35–37
NetGear router, 35, 37f
network firewalls, 37
S
Safari, 15–17
Secure Socket Layer (SSL) encryption, 103
SecurityKISS, 116
Software-based system, 27–28
T
Text-messaging-based system, 28–30
Tor website, 117
Twitter, 82–83
Twitter Terms of Services (TOS), 80
Two-factor authentication system
application, 26
codes, 26
fob-based system, 27
random values, 27
software-based system, 27–28
text-messaging-based system, 28–30
U
United Airlines website, 7
Username
definition, 19
eHarmony account, 19–20
e-mail address, 20
internet websites, 19–20
OAUTH service, 30–31
personal information, 20–21
V
Verizon, 123–124
W
Web browsing traffic
internet, 102–103
machine, 101–102
prevention
Anonymouse website, 114, 114f, 115–116, 115f
data tracking, 113–114
IP address, host, Browser/OS, 114, 115, 115f
Tor website, 117
VPN connections, 116, 117, 117f
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), 38
Windows
BitLocker, 62, 62f
C/D drive, 62
control panel, 60, 60f, 61f
disk space, 64
password policy, 63
recovery key window, 62–63, 63f
recovery password, 63–64
start button, 60, 60f
Start Encryption button, 64, 65f
system and security link, 60, 61f
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), 38
Z
Zip code, 2
132
Index

