13 january 2018 [ £4.50 
www.spectator.co.uk [ est. 1828 
May’s misfire
James Forsyth
Did the Phoenicians exist?
Justin Marozzi
Girl power
Boris Johnson
BAHRAIN BD3.20. CANADA C$7.50. 
EURO ZONE €6.95 SOUTH AFRICA ZAR79.90 
UAE AED34.00. USA US$7.20.
The digital inquisition 
Lara Prendergast, Rod Liddle and Toby Young on trial by Twitter

Aberdeen’s Asian Investment Trusts  
ISA and Share Plan
When you invest halfway around the world, it’s  
good to know someone is there aiming to locate  
what we believe to be the best investments for you.
We make a point of meeting every company in whose 
shares we might look to invest. From Thailand to 
Singapore, from China to Vietnam, we go wherever  
is required to get to know companies on-the-ground, 
face-to-face. 
To steer your portfolio in the right direction, be with 
the fund manager who aims to discover more in Asia.
Please remember, the value of shares and the income 
from them can go down as well as up and you may  
get back less than the amount invested. Asian funds 
invest in emerging markets which may carry more risk 
than developed markets. No recommendation is made, 
positive or otherwise, regarding the ISA and Share Plan.
The value of tax benefits depends on individual 
circumstances and the favourable tax treatment  
for ISAs may not be maintained. We recommend  
you seek financial advice prior to making an  
investment decision. 
Request a brochure: 0808 500 4000 
invtrusts.co.uk/asia
We strive to 
discover more.
Aberdeen Standard Investments is a brand of the investment businesses of Aberdeen Asset Management and Standard Life 
Investments. Issued by Aberdeen Asset Managers Limited, 10 Queen’s Terrace, Aberdeen AB10 1YG, which is authorised 
and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK. Telephone calls may be recorded. aberdeen-asset.co.uk
Please quote A S 23

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
3
established 1828 
I
t is only a few months since gloomy eco-
nomic commentators were confidently 
predicting that the world was about to 
plunge into a dark era of protectionism. Yet 
the global economy begins this year in its 
healthiest state ever, growing faster than any 
time since 2011. There has been a change in 
political rhetoric, but not in the willingness 
of people around the world to trade with 
each other. According to the OECD’s most-
recent projection, made in November, world 
trade grew at 4.8 per cent last year. Some-
thing seems to be going badly right.
Negative sentiments about the world 
economy echo those which have hung over 
Britain’s economy ever since the Brexit 
referendum. A month before that event, it 
should never be forgotten, a Treasury paper 
signed by George Osborne forecast that ‘a 
vote to leave would cause an immediate and 
profound economic shock’, causing a reces-
sion with half a million more on the dole. 
Instead, employment has risen by almost 
400,000 — and a lack of workers has become 
one of the UK economy’s biggest problems. 
Britain’s biggest jobs website says vacancies 
are up 20 per cent year-on-year, while unem-
ployment sits at a 40-year low. These are the 
conditions for pay rises to accelerate.
People tend to think the worst. As a 
species, we have evolved to focus on what 
is wrong. We are forever telling ourselves 
that something dreadful is about to hap-
pen, whether it be economic Armageddon 
or climate catastrophe. As the foreign sec-
retary points out on page 20, mankind has 
never been richer, healthier or less inclined 
to fight wars. If you could choose any time 
to be born, not knowing your social position 
or even nationality, you would choose now. 
It is a wonder that the endless talking-
down of Britain’s prospects has not done 
more harm. As the chief economist of the 
Bank of England pointed out, the econom-
ics profession has had its ‘Michael Fish 
moment’, referring to the weatherman’s dis-
missal of the 1987 storm and the damage 
that did to the credibility of meteorology. 
Like the weather, the economy is the result 
of millions of forces, often unpredictable.
The global economy does suffer severe 
reversals at times, but its general direction 
is upwards because human societies have a 
natural affinity for economic growth. Almost 
everyone wants to better themselves, and 
the vast majority are prepared to work to 
achieve that outcome. Government works 
best when it provides low taxes, regulatory 
restraint and sound money. That is a recipe 
for a sustained upwards trend in wealth over 
the medium to long term, whatever hiccups 
might occur in the short term through bank-
ing crisis, inflationary shock and so on. It has 
worked everywhere that it has been tried.
As the Office for Budget Responsibility 
is fond of reminding us, Britain is statisti-
cally overdue a recession — and tradition-
ally, economists are usually blindsided by 
downturns when they actually strike. We 
have plenty of problems, chief among them 
low wages, the result of low productivity. But 
wage inequality, we learned this week, is at 
a low not seen for about 30 years: since the 
2010 general election, the incomes of the 
poorest have been rising fastest. The fruits 
of the recovery are so far being distributed 
where they are needed most.
This point would be a powerful antidote 
to Corbynism if the Conservatives could 
work out how to get the message across. 
Global capitalism has created a golden era 
of poverty reduction: never have so many 
been lifted so fast out of illness, ignorance, 
squalor, poverty or misery. Fast growth in the 
developing world means that global trade is 
increasing at a healthy rate, which ought to 
provide a pointer for the post-Brexit UK 
economy. It is with countries such as China 
and India (whose economies both grew at 
7 per cent last year) that the best opportuni-
ties to do business exist. Once freed from the 
parochial, protectionist instincts of the EU, 
Britain should be in an excellent position to 
take advantage.
The UK economy recovered from 
the 2008 crash far faster than others in 
Europe, and it’s encouraging to see that 
these are now catching up. The member 
states of the EU will be Britain’s biggest 
single trading partner for some time, and 
they are now starting to address chron-
ic unemployment and sclerotic growth 
rates that have held them back for so long. 
The significant tax cuts just passed 
in the United States, our largest sin-
gle trading partner, will accelerate this 
new chapter of global growth: a poten-
tial reflected in recent stockmarket highs.
Brexit, on its own, will not change a thing. 
It won’t by itself make anything better or 
worse. But it will hand new powers to min-
isters — who can use them well or badly or 
not at all. If Britain does not prosper over 
the next few years, it will not be because of a 
lack of opportunity.
What’s going right
It is with countries such as  
China and India that the best 
opportunities to do business exist

4 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
The green-eyed monster, p38
3 
Leading article  
7 
Portrait of the Week
9 
Diary Enabling The Donald and 
the true meaning of Trumpocracy
David Frum
10 Politics Theresa May’s weaknesses
James Forsyth  
11 The Spectator’s Notes  
Remembering Gavin Stamp; 
Christmas card trumps
Charles Moore
15 Rod Liddle The Twitchfork mob
18 Ancient and modern
A madman at the helm
23 Matthew Parris Victims and justice
24 Barometer It’s getting better 
27 Mary Wakefield Therapy’s perils
29  Letters The pensions crisis; Wilfred 
Owen; Toby Young’s resignation
30 Any other business
Trump, Wolff and Wall Street
 
Martin Vander Weyer 
12 Twitter inquisition
 An online past will always
catch up with you
Lara Prendergast
13 On being a public enemy  
 
The more you defend yourself, the 
more crazed the mob becomes
Toby Young
18 A bird-brained scheme  
 
Battling to keep people 
and nests apart
Melissa Kite 
20 Girl power   
 
Educating girls is the answer 
to the world’s ills
Boris Johnson
21 Samantha Roden  
‘Shove Your Tissues’: a poem 
24 Smooth operators  
 
Is expensive surgery necessary? 
James Grogono
28 Political football  
 
To Putin, the World Cup 
means respect 
Owen Matthews
 
BOOKS
32 Nicholas Shakespeare 
Paradise in Chains, by Diana Preston
34 Jonathan Coe
 The Unmapped Country, by Ann Quin
36 A.S.H. Smyth 
The Skull of Alum Bheg, 
by Kim A. Wagner
37 Boyd Tonkin
 Writer’s Luck, by David Lodge
 
Ruth Padel  ‘Postern’: a poem
38 Emily Hill on jealousy and revenge 
39 Tim Stanley
 Franklin D. Roosevelt, 
by Robert Dallek
40 Kate Womersley
The Butchering Art, 
by Lindsey Fitzharris
41 Keith Miller on first novels
 
Candy Neubert  ‘beetle’: a poem
42 Patrick Flanery
 A Long Way from Home, 
by Peter Carey
 
Justin Marozzi
 In Search of the Phoenicians, 
by Josephine Quinn
43 Dominic Green
William Blake and the Age of 
Aquarius, ed. by Stephen F. Eisenman
THE WEEK
Is that really necessary?  p24
Oldman’s ﬁ nest hour, p44
Cover by Morten Morland. Drawings by Michael Heath, Castro, Roger Latham, K.J. Lamb, Grizelda, Adam Singleton, Percival, Nick Newman, Kipper Williams.
www.spectator.co.uk Editorial and advertising The Spectator, 22 Old Queen Street, London SW1H 9HP, Tel: 020 7961 0200, Fax: 020 7681 3773, Email: editor@spectator.
co.uk (editorial); letters@spectator.co.uk (for publication); advertising@spectator.co.uk (advertising); Advertising enquiries: 020 7961 0222 Subscription and delivery 
queries Spectator Subscriptions Dept., 17 Perrymount Rd, Haywards Heath RH16 3DH; Tel: 0330 3330 050; Email: customerhelp@subscriptions.spectator.co.uk; 
Rates for a basic annual subscription in the UK: £111; Europe: £185; Australia: A$279; New Zealand: A$349; and £195 in all other countries. To order, go to www.spectator.
co.uk/A151A or call 0330 3330 050 and quote A151A; Newsagent queries Spectator Circulation Dept, 22 Old Queen Street, London SW1H 9HP, Tel: 020 7961 0200, Fax: 
020 7681 3773, Email: dstam@spectator.co.uk; Distributor Marketforce, 161 Marsh Wall, London, E14 9AP.  Tel. 0203 787 9001. www.marketforce.co.uk Vol 336; no 9881 
© The Spectator (1828) Ltd. ISSN 0038-6952 The Spectator is published weekly by The Spectator (1828) Ltd at 22 Old Queen Street, London SW1H 9HP 
Editor: Fraser Nelson

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
5
 
ARTS
44 Andrew Roberts
 
Churchill on film
46 Exhibitions
 
Bernini  
Martin Gayford
47 Radio
 
Rwanda; Penelope Fitzgerald
 
Kate Chisholm
48 Opera
 
Duke Bluebeard’s Castle;  
Rigoletto 
Richard Bratby
49 Cinema
 
Three Billboards Outside  
Ebbing, Missouri 
 Deborah Ross
50 Television
 
James Walton
 
Theatre
 
The Twilight Zone; Pinocchio; 
The Grinning Man  
Lloyd Evans 
 
LIFE
55 High life Taki
 
Low life Jeremy Clarke
56  Real life Melissa Kite
57 Wild life Aidan Hartley
 
Bridge Susanna Gross
 
AND FINALLY . . .
52 Notes on… A Gyptian weekend 
Juliet Rix
58 Chess Raymond Keene 
Competition Lucy Vickery
59 Crossword Doc
60 No sacred cows Toby Young
 
Battle for Britain Michael Heath
61 Sport Roger Alton 
 Your problems solved
 
Mary Killen
62 Food Tanya Gold 
Mind your language
 
Dot Wordsworth
LIFE
Sculpting sunshine, p46
Boris Johnson is a former 
editor of this magazine, now 
the Foreign Secretary. On p20, 
he argues that we have never 
had it so good. 
James Grogono is a retired 
general surgeon. He delves into 
private surgery and doctors’ 
dilemmas on p24.
Emily Hill is a journalist and 
the author of Bad Romance, 
a collection of her short 
stories. On p38 she writes 
about jealousy, revenge and 
heartbreak. 
Nicholas Shakespeare, 
who writes about the founding 
of Australia on p32, is a 
novelist, biographer and 
broadcaster. He won the 
Somerset Maugham Award for 
The Vision of Elena Silves.
Kate Womersley, who 
read English then history 
at Cambridge and Harvard, 
is now back at Cambridge 
training to be doctor. On p40, 
she explores the grisly world 
of Victorian medicine.
CONTRIBUTORS
Girls who use the most social 
media are the most likely to 
experience depression. But 
which came first: the blues or  
the ill-advised retreat online?
Mary Wakefield, p27
When the rights of ground-nesting 
birds come up against the rights 
of ground-nesting doggers, the 
left-leaning environmental lobby 
truly is in a fix, isn’t it?
Melissa Kite, p18
Easily the worst Churchill 
movie ever made was Churchill 
(2017). I counted 120 historical 
inaccuracies in those two hours of 
my life I’ll never get back 
Andrew Roberts, p44
Roosevelt the radical, p39
How she persuaded Boris, p20


the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
7
in succession to Sir Patrick McLoughlin. 
James Cleverly became his deputy and nine 
vice-chairman were appointed, including 
Kemi Badenoch, given responsibility for 
appointing candidates, and Maria Caulfield, 
who opposes legalising abortion for non-
medical reasons beyond 24 weeks, given 
responsibility for women.
C
arrie Gracie resigned as BBC China 
editor, reverting to newsroom duties 
and rejecting an offer of a £45,000 rise to 
her £135,000 salary, in the face of what she 
called ‘unlawful pay discrimination’. Peter 
Preston, editor of the Guardian from 1975 
to 1995, died aged 79. Toby Young resigned 
from his new appointment at the Board 
of the Office for Students after a Twitter 
storm resurrected old bad-taste jokes that 
he had made. Meghan Markle, the fiancée 
of Prince Harry, closed her Instagram, 
Facebook and Twitter accounts. An updated 
Ministerial Code published by the Cabinet 
Office said: ‘Harassing, bullying or other 
inappropriate or discriminating behaviour 
wherever it takes place is not consistent 
with the Ministerial Code and will not be 
tolerated.’ Virgin Trains stopped selling the 
Daily Mail on its West Coast route due to 
‘concern raised by colleagues’ about the 
Mail’s view on ‘issues such as immigration, 
LGBT rights and unemployment’, an 
executive said. A series of recruitment 
advertisements asked questions such as 
‘Can I be gay in the Army?’ 
Abroad 
P
resident Donald Trump of the United 
States was regarded by White House 
staff as being like a ‘child’, because he 
needed ‘immediate gratification’, said a 
book called Fire and Fury by the journalist 
Michael Wolff. The book said that Mr 
Trump liked to be in bed by 6.30 p.m., 
watching his three televisions, eating a 
cheeseburger and making telephone calls. 
It quoted his ex-strategist Steve Bannon 
as describing a meeting between a Russian 
lawyer and Trump election campaign 
officials, including Mr Trump’s son Donald 
Jr, as ‘treasonous’. Mr Trump responded 
by saying Mr Bannon had ‘lost his mind’. 
Mr Bannon felt obliged to step down from 
Breitbart News. The book also questioned 
the ‘mental fitness’ of Mr Trump, who 
replied on Twitter: ‘Throughout my life, 
my two greatest assets have been mental 
stability and being, like, really smart.’
P
resident Emmanuel Macron of France 
made a speech in China that included 
the sentence ‘Make our planet great again’ 
in Mandarin. North Korea, having agreed 
to hold talks with the South over border 
tensions, is to send a delegation to the 2018 
Winter Olympic Games place in South 
Korea in February. In the Swiss resort of 
Zermatt, more than 13,000 tourists were 
trapped by snow, but skiing was impossible 
because of the risk of avalanches.
T
he Supreme Court of India reversed its 
order that the national anthem had to 
be played in every cinema before a film was 
screened. Hundreds of flying foxes died 
in Sydney as temperatures reached 47C 
(117F), the highest since 1939. A prisoner in 
Asturias prison in Spain was certified dead 
but woke up in a mortuary in Oviedo. CSH
Home 
T
heresa May, the Prime Minister, tried 
to shuffle her cabinet, but Jeremy 
Hunt, the Health Secretary, refused to 
become Business Secretary and stayed 
put with the words ‘Social Care’ added 
to his title. Sajid Javid, the Communities 
Secretary, had ‘Housing’ tacked on to his. 
Justine Greening spent three hours with 
Mrs May and emerged without her job 
as Education Secretary, having turned 
down Work and Pensions, which went to 
Esther McVey. David Lidington was made 
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, 
taking over tasks that had been performed 
by Damian Green, and was replaced as the 
sixth Justice Secretary in six years by David 
Gauke, the first solicitor to be made Lord 
Chancellor. Education went to Damian 
Hinds, who was replaced as Employment 
Minister by Alok Sharma, who was 
replaced as Housing Minister by Dominic 
Raab, who was replaced as Justice Minister 
by Rory Stewart, who was replaced as 
Africa Minister by Harriett Baldwin. James 
Brokenshire resigned as Northern Ireland 
Secretary on genuine health grounds, to 
be replaced by Karen Bradley, whose 
secretaryship at Digital, Culture, Media and 
Sport went to Matt Hancock. The shuffle 
brought above 50 per cent the proportion 
of Oxbridge-educated Cabinet ministers. 
Mrs May said the Government now looked 
‘more like the country it serves’.
T
he Conservative party’s official Twitter 
account congratulated Chris Grayling 
on his appointment as party chairman, 
only for Brandon Lewis to be appointed, 

ANNOUNCING A NEW £20,000 PRIZE FOR NON-FICTION
This year, John Murray, the publisher of Jane Austen, Charles Darwin and 
Lord Byron, turns 250. To celebrate, they are launching a new international 
non-ﬁction prize in association with The Spectator – open to unpublished 
authors everywhere. 
 
John Murray is looking for an original, insightful and lively piece of non-
ﬁction writing of no more than 4,000 words on the theme of ORIGIN. 
The prize will be judged by a panel of contemporary John Murray authors 
including Andrea Wulf, Sumit Paul-Choudhury, Amanda Vickery and  
Stig Abell, as well as The Spectator’s literary editor, Sam Leith.
 
The deadline for submissions is 1st May 2018.
For full details, please visit: www.spectator.co.uk/jmprize
IN ASSOCIATION WITH
FOR THE WINNER: 
• 
A £20,000 book contract with John Murray and mentoring 
sessions with the publisher
• 
Their winning essay will be published both in The Spectator 
and in a special anniversary anthology
• 
An invitation to the anniversary party
THE  
JOHN  
MURRAY  
PRIZE
 FOR THE RUNNERS-UP:   
• 
Their essays published in 
an elegant anthology 
• 
A selection of books from 
John Murray
@johnmurrays  |  @spectator

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
9
David Frum
L
ike every journalist in Washington, 
I’m enthralled by the new Michael 
Wolff book, Fire and Fury, which depicts 
Donald Trump as a president in steep 
mental decline, derided and despised by 
his entire entourage, family included. 
I read with perhaps special attention 
because I have a book of my own about 
the Trump phenomenon being released 
on 16 January, just over a week after 
Wolff’s. The experience is a little like 
being the next presenter at the Golden 
Globes immediately after Oprah 
Winfrey’s speech. Wolff is interested 
in personalities, not politics. But while 
Trump may be stupid or crazy, the people 
enabling him are neither of those things. 
The lucky-bounce election of Trump 
by a freak of the Electoral College 
offered US Republicans an unexpected 
opportunity to enact a deeply unpopular 
agenda. In return, Trump has demanded 
that they protect him — and attack his 
enemies. On the very day before the 
‘very stable genius’ tweets, Republicans 
on the Senate Judiciary Committee 
ordered the Department of Justice 
to open a criminal investigation of 
Christopher Steele, compiler of the 
famous dossier of Trump’s activities 
in Russia. They didn’t consult or even 
inform committee Democrats, a sharp 
breach of Senate practice. Trump wanted 
it, so they did it. What the world needs 
to understand is not Trump’s complex 
hairdo, but his self-serving system of 
power. That’s my story anyway.
B
ut while we’re talking about 
personalities, here’s an aspect of 
Donald Trump’s that I’ve never got past: 
his hatred of dogs. When Trump tweeted 
on 5 January that his former aide Steve 
Bannon had been ‘dumped like a dog’, 
he recycled an insult he has hurled more 
than a dozen times since declaring for 
president, according to the indispensable 
TrumpTwitterArchive.com. After the 
2016 election, a wealthy Trump supporter 
offered the new First Family a gift of an 
especially adorable Goldendoodle. On  
a visit to Mar-a-Lago, the supporter 
showed a photo of the dog to Trump.  
The President-elect asked her to show the 
photo to his then ten-year-old son, Barron. 
‘Barron will fall in love with him,’ Trump 
said. ‘Barron will want him.’ That’s just 
what happened. As the supporter told the 
Washington Post: ‘This big smile came over 
[Barron’s face], it just brought tears to his 
eyes.’ Trump never did permit his son to 
accept the promised dog. That’s something, 
say, US allies might want to keep in  
mind before relying on any of Trump’s 
commitments to them.
T
he Trump presidency has been a 
disorienting moment in American 
political life. Imagine a time traveller 
starting in the year 1990. He steps 
forward 25 years to 2015. Who are 
the leading candidates for president? 
Bush and Clinton — again! What are 
the top issues? Iraq and healthcare — 
again! Now step backwards 25 years 
from 1965. The most powerful men in 
Washington are the head of the AFL-
CIO, a federation of 55 unions across 
the US, and J. Edgar Hoover. There’s 
a draft and a telephone monopoly and 
urban riots and liberal Republicans. It’s 
a different world. I sometimes feel that 
what Trump has done is restore motion 
to a political system that froze in place 
when the baby-boomers reached middle 
age. What’s coming next? Something 
radically different. The baby-boomers will 
keep ageing, and their dependence on 
government will grow. Trump discovered 
and confirmed that ethnocultural 
resentment mobilises conservative voters 
better than economic issues ever did. 
The Republicans seem to be heading 
for heavy losses in this year’s elections 
— making Trump even more important 
as a single remaining focal point for 
party identity and party loyalty. Voters 
who cannot stomach Trump, especially 
college-educated women, are quitting 
the GOP. What will be left is a party that 
no longer commands a national voting 
majority. Only one Republican has done 
that since 1988 — George W. Bush in 
2004 — and then only barely. But what 
Republicans are also discovering is 
that with sufficiently ruthless methods, 
a national voting majority may not be 
needed to wield national power. That’s 
part of the meaning of Trumpocracy, and 
it’s more disturbing than Trump’s fast-
food diet.
David Frum is a senior editor at The 
Atlantic and author of Trumpocracy: The 
Corruption of the American Republic 
(Harper Collins).

10 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
POLITICS | JAMES FORSYTH
times — Brexit, the need to defeat the most 
left-wing Labour leader in generations and 
persistently sluggish earnings growth — 
May might find people more receptive to 
the call to serve than she’d expect.
To be fair, the reshuffle did attempt some 
progress on this front. Oliver Dowden, who 
served as deputy chief of staff under David 
Cameron, went to the Cabinet Office, where 
he’ll be able to help coordinate government 
policy. But there is a pressing need for more 
political appointees inside No. 10.
The third and biggest problem exposed 
by the reshuffle is the lack of clarity on what 
the government is trying to achieve. One of 
those who kept their job on Monday com-
plains that ‘the problem is not the people in 
the cabinet or the ministerial positions’ but 
rather May herself. This minister compares 
her to the Wizard of Oz — there’s little there 
when you pull back the curtain. 
I understand that Theresa May was so 
keen to move Justine Greening because 
she was frustrated by her approach to 
social mobility. But parliamentary arithme-
tic means that grammar schools are off the 
agenda, so it is hard to work out what May 
wants to do in this area.
There are indications that Greening and 
Jo Johnson, the Universities Minister, were 
shifted because No. 10 wants to do some-
thing on tuition fees. It would be sensible, for 
instance, to cut the interest rate on them. But 
the Tories will never be able to beat Corbyn’s 
pledge to scrap them. It would be foolish to 
highlight this issue with a Dutch auction on 
the fee level that the Tories can never win.
Several of the moves in this  reshuffle are 
at least sensible. Putting health and social 
care in the same department, something 
No. 10 insists would have happened who-
ever was Health Secretary, will help to inte-
grate the two. David Lidington, one of the 
politest men in politics, will be a natural fit 
at the Cabinet Office. He knows more about 
European politics than almost anyone else 
in government and will bring that know-
ledge — which is all too often missing — to 
the inner cabinet’s Brexit discussions. David 
Gauke’s appointment means that a lawyer is 
once more Lord Chancellor. He also under-
stands the link between the benefits system 
and prison, having been Welfare Secretary. 
But the level of turnover in the Minister of 
Justice and the Department for Work and 
Pensions is alarming. There have been four 
Justice Secretaries since the 2015 election 
and five Welfare Secretaries.
One other thing May deserves praise for 
is beginning the process of promoting the 
talented 2015 crop of Tory MPs. This is a 
more diverse intake and by bringing them 
into government now, she can ensure that 
they are ready to be promoted to Secretary 
of State before the Tories go to the country 
again. As one leading minister tells me: ‘The 
team that goes into the next election will 
look very different from the team that went 
into the last.’
Mrs May might not be restored to politi-
cal health but that doesn’t mean she is on 
her way out. There remains no agreement at 
the top of the Tory party about who should 
succeed her. There is, however, a sense that 
a leadership contest before Brexit happens 
would simply be too bloody. Indeed, opin-
ion in the cabinet is shifting towards the idea 
that the moment when it is safe to have a 
vote is the end of the transition period in 
2021, not the actual moment of departure 
next March.
If May were to continue until then, the 
new party leader would have only a year and 
a bit before they had to go to the polls. They 
would have to make use of every minute of 
that time to show the country where they 
wanted to take Britain after Brexit. What 
May must do in the meantime is ensure 
that the next election is not lost before her 
 successor even makes it into No. 10.
SPECTATOR.CO.UK/COFFEEHOUSE 
Hourly updates from Parliament and beyond.
‘T
hey are not as strong as they 
thought they were,’ one White-
hall source remarked to me on 
Monday night as he contemplated the fall-
out from Theresa May’s attempt to reshuffle 
the cabinet. No. 10 had come to believe that 
a successful Budget and ‘sufficient progress’ 
in the Brexit talks meant that much of May’s 
political authority had been restored. This 
emboldened them to think that she could 
now pull off a proper reshuffle, something 
Gavin Williamson had regularly cautioned 
against when he was chief whip.
But a reshuffle that was meant to con-
firm the Prime Minister’s return to political 
health has ended up highlighting her three 
biggest weaknesses. The first thing it showed 
was that she has not regained her political 
authority. Moving ministers around is always 
tricky unless it is done as a prime minister’s 
first act or after a landslide election victory. 
But May faced remarkable levels of resist-
ance, despite choosing to leave all the hold-
ers of great offices of state in place. In the 
end, the Health Secretary stayed put, even 
though May’s initial plan had been to move 
him, and the Education Secretary resigned 
rather than become Welfare Secretary.
The result is that every Secretary of State 
who would like to defy May on some issue 
will now feel more confident. The Prime 
Minister is, clearly, not an irresistible force. 
The reshuffle has also raised questions 
about the competence of May’s operation. 
For the party’s official Twitter account to 
start the reshuffle by inaccurately tweet-
ing that Chris Grayling was party chairman 
was a spectacular fail. But almost as bad was 
No. 10 failing to establish whether Jeremy 
Hunt was prepared to move before he came 
in to see Mrs May. One ally of the Health 
Secretary tells me he had no contact from 
Downing Street all last weekend. This is 
 particularly odd, as Hunt was being offered 
a promotion.
May’s team need to accept that this is the 
second set-piece event that has gone wrong 
for them in recent months, the first being 
the party conference where the announce-
ments were underwhelming even before 
the disaster of the Prime Minister’s speech. 
Even those who defend the competence 
of May’s team admit that the operation is 
understaffed. What is needed is an  injection 
of those with previous government — and 
preferably Downing Street —experience. 
Given the momentous challenges of the 
May’s three great weaknesses 
One minister compares her to the 
Wizard of Oz – there’s little there 
when you pull back the curtain
‘Even the Transport Secretary  
isn’t going anywhere.’

Charles Moore
Charles Moore
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
11
should require public service salaries. 
Carrie Gracie made that point when she 
said — though she didn’t quite put it like 
this — that she didn’t want her pay to go 
up, but for that of her male equivalents 
to go down. 
L
ast Saturday’s Court Circular, 
published in Monday’s papers, 
reports: ‘Today being the Feast of the 
Epiphany, a Sung Eucharist was held 
in the Chapel Royal, St James’s Palace, 
when the customary offerings of Gold, 
Frankincense and Myrrh were made on 
behalf of The Queen by Air Vice-Marshal 
David Hobart and Brigadier Jonathan 
Bourne-May (Gentlemen Ushers to 
Her Majesty).’ This is a charming custom, 
but why are there only two Gentlemen 
Ushers to represent the Three Wise 
Men? Defence cuts?
O
ur family’s Epiphany custom is 
the Christmas card game. The 
Christmas cards received are dealt out 
in equal hands. Each player, in turn, 
calls his own trumps. So it could be 
‘fattest robin’, ‘most unChristmassy’, 
‘woolliest’, or whatever. All must follow 
suit if they can. The cards played are 
then submitted (only the front of the 
card counts) for general arbitrament, 
which can become heated. This year, I 
called out ‘happiest family’ and played a 
lovely picture of Nicholas and Georgia 
Coleridge and their four children taken 
at Nick’s 60th birthday party at the V&A 
last year. My wife, however, who has a 
ruthless streak in such games, played an 
Italian Renaissance painting, ‘Madonna 
worshipping the Child’. I countered 
that the circumstances of the birth of 
Jesus might have made the family quite 
unhappy (in the short term), whereas 
the Coleridges, united and content at the 
end of Nick’s long and successful reign 
at Condé Nast, had no worries. Besides, 
I went on, since neither Joseph nor the 
Holy Spirit was depicted on my wife’s 
card, this was not a full family. Caroline, 
however, insisted that the Holy Family 
must, for theological reasons, be the 
happiest family ever, and indeed the 
Nativity is one of the Seven Joys of Mary. 
I lost. She won the entire game, with 
twice as many tricks as anyone else. 
G
avin Stamp, who died just before the 
year’s end, will be mourned by many 
Spectator readers. For years, particularly 
in the 1980s, he was the paper’s main 
voice on architectural questions, notably 
as they affected the public space. His 
voice, both angry and compassionate, 
would be raised whenever he thought 
someone in authority — in church, state, 
local government, big business — was 
damaging what belonged to the people. 
He was very important at changing 
official attitudes imbued with fag-end 
modernism. No one expounded better the 
conception of a building’s public purpose, 
so to hear him talk about, say, Lutyens’s 
Memorial to the Missing of the Somme 
at Thiepval, was revelatory. Gavin made 
his greatest splash in the paper early in 
1985 with his cover piece ‘Telephone 
boxes: reverse the changes’. This led our 
vigorous campaign to force the newly 
privatised British Telecom to stop ripping 
out all its 76,500 K2 and K6 red telephone 
boxes, designed by Giles Gilbert Scott, 
perhaps the best pieces of street furniture 
ever made. At that time, The Spectator 
had just been bought by the Australian 
Fairfax group, and I had to placate the 
dismay of one of the Fairfax executives 
at the ‘irrelevance’ of it all. In fact, few 
campaigns have gained such enthusiastic 
support of readers, or made such a 
difference, as Gavin’s. BT retreated, and 
started to save the boxes it should never 
— in the interest of ‘rebranding’ — have 
abandoned. In the end, the red box was 
destroyed by something neither side had 
foreseen at the time — the all-conquering 
mobile phone. 
G
avin was a man of great loves 
and hates. The former included 
nationalised railways, Germany, Frank 
Pick of the London Passenger Transport 
Board and John Betjeman. The latter 
included anything rural, fizzy water, food 
that was complicated to open (e.g. crab) 
and France. Both in terms of people and 
things he had a particular tenderness for 
the odd, neglected and unfashionable. He 
was an unusual mixture of the dogmatic 
and the open-minded — denouncing 
some architect, politician or philosophy, 
yet ready to welcome the new as well. He 
hated being in a gang. His politics shifted 
from right to left and yet, to a large extent, 
his views remained the same. Perhaps he was 
seeking a home for his historically minded, 
religious, organic idea of urban civilisation 
in which what was built dignified the people 
who inhabited it and what he called the 
‘respectable working class’ could thrive. 
He had an instinctive dislike of anything 
to do with money, and was therefore poor. 
Gavin was a romantic and so was often 
disappointed by the world as it is. But this 
made his kindness and humour all the 
more enchanting. My best memories of 
Gavin are of striding round the East End 
of London, with him showing me hidden 
architectural marvels. If we passed through 
a market, he would find some amazing 
piece of architectural salvage, buy it on the 
spot and lug it home on his great shoulders. 
‘Salvage’ was the right word for what Gavin 
did, rescuing beauty with the same love and 
effort that some people rescue refugees. 
C
arrie Gracie is more or less in the right, 
but I did laugh out loud when I heard 
her, on the BBC programme she was herself 
presenting, say that her resignation from 
her post as China editor over the equal pay 
issue had brought wonderful sympathy from 
‘across the country and internationally’, 
as though speaking of the plight of the 
Rohingya. People who earn six-figure 
salaries and are allowed, by the organisation 
which employs them, to complain on air to 
millions about an aspect of their pay are not 
easy for most of us to regard as persecuted 
victims. Even Ms Gracie’s ‘resignation’ from 
her Beijing post seems to permit her to stay 
on the staff. Hers are what young people call 
‘first-world problems’. The serious problem 
with BBC presenters’ and executive pay is 
that it is much too high for a service funded 
by a compulsory tax on everyone with 
a television. Public service broadcasting 

12 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
Twitter inquisition
No one should ever assume that their online past won’t catch up with them
LARA PRENDERGAST
material online to blow up his  political 
ambitions. When he tried to delete his 
tweets, his detractors were ready. They had 
already saved everything they considered 
incriminating.
Tweets never grow old or die: words 
published years ago can be reposted, fresh 
as the day they were typed. Remarks from 
one context can be republished in anoth-
er. Online comments can now define and 
destroy you. During the Blair era, Alastair 
Campbell used to say that if you were the 
story for more than seven days, you had to 
quit. But in those days newspa-
pers decided how long a scan-
dal lasted: they had readers 
who would tire easily. In the 
age of social media, there is all 
the time in the world. People 
who feel angry enough about 
something will spend weeks or 
months keeping a story alive, 
if that’s what it takes to scalp 
the enemy.
Social media companies 
have tricked us all. They have 
lured us into thinking we can 
lower our guard online and talk 
candidly as if to friends. They 
have coaxed us into blurring 
personal and private worlds 
in the name of free speech. 
We have been led to think our 
comments are ephemeral when 
nothing could be further from 
the truth. Tweets are dashed 
off, then forgotten about — 
only to be discovered years 
later by anyone with a bone 
to pick. We live in a confes-
sional age and are encour-
aged to reveal all our inner thoughts. What’s 
not encouraged, so much, is to reflect over 
whether we would be prepared to stand by 
everything we have said in the future. 
When Anthony Scaramucci was appoint-
ed Donald Trump’s communications direc-
tor, he set about deleting any tweets that 
didn’t align with his new boss’s views. ‘Full 
transparency: I’m deleting old tweets. Past 
views evolved & shouldn’t be a distrac-
tion. I serve @POTUS agenda & that’s all 
that matters,’ he wrote. But those who man-
aged to save his deleted tweets were able to 
A
friend of mine at university had a 
rule: he didn’t want anything to 
appear online that might ruin a 
future political career. On nights out, when 
photos were being taken, he’d quietly move 
out of the picture. While we were all witter-
ing away to each other on social media, he 
kept schtum. Strange, I remember thinking. 
Why so paranoid?
I thought of my friend when Toby Young 
started making headlines. After Toby 
was appointed one of the 14 non-execu-
tive members of the Office for Students, 
he discovered to his cost that 
his past — preserved as it is 
online — could be dredged up 
by those who wanted to sabo-
tage his advancement. The cam-
paign against him worked. The 
Twitter storm gathered such 
strength that it sucked in news-
papers and politicians. His old 
tweets ended up being debated 
in parliament. The Prime Minis-
ter was asked about sentences 
from articles Toby had written 
17 years ago. After eight days of 
outrage, he resigned.
Just two weeks ago, the fate 
of Toby Young would have been 
of interest to Spectator read-
ers, possibly a few free school 
enthusiasts, but not a great 
many others. Yet his resigna-
tion from an advisory post to 
an obscure quango led the BBC 
morning news — ahead of the 
cabinet reshuffle. It’s baffling: 
why is everyone, seemingly, talk-
ing about a journalist having to 
leave a minor government body 
that nobody had heard of?
The answer is that Toby has become 
just the latest — and perhaps the highest-
profile — target of a new phenomenon: the 
digital inquisition. It is something that any-
one wanting to enter public life can — and 
should — expect. As my university friend 
knew, if you happen to be ambitious in the 
internet age, you must be very careful about 
everything you say or do online.
I need not repeat the litany of Toby’s 
offending tweets. He said some bad things. 
He has been deliberately provocative. He 
deployed what Boris Johnson called his 
‘caustic wit’ on occasions where silence 
would have been wiser. Some will consider 
him beyond the pale; others will be unable 
to see what the fuss is about. For now, how-
ever, the court of social media has passed 
judgment, and there is no place harsher or 
more frenetically outraged. 
Sites such as Facebook and Twitter hold 
vast reserves of information about us, which 
we have willingly handed over. We have 
been encouraged to be honest, to share, 
to joke, often in the name of liberty. Twit-
ter users are scored on how many tweets 
they have shared with a grateful world. For 
Labour’s Stella Creasy, it’s 75,700; for Piers 
Morgan it’s 110,000. For some, using social 
media is a form of work; for others, an addic-
tion. The rough-and-tumble can be part of 
the fun: you say something, see how it goes 
down, or who’ll respond at 1 a.m. Careers 
have been made on Twitter as well as broken.
In Toby’s case, a selection of tweets and 
articles, some dating back over a decade, 
were cobbled together to present him as a 
sexist bigot. He had left enough  explosive 

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
13
show that his comments were anti-gun, pro-
gay marriage and concerned about climate 
change. By way of defence, Scaramucci said 
that ‘gotcha’ politics is dead. He soon learnt 
otherwise. 
‘Gotcha’ politics has not died. It has 
evolved. Unedited thoughts have never 
been easier to publish — or find. For my age 
group, most of our lives have been captured 
online. By the time anyone born in the new 
millennium starts to enter public life, there 
will be masses of images of them and words 
by them on the internet.
It’s no surprise that younger people 
have started to use technology that offers 
more privacy as the default. Apps such as 
Snapchat and Telegram use messaging that 
self-destructs — or at least pretends to. Insta-
gram’s ‘story’ feature allows you to publish 
videos that disappear after 24 hours. If Toby 
had chosen to use Snapchat to voice his 
opinions instead of Twitter, he might have 
avoided losing his job. Then again, far fewer 
people would have heard his opinions.
Yet even the most tech-savvy young-
ster will soon discover that it’s hard, some-
times impossible, to leave no trace, to clean 
up the photos that others took and pub-
lished online. The word ‘delete’ is often a 
misnomer. This week Kensington Palace 
announced that Meghan Markle had closed 
all her social media accounts. It’s highly 
unlikely though that there won’t be a record 
of everything she’s said, somewhere. Mass 
digitisation means that student newspaper 
articles from the 1960s are now online and 
searchable. A BBC editor once arrested 
because he was part of a hard-left protest 
group; foul language once used by a Treas-
ury minister — it’s all there if you know 
what to search for. Or if someone suddenly 
decides to look.
This digital trail makes it harder for peo-
ple to grow up or change path. Toby Young 
has moved from professional provocateur to 
education reformer, but the internet remem-
bered his past, and made his political rein-
vention near impossible. One might have 
dared hope that, in an era when the capacity 
to snoop is almost limitless, we would learn 
to be more forgiving of the failings of others. 
Instead, the mood is ever more nosey and 
censorious.
One might also hope that the adults in 
SW1 would not confuse the Twittersphere 
with the vox populi. But politicians, ever 
anxious about public opinion, are irresist-
ibly drawn to any indications of what peo-
ple think. They can’t help trying to find the 
national mood on social media. Sometimes 
they take their lead from it, seeking Twit-
ter praise or fearing its censure. This makes 
Even the most tech-savvy  
youngster will soon discover that  
it’s impossible to leave no trace
Twitter’s relatively small band of loud, regu-
lar users the most powerful focus group in 
the world. Anyone who has spent any time 
on Twitter will know how frightening that is. 
‘Is there anything you ought to tell me?’ 
Francis Urquhart asks ambitious MPs in 
the original House of Cards. ‘Anything that, 
should it come to light, might make me 
think: “I wish I had known that”?’ That’s a 
polite way of asking a rude question: is there 
any dirt? It’s now impossible to answer this 
question, since no one quite knows which of 
the hundreds, perhaps thousands of digital 
ghosts from their past may be summoned. 
The advent of social media therefore sets 
a new bar for anyone wanting to enter pub-
lic life: the trail you leave online will now be 
used to judge your character. Is your profile 
clean enough? If not, forget it. Indiscretions, 
youthful or otherwise, are now immortal 
sins. This will delight the bureaucratic class, 
who find it far easier to beat away outsiders 
or rebels who aspire to a career in politics. 
This new state of play will also deter anyone 
who doesn’t fancy having their life pored 
over, their reputation trashed. 
The internet dream was that the web 
would create a more open society. It wouldn’t 
really matter what you said because every-
one would feel more liberated. The oppo-
site has happened: increasingly, people 
are nervous about what they say online 
for fear of future rebuke. Far from mak-
ing everyone feel free to speak their minds, 
the internet has made many of us terrified 
of self- expression. Toby Young’s tale is an 
extreme example of something that could 
happen to anybody.  
So my university friend’s paranoia was 
warranted. Now, if I search for him online, 
nothing of interest comes up: a few chari-
table causes he has supported, a glow-
ing LinkedIn profile, a polished Instagram 
account with not a single photo that could 
cause trouble — or so he must assume. It is 
deliberately anodyne: the perfect starting 
point for a modern political career.
 
SPECTATOR.CO.UK/PODCAST
Brendan O’Neill and Dawn Foster on 
Twitchfork retribution.
‘Whatever you do kids, don’t become  
a ﬁgure of hate for the left.’
The hardest thing about being the 
target of a witch hunt is being turned 
into a pantomime villain. The lies, the 
distortions, the brutal literalism of 
the mob, using everything ironic or 
self-deprecating you’ve ever said and 
pretending to take it at face value so they 
can use it as evidence for the prosecution. 
It’s a kind of show trial.
Not that I wasn’t guilty of saying some 
appalling things. Whenever some ghastly, 
tasteless tweet was dragged up from 
years ago, I was filled with a burning 
sense of shame. I wanted to scream: ‘But 
that’s not who I am!’ I wanted to point 
to the good I’ve done, to plead with 
people to judge me by my actions, not 
by some puerile nonsense I dashed off 
in the middle of the night in 2009 after 
half a bottle of wine. But it’s pointless. 
The more you try to defend yourself, 
the more crazed with blood lust the 
Twitchfork mob becomes.
The power of social media is 
symptomatic of what Roger Scruton calls 
the volatile and foundation-less politics 
of our times. In an age of uncertainty, 
in which the values that underpinned 
our society are melting away, people 
seem to be more attracted to puritanical 
censure. I despair of the impact this will 
have on public life. Who will want to 
serve on a quango from now on, knowing 
there’s a risk that every skeleton in 
their closet will be dragged out with a 
view to embarrassing the politician who 
appointed them? I’ve been contacted by 
several friends, hugely distinguished in 
their professions and with an enormous 
amount to contribute, to say that after 
seeing what happened to me they’ve put 
all thoughts of public service out of their 
heads. Arnold Schwarzenegger famously 
said, when he ran to be governor of 
California, ‘I haven’t lived my life in 
order to become a politician.’ Back then, 
that didn’t disqualify him from public 
office. Today it would. 
Can I take this opportunity to 
thank all those people, including many 
Spectator readers, who’ve contacted me 
to offer sympathy and support? It makes 
a huge difference when you’re trying 
to retain your sanity and sense of self 
— knowing that there are some people 
who don’t think you’re a terrible person. 
The most moving message I got was a 
note from a pupil at the West London 
Free School. She had passed it to one 
of the teachers and asked him to give it 
to me. When I read it, I was completely 
overwhelmed. I’ve never been so 
touched by a small gesture of kindness.
On being a public enemy
TOBY YOUNG


the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
15
ROD LIDDLE
The power of the 0.1 per cent
Change.org or 38 Degrees: they are magnif-
icently arrogant in their presumption that 
because 0.3 per cent of the population have 
summoned up the ability to click a  button, 
they must have their way. 
The first thing, then, is for the government 
to reappraise the numbers issue. Maybe start 
taking a mild interest in petitions when they 
reach about the four million mark — about 6 
per cent of the population, instead of prom-
ising House of Commons debates as soon 
as they reach the pitiful figure of 100,000, as 
is the case now. So, four million, minimum, 
otherwise ignore them totally. The gov-
ernment is out of date on the numbers, on 
what constitutes a genuine public feeling. 
With Toby Young there was no popu-
lar feeling at all — it was just them again. 
The usual suspects. Take no notice of them, 
they count for nothing. Because otherwise 
nobody who is right of centre will ever be 
able to be appointed to anything. Every 
time they do, the puffins will begin their 
work. The fundamentalist wankpuffins will 
tap ‘Toby Young Twitter tits’ or ‘Rod Lid-
dle Facebook give Harriet one’  into Google 
and rip everything out of context, stripped 
of nuance and regardless of whether it was 
uttered 25 years ago — and then the foot-
soldier wankpuffins will swallow it whole 
and tap their little buttons on their laptops 
for Change.org. That’s how it works — a few 
judicious Googles and almost every one in 
the country can be found bang to rights, can 
be shrieked at and told to resign. 
The political right, in general, does not 
behave like this. It does not become beside 
itself with fury when someone who has 
views counter to their own is appointed to 
a post, which is all that happened in the case 
of Young. For the left, it is all that matters: 
if he disagrees with me, he must be vile and 
thus unsuitable.
Toby Young was appointed to a minor role 
on an obscure education quango because of 
his exceptional work with free schools. In 
the education sector there are almost no 
right-wingers appointed to anything. No 
 visiting professors, or honorary professors. 
By contrast, the genuinely idiotic journalist 
Yasmin Alibhai-Brown has been a  visiting 
professor at three universities, despite hav-
ing said that she wishes white men to be 
expunged from the face of the earth and that 
the white working class is ‘scum’, and having 
referred to people who voted Leave by the 
brilliant term ‘Brex shitters’. But the right 
do not get inflamed in quite the same way.
Your history will always come back to 
haunt you, but only if you are on the right. If 
you are on the left, it won’t matter at all. Just 
hypothetically speaking, I think it is entire-
ly possible that one could be appointed to 
a senior position within a left-wing party 
despite having demanded honours for IRA 
murderers, supported genocidal terrorist 
organisations such as Hamas and Hezbollah, 
and proclaimed an affection for a totalitarian 
communist dictatorship in, say, Cuba which 
imprisons trade union leaders and perse-
cutes homosexuals That’s just hypotheti-
cally speaking, mind; I can’t know for sure.
The problem is not the mob, no matter 
how fascistic and undemocratic its mindset 
might be. The puffins have every right to 
tap their little buttons, to scream and stamp 
their feet, to howl with anguish. The problem 
is solely the respect given to it. A Guardian 
editorial column is read by about 100,000 
people, 0.1 per cent of the population. It 
does not matter. And nor does  double that 
number signing a petition. It is time the right 
wised up to this and acquired from some-
where the semblance of a spine. 
 
SPECTATOR.CO.UK/RODLIDDLE
The argument continues online.
I 
once asked Michael Gove, when he had 
just been appointed Education Secre-
tary, if he would mind awfully appointing 
me as chairman of Ofsted: I had one or two 
vigorous ideas, such as reversing the grades 
awarded to schools for ‘cultural diversity’ so 
that they more closely represented what the 
overwhelming majority of parents actually 
think. Michael smiled politely and walked 
away, which I took as a definite indication 
of assent. Frankly, I will never forgive the 
treachery. Gove handed out the job to some-
one who went native almost immediately, 
became subsumed by the Blob. Serves him 
right. I assume Gove, in a cowardly manner, 
was worried by the possible howl-round 
of appointing a chap who had once asked 
 readers if they had ever, after a few pints, 
considered giving one to Harriet Harman. I 
had been trying to be nice, but there we are.
Michael was clearly terrified of the 
Twit ter storm, the maniacs on social media 
sites, the relentless fury of a couple of hun-
dred thousand people, almost all of whom 
we pay for out of our taxes to carry out 
their fatuous jobs, if they have any, and 
who care for freedom of speech and free-
dom of conscience with the same fervour 
with which a Tower Hamlets imam cares 
about the rights of his local LGBTQI folk.
Toby Young got a little further than I 
did, as part of The Spectator’s drive to cap-
ture all the major offices of government 
— Taki in charge of immigration, Charles 
Moore personally strangling foxes at the 
Min of Ag and Jeremy Clarke running the 
MoD — but tendered his resignation when 
it became evident that it would be shortly 
tendered for him. The mob works. The mob 
thinks it is an expression of  democracy — 
and in a sense it is, so long as nobody of 
importance pays any heed to its eternal, 
moronic fugue and its bedwetting tantrums. 
The problem is that people who should 
know better, i.e., the government, do take 
it seriously. Perhaps it is because they are 
right-wingers: they see that 200,000 people 
have signed a petition against something 
and assume that they are just normal people, 
a bit like them. But they are not. They are 
the same 200,000 liberal-left wank puffins 
who sign every fatuous petition got up by 
This is how it works – a few judicious 
Googles and almost every one in the 
country can be found bang to rights
‘An apology should get us off the hook.’

So much to do, so much time.


18 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
A bird-brained scheme
There are billions being wasted to keep people and nests apart
MELISSA KITE
tected bird nests in all three counties. Natu-
ral England believes that ‘recreational use’ 
of the heaths, having risen thanks to housing 
developments and population increase, is 
why the birds are struggling, although there 
is good evidence that their numbers are not 
struggling at all.
As a result, all housing development 
within five kilometres of each SPA is now 
subject to stringent tests and impact assess-
ments. In effect, all house-building near 
some SPAs has pretty much stopped.
But don’t worry. You, recreational user, 
are going to be given a Suitable Alternative 
Natural Green Space to walk in. Whoopee!
Now, I have never seen a sign near where 
I walk telling me to go anywhere else, but 
Natural England insists: ‘Since 2008, 51 
Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspaces 
[sic] have been created, relieving pressure 
on habitats and species.’ Natural England 
boasts that SANGS are only going to work 
if they are ‘more attractive than the SPA to 
users of the kind that currently visit the SPA’. 
It would appear hubristic to think it possible 
to create beauty spots more attractive than 
the purple-carpeted heathlands established 
over hundreds of years by generations 
of livestock grazing and scrub clearance.
In practice, over the next 125 years, Guild-
ford Borough Council is spending £12.2 mil-
lion on one SANGS alone, raised through a 
tally on developers. This is a piece of land 
called Tyting Farm. Their method reads like 
a handbook for crushing the soul: ‘It should 
be possible to complete a  circular walk of 
2.3-2.5km around the SANGS,’ the guidance 
from Natural  England sets out. The SANGS 
will have ‘a gently  undulating topography… 
and a view…with a  monument or something 
to visit…’ It will ‘provide a variety of habi-
tats for users to experience…’
‘Hills do not put people off visiting a site, 
particularly when these are associated with a 
good view, but steep hills are not appreciat-
ed. An undulating landscape is preferred…’
It is utter madness trying to quantify and 
then replicate a beauty spot. And what hap-
pens when a Dartford warbler pitches up at 
the alternative? Do they then have to create 
W
hile walking or riding on the 
 beautiful heathland near my 
home, I have noticed a grow-
ing number of signs telling me to respect 
ground-nesting birds.
I keep the dogs close. I don’t let the 
 horses trample through the undergrowth. 
But that is not proving good enough for 
the wildlife authorities who have begun to 
spend millions of pounds on a bizarre pro-
gramme to divert human beings from large 
areas of heathland — not only where I walk 
but in dozens of other places across the 
south-east of England, so that these popular 
beauty spots can be left for the birds.
Natural  England (the government agen-
cy for conservation) and local authorities in 
Surrey, Berkshire and Hampshire are cam-
paigning to safeguard what they called SPAs, 
Special Protection Areas, by creating some-
thing they call SANGS, which is so loony 
that no one can agree whether it stands for 
Suitable Accessible Natural Green Space or 
Suitable Alternative Natural Green Space. 
Either way, welcome to the wacky world of 
rare-bird protection.
In this world, you, the human being living 
in an area known to conservationists as the 
Thames Basin SPAs, will be  dissuaded from 
visiting your local heathland and instructed 
to go instead to a disused farm down the 
road, for example, where your local author-
ity and wildlife chiefs have created for you 
an approximation of the favourite place you 
thought you were enjoying and appreciating 
but in fact were ruining. Allegedly.
The policy covers 8,274 hectares of Berk-
shire, Hampshire and Surrey, including Ock-
ham and Wisley Common, where I walk and 
ride, and Whitmoor Common near Guild-
ford, where I used to walk until I got fed 
up of being accosted by environmentalists 
brandishing leaflets telling me how many 
birds I was slaughtering just by being there.
There are three rare species in these 
heaths: woodlark, nightjar and Dartford 
warbler. They nest in small numbers on or 
near the ground and are susceptible to pre-
dation and disturbance.
On Ockham and Wisley, for example, 
recent surveys show up to seven Dartford 
warbler nests, four woodlark and five night-
jar. On Whitmoor, there are two Dartford 
warbler nests, no woodlark and four nightjar. 
In total, there are around 1,000 of these pro-
Eleven local authorities in three 
counties could be planning to 
spend well over a billion pounds
Whatever 
one makes of the accuracy of the 
journalist Michael Wolff’s depiction of 
President Trump, it cannot all be the 
product of an overheated imagination. 
What makes it so interesting is that 
his picture of total dysfunctionality is 
typical of Roman historians’ accounts 
of many emperors.
Suetonius (d. c. ad 125), for 
example, was a high-ranking 
imperial secretary to the emperor 
Hadrian. In his Lives of the Caesars, 
he covered the period from Julius 
Caesar, Augustus and all the other 
early emperors — most notoriously 
Caligula and Nero — through to 
Domitian (d. ad 96).
Take his portrait of the viciously 
self-indulgent Caligula. His desire to 
humiliate senators and officials and 
to put on shows, dress up, act, sing and 
dance, made him very popular with 
the people. Consuls who forgot his 
birthday were stripped of office for 
three days. He ordered the death or 
exile of senators, friends and relatives 
with complete insouciance. His dark 
humour reflected his actions: ‘I can 
do anything I please, to anybody’ was 
his mantra.
He demanded that the finest 
Greek statues of the gods be 
brought to Rome, and have their 
heads replaced with his. He set up a 
temple to himself and would invite 
the full moon to share his bed. He 
acquired and got rid of wives almost 
at random, made a habit of seducing 
women of distinguished families, 
detailing their performance in bed, 
and indulged in incest with his sisters. 
Unsurprisingly, he wanted to abolish 
all lawyers. Suetonius commented 
that the previous emperor Tiberius, 
his adoptive grandfather, got it right: 
in Caligula, he said, he was rearing a 
viper for the Roman people.
Much of this material does read 
like invention, fed into the record 
by sources hostile to Caligula. But in 
the light of Wolff’s revelations about 
Trump, maybe Suetonius was right. 
The saving grace is that a country’s 
institutions and public servants keep 
it on the road, however pathological 
its leadership. If the Roman Empire 
could survive for half a millennium, 
the USA can probably survive Trump.
 
— Peter Jones
ANCIENT AND MODERN
Madman at the helm 

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
19
another alternative to protect the original 
alternative? Nevertheless, a housing levy on 
all new housing in the centre of Guildford 
for the next 125 years of some £6,500 per 
house has been put in place, to be paid for 
by developers.
In its draft plan, the council has estimat-
ed it will raise anything between £64 mil-
lion and £90 million to develop SANGS to 
 safeguard the small number of nests in its 
area. If you extrapolate that, 11 local author-
ities in three counties could be planning to 
spend well over a billion pounds. According 
to critics, that’s a punitive tax on develop-
ment in an area where housing (for humans) 
is desperately needed and which is likely to 
increase house prices in the south-east.
And that’s before you consider the insan-
ity that you, recreational user, are going to 
be told to drive three miles further to walk 
around a new beauty spot so that six or 
seven bird nests are not disturbed. Even if 
you have been drinking the environmental-
ist Kool-Aid and want to help these birds, 
there is scant evidence that your absence 
will help them. The latest stats show that the 
rare bird population is at virtually the same 
numbers as in 1998.
Wildlife Trust insiders tell me that bad 
weather was to blame for numbers  declining 
in the past and that global warming had 
boosted them. What’s more, in a letter, 
the environment minister Thérèse Coffey 
recently advised that numbers have been 
‘normalised’. So why the rush to spend a bil-
lion pounds diverting walkers, with near hys-
teria in  official circles over visitor numbers? 
Official surveys suggest that more than 
83 per cent of visitors to SPAs arrive by car. 
A large proportion are dog walkers, many 
of whom visit on a more or less daily basis, it 
says. So we know who is trampling through 
the nests, then. Or do we?
As someone who has walked and ridden 
on Ockham for 15 years, I have noticed a big 
increase in visitors straying off the marked 
paths, but these people are not walking dogs. 
They are dogging.
Every day, dozens of cars pull up,  driven 
by mostly men, but some women too, who 
disappear into the wooded areas of the 
heath to have sex with each other, leaving 
behind rubbish including condoms.
When I last wrote about this, I was told 
by council chiefs and police that this behav-
iour is not aggressively tackled because 
Ockham Common has been officially des-
ignated a ‘Public Sex Environment’ (PSE).
These people’s sexual preference is to do 
it outdoors and so, like the ground-nesting 
birds, their rights must be respected. But 
when the rights of ground-nesting birds 
come up against the rights of ground-nest-
ing doggers, the left-leaning environmental 
lobby truly is in a fix, isn’t it?
Is the precious heathland nearest to Lon-
don a habitat for rare birds, or is it a habitat 
for middle-managers stopping off for illicit 
open-air sex on the way home? It seems that 
it cannot be both.
I tried to get an official to respond to 
this, to no avail. A Surrey Wildlife source 
said: ‘You won’t get anyone to comment 
on that. No one wants to talk about it. But 
broadly speaking, the birds don’t nest in the 
wooded areas.’ Fine, but the point remains 
that the big rise in visitor numbers might 
not be from dog walkers but from doggers. 
And I don’t see anyone working out how to 
divert them. What, therefore, is the point of 
the SANGS initiative?
‘We have a duty to preserve our  natural 
habitat so that future generations can enjoy 
the countryside,’ says a spokesman for 
Guildford Borough Council. No doubt. But 
defending our vulnerable heathlands from 
truly invasive human behaviours would 
require the authorities to confront a  minority 
group more powerful than the Dartford war-
bler. And the idea that anyone would do that 
really is for the birds.
or call 0330 333 0050 and quote code !" Direct debit offer only
Go to www.spectator.co.uk/!"
Have better arguments. Every week.
Subscribe to The Spectator from just £1 a week
Those visitors straying off 
the marked paths are not people 
walking dogs – they are dogging

20 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
Girl power
Educating girls may fix the world’s remaining problems
BORIS JOHNSON
the next 12 years the average South Kore-
an woman will live to be 90 — the average. 
And our quality of life is improving: pover-
ty, malnutrition, child mortality — they are 
all falling.
It can never be repeated too often that 
28 years ago, in 1990, there were 1.8 billion 
living in absolute poverty. Today that figure 
has been reduced by a billion to fewer than 
800,000 in poverty, and is falling — in spite of 
the extra billions the world has acquired in 
the interim. I venture to say that we are liv-
ing through the most spectac-
ular reduction in inequality 
— and the greatest improve-
ment in the overall condition 
of mankind — since Olduvai.
Our lives are spiced, our 
taste buds piqued with pleas-
ures undreamt of by our 
grandparents; and not only 
is our food much better, but 
we have the continuous ocu-
lar stimulation of machines 
enabled by an internet whose 
pace and convenience accel-
erates everywhere, even in 
rural England.
As a species we seem 
less engaged in fighting each 
other than ever before. It is an 
astonishing reflection on our 
international relations that in 
2016 and 2017 there was not 
a single British soldier killed 
on active service anywhere in 
the world — for the first time 
in 50 years. And for the first time in 60 years 
there was not a single worldwide fatality 
involving a commercial passenger jet — a 
fact for which President Trump was swift to 
take credit.
Even the world’s potholes are disappear-
ing. Compared with only ten years ago, the 
proportion of tarmac roads across the plan-
et has risen from 53 per cent to 64 per cent 
— a fact that surely deserves a presidential 
tweet. The overall result is that our ride is 
literally as well as metaphorically smoother.
We (i.e. the human race) are living long-
er, in better health, and with higher levels 
T
he world is blessed with a brilliant 
and industrious UN secretary-gener-
al, and it was certainly worth tuning in 
last week to watch António Guterres deliver 
his New Year message to the planet. As sea-
son’s greetings go, it was not exactly festive.
Intercut with shots of attack choppers 
and bombed-out cities, the UN secretary-
general discharged a one-and-a-half minute 
jeremiad in which we learned that inequality 
was deepening; global warming was out of 
control; xenophobia and nationalism were 
on the march, not to mention 
war, famine, pestilence and 
other afflictions, as though 
2018 were beginning with 
a positive cavalry charge of 
apocalyptic horsemen.
He was putting out an 
alert, he said, a ‘red alert’ on 
the state of humanity. One 
diplomatic friend told me it 
was the UN’s most bloodcur-
dling New Year message in 
30 years. 
António is of course right, 
in that the world faces a series 
of interconnected challenges 
that require us to unite, and 
also to get behind the UN, to 
back António Guterres and 
his teams in every unfold-
ing crisis: Yemen, Libya, 
Burma, South Sudan, north-
east Nigeria, Somalia and in 
many other places. The UN 
secretary-general is bringing 
a much-needed drive and focus to the job. 
He deserves our collective support, and will 
get it from the UK.
It would be a shame, however, if anyone 
were to be so downcast by his words as to 
believe that the world is indeed teetering on 
the lip of some new dark ages. I am conscious 
that some people are now so hungry for bad 
news they might misconstrue the secretary-
general’s message. They might conclude that 
things are genuinely going backwards. Are 
you inclined to that kind of pessimism? If 
so (and even if you aren’t), allow me to put 
a contrary point of view. Yes, as António
Guterres says, the world has problems — 
largely caused by the inordinate triumphs 
of the human race over some of the things 
that made our ancestors most miserable and 
afraid. There is also a respectable case for 
saying that this is the best moment — ever 
— to be alive.
Wherever you look, the armies of dis-
ease are being driven in headlong rout. 
Never mind the victories over smallpox, or 
leprosy. We have virtually wiped out polio, 
we are zapping tuberculosis, and as for 
HIV patients, they now live almost as long 
as someone without the virus. We are mak-
ing enormous progress — notably in this 
country — in using the body’s own immune 
system to fight cancer; and thousands of 
patients are staging recoveries that would 
have been thought miraculous when I was 
a child.
Across the world, life expectancy is 
increasing so fast that we are all gaining, 
on average, an extra five hours every 24 
(I know it sounds a bit like Zeno’s paradox, 
as though we are fated never to make the 
grave, but it’s true). It is estimated that in 

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
21
of comfort, education and all-round enter-
tainment; and that is why all the data sug-
gests that, in so far as the concept makes any 
sense, people are also happier. And it is that 
very triumph — especially of mankind over 
disease — that has created and exacerbated 
the problems we must address.
Think about the UN secretary-general’s 
list. We have an arc of instability from South 
Asia to the Middle East to North Africa, a 
horrible poxy belt of civil wars and proxy 
wars. We have governments and societies 
that are struggling to provide leadership, 
struggling to provide unity. But, above all, 
they are struggling to provide a credible 
economic programme in the face of unprec-
edented large numbers of young people. 
That is the root problem.
It is precisely because we beat infant 
typhoid and diphtheria that we now have a 
population explosion, again, in Africa, the 
Middle East and South Asia; and everywhere 
that you find insecurity and instability you 
will also find huge numbers of young people 
with not enough by way of gainful employ-
ment. Look at Yemen, whose gun-wielding 
Houthi rulers are mainly under 30. Look at 
Egypt, or Pakistan, both of which are set to 
see their populations top 200 million in the 
next 30 years. These countries will have to 
create tens of millions of new jobs every year 
if they are to meet the needs of their young.
Of all the apocalyptic horsemen, over-
population — by which I mean the growth of 
restless and surplus labour — is once again 
the hardest-charging of the lot. As a glob-
al phenomenon, it is by no means univer-
sal. Things are going the other way in Japan 
(where they have the highest living stand-
ards in the world) and in much of the West. 
And that gives us the clue about the solution.
Look at those countries where popu-
lation is growing the fastest, where unem-
ployment is highest, and where the tensions 
are greatest, and without exception you will 
find a common factor: female illiteracy.
The correlation is astonishing. Look at 
the high birth rate countries of sub-Saha-
ran Africa and you will find female illitera-
cy running at 50, 60, sometimes 70 per cent 
plus. In Pakistan it is 66 per cent among 
adult women; 34 per cent even in India. 
Small wonder that India’s population is set 
to overtake that of China, where female illit-
eracy has been all but eliminated.
Yes, it really is that simple. It is not only 
a moral outrage. It is directly contrary to the 
interests of world peace, prosperity, health 
and happiness that such a huge propor-
tion of our population — so many women 
and girls — should be unable to participate, 
alongside their brothers, in the economic 
The human race is living longer,  
in better health, and with higher  
levels of comfort and education 
life of their country. Female education is 
the universal spanner, the Swiss army knife 
that helps tackle so many of the problems 
that António Guterres describes. Societies 
where women can read, write and do maths 
as efficiently as their male counterparts 
will be healthier, happier, more prosperous, 
with stabler populations and therefore with 
fewer alienated and maladjusted young men 
whose egos require them to think of women 
as childbearing chattels.
A few years ago I met Malala, shot by the 
Taleban for daring to equip herself with an 
education. She is a person of extraordinary 
intensity and persuasiveness. I have come 
to believe that she is basically right: that the 
single best and biggest thing we can do for 
the world is to make sure that every girl gets 
12 years of full-time education.
That ambition is at the heart of UK over-
seas policy — shared by Penny Mordaunt’s 
DfID and the FCO — and will be at the 
heart of the Commonwealth summit in 
April. It is not just a campaign for fairness 
and freedom, but in its essential contracep-
tive impact it will help to fix so many other 
problems: not just overpopulation and pov-
erty, but the threat of war, disorder, terror-
ism, climate change and the loss of habitat 
and species.
The lesson of the past few decades is that 
homo sapiens have seen off the doomsters 
with consummate style. Man keeps conquer-
ing the challenges, from famine to disease. 
But if we are to solve the problems of today, 
Man the wise needs to stop being such a 
damn fool about the education of girls.
Twelve years of full-time education is not 
the only answer to the world’s problems. It is 
not a panacea. But it is not far short.
Shove Your Tissues
The man wears chinos and a flannel shirt,
a zip-up fleece and odd socks:
one is more beige.
His face, as creased and faded as his shirt,
reminds me of Guernica, but without the light bulb,
or the nostrils.
If I did tell him about my penchant
for being led astray
by the man who holds a dog lead in one hand,
himself in the other,
he’d hurl himself at the space
where a window used to be,
then I’d have to counsel him.
He asks why I have my arms folded;
I ask why he doesn’t.
‘What would your present self say to your former self?’
‘She’d say you’re a prick.’
(Other self nods.)
He writes down ‘transference’ and looks
at the clock I’m not supposed to notice
behind my head. 
— Samantha Roden

By the author of In Praise of Older Women and An Innocent Millionaire
www.stephenvizinczey.com | thehappyfew@btinternet.com
Also available in Hatchards, Waterstones, Daunt Books, selected bookshops as well as  on Amazon. Paperback £14.99.
‘Beautifully written and utterly compulsive... 
sums up everything one hates.’
CHRISTOPHER SINCLAIR-STEVENSON
‘Part pitilessly real and part fairy tale, but then so 
is Gulliver’s Travels. Vizinczey is a master of  the 
fantastical that bares the wrongs of  the world.’
TERRY COLEMAN
‘One of  the great contemporary writers who makes the crucial 
\PMUM[WN W]Z\QUMPQ[W_VIVL\ZIV[NWZU[\PMUQV\W\PM[\]ٺ
WN ÅK\QWV_Q\PP]UW]ZIVLXI[[QWV¼
SERGIO VILA-SANJUAN, LA VANGUARDIA
‘I discovered Vizinczey in a bookstore in Strasbourg and was 
so fascinated that I wanted to become his Italian publisher. 
Vizinczey has a rare gift: he is able to blend disparate threads 
of  the plot, never uses a word too many; he is incisive and 
profound; he describes men and, even more impressively, 
women with a few memorable brush strokes. His new, moving 
tale is, again, rich both in irony and emotion.’
CESARE DE MICHELIS
»:IbWZ[PIZXIVLÅMZKMTaN]VVaI[KZMLQJTaNIV\I[\QKITI[;_QN\WZ5IZS<_IQV¼
MICHAEL RATCLIFFE

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
23
MATTHEW PARRIS
Victims of crime should not decide justice
such cases would sooner or later arise. The 
press would develop a case for discovering 
a sense of outrage every time a palpably 
 unsavoury character was given parole.
It would then not be long before the 
demand arose for a procedure for appealing 
against a release on parole, either by victims, 
or the CPS, or a wider public, or a new body 
set up to allow or disallow appeals. These 
demands would often be made against the 
backdrop of a wave of media-driven or 
social media-driven indignation, with the 
original crime reheated for a new reader-
ship, and the victims paraded through the 
newspapers with their stories, their recollec-
tions and (often enough) their own voices 
raised against the granting of parole.
There would also have to be provision 
made for the redacting, where necessary, of 
information about parole boards’ reasons 
for rulings. There will obviously be a range 
of sensitivities and privacies — about vic-
tims, about psychiatric and medical opinion 
and advice, about the special and private cir-
cumstances of some prisoners, perhaps even 
about new suggestive evidence that has aris-
en — which might make it inappropriate to 
put some reasoning into the public domain.
The board could not just omit to men-
tion such matters, which would often be ger-
mane to the decision taken; so it would have 
to disclose that there were matters it was 
not disclosing. This would then lead to new 
suspicions and challenges from those ques-
tioning the ruling. Calls would follow for an 
appointee or committee to see the redacted 
material and adjudicate on its suppression. 
The sort of thinking that is pushing us down 
roads like this arises from two modern ten-
dencies of which we should be wary. The first 
is the growing presumption that everything 
can be challenged, appealed or ordered for 
review. The second is the growing centrality 
of the victim when things go wrong.
I’ve been struck over my own lifetime by 
the retreat of the idea that important deci-
sions may be final. The advance of the judi-
cial review has meant that ministers, civil 
servants, businesses and civil organisations 
have found that matters which had once 
seemed entirely their own affair are now 
subject (or, more distractingly, might prove 
subject) to judicial review. Before expel-
ling a rogue member of a political party 
or awarding a franchise to a rail operator, 
you have to consider your vulnerability to 
challenge in the courts. When I first entered 
Parliament, it seemed unexceptionable that 
a Speaker’s ruling on whether to grant an 
emergency debate should be accompanied 
by the Speaker’s reminder that his decision 
was final and no reasons could be supplied. 
Today it sounds almost archaic.
To some degree these new vulnerabili-
ties to challenge and appeal represent an 
advance for equity. But they can cause great 
uncertainty and interminable delay. There 
have to be limits. I think we’re nearing them.
The growing centrality of the victim may 
represent, likewise, an advance for compas-
sion and fairness. But this can  easily court 
a sort of retributive primitivism in our 
approach to law. We should care deeply for 
victims of crime. Perhaps (though I’m doubt-
ful) the state should compensate them. We 
should be sensitive to their continuing hurt. 
But the law is there to protect  society at 
large, and a victim’s view of what law should 
decree or how a miscreant should be pun-
ished should have no special status. The 
modern media, however, and many modern 
politicians, are beginning to speak as though 
the victim should be part of the judicial pro-
cess itself. This may be prejudicial to justice. 
I have no shred of sympathy for John 
Worboys. I am appalled that he should be 
let out. But I seek no way of challenging or 
reversing this decision. Perhaps I should 
reconsider my enthusiasm for a second EU 
referendum.
H
ard cases make bad law. The release 
on parole of the ‘black cab rapist’, 
John Worboys, is a hard case. But 
ministers should not be panicked into throw-
ing open parole board decision- making to 
public inspection. 
The police have blundered, the sentence 
was surely too lenient, and the failure to 
inform his victims was disgraceful. But it was 
not upon some careless whim that Parlia-
ment barred parole boards from giving rea-
sons, and the new Justice Secretary, David 
Gauke, should think hard before reversing 
the interdiction.
Much of the furore provoked by the 
release of this serial attacker of women after 
ten years in prison really arises not from the 
parole board’s decision but the original sen-
tence and the flawed prosecution process 
which helped produce it. Given Worboys’s 
conviction for only one rape, though there 
may have been scores more that the Met-
ropolitan Police and the Crown Prosecution 
Service did not pursue, the indeterminate 
sentence with a minimum of eight years 
failed to reflect a terrible story, but judge 
and jury were not to know that; and once the 
sentence had been handed down it was inev-
itable that the parole board would be asked 
to consider release before Worboys was an 
old man and while memories of his atrocities 
were still relatively fresh. 
And when the board did that it presum-
ably based its decision partly on what had 
been proved in court, not on what argu-
ably should have been proved in court. So 
we need to understand the circumstances 
in which the board found itself before we 
declare it obvious that its members should 
have taken a different decision. Not to have 
told Worboys’s victims of his impending 
release was an inexcusable administrative 
oversight; but this must be distinguished 
from the issue of whether parole boards’ 
decisions should be open to challenge.
For that would be the result of what is 
being called for. There can be no point — 
and there would fast be seen to be no point 
— in disclosing reasons for a ruling if the 
ruling were nevertheless final. Indeed the 
reasoning behind the demand for disclosure 
in the Worboys case must surely be that the 
ruling ought to have been challenged. Other 
A victim’s view of what the law should 
decree or how a miscreant should be 
punished should have no special status
‘Oh gosh, they’re going to let us go.’

24 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
Smooth operators
Is expensive private surgery always necessary?
JAMES GROGONO
I
n George Bernard Shaw’s play The Doc-
tor’s Dilemma, written early last  century, 
the knife-happy surgeon invents a nut-
shaped abdominal organ, the ‘nuciform 
sac’. It is situated near the appendix, ‘full 
of decaying matter’, and requires removal, 
assuming the patient can afford the fee. The 
surgeon, Cutler Walpole
surgeon, Cutler W
surgeon, Cutler W
, has the line: ‘The 
operation ought to be compulsory.’
Bernard Shaw labours the point that 
removal of the nuciform sac equals 500 guin-
eas, and not removing it equals nought guin-
eas. He then suggests, wickedly, that we want 
our surgeons to be mortal, ‘quite as honest 
as most of us’, not God-like. Which of us, he 
asks, would not be influenced by the financial 
equation, if it is impossible to prove that this 
organ might be  better left in situ? Add in the 
need to pay for a Harley Street consulting 
room, school fees, and a wife with expensive 
tastes and the choice is self-evident. Every 
nuciform sac must come out. No one dares 
challenge the wisdom of the great man, 
though the operation is of course pointless. 
It might surprise a reader to know that 
there are real ‘nuciform sac’ operations 
being performed every day in private medi-
cine by surgeons just as eminent as  Walpole. 
The organs being cut out really do exist — 
but the operations are often as unneces-
sary, and always expensive. A few decades 
ago tonsils and adenoids were the nuciform 
sacs of their day. It was deemed important 
to excise them for any child with recurrent 
throat trouble. An accomplished private sur-
geon always had an explanation for why the 
lucrative operation was needed, although 
there was very little actual evidence that 
removing them made much difference. 
It was the same for the removal of vari-
cose veins. No more justification was needed 
than the patient’s request. Both these opera-
tions are now performed less frequently but 
each era has its own nuciform sac, and the 
fashion has moved on to endless ’oscopies 
and keyhole procedures. Any symptoms in 
the relevant area may lead to one of these, 
such as arthroscopy, cystoscopy, GI endosco-
py, colonoscopy, laparoscopy and many more. 
The reason given by your private doctor is 
always that serious pathology such as can-
cer is best diagnosed early, and these mod-
ern ‘look-see’ operations are relatively small 
and safe compared with the old days, when 
a ‘look inside’ was itself a major procedure.
Of course the reason is often valid, and 
indeed therapeutic, such as knee arthrosco-
py for a torn cartilage, where the diagnosis 
is confirmed, and curative treatment carried 
out at the same time through a minute inci-
sion. However the arthroscopy  epidemic 
has spread to many smaller joints, where 
the view is tiny, and the chance of finding 
serious or treatable disease equally tiny. In 
other situations, the search for early cancer 
is often genuine, such as any patient who 
has seen blood in urine or faeces or vomit or 
phlegm. But patients with nebulous symp-
toms should beware. 
How could a caring surgeon, with a clear 
conscience, put a patient through the risks of 
an anaesthetic and a procedure that it would 
be difficult to describe as necessary? What 
you have to remember is the complication 
rates of unnecessary surgery are very low. 
Wounds heal better if unhindered by the 
presence of disease. The full benefits of the 
placebo effect add on to the likelihood of 
success. Patients like being told they need an 
operation. It’s a simple solution. The patient 
has already had the satisfaction of knowing 
‘it was bad enough to require an operation’. 
Even the passing of money increases the 
desire for success. No one — patient or sur-
geon — wishes to think the fee was wasted. 
Do I sound cynical? Yes, but a healthy 
cynicism is no bad thing in all aspects of life, 
including medicine. Having an awareness 
of the pitfalls is all I am advocating. Time 
and again, in recent years, living in wealthy 
non-medical communities, I have listened to 
tales of remunerative procedures on friends 
and acquaintances that just don’t ‘stack 
up’ in terms of vital need. My own operat-
ing days are long past, but I remember my 
father, an Essex GP, pushing The Doctor’s 
 Dilemma across the breakfast table to me 
when I was a pre-medical student. I was suit-
ably appalled, but put the matter on one side 
for a decade. I then found myself drawn to a 
career in surgery, with no time for anything 
except the long, tough vocational training.
Patients like being told
they need an operation.
It’s a simple solution
Many people are gloomy about 2018. 
But some things are improving every year…
Natural disasters
These killed 9,066 people in the world in 
2017, fewer than any year since 1979. From 
2008 to 2017 an average 72,020 died in 
such disasters. Fifty years earlier (the period 
1958-67) the average was 373,453.
Life expectancy
The current lowest in the world is the 
Central African Republic with 51.4 years. 
To put that into perspective, in 1800 
Belgium had the highest at just 40 years. 
Average life expectancy changes in Africa 
since 1955:
year 
age 
year 
age
1955 ............... 38.7 
1995 ................ 51.9 
1965 ............... 43.4 
2005 ................55.1
1975 ................47.6 
2015 ................ 61.4
1985 ................51.2
Hunger
The number of people in the world classed 
as undernourished fell from 1.01 billion in 
1991 to 815 million in 2016. This is despite 
the world’s population growing from 5.4 
billion to 7.4 billion in the meantime.
Child labour
From 2000-2012 the percentage of children 
involved in regular economic activity in the 
world fell from 23 per cent to 17 per cent.
Democracy
The proportion of countries which are 
democracies rose from 24 per cent in 1976 
to 58 per cent in 2016.
Every day around the world
— The number of people living in extreme 
poverty falls by 217,000.
— An extra 300,000 people gain access to 
a supply of fresh water.
— 325,000 more people gain access to an 
electricity supply.
Source for all the above: ourworldindata.org 
Wronged men
Chris Grayling was initially wrongly named 
as the new Conservative party chairman. 
The mistake is far from unique:
— In 1997 Tony Blair made Bernard 
Donoughue agriculture minister after 
offering it to Brian Donohoe in error.
— In 2010 David Cameron appointed Lib 
Dem Ed Davey as a business minister. 
Tory Ed Vaizey says the post was first 
offered to him by mistake only to be taken 
away 30 minutes later.
BAROMETER

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
25
Fast-forward another few years and I was 
in my first year as a consultant general sur-
geon in High Wycombe. I felt I had arrived 
in paradise. The work was entirely NHS, 
and there was soon more than I could easily 
handle. No patient needed to worry about 
the cost of their operation, however great. I 
had to focus on the cases that required my 
so-called skills, and exercise some degree of 
appropriate delegation. 
I have the lists of operations I performed 
in four busy weeks spread over those early 
years. The average was ten major, six inter-
mediate and five minor procedures each 
week. The word ‘major’  indicates any abdom-
inal operation, mainly bowel surgery or 
gallstones, or, outside the abdomen, remov-
al of the breast, prostate or thyroid gland. 
‘Intermediate’ indicates operations such as 
hernia, varicose veins or piles, and ‘minor’ 
indicates removal of cysts or skin lesions or 
vasectomy. The ’oscopies were rare in those 
days, but were classified as ‘intermediate’.
After the first few months something 
unexpected happened. GPs started asking 
me to see occasional private cases. How was 
I to overcome the doctor’s dilemma? How 
would I know my motives for suggesting 
some expensive op were not self-interested? 
My answer was to apply what I think 
of as the NHS test: would you still operate 
if there were no financial gain? My NHS 
income was adequate. I consulted in my own 
home with my wife as my secretary, and thus 
had no overheads. The NHS test meant that 
I would sometimes veer away from inter-
vention, perhaps wrongly, but always in the 
best interest of patients. My NHS thinking 
cost me further referrals from at least one 
GP: ‘I asked you to operate on her varicose 
veins, not tell her she could wear a support 
stocking and keep them.’
Over time, the level of private medi-
cal insurance increased. South Bucks was 
an affluent area, and the amount of pri-
vate work also went up. For a short spell I 
 rented a room in Harley Street one half-
day a month, at minimal cost. This enabled 
local GPs to tell their patients that they did 
not need to travel to London to see a ‘Har-
ley Street surgeon’ if that was their wish. 
The challenge then became one of time 
allocation, never short-changing NHS com-
mitments for private practice. I also had a 
personal fetish about never having an NHS 
waiting list. No patient had to ‘go private’ to 
get the operation done. At times the work-
load was almost overwhelming, but that 
in itself made for safety. A busier surgeon 
is a better surgeon for reasons I’ll explain. 
The only way to try to establish that your 
operation, whatever its nature, is truly nec-
essary is to apply an NHS test too — to go 
through the diagnosing and referring pro-
cess. Once the decision is made then you 
may wish to declare your private insurance, 
and ask for the great man’s private phone 
number. You’ll then have the choice of time, 
place and creature comforts in hospital. Your 
surgeon is contracted to do the operation 
himself, a promise that must not be made in 
an NHS setting, although it may be implied 
— ‘none of my juniors know how to do this 
operation’, for example. You will be reduc-
ing the pressure on the NHS, where you may 
or may not get speedy and excellent service. 
The bigger your operation, the more 
quickly you are likely to be dealt with on 
the NHS. Long waits are probable for pro-
cedures for hernia, piles and varicose veins, 
but your turn will come, and your operation 
will be competently done. 
There is one more word of caution. Make 
sure that your surgeon is very busy in his 
NHS practice, and not looking for cases to 
fill his operating lists. It is safer for patients if 
the surgeon has too much work. He will then 
choose to operate only on the patients who 
will benefit most, and those on the border-
land of necessity will not have an operation.
   www.apollo-magazine.com/M109D 

    +44 (0)330 333 0180 quoting M109D
Offer available to new UK and overseas customers subscribing by continuous payment only 
($30 for payments in US dollars; €30 for payments in euros).
JANUARY 
SALE
APOLLO 
EXHIBITION 
OF THE 
YEAR 2017
6 issues of Apollo and a 
FREE book, for just £20
Surgeons should apply what I call 
the NHS test: would you still operate 
if there were no ﬁnancial gain?

See the ﬁlm at polroger.co.uk

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
27
MARY WAKEFIELD
When therapy does more harm than good
 increasing  frequency as the years go by. Why 
so  traumatised, so young?
The usual suspect is the internet. Teen 
girls seem trapped in a near-inescapable 
bubble of constant carping and comparing. 
It’s also a fact that girls who use the most 
social media are the most likely to experi-
ence depression. But which came first: the 
blues or the ill-advised retreat online?
I hope for all our sakes that there are 
serious scientists doing serious studies 
on this. I hope they are also investigating 
 another maybe more controversial theory 
that’s been raised in recent years.
In 2004, George A. Bonanno, a profes-
sor of clinical psychology at Columbia Uni-
versity, wrote an interesting and optimistic 
paper on how we all cope with life’s hor-
rors. Bonanno is perhaps the world’s fore-
most expert on the science of trauma and 
bereavement, but seems a jolly soul even 
so. His paper was called ‘Loss, Trauma 
and Human Resilience’, subtitled: ‘Have 
we underestimated the human capacity 
to thrive after extremely adverse events?’ 
 Bonanno’s answer was yes, probably.
He looks at some of those same stats 
about the prevalence of PTSD, but his view 
is from a different angle. Bonanno agrees 
that a decent percentage of us, and especial-
ly women, require treatment for PTSD. But 
what’s really incredible, he says, is how many 
of us just roll with the punches. He divides 
people into three main groups: the suffer-
ers (the 10 per cent of women, let’s say, and 
6 per cent of men who really go under); the 
Teflon-coated Tiggers of the world and then 
the middle group of people, who stagger 
when life whacks them, display some of the 
symptoms of PTSD, then recover.
What is particularly interesting is Bonan-
no’s suggestion that therapy, counselling or 
‘grief work’ can interfere with the progress 
of those who would, if left alone, make a nat-
ural recovery. He writes: ‘Whereas genuinely 
traumatised individuals were once doubted 
as malingerers, the pendulum has swung so 
far in the opposite direction that many prac-
titioners believe all individuals exposed to 
violent or life-threatening events should be 
offered and would benefit from some sort 
of intervention.’ But, he says, ‘growing evi-
dence shows  global applications of psycho-
logical debriefing are ineffective and can 
impede natural recovery processes’.
In the 14 years since Bonanno’s paper, 
the mania for psychological debriefing 
and counselling has expanded across the 
West, propelled both by risk aversion and 
by genuine compassion. In the 1980s, state-
sponsored counselling was just for medics 
who’d witnessed unimaginable horrors. By 
9/11, Bonanno points out, it was considered 
an appropriate ‘blanket intervention for all 
exposed individuals’. Come 2018, a wolf-
whistle can be grounds for therapy. That 
stern age which decided Elizabeth had done 
her duty is long gone.
Twice last year I reported a bike stolen 
to the Met and though no thief was pursued, 
both times I was offered trauma counselling. 
Our western universities are ever keener on 
therapy for all. As this magazine has so often 
described, campus madness both in America 
and here has meant several works of great 
literature have been considered psychologi-
cally damaging.
I’ve thought all this is silly and paid it 
little mind. But what if our caring culture, 
the one that finally (and rightly) takes real 
PTSD seriously, is simultaneously under-
mining the natural resilience of kids? What 
if we’ve created a ‘grief work’ trap, encour-
aging girls and boys to see ordinary blues as 
a problem, urging them to seek help which 
then keeps them from recovery? 
We hear more about the placebo effect 
every day. Just the thought that you’ve been 
given a cure is often enough to effect one. 
Perhaps there’s a reverse placebo effect too. 
If we tell our young their ordinary, difficult 
emotions are disordered, they’ll become so. 
Bonanno’s pendulum swings, but rarely 
settles. How can we ensure that the 10 per 
cent who need help are treated, while pre-
serving enough old-fashioned grit to chivvy 
the others on? It’s a terrible dilemma.
 
SPECTATOR.CO.UK/PODCAST
Mary Wakefield and Isabel Hardman on 
dealing with PTSD.
I
n the churchyard by the church near my 
grandmother’s house, there’s a tomb-
stone with an inscription that’s haunted 
me since I was a child. It marks the grave 
of a woman called Elizabeth who died, as I 
remember, in the 1920s. Elizabeth married 
young, had five babies in five years, then 
died well before she reached 30. The epitaph 
on her stone: ‘She did her duty.’
I often find myself thinking about Eliza-
beth and how different her cold and stoic age 
was to ours. I thought of her late last year 
as a slew of research revealed that an aston-
ishing number of women, more than one in 
ten, screen positive for PTSD (post-traumat-
ic stress disorder). We associate PTSD with 
soldiers back from some grisly frontline but 
as it turns out, twice as many women as men 
display symptoms: flashbacks, disassociation, 
unmanageable anxiety. This isn’t self-indul-
gent self-diagnosis; it’s real suffering.
Women can be shell-shocked by life. It’s 
surprising — and it’s not. Consider Eliza-
beth. All sorts of recent studies show that 
giving birth, even to a healthy baby, can be 
traumatising. Most new mothers wobble like 
light aircraft in turbulence, then stabilise and 
carry on. A number nosedive. More than 
8 per cent of mothers in America and in Can-
ada develop PTSD after childbirth. Then on 
top of the ordinary grind there’s life’s  sucker 
punches: losing a child; losing a spouse; mis-
carriage; abortion (much though we cel-
ebrate it); serious accidents; sexual abuse.
These things happen to men too — but 
they happen more often to women and 
it’s a fact that, for the most part, men and 
women react differently to traumatic events. 
A  prison chaplain once told me that when 
male convicts are stressed they become 
aggressive. They lash out and feel better. 
Women hurt themselves.
If it’s not altogether surprising that some 
women are weighed down by life, there is 
another statistic that does seem strange. 
The PTSD chart in this country has a spike. 
Our younger women suffer disproportion-
ately and increasingly. The number of Eng-
lish girls between 16 and 24 who screened 
positive for PTSD trebled in the seven 
years from 2007 to 2014, and it’s rising 
every year. It’s sad but it’s also curious. Life 
delivers shocks but surely these come with 
What if we’ve created a ‘grief work’ 
trap, encouraging girls and boys  
to see ordinary blues as a problem?

28 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
era was over. Between 2000 and 2008 Putin 
exiled and jailed over-mighty oligarchs and 
took over their TV stations; his troops made 
the separatist Georgian republics of South 
Ossetia and Abkhazia Russian protector-
ates, laws were passed banning ‘gay propa-
ganda’. Russia was borderline wicked — but 
in the eyes of the world and of Fifa, not wick-
ed enough to disqualify it from hosting such a 
prestigious event. By today’s standards, 2010 
was an innocent time — and even Russian 
liberals admitted that compared to Stalinist 
days, they were living under a ‘vegetarian’ 
regime rather than a carnivorous one. 
What a difference seven years makes. 
Since his return to power in 2012, Putin 
annexed Crimea, backed an ongoing sepa-
ratist rebellion in Eastern Ukraine that has 
killed more than 10,000 people, hatched 
a plot to conceal mass doping by Russian 
Olympic athletes, ratcheted up a propagan-
da and disinformation campaign intended to 
weaken and break apart western democra-
cies, supported separatist movements across 
Europe from Catalonia to Scotland and 
backed right-wing parties from Hungary to 
Germany — before intervening to turn the 
tide of the Syrian civil war in favour of Pres-
ident Bashar al-Assad. If the selection for 
the World Cup were held today, there’s lit-
tle doubt Russia would be out of the running. 
In the wake of the annexation of Crimea 
and the downing of a Malaysian Airlines 
plane by a Russian Buk missile launcher in 
2014, there were calls to reassign the Cup. 
Fifa rejected them. The then Fifa president 
Sepp Blatter said that ‘boycotting sport 
events or a policy of isolation or confron-
tation’ doesn’t work — and he was backed, 
naturally, by Russian sports minister and Fifa 
executive committee member Vitaly Mutko, 
who called the World Cup ‘a force for good’.
Fifa, of course, is in many ways a kindred 
spirit to the Kremlin. Fifa was shown to be 
corrupt by a high-profile investigation by the 
US FBI in 2015 that resulted in the indict-
ment of seven Fifa officials on suspicion of 
receiving $150 million in bribes. When news 
of the misdeeds was made public, Fifa, like 
the Kremlin, blamed the press rather than the 
alleged culprits. In the wake of a 2010 Sun-
day Times and Panorama investigation into 
alleged payments to Fifa board members just 
before the selection of Russia as host of the 
2018 World Cup, Blatter warned of the ‘evils 
of the media’ in a speech to the Fifa executive 
committee. As Blatter made clear, Fifa doesn’t 
do boycotts for the sake of moral principles. 
Putin has also been lucky that football is 
one of the very few remaining sports where 
Russian athletes haven’t been seriously 
tainted by evidence of systematic doping, 
and are therefore still allowed to compete 
internationally. Two independent investiga-
tions by the International Olympics Com-
mittee uncovered overwhelming evidence 
that the Russian secret services organised a 
sophisticated system to cover up mass dop-
ing of Russian athletes at the 2014 Winter 
Olympics in Sochi. Among other shenani-
gans uncovered by the IOC, urine samples 
from Russian athletes were passed through a 
small hatchway in the testing lab into a secret 
room and untainted samples passed back in 
their place. The IOC established that more 
than 1,000 Russian athletes had used illegal 
performance-enhancing drugs, and stripped 
51 of them of their Olympic medals. Russia 
itself was also denied the right to participate 
in next month’s PyeongChang Winter Olym-
pics — though individual Russian athletes 
can participate under a neutral flag. And Vit-
aly Mutko — now deputy prime minister and 
president of the Russian Football Union — 
has been banned for life from future Olympic 
Games for his role in the doping conspiracy.
Fifa seems to play by different rules. 
In November 2016, it fired Professor Jiri 
Dvorak, a distinguished doctor and neurolo-
gist who had worked on Fifa’s medical, anti-
doping and injury prevention programmes for 
22 years after he began investigating doping 
in Russian football. According to the Guard-
ian, Dvorak had contacted Professor Richard 
McLaren, author of the World Anti-Doping 
Agency’s report into drugs at Sochi, to follow 
up on evidence that 11 Russian footballers 
were among the athletes who benefited from 
state-sponsored doping during the 2012 Lon-
don Olympics. Fifa insisted that the paper’s 
‘speculations around the departure of Prof 
Dvorak are completely baseless’.
To the Russians, the doping scandal, the 
Ukraine invasion and the US election hack-
ing scandal should be seen as so much water 
under the bridge. To quote Sergei Lavrov, it’s 
time to ‘put the past behind us’ and get on 
with enjoying the World Cup. Putin will sure-
ly make certain that it’s a spectacle worthy 
of a great nation. 
A
uthoritarian regimes love grand 
international sporting events. 
There’s something about the mass 
regimentation, the set-piece spectacle, the 
old-fashioned idea of nation states compet-
ing for glory that appeals to leaders who wish 
to show off the greatness of their country to 
the world. Berlin ’36, Moscow ’80, Sochi ’14 
— nothing says ‘we’re here, get used to it’ 
better than a giant sporting jamboree. 
The 2018 football World Cup doesn’t 
offer quite the same degree of validation as 
an Olympic Games. But for Vladimir Putin, 
it’s still a major opportunity to demonstrate 
not only Russia’s new-found greatness but 
also its continued membership of the civi-
lised world. For what Putin yearns for, above 
all, is respect, a place at the table of great 
nations, and recognition from the world that 
Russia is no longer a poor, dysfunctional col-
lapsed empire but once again a superpower. 
You might think that if gaining respect 
is Putin’s aim, he has been looking for it in 
all the wrong places. Invading neighbouring 
countries, cheating at sports and undermin-
ing western democracies are hardly  classic 
reputation-enhancers. But respect and 
respectability are different things. In the con-
voluted moral logic of Putin-world, breaking 
the rules is what every great nation does — 
from the US invasion of Iraq to Washington’s 
supposed encouragement of democratic rev-
olutions all over the former Soviet Union. 
And if the US can bend international law and 
remain respectable, Russia should be able to 
as well. The question is how to get away with it. 
The World Cup, politically, is the Krem-
lin’s big chance for attempting to re-set the 
world’s bad opinion of Russia. The Kremlin’s 
sincere hope is that the world will, some day 
soon, forget about all its recent crimes and 
get on with business as usual. Sergei Lavrov, 
during his meeting last month with Boris 
Johnson in Moscow, kept relentlessly press-
ing the point that it was time to ‘move on’, 
‘concentrate on the positives’, ‘rebuild our 
relationship’ and various other diplomatic 
euphemisms for ‘please let us off the hook’. 
Putin has been very lucky with the World 
Cup. The fact that Russia is hosting the tour-
nament at all is an accident of long-term 
scheduling. Russia was awarded the hosting 
rights in December 2010, back when the rel-
atively liberal Dmitry Medvedev was presi-
dent and there was every hope that the Putin 
Political football
For Putin, the 2018 World Cup means global respect
OWEN MATTHEWS
‘He’s one of the populist kids.’

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
29
LETTERS
will prove to be yet another example of 
where ‘financial innovation’ results in a tax 
on the ignorant. Like so many inventions 
before them, they offer no superior benefits 
to those offered by incumbent solutions. 
Freddie Lait
London SW1
In praise of Parry
 
Sir: It was disappointing that Richard 
Bratby’s article (‘Hitting the high notes’, 
6 January) about classical music in 2018 
made no mention of the centenary of Sir 
Hubert Parry, a great man of British music 
and a fine musician. There is a weekend 
in May, at Gloucester, devoted to Parry 
and his pupils, and (praise be) his work 
is featured at the Three Choirs festival at 
Hereford. Who knows, perhaps even the 
BBC will realise that Parry was a lot more 
than ‘Jerusalem’.
Stephen Lamley
Nottingham
A shame about Toby
 
Sir: I read with real disappointment about 
Toby Young’s resignation from the new 
OfS board. One shouldn’t be surprised 
given the concerted public campaign to 
have him removed. These days I advise all 
colleagues to ‘assume everyone will read 
everything you write and that everyone 
will repeat everything you say’. Sad, really 
— but only this can mitigate the risk of 
nasty future surprises. But who of us are 
faultless of thought? Toby Young is one 
of an increasingly rare breed who at least 
has the minerals to commit said thoughts 
to the written word. Long may he and his 
ilk continue. The OfS will be poorer for his 
absence and his challenging approach and 
will likely end up as yet another forum of 
nodding heads. Or OfNOD, perhaps.
John Prior
Surrey
The rise of subtitles
 
Sir: Mark Mason complains that subtitles 
are taking over the world (‘Read ’em and 
weep’, 6 January). Does it not occur to him 
that for people with hearing loss (which 
must include many readers of his article), 
subtitles are essential if they are to stay in 
touch with the world, be it watching TV and 
films, or indeed the online clips which are 
the main source of his complaints?
Mike Peacock
Andover, Hants
WRITE TO US 
The Spectator, 22 Old Queen Street,  
London SW1H 9HP; letters@spectator.co.uk
Long lives and pension pots
 
Sir: Jon Moynihan is too optimistic about 
the prospects for further increasing life 
expectancy, and too gloomy about those 
of the pensions industry (‘Falling Short’, 
6 January). The wondrous advancements of 
medical science have offered little to solve 
the most pervasive problem we now face: 
declining mental health. It seems unlikely 
that society will chose to invest endlessly in 
repairing bodies to extend lifespans, when 
the minds relating to those bodies have 
already been lost. 
So the viability of pension providers 
is not as parlous as suggested. Indeed, 
many current fund deficits derive from 
the low investment yield environment 
that central bankers have engineered 
but which is not sustainable in the long 
term — the timeframe in which pension 
funds measure their liabilities. When more 
normal investment conditions return, the 
actuarial assumptions used in funding 
those liabilities (and they are always just 
assumptions) will greatly enhance the 
viability of pension provision.
The suggestion that the young can look 
forward to perhaps 50 years of drawing 
a pension looks more fanciful than the 
possibility that in a few years many pension 
funds will be reporting healthy surpluses.
Clive Thursby
Hindhead, Surrey
Robot nurses
 
Sir: Jon Moynihan is right to warn about 
the looming funding crisis of public-
sector pensions. But one wonders why 
his optimism about future advances in 
longevity doesn’t also lead him to expect 
widespread productivity gains from 
automation. Much of state employment 
today involves routine administrative 
tasks that could be taken over by robots 
in the foreseeable future. Even medical 
diagnostics and some police and nursing 
functions could be more efficiently 
performed by artificial intelligence. 
Not only will robots make us richer and 
healthier, but they won’t require support  
in their old age.
Diego Zuluaga
Head of Financial Services and Tech Policy,
Institute of Economic Affairs, London SW1
Owen’s powerful poetry
 
Sir: How depressing to read Nigel Jones’s 
article about Wilfred Owen (‘Anthem 
for groomed youth’, 6 January). The title 
suggests sinister undertones that are 
unfounded, as Jones comments: ‘All of 
this may have been entirely innocent.’ 
If he did indeed have ‘sexual forays’ in the 
East End, it is to be pitied that he could not 
behave in any other way in 1915. It is easy 
to make judgments in 2018; we live in a 
different world. His short life gave us some 
of the best war poetry ever written and his 
sexuality is irrelevant. We should remember 
the poem ‘Spring Offensive’ and think of 
the thousands of boys and men who ‘there 
stood still/ To face the stark blank sky 
beyond the ridge,/ Knowing their feet had 
come to the end of the world.’ 
No one else could have written those 
beautiful, heartbreaking words.
Jo Noble
Oxford
Better buy gold
 
Sir: Lionel Shriver misses the obvious in 
her search for an asset whose ‘value was 
not subjected to deliberate, systematic 
decay, whose supply was strictly limited, 
whose production was beyond the control 
of the state’ (‘Why cryptocurrencies are 
the answer’, 6 January). Gold already ticks 
every box she requires for investing ‘every 
last farthing’ and has further benefits 
beyond her requirements. Cryptocurrencies 

30 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
ANY OTHER BUSINESS| MARTIN VANDER WEYER
Wolff told us the US awaited a president who
could cast a spell on markets: now it has one 
Man of parts
I asked Peter Sutherland — who I  greatly 
admired and who died last weekend — 
which of his achievements made him most 
proud. Ireland’s most passionate pro-Euro-
pean was chairman at the time of BP and 
Goldman Sachs International but said 
 little about either and (more understanda-
bly) nothing about his directorship of RBS. 
Instead he listed his leading roles in the 
creation of the World Trade Organisation 
and Europe’s Erasmus student exchange 
scheme, his record as a youthful attorney 
general of Ireland, and his continuing work 
as UN special representative on migra-
tion. He told me he had never aspired to a 
business career and did not think he would 
have prospered if he had chosen that path 
as a young man, rather than the Dublin bar. 
 Nevertheless he had relished the challenges 
of BP, which included fierce arm-wrestling 
with the Russian oligarchs who were the oil 
giant’s joint venture partners.
He was a humanitarian and an inter-
national negotiator first, a slightly reluc-
tant corporate titan second. I suspect the 
least congenial milieu in his portfolio was 
the amoral money machine that is Goldman 
Sachs; so it’s ironic that his belated induc-
tion into the investment bank’s partnership 
brought him a nine-digit personal fortune.
Better than a tattoo
Here’s the best entry so far in last week’s 
competition for the most articulate justifica-
tion, 100 words max, for following the exam-
ple of the banker’s daughter who is a buyer of 
Bitcoin over the advice of her father, JPMor-
gan Chase chairman Jamie Dimon, that all 
Bitcoin investors are ‘stupid’.  It comes from 
Bernard Kerrison: ‘Dimon’s daughter is 
right because annoying your father is what 
daughters do, while buying Bitcoin doesn’t 
leave lasting damage like a tattoo and is 
much cheaper than taking up with an unsuit-
able young man.’ More entries, please, to 
martin@spectator.co.uk.
I 
once commissioned Michael Wolff —
currently the world’s most talked-about 
journalist as the author of the White 
House exposé Fire and Fury — to write for 
The Spectator. It was just before the 2004 
presidential election in which Republican 
incumbent George W. Bush looked set to 
see off the Democrat challenger John Kerry, 
and I invited Wolff to tell us the implica-
tions for the stock market. His thesis was 
that the Democrats had become ‘the party 
of wealth and Wall Street’ while the Repub-
licans had become ‘non-players’, Bush hav-
ing turned his back on business to be ‘a God-
squad cheerleader’. America was waiting in 
vain for a president who could ‘cast a spell 
of optimism over consumers and markets’.
Not even a mind as allegedly inventive as 
Wolff’s might have imagined that the presi-
dent who would one day claim credit for a 
one-third rise in the Dow Jones index dur-
ing his first year in office would be Donald 
Trump. ‘Six trillion dollars in value created!’ 
boasted the tweet — which also claimed 
incorrectly that recent weeks has seen the 
‘record fastest 1,000-point move in history’.
 In fact a comparable spike occurred at 
the height of the 1999 dotcom boom and 
I’m reminded of a conversation with a grand 
old Republican lawyer during Bill Clin-
ton’s impeachment hearings, a year before 
that boom turned to bust. ‘Do you think 
the President’s behaviour has shamed your 
 country?’ I asked. The answer came with a 
shrug: ‘The stock market’s doing just fine.’
Down on the farm
The farming community was hoping, until a 
few days ago, that Michael Gove might be 
moved to pastures new in the reshuffle that 
hardly happened on Monday. One York-
shire neighbour of mine with a big muck-
spreader used to refer to the secretary of 
state for environment, food and rural affairs 
as ‘the Grim Reaper’. But in Gove’s speech 
to the Oxford Farming Conference last 
week, he seems to have pulled off the politi-
cal trick of winning headlines about ‘deliver-
ing a Green Brexit’ that pleased the urban 
middle classes but might previously have 
had farmers reaching for their pitchforks — 
while in fact reassuring most of them that, 
contrary to previous indications, he has their 
interests at heart and understands the need 
to cut red tape, promote high standards and 
reward conservation in a balanced way.
Welcome news was that UK farm sub-
sidies of £3 billion from Brussels will be 
matched until 2022, but in future will no 
longer be paid in proportion to size — a 
system that absurdly favours wealthy land-
owners such as the Duke of Westminster, 
Sir James Dyson and the racehorse  breeder 
Prince Khalid bin Abdullah al Saud, with-
out encouraging better practice. In a sec-
tor where the average farm is just 160 acres, 
few will object to that shift. More worrying 
was Gove’s talk of rewarding ‘public goods’, 
which many farmers fear means wider public 
access to their land as well as more accepta-
ble objectives to do with bird and wildflower 
diversity. But Gove also talked about ‘sup-
porting innovation, improving productivity 
[and] training a new generation of entre-
preneurial young farmers’ — which is what 
smart farmers themselves care about most. 
These days, farming is a highly  scientific 
business that is gradually shifting from 
chemistry to biology in its quest for better 
results and is replete with acronyms such as 
‘YEN’ — a pioneering crop yield enhance-
ment network run by Adas, the Agricultural 
Development & Advisory Service. But pro-
gressive farmers are frustrated by public and 
political ignorance, and health scares such as 
the row over glyphosate, the key ingredient 
in the weedkiller Roundup, which the World 
Health Organisation declared ‘probably 
carcinogenic’ though several other reputa-
ble agencies disagreed. Gove, to his  credit, 
was quick to take the right side of that argu-
ment: my neighbour also calls him ‘our 
new glyphosate champion’. Out of place as 
he may look in his green wellies in farm- 
visit photo ops, the minister can at least be 
confident he won’t get sprayed with FYM 
(that’s farmyard manure).          

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
31
‘Self-Portrait as a Young 
Man’, 1623, by Gian 
Lorenzo Bernini
Martin Gayford — p46
Emily Hill is sending her 
ex-lover’s T-shirt to join  
the other tragic tat in  
The Museum of Broken 
Relationships  
Tim Stanley reckons that 
America’s best hope is to 
find another FDR
Kate Womersley celebrates 
the gentle Quaker Joseph 
Lister, who transformed 
surgery from butchery to a 
healing art
Andrew Roberts takes a 
look at Churchills on film 
and TV – from Nazi 
caricatures to Gary Oldman
Kate Chisholm has a 
solution to the BBC pay 
scandal: downgrade the 
celebrity presenters
James Walton suggests that 
a genuinely controversial 
TV drama would be an all-
white, all-male one
GALLERIA BORGHESE

32 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
BOOKS
The greatest journeys  
ever made
William Bligh’s was not the only astonishing open-boat voyage  
in the Pacific in the late 18th century. There were others just as 
desperate, says Nicholas Shakespeare 
Paradise in Chains: The Bounty 
Mutiny and the Founding  
of Australia
by Diana Preston 
Bloomsbury, £25, pp. 333
Many believed in Australia for 1,000 years 
before its discovery. There had to be a com-
mensurate weight — somewhere Down 
Under — to counter the northern land mass; 
an ‘unknown Southland’ which was crucial 
to maintaining the balance of the world. 
To confuse matters, this theoretical conti-
nent was dubbed for a while Austrialia del 
Espiritu Santo — in honour of the House 
of Austria. 
A socially awkward Lincolnshireman, 
Matthew Flinders, in 1804, was the origina-
tor of Australia as the name for what had 
for centuries been called New Holland, but 
two French sailors, an aristocratic cartogra-
pher, Louis Freycinet, and a manipulative, 
one-eyed anthropologist, François Péron, 
showed for the first time the continent’s 
actual shape. 
From the late 1700s, galvanised by the 
loss of their American colonies, the French 
dispatched seven expeditions in 30 years to 
seek a huge landmass known as Gonneville 
Land, named after a French sailor blown off 
course in 1503. None of these expeditions 
had marvellous outcomes for their com-
manders. Marion was eaten by Maoris, Ker-
guelen convicted of fraud, D’Entrecasteaux 
died of scurvy, while the most famous, La 
Pérouse, vanished without trace.
Napoleon — who had volunteered for 
La Pérouse’s expedition, but was rejected 
— kept alive French hopes of a replacement 
L’Amérique. In 1801, he authorised a scien-
tific expedition captained by Nicolas Bau-
din, an aloof, dry-witted botanist, to ‘study 
the inhabitants, animals and natural prod-
ucts of the countries in which he will land’. 
A popular belief is that Baudin’s instruc-
tions included a ‘secret order’ to establish 
a French settlement in Van Diemen’s Land, 
discovered by the Dutch explorer Abel Tas-
man in 1642, and to claim the island (now 
Tasmania) before the English — and then 
to claim the western half of the nearby  
continent where England had raised her 
flag; so far, only over New South Wales. 
Why else would large areas on charts 
mapped by Freycinet and Péron, two of Bau-
din’s officers, be marked ‘Terre Napoléon’? 
Had Baudin, in March 1802, not lost con-
tact with his short-sighted hydrographer 
Charles-Pierre Boulanger off the Freycinet 
Peninsula (where I write this) and spent the 
next two months searching for him, then 
the French might have beaten Flinders to it  
and charted the mainland all the way to 
Spencer Gulf. 
As it was, France’s achievement in becom-
ing the first nation to map Australia’s coast-
line was ignored: when Péron’s Atlas at last 
appeared in 1811, three years before Flin-
ders’s Voyage to Terra Australis, it aroused 
scant interest. By then, the baptismal  
melodramas which Diana Preston  
explores in Paradise in Chains had played 
themselves out.
The story about the founding of Aus-
tralia has been well told before, not least 
by Thomas Keneally in Commonwealth 
of Thieves and by Robert Hughes in The 
Fatal Shore. What Preston brings to it in the 
absence of a French connection is an 18th-
century willingness to follow in the wake 
of her leading English characters — a jour-
ney that takes her to Tahiti and Pitcairn 
Island, if not to Kupang in Timor, which has 
grounds to be considered the capital of her 
narrative as much as Sydney Cove. 
In the space of two years, Kupang’s local 
population watched sail into their harbour: 
on 14 June 1789, William Bligh and 17 sur-
vivors of the Bounty, after travelling 47 days 
and 3,600 miles in an open 23-foot boat; on 
5 June 1791, William and Mary Bryant, their 
two children, plus seven other escaped con-
victs from Sydney Cove, after sailing 69 
days and 3,254 miles in Governor Phillip’s 
stolen cutter; on 15 September 1791, Cap-
tain Edward Edwards with survivors of the 
shipwrecked Pandora, plus ten captured 
mutineers of the Bounty, after sailing 1,200 
miles from the Great Barrier Reef. Excited 
to retell these open-boat journeys, which 
‘certainly rank among the greatest such 
journeys ever made’, Preston has a chal-
lenge to keep her feet on several diverging 
rafts, and lash them together into a single, 
focused narrative. 
She is right to restore Tahiti to its posi-
tion as the fertile launch pad for Australia. 
She gives special prominence to the can-
tankerous Bligh and his suave mentor, the 
wealthy botanist Sir Joseph Banks, as char-
acters who left their lasting thumbprints on 
these colonies, as did Cortes and Pizarro in 
Latin America. The Tahitian islands ‘discov-
ered’ by the English in 1767, and visited two 
years later by James Cook, were described 
by Banks, who shared Cook’s cabin on the 
Endeavour, as ‘the truest picture of an arca-
dia… If we quarrelled with those Indians 
we should not agree with angels!’ A French 
In 1791, life in Botany Bay was so 
harsh for convicts that escape into the 
unknown was the lesser of two evils

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
33
Bligh and crew are set 
adrift from the Bounty, in a 
painting by Robert Dodd
botanist, Philibert Commerson, judged the 
Tahitians ‘free of any vice and prejudice’; 
further, their stunningly alluring women 
were ‘the sisters of the utterly naked Grac-
es’, for whom ‘the action of creating a fellow 
human being is a religious one’. The Tahi-
tians reciprocated with a corresponding 
passion for anything made of iron. The price 
of a virgin being ‘three nails and a knife’, 
many a pock-marked, toothless sailor was 
soon extracting nails from his ship’s hull to 
reward sexual favours. Nor did the natives 
simply covet metal objects. An embarrassed 
Banks had to return aboard scampily clad in 
Tahitian cloth after his clothes were stolen 
while he was in flagrante delicto at the bot-
tom of a canoe with a Tahitian girl. 
On his return home, the much-affected 
Banks immediately ‘ended his engagement 
to the wealthy heiress Harriet Blosset’. More 
significantly, he convinced the Admiralty to 
send back to Tahiti the five-foot, blue-eyed, 
only son of a Cornish customs official, Wil-
liam Bligh, ‘to bring the breadfruit plant’ 
with which, Banks argued, England could 
feed her starving slaves in the West Indies 
— following the loss of her own American 
colonies. Tahitian breadfuit was, in Preston’s 
words, ‘a kind of manna from heaven as free-
ly available as the island’s beautiful women, 
only waiting to be plucked from the tree’. 
In another significant decision, Banks 
was responsible for promoting Botany 
Bay in New South Wales as a destination 
for English convicts, now that American 
ports were denied them. The irony here: 
Banks’s twin project in Botany Bay would 
need Tahitian breadfruit a lot more than 
England’s Caribbean cane fields.
If Tahiti was a Utopia, then Sydney 
Cove was its opposite. ‘In the whole world 
there is not a worse country,’ lamented 
Major Robert Ross, commander of the 
marines sent to guard the first batch of 
759 convicts, most of them petty thieves. 
Instead of a landscape with a climate like 
Toulouse, as Banks had promised, with 
plenty of fish and fresh water, and timor-
ous natives, the First Fleet had landed in 
unforgiving, arid, stunted scrub with no pli-
ant women, no food, and hostile locals who, 
accorded to Lieutenant Philip Gidley King, 
‘desired us to be gone’. 
Within two years the situation had grown 
so critical that Mary Bryant, a convicted 
highwaywoman, decided to escape with her 
family: ‘an open boat into the unknown was 
the lesser of two evils’. Arrested in Kupang 
and taken back to London, she and her 
four surviving companions declared they  
‘would sooner suffer death than return to 
Botany Bay’.
That the fragile young colony did not 
revolt was due to its fair-minded first gov-
ernor, Arthur Phillip. In Tahiti, by contrast, 
Bligh’s narcissistic and volatile character, 
more than the allure of young women, 
sparked Fletcher Christian’s ‘unpremedi-
tated’ mutiny. 
Preston enjoys reminding us that this 
was not the last mutiny provoked by Bligh. 
In 1806 — again at Banks’s behest — Bligh 
arrived in Sydney Cove as the colony’s 
new governor. The catalyst this time was 
an appalling ancestor of mine, a profiteer-
ing officer in the New South Wales (‘Rum’) 
Corps called Anthony Fenn Kemp, who 
steadfastly resisted Bligh’s attempts to 
clean up the corruption in which Bligh 
himself participated. ‘What do you think 
he told me?’ Kemp railed. ‘Yes! Told the 
oldest merchant in the colony — that he 
came here to protect the poor. That is not 
the Governor WE want!!!’ At 6.30 p.m. on  
26 January 1808, the 20th anniversary of 
Australia’s foundation, Kemp marched up 
the drive at the head of the Rum Corps, 
sword drawn, into Government House. 
After a couple of hours, Bligh was discov-
ered in a room upstairs. One of Kemp’s 
soldiers noticed a bedcover twitching, 
prodded it with his musket and struck a 
boot. There was Bligh, covered in spider-
webs and with his shirt hanging out.
If the connections that Preston makes 
between her different narratives seem at 
times as arbitrary as the dispensation of 
English justice during this supposed Age 
of Enlightment, then it does not detract 
from the skill with which she reweaves 
a familiar story. Having doggedly fol-
lowed their trails on the page as well as 
on foot, she is well placed to judge the 
destruction wrought by her characters, 
best summarised by the Pandora’s surgeon  
George Hamilton after drawing anchor 
in Tahiti. ‘Happy would it have been  
if these people had never been visited  
by Europeans.’ 
GETTY IMAGES

34 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
Short and sharp  
Jonathan Coe
The Unmapped Country:  
Stories and Fragments
by Ann Quin, edited by Jennifer Hodgson 
And Other Stories, £10, pp. 192
Like A Fiery Elephant, my biography of the 
experimental novelist B.S. Johnson, con-
tains one particularly careless sentence: the 
one where I described Johnson as ‘Britain’s 
one-man literary avant-garde of the 1960s’. 
It was a silly thing to write, partly because it 
wasn’t true, but also because it was easily the 
most quotable line in the book and so every 
journalist and reviewer was bound to pick it 
up and repeat it. And so it proved. 
But Johnson was not Britain’s one-man 
literary avant-garde. The 1960s saw a sig-
nificant flowering of what we might (for 
shorthand) call experimental writing in 
this country. They saw the emergence of 
writers such as Nicholas Mosley, Christine 
Brooke-Rose, Brigid Brophy and Robert 
Nye, while around Johnson himself clus-
tered a small group of like-minded novel-
ists, bound together by prickly friendship 
and, if not a shared aesthetic exactly, then at 
least a shared opposition to what they saw 
as the prevailing aesthetic (neo-Victorian 
realism). These writers included Alan Burns, 
Eva Figes and Ann Quin. 
Quin was born in Brighton in 1936, and 
died in 1973, walking out to sea off Bright-
on beach in an act which shockingly pre-
figured Johnson’s own suicide a few weeks 
later. In her short writing life she produced 
four unconventional novels — Three, Pas-
sages, Tripticks and, perhaps most famous-
ly, her debut Berg, published in 1964 and 
filmed in the late 1980s as Killing Dad. 
She has never been widely read, but Stew-
art Home has written that ‘despite ongoing 
rumours of a B.S. Johnson revival, I feel our 
attention could be more usefully directed 
towards Ann Quin’; and the appearance of 
this collection of short prose — some of it 
previously unpublished — might mark the 
beginning of her rise to a new eminence.
Most of the 1960s British experimental-
ists were united, very loosely, by political 
as well as aesthetic dissatisfactions. Politi-
cally, they were in revolt against the hierar-
chies of the British literary and publishing 
establishments, which were even posher 
and more Oxbridge-dominated than they 
are today, if such a thing is possible. Of 
course this was also, ironically, the decade in 
which working-class writers such as David 
Storey, Margaret Forster and Alan Sillitoe 
became famous, but the experimentalists 
could not cheer on these pioneers because 
they considered their books too traditional. 
To be experimental, after all, required you 
to be in revolt against aesthetic hierarchies 
as well. Most of the writers in Quin’s circle 
and beyond were interested, above all, in 
narrative fragmentation: adapting William  
Burroughs’s cut-up techniques and the  
radical dislocations of the nouveau roman in 
order to avoid the bourgeois compromises 
of plot, tidy narrative resolution and charac-
ter development.
Therefore, while Jennifer Hodgson’s new 
collection of Quin’s prose describes itself as 
‘Stories and Fragments’, even the longest 
stories here are themselves fragmentary.  
A characteristic Quin paragraph will con-
sist of short sentences, often verbless, using 
the full stop the way a conventional writer 
might use a comma; perceptions will be ren-
dered in discrete, brief phrases, cutting rap-
idly from one image to another:
Along the Front. Deserted. Long sloping 
pavements. Carefully avoiding the puddles. 
She took her shoes off and ran. Laughing. 
On to the beach. Down to the water’s edge. 
She heard him panting. Crunching over the 
pebbles. Her hair over her eyes. She did not 
sweep away. Lights of the town distant. The 
sky uplifted from the heaving mass of dark-
ness. That was the sea. Sound of sea. Sounds of 
other seas. Other days. Spent in other places. 
Under foreign skies. 
This is from ‘A Double Room’, the story 
of an adulterous seaside affair, banal enough 
in its substance but rendered distinctive by 
the manner of its telling. It’s one of the more 
straightforward pieces in a very diverse col-
lection, which ranges from autobiographical 
essays (one about Quin’s schooldays, anoth-
er — short, pithy and mordant— called ‘One 
Day in the Life of a Writer’) to a 50-page 
extract from her final, unfinished novel, born 
of Quin’s ‘frequent and devastating bouts of 
mental illness’: a work, in Hodgson’s words, 
about ‘the horrors of “going sane”’.
Quin’s friend and supporter Alan Burns 
once reminisced about the time she took 
part in an ICA event in the 1960s and 
she did her Quin thing, that is to say she came 
onto the stage and she just sat and looked at 
people, she wouldn’t say a goddamn word! 
She just stared, she either implied or she actu-
ally stated that … we can communicate more 
in silence than with someone actually putting 
the words across.
That militant refusal to compromise also  
flavours her writing: you either take her on 
her own terms, or not at all. Quin is challeng-
ing, for sure, but the recent popular embrace 
of Deborah Levy and Eimear McBride 
(both writers who, to my mind, show an 
affinity with Ann Quin, if not her direct 
influence) suggests that there is a growing 
readership out there with a taste for some-
thing richer and stranger than the satisfac-
tions of mainstream fiction. It could be that 
Ann Quin’s time has come at last. 
Has Ann Quin’s time come at last?
PHOTOGRAPH BY OSWALD JONES/BRIDGEMAN IMAGES

SOAS University of London
Object-based study of the
arts of China, Japan & Korea,
India, Southeast Asia and the
Islamic world including access
to the reserve collections
in the British Museum and
Victoria and Albert Museum
Short courses also available
Further details from:
Dr Heather Elgood
Phone: +44 (0) 20 7898 4445
Email: asianart@soas.ac.uk
SOAS, University of London
Thornhaugh Street
Russell Square
London WC1H OXG
www.soas.ac.uk/art
Postgraduate Diploma in 
Asian Art

36 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
Cannon law 
A.S.H. Smyth
The Skull of Alum Bheg: The Life  
and Death of a Rebel of 1857
by Kim A. Wagner 
Hurst, £25, pp. 320
Many and various are the things one finds 
in Kentish pubs (I’m told); but few could 
top the sepoy’s skull discovered at The 
Lord Clyde, Walmer, complete with brief  
biography: 
Skull of havildar ‘Alum Bheg’, 46th Regt. 
Bengal N. Infantry... blown away from a gun.
From this grisly starting point, Kim  
Wagner, lecturer in British imperial histo-
ry at Queen Mary University of London,  
narrates how, in the swelter of mid-1857, 
following outbreaks throughout British 
India, native Bengal Army units at Sialkot 
mutinied, killing officers and civilians and 
looting the cantonment, and then set out 
for Delhi to join Bahadur Shah, the briefly-
minted ‘Emperor of India’. 
They didn’t make it. All but wiped out 
by ‘Nikal Seyn’ Nicholson’s moving col-
umn, the survivors fled into the Himala-
yas. A year later they were dragged back to 
Sialkot and executed, havildar Bheg among 
them. His head was picked up, ‘defleshed’ 
and brought home to Dublin by a  
captain of the 7th Dragoon Guards — 
‘the ultimate proof’, as Wagner deems it,  
‘of colonial power’. 
Alive, it must be said, Alum Bheg does 
not feature too prominently. An ‘archival 
absence’ about him before his execution 
surely means he was not a ‘principal leader 
in the mutiny’, as the note appended to his 
skull suggests. By and large it would appear 
that he died as proxy for a more notorious 
mutineer, the cartoonish former flogger of 
the district court.
But how the havildar (or sergeant) 
went from loyal servant of John Company 
to mutineer gives scope for looking at the 
wider mutiny. Indian conceptions of armed 
service proved incompatible with the East 
India Company’s. The sepoys — largely 
Hindustanis, in the Punjab which they’d 
recently helped to add to British territory 
— saw themselves as kingmakers, a caste-
like group unto themselves, with privi-
leges to uphold and a strict, contractual 
attitude towards the ‘military labour mar-
ket’. The Company, though, was now the 
last employer standing, and had a different 
idea of their obligations.
Religion, obviously, played its part. A 
fatal air hung over the centenary of British 
dominance in the subcontinent. The  reports 
of fat-smeared cartridges were, infamously, 
everywhere. And though the EIC officially 
frowned on evangelism, Sialkot was ‘over-
run by zealous Christians’. For their part, 
the sepoys — Hindu, Muslim or other — 
were quick to turn their scruples into larger 
problems.
Geography did not help, either. At a 
‘border post at the end of a road leading 
nowhere’ (now in Pakistan), with the cables 
cut and the mail prohibited, the Sialkot 
forces were the last to mutiny — victims, 
essentially, of a vicious spiral of distrust, 
fear and professional outrage. The British 
thought they saw conspiracy everywhere; 
the sepoys were terrified of their artillery 
being turned against them.
In all, at Sialkot, events were rath-
er minor — seven British deaths, includ-
ing one woman and one baby. But they 
epitomised the general pattern of the  
‘Uprising’ (Wagner’s preferred term), 
not least because hysterical reports of  
‘violation’, baby-murdering and mutilation 
poured fuel on the retributive colonial fire, 
‘sealing the fate of all the Indian troops’, 
however culpable. 
In his telling of the life, death and after-
life of Alum Bheg, Wagner is at home with 
terms like ‘orientalising’, ‘fetishised’ and 
‘subaltern prosopography’. But the vio-
lence of 1857 was mutiny, not (his quotes) 
‘Mutiny’; an NCO is not ‘an officer’, par-
ticularly here; and Bheg, however small 
a role he played at Sialkot, wasn’t ‘inno-
cent’. Nor do I accept Wagner’s blithe  
dismissal of the idea that rebel violence 
might have played a part in brutalising the 
British soldiery.
Nonetheless, Nicholson’s ‘exempla-
ry’ gory punishments were denounced 
by British contemporaries, and in aim-
ing the judicial cannonade at native 
audiences, the hell-mouth of the  
cannon reignited the same cultural- 
religious fears that had sparked the whole 
damn business in the first place.
As one lieutenant noted sadly in his 
diary: ‘Such cruelties must tell against us in 
the long run.’
Hysterical reports of rape, baby- 
murdering and mutilation sealed  
the fate of all the Indian troops
The execution of mutineers by the Bengal Horse Artillery, in a painting  by Orlando Norie
BRIDGEMAN IMAGES

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
37
Sunlit days  
and starry nights 
Boyd Tonkin
Writer’s Luck:  
A Memoir, 1976–1991
by David Lodge 
Harvill Secker, £25, pp. 387
In 1990, the BBC’s adaptation of David 
Lodge’s culture-clash novel Nice Work won 
an award at a glitzy soirée in London. At the 
same time, his debut stage play The Writ-
ing Game opened at the Birmingham Rep.  
Malcolm Bradbury, his old friend and part-
ner on the twin tracks of literary academ-
ia and serio-comic fiction, had come to  
Birmingham to stay and see the show. After 
a starry night in the West End, and ‘a brief 
whirl around the dance floor’, Lodge sped 
back home. He arrived at 3.30 a.m., but 
found that his wife Mary ‘had accidentally 
locked me out, and I had to throw gravel 
up at our bedroom window from the back 
garden to wake her without disturbing the 
Bradburys’. Mr Pooter may have joined the 
A-list, but mishaps and pratfalls still dog his 
every step. 
Lodge’s 15 novels reveal a sly and droll 
ventriloquist who knows exactly how to fix 
a mood or modify a key through the timbre 
of a storyteller’s voice. In this second volume 
of memoirs, the contrast between his mid-
career procession of triumphs, adventures 
and accolades and the deadpan, humdrum 
delivery is wholly conscious and controlled. 
Who knew, for instance, that this proud adop-
tive Brummie had a long-standing link with 
Hawaii — the location of his Paradise News 
— after his Auntie Eileen settled there? 
Although research for that novel involved a 
dash from the museum in Waikiki straight to 
a bar ‘with topless go-go girls on a catwalk’, 
Lodge tends to make his Pacific excursions 
to care for Eileen sound like trips to Sut-
ton Coldfield. Even a tour of Pearl Harbor 
turns out to be merely ‘extremely interesting, 
though not very relevant to my novel’. 
Self-effacing, borderline pedestrian, 
this Diary of a Somebody tone does a dou-
ble job. First, it takes the edge of envy off a 
chronicle of middle-aged success that saw 
Lucky David slip with frictionless aplomb 
away from his cosy berth at the Universi-
ty of Birmingham into a freelance career. 
During this vanished era, both cash and 
kudos might await an ideas-rich satirist 
and social comedian of Lodge’s calibre: 
‘I happened to hit my stride as a novelist 
when the going was good for literary fic-
tion.’ Here, the earnest, upwardly mobile  
South London Catholic we met in the first 
volume, Quite a Good Time to be Born, seg-
ues from learned studies of modernism and 
structuralism to the Booker shortlist (twice), 
healthy advances, round-the-world tours and 
big-budget TV serials. We glimpse him, en 
route by helicopter to Monte Carlo, ‘skim-
ming the waves in a rather thrilling way’. 
That final phrase stamps the narrator of 
Writer’s Luck as a deftly crafted character 
to match any in Changing Places or Small 
World. So does his response to footage of 
his appearance, clad in ‘a fawn corduroy suit 
from Austin Reed, and a Beatles hairstyle’, 
on a book-chat programme hosted by Rob-
ert Robinson. In the discussion, ‘I spoke rath-
er well, I think’. 
False modesty or not, Lodge’s low-key 
narration has another role. It shifts the focus 
from his serene-sounding progress through 
a gilded age of conference globe-trotting 
and literary hype onto the conditions that 
underlay these ‘buoyant times’. Without 
ever dropping his academic hat, he swapped 
gown for town during a brief window of rich 
opportunity. Changes in education, pub-
lishing and bookselling nurtured a hunger 
for the intelligent entertainment that his  
novels so smartly met. His own journey 
spotlights the social history of his genera-
tion, whether in the incremental loss of faith 
that estranged him from the church (‘I was 
not innately spiritual’) or his hawk-eyed 
scrutiny of the sexual revolution — always, 
he assures us, as ‘a war correspondent, not 
a participant’. He does admit to a taste 
for naked mixed saunas and nude swim-
ming with ‘the water coursing unimped-
ed round your loins’. Typically, though, he 
acquired his saucy sauna habit at the Cent-
er Parcs camps where the search for ‘safe, 
friendly and predictable’ holidays with his  
Down’s Syndrome son Chris led him. 
The quest to make Chris happy and 
secure casts the odd shadow over these sun-
lit uplands. His mother’s illness and death 
engender passing gloom, although when he 
kisses Mum’s forehead, ‘cold and unyielding 
as marble’, we learn that ‘I did not weep. I 
never do’. Lodge glances at his own episodes 
of stress-related ‘anxiety and depression’, 
briskly quelled by yoga and counselling. His 
closest brush with despair or revelation aris-
es from a rash surfeit of long-haul flights that 
culminates in an ‘epiphany’ on the tarmac of 
Postern
Anything can snag unexpectedly    
like this picture of an empty doorway
framed by splitting lattice       climbing ivy    
and a half-panel of tongue-and groove
unvarnished weather-hammered oak
held open       to let us out or in. 
Dead leaves     like the years behind      
blow over the floor       where we stand     
looking through to a grey-gold 
mist over rolling hills 
the kind of world 
where she felt at home.  
Inside       you can almost smell 
the rotting deck-chairs       creosote
crumbling leather       frayed rope       dust.   
You can find anything in here. Look 
once-vital objects       turning       like us all 
to junk and rust. 
What am I thinking of?  Oh yes —
the abandoned summerhouse    
below and out of sight of the back lawn
in the garden where she grew up.
This is my mind       telling me     
that’s where she’s gone.
— Ruth Padel

38 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
A girl with green eyes
Emily Hill
Jealousy: A Forbidden Passion
by Giulia Sissa
Polity, £17.99, pp. 303
Revenge: A Short Enquiry 
into Retribution
by Stephen Fineman
Reaktion, £14.99, pp. 152
The Museum of Broken 
Relationships: Modern Love 
in 203 Everyday Objects
by Olinka Vistica
Weidenfeld, £16.99, pp. 222
I loved a man. But our affair was nasty, brut-
ish and short. Copious weeping was my un-
tart retort. All that’s left of him is a stained 
T-shirt. I must rid my mind of him now. That’s 
long overdue. But how? These three books 
seem to present three answers. I’ve been 
wonkily underlining whole paragraphs and 
brooding over what to do.
Nowadays, if you admit to being 
heartbroken after the fact you’re treated 
as a malingerer. So I very much appreci-
ated Giulia Sissa’s Jealousy: A Forbidden 
Passion — a scholarly defence of indulg-
ing your violent fury. In the age of Tinder, 
your next paramour is but a thumb-swipe 
away, so the attitude is: ‘They don’t love you. 
Why would you care? It’s all in your head. 
It’s all in your past. It’s always your prob-
lem. Enough!’ I agree with Sissa. We women 
‘do not like being treated like an inter-
changeable, meaningless, replaceable pres-
ence’, and it’s OK to feel green about it.
But I am confused by how much empha-
sis she places on Medea, who, according to 
myth, helped Jason slay the Minotaur, only 
to be abandoned by the ungrateful wretch 
when he took a fancy to another woman. In 
response, Medea slaughtered all their chil-
dren. This might signify much for what Sissa 
calls our ‘erotic dignity’; but when seeking to 
prove that jealousy is not ‘the most obscene 
emotion of all’, Medea is an odd choice 
of heroine.  
So I dispensed with the idea of becom-
ing homicidally jealous and turned instead 
to Stephen Fineman’s Revenge: A Short 
Enquiry into Retribution, in which he argues, 
very persuasively, that revenge is a dish we 
really should serve — whether cold, hot or 
a Canadian airport. Artfully, enjoyably, he 
sidelines the inner life in favour of a shrewd 
and drily comic testimony from a lost epoch 
of plenty. Younger writers in these less bless-
ed times may pore over it with the stupefied 
wonder of Dark Age peasants uncovering 
a floor mosaic of feasts and revels amid the 
ruins of a Roman villa. 
as a lukewarm canapé. ‘Our compulsion to 
avenge a wrongdoing is among the most pri-
mal of human urges,’ he explains. ‘Getting 
even shows there is a price to pay.’
I raced through this book, cackling — and 
relishing in particular the pages pointing out 
how, throughout history, and still in some 
areas of the world, mine is the sex that has 
been persistently maltreated and oppressed 
and that it’s jolly nice finally to be getting 
our own back. Fineman points out that war-
time rapes have barely been prosecuted and 
refers to honour killings today. I suspect he 
is itching to write a fresh chapter on how 
Harvey Weinstein finally got his just deserts 
thanks to the #metoo brigade.
Fineman seems quite a fan of vigilante 
justice — as long as the target is indisput-
ably guilty. He doesn’t understand why we 
should get screwed over again and again 
without doing anything about it. ‘Turn-
ing the other cheek,’ he observes, ‘is sim-
ply an invitation to be slapped again.’ He 
gives voice to all the waiters who avow 
they are not ‘robots to respond to fin-
ger clicks’ and lament of their customers:
‘I wouldn’t treat a dog, the way they 
treat us.’ 
He adds: ‘Minor acts of sabotage can bring 
relief from intrinsically alienating or monot-
onous work.’ I have known that pleasure. So 
I adored, above all, Fineman’s air hostesses, 
who break wind in the direction of obnox-
ious passengers, redirect all their luggage 
to, say, Tokyo, and when asked by a man to 
smile, say they’ll smile if he will too. When he 
does, they shoot back: ‘Now freeze and hold 
that for 15 hours.’ The customer is not always 
right. When he’s vile he should get his 
comeuppance.
But not all revenge is quite so right-
eous. Sometimes it’s just vicariously amus-
ing. ‘Never wrong a writer,’ Fineman 
advises. ‘They get their revenge in print.’ 
(A statement that may send a shiver down 
my true love’s spine.) Take Norman Mailer, 
who so despised his third wife, Jeanne Camp-
bell, he had her double strangled and thrown 
off a tenth-floor balcony in An American 
Dream. Campbell dubbed this light fiction-
alisation of their unhappiness together ‘the 
hate book of all time’.
‘Mailer’s venom is palpable,’ Fineman 
concludes. ‘But it is trounced by Ernest 
Hemingway.’ When Papa’s third wife, 
Martha Gellhorn, walked out (wonder-
ing why she should ‘be a footnote to some-
body else’s life’) he retaliated by writing a 
poem to her vagina, likening ‘said organ to 
the crumpled neck of an old hot-water 
bottle’. Then, in a short story called ‘It was 
Very Cold in England’, ‘a Hemingway-
like character compares the sexual per-
formance of a Gellhorn-like character to a 
washed-up mine that had failed to detonate’.
Tempting as it would be to assassi-
nate my man in print, I don’t want to come 
off looking as petty as all that. So I turned 
to The Museum of Broken Relationships 
which claims to sum up ‘modern love in 203 
everyday objects’. The museum was found-
ed in Croatia by two ex-lovers who wanted 
to memorialise their former passion for one 
another, and I found the accompanying book 
very affecting. I don’t want to fall in love 
again if this is how it always has to end.
Each page consists of a photograph of 
an item sent to the museum together with 
a note explaining what it symbolises to the 
one who posted it. Each tale is different. And 
yet all are curiously the same — bleak and 
stark and heart-mashing. It’s like a cheerful-
ly coloured catalogue of suicide, divorce and 
venereal disease. 
At times, there’s nothing to do but 
laugh:  at the ‘can of love incense’ (explana-
tion: ‘didn’t work’); at the ‘sweatshirt with a 
smiley face on the front and the reverse on 
the back’: 
The angry face tells me that he went to a 
South American transgender prostitute on 
Vesterbro and paid 800 Danish Kroner for 
a blow job on Christmas Eve. ‘Now we have 
gonorrhoea,’ the face says.
But best by far was the note accompany-
ing the twin silicone jellies salvaged from 
a reversed boob job. (‘My ex had convinced 
me to get breast implants... at the time 
I hadn’t had enough therapy to tell him 
to go f*** himself.’)
Subscribe for 
only £1 an issue
9 Weekly delivery of the magazine
9 App access to the new  
issue from Thursday
9 Full website access
UK Direct Debit only. Special overseas rates also 
available. $2 a week in Australia call 089 362 4134  
or go to www.spectator.com.au/T021A
0330 333 0050 quoting A152A
www.spectator.co.uk/A152A
INTRODUCTORY OFFER:
Iran is our natural ally
The National Trust in trouble 
Boris in Libya 
The lesson of 
Houston 
MY 
DATES WITH 
DIANA
TAKI
Can you forgive her?
Isabel Hardman and Matthew Parris on Theresa May’s fate

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
39
I was persuaded. My love may sleep 
peacefully in his bed. I’ll just ship what’s left 
of him to Zagreb. There his T-shirt can join 
all the other tragic tat. A monument to our 
nothingness. A promise to forget.
Father of the nation 
Tim Stanley
Franklin D. Roosevelt: A Life
by Robert Dallek 
Allen Lane, £30, pp. 704
Franklin D. Roosevelt isn’t as popular as 
he once was. When Barack Obama won the 
2008 election, he let it be known that he was 
reading a book about FDR, and tumble-
weed blew through the newsrooms. Which 
is odd because for many decades FDR was 
every bit the model liberal as Ronald Rea-
gan was the model conservative. Roosevelt 
was credited with ending the Great Depres-
sion, laying the foundations of a welfare 
state and leading America through the sec-
ond world war — achievements for which 
he was rewarded with not one, not two but 
four election victories. And he did all of this 
despite being an elitist East Coaster with a 
wife who was very probably a lesbian. So 
cool was the marriage of Franklin and Elea-
nor, so European, that when Eleanor was 
asked what she thought of one of her hus-
band’s election victories, she replied: ‘What 
difference does it make to me?’
Robert Dallek’s superb book explores 
how they got away with it. Roosevelt was 
helped somewhat by the era he lived in. 
Journalists were more willing to pretend 
he hadn’t been left crippled by a paralyt-
ic illness — and the public had no need 
to know that Eleanor didn’t always spend 
Christmas with her husband. But the idea 
that the 1930s was a more genteel age in 
which it was far easier to govern is bull. 
Congress was divided not only by party 
but by region and ideology — and both 
sides liked to throw around labels like 
‘communist’ or ‘fascist’. General Douglas  
MacArthur applauded a Republican  
congressman who said that Roosevelt was 
a proto-monarch, determined to ‘destroy 
the rights of the common people’. In 1938, 
a citizen from Atlanta wrote to FDR:  
‘Try dipping your head in a pail of water 
three times and just bring it out twice.  
Then the country will really recover.’
Roosevelt made mistakes. To over-
come constitutional resistance, he tried and 
failed to pack the Supreme Court. He was 
too slow to help Germany’s Jews. His neu-
trality in the Spanish Civil War probably 
helped Franco’s fascists win. He was obvi-
ously too distracted by ill-health to negoti-
ate with Stalin. And he shared the common 
mistaken belief that the American South 
could be left alone to evolve towards black 
civil rights. From the present perspective — 
when liberalism has become so much about 
identity politics, particularly race — that 
looks not only naive but a serious blemish 
on any record.
Well, perhaps the present asks too much. 
The scale of conservative opposition to 
Roosevelt reflected how radical and thus 
remarkable his New Deal was for its time. 
He overturned a small government ortho-
doxy to electrify the countryside, adjust 
prices, regulate Wall Street, establish social 
security and support the union movement. 
How did he do it? 
For a start, he was happy to experiment, 
to try anything that might work, so long as 
the message was that an activist govern-
ment was taking the side of the little man. 
Second, his liberalism was always tempered 
by conservative instinct. So much energy 
was spent on helping agriculture, Dallek 
argues, because Roosevelt had an old- 
fashioned, bucolic sense of what America 
was all about. He fretted over balancing the 
budget — as did the average voter, accord-
ing to polls — and when it came to welfare, 
he preferred programmes that put peo-
ple to work rather than paid them to sit at 
home. His liberalism was distinguished from 
socialism in that it sought not to replace 
capitalism but save it.
It’s customary at this point in any con-
servative discussion of Roosevelt to say that 
his economic experiments may have pro-
longed the Great Depression by meddling 
with the market — but I’m not going to do 
that. What right-wingers forget is that the 
Depression didn’t just test American capi-
talism but the American way of life itself, 
and the real secret to Roosevelt’s success 
was his ability to revive his citizens’ faith 
in it. Nowadays, liberals seem to dislike  
America’s small-town, popular capital-
ism — and the middle-class heartlands for 
whom it means so much. Roosevelt both 
consciously and naturally embodied the 
cultural values of those people, reflected in 
a ‘personal routine [which] gave assuranc-
es that he was grounded in familiar Ameri-
can customs’ — hard work, martinis, poker, 
stamp collecting and an ability to talk to 
folks, particularly over the radio, in a way 
that conveyed authority, humility and com-
plete confidence in the future.
After Roosevelt, only Reagan achieved 
the same level of public admiration, and he 
exhibited exactly the same qualities, albeit 
deployed for a very different political pur-
pose. When Democrats cast around for a 
candidate to take on Trump in 2020, they 
should start by dropping the snobbish atti-
tude and picking up a book on FDR.
‘The Illegal Act’: 
Roosevelt, in 
a boat named 
National Recovery, 
struggles to save 
Uncle Sam from 
the Depression. 
The cartoon 
appeared in 1935, 
when the United 
States Supreme 
Court declared the 
National Recovery 
Administration 
unconstitutional
When Democrats look for a  
candidate to take on Trump in  
2020, they’d do well to study FDR
GETTY IMAGES

40 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
The germ of a 
revolutionary idea 
Kate Womersley
The Butchering Art: Joseph Lister’s 
Quest to Transform the Grisly World 
of Victorian Medicine
by Lindsey Fitzharris 
Allen Lane, £16.99, pp. 286
Every operation starts the same way.  
Chlorhexidine scrubbed under nails, 
lathered over wet hands, palm-to-palm,  
fingers interlaced, thumbs, wrists, forearms. 
A soothing routine accompanied by the 
sound of water hitting a steel trough sink. 
Washing is an act of safety but also humil-
ity. It acknowledges a doctor’s capacity to 
cause disease as well as cure it. More than 
once I have thought of Joseph Lister — the 
father of antisepsis (killing germs) and fore-
father of asepsis (excluding germs complete-
ly) — as I perform this hygienic set-piece. 
Not that he would have liked the idea of me, 
his sister’s great-great-great granddaughter, 
studying medicine. Lister ‘could not bear 
the indecency of discussing with women 
the secrets of the “fleshly tabernacle”’, and 
sought to block their membership of the 
profession.
In the 1860s, much of the surgical estab-
lishment dismissed antisepsis as ‘hocus-
pocus’. They were unwilling to believe 
that current techniques might actually be 
harming patients. Instruments were rare-
ly cleaned between cases, surgical aprons 
stiffened with blood, and surgeons had 
been known to suck patients’ wounds in 
the middle of an operation. Professional 
assets included a firm fist that could double  
as a tourniquet, and the dexterity to flay 
flesh to the bone in seconds (even if a tes-
ticle or finger was collateral damage). A 
surgeon’s currency was speed and strength 
rather than sanitary practice. 
Joseph Lister (1827–1912) — with his 
‘indescribable air of gentleness, verging 
on shyness’, a stutter and almost ‘woman-
ly’ concern for others — was not the obvi-
ous candidate to overhaul this filthy mess. 
Medicine didn’t run in the family. Devout 
Quakers, the Listers believed that home-
opathy and divine intention were the 
best healers. Nevertheless, aged 17, Lister  
found himself in the overcrowded stench 
of central London embarking on a surgical 
education.  
Lindsey Fitzharris has written a brilliant 
biography that embeds Lister in his medi-
cal moment. The smells and sights of rotting 
flesh seeped through the capital’s streets, 
into the teaching hospitals and around 
the graveyards (raided by body-snatch-
ers). It was the time of cholera, smallpox 
and typhoid. Amid the gore, the intellectu-
al scene of the city was flourishing. Lister 
rubbed shoulders with Thomas 
Hodgkin (whose father had iden-
tified the lymphoma that bears his 
name). Professor William Sharpey 
encouraged Lister’s enthusiasm 
for the new experimental science 
of physiology. Lister spent his eve-
nings peering into the achromatic 
microscope invented by his father, 
Joseph Jackson, to inspect animal 
specimens and swatches of human 
iris. He even tried in vitro fertili-
sation with cockerel sperm and a 
chicken egg. 
By the time of Lister’s gradu-
ation, ether and chloroform had 
ended surgery’s ‘age of agony’. 
No longer constrained by a 
patient’s reaction to pain, sur-
geons ventured deeper into the 
body with ever more radical 
procedures. As a result, surgery 
actually became riskier and infec-
tion rates increased. A patient in 
recovery was interpreted very 
differently to today: inflamma-
tion around the surgical site and 
‘laudable pus’ were seen as reas-
suring signs. Why certain patients 
developed systemic sepsis was 
unclear. Perhaps disease travelled 
from one person to another via a pathogenic 
agent. Or, as the anti-contagionists believed, 
maybe illness arose spontaneously from 
dirty conditions, moving through the air in  
miasmatic clouds. 
Lister was unconvinced by both theo-
ries. He observed that a patient’s environ-
ment mattered (death rates were higher 
in hospital than in domestic settings), but 
doubted that infective life could arise de 
novo. Prompted by scepticism rather than 
Archimedean revelation, Lister went back 
to Joseph Jackson’s microscope. Louis  
Pasteur’s recent work in France inspired  
Lister to make a connection with the 
microbes he observed in a sample of 
gangrene. Could infective processes be  
halted in a similar way to fermentation  
and putrefaction? 
Lister developed a regimen for wash-
ing hands and tools in carbolic acid, tend-
ing wounds with saturated dressings and 
spraying a chemical mist over the uncon-
scious patient. As his conviction grew, he 
agreed to remove a cancerous lump from 
his own sister’s breast, which had already 
been declared inoperable by two surgi-
cal colleagues. Etherised upon her broth-
er’s dining room table, Isabella Lister’s 
procedure was a success. Avoiding infec-
tion, she survived three years before her  
cancer recurred.
Fitzharris subtly demonstrates how Lis-
ter eventually secured his medical repu-
tation not in spite of, but perhaps because 
of, his religious upbringing. Quakerism 
has tended to be portrayed as a distrac-
Surgical aprons stiffened with blood, 
and surgeons would suck patients’ 
wounds in the middle of an operation
The surgeon and anatomist David Hayes Agnew, teaching at the University of Pennsylvania in the 1880s.  
The cautious Americans were initially resistant to Lister, who toured the US hoping to convert the sceptics
PAINTING BY TTHOMAS EAKINS (1889)/GETTY IMAGES

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
41
tion from his scientific interests, particu-
larly as Lister considered leaving medical 
school to enter the ministry. But once sat-
isfied that surgery was an altruistic path, 
Lister recognised that evidence alone 
would not change the status quo. The art of  
persuasion would be critical to converting 
non-believers. 
The ‘scientific Germans’ eagerly 
adopted antisepsis, but the ‘plodding and 
practical English surgeon’ and cautious 
Americans were more resistant. Touring 
the US, Lister made the most of his plat-
form to evangelise to roomfuls of stu-
dents and sceptics. By interweaving case 
histories, demonstrations and rhetoric, 
he won over a generation of disciples. It 
wasn’t long before he became president 
of the Royal Society and personal surgeon 
to Queen Victoria. He was now part of  
the establishment.
Despite The Butchering Art’s admira-
ble detail and vivid storytelling, Fitzharris 
is slightly heavy-handed with her conclu-
sion that Lister raised the dark curtain of 
surgical barbarism to let in the light. With-
out question, ward conditions and opera-
tive hygiene have been transformed. But 
the scourges of gangrene, erysipelas, pyem-
ia and septicaemia — collectively known 
as ‘hospitalism’ to Lister’s contemporar-
ies — did not disappear. Even with today’s 
antibiotics, surgical patients are not invul-
nerable. Nosocomial infections are a new 
strain of hospitalism: MRSA and resist-
ant superbugs threaten to undermine  
Listerian modernity, and send us back to 
a time when a scalpel’s trace could be the 
death of you.
collar mook, who has found himself in what 
would, in other hands, have been a clas-
sic horror-story location: New Glades, a 
1960s development, ‘built on ancient wood-
land owned by a monstrously wealthy pri-
vate trust’. He is the sort of homme moyen  
sensuel who is given rather more 
sympathetic life in Jon Canter’s much  
underrated Worth.
Suddenly and inexplicably deformed by 
disease, James is treated badly by all except 
his children. In due course, after a period of 
anomie and uprootedness, he finds himself 
acting badly in return to everyone he meets, 
including his children — though rather less 
badly than many would in his shoes.
Heather, The Totality by Matthew Weiner 
(Canongate, £14.99) is a lean, sharp meta-
thriller. The writing is laconic and assured, 
though Weiner can be cloth-eared at times, 
using the same preposition slightly differ-
ently twice in a sentence, and so on. But as  
storytelling goes — or, given Weiner’s cele-
brated work on Mad Men, storyboarding — 
it is superb. 
Heather is the impossibly fragrant daugh-
ter of an unhappy Manhattan couple (her 
father, Mark, is not a million miles away from 
James Orr, except that he works in finance, 
and is ‘rich but not rich-rich’). A dark star 
enters their lives in the form of Bobby, a 
construction worker and matricide, whose 
life up until now has been a long murk of  
poverty interrupted by incandescent out-
bursts of violence.
In short paragraphs the book darts 
between Mark, Heather, Bobby and Karen, 
Heather’s mother (or rather Mother —  
the archetypal roles get a capital let-
ter, as in a play or a psychiatrist’s case 
history), setting out an ever-hastening 
plot, showing how the players misun-
derstand not just one another but the 
potentially fatal circumstances they find 
themselves in. Heather, despite her alleg-
edly prodigious capacity for empathy, 
mistakes what lies behind Bobby’s dead  
eyes about as seriously as it’s possible to 
mistake anything.
The novel probably intends some sort 
of comment about money and ennui; the 
perils of living vicariously through others; 
masculinity in crisis  — though it’s a recru-
descence of masculinity that saves the day 
— and the Monster Inside Us All. But it 
doesn’t give itself room to say anything 
interesting about any of these things. Its 
gestures towards sophistication, such as the 
notion (not borne out, as far as I can tell) that  
psychopaths automatically have the senso-
ry hyperacuity of a Guerlain ‘nose’, tend to 
let it down. But you do tear through it — 
and you’re not quite sure what you think 
when you’ve finished.
In State of Emergency (Epigram, £10) 
there’s a strong case for seeing common 
ground between its author, Jeremy Tiang, 
and its subject. (Like his protagonist  
Henry, Tiang is a youngish Oxford-educat-
ed Singaporean.) But it doesn’t really read 
like a personal project — and why should it? 
It’s well researched, informative and even- 
handed in its view of a chapter of  
Singapore’s history about which many  
of us know little; but the human factor  
is underpowered. 
There are three key events: the alleged 
massacre of 24 male villagers by British 
troops at Batang Kali in 1948; the decision 
some years later by an impassioned young 
Chinese-speaking freedom fighter, Siew Li, 
to dodge the authorities, leave her husband 
Jason and their twins, Janet and Henry, in 
Singapore, and go ‘inside’ — to train with 
communist militias in the jungle; and the 
final illness and death of Jason, which 
brings Henry winging his way home, hav-
ing set aside his research on the Habsburgs 
to abseil down his own familial crevasse.
You’re left with a sense of of intense 
personal loss, and of the complexities 
of the region. But on the political front, 
other than underlying racial tensions — 
it’s clear that, as elsewhere in the area, 
communism was a rallying point for  
Chinese minorities, oppressed or other-
wise, before it was any sort of belief system 
— there’s not much debate about the rights 
and wrongs of it all. On the emotional front,  
I’d have liked more about Siew Li and Jason 
after their parting: why she found it so easy 
to ‘move on’, and he so difficult. But then it’s  
not my story.
First novels 
Dangerous living 
Keith Miller
Here come three novels marketed as debuts 
but written by authors with some sort of  
previous, be it in short stories, journal-
ism, theatre, television or a combination of  
the above. 
The Alarming Palsy of James Orr by 
Tom Lee (Granta, £12.99) takes a fable 
and transplants it into real life —  in this 
case bourgeois southern British subur-
ban life — where the neat conclusions we 
might draw from it if we encountered it in 
a more distilled form are muffled and made 
strange. The exemplar of Kafka is obvi-
ous (both Metamorphosis and The Trial);  
but I found myself thinking also of John 
Cheever, Richard Yates and other Ameri-
can writers who needle away at the pain and 
self-delusion behind the sleek lives of the 
executive class. 
James Orr isn’t much of an unreliable 
narrator, just an ordinary, appalling white-
beetle
to me
you cover
little ground
despite
how fast
you run
to you
I’m nothing
but a passing
cloud
across
the sun
to us
our errands
so important
and
so quickly
done
— Candy Neubert

42 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
A brutal race 
Patrick Flanery
A Long Way from Home
by Peter Carey 
Faber, £17.99, pp. 360
More than 25 years ago, Peter Carey  
co-wrote one of the most audacious road 
movies ever made, Wim Wenders’s Until the 
End of the World, which circles the globe 
before concluding with a long interlude in 
the Australian outback. While the film was in 
the mode of speculative science fiction and 
Carey’s captivating A Long Way from Home 
is a fiercely realist story set in the 1950s,  
this new book nonetheless shares both 
that earlier work’s fascination with outsid-
ers whose lives spin off in unpredictable  
directions, and as a profound reverence for 
Australia’s interior and its people.
Outside Melbourne, in the small town 
of Bacchus Marsh, Willie Bachhuber — a 
disgraced former schoolteacher and radio 
quiz-show regular who develops a passion 
for mapmaking — and his neighbour Irene 
Bobs — diminutive mother of two and wife 
of Titch Bobs, one of the best car salesmen 
in the country — find their lives entangled 
when Titch decides to enter the Redex Reli-
ability Trial. Although Irene is a better driv-
er than any man, Titch knows they need a 
navigator to guide them through the pun-
ishing 18-day rally that circumnavigates 
Australia; and Willie, at a loose end after 
being fired for dangling a racist boy out of 
his classroom window, is their man.
This is a novel of two dominant moods, 
split almost evenly down the middle. In 
the beginning we barrel along anarchical-
ly, marvelling at the elegance of Carey’s 
plotting and the explosive joy of the sto-
rytelling, from Irene’s and Willie’s per-
spectives alternately. They are both misfits 
in society — Irene too masculine for her  
gelignite-throwing prankster father-in-
law Dangerous Dan Bobs, and Willie too 
bookish to be anything other than an out-
sider in the provinces. Carey’s description 
of the Redex Trial is never less than grip-
ping, evoking something akin to a mid-cen-
tury Mad Max aesthetic in which Titch’s  
suburban Holden FJ is transformed into ‘a 
brutal beast, four-eyed, with mesh protected 
headlights’ and ‘massive bull bar’. 
It is in the midst of the rally itself that 
a sense of melancholy takes over, shifting 
into a moving meditation on multiple forms 
of paternal failure and the culture of rac-
ism that have shaped modern Australia. 
To give away more would risk spoiling the 
genuine pleasures and pathos Carey has 
orchestrated, with intricately mapped nar-
rative twists that are subtly foreshadowed 
yet still surprising. As the characters drive 
deeper into the interior, we become increas-
ingly aware of the corrosive effects of the 
government’s pernicious racial policies, 
which have removed ‘half-caste’ Aboriginal  
children from their families and land. 
Like Willie Bachhuber, who tries to 
create maps that depict not only place 
and location, but also the sedimented lay-
ers of time and history, the ‘lethal patch- 
work’ of settler colonialism ‘on top of the 
true tribal lands’, Carey turns the novel into 
a staging ground for his own merciless exca-
vation of Australian history. 
Reconsider Phlebas 
Justin Marozzi
In Search of the Phoenicians
by Josephine Quinn 
Princeton, £27.95, pp. 360
So the Phoenicians never existed. Herodo-
tus, that unreliable old fibber, made it all 
up in the Histories. Is this really what Jose-
phine Quinn is saying, or is it just a cunning 
ruse to stir up a fuss and infuriate the dwin-
dling band of Herodoteans out there?
Because Quinn, a professor of ancient 
history at Oxford University, declares that 
her mission is not so much to rescue the 
Phoenicians from their ‘undeserved obscu-
rity’ so much as to argue that there were no 
such people. ‘It is modern nationalism that 
has created the Phoenicians,’ she writes, 
citing 19th-century French, English and  
German historians who spoke of the  
Phoenician ‘people’ and ‘nation’ in the age 
of the nation state.
The Phoenicians are those murkiest and 
most elusive of prehistorical characters, 
which is perhaps excusable in a community 
that existed from around 1,500–300 BC and 
left little in the way of literary or archaeo-
logical evidence. Classicists don’t tend to 
give them much of a look in. Last summer 
I joined John Julius Norwich lecturing on 
a ship. His talk on the history of the Medi-
terranean, from ancient times to the cruise-
ship desecration of today, was a tour de 
force. Confessing to a lack of interest in the 
Phoenicians, he gave them just the briefest 
of cameos. Blink and you’d miss them. The  
glories of Ancient Greece and Rome still 
carry all before them.
And yet there they are at the heart of 
ancient Mediterranean history, some kind 
of confederation of irrepressible maritime 
traders and explorers based in the eastern 
Mediterranean with major cities in Byblos, 
Berytus (Beirut), Tyre, Sidon and Arwad. 
They make their entrance onto the literary-
historical stage with a first-page mention in 
the Histories of Herodotus, the 5th centu-
ry BC father of history. He writes that they 
came originally from the Red Sea, entered 
and settled in the Mediterranean and imme-
diately began ‘to adventure on long voyag-
es, freighting their vessels with the wares of 
Egypt and Assyria’. 
Their influence was intellectually and 
geographically pervasive, apparently teach-
ing the Greeks the alphabet and establish-
ing the famous Phoenician settlement of 
Carthage. ‘They have been credited with 
discovering everything from the pole star to 
Cornish cream,’ Quinn writes, noting their 
acumen as traders in cedar from Mount 
Lebanon, together with beautifully worked 
metal, ivory and glass. Both the Old Testa-
ment and the Iliad pay tribute to Phoenician 
artistry: in the construction and decora-
tion of Jerusalem’s temple of Solomon and 
the world’s most beautiful silver mixing  
bowl, a prize for the funeral games of 
Patroklos, respectively. 
In Search of the Phoenicians explores 
the links that connected these people, lan-
guage and religion foremost among them, 
while emphasising the absence of ties based 
on nationhood and ethnicity. To the extent 
that we can gauge how Phoenicians looked 
at themselves, ties and communities were 
more based on cities, families and religious 
practices than on anything else. The cult of 
the Tyrian god Melqart, for instance, known 
to Greeks as Herakles, tied together Phoe-
nician settlements throughout the Mediter-
ranean, in addition to the Greek diaspora.  
The child-sacrifice cult of Baal Hammon 
(Kronos in Greek, generally Saturn in 
Latin) seems not to have caught on to the 
same degree. 
No one called themselves ‘Phoenician’ in 
Phoenician, not least because phoenix is a 
Greek word — for palm tree. From all the 
available evidence, the first person to identi-
fy himself as Phoenician was the writer Hel-
iodorus from Emesa (in what is today the 
Syrian city of Homs) in the 4th century.
Quinn’s story is most compelling when 
she plays to her strengths as a historian and 
archaeologist (she is co-director of excava-
The Phoenicians have been credited 
with discovering everything, from the 
pole star to Cornish ice cream

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
43
tions at the Tunisian site of Utica), discuss-
ing who the Phoenicians might have been, 
trawling through the assorted archaeo-
logical, artistic, linguistic, literary, religious, 
epigraphic and numismatic evidence — or 
lack of it — to develop a clearer view of 
this shadowy people. She leaves no stone 
unturned, from archaeological ruins and 
funerary inscriptions to poetry and drama, 
in her quest to understand how Phoenicians 
have, perhaps only after their time, become 
a people.
She concludes that there has been  
a lot of ‘exciting’ work about identity in 
recent decades, but too little on ‘the con-
cept of identity’. Some might counter that 
the whole field of academic-led navel  
gazing has never been in ruder health. 
The danger of plunging into a long-wind-
ed debate about ‘multiple, fragmented and 
fluid’ identities is that it takes us away from 
the historical narrative prose favoured by 
the general reader into the sociological jar-
gon preferred by the specialist. And lan-
guage matters. ‘Herodotus’ prose’, remarked 
Aubrey de Sélincourt, one of the most trans-
lators of the Histories, ‘has the flexibility, 
ease and grace of a man superbly talking’. 
Few historians have ever matched it.
Ultimately, Quinn is surely right to 
resist an anachronistic nationhood foisted 
onto this ancient geographically and cul-
turally diverse community. But one might 
argue that she is as insistent on a malle-
able, fluid identity today as the 19th-cen-
tury European nationalists were with their 
definition of the Phoenicians as a people. 
Which is no more than to observe that 
we are all a product of our times — from  
the high-spirited Herodotus to today’s 
careful academics.
The eternal visionary 
Dominic Green
William Blake and  
the Age of Aquarius
edited by Stephen F. Eisenman 
Princeton, £37.95, pp. 224
On 3 September 1968, Allen Ginsberg 
appeared on William F. Buckley’s Firing 
Line. Buckley exposed Ginsberg’s poli-
tics as fatuous — the blarney, stoned — 
but Ginsberg stole the aesthetic victory by 
reading ‘Wales Visitation’, a homage to Wil-
liam Blake. ‘White fog lifting and falling on 
mountain brow,’ Ginsberg intones, ‘…teem-
ing ferns/ exquisitely swayed/ along a green 
crag/ glimpsed through mullioned glass in 
valley rain.’
‘Nice,’ Buckley nods. He lets Ginsberg 
read the whole poem. Ginsberg opposes 
the artificial imagery of power and money 
(‘London’s symmetrical thorned tower / & 
network of TV pictures flashing bearded 
your Self’) to the vision of the unmediat-
ed, natural Self: ‘Each flower Buddha-eye.’ 
After six minutes, the roots of Christianity 
mesh with oriental religion in a vision of 
physical liberation and spiritual democracy: 
‘Sounds of Aleph and Aum / through forest 
of gristle… All Albion one.’
‘I kinda like that,’ Buckley admits. Even 
secondhand and soiled, the visionary voice 
cannot be denied. Buckley believed that 
‘the ideologues, having won over the intel-
lectual class’, had now ‘simply walked in 
and started to run things’. Blake had stood 
athwart history, yelling ‘Stop’ to the ration-
alising, systematising civilisation that coa-
lesced in Georgian London, then conquered 
the world after 1945. The further the mar-
ket spread, the higher Blake’s stock rose. 
In 1863, Blake’s first biographer Alexan-
der Gilchrist called his subject pictor igno-
tus, the unknown painter. A century later, 
Blake was a universal poet, the prophet of 
spiritual revolt in what Buckley called ‘an 
age of conformity’.
Blake’s belatedness encourages us to 
judge him not by his works, but his admir-
ers. A century before Firing Line, Swin-
burne, anticipating Allen Ginsberg in Blake:  
A Critical Essay (1868), spotted ‘the points 
of contact and sides of likeness between 
William Blake and Walt Whitman’. But 
Blake, working with ‘Ages & Generations’ 
in mind, had hoped for the Blake revival. 
Before Joni Mitchell called her spoilt and 
selfish peers ‘stardust’, Blake wrote that 
‘Energy is the only life’, and got back to the 
garden, naked in Lambeth, not Woodstock. 
He even named the age 
when, as in the era of the 
French Revolution, ‘Fury! 
rage! madness! In a wind 
swept through America.’ 
‘Rouze up O Young Men of 
the New Age! Set your fore-
heads against the ignorant 
hirelings!’ Blake wrote in 
the preface to his epic poem  
‘Milton’ (1810). ‘Suffer not 
the fashionable Fools to 
depress your powers by the 
prizes they pretend to give 
for contemptible works or the 
expensive advertising boasts 
they make of such works.’
Accompanying an exhibi-
tion at Northwestern Univer-
sity in Illinois, William Blake 
and the Age of Aquarius is 
the most intriguing book on 
Blake since Marsha Keith 
Schuchard’s exposé of him 
as a swinger, Why Mrs Blake 
Cried (2006). America’s 
postwar Blakeans rebelled 
against expensive advertising 
and contemptible comfort. 
However misplaced the fury, 
and despite a preponderance 
of ‘fashionable Fools’, the results were 
not all contemptible. The political inspira-
tions are well known; Blake, in Ginsberg’s 
words, warned Thomas Paine to ‘get out 
of London before the fuzz came to arrest 
him’. But many other Blakean echoes are 
surprising.
I knew that Blake supplied the chorus 
lyric to the Doors’s ‘End of the Night’. But 
I didn’t know that Jimi Hendrix, while liv-
ing around the corner from the blue plaque 
marking Blake’s residence in South Mol-
ton Street, drew on Blake’s ‘Mary’ for ‘The 
Wind Cries Mary’, and on ‘Jerusalem’ for 
the ‘arrows made of desire’ in ‘Voodoo 
Chile’. Nor did I know that Kris Kristof-
ferson discovered Blake at Merton College, 
Oxford, where he played rugby and won a 
boxing Blue.
Another highlight is Jacob Henry  
Leveton’s essay on Blake’s Abstract Expres-
sionist connections. Blake’s innovations 
in colour printing influenced Sam Fran-
cis’s adoption of ‘vibrant color kineticism’.  
Clyfford Still quoted Blake’s individualist 
Christianity against the impersonality and 
fear of the Cold War. In Fearful Symmetry 
(1947), Northrop Frye described the vortex 
as Blake’s ‘image of infinity’; in the same 
year, Jackson Pollock painted ‘Vortex’.
‘One law for the Ox & Lion is oppres-
sion,’ Blake wrote in his age of conformity. 
Perhaps it is only a matter of time before 
Blake’s defence of religious conscience and 
free speech leads modern conservatives to 
concur with Kris Kristofferson: ‘William 
Blake is my man… Hell, yeah!’
‘Glad Day’ by William Blake
GETTY IMAGES

44 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
ARTS
A tough act to follow
Andrew Roberts on the challenges of playing Churchill
G
ary Oldman has joined a long list 
of actors who have portrayed Win-
ston Churchill — no fewer than 35 
of them in movies and 28 on television. He 
is one of the best three. ‘I knew I didn’t look 
like him,’ Oldman has said. ‘I thought that 
with some work I could approximate the 
voice. The challenge in part was the phys-
icality, because you’re playing someone 
whose silhouette is so iconic.’
We all have our own mind’s-eye view 
of what Churchill should look and sound 
like, and his personality was so strong and 
sui generis that it is almost impossible for 
an actor to impose himself on the role. He 
is therefore almost always left with either 
mere impersonation or caricature. Old-
man avoided this in Darkest Hour through 
research. ‘I went to the newsreel,’ he says, 
‘and what I discovered was a man who 
had this very athletic tread. He would skip 
around at 65 like a 30-year-old, he had a 
sparkle, the eyes were alive, he had a very 
sort of cherubic grin.’
This is an insight that a number of actors 
who play Churchill — who came to power 
in 1940 aged 65 — have missed, and who 
thus play him as a man in late middle age. 
Sir Jock Colville, Churchill’s wartime pri-
vate secretary, who was 41 years younger 
than him, wrote of how exhausting it was 
to keep up with the Prime Minister as he 
bounded up staircases, climbed bombsites 
and marched quickly down corridors. Old-
man catches this. Others have played what 
Oldman calls ‘this sort of rather depressed 
grumpy man with a cigar’, but he wanted to 
‘give him a bit of a twinkle in the eye’.
Churchill was depicted on the silver 
screen half a decade before he even became 
prime minister. The first time was in Royal 
Cavalcade (1935), when he was played neu-
trally in the movie made to celebrate King 
George V’s silver jubilee. The next was in 
Goebbels’s propaganda film Ohm Krüger 
(1941), about the British invention of con-
centration camps in the Boer War, where 
he of course is evil personified. Scarcely 
less believable were the four Soviet prop-
aganda movies of the late 1940s — that is, 
after Churchill’s Iron Curtain speech that 
denounced Stalinism — in which Viktor 
Stanitsyn played Churchill as a scheming, 
grasping imperialist. There was an Ameri-
can movie, Mission to Moscow (1943), made 
at President Roosevelt’s request, which was 
naturally far kinder, but not really any more 
useful as an insight into Churchill.
After two movies in which Churchill 
appeared in cameo roles, played by Patrick 
Wymark and Jimmy Sangster, Simon Ward 
played the eponymous Young Winston in the 
1972 film based on Churchill’s autobiogra-
phy My Early Life. Written and produced 
by the genius Carl Foreman (High Noon, 
Guns of Navarone) and directed by Rich-
ard Attenborough, it was sublime. (I saw it 
recently yet again on the big screen, and it 
still is.) Ward captured Churchill’s courage 
and adventurousness, but also his occasional 
youthful bumptiousness.
Although Warren Clarke played a cred-
itable Churchill in the seven-part TV series 
Jennie (1974) — in which Ronald Pickup, 
who is a convincing Neville Chamberlain 
in Darkest Hour, played Lord Randolph 
Churchill,  — the next series overshad-
owed it. Richard Burton was perhaps too 
handsome to play Churchill in the The 
Gathering Storm (1974), but the script was 
historically accurate, whereas his off-cam-
era remarks about despising Churchill for 
what he had supposedly done to the Welsh 
miners were not. Burton had a weird love-
hate relationship with Churchill — other 
statements he made were admiring — but 
fortunately he stuck to the well-crafted 
script. The advantage that the TV biop-
ics of the 1970s had over today’s knock-
ing, sneering revisionist movies — which 
Darkest Hour emphatically is not — was 
that there were many people still alive in 
1974 who knew and worked with Churchill. 
They could pour scorn on inaccuracies, as 
could audiences.
Still the best depiction of Churchill on a 
screen is in the eight-part TV series The Wil-
derness Years (1981), in which Robert Hardy 
inhabited the part of Churchill to such a 
degree that it affected everything else he did 
to a greater or lesser extent. (Can one see 
something of Churchill in Hardy’s depiction 
of the Minister of Magic in Harry Potter?) 
Hardy’s profound reading about Church-
ill, and friendship with Sir Martin Gilbert, 
Churchill’s biographer, helped make the 
series the success it was, and set the stand-
ard for everything that followed. It also 
allowed Hardy to reprise Churchill in War 
and Remembrance (1988), Bomber Harris 
(1989) and The Sittaford Mystery (2006).
Other very good Churchills have been 
Albert Finney in The Gathering Storm 
(2002), which rightly picked up a Golden 
Globe and Emmy, and Brendan Gleeson in 
Into the Storm (2009). Just as things looked 
good for Churchill on screen, however, a slew 
of frankly ridiculous revisionist films and TV 
shows were released, which, with the war-
time generation then dead or dying, showed 
a shocking disregard for historical fact, while 
still posing as that self-contradictory, want-it-
both-ways beast, the ‘docudrama’.
In The Crown (2016), the six-foot-four 
We all have our own mind’s-eye view 
of what Churchill should look and 
sound like

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
45
Cox played a prime minister desperate to 
see D-Day fail. (Yes, you read that correct-
ly.) I counted 120 historical inaccuracies in 
those two hours of my life I’ll never get back. 
Off-camera Cox spouted a series of ludi-
crous views about Churchill — such as that 
he wanted to invade Germany over the Alps 
— which showed that he had swallowed the 
views of the scriptwriter, Alex von Tunzel-
man, rather than doing his own research into 
the truth about Churchill.
John Lithgow stoops to play a semi-senile 
Churchill (who was five-foot-six and cer-
tainly not senile), who deliberately murders 
12,000 Londoners by not adopting green 
anti-global warming measures to defeat the 
London fog in 1952. He is also portrayed 
lying to the Queen about his stroke in 1953, 
whereas she was one of the first to be told 
about it. Similarly, Michael Gambon’s por-
trayal in Churchill’s Secret (2016) was ruined 
by unhistorical twaddle. I walked out of 
Quentin Tarantino’s lamentable Inglouri-
ous Basterds (2009) so I can’t report on Rod 
Tayor’s role as Churchill. 
Easily the worst Churchill movie ever 
made was Churchill (2017), in which Brian 
Gary Oldman, by total contrast, has, 
through prosthetics, thoughtfulness and 
superb acting, caught Churchill brilliantly. 
He acknowledges our preconceptions about 
Churchill, and mildly co-opts them with 
charm and acuity. The supporting cast — 
especially Kristin Scott Thomas as Clemen-
tine and Sam West as Anthony Eden — are 
excellent too. Although there have been very 
many other creditable Churchills — David 
Ryall, Mel Smith, Timothy Spall, David Cal-
der and Bob Hoskins among them — Gary 
Oldman now joins Robert Hardy and Simon 
Ward in the triumvirate of the greats.
Darkest Hour is in cinemas now.
Premier performance: Gary Oldman as Winston Churchill
I counted 120 historical inaccuracies 
in those two hours of my life I’ll 
never get back
FOCUS FEATURES

46 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
Exhibitions 
Living sculptures 
Martin Gayford
Bernini
Galleria Borghese, Rome, until 4 February
Seventeenth-century Roman art at its full-
blown, operatic peak often proves too rich 
for puritanical northern tastes. And no art-
ist was ever more Baroque than Gian Lor-
enzo Bernini, the supreme maestro of the 
idiom. But I love his work, which is why, on 
a spare afternoon in Rome before Christ-
mas, I strolled over to the Borghese Gallery 
where the largest array of Bernini sculpture 
ever assembled is currently on view.
Admittedly, the Borghese collection 
already contains the world’s finest collec-
tion of Bernini (1598–1680) and has done 
so ever since the artist’s lifetime. But on 
this occasion some 60 loans — including 
many full-scale marbles as well as paint-
ings and terracotta models — have been 
added. Given that much of Bernini’s 
work is immovably attached to the fabric 
of Roman churches and fountains, this is 
probably the fullest retrospective that will 
ever be seen.
It is a feast of creative perversity. The 
nature of sculpture is to be solid and static, 
yet Bernini was constantly trying to carve 
the insubstantial, fast-moving and softly 
yielding. That is, to make marble and metal 
do unsculptural things. The hand of the 
god Pluto, jovially abducting Proserpina, 
digs into her thigh in a disturbingly tac-
tile manner, turning the stone into flesh. In 
the same way — abracadabra! — he could 
transform a lump of mineral into uphol-
stery. His contribution to the restoration of 
a classical ‘Sleeping Hermaphrodite’ was a 
marble mattress so cushiony-looking that 
you feel your hand would sink into it.
The thin and fibrous sling with which his 
David takes aim is another startling sculp-
tural still life. Bernini’s ‘Cathedra Petri’ — 
not in the exhibition, but the focal point of 
the huge basilica of St Peter’s — is the apoth-
eosis of a piece of furniture. The throne of 
the saint ascends to heaven amid cherubim 
and fathers of the church in nodding bish-
ops’ mitres and an explosion of clouds and 
rays of light.
Who else would have sculpted sunshine? 
Or had a go at carving the flames crack-
ling under St Lawrence’s gridiron? ‘Apol-
lo and Daphne’ — the masterpiece of the 
Borghese’s own collection — is the most 
paradoxical of all Bernini’s triumphs. Here 
is a chunk of metamorphic rock represent-
ing the split-second in which the god catches 
the nymph — and she turns into a tree.
It’s full of things it shouldn’t be possi-
ble to sculpt. Daphne’s face is caught at the 
moment when her eyes dull and her fea-
tures freeze. Roots sprout from her toes, 
wafer-thin leaves and fronds from her fin-
gers. This is a magical metamorphosis in 
more than one sense.
Similarly, the best of Bernini’s portrait 
busts — of which the exhibition contains a 
magnificent array — are snapshots in mar-
ble. Cardinal Scipione Borghese, the great 
patron of the artist in his youth, seems to 
Who else would have sculpted 
sunshine? Or the ﬂames crackling 
under St Lawrence’s gridiron?
‘Apollo and Daphne’, early 1620s,  by Bernini
MINISTERO DEI BENI E DELLE ATTIVITÀ CULTURALI E DEL TURISMO - GALLERIA BORGHESE

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
47
Tel: 020 7937 3858 easter@ashbournecollege.co.uk
Prepare
for success
ASHBOURNE
Independent Sixth Form College
Easter Revision 2018
ashbournecollege.co.uk
DATES:
Monday
26 March
to Friday
13 April
Radio 
Lessons from Rwanda 
Kate Chisholm
What an incredible statement we heard on 
My Perfect Country. ‘I can walk into a board-
room and forget I am a woman,’ pronounced 
Isabelle Masozera, a PR executive, on the 
World Service programme, which this week 
visited Rwanda to find out what is happen-
ing there to make it qualify for ‘my perfect 
country’ status. Her words hit home because 
of the BBC’s current difficulties over equal 
pay and opportunities.
It appears that the corporation has been 
less than speedy or judicious in its response 
to the revelations last year about the sub-
stantial differences in earnings between 
some of its male and female employees. 
Badly handled, it led to the bizarre situation 
on Radio 4’s flagship Today programme on 
Monday morning when one of its present-
ers, Carrie Gracie, was also one of the top 
stories of the day.
She had just resigned from her job as the 
BBC’s bureau chief in China, claiming in a 
letter addressed to licence-payers, which was 
gleefully blazoned across several newspa-
pers, that her erstwhile employer ‘is break-
ing equality law and resisting pressure for 
be pausing in conversation on the point of 
a remark. This is what Bernini’s contempo-
raries meant when they praised his ‘speak-
ing likenesses’. You feel you’re meeting 
this amiable, self-indulgent fellow, almost 
humorously far from religious austerity.
The same is true of the wonderful head 
of Costanza Bonarelli of around 1635, on 
loan from Florence. But whereas the Car-
dinal seems to be holding forth convivially 
over the dinner table, the bust of Costan-
za — a married woman with whom Bernini 
had a long affair — is a love letter in 3D. 
You feel her whole presence: the passionate 
glance, the flying hair, and just how strongly 
the artist felt about her — dangerously so, 
as it turned out.
A few years after he made this incom-
parably intimate portrait, he caught her in 
an assignation with his brother, Luigi. See-
ing them together, Bernini utterly lost it. He 
attempted to murder Luigi with an iron bar 
and had Costanza slashed with a razor by 
his servant. Pope Urban VIII forgave him 
for these crimes —  the artist was far too 
useful to punish. But the servant was exiled 
and Luigi prudently moved to Bologna for 
a while.
Clearly, Bernini was capable of appalling 
behaviour. Another example was his treat-
ment of the assistant Giuliano Finelli whose 
virtuoso skills produced the laurel leaves in 
‘Apollo and Daphne’, not much thicker than 
a real leaf. Bernini preferred not to acknowl-
edge his contribution so Finelli, feeling 
slighted, left.
On the other hand, Finelli’s own works 
are weaker versions of his master’s, while 
Bernini produced endless fresh ideas. For 
much of the 17th century Bernini was artistic 
dictator of papal Rome, so one could spend 
delightful days tracking his works through 
the city — almost all of which are still there. 
With set-pieces such as the ‘Fountain of the 
Four Rivers’, he dramatised the city like an 
inspired theatrical designer.
The exhibition at the Galleria Borghese is 
full of pleasures, but it also hints at Bernini’s 
limitations. The paintings are not exciting, 
except for the portraits of himself. The busts 
of Christ intended for the artist’s tomb are 
downright vapid. And it is useful to see the 
statue of St Bibiana, which is usually locked 
away in an obscure church, as it shows how 
soppy he could be. The truth is that, although 
Bernini spent much of his life working for 
a succession of popes, serious religion feel-
ing was out of his range. He could do flutter-
ing angels, sensual ecstasies like that of St 
Teresa in Santa Maria della Vittoria, drama 
and astounding illusions. But for deep feel-
ing and sublime thinking you need to go to 
his great predecessor, Michelangelo. 
Bernini attempted to murder his 
brother with an iron bar and had 
Costanza slashed with a razor
a fair and transparent pay structure’. Gra-
cie couldn’t be interviewed by her co-pre-
senter John Humphrys (who you could tell 
was itching to take on the task) because this 
would have broken the BBC’s strict rules on 
impartiality, although she was later heard 
on Woman’s Hour explaining her position. 
Does this muddle matter?
Yes. Because as a taxpayer-funded organ-
isation the BBC is incredibly privileged as 
a broadcaster, free from commercial pres-
sures. To respect that privilege it should 
ensure that it not only manages its finances 
with scrupulous integrity and transparen-
cy but also behaves as a model organisa-
tion, leading the way on equality of pay and 
opportunity between all employees. There 
are too many overpaid people at the Beeb 
(they must know who they are) and at the 
same time too many who would earn a lot 
more if they chose to move into the com-
mercial world. A radical solution to the 
equal-pay dilemma would be to downgrade 
a lot of managers and celebrity presenters 
in favour of those who burn the midnight oil 
to deliver first-class programmes to deadline 
and on budget. Now that would truly lead 
the way in employer–employee relations.
But let’s get back to Rwanda and Ms 
Masozera. She went on to say, ‘I just pray 
that the world catches up with Rwanda.’ 
She’s in for a long wait. As Fi Glover, Martha 

48 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
Opera 
Sonic youth 
Richard Bratby
Duke Bluebeard’s Castle
Barbican Hall
Rigoletto
Royal Opera, in rep until 16 January
Everyone knows — don’t they? — that the 
National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain 
is the UK’s youngest world-class symphony 
orchestra — an ensemble of musicians aged 
18 and under that’s the equal of any profes-
sional band (and better than some). But it’s 
also the largest, and we don’t hear enough 
about the sheer sonic impact of hearing 157 
musicians moving with absolute precision. 
Even the smallest gesture by an 87-player 
string section has a sort of heft, a physical 
weight and depth that you can sense in the 
air around you. Overwhelming when the 
whole orchestra is playing at full power, it’s 
even more tangible in quiet passages, as if 
you’re in the vicinity of some vast, invisible 
living creature. 
It was a neat idea, then, for director 
Daisy Evans to make the orchestra into a 
character in the NYO’s concert staging of 
Bartok’s Duke Bluebeard’s Castle, namely 
the massive, semi-sentient presence of the 
Castle itself. The stage directions ask for it 
to give ‘a cavernous sigh, like night winds’, 
so Evans had the orchestra’s members 
produce the sound themselves, with hands 
over mouths. Neon cables snaked between 
the players’ chairs, glowing blue for tears, 
yellow for gold or red for blood. Robert 
Hayward as Bluebeard repeatedly turned 
and surveyed the immense forces behind 
him, shoulders slumping, and when the 
Third Door revealed his treasure-cham-
ber, players lifted their instruments up to 
glint and sparkle in the coloured light. The 
surtitles were accompanied by drawings 
of doors by Chris Riddell, and unnamed 
members of the National Youth Theatre 
enthusiastically declaimed the opera’s spo-
ken prologue. 
It looked striking, as far as it went. With 
Rinat Shaham standing in as Judith at short 
notice, and (perfectly understandably) 
singing from a music stand while Hayward 
performed entirely in character, you had 
to wonder if the original intention hadn’t 
been to go quite a bit further. What we got, 
though, was potent. Hayward is tremen-
dous in this role: a noble ruin of a human 
soul, whose ringing, deeply expressive dec-
lamation is undercut by the different gra-
dations of pain that move across his face. 
He can make himself look as if he’s aged 
two decades within a single bar of music. 
Shaham’s Judith was subtler and less fierce 
than some — not afraid to let her voice cur-
Lane Fox, Professor Henrietta Moore and 
Dr Keetie Roelen sought to explain on My 
Perfect Country (produced by Eve Streeter), 
Rwanda is a special case. After the massa-
cre of up to 800,000 people in 100 days dur-
ing the civil war of 1994, men were in short 
supply. Women, who had suddenly become 
70 per cent of the population, had to step in 
and do the work of men while bringing up 
their children single-handed. This genera-
tion grew up only knowing a world in which 
women are dominant, by force of circum-
stance. But the government response was 
also far-seeing, giving women formal rights 
in the constitution to land, to education as 
well as the right to equal pay. The key to 
women’s progress in Rwanda has been this 
awareness that it’s not just about money: at 
least 30 per cent of all decision-making jobs 
in the public sphere must be held by women.
It’s not all positive. The Rwandan corre-
spondent Maggie Mutesi spoke to a young 
female student who complained that girls 
are still expected to marry as soon as they 
have finished school. For a woman to get a 
loan from the bank, it’s much easier if a man 
goes with her. Ask a man why he beat his 
wife and he will reply, ‘Because she went out 
without my permission.’ But the gender gap 
is closing in Rwanda and especially in regard 
to political and economic participation. We 
could learn something, agreed Glover, Lane 
Fox, Moore and Roelen.
Saturday afternoon’s drama on Radio 4, 
Offshore (directed by David Hunter), was 
an adaptation by Michael Butt of Penel-
ope Fitzgerald’s shifting, haunting novel 
from 1979. Nenna is living on a barge on the 
Thames with her two children Martha and 
Tilda after leaving her husband (or did he 
leave her? It’s not entirely clear). The chil-
dren befriend the other ‘waifs and strays’ of 
‘the offshore brigade’ who have ended up on 
the riverside for reasons that are never clear-
ly stated but which become apparent, usually 
through Martha and Tilda’s clear, unforgiving 
perceptions. Instead of going to school, they 
spend their time mudlarking, seeking out 
fragments of pottery, signs of life before their 
existence, the river’s constant motion another 
symbol of constant flux and change.
In just under an hour of airtime this could 
only be a slice of Fitzgerald’s book, but Butt’s 
adaptation captured her delicious sense of 
irony (Nenna’s address is Cheyne Walk, the 
most expensive in London, yet she’s living 
in poverty on a broken-down boat), her win-
some style and nebulous plotting, her evoca-
tion of childhood and precise pinning-down 
of what makes us unhappy. Hattie Morahan, 
Molly Pipe and Rosie Boore excel as the 
three female leads and there’s a deliciously 
watery, slippery feel to the soundscape.
The gender gap is closing in Rwanda 
and especially in regard to political 
and economic participation
dle as she turns the screws on her spouse, 
but occasionally underpowered against the 
sheer splendour of the orchestral sound. 
That sound, of course, was the point of 
the evening. You just knew that when the 
fifth door opened, Sir Mark Elder and the 
NYO would make the floor shake, and 
Elder’s pacing of the opera’s single-act arc 
was both spacious and urgent. Still, it was the 
quieter details — world-weary clarinet and 
horn solos, quivering surges from the cellos, 
and the stunned fragility of those massed 
violins in the closing bars — that gave this 
performance its fever-dream immediacy, 
and showed you how profoundly Bartok’s 
score had got under the skin of these teen-
age artists. As well it might. 
Meanwhile at Covent Garden, the 
Royal Opera played out the festive season 
with David McVicar’s 2001 production of 
Verdi’s Rigoletto. Superficially, at least, you 
can see the logic of Rigoletto as a Christ-
mas show: a juicy, handsomely dressed 
helping of Victorian melodrama, stuffed 
with hummable tunes. But any staging 
that takes Verdi’s tragedy at anything like 
face value is going to leave an extremely 
nasty aftertaste, and to his credit McVicar 
does nothing to sugar that. Apparently the 
revival director Justin Way has toned down 
the opening orgy at the Duke of Mantua’s 
court, but the sight of courtiers in gorgeous 
Renaissance costumes grimly dry-humping 
each other in the background as the Duke 
(Michael Fabiano) reels out his ‘Questa o 
quella’ certainly soured the mood pretty 
effectively.
The darkness of this production is its 
most striking feature. Michael Vale’s grungy 
sets concentrate the drama powerfully and 
conductor Alexander Joel has a sharp ear 
for Verdi’s gamier orchestral colours. In that 
setting, the soft-edged glow of Lucy Crowe’s 
singing as Gilda stood out with intense 
sweetness. Andrea Mastroni’s Sparafucile 
had a tone like bitumen; a brooding, Fate-
like figure whose monumental presence 
could perhaps have given the drama the res-
onance of Greek tragedy had the produc-
tion overall been a bit more tightly focused. 
As Rigoletto, Dimitri Platanias was more 
alluring and charismatic — vocally at least 
— than the Duke: Fabiano had power, but 
sounded as though his voice needed a good 
rest. On this first weekend in January they 
all went at it with vigour, without really dis-
pelling the feeling (Crowe and Mastroni 
apart) that they were performing their parts 
rather than connecting dramatically. Woolly 
ensemble from the chorus and interminable 
scene changes reinforced a distinct end-of-
the-holidays feeling. It seemed to be doing a 
roaring trade, anyway.
The smallest gesture by an 87-player 
string section has a weight and depth 
you can sense in the air around you

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
49
Cinema 
All the rage 
Deborah Ross
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, 
Missouri
15, Nationwide
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Mis-
souri does, indeed, feature three billboards 
outside Ebbing, Missouri. They have been 
placed at the roadside on the outskirts of 
town by Mildred Hayes (Frances McDor-
mand), a middle-aged woman whose teen-
age daughter had been raped and murdered 
seven months earlier. The billboards read: 
‘Raped While Dying’; ‘And Still No Arrests’; 
‘How Come, Chief Willoughby?’ Mildred is 
grieving, in pain and a ball of fury. But not 
your regular, everyday ball of fury. She is a 
ball of fury of the most magnificent, unstop-
pable kind. If only she could go after every 
rapist from now on. I’d certainly sleep bet-
ter in my bed.
Written, directed and produced by the 
Irish playwright Martin McDonagh (In Bru-
ges, Seven Psychopaths), the film recently 
won four awards at the Golden Globes: best 
Fighting talk: Frances McDormand as Mildred Hayes in Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
film, best screenplay, best leading actress 
for McDormand, best supporting actor for 
Sam Rockwell. And this is satisfying, as it’s 
about a strong woman who won’t take shit 
from anybody (basically) rather than, say, 
some Brad blubbing about his status. (Boo 
hoo, Brad; boo hoo.) Plus, in its furious way, 
it’s also a hoot and a blast, which I never 
thought I’d be saying about a rape movie, if 
it is that. Hard to know what it is. Beyond 
‘different’ and ‘wonderfully so’.
To the plot: Mildred works in the town’s 
giftshop and no one is keen on her bill-
boards. Her husband, who has run off with 
a younger woman, isn’t keen on them. 
The local priest who pays a visit, stupidly 
— she rounds on him, in her magnificent, 
unstoppable fury — isn’t keen on them. 
Her son wants her to move on but she 
won’t — can’t. ‘Oh, great, we’re going the 
rape-dying route,’ he says, as they’re about 
to drive past them. It is often blisteringly 
funny, which is why it’s also a hoot, but it’s 
never funny at the expense of what might 
be hurting anyone. The comic lines never 
In its furious way it’s also a hoot and 
a blast, which I never thought I’d be 
saying about a rape movie
felt off. And it’s also just so unexpected.
The film isn’t a straightforward revenge 
drama, redemption drama, or fighting-for-
justice drama. Instead, the narrative never 
goes where you think it will go. Instead, 
it takes your narrative expectations and 
shreds them before your eyes. Oh, that 
Chief Willoughby (Woody Harrelson), 
head of the local police, he’s bound to be a 
toxic, misogynistic monster, you’re thinking 
to yourself. But he isn’t. (He is, as it hap-
pens, beloved by the town and is awarded 
his own poignant storyline.) That said, one 
of his officers, Dixon (Rockwell), is a vio-
lent, racist idiot known to beat up black 
people in custody. But he has his principles. 
‘So how’s it all going in the nigger-tortur-
ing business, Dixon?’ Mildred asks him. 
‘You can’t say that!’ he exclaims, genuine-
ly offended. ‘You gotta say persons of col-
our-torturing business!’ But Dixon doesn’t 
go where you expect him to go. Instead, 
McDonagh prods him in a surprising and 
interesting direction.
All the performances are excellent, but 
this was expressly written for McDormand, 
who owns it, and who is a wonder to behold, 
as she tears fearlessly into the script. Mil-
dred’s dialogue is supremely curse-laden — 
‘hey, fuckhead,’ is how she might address a 

50 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
BOOKS & ARTS
Theatre 
Lost in space 
Lloyd Evans
The Twilight Zone
Almeida, until 27 January
Pinocchio
Lyttelton Theatre, until 10 April
The Grinning Man
Trafalgar Studios, until 14 April
The Twilight Zone, an American TV show 
from the early 1960s, reinvented the ghost 
story for the age of space exploration. 
Director Richard Jones has collaborat-
ed with Anne Washburn to turn several 
TV episodes into a single play. Eight epi-
sodes in all. Way too many. The structure 
is designed to bamboozle us from the start. 
Some of the storylines have been broken 
up and are placed episodically throughout 
the piece, while others are preserved as 
units and delivered whole. Even the most 
keen-eyed viewer gets flummoxed by this 
mystery. Among the storylines that baf-
fled me were: a cop quizzes some strand-
ed bus passengers to find out which is an 
alien; a little girl vanishes through a worm-
hole in space-time; a man is haunted by a 
lack of sleep; a group of airmen returning 
from a mission discover that two or three 
(or perhaps just one) of them have been 
airbrushed out of newspaper reports. A 
group of angry neighbours fight over the 
last berth in a bomb shelter during a nucle-
ar attack.
The show looks cheap and flimsy and it 
aims for an atmosphere of goofy pastiche. 
There are lots of gags involving silly props 
and mysteriously vanishing cigarettes. One 
of the actors specialises in an ‘amusing’ 
laugh. Played at midnight to an audience 
of drunks, the show would succeed. For 
about five minutes. Then it would stale. The 
running time is two-and-a-half hours. I’ve 
seen a few muddles posing as dramas at the 
Almeida but this is one of the hardest to 
disentangle.
Pinocchio is the story of a genial car-
Played at midnight to an audience of 
drunks, the show would succeed. 
For about ﬁve minutes
Television 
Thinking outside the box 
James Walton
These days a genuinely controversial TV 
drama series would surely be one with an 
all-white, male-led cast that examined the 
problems of a bunch of middle-class peo-
ple. (Just imagine the Twitter outrage!) But 
while we await that — possibly for a while 
yet — we’ve now got two highly promising 
new shows of the more approved ‘contro-
versial’ kind: where racial issues are tackled 
in a thoughtful and scrupulously responsi-
ble way.
Kiri (Channel 4, Wednesday) has the 
distinct advantage of starring Sarah Lanca-
shire, whose character Miriam proves that 
TV mavericks needn’t always be doctors, 
lawyers or cops. They can, it seems, also be 
social workers. So it was that Miriam was 
first seen adding something a little stronger 
to her breakfast coffee. She then headed out 
into Bristol to show what an all-round good 
egg she is: delivering a present of sausages 
to a local crack addict, and telling a teenage 
boy who’d just broken a girl’s arm that he 
was really a great kid. 
Her next task, though, didn’t go as 
smoothly. Nine-year-old Kiri was about to 
be adopted by a middle-class white cou-
ple — but before that happened, Miriam 
thought the girl should be reminded of her 
roots by paying an unsupervised visit to 
her black paternal grandparents. (And if 
you haven’t seen the programme yet, you 
may want to look away now.) Kiri was then 
apparently abducted from their house, 
with her granddad’s connivance, by her 
birth father, who has convictions for GBH 
and drug-dealing. Even when the girl’s dis-
appearance made the Six O’Clock News, 
Miriam still thought everything would 
end well — which only made Lancashire’s 
stricken face when the body was discov-
ered all the more wrenching.
Faced with the crisis, her bosses soon 
snapped into action, denouncing her deci-
sion to set up the visit as ‘bold’ and hanging 
her out to dry. Meanwhile, the newspapers 
went on the attack with their usual mix of 
head-shaking sorrow and badly disguised 
glee, as they accused Miriam of ‘ticking all 
the leftie boxes’ by putting Kiri’s supposed 
cultural needs above her safety. 
Fortunately, the programme itself is 
much more nuanced than that, with the 
‘issues’ side of things never overshadow-
ing the human story, and the main charac-
ters permitted to be a complicated lot. By 
the end of Wednesday’s episode, in fact, Mir-
iam had turned into something resembling a 
classic whisky priest: drinking heavily, mor-
ally compromised but somehow still appear-
ing to be on the side of the angels.
Jack Thorne’s script also has an obvious 
sympathy with social workers, whose mis-
takes may not outnumber other people’s 
but generally matter far more. Even her 
boss acknowledged that Miriam’s decisions, 
however bold, were right 99 per cent of the 
time — a strike rate most of us would settle 
for. Luckily, I’m pretty confident I’ll increase 
mine by suggesting that Kiri will be among 
the TV highlights of the winter. (Luckily, too, 
if I’m wrong, my error probably won’t be on 
the evening news.) 
And the same could well apply to ITV’s 
Next of Kin. This began on Monday with 
Mona Harcourt, a saintly doctor, looking 
forward to the return of her brother, a saintly 
doctor, who’d been running a medical char-
ity in Pakistan. To welcome him back, Mona 
laid on a surprise party with her extended 
family, who took a bit of untangling but duly 
turned out to be a careful cross-section of 
British Muslims, from a traditional matri-
arch to a mini-skirted lesbian sister. 
But when Mona’s somewhat underwrit-
ten husband (Jack Davenport as the male 
version of all those sweetly supportive TV 
wives we used to get) opened the front door 
and the family leapt up to shout ‘Surprise!’, 
the person they greeted wasn’t Kareem. 
Instead, it was a policemen bringing news 
of what we already knew from the first of 
the episode’s memorably powerful scenes: 
Kareem had been kidnapped by jihadi fight-
ers on the way to Lahore airport. Not only 
that, but the policeman also seemed interest-
ed in talking to Kareem’s absent son Danny 
in connection with a recent bomb in Lon-
don — a bomb that had increased the sense 
of Islamophobia felt by that lovely grand-
mother in particular. And from there, Archie 
Panjabi’s terrific central performance per-
fectly captured both Mona’s confidence in 
her family’s status as fully accepted Brits 
and the effort that she sometimes had to 
make to retain it. 
But if I’m making it sound as if the pro-
gramme is simply doing some box-ticking 
of its own, then that wouldn’t fair. Or not 
police officer — yet the profanity becomes 
a kind of poetry. She wears a focused scowl, 
and only smiles the once (I think; it was 
weird), but as harsh as she can be, you know 
Mildred has a broken heart under there.
It does fall apart slightly in the third act, 
when it becomes a bit cartoonish, and peo-
ple can throw other people out of windows 
without consequences. And I would also add 
that we are never asked to consider the pain 
Mildred inflicts, which is considerable, just as 
we’re never asked to question her own taste 
for violence. (Tip: if you’re a dentist and you 
ever find Mildred in your chair, don’t piss 
her off.) But as a film that puts a middle-
aged woman centre stage, and allows her to 
kick ass, it has to be terrific. There should be 
more Mildreds. Then we’d all sleep better in 
our beds. 
entirely. Again, the idea that most Muslims 
are very nice, and that it’s a shame about 
the few who aren’t, can’t be called terrify-
ingly controversial. Yet, Next of Kin shows 
every sign not merely of shaping it into a 
proper thriller, but also of allowing it to 
emerge from a thoroughly imagined family 
story, rather than imposing it on one. 

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
51
penter who carves a toy out of a plank of 
wood. The toy, Pinocchio, is possessed by a 
single ambition: to dispense with his wood-
en nature and become a human being like 
his creator. Arranging the puppetry for this 
script must be the easiest task in showbusi-
ness: Pinocchio should be represented by a 
puppet and the human characters should be 
represented by human beings. John Tiffa-
ny’s production at the National reverses this 
set-up. The humans are played by puppets. 
And Pinocchio, the puppet, is played by a 
human being who wears nothing but skimpy 
breeches, as if to remind the audience that 
he’s made of flesh and blood rather than 
timber. All rather puzzling.
To make things even more topsy-turvy, 
the puppets on stage (who represent human 
characters) dominate the action. Physically, 
these mannequins are huge, like weather-
balloons, with vast immobile faces and gan-
gly limbs operated by levers manipulated 
by shuffling assistants. They seem to drift 
in midair like beach balls caught in a wind-
spiral. Their faces, incapable of movement, 
are unable to convey changes of mood or 
sentiment and their lack of vitality reduces 
the show’s pace to slow motion. Few in the 
audience cared much for these conceptual 
own goals. My son, aged 11, hailed the show 
as ‘brilliant’ and ‘nearly as good as Aladdin’. 
I should add that he spent a fair amount of 
time nudging me and asking me in whispers 
if I wasn’t bored.
Victor Hugo’s novel The Grinning Man 
has been turned into a hit musical by Bristol 
Old Vic. Now it arrives in the West End. The 
central character, Grinpayne, is an orphan 
who was attacked in infancy by an unknown 
thug who left him with a hideous grin plas-
tered across his face. Grinpayne is discovered 
by a sweet-natured impresario who exhib-
its him to paying audiences. With them is a 
beautiful blind child, Dea, whom Grinpayne 
falls in love with. They’re joined by a slaver-
ing wolf, Mojo, who at first threatens but later 
befriends them. Grinpayne’s mission is to dis-
cover the identity of the criminal who disfig-
ured him and to win the heart of Dea.
A ﬂimsy piece of apparatus manages 
to replicate a wolf’s furtive and 
sinuous menace
There’s plenty of material here for a 
romantic fairy tale but the story has anoth-
er layer of narrative complexity. The setting 
is a pastiche version of Regency London 
where a decrepit king, Clarence XII, lies on 
his deathbed. His children are a set of bick-
ering egomaniacs who indulge in incestu-
ous orgies at the palace while tussling over 
the right to succeed their father. One of the 
royal princes visits the circus and becomes 
enraptured by Grinpayne’s frozen smile. 
The two stories cross-fertilise and we jump 
between the power games at the palace and 
Grinpayne’s quest to identify his childhood 
assailant. The changes of gear are a little 
bumpy and Grinpayne’s desire to win the 
heart of Dea is never seriously threatened. 
But the show works very well as a musical. 
The tunes are strong, the singing is excel-
lent. And the puppetry, modest in scale, is 
superb. 
Mojo the wolf is the latest achievement 
from Gyre and Gimble (who created War 
Horse). Two actors using a flimsy piece of 
apparatus manage to replicate a wolf’s fur-
tive and sinuous menace. Mojo may not be 
very cuddly but the effect is astonishing.
MARC BRENNER
Missing in action: Cosmo Jarvis and Oliver Alvin-Wilson in The Twilight Zone at the Almeida

52 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
LAC D’ANNECY 
Lovely family home on favoured 
Eastern side. Fully renovated 2017. 
Sleeps 10,  5 beds,  4 baths. Heated 
pool,  large terrace garden and gym. 
Fantastic views. Wifi and walking 
distance to shops. Tel 07795095066
23 LUXURY PROPERTIES 
to rent for one week or more in 
south-west France, Provence and 
the Côte d'Azur. All sleeping six or 
more, all with pools, some with tennis 
courts. Staff; plus cooks and/or 
babysitters if required. Tel: Anglo 
French Properties:  020 7225 0359. 
Email: miles.maskell@
anglofrenchproperties.com 
www.anglofrenchproperties.com
BOULOGNE-SUR-MER.
Lovely little flats. Great for trysts, 
shopping & French life. £50 a night, 
£200 a week. Full kitchen and linen. 
www.franglaisflats.com
TUSCANY. 
Villa by the sea. 5 bedrooms, 4 
bathrooms; sleeps 11. Private pool, 
aircon, large gardens and private 
parking. www.lividonia.com
TUSCAN/UMBRIAN BORDER. 
Hilltop house in 11 acres. Looks 
amazing on the website. 
Even better in real life. 
Check it out: 
www.myhomeinumbria.com
VENICE CENTRAL. Tranquil, 
sunny apartment. Wonderful canal 
side location. Two bedrooms, two 
bathrooms. Tel: 020 7701 7540 or 
www.venicecanalsideapartment.co.uk
ROME VILLA.
Sleeps 10, heated pool, tennis, 
garden. Brilliant cook available. 
Set in 1500 olive trees.
www.romevilla.co.uk
ROME  CENTRE - self catering apts 
in royal villa, sleep 2/5; beautiful 
garden, private parking. 
Tel/ owner: 0043 1 712 5091; 
valleycastle@compuserve.com
TUSCANY UMBRIA BORDER 
Small family agency has villas with
pools for 2 to 14 people.
www.tuscanyumbria.com
0039 3337 376077
UMBRIA/TUSCANY: With tennis 
court and pool, our beautiful 
farmhouse near Monterchi sleeps 
12+ (6 bedrooms, 5 bathrooms). 
Tel: 07771 535676 or visit 
www.belvederediprato.com
UMBRIA. SPACIOUS centuries 
old farmhouse villa – our home. 
Etruscan/Roman site. Sleeps 11. 
Pool. Magical views. Therapeutic 
atmosphere. Brilliant feedback.
www.ladogana.co.uk
Travel
Contact Emma Reid  
0033 626 101667  |  info@cotegrange.eu   
www.cotegrange.eu
Cote Grange, Puyjourdes
Be Inspired
Art holidays in the Lot, France
FRANCE
ITALY
www.spectator.co.uk/
classified
bump) in beside it at lock after lock (ensur-
ing water is never wasted by unnecessary 
openings). We in turn teach the newbies 
behind us. And everyone takes their turn 
at the windlass. The ways of the water are 
quickly entrenched so a single failure to 
co-operate by another boat jars terribly.  
We wave, get steering tips (you have 
no control when reversing), play boat-
to-boat catch (and canal-to-boathook 
retrieval), share tree-fresh apples from a 
lock-side ‘help yourself’ box, race (at a daring 
5 mph), and chat as we rise or fall between 
close stone walls. There are constant sto-
ries: the ferret-owning barefoot boatie; the 
ancient canal-side drovers road; the giant 
reptiles that once roamed the region — now 
fossilised in the blue lias limestone through 
which the Stockton Locks are cut.
We are quickly absorbed into canal life 
— more so than we realise until we are jolt-
ed back into the terrestrial world. Leav-
ing the boat, we cut through the hedgerow 
and up a mud path to find ourselves on a 
six-lane road bridge. I stand shocked, like 
a newly landed alien, as cars blast past, 
horns hoot, traffic lights flash. 
How did we not know? All this, just 
feet from our parallel world wending its 
peaceful way through an oblivious Britain 
— or Brytain.    
P
hilip Pullman’s latest missal, La Belle 
Sauvage, once again features the boat-
dwelling Gyptians. Rough and hon-
ourable, they emerge from the waterways 
of Brytain to help the heroine Lyra, before 
disappearing back to their watery world, 
one that runs through Lyra’s, but is separate 
and different from it. After a long weekend 
on the canals in the heart of Britain, I feel 
I have been drifting in Pullman’s wake.
‘Just steer her in here,’ says the boatman. 
We are new to the canals, so he is taking us 
through the first lock. ‘Straight in’. He must 
be joking: only one lock gate is open. The 
gap is about six inches wider than the boat. 
But his weathered face is completely straight 
— and completely calm. Deep breath.
We make it into the lock without dam-
age. Our boatman disappears up the tow-
path, and we are alone on the canal. First 
we have to slow down. Having boarded our 
smart green-painted narrowboat at Kate 
Boats on the outskirts of Birmingham, our 
route hugs that of HS2. The train will soon 
whizz passengers to London in 49 minutes. 
By boat, it would take us a fortnight. 
Fortunately, there is something medita-
tive about steering gently along a narrow 
channel flanked with hedgerows. Locks, 
of course, are not meditative. But they are 
satisfying. They are everything the digital 
age is not: physical, controllable, perfectly 
designed technology… and unchanging. 
It is easy to imagine the 19th-century 
families whose lives were lived on the canals. 
And the canal equivalent of Land Girls — 
the so-called Idle Women, unfairly named 
for their IW (Inland Waterways) badges — 
who 75 years ago hauled open these same 
lock gates. Usefully unnoticed, they dragged 
50-tonne loads along this wartime lifeline 
between Birmingham and London.   
Though it’s half a century since the last 
working boat passed this way, the Inland 
Waterways still have their own camarade-
rie. We are taught the unwritten rules by 
the boat ahead which waits for us to slip (or 
Canals and calm: Enjoying life in the slow lane
NOTES ON …
A Gyptian weekend 
By Juliet Rix
ISTOCK


54 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
UK
CORNWALL
TREBETHERICK. 
Lovely holiday home in cliff-top 
position sleeps 14; surfing, bathing 
and rock pool beaches within easy 
walking. Available w/c Fridays 10th 
and 17th August. Tel: 07908 637708
Email: info@tregreen.co.uk
BOOKS
OUT-OF-PRINT BOOKS FOUND. 
Free search. No obligation to 
purchase. Tel: 01376 562334 
Email: jeremy.dore@tesco.net
HEALTH & BEAUTY
CONCERNED ABOUT YOUR 
MEMORY?
Maintain your intellectual edge and 
quality of life. Improve your memory 
and cognitive performance with 
working memory training. 
University researched. 
Evidence based. 
Email: contact@lifemind.us
Creating a better memory for a better life
INTRODUCTIONS
SEEKING: SINGLE ELIGIBLE 
GENTLEMEN 
for introductions with successful, 
attractive ladies of elite dating agency. 
COMPLIMENTARY MEMBERSHIP 
to eligible gentlemen. 
Call Caroline 01483 418958 
or email contact details to 
caroline@bowes-lyonpartnership.co.uk
PRIVATE DATING CLUB seeks 
attractive, successful gentlemen aged 
30's-60's+ interested in meeting 
and dating beautiful women...you 
should be open to enjoying a lasting 
relationship if you meet the right 
person. London/Europe. Reply w/ bio 
and photo in confidence: 
Phoebe@SEIClub.com
ARE YOU SINGLE? SMART? 
SCEPTICAL?
A sucker for Chris Hitchins, Cole 
Porter, Powell & Pressburger, Bach, 
Orwell and the whole Western 
Civilisation thing? Aged 45-58 and 
inexplicably drawn to attractive 47 yr 
old brunette introverts? If you exist 
(and I have my doubts) 
contact:
nelsonriddle397@gmail.com 
INVESTMENT
GET READY FOR A BETTER 
VACUUM CLEANER. 
www.oxfordtechnology.com  
JEWELLERY
LEGAL SERVICES
GARDINERS SOLICITORS. 
Domestic & Commercial 
Conveyancing. Tel: Paul Gardiner, 
020 7603 7245. Email: 
paulgardiner@gardinerssolicitors.co.uk
MASSAGE THERAPISTS
ADESTE FIDELES. Fully qualified 
and experienced English therapist 
offers a range of quality treatments in 
Paddington. For further details please 
call Nina on: 07597 485185.
PROPERTY FOR SALE
GREECE: House for sale in tranquil, 
unspoilt village on slopes of Pelion 
with spectacular views of Pagasitic 
Gulf. 4 double rooms, furnished, 
modernised, A/C, vine terrace, small 
garden, Volos 20 mins. Great beaches 
etc. £95k. 
colin.boreham@ucd.ie 07834 532954 
SPEECH WRITING
RELAX, WE'LL WRITE IT 
FOR YOU!
You’re due to speak / present at a 
wedding / event. Don’t worry- 
Call Lawrence on 020 8245 8999 or 
check www.greatspeech.co.uk
PERSONAL ASSISTANT
Cobra & Bellamy
is the leading name in classically  
designed watches, retro in style  
reminiscent of the 1930s, 40s and 50s. 
Pictured here is the Cobra watch  
available in Stainless Steel at £99, Rose 
Gold Plated and 21 Carat Gold Plated 
at £115. Sienna Miller has chosen to 
eschew more established watch  
ĐŽŵƉĂŶŝĞƐƚŽŇǇƚŚĞŇĂŐĨŽƌ 
Cobra & Bellamy’s retro inspired watch  
ĐŽůůĞĐƟŽŶ͕ŚĞƌĞŝƐĂƋƵŽƚĞĨƌŽŵŚĞƌ 
“Cobra & Bellamy watches are classic,  
ďĞĂƵƟĨƵůĂŶĚĂīŽƌĚĂďůĞ͕/ůŽǀĞĂůůŽĨƚŚĞŵ͘͟
To see the whole Cobra & Bellamy 
ǁĂƚĐŚĐŽůůĞĐƟŽŶŐŽƚŽ͗ 
www.cobrabellamywatches.co.uk  
or call 01736 732112
STYLE NEVER GOES OUT  
OF FASHION
ARE YOU IN NEED OF 
BUSINESS OR LIFESTYLE 
SUPPORT? 
If you are an exceptional business 
person or busy international 
family, I offer business or lifestyle 
support. Complete integrity and 
discretion.
Private Family & Business PA
Highly trusted, mature, 
immaculately polished, business 
& lifestyle organiser. Criminal 
Records Bureau check: Pass. 
Talk to me about your requirements 
and how I can help you
077 696 77 261 
lsnobility@gmail.com
FINE FOOD
FLORISTS
Family run since the 1920`s, Dovers is a modern 
ÀRULVWZLWKDULFKKHULWDJH%DVHGLQ:HVWPLQVWHU 
LQWKHKHDUWRIFHQWUDO/RQGRQSame day delivery.
23 Churton Street, Pimlico, London, SW1V 2LY 
Tel: 020 7834 8784 
Dovers Flowers
EST. 1925
ZZZGRYHUVÀRZHUVFRP
Try the new Spectator 
shop for cartoons, gin and 
other perfect presents
Go to www.spectator.co.uk/shop
or call 020 7961 0015
30% OFF
IN JANUARY
CLASSIFIEDS
Travel & General 

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
55
‘When a woman brings a tiny urn, my 
husband mutters “The Ashes!” and 
poses for a photograph holding them’
— Tanya Gold, p62
High life 
Taki
Gstaad 
What I miss most up here in the Alps are the 
literary lunches conducted on the fly with 
writers like Bill Buckley, Alistair Horne, 
Natacha Stewart, occasionally Dmitri Nabok-
ov and, yes, movie star and memoirist par 
excellence David Niven. This was back in the 
late 1960s and throughout the 1970s, during 
the winter months and in between ski runs. 
Bill would ring early in the morning and sug-
gest a run somewhere, then he’d pick an inn 
in the vicinity where we’d meet David and 
Natacha, two non-skiers, and that was that. 
Buckley always referred to me as Führer — 
once on the slopes, of course — as I would 
go down first, followed by him and Alistair 
Horne, the two not always steady on their 
skis, and at times more out of than in control. 
Once we were safely down, the fun began.
Natacha wrote for the New Yorker, in the 
days when it was a well-written weekly and 
not the race- and transgender-obsessed left-
ie vehicle of today. Her main gripe was the 
editing. She would not permit ‘an iota to be 
changed’, which made me envy her as if she 
were Ava Gardner (an obsession of mine 
back then). I was writing for National Review, 
Bill’s baby, and I had been told that my stuff 
was heavily edited — the second most edited 
copy in the magazine behind that of a Ger-
man intellectual with a double-barrelled 
name. Bill suggested I go to school again and 
learn proper English usage, or try to learn 
by listening to the sound of good English. I 
immediately chose the second option.
Alistair Horne preferred to talk about 
history, as he was a historian, and always 
went back to the Greek civil war of 1944–
51. ‘Taahki, you should try that. You already 
know so much about it,’ he’d sweetly suggest 
to me as the first bottle of white wine was 
opened. Then he’d clam up and look nervous 
as hell if the word Chile came up. He was 
due to start his history of the fall of Allen-
de after the skiing, and it made him terri-
bly depressed. The book was a success and 
I loved the title, Small Earthquake in Chile. 
Low life 
Jeremy Clarke
By New Year’s Day I’d had enough of festiv-
ities. Instead of getting out of bed, I turned 
over, put my face to the wall and refused 
all offers of food, drink and conversation. 
I kept this up throughout the day and into 
the evening, when I had to get up to go to 
the toilet. Asked for an explanation of such 
childish behaviour, I blamed the wind — a 
cold, violent Mistral that had been blowing 
since Christmas Eve.
The cypresses were still twirling and bow-
ing the next day. Though not yet restored 
enough to dance the Gay Gordons, I felt 
a bit more sociable, and in the evening we 
went out. A neighbour, Professor Brian Cox, 
had invited us over to his house to play the 
board game Escape From Colditz. He and 
his family have developed a passion for the 
game and they thought I might be a poten-
tial convert. When we arrived, the board, 
depicting a bird’s-eye view of Colditz cas-
tle and environs, was unfolded on the din-
ing-room table. Drinks were issued. Then 
we gathered around it and Professor Cox 
explained the rules of the game. 
He once explained Einstein’s theory of 
relativity to me in 20 minutes over a risot-
to and I almost — I say almost— grasped 
Alistair always got that way before starting 
one of his books, but skiing and wine and the 
talk about women helped him unwind.
The mysterious Dmitri Nabokov was 
among the best-looking men ever. He was 
the only son of the great Vladimir, and a 
close friend of the Buckleys, as were his 
parents who lived 45 minutes away in Mon-
treux. Dmitri was an opera singer, a racing 
driver and a novelist, but one who wrote 
under a pseudonym that none of us ever 
discovered. One of the games I played with 
him was to announce that I had found out 
his pen name, and blurt out ‘Romain Gary’ 
or, if drunk, ‘Grace Metalious’, the bestsell-
ing female author of Peyton Place. I almost 
got hit for that one.
David Niven would tell us stories about 
Hollywood, and so when his great bestsell-
ing The Moon’s a Balloon was published, 
the joke among us was that we should not 
waste any time even opening it as we had 
heard every single story — sometimes more 
than once. When my first book, The Greek 
Upheaval, was published in the UK by Tom 
Stacey and in the US by a publisher who 
went broke almost immediately, the book-
store on Gstaad’s main street — yes, there 
was a bookstore, long before it became a 
luxury-goods store attended by high-class 
hookers — showcased it and my moment of 
triumph had arrived. In fact, the book with 
my name on its cover was in the middle, 
shadowed by one by Bill Buckley and by a 
bestseller predicting the crash of capitalism 
by 1979. (Close but no cigar, as communism 
collapsed in 1989, but what’s ten years where 
oracles are concerned.)
The lunches were literary, but no one 
touched upon what I wanted to hear and 
learn from: things like rhythm and idioms, 
and pauses and innuendos. Bill wrote a 
novel each winter based on a CIA operative 
who had a one-night stand with the Queen 
of England, Queen Caroline. His novels 
were based on plot and action, and there 
wasn’t much dialogue or suspension of real 
speech to learn from. Never mind, they were 
the best lunches ever because Buckley was 
always in a hurry, so we’d down a couple of 
bottles of wine and then hit a Pflümli or two, 
the Swiss grappa that supposedly makes hair 
grow on one’s chest.
Back then we skied better and faster after 
drinking. Niven would stay behind reminisc-
ing — as articulate as ever while under the 
influence, looking always the English gent in 
his tweeds — in a simple wooden hut high 
up in the Alps. Straight out of Conan Doyle, 
actually. Natacha would fret about iotas, 
and Dmitri would head back down to places 
unknown to us. Alistair Horne was the last 
to die last year. Bill went eight years ago, and 
Dmitry about six. Natacha died 15 years ago 
after losing a son. Niven left us in 1984. 
Gstaad has changed and there are no 
bookstores or writers around. Those charm-
ing huts that served simple food and chilled 
white wine have gone upmarket; you need 
to show a bank balance to get in. I now lunch 
at home and occasionally up at the club. 
Things ain’t what they used to be.  
Bill Buckley suggested I go back to 
school and learn proper English usage

56 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
LIFE
Real life 
Melissa Kite
‘Not being rude, but I don’t think you should 
do any DIY,’ said the gamekeeper.
He had just witnessed me make chicken 
soup by liquidising a boiled chicken carcass 
then pressing all the wrong buttons on the 
liquidiser, so detaching the bottom of the 
jug from the jug rather than releasing the 
jug from the machine, sending a deluge of 
soup downwards on to the kitchen counter 
and floor.
Cydney was standing below, ever hopeful, 
so as the cascade of soup splashed on to the 
spaniel’s head she simply tilted herself to gar-
gle down the rain of good fortune.
The keeper, who had popped in for a 
coffee, had been listening to me excitedly 
reciting my plan to finish the house myself 
by doing all the outstanding work bit by bit 
with my own fair hands, no matter how many 
years it took me.
I would drill, hammer and paint my way 
to glory, I told the keeper, finally sorting out 
my life for myself, with no help from anyone. 
No more Cinderella complex. No more male 
rescuers needed.
‘Right you are,’ said the keeper, then 
added: ‘So do you want me to drill that piece 
of plaster board in front of the loft entrance 
or not?’
‘Yes, obviously…’ I checked myself. ‘No. 
It’s fine. I can do that myself. Soup?’ I had 
swilled as much as possible into a pan. Waste 
not, want not. The keeper grimaced as I 
sloshed liquid chicken with my bare hands 
across the counter and into the pan: ‘No, 
thank you.’
Later, after I had cleared up the rest of 
the soup, which had leaked into every crevice 
of the worktops — at least my new kitchen 
smells homey — I hauled the piece of board 
into place in front of the corridor leading to 
the loft I cannot now afford to convert, and 
whose non-insulated roof consequently leaks 
it. I might not have been on the same page 
as him come the end, but I was on the right 
bus to the library. The rules of Escape From 
Colditz, however, are much more complex 
than Einstein’s theory of relativity and prob-
ably disprove it. Even physicist, astronomer 
and cosmologist Professor Brian Cox con-
fessed that he hadn’t quite yet got his head 
around them. But he patiently outlined 
them to me as far as the limits of his current 
research and understanding allowed. Basi-
cally, there are three escape teams of ten 
prisoners (coloured wooden counters) and 
someone has to be the Nazis (black coun-
ters). This is always Mrs Cox because she 
likes to be the Nazis. Whether she likes to 
be the Nazis in spite of her staunchly pro-
gressive outlook in real life or because of it I 
didn’t ask. Either way, she threw herself into 
the role of a cold-hearted camp Komman-
dant, even as she passed the nibbles around. 
The movements of both prisoners and 
guards are determined by the roll of two 
dice. If you throw a double you throw again. 
Before making a dash for it, prisoners must 
assemble a collection of items, such as rope, 
keys, wire cutters and false papers, hidden 
at various locations within the castle walls, 
and concoct a plan. In the outwitting of the 
guards, prisoner escape committees can co-
operate. Also, players are encouraged to 
practise duplicity of every conceivable sort 
when dealing publicly or privately with the 
player who has chosen to be the Nazis. This 
last overriding rule of the game struck me 
as amazingly anarchic and perhaps the final 
nail in the coffin of Christian civilisation. As 
I mentally grappled with it, the needle on 
the dial showing my post-Christmas brain 
storage capacity leant hard over into the red, 
and perhaps there was a faint smell of burn-
ing, because the Cox family kindly said that, 
well, perhaps it would be best if we started 
playing the game. All being well, I would 
pick things up as we went along.
So away we went. During the first round 
of dice throws, the disciplined Nazi guards 
fanned out to cover the escape routes; Pro-
fessor Cox’s senior British officer headed 
for the shower block; and mine followed him 
in. Pressed by Professor Cox for an expla-
nation of my apparently futile and slavish 
move, I said that my man was celebrity-mad 
and wanted to serve him as his vassal.
The next time the dice were passed to 
me, I threw a whopping 27 with three con-
secutive doubles. His advances spurned, my 
Senior British Officer ran pell-mell through 
the fortress and flung himself at an outside 
wall, which he scaled with the aid of two 
ropes. In the full glare of a searchlight he 
then dashed across the moat, snipped his 
way through the perimeter fence with a pair 
of stolen wire cutters and made a success-
ful dash for the undergrowth. He was home 
and dry and languidly filing off a hang-
nail before anyone else, either prisoner or 
guard, had moved a muscle.
The Coxes fell silent. Mrs Cox lifted a 
satirical Teutonic eyebrow. The timing and 
speed of my chap’s escape was unprece-
dented in the history of the board game of 
Escape From Colditz, apparently, wheth-
er those games were played here on plan-
et Earth or in a parallel universe, of which 
there could be an infinite number. If the 
rules hadn’t stipulated TWO escapers to 
claim victory, the game would have been 
over right there and then. 
cold air into the rest of the house, a cruel 
internal wind of failure.
I tried drilling a screw into the board with 
the hand drill but it just jiggled and popped 
out, and I was on the verge of giving up and 
either calling the keeper, Stefano the Alba-
nian, or possibly even asking the builder boy-
friend to take me back, when I suddenly had 
the idea to try a screwdriver.
This worked a treat. I should have known, 
low tech is my thing. With my loft corridor 
newly closed up, the house was draft-free and 
toasty warm, and I settled down to think what 
else I could do myself.
After nailing up a few paintings to hide 
holes in walls I can’t afford to plaster, I tried 
to unblock the main drain under a huge man-
hole cover on the patio and, pounded by wind 
and rain, promptly fell into it.
Well, I can build up to engineering. The 
main thing was that I had my resolve: the new 
year would mean fewer disasters and more 
competence all round.
I set off in good spirits for a weekend at a 
friend’s house on a country estate in Hamp-
shire, and after a relaxing couple of days got 
into the Volvo to come home and promptly 
drove straight over a stone marking out the 
driveway. The front driver-side tyre, one of 
four new Continentals fitted three weeks ago, 
duly burst open, and as I got out of the car a 
loud hissing confirmed that I had shredded it.
The car sat on the rim, the tyre utter-
ly deflated. I felt the same. The wait for the 
RAC was three hours and my new policy of 
doing everything for myself only got me as 
far as opening the boot and peering at the 
huge metal hoojamaflip that winds the spare 
tyre down from the undercarriage.
I pulled the thing out of its casing and 
flung it about to no avail. What was worse, 
the keeper couldn’t help me now. I was miles 
from his jurisdiction. Luckily, my friend knew 
the keeper there and was on the phone to 
him immediately.
When a Kubota hoved into view and two 
men in camouflage got out, I knew I was 
saved.
‘How come gamekeepers are the only 
people who can fix anything?’ I asked the 
keeper by text as the other keeper changed 
my tyre.
‘What have you done now?’ he asked. I 
told him. ‘You’re unbelievable,’ came the 
reply. ‘Put me on the phone to him and I’ll 
thank him.’ Evidently, there is some unspo-
ken code between keepers. When one 
keeper’s friend gets into trouble in another 
keeper’s jurisdiction, a form of diplomatic 
immunity kicks in.
In any case, the Hampshire keeper was all 
smiles, and sent me on my way to drive back 
to Surrey on the space-saver at 40mph, begin-
ning 2018 as I will no doubt go on.
No more Cinderella complex. No 
more male rescuers needed

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
57
Wild life 
Aidan Hartley
Kenya
First comes a distant hum, rising in volume 
until I hear it coming straight at me like 
Niki Lauda behind the wheel of his Ferrari. 
The blue sky darkens. I duck as swarming 
bees zoom overhead, trailing their queen. 
They are gone again in a second, coiling off 
in a shadowy murmuration across the veldt. 
After the rains, several swarms hurtle over 
us daily looking for homes, criss-crossing in 
the air.
When bees nest in our farmstead walls we 
leave them be. Anybody who has had bees 
live under the eaves will know how cosy it is 
to lie in bed at night, listening to the sopo-
rific thrum of countless beating wings. When 
bees swarm in the kitchen or chimney, burn-
ing two or three large turds of desiccated ele-
phant dung produces a cloud of smoke with 
the aroma of incense, Montecristo and pachy-
derm bowel — and the insects swiftly vacate.
Laikipia is honey country. Honey from 
grass blossom is clear as water, honey from 
forest flowers reaches almost black, but the 
finest is honey from jasmine-scented wait-a-
bit thorn, which blossoms in the driest weeks 
before the rains, making the landscape 
resemble a peach orchard in spring, or a for-
est after snowfall. For years I have bought 
honey from our neighbour Gilfrid Powys. He 
tended hundreds of beehives on his ranch 
and on Christmas Eve he kindly gave me a 
present of two large pots of his best honey. 
Three days later an elephant killed Gilfrid 
and this signals the passing of an era. He was 
a giant figure in Kenya, a great Boran cattle 
rancher, aviator, conservationist, aficionado 
of camels and rare aloes. Among his many 
attributes that his neighbours will miss, he 
was a beekeeper.
It was Gilfrid who inspired me to keep 
bees and more than a year ago we start-
ed several dozen brood hives on the farm. 
A young beekeeper, Charlie, came to help 
me set these up and through him I began to 
learn the basics. Sweating in my heavy bee 
suit, I was fascinated to watch Charlie and 
Leshomo, one of our Samburu stockmen, 
work without gloves or any protection as 
they opened the hives to check on brood 
combs. Their skin crawled with bees yet they 
were hardly stung. In the past year I have 
been stung multiple times, until I felt I was 
building a resistance like my friends who 
are entirely comfortable with bees. Walking 
with a Samburu elder one day, we found a 
cobweb across our path in which a bee was 
trapped alive. As I waited, the man spoke 
softly to the creature and used the point of 
his spear to gently cut it out of its silk prison 
— and only when it had been liberated were 
we allowed to proceed.
Our hives will shortly begin to produce 
hundreds of kilos of honey and my plan is to 
supply raw honey, propolis (a natural rem-
edy that supposedly boosts your immunity 
and a substance used to varnish Stradivarius 
violins) and bee venom to the organic honey 
business run by Charlie’s father, my friend 
Andrew Wright. To discuss business, this 
week I visited Andrew’s honey and kombu-
cha shop in the old coastal town of Malindi, 
tucked away behind the fish market, near 
the old pillar erected by Vasco da Gama. It 
was time for my January detox, so no booze 
— and to clean out my system I drank one of 
Andrew’s papaya-leaf kombuchas and pur-
chased a pot of prickly-pear honey. Andrew 
provides bee-venom therapy for the afflict-
ed and declaring that this was just the thing 
for my detox, I asked him to sting me. ‘Raise 
your shirt,’ Andrew said and with tweezers 
he applied beestings in two spots on my 
back. This, I sensed as the pain spread, was 
making me feel better already. An hour later 
at home I had developed hives all over my 
body, my ears had swelled shut and I was 
fire-engine red. I felt there was no point 
driving back to see a doctor because I would 
be too late. ‘Andrew,’ I said on the phone, 
‘I think I have anaphylaxis.’ ‘Drink two big 
tots of vodka,’ he said. ‘Whisky?’ ‘That will 
do.’ It was half-a-litre of Jameson’s and a 
bottle of blush before the hives passed.
My New Year’s detox was over, but I 
toasted Gilfrid embarking on his great 
camel trek across the constellations — and 
all the bees of Laikipia.
I had developed hives all over my 
body, my ears had swelled shut and I 
was ﬁre-engine red
Bridge 
Susanna Gross
My friend Neil Mendoza and I had a great fin-
ish to 2017 when we won the Portland Club’s 
annual Auction Pairs (which is always a high-
light of my year). I can’t pretend we had any 
real expectation of winning, but a combination 
of good luck, good play and flawless bidding 
by Neil meant we scooped the £8,000 jackpot 
(actually we only got half, as Stuart Wheeler 
had bought 50 per cent of us).
Since then, alas, things have been slip-
ping downhill: I had a poor result with David 
Gold at the Year End mixed pairs, and last 
Sunday, a solid beating at the Young Chel-
sea’s ‘pivot’ teams. Time to buck up for 2018! 
On Sunday, amid a host of poor decisions, 
this hand sticks most in mind. My partner 
and I had an early misunderstanding in 
defence, and the declarer, Tim Gould, made 
a brilliant play to ensure we carried on down 
the wrong track:
Sitting West, I led the yK. Normally, the 
king asks partner to give ‘count’ in the suit 
— but some people prefer to give ‘attitude’ 
signals, and my partner thought that’s what 
we’d agreed. So on my yK he played the y2 
(‘reverse’ attitude: encouraging). I continued 
with the yA. My partner followed with the yJ, 
and South (Tim), with no hesitation whatso-
ever, played his yQ! Clearly, he was the only 
one who knew what was going on. Now, con-
vinced that my partner had started with yJ42, 
I assumed the yJ was a suit-pretence signal, 
showing the XK. It was vital, then, to switch to 
a diamond. If I played my winning y10, declar-
er might ruff, draw trumps and play wA and 
another club for a diamond discard. Of course 
that was exactly what Tim wanted: he won the 
diamond in hand, drew trumps, and discarded 
his club on the fourth diamond.
Things can only get better…
N
W 
E
S
z A K Q J 6 2 
y  Q 4 3
X K Q 6 
w 3
West 
North 
East 
South 
 
 
 
1z 
2y 
Dble 
pass 
4z
All pass
z  4
y 9 8 6
X A J 8 3 
w  Q J 10 5 3   
Dealer South 
N/S vulnerable
z 8 7 
y A K 10 7 5 
X 7 4
w K 9 7 4 
z 10 9 5 3
y J 2  
X 10 9 5 2 
w  A  8 6   

58 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
LIFE
is easily winning for Black. 28 g3 b5 29 
cxb5 Rd4 White resigns
Carlsen-Karjakin, Riyadh Blitz 2017
19 ... Be6 19 ... g5 would trap the white rook 
but the weakening of the black kingside allows 
White to break through with an amazing 
sacrificial sequence: 20 Rh4!! gxh4 21 Bxh6 
Bd7 and now the incredible 22 Bg7!! wins, the 
main point being 22 ... Kxg7 23 Ng5 Rh8 24 
Rxf7+. 20 Rh4 f6 21 Qg6 Qf7 21 ... Bf7 was 
the best defensive try. 22 Qg3 Nb4 23 Bxh6 
Nxc2 24 Ne5 fxe5 Giving up the queen is 
hopeless but so is 24 ... Qe7 25 Ng6. 25 Rxf7 
Rxf7 26 Qg6 Bxa2 27 Bg5 Rff8 28 Rh7 
Rf7 29 Bf6 Black resigns
Although it does not have the prestige of the 
Classical World Championship (to be staged in 
London in November), the Rapid and Blitz 
championships recently concluded in Saudi 
Arabia carried not just worthy titles, but an 
impressive overall prize fund of $2 million. 
Viswanathan Anand emerged victorious in the 
Rapid, while Magnus Carlsen dominated the 
Blitz. The only fly in the ointment was the refusal 
to grant visas to Israeli players, an omission 
excoriated by Carlsen. This week, key extracts 
from play in both championships.
 
McShane-Anand, Riyadh Rapid 2017
The veteran new champion strikes with a bolt 
from the blue against a leading British 
grandmaster and winner of the recent UK 
Knockout Championship. 51 ... Qh3+! 52 
Kxh3 Rh1 mate
 
Karjakin-Esipenko, Riyadh Rapid 2017
(see diagram 2)
 
The defending champion is poleaxed by a blow 
which would have gladdened the heart of Frank 
Marshall, who crushed Levitsky with an 
unexpected Queen sacrifice at Breslau 1912. 
According to Marshall, his coup was greeted with 
a shower of gold coins by the onlookers. 
22 ... Qb3 23 bxc3 23 axb3 Nxb3 is a beautiful 
mate. 23 ... Qxc3+ 24 Bb2 Bxb2+ 25 Rxb2 
Qc1+ 26 Rb1 Nc2+ 27 Qxc2 Qxc2 With a 
queen against just two minor pieces, the position 
In Competition No. 3030 you were invited to 
provide a poem entitled ‘January’. 
I mentioned William Carlos Williams, 
R.S. Thomas and Dante Gabriel Rossetti 
in the brief for this challenge, all of whom 
wrote poems with ‘January’ as their title. 
But that most maligned of months also 
lands a starring role in the opening stanza 
of George Barker’s charming poem ‘Janu-
ary Jumps About’: ‘January jumps about/ in 
the frying pan/ trying to heat/ his frozen feet/ 
like a Canadian…’
Freezing temperatures were very much 
on your minds, too, and for hot-flush-rid-
den Jayne Osborn they are a cause for cel-
ebration. The winners printed below are 
rewarded with £25. Chris O’Carroll is over-
all champ and earns £30.
One face surveys the long, cold month behind,
One contemplates the deep, short freeze ahead.
Too much of nature on your watch, you find,
Is more than metaphorically dead.
 
Yours is the standstill at the end and start:
The pied, bright spring will flourish from this ice;
Refreshed from every flower’s fragrant heart,
The air will soften as it wells with spice;
 
From silver frost a golden sun will climb,
Gilding green pastures, warming every beach;
The crops and herds will fatten in their time,
Full of those lessons plenty has to teach;
 
But once brief bounty has been stored away,
The harsher lessons learned from scarcity
Will loom; the cold truth of the shortest day
Will dim the world your backward gaze can see.
Chris O’Carroll
Of January wary be!
The fairy on the Christmas tree
Can wave no more her magic wand,
She’s in the loft, she won’t respond.
A cold east wind from Europe blows
But what it augurs no one knows,
It bites the ears and seems to moan
‘We’ll freeze you out. You’re on your own.’
Then, turning to the west, we hear
The Mighty Trump sound loud and clear:
A wild, discordant blast that hails
More vehement storms and violent gales;
This month bodes ill but all’s not lost,
The spring might yet unfreeze the frost,
And kinder months are on their way,
There’s always hope, there’s always May!
Alan Millard
Cooler month, you find us huddled
In the ashes, ex-Noelled;
Overhung, contrite and muddled
Needing Christmas fog dispelled.
Mark our faces, whitened, ashen,
Pull us up and set us straight.
January, with compassion
Save us from this chastened state.
PUZZLE NO. 488
Black to play. This is from Carlsen-Anand, Riyadh 
Rapid 2017. The needle clash from the Rapid was 
Anand’s destruction of Carlsen. What was Black’s 
key move? Answers to me at The Spectator by 
Tuesday 16 January or via email to victoria@ 
spectator.co.uk. There is a prize of £20 for the first 
correct answer out of a hat. Please include a postal 
address and allow six weeks for prize delivery.
Last week’s solution 1 … Qxc6
Last week’s winner Malcolm Burn, Tuffley, 
Gloucester 
Chess 
On speed  
Raymond Keene
Competition 
First thoughts  
Lucy Vickery
rDbDW4kD 
0W0W1p0W 
W0nDWDW0 
DW0WDWDQ 
WDWDP$WD 
DWDPGNDP 
P)PDWDPD 
DWDWDRIW 
WDWDWDkD 
0bDW1W0p 
WDWhWDWD 
DWHrDpDW 
W!pDWDWD 
)WDW)W)W 
WGWDW)W) 
DW$WDWIW 
WDk4WDW4 
0pDWDp0p 
W1WDpDWD 
DWDW)WDN 
WDPhW)WD 
gWhPDWDP 
P)W$W!PD 
IWGWDBDR 
WDWDWDWD 
DWDWDW0k 
WDWDq0WD 
DWDWDWDp 
pGWDWDW) 
)WDWDQ)W 
WDWDWDNI 
DrDWDWDW 
Diagram 2

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
59
LIFE
 
 Across
 1 Confines at convenience 
stores (5)
 4 Prison visitor, not in  
Rolls Royce, sadly places 
eggs for fertilization (9)
 11 Over half the train to 
Dover isn’t broad-gauge 
(6)
 14 Range of school note (5)
 15 I left seafood dish for old 
highwayman (5)
 16 German philosopher and 
literary critic who tends  
the flock (6)
 22 Decide against having 
completed the crossword, 
we hear (8)
 23 Italian number silly fellows 
adopted (7)
 24 Engagements of heartless 
Man Utd player (4)
 25 Dull Eisteddfod champion 
returns (4)
 27 Dire Straits for Bolshevik 
opponent (7)
 29 One male with handy 
phone won’t move (8)
 32 Forcibly remove 
unconventional values (6)
 34 Epic about parliament 
(Italian) (5)
 35 English author left in pit 
(5)
 36 Provide illumination and 
have a fag (7, two words)
 38 Gent and Monroe cavorting 
in the Balkans (10)
 
 
 Down
 2 Ornamental orange tree 
becoming very large with 
time (5)
 3 Row of shops is away from 
old private apartment (6)
 4 Sign of progress where 
nursing is concerned (7)
 6 Setting out food on thin 
metal cover (7)
 7 Deflecting stroke made 
by Small and Compton (5)
 8 Jewish scholar stimulated 
without English being 
translated (9)
 9 Fielder’s thin dress is an 
error (4)
 13 Family member at piano, 
with introductions to 
Mozart’s Adagio (7)
 15 It’s a party, so lay back (6)
 19 Kept open by the alert, 
brave investigator 
(10, two words)
 20 Red sign by tailless rats, 
say (9)
 21 Favourite mariner 
admitted to Davey Jones’s 
locker (6)
 26 Chemical element upset 
stomach in senior 
clergyman pre-op (7)
 28 Tool for bridge, it seems (7)
 30 Warning call around the 
old city causes such an 
uproar (6)
 31 US lake regularly 
encountered in 
Strath More (5)
 33 Wise king hasn’t got a 
moment for law-giver (5)
 34 In France, there is the  
heart of the sail-yard 
(4, three words) 
A first prize of £30 for the first 
correct solution opened on 
29 January. There are two 
runners-up prizes of £20. (UK 
solvers can choose to receive the 
latest edition of the Chambers 
dictionary instead of cash —  
ring the word ‘dictionary’.) 
Entries to: Crossword 2341, 
The Spectator, 22 Old Queen 
Street, London SW1H 9HP. 
Please allow six weeks for 
prize delivery.
Crossword 
2341: 
Durum, Durum 
by Doc
Back to work now firmly send us;
Pay no heed to our complaints.
With new discipline amend us,
Set our boundaries, cast constraints.
Slowly then, reveal your glory:
Longer days to which we cling;
Month of firsts, renew our story,
Send us hopeful into spring.
Paul Carpenter
January now. It should be cold,
Freezing breath and slippery underfoot
With frost and hoary leaves in every fold
Of earth, its hard and wizened face like soot
Where spiders’ webs and scattered dirt streak out
From corners where the hose has splashed in  
 
pots.
But still the soil is soft and through it sprout
The sturdy spears of daffodils and knots
Of tiny seedlings. Still the cannas stand
Erect and green, like loyal sentries fixed
On duty as the seasons’ change is spanned,
And autumn’s death and spring’s new life are 
 
mixed.
But who knows what the morning light will 
 
show —
Cold sexton winter still could bring us snow.
Katie Mallett
There are three months that start with J:
January, June, July.
June leads July but follows May.
Does anyone know why?
In June the weather’s fairly warm;
In July much the same.
But rain and sleet and icy storm?
That’s January’s game.
June as we know can name a girl.
July is Caesar’s tag.
Cold January’s a cruel churl,
A murderous old lag.
As sensual souls beneath the moon
We can enjoy a flux
Of pleasure in July and June,
But January sucks.
Basil Ransome-Davies
We welcome you and yet you turn your back
On thoughts of spring, presenting snow and ice.
Our streets are traps, our pavements icy black
And bleakness wrapped in bleakness is your vice.
December loved our generosity
And rang her bells with optimistic joy
But you arrived with animosity
To inconvenience, anger and annoy.
There was a time in childhood when your snow
Had playful kindness and you even smiled;
Now that our steps are warier and slow
We are your playthings, rattled and reviled.
And so, dark month, we do not call you friend
But shiver till your tribulations end.
Frank McDonald
NO. 3033: PRESIDENTIAL PATTER 
Thanks go to @huntthesnark on Twitter 
for this one: you are invited to take as your 
first line ‘I am the very model of a Very Sta-
ble Genius’ and continue for up to a further 
15. Email entries to lucy@spectator.co.uk by 
midday on 24 January, please.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
SOLUTION TO 2339: INTERESTING
Deployment of a GRABBING CRANE (1D) is required to 
complete entries at 11, 13, 21 and 23. 1A, 19 and the puzzle’s 
TITLE (35) are synonyms of GRABBING; 5, 18 and 41 are 
types of CRANE, which is also the surname of Washington 
Irving’s character whose first name is ICHABOD (28).
First prize John Bartlett, Shirley, Solihull
Runners-up Mark Rowntree, London SE10;
M. Day, London N6
Name  
  
 
Address  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Email  
 
The unclued lights (one of two 
words) are of a kind.

60 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
LIFE
Does spending too much time on 
smartphones hinder children’s cogni-
tive development? I’m usually pret-
ty sceptical when people make those 
claims, but I heard it from a source 
I respect last year: James Flynn, the 
eminent political scientist who gave 
his name to the ‘Flynn effect’. This is 
the well-documented phenomenon 
whereby average cognitive ability, as 
measured by intelligence tests, has 
been steadily increasing in the United 
States and other countries since 1930. 
Until now, that is.
I attended a conference in Mon-
treal in July where Flynn present-
ed his latest findings, namely, that 
IQ is still increasing in the develop-
ing world, but has started to decline 
across the West. If you ask 14-year-
olds in Britain to take the same tests 
that 14-year-olds took in 1980, they 
score significantly worse. Flynn spec-
ulated that one possible explanation 
is the prevalence of smartphones and 
the amount of time British teenagers 
spend on social media.
This is known as the ‘anti-Flynn 
effect’ and, after seeing how brain-
dead our children became during 
the holidays, Caroline and I decided 
we had to take the situation in hand. 
But how? In the past, our attempts 
to restrict screen time have always 
ended in failure because neither of 
us has had the energy to enforce the 
rules for more than about two weeks. 
But Caroline had heard about an app 
called OurPact that would let her 
choose what apps the children could 
launch via a control panel on her own 
phone. Instead of the two of us try-
ing to take our children’s devices off 
them during certain parts of the day 
— never a pleasant experience — she 
O
ver Christmas, Caroline and 
I finally snapped about the 
amount of time our chil-
dren were spending on their screens. 
If they weren’t watching Logan Paul 
vlogs on YouTube, they were on 
Snapchat or playing video games. I 
couldn’t get them to read anything — 
not even one of the wonderful How 
to Train Your Dragon books — and 
attempts to persuade them to go on 
walks were met with fierce resist-
ance. Towards the end of the holidays 
they began to look and act like drug 
addicts — pallid complexions, easily 
distracted, short-tempered. Perhaps 
they really were addicts.
Any parent who has tried to 
limit their child’s screen time will 
be familiar with the standard objec-
tion: ‘But Dad, you’re always on your 
screen.’ That’s true, but the differ-
ence is that I’m on a Kindle reading 
a book. In the past, I scoffed at bib-
liophiles who claimed that something 
was lost when we switched to read-
ing on screens, but I now realise they 
were right. We’ve lost the ability to 
set a good example to our children. 
Kids brought up in houses surround-
ed by books are supposed to have an 
advantage over those who aren’t, but 
it’s hard to see how children benefit if 
those books are never opened. As far 
as mine are concerned, Mummy and 
Daddy are just on screens too.
could simply deactivate Snapchat, 
YouTube, Netflix… everything apart 
from the Kindle app. They’d get to 
keep their phones, but all they’d be 
able to do on them for certain periods 
of the day would be to read books.
The hard part, of course, is install-
ing the app on your children’s phones. 
As you can imagine, they’re pretty 
reluctant to part with them, knowing 
what you’ve got in mind. You then 
have to persuade them to cough up 
their passcodes and, if we’re talk-
ing about iPhones, their Apple 
IDs as well. I cannot tell you how 
much cajoling and threatening that 
took. Agreeing which apps they’d 
be allowed to use at what times of 
day was like negotiating the Oslo 
Accords. It took days. 
There were also teething prob-
lems. For instance, we didn’t bother 
to deactivate the ‘News’ feature on 
their phones — we want them to keep 
up with current affairs — and my 
12-year-old son quickly discovered 
that it provided a gateway to You-
Tube. Luckily, he couldn’t help boast-
ing about this — ‘I’ve hacked your 
stupid app’ — so we were able to close 
that loophole.
We’ve now got the system up and 
running and it’s pretty good. Not that 
they’ve started reading books on their 
phones, mind you. Instead,  during the 
restricted hours they just toss them 
aside and start watching reruns of 
Friends on television. But that feels 
like a step in the right direction. Com-
pared to Snapchat, it seems positively 
wholesome. Now, if we can just find 
an app that immobilises the telly…
Toby Young is associate editor of 
The Spectator.
No sacred cows 
Screen-addicted kids? 
There’s an app for that
Toby Young
MICHAEL HEATH
Towards the 
end of the 
holidays, 
my children 
began to look 
and act like 
drug addicts

the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk 
61
England and Australia will still play 
Test cricket against each other as long 
there is demand. (Though how much, I 
wonder, was the great A.B. de  Villiers 
paid to come out of ‘Test retirement’ 
for the modestly supported current 
home series against India?)
No, the truth is that not enough 
happens for modern tastes. On a flat 
pitch at the WACA, 43 for two in a ses-
sion is just not good enough.  Neither 
are innings lasting 180 overs with a 
scoring rate of mostly less than three 
an over. The home crowds were rest-
less at Perth, Melbourne and Sydney, 
with most of the atmosphere coming 
from the Barmy Army. 
So will five-day Tests with tea at 
20 to four become an anachronism 
for all but old codgers like me, sitting 
in a deckchair with nurse not too far 
away? Lurking not so far away in the 
wings is the power behind the game, 
the Indian broadcasters. India con-
trols international cricket, but Test 
cricket (apart from the Ashes and 
games involving India) no longer fills 
grounds or attracts TV advertising. 
T20 cricket does, as does the 50-over 
game if it’s day-night. The five-day 
format is simply too slow, too biased 
toward home teams, and there is just 
not enough tension per session.
I am told broadcasters say private-
ly that they only want to screen games 
with full grounds, with a result, and at 
prime time. They argue that the long 
form must be rethought completely, 
S
o will the sight of poor Joe Root 
at Sydney, pale as a ghost and 
barely able to stand,  heroically 
facing 90mph bowling in a totally 
doomed cause, all the while racked 
with a tummy bug, mark the begin-
ning of a rethink for traditional long-
form cricket? Make no mistake, like 
millions I love the Ashes, but this was 
a dull series with a lot of very repeti-
tive cricket, whether you were there 
— as I was for a few Tests — or one of 
an ever-dwindling band of late-night 
viewers in front of the BT coverage. 
And just because I can remember 
huddling round a small black-and- 
white telly as a kid to watch Kenny 
Barrington inch his way to 85 not out 
at the end of a full day’s play doesn’t 
mean such memories matter a fig to 
anyone in the future. 
Many more tours like this, and Test 
cricket will be in trouble. It is already 
less visible, with matches  involving 
former great nations such as Pakistan, 
New Zealand and West Indies largely 
dying or dead. The traditionalists will 
say that Ashes cricket will always be a 
major event, and India, South Africa, 
with Test matches of four days maxi-
mum, all day-night to ensure crowds 
and prime-time viewers, and  ticketed 
cheaply to ensure big crowds. Each 
innings would be 120 overs with 
incentives for results, and the format 
supported by a World Cup to attract 
outlier nations (New Zealand and so 
on). Administrators must grasp the 
nettle of the new long form, otherwise 
Test cricket as played by Gavaskar, 
the Chappells, May and Kallis is dead. 
T
hree things we learnt over the 
holiday: Anthony Joshua always 
makes his bed before leaving home. 
It makes you feel better when you 
get in at night, he says. What a well-
brought-up young man he is. Second, 
the presenter Kelly Cates, besides 
being Kenny Dalglish’s daughter, is a 
massive breath of fresh air in the dull 
old world of football punditry. She 
showed the boys a thing or two with a 
blistering attack on the pampered nar-
cissism and lavender tuxes of the Bal-
lon d’Or player of the year awards on 
Fighting Talk. Give that girl her own 
show soonest. Finally, he might be a 
big lad but the  reaction of Rob Cross 
at the moment of his World Champi-
onship victory over Phil Taylor was a 
moment when darts led the way for 
graciousness and fully human inter-
action in sport. (Taylor’s subsequent 
dad-dancing to Coldplay was less so, 
but hey, after 30 years and 16 titles he 
had probably earned the right.)
Q. Should the lady or the 
gentleman have the banquette in 
a restaurant? I’ve been brought 
up to believe that the lady has the 
banquette for her more delicate 
bottom — and for her handbag. 
She has the view of the room; the 
gentleman has only eyes for her. 
My fiancé says that a modern 
couple should take it in turns 
to have the hard chair. Whose 
bottom takes precedence?
— L.F., Bayswater, London
A. As with so many cultural 
traditions, the lady takes the 
banquette for practical reasons. 
Not only does it allow access to 
her handbag and protect her more 
delicate clothing from spillages, 
but the lady usually has more 
data in her gossip repertoire than 
does the man. She tends to be 
more beady-eyed when it comes 
to social observation and more 
able to recognise prominent 
fellow diners. The man will miss 
out by denying her the better 
viewpoint since it allows her to 
entertain him. If, in the name of 
modernity, your fiancé is prepared 
to face the Bateman cartoon-style 
disapproval of waiters and other 
diners who will assume he just 
doesn’t know the form, then by all 
means let him take it in turns with 
you to have the banquette. 
On the subject of banquettes, 
never overlook their facility to fast-
forward latent romance should 
space permit a potential couple 
to sit side by side. In this way you 
experience a ‘taster’ of what closer 
intimacy might feel like.
Q. I have been invited by some 
friends to a Burns Night supper 
in London. There will be fine 
company with smoked salmon, 
haggis, cranachan, poetry, and of 
course whisky. However other 
friends may accuse me of cultural 
appropriation. I am English born 
and bred. How should I respond?
— L.K., by email
A. I turn to Burnsian Ross Leckie 
for the answer. Leckie, who is 
booked seven years in advance 
to speak at Burns suppers (his 
turn includes reciting Burns’s 
‘Tam o’Shanter’, which takes 25 
minutes) says ‘Burns would be 
appalled to think any Englishman 
would imagine a Scot would be 
offended by his going to a Burns 
Night supper. The broad kirk is 
what the Burnsian aspires to and 
as for being English, “A man’s a 
man for a’that.”’
Q. I often receive emails from 
people who are friends of 
friends but who I have not met, 
asking me to attend various 
Sloane Ranger-style fundraising 
functions set many weeks ahead. 
Sometimes I want to decide 
nearer the time yet there is 
often pressure to give my reply 
as soon as possible because of 
the caterers. So what I do is just 
send an immediate reply saying 
that I’m away for two weeks 
and will be checking emails only 
sporadically. I hope some of your 
readers might find this tip useful. 
— Name and address withheld
A. Thank you indeed for 
supplying it.
Spectator Sport 
Can the long 
game survive?  
Roger Alton
Many more 
tours like 
this, and Test 
cricket will be 
in trouble
DEAR MARY YOUR PROBLEMS SOLVED

62 
the spectator | 13 january 2018 | www.spectator.co.uk
LIFE
centre, which looks like a squashed 
golf ball in the sky) atop its mystery. 
It seemed to be everything this out-
sider loved about England: England 
the stage set, and self-gilding fantasy; 
it sure beats a pogrom on Twitter, or 
back in the old country. I passed Lord’s 
every day when I lived in London, and 
marvelled that something so English 
could exist in St John’s Wood without 
an army to defend it, but then I realised 
it does have an army. My husband’s 
uncle comes from Devon to London 
to serve, after queuing for 200 years. 
I have never been inside before; I 
am a hack, and hacks don’t queue for 
200 years for anything. We did hold the 
party for our son’s naming ceremony 
inside the Lord’s Tavern next door 
though. It seemed to express his her-
itage (Devizes/Lodz) better than any-
thing Stefan Zweig, or I, could write. 
I didn’t know you could eat at 
Lord’s without queuing for 200 years, 
and I have nothing like that kind of 
time to spare. But then my husband’s 
sister sent us tickets for tea in Novem-
A
s dreams of winning the 
Ashes became, well, the only 
word is ash, for 4-0 is not  
a number even I would minimise, 
there is a place — a restaurant actu-
ally — where you can hold the Ashes 
in your hands. Calm down. What, as I 
imagine myself telling Chris Grayling 
all the time, would your cardiologist 
say? They may not be the real Ashes 
— the person looking after them was 
vague, like a parent telling a child that 
Father Christmas would probably 
come down the chimney on Christmas 
Eve, they couldn’t really say, but it’s 
quite likely. This restaurant is the Long 
Room at Lord’s  Cricket Ground, the 
home of Maryle bone Cricket Club.  
I don’t have a sport — just arguing — 
but if I make mistakes, please write in 
like angry birds. It will cheer you up. 
Throw a ball at me, made of words. 
I always saw Lord’s, which was 
opposite my synagogue — the Liberal 
Jewish Synagogue, which has two lady 
rabbis and is, to the orthodox, about as 
Jewish as a pet shop — as a friendly 
alien space, with an alien ship (the press 
ber, when there would be no cricket 
on, and so there would be space for us. 
And so we stood, my husband and 
I, outside the W.G. Grace gates with 
other married couples, all dressed up 
for the occasion in suits and tea dress-
es and hats like country cousins on a 
road trip to the House of Fraser sale. 
The women wore tolerant expressions; 
the men looked like infants do when 
they are happy. 
And what is inside? A cricket 
pitch, of course, as fine as an Oxford 
college lawn; and a museum featuring 
knee-pads and photographs of hand-
some West Indians throwing balls  
at other people; and a tea-room — 
the Long Room. It is pale blue, with 
shining chandeliers and gaping ceil-
ings and some very good art (for 
England), all of dead men and boys 
playing cricket in a long, speechless 
conversation. It is not my dream, but  
I admire it anyway.
We have a view of the empty 
ground. I prefer ghostly places; plac-
es that bear witness; places that just 
are. The food, served by waiters who 
act like nannies — they are soothing, 
as if we are babies in a ball pit — is  
a perfect English tea: scones, jam, 
cream, delicate, fleeting sandwiches. 
My husband looks as happy as I have 
ever seen him, and when a woman 
brings a tiny urn — accompanied by 
a photographer! — he mutters ‘The 
Ashes!’ and poses for a photograph 
holding them, with glazed eyes. Not a 
restaurant then, but something better, 
something more — a drug. 
Lord’s, St John’s Wood Road, London 
NW8 8QN, tel: 020 7616 8500.
Food 
Tea in the hallowed grounds 
Tanya Gold
I didn’t know 
you could 
eat at Lord’s 
without 
queuing for 
200 years
Why do so many academics write 
so badly? Those who make the 
study of language their life’s 
work are as bad as any. I saw two 
books about English in the 18th 
century reviewed in the TLS and 
thought I might buy them, until 
I read quotations from them that 
the reviewer had chosen, not by 
way of mockery, but to explain 
their arguments.
In Multilingual Subjects, 
Daniel DeWispelare argues that 
‘anglophone translation theorists 
gravitated towards one specific 
set of metaphors in order to 
advocate for protocols of 
linguistic inclusion and exclusion 
that would improve anglophone 
literary aesthetics within the space 
of global linguistic multiplicity’. 
I would guess that he means by 
this something like: ‘In discussing 
how to choose the right words to 
make English translation more 
beautiful in a world of many 
tongues, critics tended to use one 
set of metaphors.’
He doesn’t mean ‘in order to 
advocate for’ but ‘in advocating’. 
I happen to hate the neologism 
advocate for. That may be just me, 
but it is a choice of words (or, if 
you prefer an outcome of 
protocols of linguistic inclusion 
and exclusion) that bodes ill, like 
mouse droppings in a hotel 
bedroom. Even the patient 
reviewer finds him ‘occasionally 
falling prey to too much jargon’.
It is possible by ‘within the 
space of global linguistic 
multiplicity’ he is referring to 
different forms of English spoken 
round the world. Who can say? 
But I am not prepared to translate 
his whole book into English first 
so that I can read it.
Janet Sorensen in Strange 
Vernaculars, says representations 
of provincial speech ‘with their 
humorous innovations on genres 
of antiquarian writing, their mixed 
lexicons, and linguistic innovations, 
remind us … that Britain’s 
provinces were not enclaves 
untouched by the period’s 
transformations; they were not, as 
anachronizing narratives would 
have it, the products of the 
“waiting-room of history”.’ Perish 
the thought. But what’s with the 
scattering of innovations? And 
how can you innovate on genres?
For all I know, these are 
brilliant and painstaking scholars, 
but the university presses of 
Pennsylvania and Princeton, 
which published the two books, 
would find their reputation shine 
more brightly if they improved 
their own ‘anglophone literary 
aesthetics within the space of 
global linguistic multiplicity’.
 
— Dot Wordsworth
MIND YOUR LANGUAGE
Bad academic style
‘I’m already feeling miles smugger.’



