
THE CHILD IN CINEMA

ii 

THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Edited by Karen Lury

THE BRITISH FILM INSTITUTE
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
50 Bedford Square, London, WC1B 3DP, UK
1385 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, USA
29 Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin 2, Ireland
BLOOMSBURY is a trademark of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
First published in Great Britain 2022 by Bloomsbury
on behalf of the
British Film Institute
21 Stephen Street, London W1T 1LN
www.bfi.org.uk
The BFI is the lead organisation for film in the UK and the distributor of Lottery funds 
for film. Our mission is to ensure that film is central to our cultural life, in particular by 
supporting and nurturing the next generation of filmmakers and audiences. We serve a 
public role which covers the cultural, creative and economic aspects of film in the UK.
Copyright © Karen Lury, 2022
Karen Lury has asserted her right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act,  
1988, to be identified as editor of this work.
For legal purposes the Acknowledgements on p. xi constitute an extension  
of this copyright page.
Cover design by Louise Dugdale
Cover image: The Year My Parents Went on Vacation, 2006. Gullane Filmes/Caos Producoes
Cinematograficas/Miravista/Alamy Stock Photo
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted  
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,  
recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior  
permission in writing from the publishers.
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc does not have any control over, or responsibility for, any  
third-party websites referred to or in this book. All internet addresses given in this 
book were correct at the time of going to press. The author and publisher regret any 
inconvenience caused if addresses have changed or sites have ceased to exist,  
but can accept no responsibility for any such changes.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
	
ISBN:	
HB:	
978-1-8445-7513-8
	
	
PB:	
978-1-8445-7512-1
	
	
ePDF:	
978-1-8390-2495-5
	
	
eBook:	
978-1-8445-7724-8
Typeset by Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com  
and sign up for our newsletters.

CONTENTS
List of Illustrations  vii
List of Contributors  viii
Acknowledgements  xi
Introduction  Karen Lury  1
PART ONE  SPACE AND TIME  19
1	 The dream house  Amelie Hastie  21
2	 Children’s right to space, place and home   
Owain Jones  35
3	 Synchrony in the work of Hayao Miyazaki   
Robert Maslen  49
PART TWO  SCREEN PERFORMANCE  69
4	 The achievement of Janis Wilson, Hollywood juvenile 
supporting actor  Martin Shingler  71
5	 Performing black boyhood, quiet and Moonlight   
Karen Lury  85
6	 Children in documentaries: or, the camera never lies   
Stella Bruzzi  101

vi      CONTENTS
PART THREE  HISTORIES  119
  7	 Kusturica’s children: the bubble that bursts history   
Dimitris Eleftheriotis  121
  8	 The child imprisoned in history: crystalline community 
building in O Ano em Que Meus Pais Saíram de Férias 
(Brazil, 2006)  David Martin-Jones  139
  9	 Beginnings and children  Lalitha Gopalan  157
PART FOUR  BEYOND CINEMA  169
10	The child in surrealism: Bellmer, Cornell, Hiller   
David Hopkins  171
11	Mind how you go: children and the public 
information film  Andrew Burke  187
12	‘We know what it’s actually like’: voice, dialect and 
self-efficacy in Scotland’s Understanding Cinema 
project  Jamie Chambers  203
Index  224

1.1	 ‘The burning dollhouse’. Badlands directed by Terence Malick  23
1.2	 Mason (Marc Donato) in The Sweet Hereafter directed by Atom 
Egoyan  29
2.1	 ‘In between spaces’. Boyhood directed by Richard Linklater  41
2.2	 Mason (Ellar Coltrane) in the car moving home. Boyhood directed by 
Richard Linklater  44
3.1	 A ‘mobile home’. Howl’s Moving Castle directed by Hayao 
Miyazaki  61
3.2	 In flight. Howl’s Moving Castle directed by Hayao Miyazaki  66
4.1	 Janis Wilson distraught as ‘Tina’ in Now, Voyager directed by Irving 
Rapper  76
4.2	 The ‘make over’ of Janis Wilson as ‘Tina’ in Now, Voyager directed by 
Irving Rapper  79
5.1	 Alex Hibbert as ‘Little’ in Moonlight directed by Barry Jenkins  90
5.2	 Ashton Sanders as teen Chiron looking back through the camera in 
Moonlight directed by Barry Jenkins  91
5.3	 ‘What’s a faggot?’ Little’s question in Moonlight directed by Barry 
Jenkins  94
6.1	 In the queue for the cinema. Seven Up!  107
6.2	 At the photocopier. Être et avoir directed by Nicolas Philibert  111
7.1	 On the trailer in When Father Was Away on Business directed by Emir 
Kusturica  128
7.2	 The disruptive ‘bubble’ of childhood in When Father Was Away on 
Business directed by Emir Kusturica  130
­LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Stella Bruzzi is a professor and Executive Dean of Arts and Humanities at the 
University of Central London. Her research and publications include work on 
documentary film and television; costume, fashion and film; masculinity and 
cinema; and representations of the law and true crime in film and television. 
Following on from the Leverhulme Major Research Fellowship ‘Approximation: 
Documentary, History and the Staging of Reality’, a monograph of the same title 
has been published by Routledge (2020).
Andrew Burke is a professor in the Department of English at the University 
of Winnipeg, Canada. His book Hinterland Remixed: Media, Memory, and the 
Canadian 1970s was published by McGill-Queen’s University Press in 2019.
Jamie Chambers is a lecturer in film and television at Edinburgh College of Art. 
He is the founding editor of the Film Education Journal and has worked as a film 
education practitioner with Understanding Cinema and Cinéma Cent Ans De 
Jeunesse since 2013. He is the curator of the Folk Film Gathering (the world’s first 
folk film festival (www.folkfilmgathering.com) and is the director of the award-
winning, BAFTA-nominated films When the Song Dies (2012) and Blackbird 
(2013).
Dimitris Eleftheriotis is Professor of Film Studies at the University of Glasgow. 
He was an editor of Screen between 2012 and 2021. His publications include the 
monographs Popular Cinemas of Europe and Cinematic Journeys. He is currently 
working on film and cosmopolitanism and has published a series of articles on the 
subject.
Lalitha Gopalan is Associate Professor in the Department of Radio-Television-
Film, affiliate faculty in the Department of Asian Studies, South Asia Institute, 
and Core Faculty in the Center for Women and Gender Studies at the University 
of Texas in Austin, USA. She is the author of Cinema of Interruptions: Action 
Genres in Contemporary Indian Cinema (2002) and Bombay (2005), and editor 
of Cinema of India (2010). She is a member of the editorial collective Camera 
­LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

­LIS T OF CONTRIBUTOR      ix
Obscura: Feminism, Culture, and Media Studies. Her most recent book, Cinemas 
Dark and Slow in Digital India (2020), explores various experimental film and 
video practices in India.
Amelie Hastie is the author of Cupboards of Curiosity: Women, Recollection 
and Film History (2007), The Bigamist (BFI Film Classics, 2009), a forthcoming 
volume on Columbo (Duke University Press), and essays on film/television theory 
and historiography, feminism, and material cultures, including ‘The Vulnerable 
Spectator’ column in Film Quarterly. She teaches at Amherst College in the United 
States.
David Hopkins is Emeritus Professor of Art History and Research Fellow at the 
University of Glasgow. His books include Dada’s Boys: Masculinity after Duchamp 
(2007), Virgin Microbe: Essays on Dada (co-edited, 2014) and After Modern Art 
1945–2017 (2nd edition, 2018). His latest book is Dark Toys: Surrealism and the 
Culture of Childhood (2021).
Owain Jones trained as cultural geographer and became the first Professor of 
Environmental Humanities in the UK in 2014 at Bath Spa University. He gained a 
PhD in the geographies of rural childhood at the University of Bristol; conducted 
an Arts and Humanities Research Council project into depictions of childhood and 
has published many scholarly articles on various aspects of children’s geographies. 
He was a founding associate editor of the Children’s Geographies journal, and chair 
of the Royal Geographical Society’s Children, Youth and Families Research Group 
from 2009 to 2014.
Karen Lury is Professor of Film and Television Studies at the University of Glasgow. 
She has published widely in film and television studies, focusing particularly on 
aesthetics, childhood and performance. She is the author of The Child in Film: 
Tears, Fears and Fairytales (2010) and, most recently, co-editor of Discourses of 
Care: Media Practices and Cultures (2020). She is an editor of the international film 
and television studies journal Screen.
David Martin-Jones is Professor of Film Studies at the University of Glasgow. His 
work explores the question of what it means to study a world of cinemas. He is the 
author/editor of nine books, including Cinema Against Doublethink (2018) and 
Columbo: Paying Attention 24/7 (2021).
Robert Maslen is a senior lecturer in English Literature at the University of 
Glasgow and founded the MLitt English Literature: Fantasy, dedicated to the 
study of fantasy and the fantastic. He is the author of Elizabethan Fictions (1997), 
Shakespeare and Comedy (2005), and The Shakespeare Handbook (2008), and has 
edited Sir Philip Sidney’s Apology for Poetry (2002) and Mervyn Peake’s Collected 
Poems (2008) and Complete Nonsense (2011). He has written many essays on early 

x      ­LIS T OF CONTRIBUTOR
modern literature and twentieth-century fantasy and science fiction, with subjects 
ranging from fake translations to books and reading in Japanese anime. He also 
blogs at ‘The City of Lost Books’.
Martin Shingler is an independent scholar and freelance writer/editor who 
previously lectured on film and media at the universities of Staffordshire (1990–
2005) and Sunderland (2005–2019). In addition to co-editing the BFI Film Stars 
book series (2012–2019), he has published books on radio, film melodrama, star 
studies and Warner Bros.

T
his anthology has been in limbo for a long time. I particularly want to 
acknowledge all those contributors who did make it this far, even when 
it meant you had to provide new material. Of these patient fellows, my 
close colleagues at Glasgow, Dimitris Eleftheriotis and David Martin-Jones, made 
particular efforts to keep the anthology on track. You and your fellow contributors 
have been endlessly sympathetic and kind. I want to offer special thanks to Amy 
Holdsworth and Michael Lawrence, who – of course, when I was now suddenly ‘in 
a rush’ – both provided a final critical reading of my contributions, enabling me 
to just ‘finish the thing’. As ever, I am also indebted to Caroline Beven who made 
the business of pulling everything together so much easier and who added stylistic 
elegance and coherence to my and other contributors’ chapters. I’d also like to 
thank Rebecca Barden, who initiated the project (how she must rue the day) and 
ultimately came back to see it finally completed. I’d also like to thank my husband, 
Tim Niel and our daughters – Delilah, Alice and Edie – all of whom in different 
ways made suggestions and offered encouragement along the way.
Finally, I’d like to dedicate the book to the late Elizabeth Lebas, whose 
contribution sadly could not be completed – however, her passion, humour, 
scholarship and sense of style made a huge impression on me in the brief time 
I knew her.
­ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

xii 

T
his collection is, as its title suggests, about the child in cinema: its central 
ambition is not just to think about the representation of the child on screen, 
but to expand this critical domain to include the child as they appear in 
non-fiction and non-theatrical films (documentaries, art installations and public 
information films), to develop the global reach of the texts discussed (including 
the former Yugoslavia, Brazil and India) and to explore the labour of the child both 
in front of and behind the camera (as actors and filmmakers.) Despite the diversity 
of texts discussed, the anthology provides an overlapping series of arguments, in 
which key themes and preoccupations recur: the spaces and places children inhabit 
and imagine; a concern for children’s rights and agency; the affective power of the 
child as a locus for memory and history; and the complexity and ambiguity of the 
child figure itself. Since the book was originally commissioned, it would be fair 
to say that there has been an explosion of popular and academic writing on the 
child in cinema and, to a lesser degree perhaps, on children’s films.1 Previously 
overlooked, the child is now a subject of interest across a wide range of different 
film analyses, which employ the child to expose the under-explored nooks and 
crannies within the architecture of cinema.2 In the chapters in this volume and 
elsewhere, the majority of film analyses focus – understandably – on how the 
child is depicted and represented: in the closing section of this introduction, I 
will highlight how my various contributors (and I) similarly explore questions 
of representation and agency. In opening up the discussion, however, in the first 
section of this introduction, I want, perversely perhaps, to take the opportunity to 
reflect on my increasing ambivalence about the child as a critical lens.
This is, I suspect, because this anthology has had – even more than most 
academic anthologies – a very long gestation, and it has been neglected, in large 
part due to the distractions of other commitments, both domestic and professional. 
Over this period, my own interest in the child has also waxed and waned, although 
I am not sure whether I want, or am even able, to let go of the child’s grasp on my 
attention. I suspect that the child will still manage to get its ‘sticky fingers’ into 
everything and anything I write. However, having now spent over fifteen years 
thinking and writing about the child in film, television and amateur media, I want 
to be a bit disruptive – to make some noise, to stir things up a bit – by reflecting 
on my ambivalence about the exploitation of the child as critical lens in film; in 
doing so, I know that I share these concerns with many of my peers. The following 
  INTRODUCTION
   Karen Lury

2      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
is therefore both a rebuke and a challenge to myself and others. I will start simply, 
with a list of statements that make me anxious when people (and by ‘people’ I 
mean adults, like me) use them to explain or justify their focus and ‘expertise’ in 
relation to the child.
‘We were all children once’
Well, yes I guess, in a sense ‘we all’ were. But surely the point is that we were no 
more alike (or unalike) as children as we are now as adults. Children, like other 
non-human animals, are universalized (and homogenized) not so much because 
they share characteristics or perspectives amongst themselves but because they are 
both unknowable and vulnerable. It can often be a mistake to recognize the child 
‘you once were’ on screen, or project fantasies about your own children (about 
whom you probably know very little) in order to understand child characters, or 
to use your own memories as a way of understanding or legitimizing ‘childish’ 
behaviour and attitudes that are depicted on screen. As Chris Philo observed, 
while it may seem to be the only viable approach, adult researchers must take great 
care not to colonize children’s space or identity.3
‘The child and … ’ or ‘The child in … ’ 
or ‘The child on … ’
I am as guilty as anyone here (see, for instance, the title of this anthology and my 
previous book on ‘the child in film’). My admonition here is to myself as much as 
it is to other authors thinking of writing about the child figure. The child really 
shouldn’t be a cookie-cutter metaphor that is picked up and slapped onto a series 
of films to make them more appealing. Each time I see ‘The Child and … (national 
cinema, genre of filmmaking, auteur)’ as a book or essay title, I think about 
Richard Benjamin’s 1990 film adaptation of Patty Dan’s novel Mermaids, featuring 
Cher as the bad/’good enough’ mother, Rachel, who, in one memorable scene uses 
a cookie-cutter on white bread and ham, creating a star-shaped sandwich (she 
only makes childlike ‘party food’) for her embarrassed teenage daughter Charlotte 
(played by Winona Ryder). All of us should have the ambition to make more than 
another ham sandwich.
‘The child’s point of view’
Or ‘objects in the rear view mirror may appear closer than they are’. Film directors 
and academics generally accept that they cannot see the world as children do, but 
are sometimes guilty of thinking that if they look back carefully enough – in the 
rear view mirror provided via psychoanalysis perhaps – or if they are willing to 
‘get down’ physically to the child’s presumed eye level, then they will be closer to, 

INTRODUCTION      3
or even be able to adopt, the child’s ‘point of view’ (perspective.) No, I don’t think 
so. Taking the time to do this can create more interesting stories, and the films 
and analyses produced are often illuminating and moving. Ultimately, however, 
they are still stories (films and/or critique) by adults for adults, or – at best, or 
sometimes at worst – by adults ‘as if’ they were able to speak for children (they 
rarely, if ever, speak to children, but that can be even more excruciating). ‘As if’, in 
my childhood at least, was used as an alternative phrasing to the provocative and 
sarcastic use of ‘yeah … right’ – meaning that the speculation or possible solution 
being promoted by the storyteller would and could never happen, and in fact was 
actively prevented from ever happening, in that particular way, however much it 
might have been wished for – ‘as if’. (By the way, see my first point – my childhood 
was not your childhood and as an explanation this may make little sense to you.)
The child as ‘becoming’, the child in 
‘transition’, the ‘liminal child’
This is difficult, as I am pretty certain I have also used all those descriptors myself 
at one time or another (and both Owain Jones and David Martin-Jones, along with 
some of my other contributors, use the same kind of descriptive terms to good 
effect). The concept of ‘becoming’ is often drawn from Deleuze, whereas the term 
‘transition’ is often framed, at least initially, as sociological; the ‘liminality’ of the 
child more frequently emerges from literary studies and close textual analysis – and 
all are used in film studies.4 Like many approaches to the conception or description 
of childhood, it comes with the best of intentions. After all, it is evidently true that 
(most) children are not fixed as categories or as individuals (since most children 
grow and are growing), meaning that the child figure as a theoretical, social and 
psychological construct has a useful slipperiness, where it appears vividly, as 
neither one thing nor the other, delightfully, scarily plastic. But, as ever with the 
child, there is a danger of fetishization here, and, as I have indicated, even the 
conception of ‘growth’, which may appear as a biological certainty, excludes those 
fictional and actual children who may not, for various reasons, ‘grow’ as other 
children appear to do.
The growing child is in fact rather difficult to capture – even filmmakers who 
follow the child over a number of months or years (see, for instance, Hirokazu 
Kore-eda, Michael Winterbottom, Richard Linklater or the 7 Up! documentary 
team)5 – necessarily fail to capture growth as it is actually happening. For this 
reason, perhaps, critics are drawn again and again to instances exemplified by the 
ambivalent meaning of a ‘freeze-frame’ (usually at the end of a film), a clever, two-
faced image, looking back and forward, although in reality this is more often true 
of the filmmaker and adult spectator than of the child character. The most cited 
version of this image is the much discussed ending from 400 Blows/Les Quatre 
Cents Coups (Francois Truffaut, 1959), where Antoine Doinel (Jean Paul Leaud) is 

4      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
running to the sea but is stranded, or stilled, in the final shot of the film, looking 
back at the camera, in a freeze-frame. This is a position and gesture directly 
referenced by other little boys in This is England (Shane Meadows, 2006) and 
Moonlight (Barry Jenkins, 2016), both of which also feature a final image of the 
boy on a beach, looking out to the horizon and/or back at the camera. My point 
is not that the readings of the child as ‘becoming’, or in ‘transition’, or as ‘liminal’ 
are wrong, but rather that as adult critics we invest too much in these instances or 
this positioning of the child as ‘betwixt and between’ and as a figure of potential (a 
fulcrum between the past and the future). This leads me to my final anxiety about 
whether or not we should:
‘Fuck the child’
Lee Edelman has offered a profound and provocative critique of the ‘sacred status’ 
of the child in social and political discourse. In his summary of his own argument, 
he suggests:
No Future argued that social relations that imagine an end to their structural 
antagonism in a tomorrow perpetually deferred invoke the future as guarantee 
of meaning’s realization. Such a future, in its status as supplement, as the empty 
placeholder of totalization, works at once to preclude and assure the social 
system’s closure, denying its totalization in the present while filling the gap that 
denial opens with the pledge of the yet-to-come. The Child, as the privileged 
figure of that pledge – one with no markers of identity in advance, such that 
any child, in the proper context, can instantiate its logic – compels us take our 
social value from our various relations to it and to make ourselves, in whatever 
way, the guardians of its future.6
I am pretty sure that Edelman would be fully aware of how that last line chimes 
with the nauseatingly sentimental (and retrospectively contaminated) line from 
Michael Jackson’s recording of ‘The Greatest Love of All’ (written by Michael 
Masser/Linda Creed): ‘I believe the children are our future.’ Edelman’s provocative 
critique is sophisticated and complex; however, it makes two simple things very 
clear. Firstly, that the child is a political hostage through which we (well certainly, 
‘I’, as a mother of three daughters) are all hoodwinked into saving and preparing 
for a future-yet-to-come and which, of course, never actually arrives. This prompts 
an inevitable recollection (another cultural earworm, if you like) that it feels 
impossible to avoid, this time from Lewis Carroll’s Alice, a real and fictional little 
girl who seems inescapable, either within academic studies of childhood or in 
numerous adaptations in film, television and other media forms. The deniability of 
today and the forfeiting of the present to the future is, after all, neatly summarized 
by the White Queen’s rule: ‘jam tomorrow and jam yesterday – but never jam 
today’.7

INTRODUCTION      5
Secondly, within the bio-political framework described by Edelman, the child 
is othered, since as a child they must always be to one side, or on the outside, 
awaiting this unknown and anticipated future, so that they are therefore ‘other’ 
to the society they presently inhabit. Ironically, perhaps, this then aligns the child 
with those ‘other’ individuals (‘queers’) who refuse to participate in the relentless 
merry-go-round of reproduction and child-worship.8 Or, as Edelman famously 
puts it:
Fuck the social order and the Child in whose name we’re collectively terrorized; 
fuck Annie; fuck the waif from Les Mis; fuck the poor, innocent kid on the Net; 
fuck Laws both with capital ls and small; fuck the whole network of Symbolic 
relations and the future that serves as its prop.9
What Edelman’s critique exposes, I think, is that the child – as metaphor, as 
metonymic figure, or featuring otherwise in our various shared fantasies – is hollow, 
much like the cookie-cutter I described earlier. It can seemingly be used for almost 
any purpose, filled by and shaping whatever ideology is desired and it can be used 
– at this point in time and certainly since the late twentieth century – as the ‘trump 
card’ in any political debate.10 The importance of the child appears, at the current 
time, to be a given; it is almost always possible to describe work or research on the 
child as urgent, inclusive and universal. It is more difficult, I have discovered, when 
facing a number of rejected grant applications, to make it interesting. In addition, 
as many others have noted, the sanctity of the child as political subject (as future 
citizen) does not, despite the rhetoric, appear to hold for actual children (those 
annoyingly material, solid, messy and frequently noisy beings). However, this final 
switcheroo – replacing the child-figure with the actual child – is another familiar 
conceit, since real children really matter, don’t they? So it is good, isn’t it, to do 
‘work’ on the child? Edelman’s point is not, however, that children don’t matter, just 
that they don’t matter ‘more’ – that is, more than the old, the queer, the childless, the 
disabled, the dying and those other individuals we deem to be ‘adult’.
Writing this now, in the second year of a global pandemic, the sacred status 
of the child is employed in popular discourse and political debate in various, and 
often confused, ways. COVID-19 and its variants is highly infectious but it seems 
(predominantly) to kill old people (and this is acceptable? Although when, exactly, 
are we suggesting someone is ‘old’?) But even young children can be infected, 
some with lasting effects. So whom do we vaccinate and whom do we expose? Do 
we vaccinate children to protect them, or is it to protect their parents, adult carers, 
siblings, grandparents and others? And if we decided to do this, whom can we ask 
for permission to administer that vaccination? (The child or, perhaps, their ‘anti-
vaxxer’ parents?) What are the consequences, for all of us, as the normal patterns 
and routines for schooling and socializing children continue to be disrupted? 
It seems that there is no escaping the question of who ‘matters most’, since it is 
becoming clear, finally, in the discussion around ‘key workers’ that ‘everyone’ does. 

6      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
A virus that attacks everyone explodes the tidiness of our antiquated and toxic 
taxonomies, established through our fetishization of biological ‘difference’ rather 
than an appreciation of the similarities and intra-dependencies that exist between 
humans of all ages, as well as with other entities of all kinds, such as non-human 
animals, microbes and bacteria. In her fascinating book, Infrahumanisms: Science, 
Culture and the Making of Non/Personhood, Megan H. Glick provides a cogent 
account of the various ways in which the child emerged in the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries as a convenient vehicle for and the primary ‘exception’ 
within medical and psychological doctrine.
Imagining the child as unique in soma and psyche, in dietary consumption and 
patterns of rest and activity, in health and illness – in short, imagining the child 
as infrahuman – seemed to allay fears about human progress, of which there 
was still so much to learn. The consideration of the child as a special case, in the 
rise of both child psychology and paediatric physiology, animated fantasies of 
control and quantifiable difference.11
As Glick goes on to demonstrate, the result is that the child is employed (once 
again) as both the exceptional proof of, and thus the rationale for, a racist and 
anthropocentric world view.
It may seem that I have come a long way from thinking about film or media 
representations of children. However, my point is to look forward to what might 
be the next step in our thinking about children/childhood and their various ways 
of being, and seeming, both on and off screen. It seems to me that one way forward 
might be to consider the heterogeneous, and apparently eccentric, relations shared 
between children; between the child and adult; between children and those others 
(non-human animals, viruses, machines, atmospheres, climates) with which we 
share our screens and our world.
In an essay I am still struggling to write, I try to articulate what it might mean to 
think about how one set of relations between children and these kinds of inhuman 
entities are captured on film, focusing on three ‘devices’ that appear frequently in 
films for and about children: the balloon, the kite and the bicycle. Using work by 
the geographers Derek McCormack and Sasha Engelmann, and their attempts to 
imagine and reveal a ‘geo-poetics of air’ – in Engelmann’s words, ‘an awareness of 
the simultaneous material, affective and aesthetic impressions of air’12 – I suggest 
that the kite, balloon and bicycle can be determined not simply as children’s 
playthings, but as McCormack suggests, following arguments by Jane Bennett, 
that they are objects with ‘thing power’.13 All three devices use, employ or pass 
through the atmosphere and the air, and in doing so they bring the child into a 
material, aesthetic and affective relationship with air and atmosphere, provoking 
scary, necessary and delightful experiences of flight, breath and lift. The kite flies 
because of heat and wind; the balloon is made up of, and rises and falls through, 
the air; even the bicycle, the most ‘grounded’ of these devices, is a machine that can 

INTRODUCTION      7
be ‘punctured’ and which will not work with deflated tyres (meaning that tyres are 
dependent on air and air pressure). The bicycle is also a machine that frighteningly 
and excitingly propels its operator and/or passenger through the air, making the 
air audible, tangible (it hums, it is cold or hot, feels soft, fluid, prickling or harsh 
as you pass through the air and it rushes over your skin.) Air and atmosphere are 
part of the experience of the bike, the kite and the balloon: whether this is the air 
rushing past as you descend down a hill, the tug of the wind as you pull at the 
strings of a kite, or the envelopment of your exhaled breath within the rubber skin 
of the balloon.
The significance of these different objects is not just because these three air-
borne or air-filled devices are symbolically loaded with cultural associations 
that are related to childhood, to parent–child relationships, or that they rehearse 
child-related concepts of attachment and loss. They are of interest and importance 
because they facilitate an openness and expose a series of relations between child 
and world or ‘sensing-spaces’ as McCormack describes them.14 They allow for a 
moment of animation, the instance of lift, the possibility of untethering, the intake 
or expulsion of breath, of making yourself heard or making yourself present, to 
the just-before, the just-after, suggesting a momentum anywhere between balance, 
falling and moving forward. In film, therefore, these relational moments provide 
instances of affective force, a sense of being in and of the world, in which the 
child on screen and the audience participates.15 To award these objects agency 
in this way also acknowledges the humility that can be experienced by the child 
in these relations – a give and take that is not always or only about ‘mastering’ 
a new skill. It can be difficult to try and think in this way (I find it appealing, 
sometimes appalling and often just a little bit silly) but perhaps there is something, 
in considering not just what the balloon, the kite and the bicycle mean to the child, 
but how they work together.16 As McCormack suggests: ‘It’s about how movement 
and thought think you: about how ideas have you; about how things work you 
out.’17 It isn’t going to be easy, but surely in a world in which a virus can destroy 
national economies and when climate change ‘changes’ everything, we should 
consider how to work things out so that we recognize the child less as a hostage to 
our future and more as an ally in our present.
The book
The anthology is divided into four parts: Space and Time; Screen Performance; 
Histories; and Beyond Cinema.
Space and time
In this first part, the essays overlap in their focus on the spaces, places and 
temporalities that children occupy, imagine and travel through with a specific 
focus on the idea and material qualities of the house and home. In the first chapter, 

8      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
the film scholar Amelie Hastie’s writing, in terms of its poetic phrasing and eye for 
detail, is both informed by and resonates with Gaston Bachelard’s sensitivity to 
the child’s experiences and memories of home in his series of remarkable essays 
in The Poetics of Space.18 Looking at three films, Terence Malick’s Badlands (1973), 
Lynn Ramsay’s Ratcatcher (1999) and Atom Egoyan’s The Sweet Hereafter (1997), 
Hastie asks us to reflect on how these films are alert to the way in which children 
use the space they live in, and how what may seem to be mundane spaces (the 
nooks and crannies of the home which are both found and created) are, for the 
child, also places of fantasy. She illustrates, through close analysis, how key images 
from each film – a burning house; a boy wrapped in a white lace curtain; children, 
who we know to be actually dead, apparently alive and safely asleep in their beds – 
demonstrate that these filmed houses become dream houses, places of fantasy, 
sometimes offering comfort but also provoking fear.
In Owain Jones’s chapter, which focuses primarily on Richard Linklater’s 
Boyhood (2014), he boldly sidesteps what is perhaps best known about this film 
(which is that it was filmed over twelve years as the central protagonist/child 
actor Ellar Coltrane grew up) and, rather than reflecting on the passage of time, 
he considers the child’s desire, or indeed their right, to place – and specifically 
to a ‘home’. What, he writes provocatively, ‘if we were to ask questions of how 
seriously children’s aspirations should be heeded’, and further asks us to consider 
how doing so might transform ‘the conditions of both children’s and adult lives, 
the interactions between them, as well as their spatial out-playings in everyday 
life’. As he notes, the controversial United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
the Child Charter (1989) apparently offers a series of rights to the child, which 
many national governments (including the United Kingdom but not the United 
States) have ratified. However, as Jones indicates, what this means in practice is 
variable, with the child’s wishes (for example the desire not to move home) often 
overruled by adult pressures, desires and life choices. By focusing on the instances 
when the children are moved (by their mother who relocates several times in the 
film) he is able to illustrate how the child’s movements in space (often reflected 
in purposeless, mundane activities such as ‘lying about daydreaming’, fidgeting 
and farting) create a kind of affective choreography in which children can be seen 
to attune themselves to and sometimes subtly resist the adult ‘patternings and 
orderings’ of their environment. In both these chapters, then, albeit with some 
ambiguity, the child’s ability and indeed their right to occupy, make use of and 
control spaces and places, to subvert the apparent meaning of the corner of a room 
or the otherwise redundant space between houses, is seen as important to their 
well-being.
In the final chapter of this section, Robert Maslen, a literary and fantasy scholar, 
brings together the concerns of both Hastie and Jones when he considers the 
possibility of ‘synchrony’ in relation to the child’s experiences of time and space. 
He asks how it might be possible to create a cinematic experience that could play 
to an ‘auditorium as a complex web of experiences governed both by the constantly 

INTRODUCTION      9
shifting dynamics of biological development and by distinct but overlapping 
perspectives on the object of attention, variously oriented towards past, present 
or future’. Examining, in detail, three animated films by Hayao Miyazaki – My 
Neighbour Totoro (1988), Whisper of the Heart (1995) and Howl’s Moving Castle 
(2004) – Maslen demonstrates how the overlapping chronologies of the characters, 
their mutability (in terms of appearance, age and species) as well as the plastic 
and frequently magical properties of the spaces and places they inhabit (however 
mundane these places might at first appear) facilitates a cinema for children and 
adults in which the child’s experience is foregrounded but, significantly, is not 
detached (or ‘othered’) from that of other generations, or indeed other species 
and hybrid figures (animals, gods, monsters or machines). Miyazaki’s artwork – 
indebted still to the traditions of cel (hand-drawn) animation and using very little 
computer-generated imagery (CGI) – has a very light touch, and appears, in some 
senses ‘simple’. However, Maslen’s absorbed and absorbing analysis illustrates 
quite how detailed and frequently dark the artwork and themes of Miyazaki’s films 
actually are. Taking us from the playful, melancholy terrain of Totoro (with its 
memorable hybrid, the ‘cat-bus’) through the temporally complicated romance of 
the protagonists in Whisper of the Heart, he brings us finally to the eccentric and 
time-travelling occupants of Howl’s Moving Castle. With a focus on time and inter-
generational relationships, it may seem that his focus is solely on the significance 
of time for the child. Yet in the final images of the moving castle, delightfully 
described by Maslen as a ‘poignantly rickety structure’, children (and adults) are 
provided with a ‘mobile’ home, a home full of nooks and crannies, that can move 
through and with time – a mutable, hopeful place of nostalgia and anticipation – 
that becomes, as Maslen suggests, a ‘blueprint for co-habitation’.
Screen performance
In this part, the essays variously address the agency of the child in relation to their 
performance on screen. The first two chapters, by Martin Shingler and myself, 
concentrate squarely on the labour of the child actor in fictional film. Shingler 
draws on his vast expertise in Hollywood cinema (and the work of Bette Davis) to 
reflect on the acting choices and performance of the child actor Janis Wilson, in 
the Bette Davis star vehicle, Now, Voyager (Irving Rapper, 1942). He demonstrates, 
via close textual analysis (drawing on an analytic model provided by Cynthia 
Baron and Sharon Carnicke, along with work by Andrew Klevan) how Wilson’s 
overlooked performance (both at the time and now) can be seen not only as an 
exemplary ‘supporting performance’ but as distinctive in its deliberate opposition 
to the performances of the ‘cute’ child characters and child stars that dominated 
Hollywood cinema in the 1930s. Indeed, via his close analysis of specific scenes, 
it becomes possible to discern how Wilson offers a prototype for the anxious, 
unhappy (sometimes anorexic) teen character that was the precursor to the ‘sullen’ 
teenage girls that moved centre stage in various films from the 1990s on, such as 

10      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Girl, Interrupted (James Mangold, 1999), Thirteen (Catherine Hardwicke, 2003) 
and perhaps even Ladybird (Greta Gerwig, 2017).
In my chapter, I also focus on the acting choices made and the resulting 
performances of the child actors who portray the character of ‘Little’/Chiron (Alex 
Hibbert and Ashton Sanders) in Barry Jenkins’s 2016 film, Moonlight. Originating 
from a discussion with students from my Screen Performance class in the spring of 
2020, I employ Kevin Quashie’s concept of ‘quiet’ in relation to black masculinity, 
and here black boyhood, as part of a strategy to do justice to the child actors’ 
minimalist but hugely affective performances in the film. In doing so, I touch on 
the various racist discourses and practices at work in cinema, largely arising from 
the expectations that are raised between the black actor and spectator, but also, 
following work by Richard Dyer and Mary Ann Doane, as they are consolidated 
by apparently neutral technological processes such as lighting, cinematography 
and specifically, in this context, the formal properties of the close-up. In doing so, 
I challenge some of our assumptions about how we ‘read’ faces and, like Shingler, 
ask that we grant the child actor an agency and power that is often overlooked.
In Stella Bruzzi’s chapter on the ‘performative’ child in non-fiction cinema, the 
performance of the child is understood not as work in which the child produces 
a fictional character, but as how the child in these non-fiction contexts – such as 
the documentaries Être et Avoir (Nicolas Philibert, 2002), Seven Up! (Granada/
BBC, 1964–), Tarnation (Jonathan Caouette, 2003) and Capturing the Friedmans 
(Andrew Jarecki, 2003) – oscillates, and actively manages the distinction between 
their apparent unselfconsciousness in front of the camera, and other times in 
which they are clearly acutely aware of their ‘to-be-looked-at-ness’. In teasing 
out the discomfort experienced by audiences viewing the ‘home movie’ footage 
in the latter two documentaries, and the related exposure of the documentarist’s 
unhealthily obsessive interest in and necessary exploitation of their subjects, 
the child’s presence on screen – their labour if you like – is to problematize, as 
Bruzzi suggests, ‘so many received ideas about documentary and how nonfictional 
images function’. As her chapter further illustrates, the child’s mutability (at times 
beguiling yet capable of acting with guile) provokes larger questions about the 
work of performance of ‘self’ on screen.
Histories
In the third part of the book, the child as a social, historical and political figure 
is examined in three chapters that explore the child’s articulation of cinematic 
histories – histories as they are refracted through cinema, in films about significant 
historical periods and events and, in Lalitha Gopalan’s essay, in relation to the 
history of cinema in India.
In Dimitris Eleftheriotis’s elegant and playful chapter, he engages with the 
earlier work of the controversial Serbian film director Emir Kusturica. Focusing 
on three of his films – Do You Remember Dolly Bell (1981), When Father Was 

INTRODUCTION      11
Away on Business (1985) and Time of the Gypsies (1989) – he examines the role 
of the child and children in these films, observing that the child’s ‘messy’ agency 
constantly disrupts attempts to construct ‘smooth’ master narratives of official 
history. In developing this argument, he conceives of the child as inhabiting a 
‘bubble’ – porous, fragile, yet beguiling and distracting. These bubbles, or micro-
histories, enclose each child’s unique experience, their sense of chronology, 
their sense of place, as well as their intimate desires and distractions. Having 
established this model, through close analysis the films reveal, in Eleftheriotis’s 
words, a ‘“bubbling-up” of agency that disturbs the powerful, linear surface of 
dominant history’s symbolic violence’. Employing quotations from Reif Larsen’s 
The Selected Works of T. S. Spivet as sub-headings, Eleftheriotis encourages the 
reader to recognize how the messy approach of this narrative (the book is full 
of maps, notes in the margin, souvenirs, drawings, the ‘detritus’ of observation 
rather than ordered note-taking or storytelling) resonates exactly with the 
impermanent, marginal, distracting and (from an adult perspective) frequently 
irritating activities of the children in these films. If paid proper attention, these 
could ‘constitute a mighty centrifugal force that confuses simplistic and reductive 
versions of Yugoslavian history’.
In the second chapter in this part, David Martin-Jones explores a violent and 
turbulent period in Brazilian history, in his analysis of the child’s role in the film 
O Ano em Que Meus Pais Saíram de Férias/The Year My Parents went on Vacation 
(Cao Hamburger, 2006). The film, set in 1970, reflects the exuberance of the few 
intense weeks during that summer when the Brazilian football team won the 
World Cup, while at the same time, it depicts the ongoing struggles of a diverse 
population subject to the violence imposed by the ruling military dictatorship. 
This is further complicated by the way in which that dictatorship, unsurprisingly, 
attempted to align the national team’s success with their political authority and 
a ‘banal’ nationalism, an ideology that could never articulate or comfortably 
incorporate the diverse individuals and communities we see in the film. Drawing 
on Deleuze, Martin-Jones establishes the child protagonist here as not simply the 
Deleuzian ‘seer’ or privileged witness to events, but rather as the ‘seed/environment’ 
through and around which the recreated ‘crystal of time’ (that fraught summer of 
1970 in Brazil) oscillates. Initially imprisoned in this layer of history, the child – 
Mauro – ultimately acts as the locus through which the diverse community he 
inhabits (left-wing radicals, the older Jewish community, the various individuals 
of Polish, Greek, Italian and African descent) are temporarily drawn together 
to establish, in this reconstructed past, a possible (virtual) future that might be 
imagined (by the viewer in 2006 and beyond). In a delicate and detailed analysis of 
the social and historical context for the film, alongside a careful observation of the 
film’s aesthetics (its many reflecting surfaces, windows, windscreens and mirrors 
embodying the crystalline qualities of the image) Martin-Jones demonstrates 
Mauro’s affective agency. Although the film does not provide a ‘happy ending’ for 
the child in 1970 – Mauro’s father is killed, his mother injured and they are forced 

12      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
into exile – Martin-Jones demonstrates how the film, and specifically Mauro, are 
nonetheless able to ‘reclaim the past, in the service of the future’.
In the final chapter of this part, Lalitha Gopalan provides a fascinating account 
of the significance of the child – as character, as metaphor, as audience – within 
the history of Indian cinema. Taking us from early cinema where the child 
features as a god – Krishna as child in Dadasaheb Phalke’s Kaaliya Mardan (1919) 
– and the magical metamorphosis achieved in this film by double exposure, she 
traces the way in which the child’s presence has continually inspired some of the 
most interesting and transformative moments within Indian cinema. Whether 
this is in relation to film form – for example, the low-angle framing and illusion 
it creates in Satyajit Ray’s Pather Panchali (1955) – or in relation to making films 
specifically for children – via the creation of the Calcutta Film Society in 1947 
– or its significance in ‘New Wave’ filmmaking (here the Kannada New Wave 
in the 1970s and 1980s), Indian cinema can be seen to echo and often pre-empt 
the way in which the child has been employed in other national cinemas or 
filmmaking movements. As she notes, children ‘similarly crowd popular cinema’ 
in India and are employed in a variety of genres, both in those we might expect, 
such as romance, socials and melodrama but also as rhetorical figures in the 
gangster film and within the Tamil ‘Cruel Cinema’, in which conflicts related to 
toxic masculinity, caste, class and religion are refracted through the child’s birth, 
death and position within the extended and blended ‘families’ depicted on screen. 
Ending with a brief but evocative insight into the difficulties of filming children 
(specifically the pressures on the child actor and on the adult filmmakers who 
must accommodate the difference that a child makes) she embraces the ambition 
of this anthology, which is, in part, to recognize the child’s value and agency both 
on and ‘off’ screen.
Beyond cinema
In this part, the final three chapters of the anthology pay attention to the child 
as they appear and function outside mainstream cinemas. Firstly, David Hopkins 
introduces us to the child as used, imagined and dreamed, in artworks such as 
surrealist films and contemporary video installations. Secondly, in Andrew Burke’s 
chapter, his focus is on children as they appear in another kind of non-theatrical 
cinema, and he reflects on the powerful imagery and legacy of a series of short 
public information films produced in the UK during the 1970s. Appropriately, 
the last chapter of this section and of the book itself, written by Jamie Chambers – 
himself both a filmmaker and educator – looks even further beyond the child 
on screen and takes seriously the question of how and in what ways children 
themselves can become filmmakers.
In his chapter, David Hopkins reflects on the child’s relationship to and 
exploitation within surrealism, initially focusing on artworks by the German artist 
Hans Bellmer, which were preoccupied by the figure of the pre-pubescent girl-child 

INTRODUCTION      13
as a doll (sometimes as mannequin, in photographs and in drawings). Hopkins 
then contrasts Bellmer’s explicitly paedophilic interest in the child with the no less 
problematic but less overtly expressed desires, fantasies and ambiguous relations 
to childhood that recur in films made by Joseph Cornell, specifically, the trilogy of 
‘Collage films’, produced in collaboration with the filmmaker Larry Jordan, between 
the 1940s and 1960s, The Children’s Party, The Midnight Party and Cotillion. As an 
art historian, Hopkins expertly guides the reader through Bellmer’s obsessions, 
and provides a detailed analysis of several of Cornell’s films, in which the child 
figures are often retrieved and displayed via short fragments of ‘found footage’ – an 
interesting parallel to Bruzzi’s earlier chapter, in which she focuses on the use of 
‘home movies’ in documentaries featuring children. He traces the origins of these 
artists’ fascination with childhood to Goethe’s ‘Mignon’ (the boy-girl acrobat, 
previously the subject of Carolyn Steedman’s book, Strange Dislocations: Childhood 
and the Idea of Human Interiority),19 as well as within Freudian psychoanalysis. 
Read alongside the wider surrealist interest with ‘primitive cultures’ and ‘child’s 
play’, the chapter necessarily takes us into some uncomfortable territory. As a coda 
to this complicated legacy, Hopkins provides evidence for the significance of this 
earlier history for the contemporary female artist, Susan Hiller, and specifically, 
her powerful video installation ‘An Entertainment’ (1990) which explores and 
explodes the child abuse, sexual violence and misogyny at work within the 
traditional ‘children’s’ puppet show, ‘Punch and Judy’. We might tentatively suggest 
therefore, that since the installation interrogates, in a far more critical (and as 
Hopkins suggests, in a far more censorious) manner than the earlier surrealists, 
society’s ongoing fascination with child/adult sexuality and associated fantasies of 
neglect and violence, Hiller’s installation succeeds in de-sublimating, to an extent, 
some of the more troubling associations related to the exploitation of the child in 
the history of surrealism.
In Andrew Burke’s chapter there is another kind of violence at work, as 
he examines an eccentric series of public information films produced in the 
United Kingdom in the 1970s. Including a detailed analysis of three films – 
Mind How You Go, (1973) Apaches (1977) and Lonely Water (1973), amongst 
other films from that era – Burke demonstrates how, in the 1970s in the UK, the 
peripheral, unregulated spaces and places that were, in some senses, celebrated 
in earlier chapters by Hastie and Jones, are depicted in these films as dangerous, 
risky places, in which the incautious child could be maimed, electrocuted or 
drowned. As he carefully reveals, the films – now long remembered by many 
adults in the UK with a kind of bemused nostalgia – were already articulating a 
contemporaneous nostalgic version of childhood, perceived to be under threat 
not just by the dangers of under-supervised farmyards and waste sites, or because 
these cautionary tales reflected the generic conventions of the then emergent 
‘slasher’ series of horror films. He suggests that this threat emerges because the 
children in the films were also (crudely) aligned with other indigenous ‘others’ 
(such as Native Americans) who were similarly fantasized or more comfortably 

14      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
‘imagined’ just as they were apparently ‘vanishing’ from the landscape. In his 
conclusion, he speaks not just to these films, but to very many versions of the 
cinematic child, when he suggests, ‘These films persist in memory, they haunt 
the present, not because they represent an idealised safe world, but because they 
imagine a world in which adventure, imagination, and possibility goes hand-in-
hand with risk, danger, and uncertainty.’
In the last chapter in this part, and the book, Jamie Chambers reflects on his 
experience as a practitioner and tutor for Scotland’s Understanding Cinema project 
(2014), modelled upon the Cinémathèque Français Cinéma Cent Ans De Jeunesse 
programme (CCADJ).20 Working with children (9 to 12 year olds) in a number of 
different primary schools across Scotland, Chambers details his struggle to convince 
the children of the value of learning the ‘language of cinema’ (largely informed by 
the writings of André Bazin and, latterly, the work and pedagogy of the French film 
critic Alain Bergala.)21 By encouraging them to adopt a neorealist process, his hope 
was that they might make short films that were more authentic to their actual life 
experience – and might thereby find their own voice and ‘dialect’. Aware that to 
privilege authenticity (as understood from the adult’s point of view) and even to 
suggest that the children ought to prioritize ‘finding their voice’ can be understood 
as a contentious ambition (indeed it is one I interrogate in my own chapter in this 
anthology), Chambers is both passionate and pragmatic in his description of his 
work with the children and their responses to his (self-acknowledged) paternalistic 
and ‘teacherly’ interventions. Nonetheless, Chambers provides persuasive 
evidence of the localized but very real impact that learning to make films had on 
those children involved. While in the end, as he ruefully notes, he was unable to 
completely eradicate the desire of many of the children to emulate (whether in 
relation to film form or in terms of performance and accent) the Hollywood cinema 
they were most familiar with, at the same time many of the students recognized 
how the apparently mundane characters, locations and events in their own lives 
(hard-working mothers, forbidden sweets, the wider school environment, and girls 
they fancied) might be successfully captured in all their ‘local’ specificity and made 
interesting to an audience wider than their immediate peers. Here, the children’s 
work in and on film – as camera operators, writers, directors and performers – may 
arguably be seen as compromised, but is still justifiably celebrated.
The chapters in this anthology are not intended to be a direct or comprehensive 
response to my personal ambivalence about the models of analysis and the framing 
of our enquiry around the child in cinema. They do, I hope, make a distinctive 
contribution and broaden the scope of popular and academic debate in terms of 
geography and disciplinary perspective as well as in thinking about the different 
kinds of cinema in which children participate. More by accident than design, 
many of the chapters overlap in terms of their concerns, interests and certain 
key references (such as the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, Deleuze 
and Freud.) Read together, they establish the complexity but also the centrality of 

INTRODUCTION      15
the child to a wide range of different modes of cinema and filmmaking activity. 
Approached holistically, or read separately, I hope the reader will find the different 
chapters useful, entertaining and at times, discomfiting.
Notes
  1	 This is a necessary distinction made by nearly every author discussing this topic – 
many films feature children which are not intended for child audiences; many films 
(but not all) that are made for children are also intended for adult audiences, and 
there is, of course, despite the need for clarification, some degree of overlap between 
these categories. Excellent work on children’s films has been done, for instance, by 
Noel Brown; see his The Children’s Film: Genre, Nation and Narrative (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2017), British Children’s Cinema: From The Thief of 
Bagdad to Wallace and Gromit (London: I.B. Tauris, 2016), The Hollywood Family 
Film: A History, from Shirley Temple to Harry Potter (London: I.B. Tauris, 2012) 
and Family Films in Global Cinema: The World Beyond Disney (London: I.B. Tauris, 
2015). Other work which manages to discuss both, while maintaining the distinction 
between the child on screen and the child spectator, includes Pamela Robertson 
Wojcik, Fantasies of Neglect: Imagining the Urban Child in American Film and Fiction 
(New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2016).
  2	 Pre-empting my own research and publications on the child and film, Vicky Lebeau’s 
Childhood and Cinema (London: Reaktion Books, 2008) is now a foundational 
book in the field, as is Emma Wilson’s earlier but equally inspiring Cinema’s Missing 
Children (London: Wallflower Press, 2003). An exemplary but not exhaustive list 
of later publications includes Daniela Berghahn, Far-Flung Families in Film: The 
Diasporic Family in Contemporary European Cinema (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2013), Andrew Scahill, The Revolting Child in Horror Film: Youth 
Rebellion and Queer Spectatorship (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015), Sarah 
Wright, The Child in Spanish Cinema (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 
2016) and Stephanie Hemelryk Donald, There’s No Place Like Home: The Migrant 
Child in World Cinema (London: I.B. Tauris, 2018). Edited collections include Debbie 
C. Olson and Andrew Scahill (eds), Lost and Othered Children in Contemporary 
Cinema (Washington, DC: Lexington Books, 2012), Debbie C. Olson (ed.), Children 
in the Films of Alfred Hitchcock (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014) as well as 
many on different national cinemas, such as Carolina Rocha and Georgia Seminet 
(eds), Screening Minors in Latin American Cinema (Washington, DC: Lexington 
Books, 2014) and Stephanie Hemelryk Donald, Emma Wilson and Sarah Wright 
(eds), Childhood and Nation in Contemporary World Cinema: Borders and Encounters 
(London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2017). There are also collections 
exploring both film and television for and about children; for instance, Casie 
Hermansson and Janet Zepernick (eds), The Palgrave Handbook of Children’s Film and 
Television (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).
  3	 Chris Philo ‘To go back up the side hill’: memories, imaginations and reveries of 
childhood’, Children’s Geographies, vol. 1, no. 1 (2003), pp. 7–23.
  4	 For Deleuze and the child, see Anna Catherine Hickey-Moody, ‘Deleuze’s children’, 
Educational Philosophy and Theory, vol. 45, no. 3 (2013), pp. 272–86. As an example 
of the use of ‘transition’ along with ‘transdisciplinary’, see Sandra Dinter and Ralf 
Schneider (eds), Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Childhood in Contemporary 

16      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Britain: Literature, Media and Society (London: Routledge, 2018); for transition as it 
relates to both the child and a historical ‘transition’, see Sarah Thomas, Inhabiting the 
In-Between: Childhood and Cinema in Spain’s Long Transition (Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 2019); for work in which the child is conceived as ‘liminal’, see my The 
Child in Film: Tears, Fears and Fairytales (London: I.B. Tauris, 2010), and Linda C. 
Ehrlich, The Films of Kore-eda Hirokazu: An Elemental Cinema (New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2019).
  5	 Long-term filming of children was employed (over the course of a year) in 
Hirokazu Kore-eda’s film Nobody Knows (2004), over a five-year period in Michael 
Winterbottom’s Everyday (2012) and over twelve years in Richard Linklater’s Boyhood 
(2014). The documentary series, Seven Up! (Granada/BBC, 1964–) has filmed the 
same group of children, now adults, every seven years since the initial episodes, first 
broadcast by Granada TV in 1964.
  6	 Lee Edelman, ‘Learning nothing: Bad Education’, differences: A Journal of Feminist 
Cultural Studies, vol. 28, no. 1 (2017), pp. 124–73, p. 124.
  7	 Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass: The 
Centenary Edition (London: Penguin, 2003) first published as Through the Looking-
Glass, and What Alice Found There (London: Macmillan, 1871).
  8	 The definitive examination of alliance of children, childhood and ‘queerness’ can 
be found in Kathryn Bond Stockton, The Queer Child, or Growing Sideways in the 
Twentieth Century (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009).
  9	 Lee Edelman, No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2004) p. 29.
10	 Here I am conscious that I am echoing in a slightly different guise arguments first 
about the ‘innocence’ of the child initiated by James Kincaid in both his books, Child-
Loving: The Erotic Child and Victorian Literature (London: Routledge, 1994) and 
his later book, Erotic Innocence: The Culture of Child Molesting (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 1998).
11	 Megan H. Glick, Infrahumanisms: Science, Culture and the Making of Non/personhood 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2018) p. 54.
12	 Sasha Engelmann, ‘Towards a poetics of air: sequencing and surfacing breath’, 
Transactions, no. 40 (2015), pp. 430–44, p. 430; see also Derek P. McCormack, 
‘Aerostatic spacing: on things becoming lighter than air’, Transactions, no. 34 (2009), 
pp. 25–41 and his book, Atmospheric Things: On the Allure of Elemental Envelopment, 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2018).
13	 McCormack cites Jane Bennett, ‘The force of things: steps to an ecology of matter’, 
Political Theory, no. 32 (2004), pp. 347–72.
14	 McCormack, ‘Aerostatic spacing’, p. 38.
15	 The possibility of understanding and engaging with the world in this manner 
is aligned with Tim Ingold’s work; see, for instance, his The Perception of the 
Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill (London: Routledge, 2000).
16	 One version of this work in progress, ‘Children, objects and motion … balloons, bikes, 
kites and tethered flight’ is available as an audio recording along with the Powerpoint 
slides. These can be retrieved, thanks to the Leverhulme funded network, whose 
co-investigators (Sarah Wright, Stephanie Hemelryk Donald and Emma Wilson) 
organized the conference ‘Childhood and Nation in World Cinema’ at Royal Holloway, 
in London in 2018, https://backdoorbroadcasting.net/2016/04/karen-lury-children-
objects-and-motion-balloons-bikes-kites-and-tethered-flight/ (accessed July 2021).
17	 Derek McCormack, ‘Devices for doing atmospheric things’, in Philip Vannini (ed.), 
Nonrepresentational Methodologies: Re-Envisioning Research (London: Routledge, 
2015), pp. 89–111, p. 102.

INTRODUCTION      17
18	 Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space, trans. Maria Jolas (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 
1994).
19	 Carolyn Steedman, Strange Dislocations: Childhood and the Idea of Human Interiority 
1780–1930 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994).
20	 For more on Bergala’s pedagogy and responses to this (including my own critique) 
see the recording of a 2017 symposium held by the BFI in London, ‘Alain Bergala: The 
Cinema Hypothesis’, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C0H74quQWJ8 (accessed 
July 2021).
21	 Alain Bergala, The Cinema Hypothesis – Teaching Cinema in the Classroom and 
Beyond (Vienna: Austrian Film Museum, 2016).

18 

PART ONE
SPACE AND TIME

20 

The present tense is the one in which wishes are represented as fulfilled.
SIGMUND FREUD
Nights now I can sit in my living room alone, looking at the glass of the 
picture window, with the reflection of my body and the drink in my hand 
and the chair and the lamp beside me glaring flat and white back at me, 
and I am in no way as real in that room as I am in my memories of my 
wife and children.
BILLY, THE SWEET HEREAFTER1
Inhabited geometry
I have always loved nooks and crannies. They are perfect places for both hiding and 
displaying things, whether sacred or ordinary objects, or children small enough to 
burrow into them. They are places of sanctuary: a kind of house within a house. 
As a child, I both explored the nooks and crevices of houses and sometimes made 
my own, whether through my cupboard of miniatures or through composing new 
corners in my own space. In my bedroom, for instance, I had a giant closet with 
three doors: I could open the doors and form them to make an enclosed triangle, 
multiplying myself across the mirrors. When I imagine doing this now, I don’t 
believe I stared at my own seeming infinite reflections for long but rather looked 
inwards, eyes almost closed, comforted by this tiny space where three corners met. 
I don’t exactly remember what I daydreamed in these moments of reverie, though 
today I rather believe that I imagined being somewhere else, transported in and 
by this tiny space.
Such imaginings and desires are hardly unusual for a child (and such acts of 
selective memory and forgetting are common for an adult). Children seek to 
duplicate or reimagine their own living spaces in other manners, sometimes in 
miniature and certainly in narrative form. The miniature object or the small space 
of a nook allow for both a means of possession and control as well as a projection 
of oneself into another world that’s physically impossible to inhabit, at least for 
long. Films are like miniature worlds in this way. While as viewers we cannot 
­1 THE DREAM HOUSE
Amelie Hastie

22      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
order them ourselves, we might unconsciously imagine ourselves controlling their 
universes.2 But of course we also cannot inhabit a film. It enters us more than we 
enter into it.
In The Poetics of Space, Gaston Bachelard understands the house as a space for 
dreaming. Corners are particularly fertile spaces for the imagination, he tells us. 
‘The corner is a haven that ensures us one of the things we prize most highly – 
immobility’, Bachelard writes; ‘We have to designate the space of our immobility 
by making it the space of our being.’3 This is a way of saying ‘I don’t want to leave 
here. Let me inhabit this space forever.’ Solitude also allows us, as ‘corner-readers’, 
the opportunity to see forgotten details – the things or dreams that might be 
overlooked or tucked away, lost in the crevices between the inside and outside, the 
past and the future.
Perhaps, then, cinema is more like a corner than a miniature world. The screen, 
after all, is made up of four corners – whether it’s in a movie house or whether we 
watch it on a small screen in another abode. Those corners register an inside and 
an outside, a space between imagination and physical reality – all the more blurred 
because film, in the strictest sense, has its roots in physical reality. I want to take 
advantage of these corners and of ‘corner reading’ to think about both physical 
and imaginary houses of childhood in three narrative films: Badlands, Ratcatcher, 
and The Sweet Hereafter. Via a controlled, even restrained, exposition, each film 
narrates a trauma, explicitly or implicitly, from a child’s point of view. Resonant 
moments in each also reveal a house that holds the child’s memories but that also 
incites the child’s imagination of the future. In this medium defined by mobility – 
the moving image – we can see how images of nooks and corners of houses invite 
us to dream of their own imaginary dwellers inhabiting those spaces forever. I 
want to home in on the details of the houses the children inhabit, paying attention 
to the crevices between reality, memory and fantasy in the films themselves.
Playing house
In Terrence Malick’s 1973 film Badlands our protagonist and narrator, 14-year-old 
Holly, falls in love with the bad-boy Kit, and they decide to run away together. 
In an act of finality that begins their new life, Kit kills Holly’s father and sets fire 
to her house. He begins by dousing the piano, then wildly throws gasoline atop 
the furniture throughout the perimeter of the living room. We briefly watch him 
continue through a hall towards another room and then cut to see Holly leaving 
the house with a box of treasures while Kit sets up a record player, the album 
spinning, telling his tale for the District Attorney to find – ‘gamblin’ for time’, Holly 
tells us. He tosses a match to ignite the fire, then runs jig-jaggedly to the car. As Kit 
and Holly flee we stay with the burning house. The sequence in which her house 
burns haunts this essay, begetting my own reverie regarding the latter films.
First we see the flames beginning to engulf an old photograph of a child, 
and then we move through the house to see the fire surround other objects and 

THE DREAM HOUSE      23
furniture. The camera itself doesn’t move: instead, our gaze shifts with each slow 
cut. The image holds still on various objects as the flames take flight around them: 
fallen dolls, Holly’s bed, the doll’s house in her room, her father dead on the floor. 
The space which contained her childhood and those things which measured and, 
indeed, constrained her age now topple, melt and burn.
It is the burning doll’s house that particularly haunts me (Fig 1.1). At once 
terrifying and beautiful, it signifies the end of Holly’s childhood, quite literally 
and doubly refusing a sense of immobility that would allow anyone to dwell 
in it forever. The burning house is liberating in its signal to start anew whilst 
simultaneously terrifying in the sense of loss that it invokes. The coincidence of 
beauty and terror and of loss and liberation is uncanny; in fact, its coincidence is 
in some ways definitive of the very essence of the term, itself based in a paradox. 
In his essay on ‘The uncanny’, Sigmund Freud traces the etymological origins of 
heimlich and unheimlich, ultimately noting that the former ‘becomes increasingly 
ambivalent, until it finally merges with its antonym’.4 Thus, in its act of destruction, 
the home begins its act of haunting the film, its characters and, as I suggest above, 
my own reading. Perhaps this is inevitable; as Freud tells us, ‘in some modern 
languages the German phrase ein unheimliches Haus [an uncanny house] can be 
rendered only by the periphrasis “a haunted house”’.5 As the flames engulf Holly’s 
house, we stand in the moment of the present, between the past and future: we 
catch a glimpse both of what might have been and the possibility for something 
else, even as we know that something-else is also surely doomed. But at first, of 
course, this possibility persists; or at least the characters try to insist on a new 
possibility as the story goes on.
FIGURE 1.1  ‘The burning dollhouse’. Badlands directed by Terence Malick © Warner 
Bros. 1973. All Rights Reserved.

24      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
The loss of Holly’s home and her house-within-a-house initiates a series of 
attempts for our characters to play house in other unheimlich spaces. First – and 
most elegiac – is the treehouse the runaways build. A fantastic structure fitted 
with pulleys and booby traps, Holly and Kit occupy it like storybook children 
and, perhaps inevitably, like an old married couple (as our narrator tells us). Such 
dual roles are not surprising. In ‘The creative writer and daydreaming’, Freud 
asserts that ‘the child’s play is governed by its desires, in fact by the one desire 
that contributes to its upbringing – the desire to be big and grown up’.6 In their 
treehouse in the woods, they begin their days by coming up with a new password 
between them – a childish game of playing captives and spies – yet Holly also dons 
ladies’ curlers and Kit shaves before a makeshift bathroom mirror as part of their 
morning ritual (Kit, after all, has entered adulthood, even as he acts impulsively 
like a child).7 After their hideaway in the forest is discovered, the runaways first 
head to Kit’s friend Cato’s shack, and then they briefly take over a wealthy man’s 
house, Kit stealing the man’s hat and seersucker jacket, so that he is now dressing 
as well as performing the part of a grown-up.
The performance of adulthood resonates within Holly’s narration, which 
throughout the film pointedly has the earnest sophistication of an adolescent who 
imagines herself older than she is. Her narration is therefore also like that of the 
children in Carolyn Steedman’s study of children’s storytelling in The Tidy House. 
Remarking on a fictional story that a group of schoolchildren wrote collaboratively, 
Steedman claims:
The children’s text is a dramatisation of the circumstances they describe, not to 
be confused with the narration of a particular event. For the children, the text 
asserted that they were not there, were not witnesses. It is as if, projected onto 
a screen, the events of the story take place out there, out of real time; and the 
children briefly watch them, involved and fascinated, considering them and 
perhaps denying that this will be their future, that they will have children they 
don’t really want, and spend their days in irritation and regret.8
Steedman’s remarks might also apply to Holly’s narration throughout the film, but 
especially to one of the film’s most poignant scenes, in which she looks at a series 
of images through her father’s stereopticon. Over photographs of famous sites or of 
anonymous figures, which narrate the possibility of other spaces or events, she says,
Where would I be this very moment if Kit had never met me, or killed anybody – 
this very moment – if my mom had never met my dad, if she’d never died? And 
what’s the man I’ll marry gonna look like? What’s he doing right this minute? Is 
he thinking about me now, by some coincidence, even though he doesn’t know 
me? Does it show on his face?
And after this revelation, Holly tells us, she lived in dread, fantasizing about being 
taking away to a ‘magical land, and this never happened’. As Barbara Jane Brickman 

THE DREAM HOUSE      25
notes, ‘In this one small interlude, we see the female teen simultaneously as 
spectator and as storyteller’9 tying her further to the children in Steedman’s work.10
But while Steedman suggests that the children had a sense of the function 
of narrative (which arguably Holly does here, too) – to ‘objecti[fy], deny, and 
transmut[e]’ – I want to consider these remarks as pertinent not just to children’s 
written stories but also, as Steedman herself directs us here, to film: ‘projected 
onto a screen, the events of the story take place out there, out of real time’. And 
here, of course, the corners return, as in this moment in Badlands, when Holly’s 
daydreams over the images we share with her take us to another place and time. In 
the ‘tidy house’ of film, we are left to imagine that which seems possible, because 
it has its ontological foundation in the real, physical world. It is possible not just 
because we have lived in that world in some way, too, but also because through it 
we dream in and of another world.
Escape hatch
Lynne Ramsay’s 1999 Ratcatcher lures us back into Malick’s world. It takes place 
in 1973 during the garbage workers’ strike in Glasgow, the year that Badlands was 
released, and it is also set in a similar aesthetic and emotional landscape as Malick’s 
1970s films (both of which, like Ramsay’s work, are themselves placed in an earlier 
historical period). Like Badlands, Ratcatcher is grounded in a traumatic experience 
and the attempt to escape from it. The film begins with a staggeringly beautiful 
image: a white lace curtain is wrapped about a body that twists around slowly in 
the light of the window. But within a few minutes, this child, Ryan Quinn, drowns 
in the canal near his home, pushed in rough play by his friend James Gillespie. We 
remain with James for the rest of the film, silent witnesses to his part in his friend’s 
death and, implicitly, to his own quiet guilt and grief.
James’s family lives in council housing, garbage building up all around them, 
but they dream of a new home. It is on that dream that I wish to focus here. About 
a third of the way into the film, James hops on a bus, with the intention of finding 
out where his older sister secretly goes. Instead of finding her, he simply rides to 
the end of the line, where he almost magically comes upon a modern estate under 
construction. The ride itself is a kind of daydream, the film cutting between shots 
of the outside world passing by (the garbage beginning to recede as he gets deeper 
into the countryside), close-ups of James seated (doubled by his faint reflection in 
the window), and long shots of James standing in the aisle, as if he were not on a 
city bus but rather on a ferry, looking out at the sea before him. The bus enables a 
kind of immobility for its lone passenger, even as it moves through space itself. The 
inside of the bus appears perfectly still; this is, indeed, a safe passage.
Reality and imagination converge throughout the following scenes. In her 
BFI Film Classic volume on Ratcatcher, Annette Kuhn comments on just this 
convergence: as it integrates stillness and movement, the film ‘draws on the 
indexical qualities of the photographic image to conjure a world that resembles 

26      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
the one we normally inhabit, and yet is at the same time self-evidently virtual’.11 
She notes shortly after that the film ‘weaves together […] several realities in an 
extraordinarily complex manner [… to] bring together and explore the relationships 
and rifts between outer and inner worlds, worlds of external reality and worlds of 
imagination and fantasy’.12 These relationships are particularly resonant in those 
moments when James – and the film – encounters his dream house. Thus, when the 
bus finally stops and James disembarks, he walks away from it and towards us; the 
scene cuts mid-action, and suddenly James appears again, coming around a gate 
towards a building. He enters into what appears a kind of make-believe world but 
one, like the film, that is clearly grounded in reality.13 In an act of play, the objects 
of this construction site fluidly become other things: James runs an obstacle course 
around a bunch of pipes, he stares through a giant tube as if it were a telescope, he 
rests on a set of scaffolding like a ship captain exploring the sea.
Once inside the house, he treats the unfinished space as if it were complete, the 
house where he luxuriously lives. He lies in the tub (covered in plastic), turns the 
un-plumbed faucet handles, pees in the unconnected toilet (then watches it seep 
out onto the floor). And why not dream here as if it is real – indeed, as if it is really 
his? For our fictional character, the unfinished house is like a materialized dream – 
or, from our point of view, the materialization of a film. All the pieces of the house 
are a part of physical reality, even if they are, for now, only representations of 
daily life. Like the children in Steedman’s essay or Holly with her stereopticon, 
he watches this other story himself – the events take place ‘out there, out of real 
time’ – but he also enters into it as if it were his world. James here is what Bachelard 
calls a corner dweller: ‘For to great dreamers of corners and holes nothing is ever 
empty, the dialectics of full and empty only correspond to two geometrical non-
realities. The function of inhabiting constitutes the link between full and empty. A 
living creature fills an empty refuge, images inhabit, and all corners are haunted, 
if not inhabited.’14
This ‘as if’ is the very ontological, phenomenological, and, of course, 
technological premise of film. In the epilogue to his treatise of film’s relation 
to physical reality, Siegfried Kracauer draws on the aesthetic theories of Alfred 
North Whitehead to describe our perception of art: our will towards experience. 
Kracauer writes, ‘In experiencing an object, we not only broaden our knowledge 
of its diverse qualities but in a manner of speaking incorporate it into us so that 
we grasp its being and its dynamics from within – a sort of blood transfusion, as 
it were.’ And he goes on, ‘What we want, then, is to touch reality not only with the 
fingertips but to seize it and shake hands with it.’15 In this scene from Ratcatcher 
before us, James seizes and shakes hands with the reality before him, the space 
itself – and the dream it encompasses for him – becoming incorporated into him. 
For Kracauer, of course, this is our potential (and ideal) experience of film: in 
its revelation of actual physical existence, moving in space and evolving through 
time, film invites our touch, even if we almost never move our actual bodies to 
attempt to shake its hand.

THE DREAM HOUSE      27
This dream house – both real and unreal – becomes increasingly parallel with 
the cinema (both the physical space and the film on the screen) as James moves 
through it. Thus, when he opens a door, we are situated inside as he pauses in the 
entrance, as if he is sneaking from behind the curtain to enter the screen. But it is 
also as if he is sneaking into a movie theatre. In fact, the film cuts from his act of 
looking to the ‘screen’ itself: a rectangular window frame without the pane inside, 
revealing an open field before it.16 Here the outside world is literally framed by 
the dream house. James then climbs onto the window sill, swings his legs over the 
ledge, and stares into a field of wheat before he jumps through the empty window. 
At once he enters the film screen and abandons it for the real world, so that in this 
brief moment the two become – for us – one and the same. (As a nice twist on this 
simultaneity, in another neat, if avowedly unintended, nod to Terrence Malick, 
James seems to enter the very fields of Days of Heaven.) Once outside, the frame 
disappears, and James runs through the field before us with the sort of abandon we 
never see him experience in the rest of the film.17
Towards the end of the film, after a series of disquieting events, James returns 
to the house in the country, but the doors and windows are now locked. When he 
gets back home, the yard outside the tenements has been cleared by scabs working 
to break the strike. As James walks through the yard he eventually comes upon 
his friend Kenny, who sing-songs that he saw James kill Ryan Quinn. Kenny’s 
pronouncement rings into the next scene, which opens with an image shot from 
above of James lying across the family sofa. The couch is wrapped in white and 
James’s body is so still, the image briefly looks like a boy lying in a coffin. In a 
seemingly hypnogogic (or dreamlike) state, James’s younger sister Anne Marie 
enters the room and joins him on the sofa, throwing her arm across his chest. 
James eventually embraces her as well, though quickly thereafter the scene cuts 
to one that echoes an image from earlier in the film, in which James replaces his 
mother’s torn stockings over her big toe. From there we see him standing next to 
the canal where Ryan Quinn died (and where Kenny also nearly drowned). He 
removes his jacket and lightly jumps in. We watch the air bubbles on the surface of 
the water and then enter the water with him, witnessing his body float downwards. 
But as James’s body continues down, the film cuts again: now we see his family and 
their friends walking across the field that James had earlier visited, transporting 
their possessions, seemingly on the way to their new home. At first James isn’t 
visible, but the last shot in the field is of him, smiling towards the camera. And 
then it cuts again, back to James in the water, as the credits begin to roll.
In a fiction that ventures so close to reality – and one in which James himself 
experiences a kind of materialization of a cinematic dream – it’s quite tempting to 
see this double ending as a form of ambiguity. Does he eventually leave the water 
and move with the family into their new home, or is this merely a fantasy as he 
drowns and thus ends his life? Ramsay herself claims that she meant for it to be 
‘ambiguous’: ‘It was meant to be a dream, well, not a dream – it’s surrealistic. For 
me it was always that he’s going down in the water and what is projected for him 

28      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
is like his fantasy.’18 In spite of her initial claims of ambiguity, Ramsay actually 
suggests that there is a difference here between reality (James’s death) and fantasy 
(what he imagines as he slips through the water). The fantasy provides a potentially 
happy ending for viewers, but given the bookends of James’s sinking body, it’s far 
less ambiguous than Ramsay (or other viewers) might suggest.19 Perhaps, then, 
as with the convergence of ‘heimlich’ merging with its antonym unheimlich, it’s 
more accurate to call the ending ambivalent rather than ambiguous. The fantasy 
of a happy ending is briefly proffered to us, but it is markedly still a fantasy for 
us and for our primary character. In the end, however, I would suggest what is 
more important than the question of the film’s ambiguity is the fact that we share 
a fantasy with the character James. And in that very shared fantasy between us, we 
the viewers can ‘grasp its being and its dynamics from within’. In this way, images 
inhabit us.
Corner dwellers
While James occupies an empty dream house in Ratcatcher, the children of Atom 
Egoyan’s 1997 The Sweet Hereafter daydream in the corners of their own homes. 
Adapted from Russell Banks’s 1991 novel, Egoyan’s film is the devastating story 
of a school bus crash that kills nearly all of its riders, save for 14-year-old Nicole 
and the bus driver Dolores.20 Banks’s novel, in which there are other survivors 
besides these two, is narrated by four of the central characters: Dolores, Billy Ansel 
(father of twins killed in the crash), Mitchell Stevens (the lawyer who attempts to 
organize victims to sue for compensation), and Nicole. Egoyan’s adaptation retains 
these central voices, yet with the exception of Nicole’s intermittent voice-over, he 
does so much less explicitly than in the novel; moreover, rather than following 
the organization of the four distinct narrations of the events (ending with a coda 
from Dolores’s point of view), the film cuts across moments in time. This temporal 
structure not only elides a clear sense of chronological time, effectively refusing a 
stable conclusion to the story, but it also raises the question of what time, exactly, 
comprises the present. In a sense, rather than merely following a design of a 
clear diegetic past, present or future, the narrative’s present coincides with our 
own present time of viewing. And in this present resides the possibility of what 
Bachelard might call the ‘immobility’ of time – the collapsing of dream and reality, 
memory and imagination.
To reveal this state of its being, I want to focus on one particular scene, which 
wends its way across other key moments in the film. Before we witness the bus 
accident – in fact, diegetically speaking, the night before it takes place – Nicole goes 
to Billy’s house to babysit his twins, Jessica and Mason. Her arrival at his home is 
interrupted by a cut first to Billy in his gas station, playing guitar, and then to his 
assignation with his lover Risa, in room 11 of the Bide-a-Wile Motel, which Risa 
owns with her husband Wendell. As we return to Billy’s house, Nicole is putting 
the children to bed, reading to them the story of The Pied Piper, a fairy tale that 

THE DREAM HOUSE      29
connects, through this scene, disparate parts of the film’s narrative. The children’s 
shared room is a nook of sorts, which is likely what draws me to it: each child has 
a twin bed tucked in a corner, and Nicole leans against a chest of drawers between 
them as she reads. In this way, the children ‘take possession of a border or boundary 
zone in the house’, as Karen Lury describes children’s spaces in mid-century amateur 
films.21 Together they occupy this corner of the house – a liminal space, as Lury 
would describe it or, as Bachelard might put it, a house within a house.
The scene begins with a full-screen image of the book itself – its title page and 
the one thereafter – as the story opens. We cut to the three children tucked away 
in their shared corner: the twins in their beds and Nicole against the dresser, with 
the window behind her. Both children look at her and listen, Jessica quietly leaning 
towards the end of her bed closest to Nicole, Mason in the middle of his, in an 
almost uncanny repose of sophisticated attention towards this girl he clearly loves. 
The camera moves continuously closer to Nicole – attending to her reading as 
do the children – initially without losing Mason or Jessica from the frame, who 
each briefly occupy a corner of the bottom of the screen. Nicole begins the book, 
at first interrupted by Mason’s questions: ‘What’s a ditty?’ and ‘What’s vermin?’ 
As she answers and then goes on, the camera continues closer towards her, and 
the children disappear, though we hear them giggle and we see Nicole gesture to 
each as she reads. This shot of Nicole reading continues to be alternated with full-
screen shots of pages of the book. We follow along with her, occupying her point 
of view in these moments. Then, as Nicole descends deeper into the book, Mason’s 
questions become increasingly serious.
He interrupts once more, and this image of this little boy, tucked in a corner 
alongside a teddy bear, with a photograph of his dead mother behind him (Fig 1.2), 
fills the screen. ‘Nicole?’ ‘Yes, Mason?’ ‘Can I sit beside you on the bus tomorrow?’ 
Nicole asks whether he wouldn’t rather sit at the back of the bus, where he can 
wave to his father, who follows behind them in his truck. No, he says, he wants to 
FIGURE 1.2  Mason (Marc Donato) in The Sweet Hereafter directed by Atom Egoyan 
© Alliance Communications Corporation 1997. All Rights Reserved.

30      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
sit beside Nicole. And then he pauses for another question: ‘Nicole, did the Pied 
Piper take the children away because he was mad the town didn’t pay him?’ ‘That’s 
right,’ she answers. ‘Well, if he knew magic, if he could get the children into the 
mountain, then why couldn’t he use his magic pipe to make the town pay him for 
taking away the rats?’ ‘Because he wanted them to be punished.’ ‘So he was mean?’ 
‘No, not mean,’ and here Nicole pauses. ‘Just very – very angry.’ Nicole asks if she 
should keep reading. He replies yes, and we cut briefly to Jessica beginning to close 
her eyes on the other side of Nicole. And then we shift back to the motel room 
where Billy and Risa are in the quiet throes of passion.
The (non-diegetic) song, a cover of ‘Courage’, that plays while Billy’s mouth 
moves across Risa’s body is sung by Nicole/Sarah Polley. It continues to play as a 
bridge into the next scene, where Nicole is dressing in the hallway, the children 
now sleeping in their room. She swaps her jeans for a tight T-shirt dress, seeming 
to prepare for a date. I would argue that the connection between the initial 
two scenes – Nicole with the children and Billy with Risa – is not a means of 
sexualizing Nicole’s relationship with the kids, though perhaps it is a means of 
suggesting a similar sort of affection between Billy and Risa to that which the three 
children share with one another. Both scenes are also, of course, ones of respite or 
sanctuary, allowing for a feeling of courage amidst foreboding sadness: in each, 
Nicole and Billy occupy corners of sorts – spaces of imagination or fantasy, spaces 
which briefly stop, or immobilize, time. What takes place shortly afterwards, after 
Nicole leaves Billy’s house, however, is surely informed by the alternating scenes 
which come before it, complicated further by the now-atemporal sound bridge 
of Nicole reading the children’s story. Nicole’s ‘date’ is with her own father – who 
has already played this role in the opening scene of the film, presenting himself as 
more of teenage boyfriend or rockstar groupie than a dad. And though he drives 
his daughter home, he takes her instead to the barn behind the house.
As they step out of the car, her father Sam going ahead of her, Nicole pauses 
behind and the children’s story begins again. Sam waits near the entrance to the 
barn and turns to look back at his daughter. She stands in the moonlight wrapped 
in a red blanket – resembling Red Riding Hood in her cape, thus offering another 
reference to a nightmarish fairy tale about children and their predators – while 
the narration of ‘The Pied Piper’ sets the scene. In fact, we return here to an image 
of the pages of the book: the children ‘tripping and skipping, ran merrily after’ 
the magical musician, with eerie music playing alongside Nicole’s reading voice. 
Again, we see a shot of Nicole behind her father, who carries his guitar case as he 
walks towards the barn, and her reading voice softly echoes: ‘When lo, as they 
reached the mountain-side, a wondrous portal opened wide, as if a cavern were 
suddenly hollowed, and the piper advanced, and the children followed.’ Now 
father and daughter are inside the barn.
When all were in and the mountain shut fast. Did I say all? No, one was lame. 
And could not dance the whole of the way. And in after years if you would 

THE DREAM HOUSE      31
blame his sadness, he would say, ‘It’s dull in my town since my playmates left 
and I can’t forget that I’m bereft of all the pleasant sights they see, which the 
piper also promised me’.
The story continues as we watch them settle into this candlelit scene – too tender, 
too intimate between father and daughter, which then becomes even more 
explicitly sexualized as Nicole’s father kisses her.
This scene is confusing. Confusing because it seems to suggest some culpability 
on Nicole’s part – her change into her pink T-shirt dress looks like part of an act 
of desire, for one, and the story read over the set of images notwithstanding, she 
seems a willing participant in this sexual fantasy when she leans into the kiss with 
her father. But of course the voice-over narration is hardly ‘notwithstanding’, for 
it is part of the very confusion of the scene; hypnotized by her own childish trust 
in her father’s paternal authority, she follows when he beckons. (Banks’s book is 
much clearer on this sexual abuse. There are no scenes of candlelight and tender 
kisses; rather, Nicole fears her father, knows what he is doing with her is wrong, 
and is caught in his trap, only to be released – as in the film – when she becomes 
paralysed from the accident.) And then, from the father’s kiss, we cut to the bus 
on the snowy road and the terrifying accident that follows. Obviously the tale of 
the Pied Piper – which does not appear in Banks’s novel – does double duty here: 
it is the story of Nicole’s father and also the story of the bus, in which children 
are drawn into cavernous mountains, shut off from the world and, it seems, from 
childhood itself. With her playmates gone and her future altered, Nicole is left 
bereft. But drawn into her downstairs room after the crash, with a lock on the door 
that allows her to be shut off from the rest of the house, so is she also safe.
The Pied Piper returns at the end of the film, after Nicole gives a false deposition 
as part of Mitchell Stephens’s organized suit with the townspeople. By claiming 
that Dolores the bus driver was going too fast, she effectively ends the lawsuits, 
eliminating the need for Billy Ansel to be deposed (and thus saving him from 
reliving the grief of the loss of his children before his eyes). Simultaneously, of 
course, Nicole is also punishing her father. But one look at Nicole and we know she 
is not mean, just ‘very – very angry’. We leave this site of the deposition and turn to 
Mitch Stephens, whose plane ride to see his own troubled daughter – sometime in 
the future – has ended. Outside the airport, he sees Dolores boarding passengers 
on a hotel shuttle, and Nicole’s voice returns. But now she is commenting directly 
on the scene of the film itself, with words drawn quite explicitly from the novel’s 
final chapter (itself set in Dolores’s voice, shortly after the deposition, in which the 
town watches a demolition derby together, cheering first the seeming destruction 
of Dolores’s old station wagon and then its victory). Nicole’s voice-over continues, 
as the scene shifts to Billy watching the school bus loaded on a truck, to be taken 
away. After Nicole announces that this is ‘a town of people living in the sweet 
hereafter’, we draw back again to The Pied Piper: ‘where waters gushed and flowers 
grew and everything was strange and new. Everything was strange and new.’ And 

32      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
now Nicole sits at the fairground where a whirling ride spins behind her; from this 
near close-up, we return again to Mason and Jessica’s bedroom, at the moment 
when Nicole closes the book. She kisses the children, turns off their lights, and 
then heads into the hallway, standing before a window that lights her from the 
traffic passing outside. The film ends.
This house and its children, to which Nicole and the film return, leave us 
in another present tense. Perhaps this is the present tense ‘in which wishes are 
fulfilled’, as Freud tells us. The psychoanalyst’s claim appears in his narration of a 
father’s dream: his child has died, and he dreams that the child wakes him from 
sleep to announce that he is on fire: ‘Father, don’t you see I’m burning?’ Freud tells 
us that the father then actually awakens to find that his dead child’s arm has caught 
fire from a candle that has fallen on him. As frightening as it is, Freud offers us this 
dream as another case of wish-fulfilment: ‘The dead child behaved in the dream 
like a living one: he himself warned his father, came to his bed, and caught him by 
the arm, just as he had probably done on an occasion in his life … For the sake of 
the fulfillment of this wish the father prolonged his sleep by one moment.’22 Freud 
compares this dream to a waking moment, perceived about a present incident, 
concluding, ‘Thus dreams make use of the present tense in the same manner and 
by the same right as day-dreams. The present tense is the one in which wishes are 
represented as fulfilled.’
I believe that the conclusion of The Sweet Hereafter, a film about a nearly 
unspeakable tragedy, also fulfils a wish.23 In the end, the children have returned 
to us; they occupy here not the past, but the present in our viewing. Is this to 
be conflated with the present-ness of memory (which is, by nature, of the past)? 
Perhaps, given that the final scene with the children follows Nicole’s own beatific 
face at the fairground, seemingly at a moment after the accident. But if this is a 
fantasy in which Mason and Jessica are still alive – in fact, are merely sleeping 
in their beds after storytime – it is one that is very real in the images of the film, 
collapsing a sharp line between imagination and reality.24 Banks’s novel remarks 
on this blurred line (which is likely the origin of the blurriness in the film) in 
commentaries by both Billy and Mitch who have, albeit in different forms, lost 
their children. In fact, when Billy recounts the scene of the accident, he appears to 
be retelling the dream, or at least the wish, that Freud narrates about the father’s 
burning child:
we received one child after another from the divers and wrapped them in 
blankets and dispatched them on stretchers up the steep slope to the road 
and the waiting ambulances, as if by doing that I could somehow prolong this 
part of the nightmare and postpone waking up to what I knew would be the 
inescapable and endless reality of it.25
The film offers a version of this sensation for Billy: after identifying his children 
on stretchers, he turns and sees them laughing and playing, running in the snow. 

THE DREAM HOUSE      33
In that scene, they are as real in that moment as living children, playing before us 
in our present witnessing of the film. Or in Mitchell Stephens’s words, in relation 
to his own living but troubled daughter, ‘It’s the other child, the dreamed baby, the 
remembered one, that for a few lovely moments we think exists.’
I watch this film, on the edge of my seat, and I think, ‘These children are still 
alive.’ A wish fulfilled, they appear in the space and the image of the film before 
me, set in place by the four corners of the screen. Together, these corners make up 
a dream house of my own.
Epilogue
By looking across these three films, which arguably come together largely through 
my own interests or predilections than through consistent inherent connections 
between them, I wonder if writing this essay is my own act of daydreaming. And 
here I return to those three mirrors that surrounded me as a child. Building 
my own little sanctuary in my family’s house, one might say I was retreating 
‘into myself’. But if my memory is right, and I did not just see the mirrors as 
reflecting myself, I might say the mirror could be like a screen – rather than the 
other way around. With my eyes turned away from myself, these were screens 
of other images, of a somewhere-else I would rather be. Therefore I might now 
imagine these three mirrors to screen one of each of the three films. Surrounded 
today by these mirror-screens, these films first take my place in the glass, and then 
they enter into me. And this is my blood transfusion.
Notes
1	
Russell Banks, The Sweet Hereafter (New York: HarperCollins, 1991) p. 43.
2	
This is a nod, of course, to the work of Christian Metz.
3	
Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space, trans. Maria Jolas (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 
1994) p. 137.
4	
Sigmund Freud, The Uncanny, trans. David McClintock (London: Penguin Books, 
2003) p. 134.
5	
Ibid., p. 148.
6	
Ibid., p. 27. This understanding of the play-acting within the film might also be 
informed and complicated by Karen Lury’s discussion of ‘acting and not-acting’, as 
well as in relation to our knowledge of the actual age of the actors Sissy Spacek and 
Martin Sheen. See Lury, ‘The impropriety of performance’, in The Child in Film: Tears, 
Fears and Fairy Tales (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2010), pp. 145–89.
7	
Karen Lury considers how amateur family films indicate how ‘children apparently 
occupy the same places in the home as adults but they may experience and employ 
them differently — as elsewhere and even as elsewhen’. Lury, ‘Halfway down the stairs: 
children’s space in amateur family films from the 1930s to the 1960s’, Home Cultures: 
The Journal of Architecture, Design and Domestic Space, vol. 10, no. 3 (2013), p. 271.
8	
Carolyn Steedman, Past Tenses: Essays on Writing, Autobiography and History 
(London: Rivers Oram Press, 1992) p. 82 (emphasis in original). See also Carolyn 
Steedman, The Tidy House: Little Girls Writing (London: Virago, 1983).

34      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
9	 Barbara Jane Brickman, ‘Coming of age in the 70s: revision, fantasy and rage in the 
teen-girl Badlands’, Camera Obscura, no. 66 (2007), p. 26.
10	 Brickman goes on to suggest that ‘the scene is expressing a female viewpoint and 
a female consciousness’, which had not primarily been recognized in critical work 
preceding her own about Malick’s film.
11	 Annette Kuhn, Ratcatcher (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008) p. 12
12	 Ibid., p. 18.
13	 Kuhn remarks: ‘Significantly, this place is figured as James’s own discovery, its 
mise-en-scène the fulfilment of his desire.’ Ibid., p. 61.
14	 Bachelard, The Poetics of Space, p. 140.
15	 Siegfried Kracauer, Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1997) p. 297.
16	 See Pascal Bonitzer, ‘Off-screen space’, Cahiers du cinéma, nos 234/235 (1971/72).
17	 Interestingly, the next scene shows James and his family in front of the television, 
watching Tom Jones; following this is a lengthy scene involving his friend Kenny, 
who ultimately sends his pet rat out of the window, tied to a balloon and headed to 
the moon. In the only purely fantastic sequence of the film, the rat appears actually to 
land there, accompanied by ‘Gassenhauer’ from Carl Orff’s Schulwerk, a tune written 
for children also used in the score to Badlands, framing the building of the treehouse. 
Soon the scene shifts to a televised image of rats on the moon, which subsequently 
transforms into the ‘snow’ in the TV screen, with the screen itself coming into view in 
the film.
18	 Kuhn, Ratcatcher, p. 86.
19	 In his treatise on The Fantastic, Tzvetan Todorov sees the uncanny as that which 
can also be explained. He writes, ‘The fantastic, we have seen, lasts only as long as a 
certain hesitation: a hesitation common to reader and character, who must decide 
whether or not what they perceive derives from “reality” as it exists in the common 
opinion. At the story’s end, the reader makes a decision even if the character does not; 
he opts for one solution or the other, and thereby emerges the fantastic. If he decides 
that the laws of reality remain intact and permit an explanation of the phenomena 
described, we say that the work belongs to another genre: the uncanny.’ Tzvetan 
Todorov, The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre, trans. Richard 
Howard (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1975) p. 41.
20	 This is at once a very simple and a very complicated emotional film. It is quite literally 
about the grief of parents over the death of their children, but each loss also, as Lury 
puts it in her discussion of children and war films, ‘stand[s] in for many deaths’. Lury, 
The Child in Film, p. 107.
21	 Lury, ‘Halfway down the stairs’, p. 271.
22	 Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, trans. James Strachey (New York: Avon 
Books, 1965) p. 548.
23	 While I am describing a dream of the life rather than the death of the children, I 
would refer the reader to Vicky Lebeau’s chapter on ‘The child, from death’, in her 
Childhood and Cinema (London: Reaktion Books, 2008) esp. pp. 136–7.
24	 The scene also precedes Nicole’s father’s abuse of her.
25	 Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, p. 70.

No, Mother, we’re not moving. Nope, Nope
OLIVIA (Lorelei Linklater) in Boyhood 
(Richard Linklater, 2014)
What might society (that is, modern, ‘developed world’ societies) look like if 
children had rights – or rather, if the rights that they do have, on paper – were 
fully actualized in their everyday life: in their home, neighbourhood and in their 
schooling? Another, follow-on question might be – should, or could, children have 
rights to place and home? Children (in some social classes in the developed world) 
do have rights. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child is the 
most ratified UN treaty in history.1 Some enlightened administrations are trying 
to enshrine children’s right to play in all aspects of their governance: for example, 
see the Welsh Government’s Play Sufficiency Duty, enacted in two stages – 2012 
(assessment) and in 2014 (implementation of measures).2 But what would it be 
like if children’s desires – say, not to go to school; not to move house; to go out and 
associate and play unsupervised; to continue to live with their birth parents (or 
not); not to live in zones of conflict or ecological violence – were taken seriously 
as rights? What would the world look like then? If, in other words, children were 
‘put first’ in society?3
This chapter was in part prompted by watching the film Boyhood (Richard 
Linklater, 2014). In one key early scene – when the mother of two children, one 
being the boy in question, is planning to move house in response to domestic 
tribulations (her separation from her partner, insufficient income and lack of career 
opportunities) – the boy’s elder sister, Olivia, insists that she does not want to move.
I am a parent (of two boys, now adults). I am not saying that what children 
say they want is automatically right, and/or should be delivered as a right. But 
I feel to ask questions of how seriously children’s aspirations should be heeded 
is helpful in understandings the conditions of both children’s and adult lives, the 
interactions between them, as well as their spatial out-playings in everyday life. 
We (my partner and I) chose not to move home in the time between our children 
being conceived, born and leaving home as adults. We have been lucky insofar as 
circumstances have allowed us to do that. Across the world it is only too apparent 
2 CHILDREN’S RIGHT TO 
SPACE, PLACE AND HOME
Owain Jones

36      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
that millions of families are forced to move and/or to split up. But it is also obvious 
that many families, or rather many parents/adults, choose to move home for a 
whole range of reasons: for the sake of their careers, or a change of setting, or in 
the pursuit of gain through house sale and purchase. The children, whatever their 
views, have to tag along.
Children’s rights
Before we go any further, let us remind ourselves about some aspects of children 
rights as articulated by the UN. These do, after all, exert at least some force on 
society. For example, they explicitly underpin the aforementioned Play Sufficiency 
Measures implemented by the Welsh Government. Children’s rights were 
enshrined in the UN Conventions on the Rights of the Child Charter (1989) and 
as stated, this is (or was) ‘the most ratified human rights treaty in history’.4 But 
I think this widespread ratification is partly lip service and easy to do, as the come-
back for governments and adults is minimal despite the routine flouting of these 
rights. Indeed, this is symptomatic of what has been termed the adult-centrism 
of modern society. In fact, rights may be nominally or prescriptively bestowed 
often as a form of domination and entrenchment of power.5 Having said that, the 
language of rights has to look good, or sound right and maybe there are genuine 
aspirational political sentiments here too.
Of the forty-five Articles in the Charter, I highlight four for the purposes of this 
discussion:
Article 2 (non-discrimination). ‘The Convention applies to every child without 
discrimination, whatever their ethnicity, gender, religion, language, abilities or 
any other status, whatever they think or say, whatever their family background’.
The convention is universal. All children’s views should be heeded – ‘whatever they 
think or say’.
Article 3 (best interests of the child). ‘The best interests of the child must be a 
top priority in all decisions and actions that affect children’.
This immediately becomes highly problematic for all governments and any 
adult authorities making decisions that change society. It is difficult to think of 
any decision that does not have immediate or deferred impacts on children. For 
example, decisions about the economy; planning; foreign, welfare, transport or 
health policies.
Article 12 (respect for the views of the child). ‘Every child has the right to 
express their views, feelings and wishes in all matters affecting them, and to 
have their views considered and taken seriously. This right applies at all times, 

CHILDREN’S RIGHT TO SPACE, PLACE AND HOME      37
for example during immigration proceedings, housing decisions or the child’s 
day-to-day home life’.
(Emphasis added)
Housing decisions and the child’s day-to-day home life are the key focus of this 
chapter. In the light of this right, what weight should be given to the heart-felt 
assertion of Olivia in Boyhood that she does not want to leave her home?
Article 4 (implementation of the Convention). ‘Governments must do all they 
can to make sure every child can enjoy their rights by creating systems and 
passing laws that promote and protect children’s rights’.
The Welsh Government Play Sufficiency Measures represent an effort to do this 
in relation to children’s rights to play. But, generally, this Article is not realistically 
implementable in the current context of our adult-centric forms of power.
Children, space and the importance of 
place and home
As set out above, it is recognized that place and home are key elements of children’s 
lives and rights. Place and home are, of course, important to everybody insofar 
as we are bodies in space with all the affective, material and social ecology that 
emerge as part of this experience. But place, I suggest, is particularly important to 
children. For where they are born, and where and how they spend their first years, 
inevitably becomes the underpinning foundation of their affective ecology of 
becoming. Humans are creatures of memory and self-narrative that build through 
experience and time.6
The poet and critic Tom Paulin states, ‘I believe there are primal, original 
landscapes of the imagination. Often they are the places in which we grew up and 
which remain important to us throughout adulthood.’7 More recently, J. Douglas 
Porteous and Sandra E. Smith similarly suggest that
Home is significant at all times in our lives, but particularly when we are 
children. Home is the centre, the mould, to family and friends; it is [or should 
be] our place in the community and the place where acculturation occurs. 
Feelings towards home include psychological territoriality, rootedness, a sense 
of security, irrational attachment, and refuge.8
And around the home is the locale, the home territory, or as Mike Pearson and 
Michael Shanks put it, ‘the square mile’ of one’s first home.
­In our earliest years we know a patch of ground in a detail we will never know 
anywhere again – a site of discovery and putting names to things – people and 

38      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
places – working with difference and similitude – favourite places, places to 
avoid – neighbours and their habits, gestures and stories – textures, smells – 
also of play, imagination, experiment – finding the best location for doing 
things – creating worlds under our own control, fantasy landscapes – a place of 
exaggeration and irrelevance, making rules and breaking rules … of learning to 
distinguish between ‘do and ‘don’t do’, of improvised response, rules of thumb.9
In the prize-winning novel, So Long, See You Tomorrow, author William Maxwell 
sets out just how central to the child’s becoming is the rich, everyday fabric of 
home and what might happen if children are removed from it:
Whether they are part of home or home is part of them is not a question 
children are prepared to answer … Take away the pitcher and bowl, both of 
them dry and dusty. Take away the cow barn where the cats, sitting all in a 
row, wait with their mouths wide open for someone to squirt milk down their 
throats. Take away the horse barn too – the smell of hay and dust and horse 
piss and old sweat-stained leather, and the rain beating down on the plowed 
field beyond the open door. Take all this away and what have you done to 
him? In the face of deprivation so great, what is the use of asking him to go 
on being the boy he was? He might as well start life over again as some other 
boy instead.10
The poet and landscape writer Kathleen Jamie said she was jealous when a student 
told her that in the Shetland dialect there is a word for childhood/spiritual 
homelands – ‘Bonhoga’.
I was envious, [I thought] I haven’t got one, and I want one. And then I thought 
about it, and thought – there is nothing I can think of except the back lane 
where we played, behind the houses, and there is a particular old tyre tree at the 
bottom of the lane, and I thought – that tree, that was my Bonhoga.11
Whatever landscapes children are born into, and first grow up in, even if these 
landscapes, and the times of them, are very ‘ordinary’ such as that Jamie describes, 
or even if they leave much to be desired, children have the skills to make the most 
of them. And in turn this will mark children and enter their very being.
Even in zones of conflict, children find ways of becoming, and playing, 
becoming embedded in the ruins and in the paraphernalia of war. This is depicted 
in a range of films such as Turtles Can Fly (Bahman Ghobadi, 2004) and The Grave 
of the FireFlies (Isao Takahata, 1988). Of course, war can never benefit children in 
general terms, but it is testament to the striations of modern adult space – such as 
the city – that the disruptions of war can open it up for childhood, as described 
by Cloke and Jones in relation to the Second World War ruins of London as 
playground.12

CHILDREN’S RIGHT TO SPACE, PLACE AND HOME      39
The affective affordances of home for the 
otherness of children
I have suggested elsewhere13 that childhood studies needs to a) engage with 
challenges of recognizing the ‘otherness’ of children, and b) do so through the 
lenses of the ‘the affective turn’.14 Although the concept of affect cannot and 
should not be pinned down to one clear definition or approach, it is clear that it 
encompasses all the richness of bodily being(s) in place, with the interplay of the 
senses, emotions, memory and materiality making the weave of what life actually 
is, moment to moment. A weave that is mostly invisible to the conscious self. Most 
of our mind–body functions, our relations of being in the world, physically and 
emotionally, are not easily known to us in thought or language. Research that is 
based upon representational accounts of thought and language alone therefore 
struggle to delve into this realm of affect. That is why the ‘affective turn’ demands 
research approaches that are ‘non-representational’.15 As Melissa Gregg and 
Gregory J. Seigworth put it, ‘affect emerges out of muddy, unmediated, relatedness 
and not in some dialectical reconciliation of cleanly oppositional elements or 
primary units’.16 I think the otherness of children is largely located in affective 
becoming, in differing sets of affective attunement to adults, and this can been seen 
in the way children move, play and interact with other things and beings (animals, 
people, toys and the materiality of space, such as the home and neighbourhood).
That is why film has an advantage here: it can show children’s bodies in action. 
Glimpses of this kind of activity are shown in films such as I Was Born But … 
(Yasujiro Ozu, 1931) and in the remake Good Morning (1959) by the same director. 
Here the camera focuses on how children ‘fidget’ when sitting in chairs; how they 
move through the local environment; and their interest and delight in ‘bodily 
functions’ (e.g. farting); and the always (it seems) vexed interactions with often 
dismissive adult authority. Lury has also commented on the extent to which 
child actors’ abilities to bring such behaviour to the screen is an element in the 
degree to which these performances are ‘good’ or represent the spirit of everyday 
childhood.17
In her article, ‘Deleuze’s children’, Catherine Hickey-Moody employs Deleuze 
and Guattari to reflect further on the nature of the child’s becoming
Children are Spinozists. When Little Hans talks about a ‘pee-pee-maker’, he is 
referring not to an organ or an organic function but basically to a material, in 
other words, to an aggregate whose elements vary according to its connections, 
its relations of movement and rest, the different individuated assemblages it 
enters … Children’s questions are poorly understood … they are not understood 
as question-machines; that is why indefinite articles play so important a role 
in their questions (a belly, a child, a horse, a chair, ‘how is a person made?’). 
Spinozism is the becoming-child of the philosopher.18

40      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Spinoza, as the quote implies, is one of the founding thinkers employed by affect 
theory. As Julie Henry suggests, he also addressed the challenges of the otherness 
between child and adult becoming. Henry concludes, for instance, that even 
though the
change is so radical between being a child and being an adult, that it seems to 
be a real transformation, in the strong sense of the word: that is a mutation, a 
change from one form (and so a nature) to another … becoming an adult can’t 
involve destroying the child’s form to replace it with a grown up form, even if 
the body and the mind of a child and of an adult seem to be incommensurable.19
In Hickey-Moody’s essay, she further quotes Deleuze to demonstrate how the 
becoming of the child and their perceived otherness is spatial:
Children never stop talking about what they are doing or trying to do: exploring 
milieus, by means of dynamic trajectories, and drawing up maps of them. The 
maps of these trajectories are essential to psychic activity.20
Importantly, this emphasis on the spatio-materiality of the child’s becoming 
speaks to the affordances of home and home territory. This, for me, is what the 
filmic depiction of children’s lives, the choreographing of figures in landscapes, 
can show.21
Movements in space: playing as 
being other
To add further support to this ongoing idea of the otherness of the child and the 
challenges to portraying their lives in film – and in academic research – I point 
to the suggestion by Sarah Scott, a writer on architecture and children, that 
‘children are a unique client [for architects] with heightened sensory needs, special 
scale considerations and a totally different way of moving through and perceiving 
space to adults’.22 As previously stated, I am not convinced that such differences 
in (spatial) becomings have been fully appreciated in many areas of childhood 
studies. However, I do think some films have portrayed this quite movingly, for 
example Bryan Forbes’s Whistle Down the Wind (1961). Here the children are seen 
in their own worlds, which are in part constructed by lying to adults and therefore 
as secret realms, while at the same time moving through Pearson and Shanks’s 
concept of the ‘square mile’, moving through the landscape using hedges as cover 
and an old barn as a key space to the narrative.
I think Boyhood shows similar aspects of the affective otherness of childhood in 
play and its spatial outplaying. As I focus here on space rather than time, the much 
vaunted fact that the same actors were used to make the film over an eleven-year 
period (2002–13) is actually an irrelevant distraction of my reading of this film. 

CHILDREN’S RIGHT TO SPACE, PLACE AND HOME      41
There are a few shots in Boyhood which remind me of classic scenes which 
underpin the figure of the ‘child in the environment’ as featured in the books of 
Colin Ward (1970) and Robin Moore (1986).23 For example, when Mason (the 
central boy protagonist) finds a space of solitude between a fence and the side of a 
house, the space is derelict or abandoned by adult power and thus becomes ‘other 
space’ for childhood becoming (Fig 2.1).24
The trouble with place and home
The fundamental problem facing the delivery of the rights of the child, and the 
wider suite of rights in the Charter, is that the modern world is overwhelmingly 
prioritized, scaled and ordered to adult agendas, ideologies and desires. This poses 
deep challenges to children’s relationships to place. And within that overarching 
adult structuring, there are competing and conflicting sets of adult ideologies, 
which, in their battles, certainly do not put children first. Children have to fit into 
the adult patternings of society whether these are material, economic, cultural 
or political. Or they are forced into it, and through it, by all sorts of political, 
institutional, commercial and other means.
This raises a number of profound questions about children’s experiences, 
children’s rights, and how adult societies construct, instruct, coerce and oppress 
children and childhood; not least though systems of education.25 As Ivan Illich 
states
School has become the planned process which tools man for a planned world, 
the principal tool to trap man in man’s trap. It is supposed to shape each man to 
FIGURE 2.1  ‘In between spaces’. Boyhood directed by Richard Linklater © IFC 
Production 2014. All Rights Reserved.

42      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
an adequate level for playing a part in this world game. Inexorably we cultivate, 
treat, produce, and school the world out of existence.26
The plight of children and young people is particularly sombre, in the light of the 
fact that adult orderings of the modern world are so often highly dysfunctional 
in social, political and ecological terms. Violence, injustice, degradation and 
‘cleansing’ of rich cultural and biological ecologies are all too common.
As Felix Guattari suggests, the dominant powers of subjugation, embedded in 
capitalist systems and modernist world views, create conditions hostile not only to 
children but to human well-being more generally.
­In all its forms (family, school, factories, army, codes, discourse …) it 
continues to subjugate all desires, sexuality, and affects to the dictatorship of its 
totalitarian organization, founded on exploitation, property, male power, profit, 
productivity … Tirelessly it continues its dirty work of castrating, suppressing, 
torturing and dividing up our bodies in order to inscribe its laws on our flesh, 
in order to rivet our subconscious [into] its mechanisms for reproducing this 
system of enslavement.27
I add that this power has adult-centrism, as well as andro-centrism, at its core. 
Another aspect of modernity key to this discussion, and alluded to in relation 
to Article 12 above, is modernity’s indifference or (at best) hostility to ideas and 
practices of place and home.28 Places are expendable in relation to, and act as an 
impediment to, mobility, economic restructuring as well as military, ideological 
and economic imperialism. In considering this alliance between the adult-
centrism of modernity and its associated hostility to place and home, we can see 
that quite a challenging picture for the well-being of children develops.
Moving home
A theme that rather jumped out at me from Boyhood – which has been nagging 
away at me for some time now, not least through film, and which might pertain to 
a reconstituted society for children – is therefore the idea of ‘homeland’, of ‘rights 
to place’ and particularly ‘children’s right to place and home’. Boyhood revolves 
around three periods in Mason’s (and his older sister Olivia’s) lives, which are 
created by moves from one home to the next. These moves are precipitated, as is 
so often the case by marital/relationship breakdown and new partnering, domestic 
financial pressures and adults/parents seeking employment and/or looking to 
better their career or self-development.
The socio-spatial fabric of the children’s lives, their affective terrains of 
becoming  – represented by a sense of home, neighbourhood, peer group and 
school – are ripped up at each move. The children do not want to move – they 
express this very clearly and forcibly, especially during the first move when they 

CHILDREN’S RIGHT TO SPACE, PLACE AND HOME      43
are younger. In particular it is Mason’s older, more voluble sister Olivia, who states 
on a number of occasions ‘we are not moving’.
Although forcefully expressed, such statements do not register as objections 
that should be considered seriously by the parent and – one assumes, though less 
confidently, by those, presumably mostly adults, watching the narrative. Children 
have to fit into their parent(s)’ lives. Home, from the parents’ perspective is where 
they choose to live. Not a place in itself. Mobility is one of the hallmarks of modernity 
and as Leslie Van Gelder suggests ‘contemporary western culture has discouraged 
people from maintaining articulating deep relationships with place. Few of us live 
in the homes we were raised in.’29 Children therefore live within this adult modern 
world of ‘mobility’ – whether this is mobility afforded to highly resourced affluent 
adults moving regionally, nationally and internationally for the sake of career, power 
and so on, to adults who are forced to move due to conflict, economic and ecological 
violence and degradation. As such, our relations to home and our children’s relations 
to home are more often in a state of rupture than continuity.
As an academic (geographer) of now some twenty years in the UK, I have 
witnessed the career paths of many other academic colleagues, both those with 
children and those without. Moving universities, cities, even countries, to secure 
a post and often simply a better post, is common. And I always wonder: did their 
children want to move? Is it just taken for granted that the parent’s interests are 
paramount? Did these geographers consider the geographies of their children, 
apart from – perhaps – a careful scrutiny of the schools in the destination location? 
Beyond moving for career, moving home can also be for a process of financial/
status advancement. At this point the home – ‘homeland’, the emotional ground 
of life, becomes a commodity insofar as the home becomes an asset for financial 
exchange and advancement in the adult world of self-fulfilment.30
A repeating motif in Boyhood is of the children looking back out of the car 
window as they leave what was their home and neighbourhood for the last time. 
On one occasion there is an explicit instruction from their mother that they ‘don’t 
look back’, since they are, at that point, fleeing a violent stepfather. At the same 
time the audience understands that they are leaving step-siblings and a whole set 
of local relations. Yet, when the children are looking back – just what is it that they 
are leaving? Is it simply architecture, their own past, temporary siblings and their 
violent stepfather? Given that, as already set out, children learn and develop so 
quickly, developing fundamental capacities and characteristics in the early years 
of their life, it is likely that the local environment is also or perhaps even more a 
fundamental part of their mental/emotional ecology, whether this is the domestic 
home, the wider environment or their local peer group. In Boyhood when they 
move – as they inevitably do – there is nearly always a scene where they are 
loading up the car and leaving the house and garden (Fig 2.2). In the scenes of the 
first enforced move Olivia walks around the garden and porch saying ‘goodbye’ 
to many of the spaces and objects of their homeland, such as the yard, the crape 
myrtle and the mailbox.

44      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Losing home
Sagas of children losing home, moving home and sometimes finding home in 
‘ordinary’ (non-conflict) settings are themes in some other very striking films 
about childhood and family. In Y aura-t-il de la neige à Noël /Will it Snow for 
Christmas? (Sandrine Veysset, 1996), the home is ‘lost’ due to domestic sexual 
abuse. Other films such as Le Havre (Aki Kaurismäki, 2011), In this World, 
(Michael Winterbottom, 2002), The Night of the Hunter (Charles Laughton, 1955), 
along with Turtles Can Fly (Bahman Ghobadi, 2004) and Grave of the Fireflies 
(Isao Takahata, 1988) illustrate the harrowing disruption for children forced to 
move by conflict and abuse. Other films show children trying to maintain home 
in the face of both family and environmental challenges as in the Beasts of the 
Southern Wild (Benh Zeitlin, 2012). What is at stake and shown in these films 
is home and place as the ground of the child self, which in turn, becomes the 
adult self. In Boyhood each ‘home’ is only a place to be for a few years, enough to 
become embedded before being moved on again by adult agendas. Roots are put 
down – then pulled up – repeatedly. The destruction of home and place and the 
children’s relationship with them is, I suggest, a key part of what Guattari calls 
the ‘ecocide’ of the three ecologies31 – biological diversity, cultural diversity and 
individual psychic diversity.
The film Home (Ursula Meier, 2008) offers an interestingly provocative account 
of the disruption of home and its impact on children and family. It is very much a 
mundane story in terms of modernity, as it is about the building, and subsequent 
delayed opening, of a trunk road through some open agricultural land. Here home 
is lost not by enforced displacement of the family but by modernity crowding 
FIGURE 2.2  Mason (Ellar Coltrane) in the car moving home. Boyhood directed by 
Richard Linklater © IFC Production 2014. All Rights Reserved.

CHILDREN’S RIGHT TO SPACE, PLACE AND HOME      45
around the house and home. Husband and wife Michel and Marthe live with their 
three children in a house next to an uncompleted highway. The deserted road is 
a playground for cycling, inflatable pools and games in the sun. The road seems 
to be part of some forgotten development scheme, and the house has a feeling of 
tranquillity and privacy. The older teenage daughter is a fan of sunbathing and 
listening to music. One day, construction workers in high-visibility jackets appear 
out of the blue and move about the road, and it becomes obvious that the road is 
finally going to open. The home is much loved and the family feel that moving 
is not an option. The children are in the local school and the father has a job 
nearby. But the school and the father’s employment are now on the other side of 
the very busy high-speed dual carriageway – with no crossing. The house, once 
a haven, is now permeated with traffic noise and vibrations, and the constant 
sense of strangers glancing through the windows and into the garden. The 
youngest daughter, Marion, becomes concerned about and then obsessed with 
the environmental consequences of the traffic pollution, monitoring the grass 
as it exhibits evidence of the effects of carbon monoxide emission. She becomes 
worried that the family will become ill, or even die from the pollution. The older 
daughter, Judith, continues to lead her life of sunbathing out on the front lawn 
in her bikini, despite attracting unwanted attention from passing motorists. One 
day she disappears – apparently picked up by one of the regular commuters. The 
remaining family members descend deeper into obsession and paranoia and the 
father bricks up the windows and seeks to soundproof the entire house. What 
the film demonstrates is the gradual unpicking of family cohesion and well-being 
for both the adults and the children who are under siege from the architecture of 
mobility and capitalism.32
­Conclusions: children’s right to place and 
home?
If you Google ‘children’s right to place’ or similar phrases (with quotation marks), 
you get no meaningful results. That is how obscure this idea currently is. There 
are quite active ‘rights to stay put’ movements in the developing and developed 
world, for example, in relation to communities being evicted directly, or pushed 
out more insidiously, by planning and gentrification, in the face of regeneration, 
redevelopment in relation to large-scale sports events such as the Olympics, 
Commonwealth Games or the Football World Cup, but these are not particularly 
‘child focused’.33 The trouble with ‘human rights’ and within them ‘children’s rights’, 
as currently articulated, is that they are nation-state based. This is not surprising 
as they emanate from the United Nations in the first place. It is the nation-state we 
supposedly have rights to in terms of our security and in terms of belonging and 
identity. Yet there is often a great distance in scale, culture and politics between 
the nation-state, home and local territory. And, of course, the modern nation-state 

46      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
is a relatively recent, highly problematic, internally and externally violent spatio-
political unit, built upon the destruction of local places. The nation-state-based 
rights of children suffer most badly when states become contested and or highly 
dysfunctional, as is only too obvious today.
In this context, Porteous and Smith assert the significance of ‘domicide’ – the 
‘destruction of home’ – stating that ‘the meaningfulness of domicide resides in the 
probability that home is central to our lives and the likelihood that the forcible 
destruction of it by powerful authorities will result in suffering on the part of the 
home dweller’.34
Therefore, rather than focusing on its temporal ingenuity, from a materialist 
and spatial perspective in which children’s right to place is foregrounded, Boyhood 
can be seen to be about the children’s efforts to develop their socio-geographical 
life in a series of new ‘homes’.
Notes
1	 See Helen Brocklehurst, ‘Kids “R” us? Children as political bodies’, International 
Journal of Politics and Ethics, vol. 3, no. 1 (2003), pp. 79–92.
2	 See, for example, ‘Play Wales’ in 2015.
3	 See Penelope Leach, Children First: What Society Must Do – and Is not Doing – For 
Children Today (London: Random House, 1994).
4	 See Brocklehurst, ‘Kids “R” us?’, p. 1.
5	 See Nicola Perugini and Neve Gordon, The Human Right to Dominate (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2015).
6	 See Owain Jones and Joanne Garde-Hansen (eds), Geography and Memory: 
Explorations in Identity, Place and Becoming (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012).
7	 Cited in Suzy Smith (ed.), Country Living: My Country Childhood (London: Coronet 
Books, 1999) p. 137.
8	 J. Douglas Porteous and Sandra E. Smith, Domicide: The Global Destruction of Home 
(Montreal: McGill-Queen’s Press, 2001) p. 63.
9	 Mike Pearson and Michael Shanks, Theatre/Archaeology: Disciplinary Dialogues (New 
York: Routledge, 2005) pp. 138–9.
10	 William Maxwell, So Long, See You Tomorrow (London: Vintage Books, 1996) p. 113.
11	 Kathleen Jamie, speaking on The Echo Chamber, BBC Radio 4, 3 January 2016.
12	 See Paul Cloke and Owain Jones, ‘Unclaimed territory: childhood and disordered 
space(s)’, Social & Cultural Geography, vol. 6, no. 3 (2005), pp. 311–31.
13	 See Owain Jones, ‘“True geography [] quickly forgotten, giving away to an adult-
imagined universe”. Approaching the otherness of childhood’, Children’s Geographies, 
vol. 8, no. 2 (2008), pp. 195–212.
14	 See Melissa Gregg and Gregory J. Seigworth, The Affect Theory Reader (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010).
15	 See Nigel Thrift, Non-representational Theory: Space, Politics, Affect (London: 
Routledge, 2007).
16	 Gregg and Seigworth, The Affect Theory Reader, p. 4.
17	 See Karen Lury, ‘The involuntary dance: child actors, fidgeting and authenticity’, in B. 
Henzler and W. Pauleit (eds), Childhood, Cinema and Film Aesthetics (Berlin: Bertz + 
Fischer, 2018), pp. 85–100.

CHILDREN’S RIGHT TO SPACE, PLACE AND HOME      47
18	 Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia, trans. B. Massumi (London: Athlone Press, 1988) p. 256, as quoted 
in Anna Catherine Hickey-Moody, ‘Deleuze’s children’, Educational Philosophy and 
Theory, vol. 45, no. 3 (2013), p. 272 (emphasis added).
19	 Julie Henry, ‘The philosophical figure of the child. Descartes, Spinoza’, 1. Paper 
presented to Lors du Scottish Seminar of Early Modern Philosophy, https://www.
academia.edu/5526936/The_philosophical_Figure_of_the_Child._Descartes_Spinoza 
(accessed 7 October 2016).
20	 Gilles Deleuze ‘What children say’ in D. Smith and M.A. Greco, (trans.), Essays 
Critical and Clinical (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1997), p. 61.
21	 It is harder for children to express their affective becoming if home and place are lost 
to them, or hostile to them. A striking feature of the film The Other Bank (George 
Ovashvili, 2009) is that the child protagonist, Tedo, is often portrayed sitting still, 
staring. In this instance, the mobile, affective bodily becoming is curtailed by the 
trauma of conflict and displacement.
22	 Sarah Scott, Architecture for Children (Camberwell, Vic. Australia: ACER Press, 2010), 
p. 191.
23	 Colin Ward, The Child in the City (London: Pantheon Books, 1978); Robin C. Moore, 
Childhood’s Domain: Play and Place in Child Development (Beckenham: Croom Helm, 
1986).
24	 See Cloke and Jones, ‘Unclaimed territory’ for a wider discussion on children and 
disordered space.
25	 John Holt, Escape From Childhood: The Needs and Rights of Children (New York: 
E.P. Dutton, 1974).
26	 Ivan Illich, Deschooling Society (New York: Harper & Row, 1971), p. 77.
27	 Felix Guattari, Soft Subversions (New York: Semiotext(e), 1996), p. 29.
28	 See Edward S. Casey, Getting Back into Place: Towards a Renewed Understanding of the 
Place-World (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1993), and The Fate of Place: 
A Philosophical History (London: University of California Press, 1998); J. Douglas 
Porteous, ‘Topocide: the annihilation of place’, in John Eyles and David M. Smith 
(eds), Qualitative Methods in Human Geography (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1988), 
pp. 75–93; as well as Porteous and Smith, Domicide.
29	 Leslie Van Gelder, Weaving a Way Home: A Personal Journey Exploring Place and 
Story (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2008), p. 4.
30	 Writers such as Christina Hardyment have questioned this very forthrightly in 
relation to the child’s well-being and rights. See Christina Hardyment, Dream Babies: 
Childcare Advice from John Locke to Gina Ford (London: Frances Lincoln Publishers, 
2007).
31	 See Felix Guattari, The Three Ecologies (New York: Semiotext(e), 2000).
32	 I should add that I grew up on a farm: a family house that was compulsorily 
purchased for the development of large housing estates. Our entire family had to 
move, but we lived in the farmhouse while the farmstead, fields and what was a rural 
landscape were bulldozed and replaced by a suburban landscape. I was in my teenage 
years when that happened. I know what it is like to lose one’s home forcibly. I suppose 
that memory informs this chapter.
33	 See http://www.gamesmonitor.org.uk/ (accessed 28 July 2020).
34	 Porteous and Smith, Domicide.

48 

A
dults and children live in different time zones, their internal watches set 
by different clocks, their days constructed around alternative timetables. 
The question of how to communicate across the temporal divide is 
confronted daily by parents and offspring, teachers and pupils, at school and in 
the home, and is intensified in a work of art made for children. Such works are 
usually created by adults, whose principal challenge – how to imagine themselves 
into a frame of mind they inhabited years beforehand – is complicated by the 
problem of keeping track of the rapidly shifting cultural reference points among 
young people. Living in a household with children may help the would-be 
creator tune in to the latest developments in social media, music, gadgetry and 
fashion, but it is likely too to reinforce the conviction that adults can never really 
understand what makes youngsters tick. In the struggle to communicate despite 
this lack of understanding, artists fall back on imaginative reconstructions of 
their own childhoods in the vain hope that the radical changes of the intervening 
decades have not rendered them wholly redundant, or distorted them beyond 
redemption with overlays of sentiment and cliché. Such reconstructions invariably 
emphasize the chronological gap even as they seek to bridge it. And they often 
take as their subject – as the driving motor of their narratives, so to speak – the 
complex interplay between time zones that constitutes any given cultural or social 
environment in each successive generation.
The filmmaker Hayao Miyazaki is particularly concerned with this interplay 
of time zones, both within the communities he represents on film and among 
the projected audiences for his movies. Miyazaki has often stressed his belief that 
animated movies were originally ‘created for children’,1 and he often identifies, in 
his interviews and writings, the precise age of the children each of his films is 
primarily intended to address. He is also interested in the question of how targeting 
a particular age group will affect other potential viewers. His original pitch for the 
1986 movie Laputa: Castle in the Sky goes into detail on this point:
By focusing mainly on fourth graders (the year when the number of cells in a 
child’s brain reaches that of an adult), it will reach an audience of even younger 
children, and expand even further its age appeal. I am certain that hundreds 
3 SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK 
OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI
Robert Maslen

50      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
of thousands of older anime fans will come to see this film no matter what, 
so there is no need to overtly cater to their tastes. There is also a large, latent 
audience of older viewers who yearn for a film to enjoy with a more naïve, 
childlike spirit. The future of animation is threatened by the fact that for most 
films being planned today the target age is gradually creeping upwards …
[Laputa] is a project to bring animation back to its roots.2
In this passage, the time zones of the various age groups that make up the film’s 
audience are represented as both distinct and overlapping. The crucial age of 
the Japanese fourth-grader – nine or ten – is the point at which the brain has 
achieved its full physical development, making available a capacious internal space 
to be stocked with the wealth of experiences undergone by the subject as child, 
adolescent and adult over the course of a lifetime. The development of younger 
children points forward to this moment of cerebral maturity, making them eager 
to share as far as they can in the activities of their fourth-grade seniors. Meanwhile 
adults of all ages look back nostalgically on the fourth-grade moment as the point 
when their experiences – of film, among other things – were at their freshest and 
most exciting. The point here is not whether Miyazaki paints an accurate picture of 
his audience’s encounter with his projected movie, but the impression he gives of 
the auditorium as a complex web of experiences governed both by the constantly 
shifting dynamics of biological development and by distinct but overlapping 
perspectives on the object of attention, variously oriented towards past, present 
or future. This auditorium has much in common with the social spaces and 
communities Miyazaki constructs in his films, except that here the presence of 
multiple perspectives shaped by different chronologies invariably triggers some 
form of crisis. The question of how different age groups can successfully live 
together, of how their distinct chronologies can be synchronized, is in many cases 
the central problem explored by his films.
My Neighbour Totoro (1988) is a case in point. Set in the 1950s Japan of 
Miyazaki’s youth, the film recounts the adventures of two young girls and their 
father who have been forced to relocate to an old house in the country, near a 
hospital where the children’s mother is being treated for a life-threatening 
illness.3 The house turns out to be occupied by kami, spirits that can only be 
seen by children; yet it is the father who explains the spirits’ identity, recalling 
his own encounters with the spirit world in his childhood, despite the fact that 
he is excluded from it now by the demands imposed on his time by his job as an 
academic.4 Meanwhile the spirits provide a conduit between the children and the 
cyclical time zone of the other growing things among which the spirits live: from 
the gigantic camphor tree where the titular troll-spirit, Totoro, hides in daytime, 
to the trees the children plant at night with Totoro’s help in the grounds of their 
new home, to the freshly-picked corncob they leave as a gift for their mother at the 
end of the movie, whose miraculous appearance on the hospital windowsill helps 
the sick woman recognize that she is on the road to recovery. Social time, spirit 

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      51
time and the cyclical time of the natural world operate side by side throughout the 
narrative, sometimes at odds, sometimes coming together; and the necessity that 
drives the plot is to achieve synchrony between these different time zones – to find 
a way for them to work together for the good of the human community and the 
ailing body of the children’s mother.
The encounter between the three principal time zones in the movie is enriched 
by smaller chronological differences between the characters. The little girl Mei, for 
instance, experiences the passage of time quite differently from her big sister or her 
father. Her first encounter with the spirits takes place while her sister is at school 
and her father working at his desk. Mei plays outside as her father works, and her 
detachment from the regulated schedule of work and education is indicated by 
her wish to eat lunch in the middle of the morning. At this point in the movie 
only Mei occupies the imaginative and geographical vantage point that enables 
her to see the pair of tubby spirits who come trundling through the grass as she is 
playing, drifting between visibility and invisibility like daydreams and leading her 
to the giant being who lives inside the camphor tree, whom she promptly names 
Totoro. Her lack of a formal timetable gives her leisure to follow the spirits to 
Totoro’s sleeping place, just as her lack of prejudice concerning Totoro’s possibly 
threatening nature enables her to embrace his companionship, to occupy his space 
as if it were her own. The problem in the rest of the film for the other people 
who share Mei’s home – in particular her elder sister Satsuki, who is growing out 
of the sorts of fantasies that dominate early childhood – is that they must learn 
how to synchronize themselves with her time zone, for a while at least, unlearning 
the sense of urgency that has been instilled in them by work, education and the 
imminence of death for long enough to share her vision.
Satsuki learns to do this as a result of a disruption to her regimented daily 
schedule. One evening she finds that her father left his umbrella behind when he 
went to work. It is raining, so she decides to go and meet him with it at the bus stop. 
She and Mei wait at the stop till dark, growing increasingly uneasy as the shadows 
lengthen and their father fails to arrive. Rain falls, night falls, and Mei falls asleep 
on Satsuki’s back. The uneven dripping of water replaces the ticking of human 
clocks, signalling the girls’ entry into an alternative time zone. Abruptly Satsuki 
notices Totoro standing beside her, sheltering from the rain under the inadequate 
protection of a leaf. She lends him her umbrella, which he accepts – though less 
for its intended function than for the pleasure of the sound of the rain drumming 
on the fabric. Soon afterwards a bus arrives; but it is not the petrol-driven machine 
the girls expect. Instead it is the celebrated cat-bus which furnishes one of the 
film’s most famous images: a tabby twelve-legged vehicle whose ribcage opens 
to admit passengers into its fur-lined interior, and whose journeys display a cat’s 
contempt for conventional roads and pathways, a preference for telegraph wires 
over carriageways, for fields and hedges over tarmac.5 The cat-bus veers away into 
the night carrying Totoro, and soon an ordinary bus looms out of the darkness, 
with the father safely on board.

52      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
The fusion of cat and bus in the hybrid creature known as the cat-bus seems 
specifically calculated to conjure up the notion of what might be called synchrony: 
the fruitful combining of different time zones – different ways of measuring or 
experiencing time – in the household or elsewhere, to enable successful dialogue or 
other forms of social interaction.6 Cats are domestic pets which notoriously ignore 
the rigid spatial and temporal structures of the human household. Buses knit the 
family home to the socially significant destinations of work and school, operating 
to a structured timetable and unchanging routes; they are inextricably linked with 
the notion of accurate timekeeping, even when they run late. Combining cats with 
buses gives you a form of public transport that ignores timetables, turning up 
when least expected and cutting across the regulated rural geography to reach not 
a place of work or education, but the object of its passengers’ desires. And there 
is another fusion here too. Cats make a great show of being solitary yet inhabit 
human communities, while buses serve those communities unambiguously. The 
cat-bus, with its slightly menacing Cheshire-cat grin, is clearly singular – nothing 
like it has existed or been drawn before; yet it also supplies a collective need, in 
this case both transporting Totoro to his unknown destination and heralding the 
restoration of the father to his children, a return to the safe routine of family life, a 
timetable that has been under threat since the beginning of the film because of the 
mother’s absence. The individual and the collective, human, animal and spirit, all 
are fused in this hybrid creature, whose impeccably timed appearances draw these 
categories together in the face of fear.
It is not surprising, then, that the cat-bus should show up again when the little 
family and its routine come under threat for a second time. On this occasion it is 
the girls’ sick mother who fails to come home on a scheduled visit. She catches 
cold and is told to stay in hospital, an incident that conjures up the spectre of a 
permanent dissolution of the family unit by the mother’s death. Fear for her mother 
makes Satsuki lose her temper with Mei, who then sets out on an unscheduled 
cross-country journey of her own to take her mother what she thinks of as a 
healing corncob. Mei’s disappearance sparks off a frantic search by the whole of 
the local community, and drives Satsuki to ask for Totoro’s help at his tree. The 
troll’s response is to summon the cat-bus, which first takes Satsuki to Mei, then 
transports both girls to the hospital, where they leave the corncob on their mother’s 
windowsill. More even than in the bus-stop incident, this journey connects all the 
time zones of the story – adult and child, human and spirit, urban and rural – 
much as a cat connects the human and natural worlds in its comings and goings, 
or a bus connects place to place within a city, and city to country within a nation. 
The cat-bus itself is part public transport vehicle, part spirit, part maternal womb, 
and its successful marriage of these elements anticipates the eventual reunion of 
parents with children, and of Satsuki’s family with the rural community, both of 
which are celebrated in the evocative stills that accompany the film’s end credits, 
where the human characters we have come to know are watched over by Totoro 
and his benevolent fellow spirits.

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      53
Part of the power of My Neighbour Totoro springs from its recognition that 
the ability to occupy any particular time zone – above all that of childhood, with 
its ready recognition of the interaction between seen and unseen, humans and 
spirits – will necessarily be a temporary one, and that its transitory quality need 
not be perceived as frightening or repugnant. At the end of the movie Satsuki’s 
parents still cannot see the spirits, even though they have received material 
confirmation of their presence in the form of the corncob, which appears where 
it could not possibly be, inscribed with a message from Mei. It is clear, too, 
that Satsuki will soon move on to occupy her parents’ time zone. Her awkward 
but friendly relationship with the boy next door anticipates her approaching 
puberty, just as the boy’s grandmother, who seems to remember her childhood 
more vividly than most grown-ups, foreshadows the girls’ old age. Even the stills 
of the final credits, which recall snapshots from a family album, remind an adult 
audience, at least, that they have been watching a historical reconstruction, a 
cartoon representation of the filmmaker’s past, no longer accessible except 
through photographs, films and drawings. Owing to the pressures of twentieth-
century life – above all its mobility, as embodied in the luggage-laden car that 
opened the film – moments of synchrony are fleeting, though their impact 
on those who experience them may be lifelong, as the very existence of My 
Neighbour Totoro testifies.
A few years after Totoro, Miyazaki explored the concept of synchrony from 
another angle in his script for Yoshifumi Kondo’s movie Whisper of the Heart 
(1995), based on the manga by Aoi Hiiragi. Here the protagonist Shizuku at 14 
or so is a few years older than Satsuki, and attending Junior High. Where Satsuki 
needed to achieve synchrony with her neighbours – her sister, the boy next door, 
the spirit Totoro – Shizuku’s problem is that of finding a neighbourhood at all in a 
world where urban sprawl has broken up long-standing communities.
The same theme was developed by Miyazaki’s colleague Isao Takahata in 
his immensely successful film of the previous year, Pom Poko (1994), which is 
set in the suburb of Tokyo where Shizuku lives, Tama New Town. In Pom Poko, 
raccoon dogs or tanuki fight against the incursions of suburban development on 
their territory; but their resistance is futile, and the tanuki end the film by using 
their traditional powers of metamorphosis to merge themselves with the city’s 
population, walking among men and women in human form. For Takahata, then, 
Tama New Town consists of two time zones superimposed on one another: that 
of the old land and its animal cultures, in defence of which the tanuki fought, and 
that of the new suburbs, where human beings dwell unknowingly side by side with 
the region’s aboriginal population. The coexistence of these two time zones in the 
suburbs is an example not of synchrony but colonization, even at the poignant 
moment towards the end of the film when the tanuki use their powers to give the 
audience a fleeting retrospective glimpse of the rural landscape that underlies the 
urban. By the time we get this glimpse, however, human culture has effectively 
supplanted tanuki culture, consigning it to the past like a ghost or a half-forgotten 

54      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
folktale; reconciliation between the time zones of people and animals may be 
possible, but this film does not offer a clear indication of how it might be achieved.
In Whisper of the Heart, Shizuku’s human and animal neighbours, despite 
cohabiting with her and her family in the same suburban space, turn out to be 
separated from her by time, much as the tanuki are forever separated from their 
human colonists. Shizuku has to look for them in the spaces and times that open 
up in her official timetable; and for much of the time, without her being aware, 
she is abetted in this by her eccentric family. Their tiny apartment, squeezed into a 
hillside block in the new suburb, resembles a book-crammed annexe of the library 
where her father works. Here Shizuku’s parents give her elbow-room to dream 
and write, while her schoolmates, such as her best friend Yuko, are sent off to the 
notorious Japanese cram schools to achieve the grades they need to attend the best 
high schools. Throughout the summer vacation Shizuku either works at home or 
explores her neighbourhood, scurrying up hidden alleyways and clambering over 
locked gates marked ‘no entry’ in pursuit of stories and ideas. Her wanderings 
are accompanied by the ceaseless buzzing of the summer cicadas, playing music 
from a hidden insect world ignored by the city’s residents but full of emotional 
resonance for lovers of Miyazaki’s earlier movie, Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind 
(1984), whose protagonist communicated with the insects shunned by the rest of 
her community.
In Whisper of the Heart, the first clue to the existence of other neighbours 
besides the insects – neighbours of the heart, as the English title suggests7 – occurs 
when Shizuku discovers, from library stamps, that someone in her school has 
been borrowing the same books as her, though at different times. The mysterious 
reader turns out to be a boy called Seiji, who is in another class and therefore 
separated from her geographically as well as chronologically, occupying a different 
section of the school building. She finds him with the help of a cat, an independent 
sharer of human space like the cat-bus in Totoro. In Whisper, too, the cat is linked 
with public transport; indeed, it is in a sense a public cat, ownerless and known 
by different names to different people, so that it plays a role in a range of stories 
throughout the city, connecting disconnected lives, as it were, with its amiable 
presence. Shizuku first meets the cat on a commuter train, following it on a whim 
when it alights at her station. The animal leads her to an old shop full of bric-a-
brac from different periods and places, the ‘World Emporium’, a cheerful jumble 
of clocks and statues and furniture which has been assembled at random over the 
course of its owner’s lifetime, making the shop an embodiment of synchrony. Here 
she runs into two figures who might equally be said to embody synchrony: the 
owner himself, an old man called Nishi who she later learns is Seiji’s grandfather; 
and a small statue of a cat with coat-tails and a walking stick, which Nishi calls the 
Baron. It is in this shop, and in relation to the story of the cat statue, that Shizuku 
learns about the importance of synchrony in the late twentieth century.
The cat statue stands, among other things, for the arbitrary fracturing of 
relationships by history in the century’s turbulent middle years. There was once 

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      55
a female counterpart for the Baron, a statue known as Louisa; and Shizuku learns 
that the woman Nishi loved, also called Louisa, bought the Louisa statue in Vienna 
on the day Nishi bought the Baron. The lovers were then driven apart by the 
outbreak of the Second World War – an event as calamitous for Louisa’s people, 
the Europeans, as for Nishi’s, the Japanese. Nishi and Louisa swore to reunite their 
statues – and each other – after the war; but the opportunity never arose, and the 
couple never met again. From then on the Baron has represented the brief moment 
of serendipity that brought two people of different cultures together for a little 
while at a time of chaos; a moment that may never be repeated.
Another object in the shop that catches Shizuku’s eye is a clock Nishi has 
been working on, with the figure of an armoured prince on the clock face gazing 
soulfully up at a window. The person the knight longs to see at the window is his 
lover, a fairy princess; but the clock is so constructed that the lovers only glimpse 
each other twice a day, when the clock strikes twelve. In fact, when Shizuku sees 
the clock they have not seen each other for many years. The clock’s mechanism was 
broken, and Nishi has just finished repairing it so that the two figures can again 
become a symbol for the complex workings of life and love, showing that lovers, 
like neighbours in a modern suburb, may only coincide at certain moments, when 
the pressures of work and history permit (the prince in the clock is a working man, 
the prince of the miner-dwarves who inhabit its belly). Nishi’s labour on the clock 
confirms something else: that such intersections can themselves be brought about 
by hard work, and that waiting for synchrony to occur without labouring to fulfil 
one’s desires may well be futile.
As the film goes on, Shizuku and Seiji – the girl and boy who read the same 
books at different times – are transformed into the working prince and princess, as 
it were, of Tama New Town, victims of the common twentieth-century condition 
of being out of synch, despite their mutual attraction. Seiji’s ambition is to work 
as a violin-maker, for which he must serve a demanding apprenticeship in far-off 
Italy. Shizuku’s dream is to work as a novelist. The young pair’s aspirations are 
incompatible both with their budding relationship and with the rigorous demands 
of the Japanese school system. Seiji cannot find out if he has the talent to become 
an apprentice if he stays at school; Shizuku cannot try her hand at fiction if she 
works hard enough to get good grades. The solution, it would seem, is for them 
to pursue their chosen pathways simultaneously, apart from school and apart 
from each other, labouring to advance their artistic dreams in different locations. 
When they meet in Nishi’s shop, Seiji is about to leave for a three-month trial 
period of violin-making in Italy, which if successful will be followed by a much 
longer apprenticeship. On hearing his plans, Shizuku decides to write her first 
novel while he is away, regardless of her studies and grades, aiming to complete 
the narrative by the day of Seiji’s return. Seiji’s absence is thereby transformed into 
a clockwork mechanism, a fragile chronometric device that counts out the hours 
until the moment the young people can get together to compare their experiences. 
Separated in time and space, the boy and girl will be united imaginatively through 

56      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
their work and through their awareness of the approaching moment when the 
cogs of the world’s workings will reunite them.
This moment, when it comes, is marked both by further hard work and a 
scrupulous attention to good timing. Shizuku wakes before dawn one morning 
to find Seiji waiting below her bedroom window – the most perfect example 
of synchrony in the film (Seiji calls it a ‘miracle’). He invites her to mount his 
bike behind him, then cycles up a steep hill to a nearby viewpoint from which 
the city of Tokyo can be seen spread out below. At one point during the climb 
Shizuku dismounts and helps push the bike, determined to do an equal part in 
the labour that will get them to the place they are aiming for. The pair arrive just 
as dawn is breaking, transforming the misty urban sprawl into a magical flooded 
world a little like the surreal landscape Shizuku has created in her novel. As the 
young couple journey to this place where perfect timing will bring beauty to 
the landscape, background music plays on strings and woodwind, invoking an 
earlier moment when Shizuku sang a song to Seiji’s accompaniment and they were 
joined unexpectedly by Nishi and two elderly friends, who provided additional 
accompaniment on the antique instruments they happened to have with them. 
At the moment when Seiji shows Shizuku the vision of a transfigured Tokyo, the 
song they played together on that earlier occasion begins again; it is John Denver’s 
‘Country Roads Take Me Home’, itself transfigured by new lyrics written by 
Shizuku. All the different chronologies in the movie converge in time and space, 
harmonizing like the different instrumental parts in a musical performance, and 
the young couple are inspired to exchange a promise of marriage that will ensure 
similar moments of convergence take place many times in the future.
The miraculous transformation of West Tokyo in this scene, as witnessed by 
Shizuku and Seiji – its fusion with the fantastic landscape Shizuku invented for 
her novel, a novel she could only write with the support of Nishi, Seiji and her 
parents – extends the possibility of creativity throughout the community. The film’s 
credit sequence underscores this extension of creative synchrony by recording the 
passage of many people – schoolchildren, old folk, workers, dog walkers, cyclists, 
joggers – along an anonymous stretch of road not far from the viewpoint. Trotting 
along beside the human passers-by is the mysterious cat who brought Seiji and 
Shizuku together. The audience knows that this cat has been endowed with 
different names and different imagined narratives by every individual who comes 
across it in its daily wanderings. It is a perfect symbol, then, of how the creative 
imagination draws together diversity into a dynamic, constantly changing unity. 
And it helps too to suggest how the relationship between the children has finally 
brought about a happy ending for all the interwoven stories they have encountered 
on the road through the movie’s narrative: the stories of the older couple who met 
before the war, the prince and the princess on the clock, the feline statues known 
as Louisa and the Baron. The notion of synchrony between generations, between 
members of a local community, and between the imagined and the real, has never 
been more richly conjured up on screen than in this closing sequence.

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      57
Almost a decade after Whisper of the Heart, Miyazaki returned to the theme 
of synchrony in his second film of the new millennium, Howl’s Moving Castle 
(2004). The film is based on a novel for children by the British author Diana 
Wynne Jones, whose concern with the complex chronology of domestic and other 
communities, where the time zones of the young, the middle-aged and the old 
converge and clash, is evident throughout her work. This concern is present from 
her early novels Seven Days of Luke (1975) and Dogsbody (1975), in which the 
lives of immortal beings (gods and stars) intersect with those of children, to The 
Homeward Bounders (1981), whose young protagonist finds himself ageing at 
a slower rate than his contemporaries, and Fire and Hemlock (1985), about the 
friendship between a young girl and a man, which alters little by little as the girl 
grows to adulthood.8 Wynne Jones’s version of Howl represents synchrony not 
merely as a prerequisite for the successful cohabitation of different generations 
within the same building or society, but as a psychological condition achieved with 
difficulty by individual men and women, aspects of whose personalities develop or 
mature at different rates, thus effectively establishing different time zones within 
a single mind and body. It is this perception, among other things, that seems to 
have drawn Miyazaki to the novel, as permitting a new departure in his lifelong 
exploration of temporal interfaces in domestic and social space.
The protagonist of Wynne Jones’s novel is a teenage girl, Sophie Hatter, 
who lets herself be seduced by the rules of fairy tale into believing that her 
destiny is predetermined by her position as the eldest daughter in a family. This 
conviction comes easily to her because she lives in the land of Ingary, ‘where 
such things as seven-league boots and cloaks of invisibility really exist’ – a land 
of fairy tale in action, where witches are as common as bakers.9 Since she is the 
eldest child, so the tales affirm, nothing interesting can ever happen to her: it is 
always the youngest child who sets off on adventures and wins all the prizes. In 
addition, her sole surviving parent is a stepmother, who Sophie assumes must 
therefore be tyrannous, if not wicked. As a result, Sophie’s lifelong entrapment 
in the family hat-making business (which she does not enjoy) is for her as 
certain as if she had already lived through it, and she behaves and dresses as 
if she were already the elderly spinster she expects to be. Thus when she is 
transformed into a real old woman by a jealous witch, who has mistaken her for 
one of her attractive younger sisters (an early indication that order of birth need 
have no effect on a person’s identity), Sophie embraces her new condition with 
enthusiasm. Before the transformation she was in effect an old woman trapped 
in a young girl’s body, after it she is a young girl trapped in an old woman’s 
body; since her life and story are now effectively over, she leaves the hat-making 
business and wanders out into the world to seek her fortune. But the world 
– and the old women who play their part in it – prove to be very much less 
predictable in their movements than her enslavement to fairy-tale convention 
has led her to expect; and the delightful metaphor for this unpredictability is 
the Moving Castle of the title.

58      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Coming across the Castle by accident, Sophie discovers in it a peculiar all-male 
household quite unlike the ‘conventional’ nuclear family (if such a thing exists, 
which Wynne Jones would have us doubt). The family is composed of the teenager 
Michael, an apprentice wizard; Calcifer, a stubborn but friendly fire-demon, 
whose magic keeps the Castle moving; and the wizard Howl himself, a dashing 
charmer whose one aim in life is to dodge the responsibility to which Sophie has 
always been a willing slave – hence his possession of this unusual mobile home. 
Incorporating Sophie, these four housemates span a tremendous age range, from 
the apprentice, who is 15, to the demon, who has lived for millennia. But they are 
none of them restricted in their movements by their apparent or actual ages. In 
financial matters Michael behaves with a responsibility beyond his years, keeping 
some of the household money hidden from Howl to prevent him from wasting 
it. Calcifer is as dependent on the other members of the household as an infant, 
confined to the Castle’s only hearth like a baby to its crib. Howl behaves like a 
spoiled adolescent, obsessed with his appearance and refusing to let Sophie clean 
his room. Sophie, who makes herself Howl’s housekeeper because she cannot 
imagine herself capable of anything more, becomes increasingly energetic as the 
novel goes on, despite her extreme old age: dashing across the landscape in seven-
league boots, plotting to foil Howl’s various affairs, and rearranging the Castle 
so extensively that it eventually becomes her own home – quite literally so, in 
fact, since Howl moves the building into the hat-shop at one point to avoid the 
unwanted attentions of the Witch of the Waste. Each occupant of the Moving 
Castle encompasses more than one time zone in his or her personality, like a 
miniature model of a household, and the spell that governs Sophie is only the most 
obvious example in the book of the link between the individual body or mind and 
the multi-generational domestic space.
Age, in Wynne Jones’s Moving Castle, is in part a matter of attitude. Even the 
physical strength of individual housemates’ bodies varies as much in response to 
hormones, cold germs and lashings of self-pity as to the motions of the heart. 
The movement of time can easily have little effect on a person’s character; it is 
not time that induces emotional or intellectual maturity, but successful interaction 
with other people, a capacity to adapt one’s personal needs to the demands of a 
community (and to resist those demands, of course, when they become oppressive). 
Synchrony, then, for Wynne Jones, is a matter of careful and prolonged negotiation, 
enabling competing narratives and attitudes to achieve compatibility, to coexist. 
Frequent setbacks and digressions prevent the negotiating process from becoming 
either consistent or linear. Her book – like most of her books – is a celebration 
of domestic negotiation as a form of perpetual motion, repeatedly disrupting the 
pace and direction of conventional chronologies.
The identities of the Castle’s four eccentric tenants are as flexible as their 
ages. Michael disguises himself as a red-bearded man, or as a horse, every time 
he leaves the building. Calcifer, in his capacity as (quite literally) the heart and 
hearth of the Castle, changes the building’s appearance as well as its location 

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      59
with his demonic powers. Sophie successively takes on the roles of Howl’s 
assistant, his aunt, his mother, and (eventually) his partner, as the book goes 
on. And Howl has a different name and role in each community he visits. The 
Castle’s magical front door opens on a range of locations depending on the 
opener’s wishes: Kingsbury, Porthaven, Market Chipping, and (oddly) modern 
Wales; and in each place Howl has a distinct identity: as reluctant royal wizard, 
well-intentioned local magician, demonized ladykiller, or idle waster, all of them 
with alternative costumes and reputations as well as names. These conflicting 
roles of Howl’s converge and overlap in the interior of the Castle, so that it 
provides an active illustration of the sheer dynamism of the domestic space to 
which Sophie has willingly confined herself. All political and social action, all 
adventure, all identity originates in the creative melting-pot of the household, 
and the relationships between householders are always changing; responding 
to and influencing the changes that take place in the world beyond. Nobody 
can ever be fixed, the Castle implies, in any given role, whether by age, gender, 
birth or any other factor – unless the community they inhabit, the household 
and the society it is part of, and above all their own state of mind, exert all their 
energy to imprison them in a single unchanging function, like the clockwork 
prince and princess in Whisper of the Heart. No one character dominates the 
household; control of the Moving Castle alternates between Howl and Sophie, 
with Michael and Calcifer taking the reins when the need arises. And the shape 
of the community is always changing, as new members join the strange little 
family through Sophie’s influence. It is a political as well as temporal interface, 
a functional democracy, where the needs, pleasures and pains of old and 
new inhabitants succeed one another as the focus of attention. The notion of 
domestic democracy, or democratic domesticity, is another thing that seems to 
have attracted Miyazaki to the novel when he chose to adapt it for what was 
slated – at the time – to be his final film, his swansong to the animation industry 
and the century in which he was born.
Miyazaki’s film has been described as less an adaptation than a reimagining, 
synchronizing the novelist’s concerns with the director’s through a series of daring 
shifts away from Wynne Jones’s storyline towards a set of themes that have engaged 
Miyazaki for years. The problem of age remains at the centre of the narrative. Once 
again Sophie’s premature old age is balanced by Howl’s over-extended childhood, 
and the central problem is how to synchronize their ages, enabling them to cohabit 
in the Castle of the title. The problem could be said to represent the plight of an 
ageing filmmaker as he seeks to engage the attention of much younger viewers – 
the problem with which this essay began. But in addition, the two time zones 
that converge in each of Miyazaki’s central characters – youth and elderliness, 
adolescence and maturity – become symptomatic of a pervasive dualism that 
extends through every aspect of their environment. Miyazaki’s changes to the novel 
highlight the way the problem of synchronizing the household, of enabling the 
many chronologies and time zones that occupy domestic space to work fruitfully 

60      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
together, provides a miniature working model of the problem of synchrony that 
also confronts the millennial world.
The principal dualism in the film is a sociopolitical one, concerning the two 
alternative futures towards which Ingary may be moving: as a bright, colourful, 
mutually supportive community dedicated to the arts of peace, or a dark, war-
ravaged wasteland, the energies of whose inhabitants are directed at mutual 
destruction. Suspended between these possible future destinies, the Ingary 
of the film is an in-between place, drawing on historical sources that look two 
ways. The setting of the movie, for instance, is an alternative turn-of-the-century 
Europe, where a pastoral landscape of mountains and flower-strewn valleys is at 
the same time overshadowed by smoke-spewing industrial chimneys and half-
monstrous, half-comic flying gunships. The model for this landscape is Alsace, 
the disputed border territory between France and Germany that found itself 
caught at the epicentre of two world wars.10 The machines that move around 
this landscape – from flying kayaks to steam-driven trams and the bomb-filled 
gunship-zeppelins that patrol the skies – derive from the work of the visionary 
French artist Albert Robida (1848–1926), who became famous in the 1880s for 
his exuberant illustrations of technology as he imagined it would evolve in the 
coming century.11 Every visual detail of the film, then, looks in two directions, 
to war and to peace, to the past and the future, so that the competition between 
ages fought out within Howl and Sophie serves as a miniature enactment of the 
competition over alternative destinies being fought out in the world around them. 
And the Moving Castle becomes an embodiment of all these dualisms. Its erratic 
movements recall the jerky progress of a turn-of-the-century nation towards 
cataclysm or prosperity, towards life or death; in fact towards both, since the film’s 
adult audience is conscious that both life and death will dominate the war-torn 
century they have just emerged from.
Our first view of this building comes with the opening credits, and it is a very 
different structure from the tall, chimney-shaped fortress of the novel. Mounted 
on four metal chicken-legs, Miyazaki’s Castle resembles the hen-footed hut of 
Baba Yaga the Russian witch, an ambiguous figure who is either child-eater or 
magical helper, depending on the storyteller’s whim. Its appearance points, then, 
to the centrality of ambiguous witches and other women in the narrative, whose 
apparent ages constantly fluctuate in response to internal or external pressures. The 
surface of the Castle bristles with gun turrets and rural cottages, as if to highlight 
the two opposite conditions towards which it may be moving, the military and the 
cosily domestic (Fig 3.1). The castle’s internal and external appearance changes as 
the film goes on, much like the appearances of its various occupants, and these 
physical changes reflect the dominance of one or other tendency – the military or 
the domestic – at any given moment in Miyazaki’s narrative.
The most significant change Miyazaki makes to the novel, then, is to place war 
at his movie’s heart, and to embody its centrality in the eccentric mobile fortress. 
The other crucial change is to the film’s antagonist, who in the novel is clearly 

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      61
identified as the Witch of the Waste. The movie splits this antagonist in two, much 
as it splits nearly everything else into pairs of opposites. The Witch of the Waste 
starts out as the principal villain, as she is in the book: a towering, fleshy presence 
who conjures Sophie into decrepitude in a spontaneous fit of jealousy. But a third 
of the way through the film the Witch herself is stricken down with the curse of 
old age by a more powerful sorceress, Madame Suliman, and spends the rest of the 
film adjusting to her new position as the oldest member of the community that 
inhabits Miyazaki’s version of the Moving Castle. The Witch’s entrapment in the 
second childhood of senility fulfils the destiny she intended for Sophie – restricted 
to a time of life that renders her socially powerless – and contrasts with Sophie’s 
refusal to be limited to a single time zone, a single understanding of her social and 
domestic role as an elderly woman.
The Witch’s successor as the film’s antagonist is the sorceress Suliman, Howl’s 
former tutor in the magic arts. A more potent user of magic than either the 
Witch or Howl, Suliman deploys her formidable talents in the service of Ingary – 
or so she claims – in the combined roles of spymaster, bomber command and 
military general. She is eager to secure her most promising pupil as her servant 
and perhaps her successor in all these capacities. Her character, then, combines 
aspects of Miss Pentstemmon (Wynne Jones’s benevolent version of Howl’s old 
tutor), and the novel’s Witch of the Waste, who wished to fix Howl in unchanging 
form as her puppet husband. Unlike Miss Pentstemmon and Wynne Jones’s Witch, 
however, Madam Suliman wishes to fix Howl as a permanent child rather than a 
husband, just one among the host of identical pageboys who wait on her at the 
royal palace of Ingary. These boys look like younger versions of the wizard, and 
their unquestioning obedience and uniform prettiness makes them resemble toys; 
FIGURE 3.1  A ‘mobile home’. Howl’s Moving Castle directed by Hayao Miyazaki 
© Buena Vista Home Entertainment 2004. All Rights Reserved.

62      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
clockwork toys, perhaps, or the sets of identical toy soldiers given to schoolboys 
in the nineteenth century as an encouragement to emulate a soldier’s obedience, 
smartness and uniformity.
The threat posed by Suliman, then, is that of fixing the film’s protagonists, 
Howl and Sophie, at a time of life and (more importantly) in a state of mind over 
which she can exert absolute control. She wants to arrest them, so to speak, as 
she arrested the Witch of the Waste, at a point in their physical and emotional 
development when they are utterly helpless except when acting on her orders. 
The playful mutability of the housemates in the Moving Castle poses a threat 
to Suliman’s version of playfulness, which seeks to make other people her rigid 
playthings to be manipulated – or animated - as she wishes. From this point of view 
it is interesting to note that Miyazaki places her in a wheelchair, as if to highlight 
her own relative lack of mobility – and perhaps to suggest a motive for her desire 
to impose ever greater restrictions on her subjects’ movements. In adopting this 
mindset Suliman sets herself at the opposite philosophical pole from Sophie – 
whose name balances hers as a synonym for wisdom (Suliman is a version of 
Solomon, the wisest of biblical monarchs, while Sophie’s name derives from the 
Greek for wisdom). Where Suliman is all about constraint and imprisonment, 
Sophie is concerned with liberation and energetic drive, setting free the scarecrow 
Turnip (for instance) from the various scrapes in which he becomes caught, and 
working to free Howl from the calamitous military time zone in which Suliman is 
concerned to trap him.
It is at the precise moment when Suliman takes over from the Witch of the 
Waste as the éminence grise propelling the world towards a military destiny that 
Sophie finds a new role for herself as Suliman’s principal opponent. She signals this 
transformation by posing as Howl’s mother when she visits the sorceress to present 
the wizard’s excuses for not joining her in the war she has chosen to orchestrate. 
By offering these excuses Sophie aims to protect the wizard’s independence, which 
comes across as adolescent petulance and irresponsibility. Howl’s other would-be 
mother, Suliman herself, wishes only to preserve him in pre-pubescent conformity 
and dependence. For the rest of the film the two women compete for possession 
of the wizard’s heart, which is hidden in the hearth of the Castle and guarded 
by Calcifer (as in the book). Between them they stand for alternative versions of 
his destiny, either as imperialist warmonger or affectionate family member; and 
the richness of the film consists in its implicit acknowledgement that the historic 
moment at which he lives – at the turn of a new age when domesticity will need 
urgent and continuous protection from the threat of violence – means that he 
could well end up as both.
In this competition between powerful women, the imperialist war 
orchestrated by Suliman comes across as a children’s game played by adults 
for the highest of stakes. At the end of the film Suliman draws attention to the 
unsettling childishness behind her plotting when she tells her pageboys: ‘Let’s 
put an end to this idiotic war.’12 The statement implies that she could have ended 

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      63
the conflict at any point in the preceding action, and failed to do so only to 
forestall the ravages of boredom. By this stage, however, the movie’s audience 
has long been aware of the ‘idiotic’ nature of her war game – that is, to its 
irrationality – thanks to the impossibility of determining which ‘side’ is being 
supported by which of its combatants, or even whether opposite sides exist 
at all. Just as the ages of the characters in the film exist in a constant state of 
flux, so too are they always changing sides in a conflict the causes of which are 
unknown and the objectives of which can never be guessed at. The faceless, tar-
coloured ‘blob men’ who begin as henchmen of the Witch of the Waste seem to 
switch allegiance halfway through, hiring themselves out to Suliman after her 
defeat of their former mistress at the royal palace.13 When the defeated Witch 
moves into Howl’s Moving Castle – the fortress of her former enemy – so too 
does the asthmatic dog Heen, which started out as Suliman’s spy but ends up 
as the cheerful playmate of Howl’s apprentice Merkl (a much younger version 
of Wynne Jones’s Michael). Meanwhile, Sophie’s stepmother becomes Suliman’s 
new spy, delivering a ‘spy-worm’ to the Moving Castle under pretence of a family 
reunion with her long-lost stepdaughter. Another member of Howl’s household, 
the scarecrow Turnip, turns out in the end to have been an enchanted prince 
from the neighbouring country with which Ingary is at war – and once restored 
to human shape he promptly agrees to tell his compatriots to stop fighting. Howl 
himself at one stage states that it makes no difference whether he is attacking 
Ingarian or enemy gunships with his magic. The arbitrariness of these sudden 
shifts of allegiance transforms the war into a chaotic playground brawl, locking 
the entire cast – and by extension the country of Ingary – into a particularly 
grim variety of childishness from which they find it increasingly hard to extract 
themselves. Moving into the maturity of synchronized living is more challenging 
in Howl’s Moving Castle than anywhere else in Miyazaki’s oeuvre.
The most disturbing ambiguity of affiliation in Suliman’s war is that of the blob 
men. The servants of Madame Suliman, they might be expected to form part of 
Ingary’s army, and indeed when they attack the Moving Castle at a late stage in 
the action they are wearing Ingarian military uniforms. But at other times they 
wear civilian clothes – top hats or boaters, Venetian masks and elegant suits – 
some of which they share with the vicious winged monsters who emerge from the 
bellies of the flying gunships when they are bombing Ingary. Madame Suliman, 
then, seems to be fighting on both sides of the conflict she presides over. She is 
sinisterly irresponsible, indulging a second childhood in old age – like the Witch of 
the Waste – as she conducts the affairs of the country from her padded wheelchair 
in a flower-filled conservatory, surrounded by children. Her malicious variety of 
playfulness is encapsulated in the circle of dancing star-spirits that appears every 
time she casts a spell on rival magic-workers, entrapping them one by one – first 
the Witch, then Howl – in the shape that best suits her war game. Yet even Suliman 
does not come across as a mere monster; she is too humorous, too complex and too 
attractive to be despised or feared. Her body, like Howl’s and Sophie’s, or like Ingary 

64      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
itself, is a space where diverse elements converge, each in turn becoming dominant 
as she wearies of the game she has been playing and moves on to a new one.
War itself slips between identities as the film goes on, changing successively from 
game to nightmare, to game, in response to the changing moods of its conductors. 
At the beginning it is a carnival, a form of collective entertainment for the citizens 
of Ingary, whose lives are filled with toys: fancy hats from Sophie’s hat-shop, fancy 
cakes from the bakery where her sister works, national flags, charmingly silly 
steam-driven vehicles. The fighting is conducted by dashing soldiers in colourful 
uniforms, post-adolescent show-offs who steer clockwork kayaks around the sky 
like teenagers in sports cars. At the harbour the civilians celebrate, with infantile 
enthusiasm, the deployment of the national fleet. Sophie’s own stepmother adds to 
the air of flippant collusion with warfare by wearing a hat decorated with cannon 
in honour of the navy’s dreadnoughts. At first, then, war is full of light and colour, 
but it soon grows dark and violent, swallowed up in the bomb-torn night whose 
reds and blacks threaten, by the end, to dominate the movie’s palette. Lightness, 
then, and light are capable of giving birth to heaviness and gloom; playfulness can 
become cataclysmically destructive; and in this, war follows the trajectory along 
which Suliman is keen to steer her pupil Howl.14
From the beginning of the film Howl shares Suliman’s moral ambiguity, though 
at first this comes across as an overgrown teenager’s resistance to being pinned 
down. Rumour has it that the wizard devours the hearts of the girls he seduces; 
yet he makes his first appearance in a very different role, rescuing Sophie from the 
clutches of a pair of soldiers by leaping lightly with her into the sky, then parading 
through the air above her home town with the insouciant flamboyance of a born 
show-off. Even at this point, however, he is a source of danger as well as pleasure, 
since he is pursued by blob men who pose more of a threat to Sophie than the 
soldiers did. Not long afterwards, Sophie undergoes her transformation at the 
hands of the Witch and joins Howl’s household. But here his moral ambiguity 
only becomes more obvious, along with his tendency to veer between mature 
competence and teenage irresponsibility. When Sophie starts to clean up after 
him in her capacity as his self-appointed mother, she accidentally switches the 
blond and black hair dyes in his bathroom; and the transformation of Howl’s 
hair from blond to black signals his potential to transform himself from hero to 
villain, like a cowboy changing hats. This prospective switch of moral allegiance 
is foreshadowed by his reaction to the hair-dye incident. Howl goes into a titanic 
adolescent sulk, during which he generates both huge quantities of green slime, 
as in the novel, and a host of shadow-monsters closely resembling the blob men. 
This extravagant reaction, with its echoes of the sinister sorcery of the Witch and 
Suliman, is rendered more disturbing by the fact that immediately before this scene 
we witnessed Howl in action for the first time against the invading air force; an 
experience he seems to take far more lightly than Sophie’s assault on his cosmetics.
Howl’s adolescent lightness, then – his excessive concern for his appearance 
and the pleasures of flirtation – represents the flip side of his increasingly frequent 

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      65
forays into the darkness of Suliman’s war. If young boys are the perfect recruits for 
a nation’s armies, Howl’s insistence on retaining his adolescent traits – his filthy, 
toy-strewn bedroom; the ‘secret garden’ of his childhood, which he claims to be 
protecting when he fights;15 his love of fancy clothes – render him vulnerable to 
Suliman’s efforts to draw him into her war games. The connection between his 
boyish lightness and his attraction to war is made most vividly when he shows 
Sophie the secret garden. At this point he looks much younger than he does 
elsewhere in the film, gesturing towards flowers and mountains with wide-eyed 
enthusiasm; but the appearance of a flying gunship prompts him to begin the 
change into a winged monster, a demon of combat which smiles as it launches a 
magical attack on the gunship with one claw-like hand. The monster and the boy 
cohabit in Howl, both of them symptoms of his heartlessness – that is, his staunch 
defence of his emotional secrets, his carapace of bright insouciance, from external 
assault. If the literally light-hearted Calcifer guards Howl’s heart in the hearth of 
the Castle, safely hidden from intruders, it is for Sophie to lend him the weight he 
needs to launch into a mature relationship.
Sophie, on the other hand, needs to achieve synchrony with Howl if she is to 
escape the weight of self-inflicted anxiety that binds her to an aged body. Their 
first meeting shows her what is missing from her life as a teenaged girl: the 
lightness Howl possesses in abundance. Wearing her trademark sombre clothes 
and unflattering hat, she timidly skirts the carnival crowds as she crosses the city, 
dodging into shadowy back streets to avoid the limelight. It is in one of these alleys 
that Howl rescues her from the soldiers, before saving her a second time, this time 
from the blob men, by launching them both into the air without the aid of wings. 
The second rescue visually acts out the light-heartedness of first love in an echo 
of a celebrated scene from Whisper of the Heart.16 It is not surprising, then, that 
after this Sophie continues to see Howl as the carefree young man of this first 
meeting, and that she works, as he grows steadily darker and more monstrous 
under Suliman’s influence, to align the chaotic interior of his Castle with the 
brightness of his first appearance. In the process she discovers lightness and colour 
in herself, which are reflected in the light and colour she brings to Howl’s shabby 
domicile – as well as in her increasingly frequent physical shifts between old age 
and youth. For a woman burdened with an overdeveloped sense of responsibility 
and wedded to the shadows, Sophie succeeds in bringing an abundance of 
brightness to the Castle’s gloomy interior. She smashes a hole in the wall with a 
flying kayak while escaping from Suliman’s troops, and inspires the wizard to shift 
the Castle to the many-windowed, sunlit hat-shop to keep his household safe. Her 
final transformation of the Castle, when she rebuilds it from scratch by removing 
Calcifer, with Howl’s heart, from the building’s hearth and carrying both outside, 
culminates in the reduction of the Castle to an open platform, its defences stripped 
away, its inhabitants exposed to the elements. And although this transformation 
begins at night, so that its implications are hidden by the darkness that surrounds 
the platform, when the dawn comes, it is clear that Sophie’s housekeeping has 

66      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
finally exposed Howl and his remarkable family to the open scrutiny from which 
he has so sedulously been keeping them hidden.
The synchrony between Howl and Sophie reaches its culmination in the 
reconstructed Moving Castle of the final frames. Winging its way across an open 
sky, on flapping wings not so very dissimilar to the wings of the airborne gunships, 
the flying fortress is now dominated by cottages rather than gun turrets, gardens 
rather than protective armour. It represents, then, Howl’s opening up of his 
childhood secret garden to a wider community, his entry into full socialization – 
an entry in which the rejuvenated Sophie fully participates. But the gun turrets 
are still there, and though the flying gunships are heading home they have not 
been dismantled or destroyed. The difficulty of achieving synchrony in personal 
relationships – between generations of a family or different people in the same 
generation – is clearly made equivalent here to the difficulty of achieving synchrony 
between rival nations: a harmonizing of different interests to the mutual advantage 
of both parties. Flight has been rendered joyful rather than threatening in the final 
frames of Howl’s Moving Castle (Fig 3.2). Howl and Sophie face forward into the 
future from the bows of the Castle with the self-assurance of young lovers, whose 
relationship has been literally tested in the fire. But the future towards which they 
are facing – whether this is the twentieth century, when the film is set, or the 
beginning of the new millennium, when the film was made – will surely share 
the synchronies of their relationship. It will contain darkness as well as light, 
war as well as peace, the premature ageing brought on by anxiety as well as the 
exuberance of childhood prolonged into maturity. The Moving Castle remains a 
poignantly rickety structure in which to confront such a future.
This chapter on synchrony in the work of Hayao Miyazaki has traced the very 
different ways in which his films address the problem of harmonizing competing 
FIGURE 3.2  In flight. Howl’s Moving Castle directed by Hayao Miyazaki © Buena Vista 
Home Entertainment 2004. All Rights Reserved.

SYNCHRONY IN THE WORK OF HAYAO MIYAZAKI      67
time zones in domestic, suburban and national communities. Taking as its focus 
three movies from three successive decades, it has discovered the presence in 
each of a range of overlapping chronologies governed by the different ages of 
family members or housemates, their staggered birth dates furnishing them 
with alternative histories and perspectives on the times and spaces they share. 
Each film charts the relationship of these household chronologies or interacting 
time zones to the changing dynamics of the outside world: the countryside, the 
suburban neighbourhood and the nation. In the process it points up the multiple 
chronologies, the competing ways of measuring and understanding time, that 
converge in these larger communities. In each film, various populations, from 
the domestic to the urban to the national and, by implication, the global, find 
themselves under threat of dissolution, of losing their capacity for collaborative 
coexistence in the face of the increasing mobility of populations large and small 
under late capitalism. And in each film the community finally succeeds in 
holding together against all odds, thanks to the hard work and capacious hearts 
of its eccentric inhabitants. In representing these different processes of achieving 
synchrony – of reconciling the multiple time zones their characters occupy, and of 
building a community from their complementary differences – Miyazaki’s movies 
provide their intergenerational audiences with a blueprint for cohabitation. It is 
for those audiences to decide how far they are able or willing to follow it.
Notes
1	 Hayao Miyazaki, Starting Point 1979–1996, trans. Beth Cary and Frederik L. Schodt 
(San Francisco, CA: VIZ Media, 1996), p. 49.
2	 Ibid., pp. 252–3.
3	 For Totoro as a representation of Miyazaki’s childhood, see Colin Odell and Michelle 
le Blanc, Studio Ghibli: The Films of Hayao Miyazaki and Isao Takahata (Harpenden: 
Kamera Books, 2009), p. 79; and more expansively, Phillip E. Wegner, ‘“An unfinished 
project that was also a missed opportunity”: Utopia and alternate history in Hayao 
Miyazaki’s My Neighbor Totoro’, ImageText, vol. 5, no. 2 (2010–11), http//www.english.
ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v5_2/wegner/ (accessed July 2021).
4	 For an explanation of the complex term kami, see Michael Ashkenazi, Handbook of 
Japanese Mythology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), pp. 29–36. Miyazaki’s 
term for Totoro and the soot-spirits is translated by Beth Cary and Frederik L. Schodt 
as ‘goblins’; see Miyazaki, Starting Point, pp. 255–6.
5	 Miyazaki calls it a ‘mountain-lion bus’, which makes it less domestic than ‘cat-bus’, 
but the vehicle’s resemblance to a tabby is unmistakable; see Miyazaki, Starting Point, 
p. 257.
6	 The term is widely used in the psychology of adolescence, referring to ‘The carefully 
coordinated interaction between the parent and the child or adolescent in which, 
often unknowingly, they are attuned to each other’s behavior’; John W. Santrock, 
‘Key terms: synchrony’, Adolescence, 12th edn (New York: McGraw Hill, 2009). 
Some psychologists prefer the term ‘alignment’ to synchrony, since it implies the 
establishment of links between interlocutors in several domains simultaneously: 
timing in dialogue (e.g. speech rate), word choice, planning, memory, even posture. 

68      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
See, for example, Simon Garrod and Martin J. Pickering, ‘Joint action, interactive 
alignment, and dialog’, Topics in Cognitive Science, vol. 1 (2009), pp. 292–304. I am 
grateful to Dr Kerry W. Kilborn, School of Psychology, University of Glasgow, for a 
discussion on this topic.
7	 The Japanese title is Mimi wo Sumaseba, If You Listen Closely. This is also the title of 
Aoi Hiiragi’s manga, on which the film is based. The emphasis on listening should 
encourage us to pay attention to the sound of the cicadas, as well as the movie’s 
beautiful score by Yuji Nomi.
8	 For a full account of Diana Wynne Jones’s recurrent themes, see Farah Mendlesohn, 
Diana Wynne Jones: The Fantastic Tradition and Children’s Literature (New York: 
Routledge, 2006).
9	 Diana Wynne Jones, Howl’s Moving Castle (London: HarperCollins, 2005), p. 9.
10	 See Jim Hubbert, The Art of Howl’s Moving Castle (San Francisco, CA: Viz, 2005), 
p. 12.
11	 For Robida, see ibid., p. 49.
12	 The quotation is taken from the script of the film as translated by Hubbert, The Art of 
Howl’s Moving Castle, p. 252.
13	 The term ‘blob men’ is used in ibid., p. 212, and elsewhere.
14	 For an extended discussion of the concept of lightness (as against weight) in 
twentieth-century history, see Italo Calvino, ‘Lecture 1, Lightness’, in Six Memos for 
the Next Millennium, trans. Patrick Creagh (London: Penguin, 2009), pp. 3–29.
15	 The term ‘secret garden’, with its invocation of Frances Hodgson Burnett’s novel, is 
used in Hubbert’s translation of Miyazaki’s script, The Art of Howl’s Moving Castle, 
p. 240.
16	 The scene is a dream sequence, in which Shizuku is led through the sky by the Baron 
towards a city of floating towers.

PART TWO
SCREEN 
PERFORMANCE

70 

I
n October 1942, a 12-year-old actress by the name of Janis Wilson (1930–2003) 
made her screen debut in Now, Voyager (Irving Rapper), appearing alongside an 
impressive cast headed by Bette Davis. Her performance as Tina earned her a 
place in film history. Back in 1942, it won her a contract with Warner Bros. and a 
part in Watch on the Rhine (Herman Shumlin, 1943), supporting Bette Davis and 
Paul Lukas. The teenage actress subsequently made a further five films, appearing 
in a comedy at Columbia, two Barbara Stanwyck films and two B-movies for 
independent production companies, a comedy and a horror movie.1 By the end of 
1948, at the age of 18, her six-year film career was over.
When compared to MGM child star Margaret O’Brien (b. 1937), Wilson’s 
achievement seems rather paltry. Margaret O’Brien also came to public attention 
at the end of 1942, at the age of five, after appearing in Journey for Margaret (W.S. 
Van Dyke). Her Hollywood profile rose significantly the following year with her 
supporting roles in Greer Garson’s Madame Curie (Mervyn LeRoy, 1943) and Joan 
Fontaine’s Jane Eyre (Robert Stevenson, 1943). However, her career-defining role 
came in 1944 when she played Tootie in Vincente Minnelli’s Meet Me in St Louis, 
receiving second billing to Judy Garland.2 By the end of the 1940s, after Wilson had 
retired, O’Brien’s career was still going strong. In 1949, she co-starred alongside 
June Allyson, Elizabeth Taylor and Janet Leigh in Little Women (Mervyn LeRoy) 
and took the leading role of Mary Lennox in The Secret Garden (Fred M. Wilcox), 
supported by Herbert Marshall and Dean Stockwell. After 1950, O’Brien remained 
successful as an actress on television and in TV movies, her career spanning a 
remarkable eight decades.
While Wilson’s short Hollywood career seems rather insignificant in comparison 
to O’Brien’s, it is still noteworthy and, as I hope to demonstrate here, her screen 
performances reward detailed scrutiny. In particular, analysis of her work brings 
to light some telling insights into the role of juvenile supporting actors in studio-
era Hollywood, the challenges that confronted them and the techniques used to 
­4 THE ACHIEVEMENT OF 
JANIS WILSON, HOLLYWOOD 
JUVENILE SUPPORTING 
ACTOR
Martin Shingler

72      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
provide effective support to adult stars. By taking a leaf out of Andrew Klevan’s book 
Film Performance (2005), I intend to subject a small number of Wilson’s screen 
performances to detailed analysis, concentrating closely on isolated sequences and 
attending to the moment-by-moment development of her performance as Tina 
in Now, Voyager and young Martha in The Strange Love of Martha Ivers (Lewis 
Milestone, 1946). Here I shall examine the relationship of her acting to other 
elements of film style (i.e. mise en scène and cinematography) in a bid to appreciate 
the way in which Wilson and her fellow actors created performances rich in 
meaning.3 In order to better understand this process, I shall also employ a method 
advocated by Cynthia Baron and Sharon Marie Carnicke in Reframing Screen 
Performance (2008), which combines script analysis with a close reading of the 
film itself, subdividing the scene or sequence into separate units of action or ‘beats’, 
each with their own specific narrative objective, mood or rhythm.4 These enable 
the structural dynamics of a performance to be more readily comprehended, while 
also providing insight into the acting choices available to and made by the actors. 
By subjecting Wilson’s screen performances to such close and systematic analysis, 
I hope to demonstrate the strength, subtlety and coherence of her work as a child 
actor in Hollywood during the 1940s.
Now, Voyager was not only Janis Wilson’s debut but also her defining role. For 
her first film, she performed alongside an impressive cast headed by Warners’ most 
successful star at the time, Bette Davis. The supporting cast was just as impressive, 
featuring Hollywood’s latest European romantic male lead, Paul Henreid, the 
British actors Claude Rains, Gladys Cooper and John Loder, the fine comic talents 
of Ilka Chase, Mary Wickes and Franklin Pangborn, and experienced juvenile, 
Bonita Granville. In 1942, at 19 years of age, Granville was making the transition 
from playing juvenile to adult roles, having made her screen debut ten years 
earlier in 1932, subsequently acting with Bette Davis in It’s Love I’m After (Archie 
Mayo, 1936) and starring in the title role of Warners’ Nancy Drew mysteries in 
1938 and 1939. Taking on the juvenile role of Tina in Now, Voyager was therefore 
a daunting prospect for Wilson as a 12-year-old novice making her screen debut 
alongside such an illustrious company of actors.
Wilson was cast in the role of Tina Durrance, the daughter of Jerry (Paul 
Henreid), a married man who becomes the secret lover of the film’s heroine, 
Charlotte Vale (Bette Davis). During the film’s final 30 minutes, Charlotte meets 
and forms a close bond with Tina and, in order to preserve this relationship, she 
finally sacrifices her affair with Jerry. During this final half-hour of the movie, Tina 
is transformed from a withdrawn and miserable adolescent into a more confident 
and happy teenager. For much of the time, she displays a melodramatic personality 
and a tendency towards exaggerated reactions, such as when she frantically kisses 
Charlotte’s fingers after she has burned them on a hot potato roasting on a camp 
fire. On another occasion, Tina declares that she would rather sicken and die 
than have anything bad happen to Charlotte. The challenge of playing such a 
neurotic and hysterical character was something that the Warner studio publicists 

JANIS WILSON, HOLLYWOOD JUVENILE ACTOR      73
highlighted in the press book for Now, Voyager, which contains an article on the 
young actress, described here as ‘Janice Wilson’, entitled ‘12 Yr. Old Tops in Screen 
Debut of Different Role’:
Betting on a 12-year old girl making her screen debut in a Bette Davis picture 
is like wagering on a filly in the Kentucky Derby. Even experienced players of 
the movie-acting world often get the nervous jitters at the prospect of stacking 
up against a lady so formidable. A little Santa Barbara, Calif., girl named Janice 
Wilson didn’t know about this legend. She simply moved in on ‘Now, Voyager’ 
at Warner Bros. and played scene after scene with Miss Davis as sincerely as 
if she were make-believing in her own back yard. The result is that Janice has 
made a solid hit, has won a contract, and has been cast with Bette again in 
‘Watch on the Rhine’.
Janice’s part in ‘Now, Voyager’ called for an inhibited, affection-starved little 
girl, not a mischievous one, but a bewildered, neurotic juvenile headed for 
frustration and old-maid-dom.
In getting away with that kind of part, Janice has apparently brought 
something new to the screen.5
This clearly established Wilson’s difference from other Hollywood female child 
stars. Unlike Shirley Temple, Elizabeth Taylor and Judy Garland, she did not have 
Garland’s voice and was neither pretty nor cute. While other child actors often 
achieved Hollywood stardom through a combination of tears and twee, Wilson 
brought a sullen and rather charmless brand of adolescent angst to the screen, 
hinting at something altogether more disturbed and disturbing: something that 
Hollywood publicists would find almost impossible to brand and package for 
popular consumption in the same way as they did for Margaret O’Brien, the new 
kid on the block in 1942.
Warner publicists did little to promote Wilson’s appearance in Now, Voyager 
and there is no evidence to suggest that the studio was interested in developing 
her into a child star. Consequently, her name was excluded from the opening titles 
of the film, while her name and image were absent from film posters, which either 
featured Bette Davis alone or Davis with Henreid. Nor was Wilson included in the 
theatrical trailer, which featured only Paul Henreid, Claude Rains, Gladys Cooper 
and Ilka Chase, in addition to Bette Davis. It is unusual that the promotional 
materials made no mention of Wilson, particularly given her character’s crucial role 
in the plot. Standard Hollywood practice was to announce important new talent 
with the word ‘Introducing … ’ before their name, in the publicity accompanying 
the release of their first film. The absence of the line ‘Introducing Janis Wilson’ 
from the promotional materials for Now, Voyager suggests that Warners had 
no intention of building her up into a star in 1942, which is confirmed by their 
subsequent failure to cast her in more substantial roles. This, however, was certainly 
not for want of talent. Analysis of Wilson’s screen debut reveals an intelligent and 

74      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
articulate performer, a child capable of holding her own against Hollywood’s finest 
and most acclaimed star actors.
Janis Wilson makes her screen entrance in Now, Voyager after 86 minutes 
in a 3½-minute scene with Davis and Katherine Alexander. Using Baron and 
Carnicke’s method of performance analysis, this scene can be subdivided into six 
units of action.6 These might be described as the Arrival, the Approach, the Puzzle, 
the Interruption, the Decision and Collusion. The scene charts the first meeting of 
Charlotte Vale and Tina shortly after her return to Cascade, a sanatorium in New 
England. Arriving in the hallway, Charlotte spots Tina sitting in an adjacent room. 
She approaches and sits down beside her, engaging her in conversation, inquiring 
about her name and age, before being interrupted by the head nurse, Miss Trask 
(Katherine Alexander), who has come to inform the girl that she is to spend the 
evening playing table tennis with some young people. Mortified by having to join 
the others, Tina begs to be excluded and Charlotte comes to her aid by proposing 
that she join her on an errand in to town. Surprised and relieved, Tina accepts 
this invitation, dashing out of the room to fetch her coat, while the nurse informs 
Charlotte that she has been given the room next to Tina’s and may well hear her 
crying during the night. Miss Trask also asks Charlotte to encourage the girl to eat 
something while they are out as, in addition to her bouts of nocturnal crying, she 
has a habit of refusing to eat. During the course of this scene, a number of basic 
facts about Tina are established, including several things that Charlotte and Tina 
have in common: most notably, their tendency towards depression and their fear 
of social interaction.
Analysis of Wilson’s first scene reveals her competency as an actor, involving 
a range of actions and emotions, beginning with a very contained and subdued 
performance that erupts at a critical moment into a frenzy of movement, sound 
and emotional excess (i.e. hysteria). There is, however, only one brief moment 
when Wilson’s performance dominates the screen, distracting attention away from 
the film’s star player, Bette Davis. Wilson first appears in the second unit of this 
scene (the Approach), after Charlotte has entered the hallway of Cascade and been 
met by Miss Trask. While being escorted up to her room, Charlotte spies a forlorn 
child, sitting by herself, lost in her thoughts and visibly depressed.7 She halts at 
the foot of the staircase, recognizing the girl as her lover’s child, arrested by the 
sight of her sitting glumly at a table, pondering over a jigsaw puzzle. The girl, with 
spectacles and lank dark hair, rests her head in both hands, supported by her elbows 
on the table.8 Though bent low, her face is still visible. Romantic music (previously 
heard during Charlotte and Jerry’s love scenes) swells on the soundtrack, marking 
the significance of this moment and establishing the connection with Jerry. A 
puzzled and frowning Charlotte edges towards the girl, the camera moving with 
her as she advances hesitantly, coming to rest in the doorway.9 Propelling herself 
forward, Charlotte announces her presence by asking in a cheery voice ‘How’s it 
coming?’, while the camera pans to the left to reveal Wilson. By contrast, in the 
screenplay Charlotte purposefully disturbs a chair to alert the girl to her presence 

JANIS WILSON, HOLLYWOOD JUVENILE ACTOR      75
and Tina responds by looking up at her quickly with a ‘suspicious look’.10 In the 
film, however, Charlotte approaches unheeded and, even when addressed, Wilson 
does not look up. Her face remains in the grip of her hands, stretching her mouth 
into a false grin that emphasizes the sadness of her large eyes behind her glasses. 
Without raising her eyes to look at her interlocutor, she utters her first word, 
saying in a flat voice, ‘alright’.
The third unit of action (the Puzzle) is established as Charlotte settles herself 
down beside the girl at the table and proceeds to help her with the jigsaw, posing 
a series of questions, initially about the puzzle and then about Tina herself, that 
are either ignored or challenged. While Davis is animated, Tina’s movements 
are heavily restricted and slow. After asking Tina what the puzzle is about and 
having received the sorrowful reply, ‘I don’t know’ from the girl, Davis bursts into 
motion, transferring a handbag from one hand to the other, seizing a piece of the 
jigsaw and fitting it into place. This brings Davis’s body much closer to Wilson’s. 
Still the child makes no response, even as she settles in beside her. Charlotte 
enquires about the title of the picture, removing her coat, while moving her chair 
in closer, prompting a cut to a medium-close shot of Wilson in the foreground to 
the left of the frame and Davis in the centre and middle distance, what might be 
called the ‘star spot’. From here, Davis executes a set of small incidental actions, 
while Tina remains largely impassive until provoked to speak to and look at her 
neighbour. Taking up several pieces of the puzzle, Charlotte acknowledges that 
‘some people prefer to do a puzzle alone’. This final word triggers Tina’s first 
major response. In the screenplay, it states that the ‘child raises her eyes then, 
but not her chin, and looks at Charlotte’.11 In the film, it is at this very moment 
that Wilson begins to move, slowly and deliberately turning her head to look 
at the woman beside her, dropping and raising her eyes as she gives Charlotte 
the ‘once over’ before declaring ‘I know who you are’ in an accusatory voice. 
According to the screenplay, her tone is ‘antagonistic’ but this suggests a level of 
animosity towards Charlotte that is not fully achieved by Wilson’s performance.12 
On the contrary, the young actress presents her character here as guarded and 
suspicious (because she suspects that Charlotte is her new nurse) but her efforts 
to remain stern and stand-offish prove unsustainable. For instance, although her 
voice sounds hostile (such as when she declares, ‘You can’t fool me’) her eyes 
are noticeably softer, being frequently cast down, appearing more submissive 
than offensive. Consequently, while Wilson adheres precisely to the script, 
her interpretation is more nuanced and ambiguous, hinting at the character’s 
innately affectionate nature and her need for companionship and love that are 
being repressed at this stage.13
As Tina is beginning to open up to Charlotte, their intimate conversation 
is interrupted by Miss Trask, marking the start of a new unit of action – the 
Interruption. Katherine Alexander bursts into the scene, her first words heard over 
a medium-close-shot of Tina and Charlotte, motivating a cut to her striding across 
the room. Informed that a game of ping-pong has been arranged for her with a 

76      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
group of young people, Tina declares sorrowfully, ‘They don’t want me.’ Charlotte 
now detaches herself, rising from her seat and walking towards the camera, while 
Tina (in the background of the shot) expresses mortification at having to join the 
other children.14 Alarmed at the prospect of being the worst player, she declares 
to the nurse, ‘I’ll die, I’ll just die’, light glinting off the braces on her teeth as she 
speaks (Fig 4.1). Told not to dramatize, Wilson gasps, jumping up from the table 
and swiftly executing her first major dramatic movement, seizing hold of the nurse 
and pleading, ‘Please, please, please … don’t make me, don’t make me!’ Her voice is 
loud and desperate, becoming increasingly choked with emotion.15 ‘Oh don’t make 
me!’ she pleads more loudly, dramatically, even melodramatically, before burying 
herself into the nurse’s body. While Tina sobs, Charlotte intervenes, persuading 
Miss Trask to let Tina accompany her to town. Having cried quietly into the body 
of Katherine Alexander throughout this exchange (her sobbing being conveniently 
muffled so as not to distract from the dialogue), Wilson raises her head slowly, her 
sobs subsiding. This initiates the fifth unit of action - the Decision - which includes 
Wilson’s big moment.
At first, only the back of her head is seen, her long dark hair concealing her 
face, until she turns towards the camera to fix Charlotte with an intense gaze of 
wonder. Without a word, she drops her eyes and turns slowly and methodically 
from one woman to the other and back again before pausing, nodding gently 
FIGURE 4.1  Janis Wilson distraught as ‘Tina’ in Now, Voyager directed by Irving Rapper 
© Warner Bros. 1942. All Rights Reserved.

JANIS WILSON, HOLLYWOOD JUVENILE ACTOR      77
and whispering ‘yes’ by way of accepting Charlotte’s invitation to accompany her. 
This is a critical point in the drama, Tina deciding between remaining at Cascade 
or going with Charlotte. To mark the significance of this, Wilson takes her time 
(about twelve seconds), performing in the star spot by occupying the centre and 
middle ground, flanked by Alexander facing forward in the distance on the left 
and Davis in the foreground with her back to the camera on the right. The young 
unknown actress is the focus of attention: of the two women in the scene, of the 
camera, the crew in the studio and the audience in the movie theatre. She takes her 
time to turn from Alexander to Davis and from Davis to Alexander and, finally, 
back to Davis, pauses, gazing up at Charlotte, motivating a cut to a close-shot of 
Charlotte’s expectant face, followed by the reverse shot. Only then does she speak, 
slowly, softly, with a slight bow of her head and a drop of her eyes. ‘Yes.’ With all 
eyes still upon her, Wilson spins rapidly round and takes hold of Alexander again 
to deliver her longest line, ‘Oh please let me go with this lady, I promise to drink 
all my cocoa tonight if you will.’16 Wilson imparts considerable energy into her 
final line of the scene, speaking quickly in a voice full of emotion, of desperation. 
Although Miss Trask tells her not to ‘carry on’, she is persuaded, telling the girl to 
go and get her coat. Wilson makes her exit by spinning round and trotting quickly 
out of the room.17
What stands out about Wilson’s first scene in Now, Voyager is her high level of 
concentration and her deliberateness, using minimal gestures that are purposeful 
and measured. Moreover, there is a striking contrast between the start and end 
of the scene, from her initial fixed position with all energy removed from her 
words and gestures to her swift and dramatic speech and movements provoked 
by Miss Trask. During this scene, the young actress demonstrates her control, 
on the one hand, and her ability to explode in an excess of movement, sound 
and emotion, on the other. The first part of this scene is all about containment, 
Wilson holding her face between her hands for a long period of time, stretching 
her mouth into a fixed, artificial grin that makes her seem both unnatural and 
ugly. When she says her second line, ‘I don’t know’, her voice lacks energy and 
the pitch descends, making her sound dejected. The words drop lifelessly from 
her lips. It is noticeable that in a rare departure from the screenplay, Wilson does 
not move at all when Davis invades her space, coming to sit very close to her. This 
absolute stillness seems remarkable for a young person, yet it enables Davis to 
dominate the scene, maintaining the attention of the viewer. It is her movements 
that capture the audience’s attention, such as when she wriggles out of her coat 
or moves her hands and arms about, transferring her bag or picking up pieces of 
the jigsaw puzzle. It is several minutes before Wilson moves and when she does 
she is slow and deliberate, turning to look at Davis, directing the audience’s gaze 
back towards the star. Rarely does she retain Charlotte’s and the audience’s gaze for 
long: most notably, when she does so it is when she makes her decision to accept 
the invitation to accompany the unknown woman in to town, sealing her fate by 
choosing Charlotte’s guardianship over that of the staff at Cascade.

78      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Janis Wilson appears opposite Bette Davis in a further eight scenes in Now, 
Voyager, charting their growing intimacy and Tina’s evolution into a more 
confident and happy adolescent. Having won the girl’s trust on their trip in to town 
and by comforting her at night, Charlotte is granted permission by Dr Jacquith to 
take Tina camping. After informing her father of this by telephone (disclosing the 
fact that Charlotte is Tina’s new companion), there follows a montage sequence 
of their trip (fishing, running through woods, boating and sleeping under the 
stars), before a scene in the woods beside a camp fire, in which Tina expresses her 
wish that Charlotte was her mother and is given permission to call her Camille 
(Jerry’s pet name for her) rather than Miss Vale. Here, Charlotte tells the girl that 
she has asked Jacquith to be allowed to take her home with her to Boston. In the 
screenplay, the camping sequence is followed by a scene in Tina’s studio at the Vale 
mansion on Marlborough Street in which she is happily working on a picture of 
Charlotte’s cocker spaniel, until told that her father and Dr Jacquith are about to 
visit. Thinking that she is to be taken away, she bursts into tears and is comforted 
by Charlotte, who reassures her that she loves her as much as her father does.18 
This scene, however, was cut from the film, effecting a direct transition from the 
campsite in the woods to Tina’s party at the Vale mansion. On entering the house, 
Jacquith is surprised by its makeover and congenial atmosphere, while Jerry is 
amazed by the sight of his daughter, who appears to him at the top of the stairs 
dressed in an elegant party dress, her hair in ringlets and her face free of braces and 
spectacles. After she has thrown herself into his arms, he tells her how lovely she 
looks and that he loves her. She then takes him to see her room while, in the next 
scene, Charlotte and Jacquith discuss the construction of a new children’s building 
at Cascade due to her beneficence. Janis Wilson makes her final appearance at this 
point, informing Charlotte that her father has gone in to the library. Charlotte tells 
Tina to take care of Jacquith while she goes to see Jerry, the girl being delighted 
by the irony of having to take care of a doctor, so that the last image of her (pretty, 
confident and smiling, Fig 4.2) stands in marked contrast to the first image of her 
gazing listlessly at the jigsaw puzzle at Cascade.
Janis Wilson’s performances in Now, Voyager reveal a child actor with a 
remarkable degree of control, able to produce contained actions with confidence 
against more powerful and seasoned performers. She ably fills out the screen 
(occupying the spaces adjacent to the star) providing a focus for the star’s 
attention, being someone she can play off and against without losing the attention 
of the audience. It is also clear that Wilson is effective when either under-playing 
(e.g. subdued or sulky) or over-playing (i.e. when dramatizing, such as when she 
declares ‘I’ll die, I’ll just die!’). She is less effective, however, when trying to be 
sweet. Alarm bells start to ring in the nocturnal crying scene when Charlotte tells 
Tina that she thinks she is pretty and Wilson responds by batting her eyelashes 
several times à la ‘Bette Davis’. Things get much worse, however, on the staircase at 
the Vale mansion when Tina asks Charlotte, ‘Would it sound too funny if Daddy 
should call you my name for you, Camille?’ Here the problem lies in the way she 

JANIS WILSON, HOLLYWOOD JUVENILE ACTOR      79
says the word ‘you’, stressing it by elongating the word and puckering her lips. It 
is not just the emphasis she gives to it that registers as phoney but also a degree of 
elegance to the voice, being both posh and romanticized. While Davis replies (in 
a voice choked with emotion), ‘I think it would sound very nice indeed’, it actually 
sounds ridiculous.
When Variety reviewed the film on 19 August 1942, following its trade showing, 
Janis Wilson was said to have contributed ‘a moving characterisation as Henreid’s 
young, neurotic daughter’.19 When the film was released two months later, the 
New York critics concentrated on the performances of Davis, Henreid, Rains and 
Cooper, few noting Wilson’s contribution, although Archer Winsten, in the New 
York Post, noted that ‘Little Miss Janice Wilson deserves praise for her work.’20 
Clearly, Warner executives were sufficiently impressed to put her under contract 
and cast her alongside Bette Davis again in Watch on the Rhine (1943). However, 
the studio did not grant her star status nor give her a leading role, making no 
use of her at all in 1944. In fact, Warners only cast her on one more occasion, 
in a very minor role in the Barbara Stanwyck vehicle My Reputation in 1946. 
However, when Now, Voyager’s producer, Hal B. Wallis made The Strange Love of 
Martha Ivers at Paramount Studios in 1946, he chose Wilson for the role of young 
Martha, the adult Martha being played by Stanwyck. The challenge here was less 
to impersonate the adult star than to portray young Martha as a troubled teenager, 
FIGURE 4.2  The ‘make over’ of Janis Wilson as ‘Tina’ in Now, Voyager directed by 
Irving Rapper © Warner Bros. 1942. All Rights Reserved.

80      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
deeply unhappy since the death of her parents, which has forced her to live with 
her wealthy widowed aunt, Mrs Ivers. A further challenge was to perform opposite 
Judith Anderson (as Mrs Ivers), an actress most famous for her Oscar-winning 
performance as Mrs Danvers in Rebecca (Alfred Hitchcock, 1940). This did not, 
however, entail Wilson reprising her performance of Tina for The Strange Love of 
Martha Ivers since Martha is a different type of personality, being stronger, more 
resilient and feisty, making her much more defiant, wilful and confrontational. 
Consequently, Wilson’s performance required a very different set of articulations 
in order to bring the character of young Martha Ivers to life.
Wilson is introduced in the film’s opening scene, discovered by her friend Sam 
(Darryl Hickman) hiding in a railway truck, having fled from her aunt’s house. 
Their attempt to run away is thwarted by the police, who escort Martha home. 
There she confronts her aunt in a scene that exposes the hostility and resentment 
at the heart of their relationship. When her aunt commands her to step closer, she 
looks down before taking two small steps forward, her head bowed. When further 
commanded to look at her, Wilson slowly raises her head and then, and only then, 
lifts her eyes to look into the woman’s face. Her lips are tightly closed, her jaw tense, 
while light reflects off her high forehead as she stares intently and with hatred 
at the older woman. Through a tense mouth, the girl declares that she is sorry, 
sorry for being caught, which earns her a slap across the face. In response, her 
eyes flare with shock and fury while the rest of her body remains rigid. Refusing 
to cry, she tenses her forehead, the veins above her eyebrows visibly pulsing, her 
shoulders rising and falling slightly with the effort of suppressing her emotions. 
Her aunt warns her that no matter how many times she runs away she will always 
be brought back. ‘You don’t own the whole world,’ Martha declares loudly, in a 
voice noticeably deeper than in Now, Voyager. ‘Enough of it to make sure you’ll 
always be brought back here,’ Anderson replies, as the young woman fixes her 
gaze to the floor, refusing to speak further until finally provoked by her aunt’s 
vicious comments about her deceased parents. Here she fires the words ‘shut up’ 
four times into Anderson’s face and, after being called a nobody, she shouts ‘I’ll kill 
you!’ moving forward to attack until restrained by her tutor, Mr O’Neil (Roman 
Bohnen), who grabs her by the shoulders. Held back, her hands flare out, making 
ineffectual stabbing motions as she gasps and squeals with frustration. Catching 
her breath, Martha controls herself, confronting her aunt face to face. Told to go 
to her room, she turns and slowly walks away, her head held high, signalling her 
pride, although as she passes through the doorway it drops so that she crosses the 
hall with her head bowed, looking defeated.
This scene is a prelude to one of the most dramatic moments of the film, when 
Martha attacks her aunt on the staircase during a thunderstorm. As lightning 
flashes, a hand seizes the cane that Mrs Ivers is using to beat Martha’s pet kitten 
to death. The cane is quickly wrestled out of the woman’s grasp and is then seen 
raised above Wilson’s head. A reverse shot of Judith Anderson follows, her eyes 
closed and her right hand raised protectively before her face as she begins to 

JANIS WILSON, HOLLYWOOD JUVENILE ACTOR      81
tumble backwards on the stairs, motivating a wavering point-of-view shot of the 
ceiling as she loses her balance. Wilson’s face looks aghast, the cane held above and 
behind her head, as the woman falls down the stairs. Wilson’s face becomes more 
composed moments later when, standing over the dead body, she invents a story 
of seeing a man assaulting her aunt and then fleeing from the house. Mr O’Neil 
is incredulous but decides to go along with this tale. Wilson’s slow deliberate 
movements convey her character’s sense of purpose and her implacable spirit. 
Later, in her bedroom, the tutor tells Martha that now that she is alone in the 
world, he and his son Walter (Mickey Kuhn) will always stand by her. A pact is 
made, the truth of the aunt’s death being concealed so long as Mr O’Neil and his 
son are able to profit from Martha’s inheritance. The girl complies with an act of 
deferential gratitude. Here Wilson makes it clear that she is acting, playing along. 
She gazes at her tutor passively, her head slightly to one side, an image of gentle 
compliance. While closing her eyes she says in a soft voice, with mock gratitude, 
‘Thank you, Mr O’Neil’, speaking slowly, as though in a dream, although instantly 
the sound of a distant train whistle disturbs her composure, initiating a cut to her 
friend Sam on board a train heading out of town, the image fading and bringing 
this opening section of the film to a close.
There is no doubt that the performances of Janis Wilson dominate the opening 
sixteen minutes of The Strange Love of Martha Ivers and, moreover, that her two 
confrontation scenes with Anderson are among the film’s most dramatic moments. 
Wilson’s appearances throughout this section are entirely effective, largely on 
account of the fact that she is required to be sulky, stern and deliberate rather 
than sweet, pretty or cute. Studio publicists described Wilson as a ‘15-year-old 
emotional actress’ in the press book for The Strange Love of Martha Ivers, stating 
that she plays ‘no ordinary part’ in this film. In a short article entitled ‘Fifteen-
year-old in “Martha Ivers”’, Wilson is referred to as a ‘talented youngster’ who, 
having previously been cast in Stanwyck’s My Reputation and Davis’s Now, Voyager 
and Watch on the Rhine, now appears ‘in excellent acting company’. As before, 
the New York critics ignored Wilson’s performance in favour of those of the adult 
stars, although Kate Cameron of the Daily News did note that all the child stars 
were fine, while Variety observed that the opening sequences were ‘dominated by 
young Janis Wilson, playing Miss Stanwyck as a girl’.
Analysis of Wilson’s performance in the opening section of The Strange Love 
of Martha Ivers confirms that she was a fine screen performer: intelligent and 
articulate, well suited to playing complex juvenile roles such as moody teenagers 
and psychologically troubled adolescents. Nevertheless, her track record in terms 
of casting suggests that she lacked star quality, that ineffable quality often referred to 
as ‘charisma’ or ‘It’. Karen Lury has discussed the importance of ‘It’ for child stars in 
The Child in Film, writing that, ‘[w]hilst the child actor’s skill and acting style need 
to be contextualised within the film text and the historical period of production, 
it does seem to be evident that success is based on possession of an idiosyncratic 
quality that makes the child, perhaps, “abnormally interesting”’.21 If success and 

82      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
stardom for child actors depended on them being abnormally interesting, then 
Janis Wilson’s lack of success and stardom can probably be ascribed to an absence 
of this quality. Nevertheless, it may well have been this very lack that made her 
such an effective supporting actor for the likes of Bette Davis. For, as Karen Lury 
has also written, ‘[i]f the successful child actor is often blessed (or cursed) with It, 
then another risk accrues to their presence beside the adult actors – that they will 
upstage these actors and draw the audience’s attention and admiration towards 
them unfairly’.22 As analysis of her first scene in Now, Voyager has revealed, Janis 
Wilson seldom drew attention away from the adult stars she performed with, 
making her particularly well suited to supporting roles in star vehicles.
Being the star of a film is clearly no easy task and relatively few child actors 
attain stardom and even fewer sustain star status for long. However, being a 
juvenile supporting actor is also a challenge. For a child actor to effectively play 
against and support an adult star they require skill, an intelligent grasp of the 
dynamics of human interaction, concentration and physical control. Janis Wilson 
had these abilities. Although she may have lacked the star quality of Shirley 
Temple, Elizabeth Taylor, Judy Garland or Margaret O’Brien, she was nevertheless 
an accomplished juvenile supporting actor who deserves her place in film history.
Notes
1	 Janis Wilson’s filmography is as follows: Now, Voyager (Irving Rapper, 1942), 
Watch on the Rhine (Herman Shumlin, 1943), Welcome Home (Jack Moss, 1945), 
My Reputation (Curtis Bernhardt, 1946), The Strange Love of Martha Ivers (Lewis 
Milestone, 1946), Heading for Heaven (Lewis D. Collins, 1947) and The Creeper (Jean 
Yarbrough, 1948).
2	 Karen Lury, The Child in Film: Tears, Fears and Fairy Tales (London: I.B. Tauris, 
2010), pp. 151–3.
3	 Andrew Klevan, Film Performance: From Achievement to Appreciation (London: 
Wallflower, 2005), p. 103.
4	 Cynthia Baron and Sharon Marie Carnicke, Reframing Screen Performance (Ann 
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2008), p. 210.
5	 Warner Bros. press book for Now, Voyager (1942), p. 5. A copy is available at the 
library of the British Film Institute.
6	 Baron and Carnicke, Reframing Screen Performance, p. 210.
7	 In the screenplay, she is described as a ‘most piteously unattractive child’. Jeanne Allen 
(ed.), Now, Voyager, Wisconsin/Warner Bros. Screenplay Series (Madison, WI: The 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1984), p. 188.
8	 The screenplay notes that she is ‘just sitting there, staring down, not moving a muscle’, 
which is precisely what Wilson does. Ibid.
9	 The screenplay notes that Charlotte ‘still can’t believe that this is Jerry’s child – and yet 
– there can’t be any mistake’. Ibid.
10	 Ibid.
11	 Ibid., p. 189.
12	 Ibid.
13	 While Wilson sticks to the script, Davis makes a series of minor departures. For 
instance, when Tina asserts ‘You know my name, that’s why you stood there and 

JANIS WILSON, HOLLYWOOD JUVENILE ACTOR      83
stared at me,’ Davis replies ‘Oh, that was very rude of me!’ casting her eyes down in 
order to add (slowly and hesitatingly) ‘but, you see, you reminded me of somebody.’ 
Davis has changed this line from the screenplay, which states, ‘How rude of me. But 
it was only because you reminded me of somebody’, which seems more confident. 
When Tina asks who she reminds her of, Davis hesitates, her eyelashes flickering, 
almost mechanically and so very ‘Bette Davis’. She drops her head and, gazing down 
at the puzzle so that her face falls into shadow, she laughs nervously as she begins 
to answer, ‘Well, if you must know … ’. Here, she turns slowly to look into the girl’s 
eyes, the camera reframing to a medium-close shot with Wilson on the left in the 
foreground and Davis in the star spot (i.e. the centre and middle ground). Only then 
does Davis complete her line with the word ‘myself’, quickly adding in a much lighter 
tone, ‘of course, at your age’. In so doing, Davis leaves out the words ‘in lots of ways of’ 
from the screenplay. Allen (ed.), Now, Voyager, p. 190.
14	 Davis’s empathy for the girl is telegraphed via a tense mouth and a hand that presses 
against her stomach, suggesting a feeling a nausea deep down inside.
15	 The screenplay states here she ‘beseeches with a terror-stricken expression’. Allen 
(ed.), Now, Voyager, p. 191.
16	 In the screenplay, Tina also says ‘Upon my word of honor’ but this is omitted from the 
film. Ibid.
17	 In the screenplay, it states: ‘Tina shoots out of the room like a bird let out of a cage’. 
Ibid., p. 192.
18	 Ibid., pp. 210–12.
19	 Anon., Review of Now, Voyager, Variety, 19 August 1942.
20	 Archer Winsten, Review of Now, Voyager, The New York Post, 23 October 1942.
21	 Lury, The Child in Film, p. 147.
22	 Ibid., p. 148.

84 

T
his chapter focuses on the performance of child actors: while this is a topic 
I have approached before, the purpose of my argument here is to extend 
and revisit these discussions and to think carefully and critically about the 
significance of race. It is based, in part, on the discussion I had with students from 
a class on screen performance in which I had wanted to introduce and expand on 
notions of subjectivity and performance and on the significance of race, including 
exploring racist caricatures in the history of cinema, using work by Donald Bogle 
and other writers.1 For the seminar, I had asked the class to view Barry Jenkins’s 
2016 film Moonlight (2016). Opening the discussion, I expressed my anxiety that 
the film perhaps took us back too neatly and unnervingly to discussions we had at 
the beginning of the course concerning the Kuleshov effect. This ‘effect’, associated 
with the Soviet filmmaker Lev Kuleshov, is related to his famous experiment, in 
which the same static shot of a man’s expressionless face is intercut with different 
images; in most reports of the experiment this is a bowl of soup, a woman and a 
coffin.2 When viewed alongside one another, audiences apparently read into the 
man’s expressionless face appropriate emotions that refer to associations prompted 
by the secondary images. So, respectively, they saw, or believed they saw, that the 
man was expressing hunger in relation to the picture of the soup, desire in relation 
to the woman, and sorrow in relation to the picture of the coffin. This effect poses 
a particular challenge for the analysis of screen performance – if the audience is 
so ready or so willing to read the appropriate emotion from an expressionless face, 
then what agency can the film actor really have? What more, really, can the actor 
add when the audience and the context of the film as a collaborative production 
(incorporating narrative, editing, cinematography, music, sound) and the context 
of the film’s exhibition and reception (the audience’s desire to attribute meaning) 
already do so much of the work? And since the young actors playing the main 
character in Moonlight (known as ‘Little’ when a boy, by his name Chiron as a 
teenager and ‘Black’ as a man) appear to say and do very little in terms of their 
performance, what could be said about their expressions and performance that 
would not fall into the kind of speculation and easy attribution that the Kuleshov 
5 PERFORMING BLACK 
BOYHOOD, QUIET AND 
MOONLIGHT
Karen Lury

86      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
effect exposes? Was the impact of their presence and performance little more than 
a trick of the light, and the careful and artful composition of their bodies, skin 
and faces?
In seeking to award agency and authorship to the screen performer, the class and 
I had previously discussed the technique and popular reputation of the ‘method’, 
which seemingly allows actors to claim some authorship of their performance. 
The discourse (both critical and popular) surrounding the method, while not 
always coherent, generally suggests that actors who are believed to employ this 
technique to produce specific actions and expressions that are informed by their 
idiosyncratic psychology, suggesting that a successful performance depends upon 
the engagement by the actor with an interior self that can be mined to provoke 
a repertoire of appropriate, naturalistic gestures.3 Certainly, the performances of 
the adult actors in Moonlight (notably Mahershala Ali and Naomie Harris) were 
naturalistic and expressive. But they and the child actors weren’t described as 
‘method’. As I have noted elsewhere, children also pose a particular issue in relation 
to the dominance of the ‘method’ in contemporary discourses of acting, because 
they are not usually understood to have (indeed are often defined by their lack of) 
agency and interiority. They may have presence, be compelling or beautiful, but 
they don’t act in the same way that adults do. They can’t be or do ‘method’.4
This is further problematized in relation to Moonlight because we are discussing 
black children and black teenage actors. The method, and its success in terms of 
its association with wide critical acclaim for particular performances, is almost 
exclusively associated and celebrated as a consequence of the apparent labour, 
dedication and complex subjectivity of white, male, adult actors. This means that 
the method and the contemporary discourse surrounding successful acting is a 
racialized, if not explicitly racist, discourse since it is rare or exceptional to suggest 
that black actors employ the ‘method’. Further, it is also problematic because as a 
technique the method is related to the belief that interiority and agency are, in the 
contemporary and liberal conception of the self, integral or even the essence of 
subjecthood, and as a consequence, with the current conception of human-ness 
itself. Simply put, therefore, the contemporary and dominant models of good acting 
and subjecthood and agency are aligned. This isn’t surprising – how could they not 
be? However, the alliance of these discourses – of acting and subjecthood – are 
unfortunately established and dependent upon their exclusion of women, queer 
individuals, people of colour and children, or in other words, those individuals 
who are other to the adult, heterosexual, white male.
I am not suggesting that actors of colour, queer individuals, women and 
children don’t act – of course they do – but rather that their performance is often 
‘too little’ or ‘too much’ and within the context of Western mainstream cinema, 
their acting is rarely evaluated or celebrated in the same way that white, adult, male 
actors’ performances are (as Martin Shingler’s previous chapter goes some way to 
illustrating). For instance, children can often seem to do too little in terms of their 
performance – they are perceived to be stilted or awkward – or alternatively they 

PERFORMING BLACK BOYHOOD, QUIET AND MOONLIGHT       87
do too much – seemingly hysterical, melodramatic and precocious. Frequently 
children and these ‘other’ performers are perceived as being primarily body (their 
external qualities) and lacking agency (a force determined in part by an assumed 
interiority). Their presence is at once hyper-visible, yet at the same time, their 
actions, gestures, expressions and narrative status are often less important than 
the other actors they appear alongside. As performers, it is difficult to attribute 
agency to their appearance or performance, as this appears to be over-determined 
either by the constraints of the film’s narrative, or by conventions of editing and 
cinematography.
The students and I had discussed all these issues over the weeks of the class – 
questions of agency, authorship and evaluation had emerged in the discussion 
of different adult stars’ performance as well as the behaviour on screen of non-
human beings such as animals. We discussed, in detail, aspects of the three actors 
who played Little/Chiron/Black, especially Little and Chiron, since our focus was 
on the child and young person as screen performer. The students commented 
on the immersive aspects of the mise en scène, in particular highlighting the key 
scene in which Little (Alex L. Hibbert) is taught to swim by Juan (Mahershala Ali.) 
Overall, we observed that Hibbert’s performance (and that of Ashton Sanders who 
plays Chiron) were marked by the fact that they were mostly silent and that our 
understanding of character was driven, primarily, by our proximity to both the 
actors and to the events in the film – encouraged by that sense of an immersion 
within the mise en scène. Throughout the film, there is recurrent proximity and 
attention paid to the actors’ faces and skin. In addition to numerous close-ups 
of their faces, this was also evident in the way in which the hand-held camera 
repeatedly follows Little, and later Chiron, as he makes his way through school 
corridors and along the streets and backyards to and from his home.
The relative silence of the characters further pushes our attention to what we 
can see of the character rather than what we hear. I suggested to the class that his 
silence might be attributed to the traumatic context in which Little (and later as 
Chiron) finds himself: living in poverty, bullied in school, Little’s situation worsens 
as we observe his mother becoming addicted to crack. In that sense, his character 
might have chosen to be selectively mute; just as, for instance, the traumatized little 
girl, Johanna, played by Helena Zengel, in the recent Western News of the World 
(Paul Greengrass, 2020) chooses not to speak. Other traumatized boy characters 
in films have also been frequently characterized by their inability or unwillingness 
to speak: for instance, two Scottish, white, working-class boys, Jamie (Stephen 
Archibald) in Bill Douglas’s My Childhood (1972), or James (William Eadie) in 
Ratcatcher (Lynne Ramsay, 1999) are also reticent and rarely speak. An exception 
to this (perhaps not coincidentally) is the cheerfully verbose adolescent Ricky 
Baker (Julian Dennison) in Taikia Waititi’s film the Hunt for the Wilderpeople 
(2016). Yet Hibbert’s and Sanders’s performances suggest not so much that 
Little/Chiron is silent but more that he is quiet – a subtle difference which would 
mean that the character is not being prevented or inhibited from speaking but is 

88      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
choosing not to. As Jenkins observed of himself as a child: ‘The way I grew up, I 
was kind of a quiet kid. I ended up watching people a lot, more than interacting, 
in a certain way.’5 The likelihood that Little and Chiron’s behaviour and the actors’ 
performances owed something to the distinct qualities of ‘quiet-ness’ was inspired 
by a short essay/interview with Barry Jenkins by Michael Boyce Gillespie, in which 
he draws specifically on Kevin Quashie’s conception of ‘quiet’ as an under-valued, 
under-remarked way of being for Black masculinity.6 Crucially, Quashie does not 
suggest that quiet is the same as silence, or a result of being silenced; it is not 
acquiescence or repression. Instead, he suggests, ‘The distinction between quiet 
and silence is more clear: silence, in a purely denotative sense, implies something 
that is suppressed or repressed, an interiority that is about withholding, something 
hidden or absent; quiet, more simply, is presence.’7
In terms of what the youngest child actor, Hibbert (as Little) does or doesn’t 
do, the concept of quiet can offer a way into a more compelling reading of his 
performance than simply suggesting that he doesn’t do anything – it ascribes 
meaning, for example, to the way that his face fills the screen, with his head tilted 
down, or to one side, to his slow, careful blinking and the sense of his waiting 
for and engaging with the look of others. Our proximity to his quiet makes him 
both present and a presence. In that sense, his presence and quiet is akin to the 
description that Quashie offers of the athletes Tommie Smith and John Carlos and 
their black power salute at the 1968 Olympics, which he uses as his model example 
of quiet.8 Like these sportsmen, Hibbert’s performance (and later, Ashton Sanders’s 
as the teenage Chiron) could be described as ‘vulnerable as they are aggressive, as 
pensive as they are solidly righteous’.9 Interestingly, in relation to techniques of 
performance, however, the depiction of the interior that is inhabited (expressed?) 
through quiet is not simply an evocation of the interior as imagined through a 
psychoanalytic model of consciousness: ‘It is not to be confused with interiority 
or consciousness, since it is something more chaotic than that; it is more akin to 
hunger, memory, forgetting, the edges of all the humanity one has.’10
Quashie is radical here in his refusal to suggest that quiet is akin to our existing 
or dominant conception of interiority – rather than an internal conversation, he is 
suggesting that it is more like an overwhelming tide of bodily sensation and feelings 
(hunger, memory, forgetting). He also describes this inchoate assemblage as 
encompassing ‘wild motion’. As an affective quality, this might be associated with an 
experience similar to yearning, which refers to the constant pull and ache of desire 
and melancholy. The quality of yearning could be said to inform much of Jenkins’s 
work, and is evident in his debut film, Medicine for Melancholy (2008), in which a 
young black couple have a desultory but nevertheless highly charged encounter. 
One reviewer suggested that it was ‘both sad and vibrant, meandering and 
formally sure-footed’,11 something that also resonates with Moonlight’s distinctive 
combination of a loose narrative structure and strict formal composition.
Within the context of black culture, ‘quiet’ challenges the way in which black 
expression is commonly and reductively limited to a contrarian or resistant 

PERFORMING BLACK BOYHOOD, QUIET AND MOONLIGHT       89
position in which the expression of black subjectivity is primarily defined by 
its expressiveness (Quashie calls this ‘public-ness’), whether this is manifest in 
speech, song or prayer. This does not mean that the power of the black voice and 
the demand for agency (to be heard, to be seen and to act) are not important, and 
Quashie is insistent that quiet is not a substitute for these activities and ways of 
being. Quiet is rather an expansion of how it is to be and to be seen. It is sensitive 
to and disrupts the contemporary expectation that individuals must be articulate 
to give voice to their demands – instead, as Quashie suggests, of Smith and Carlos, 
that quiet is evident in the way in which ‘though they do not speak, their language 
is a generous vocabulary of humanity’.12 It is an instance, perhaps, where the hyper-
visibility of the performer is turned around. If the black athlete or black child is 
to be ‘stared at’ (as exceptional) then their quiet is less a withdrawal, and more a 
demand for reciprocity from the spectator and for the spectator to do the work 
of interpretation – to do, in effect, ‘face work’. As Rosemarie Garland-Thomson 
suggests: ‘Staring is a sensory sorting process of determining an interpretive 
foreground and background, of formulating an ocular hermeneutics. Face work 
is a constantly dynamic, delicate dance of mutual scrutiny, adjustment, call, and 
response.’13
As she goes on to argue, staring can be an ethical and productive encounter – 
but to be so the starer needs to be willing to be arrested, held and encouraged into 
a position of ‘attentive identification’. The subject of the stare – the staree –also has 
agency, however, and must be able to negotiate, manage and choreograph the way 
in which they are stared at. Consider for example the way she describes the work 
of the staree as they are being stared at:
The staree must assess the precise attitude of the starer, measuring intentions 
and attitudes so as to respond in the most effective way. Facilitating your starers’ 
maintenance of face means relieving them of anxiety, understanding their 
motivations, and working with them to overcome their limited understanding 
of human variation and their social awkwardness at facing it.14
In many instances, Hibbert as Little does just this – in his encounters with adults 
and in a sense, with the camera (and the anticipated audience.) Hibbert does not 
flinch; while he may look down, away or up and to one side, he is negotiating 
rather than refusing the gaze – or indeed the stare – of the on-screen adult and 
the film’s audience. A key example occurs during his first encounter with Teresa 
(Janelle Monae), Juan’s girlfriend. Little is bought to their shared house by Juan; 
Teresa gets in the driver’s seat of the car to sit next to him, ostensibly to get some 
kind of verbal response (Juan has thus far been unable to get Little to talk.) Like 
many of the sequences in the film it is brief and inconclusive – Teresa looks at 
Little, he looks down and then without turning his head he looks sideways at her. 
The scene then immediately cuts to inside the house, at dinner, where Little is 
eating, watched by Juan and Teresa (Fig 5.1). Intriguingly, in this sequence he does 

90      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
speak (not a great deal, revealing not much more than his name and nickname) 
but in fact the audience don’t see him speaking very much – most of his dialogue 
is heard when we are looking instead at Teresa and Juan’s reactions to him. When 
we return to looking/staring at Little, he is quiet again, looking down, nodding and 
only registering visible discomfort (after a question asked about his absent father) 
by moving his arms into a defensive position and moving his fingers slowly on the 
table. When asked by Teresa whether he wants to stay the night, he simply looks 
up without moving his head (so in a gesture that is at once flirtatious and cautious) 
and nods. On the one hand, therefore, Hibbert is not doing very much, he’s barely 
speaking, and any physical movements he makes are small and restrained. On the 
other hand, it feels like a master class in terms of the way in which he demonstrates 
how Little acknowledges and then manipulates the gaze and reactions of the adults 
on screen and, in turn, it is evidently Hibbert who is directing the reactions and 
emotions of the film audience who, like Teresa and Juan, are staring at him.
In Quashie’s discussion of quiet, the focus is on adult expression and 
adult interiority. However, in the context of this discussion of the black child’s 
expressiveness and subjectivity I am drawn to this conception of quiet because it 
unravels the way in which voice and agency are equally and continually championed 
and expected of the child. Or, at least, the way in which our conception of what it 
means to have agency has often demanded that the child has to speak and to act in a 
specific way, in order to be recognized and heard by adults. Often this requires that 
the child’s voice be articulate, that their behaviour is civilized and their emotions 
legible. While many authors have reflected on the importance of voice and agency 
with respect to the child and noted its problematic qualities, in a thoughtful essay, 
Michael Wyness makes a key contribution by noting that this kind of agency is 
unequally distributed, with working-class children and children from poor families 
often unable to participate in the discursive and institutional frameworks set up 
to award an agency that is dependent on a particular performance by the child of 
their voice (or their ability to ‘tell their story’ often again and again for different 
FIGURE 5.1  Alex Hibbert as ‘Little’ in Moonlight directed by Barry Jenkins © A24 2016. 
All Rights Reserved.

PERFORMING BLACK BOYHOOD, QUIET AND MOONLIGHT       91
gatekeepers and service providers.)15 The restrictive or alienating aspect of what 
Wyness calls ‘institutional agency’ is reflected in Moonlight, in a scene occurring 
immediately after an encounter in which Chiron has been beaten up by his friend 
(and love interest) Kevin (as a teenager, Kevin is played by Jaden Pinner). Having 
received first aid, this scene involves the principal of his school asking Chiron 
to name the boys involved. In response, Chiron declines, saying, ‘You don’t even 
know.’ The principal – played by a young black woman (Tanisha Cidel) – says 
sarcastically, ‘Oh, I don’t?’ but Chiron makes it clear that he can’t and won’t name 
names, as ‘speaking up’ is not something he is able or wants to do. Instead, as the 
sound in the scene is distorted and ultimately fades out, Sanders flinches and turns 
away from the principal as she steps over to offer comfort. The camera is set low, 
looking up; as Sanders turns his face to the camera he briefly looks straight into the 
lens, breaking the ‘fourth wall’ in an instance of direct address (Fig 5.2). Although 
his face does not completely occupy the screen (the principal remains visible but 
out of focus) there is no question that Chiron/Sanders’ face dominates the screen 
and that he is looking back at the (anticipated) audience. Nothing is said and in 
terms of his performative intention, we cannot be certain whether this brief glance 
through the lens was wholly instigated by direction from Jenkins or whether it was 
Sanders’s own decision.
Either way, it is a key example of the significance of quiet, and the use of close-
up in Sanders’ portrayal of Chiron. The impact of this brief moment of direct 
address is to reverse what might otherwise be the overpowering affect of the scene. 
Instead of amplifying a sentimental sympathy for his character, Sanders’ ability to 
stall his apparent distress and then implicitly challenge the audience effectively 
throws back pity in the spectator’s face. If we were to apply James Naremore’s terms 
in relation to the modes of acting here, it is perhaps the point at which Sanders’ 
performance moves from expressive (naturalistic) to rhetorical (demonstrative 
or didactic.)16 As Jenkins himself suggested, ‘Ashton would explain what his 
approach was, from moment to moment. It’s a very intellectual approach to the 
FIGURE 5.2  Ashton Sanders as teen Chiron looking back through the camera in 
Moonlight directed by Barry Jenkins © A24 2016. All Rights Reserved.

92      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
performance, but then what you see on the screen is very raw.’17 It also aligns with 
the previous instances of direct address by black actors. In her essay focusing on 
the performance of black actors in a series of independent films from the 1960s, 
Katherine Kinney suggests that direct address is the moment when the actor, in 
close-up, engages the anticipated audience:
These brief moments contextualize the film’s compositional pattern by 
acknowledging the camera’s intimate proximity, the dramatic space it defines, 
and the black actors’ claim to that space. That acknowledgment refashions 
scrutiny as reciprocity, the dramatic exchange between actor and camera.18
What is interesting about this glance by Sanders is that although there are 
numerous instances where the actors in Moonlight look directly into the camera 
lens, it is usually clear what (or who) they are looking at and this is always within 
the world of the film itself. As previously noted, Moonlight is full (one might almost 
say defined by) the exchange of looks between the actors and depictions of Little/
Chiron/Black watching, looking and returning the gaze of others or themselves. 
For instance, there are several, carefully choreographed scenes in which Little/
Chiron/Black look at their reflections in a mirror. Chiron’s (Sanders’) glance is, 
however, the one of the few instances in which it is the film’s audience rather than 
another object or subject in the world of the film that is being engaged by the 
actor’s/character’s gaze. In that sense, it meets with Kinney’s examples of how 
instances of direct address by black actors claim the space between performer and 
audience and how this challenges the restrictions of film technology and narrative 
commonly encountered by the black actor. As Jenkins observed, it also relates 
to the kind of interaction associated with live theatre, in which the audience is 
directly engaged: ‘We wanted to find a few little moments to use the idea of the 
actors looking right at the camera. And that goes back to theater.’19
Although this brief instance of direct address illustrates the actor’s (Sanders’) 
potential for agency, in doing so it perversely reveals how the character (Chiron) 
cannot participate or be supported via an institutionalized agency. Chiron’s 
unwillingness or inability to speak here chimes with the character’s employment 
elsewhere of an ‘embedded’ agency, which Wyness presents as an alternative to 
the socially legitimate institutional model which prioritizes the voice of the child. 
In contrast, in Wyness’s model of embedded agency, it is the material and routine 
activities that the child carries out – such as taking responsibility in the home, 
caring for family members, self care – that provide him (or her) with agency and 
serve as an alternative to his (in)ability to ‘speak up’. In that sense, instances where 
we see Little, for example, prepare and take a bath on his own (carefully heating 
water on the stove) and other moments where Chiron covers his mother with a 
blanket as she sleeps off a drug binge, can be understood as embedded agency even 
though these same events may also be recognized as a consequence of parental 
neglect.20 Wyness notes that this embedded form of agency emerges because ‘At 

PERFORMING BLACK BOYHOOD, QUIET AND MOONLIGHT       93
another level, children in poverty draw on their agency in mitigating a lack of 
social and political participation, which directly confronts more discursive forms 
of agency. Thus, agency can operate in the absence of participation.’21
What Wyness is suggesting is that the refusal or inability of the child to speak 
up, or to vocalize their situation does not mean that the child cannot or does not 
express their agency in other ways. For Little (and later Chiron) participation 
within an institutionally determined model of agency is clearly demonstrated to be 
inadequate and irrelevant. As actors, therefore, Hibbert and Sanders are portraying 
characters in which agency is embodied by routine actions, and they are required 
to express a non-verbal model of agency that is, as Wyness suggests, ‘embedded 
and relational’ rather than discursive and vocally expressive. The embodied and 
embedded character of their agency is exemplified by the many sequences in 
which we simply observe Little watching others, taking care of himself, or when 
we follow Chiron walking from school to his house, or along the school’s corridors 
or in the extended sequence where he takes a trip on public transport ending up 
on the beach, where he meets Kevin.
In terms of performance, it is not just that the actors do these actions, but how 
they are done. How to describe this? I have already noted, for example, the way 
that Hibbert holds his head, how he takes his time to look, often moving his face 
first and then his eyes, or looking up without moving his head, in a manner that 
might almost be comic if it weren’t also touching. Similarly, the awkward gait 
of Sanders in jeans that are at once too narrow, too straight and too short, with 
his arms held slightly too stiffly at his side, amplifies the sense that his body is 
being stretched by puberty (a period of awkward and ridiculous grace) whilst 
simultaneously exposing how Chiron is constantly on edge, or on high alert, ready 
to defend himself or run.
While Jenkins’s direction undoubtedly encourages the audience’s fascination 
and attention to Hibbert, as he is frequently centred in the frame and we have 
numerous close-ups of his face, it is Hibbert’s ability to hold that attention that 
is key to the sense of quiet in his performance. Another particularly effective 
scene in which Hibbert claims our attention is when Little comes to Juan’s 
house and asks some questions: what ‘faggot’ means and whether he is one, and 
secondly, whether Juan has supplied drugs to his mother (Fig 5.3). Seated and 
centred in the frame between Juan and Teresa he speaks quietly, and his head 
hangs forward, seemingly heavy, as he looks up and turns his face from side to 
side, looking alternately at the two adults, leaving significant pauses between the 
few sentences he does say. The maturity and surprising control Hibbert as Little 
demonstrates here makes the way in which he is called ‘little man’ by both Juan 
and his mother’s boyfriend resonate over and above its appropriate familiarity 
as a common nickname for young black boys by older black men.22 The quality 
of Hibbert’s mature and perhaps world-weary performance in this scene can be 
detected by reflecting how differently he appears in one of the few instances in the 
film where he is more playful, less measured and less watchful. After he has been 

94      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
taught to swim by Juan and is playing with the waves at the beach, Hibbert can be 
seen in long shot, running back and forwards as the waves approach and retreat, 
neither looking at nor responding to the gaze of others (Juan may be watching 
but we do not have confirmation of his point of view). Hibbert’s running to 
and from the waves as they come into the shore, his (just audible) laughter, the 
evident relaxation in his shoulders and apparent lack of self-consciousness evoke 
a lighter, more ‘childlike’ and apparently spontaneous aspect to Little, revealing 
how careful, constrained and controlled most of his other interactions and 
activities are. Another scene, in which Little is filmed (again from a distance) 
dancing with his classmates, in a free for all, shows Hibbert presenting Little as 
focused and quietly exuberant, dancing as much, if not more, with his reflection 
than with his peers. These instances serve to remind the audience that Little is a 
child, after all, and not a ‘little man’.
Hibbert’s and Sanders’ performances make an impression, in part, because 
they are awarded the screen time and focus rarely accorded to other black child 
actors. In numerous sequences, their heads, shoulders and bodies are set within 
frames within the frame of the film image itself – in hallways, mirror frames 
and doorways. In many of these scenes the camera’s focus is on their faces and 
since many of these encounters are without dialogue, it would seem that we are 
encouraged to concentrate on tiny movements in and across their face, such as the 
flicker and shine of light and shadow as well as minute gestures such as blinking, 
looking and breathing. In relation to the child actor and child performance many 
spectators will be familiar with the camera’s seeming fascination with the child’s 
face, as it expresses fear, love and perhaps most often wonder. Indeed many of 
Stephen Spielberg’s child-centred films are driven by this passion; see for instance, 
the child’s face expressing fear, wonder and love in War of the Worlds (2005), Close 
Encounters of the Third Kind (1977), E.T. (1982) and A.I.: Artificial Intelligence 
(2001).23
FIGURE 5.3  ‘What’s a faggot?’ Little’s question in Moonlight directed by Barry Jenkins 
© A24 2016. All Rights Reserved.

PERFORMING BLACK BOYHOOD, QUIET AND MOONLIGHT       95
Within the class we had spent some time considering the significance of the 
close-up in adult actors and as a key aspect of cinematic performance – looking 
at, amongst others, the work of actors such as Lillian Gish, Al Pacino, Tom Hardy 
and Nicole Kidman, we had learned to value and scrutinize the performance of the 
actor in close-up, where the smallest tremors of the face might reveal their agency 
as actors and award complexity to the character they were playing. The details – 
rapid movements of the eyes, blinking, a tear, a slight smile or frown - might be 
small but they could be found, identified, evaluated. But despite the focus on the 
performer’s faces Moonlight didn’t sit easily alongside these examples. Yes, there 
were close-ups but as black faces could they, should they, be read in the way that 
white faces are? It is the white face, after all, that has dominated the discussion of 
the significance of the close-up. In her important essay on the close-up in cinema, 
Mary Ann Doane makes us aware of this, as she carefully, if not unequivocally, 
cites Deleuze and Guattari, who suggest that the semiotics of the face, is not only – 
or coincidentally – based on the white face, but that:
the face is determined by a white wall/black hole system—the white wall of 
significance or the field of play of the signifier and the black hole of subjectivity, 
of passion, consciousness, the illusion of a depth. In such a system, the face 
becomes the screen upon which the signifier is inscribed, reaffirming the role 
of the face as text, accessible to a reading that fixes meaning. Simultaneously, 
the ‘black hole’ allows access to an assumed interiority where passions and 
affects reside.24
This face, which Doane suggests may be aligned with the impact or meaning of the 
cinematic close-up, is understood as operating within ‘faciality’ – a racist system 
that oppresses and restricts subjectivity, attributing subjecthood only to those with 
a ‘face’ (the ‘White Man’) and dehumanizing those without such faces – Deleuze 
and Guattari suggest such individuals are from ‘primitive societies’.
Whether or not this abstract conception of the face and the system of faciality 
is accepted (and certainly Doane treats it with some caution), it resonates with the 
way in which the close-up of faces in Western cinema have previously been read, 
understood, critiqued, admired and celebrated. The white wall/black holes of the 
magnified face have been the focus of key writings on the close-up and its erotic 
power, whether this is Roland Barthes’ limpid prose reflecting on the face of Garbo 
(whose eyes, he suggests are not simply holes, but wounds), or the many critiques 
of the angelic yet potentially monstrous close-up of Grace Kelly’s white face in the 
opening sequence of Hitchcock’s Rear Window (1954).25 And in relation to the 
face of the child actor, as I have indicated, the absence or elision of the black child 
in Western cinema for much of the twentieth century has meant that it is white 
children’s faces in close-up that are read again and again. Even child actors’ faces 
from outside Hollywood – such as Ana Torrent’s piquant close-ups in the Spanish 
film, Spirit of the Beehive (El Espiritu de la colemena, Victor Erice, 1973) or the 

96      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
soft, enduring close-up of a young child’s face in the extraordinary Latvian film 
10 minutes older (Herz Frank, 1978) (in which the child’s face and his reactions 
to the unseen theatre production are the sole content of the film), all replicate the 
way in which the close-up of the face as a familiar text is constituted of pale skin 
and dark eyes.26 Interiority, in these readings, as Doane reminds us, is situated, or 
believed to reside in the ‘black holes’ (the eyes, the mouth) in the ‘white face’. The 
question is, therefore, whether Moonlight asks us to read the black child’s face in 
the same way or does it ask us to do something different?
One way in which Moonlight challenged the close-up’s exclusive relation to the 
‘white face’ and instead invited the scrutiny of the spectator was through the care 
in which the characters and their faces were lit and filmed. While it might seem 
self-evident, the care taken in shooting and presenting the black skin of Little and 
Chiron’s faces is crucial. As Richard Dyer and others have noted, the history of 
lighting in Western cinema has continuously privileged white skin, establishing 
it as the ‘norm’ and further amplifying its metaphorical value by establishing 
numerous techniques (such as backlighting to create a halo effect, and the use of 
key lighting to eliminate shadows) that underpin the way in which whiteness and 
‘light’ itself are understood to be metaphorically virtuous and epistemologically 
rigorous.27 As Racquel Gates also suggests, ‘film and television industries have 
typically prioritized the beautification of white skin on screen, with lighting and 
colour schemas designed to optimize every nuanced detail of white skin and white 
performance’.28
In Moonlight, however, it is black faces such as Little’s that are prioritized; they 
glisten – an effect apparently desired by Jenkins and facilitated by Moonlight’s 
make-up artist, Doniella Davy, and her careful application of rosehip, grape seed 
or baby oil onto the actors’ faces and skin to ensure that they took up and held the 
light.29 The title of the film, after all, refers precisely to the way in which black skin 
holds and transforms light (‘in moonlight black boys look blue’). As Gates suggests, 
we need to be careful here, as ‘the celebration of Moonlight’s cinematography 
veers into the territory of fetishization’,30 but my point is that the attention paid to 
lighting, colour saturation (even to the extent of mimicking specific film stocks) 
and framing in the film does not simply replicate the way in which the close-
up and lighting works for white performers. Although as Gates suggests, there is 
merit in the way that the images in Moonlight are ‘beautiful precisely in the way 
that white images have traditionally been beautiful and black ones have not’31 there 
is, I would suggest, something else – in part related to the question of interiority 
and childhood – at work. While, as Dyer has suggested, conventional lighting in 
Western cinema often confers a luminous, translucent quality to white faces in 
close-up (particularly for white women and I would argue for white children too)32 
in Moonlight, Little and Chiron’s faces refuse transparency: they are beautiful but 
solid, the light does not (mythically) come ‘from within’ but bounces off. In his 
comments as to how casting decisions were made in relation to the three actors 
chosen to play the character of Little/Chiron/Black, Jenkins has noted that he was 

PERFORMING BLACK BOYHOOD, QUIET AND MOONLIGHT       97
not so much concerned that the actors looked (or even acted) like one another but 
more that they were ‘iceberg actors’.
I wasn’t worried about whether they all looked and sounded the same. What 
I was concerned about was, when the camera’s on them and they’re not speaking, 
how’s this person going to emote? Are they going to try and externalize their 
emotions, or are we going to just feel the pain beneath the surface? The iceberg 
theory. They’re all iceberg actors, man.33
The ‘iceberg theory’ commonly refers to a sense in which much is buried beneath 
the surface since it is only the tip of the iceberg that is usually seen above sea level. 
As a metaphor it is intriguing in this context, as it is not simply about ‘hidden 
depths’ but about an interiority that is implacable and potentially destructive. It is 
a force – an energy or agency – representing the quiet nature of the characters in 
which their reticence does not reflect a lack of interiority.
I began this chapter by seeking to discover how we might evaluate children’s 
acting in cinema and specifically to think about a black child’s performance. In 
Moonlight, Hibbert and Sanders do not sing or rap and they rarely shout. Their 
facial expressions are predominantly low key, characterized by small movements 
of their eyes and when they move their hands they do so carefully and cautiously. 
Their lack of exhibition is in counterpoint to the elaborate and heightened formal 
qualities of the film in terms of its use of sound, colour and composition and our 
attention is often simply drawn to the way the light plays over the skin of these 
children. In terms of physical exuberance there are only two instances where we 
see Hibbert as Little playing or dancing in a relatively carefree manner; and when 
Sanders depicts the same character he too has only one scene of extraordinary 
physicality and violence (where he crashes a school chair over the head of his 
chief tormentor.) Chiron’s intimate encounter with Kevin on the beach is also 
expressed quietly - primarily through the way his hands grasp at grains of sand 
on the beach. While I have presented this as a problem in relation to the analysis 
of performance (what can be seen?) I have also chosen to do so because the 
performances here resist the kind of ‘public-ness’ that Quashie suggests is too 
often demanded or expected of black masculinity. In accordance with this, I 
have resisted another narrative, which might have focused on the very few, but 
nonetheless well-known, black child performers, whose expressive and visible 
skills in terms of their comic timing, dancing and singing were exceptional. For 
example, I could have examined the performances of the young black boys who 
played ‘Buckwheat’ in versions of the comic series, The Little Rascals, including 
William Thomas Jr. in the MGM film series (1934–44), or as played by Ross 
Bagley in 1994 in a feature film outing, or again – in yet another ‘sequel’ – this 
time featuring Isaiah Fredericks (made in 2014). I could have examined the rich 
repertoire of gestures and exclamations of Gary Coleman, perhaps the most 
famous child actor on American television in the twentieth century, on which the 

98      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
success of the sitcom Diffr’nt Strokes (NBC, 1978–84) almost entirely depended, 
and noted his superb control of exaggerated facial expressions, vocal dexterity 
and comic timing. I have also ignored the most famous young black performer 
of the last fifty years, Michael Jackson, whose professional abilities in terms of his 
uncanny mimicry, vocal and dancing skills were exceptional. I did not include 
them because they were not excellent but because as performers and in their 
various performances, they seemed to me to be overlaid, or perhaps haunted, 
with the various kinds of masks and performative expressiveness that black 
performers have been obliged to reproduce over the history of theatre, cinema 
and in popular entertainment. These young boys were fast-talking and better, 
bigger, dumber, cuter, sweeter and more intelligent in terms of their knowingness 
and delivery than the many white children they frequently acted and performed 
alongside. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to go in to the various ways in 
which black performance – and specifically the performance of the black child 
– is over-determined; however, it would seem fair to suggest that all of these 
performers had to manage the racist expectations of white audiences whilst using 
their extraordinary skills and talent to express their own subjectivity and to create 
believable characters and credible performances. In Moonlight, however, this 
overt expressiveness was largely absent. The direction of Jenkins and the skills of 
his young actors allowed for a characterization of a black boyhood that creates 
presence and is equally remarkable in its affective qualities. At the same time, it 
escapes definition through conventional modes of evaluation, asking us to think 
about the history of cinema and within this the importance of looking, of staring 
and about the micro-expressions of blinking and breathing; the weight of the 
glance as well as the ambiguity of the sigh.
Notes
1	 Donald Bogle, Toms, Coons, Mulattoes, Mammies & Bucks: An Interpretative History 
of Blacks in American Films (New York: Continuum, 1989 [first pub. 1973]) and 
Carole E. Henderson, ‘“King Kong Ain’t Got Sh** On Me”: Allegories, Anxieties, 
and the Performance of Race in Mass Media’, Journal of Popular Culture, vol. 43, 
no. 6 (2010), pp. 1207–21. The Screen Performance class was taught at the University 
of Glasgow (online due to the pandemic) between January and March 2021 and 
I want to thank the students for their commitment and enthusiasm in the session 
on Moonlight and many others. I would also like to acknowledge that inspiration for 
the essay is partly due to my second marking of another student’s audiovisual essay 
that was submitted as part of the assessment for a course taught by my colleague Ian 
Garwood. The essay was by Veronika Radman, called: ‘Eye/contact: acts of looking in 
Moonlight and Medicine for Melancholy’.
2	 See Stephen Prince and Wayne E. Hensley ‘The Kuleshov Effect: recreating the Classic 
Experiment’, Cinema Journal, vol. 31, no. 2 (Winter 1992), pp. 59–75.
3	 See Cynthia Baron, Diane Carson and Frank P. Tomasulo (eds), More than a Method: 
Trends and Traditions in Contemporary Film Performance (Detroit, MI: Wayne State 
University Press, 2004) and Sharon Carnicke, ‘Lee Strasberg’s Paradox of the Actor’, 

PERFORMING BLACK BOYHOOD, QUIET AND MOONLIGHT       99
in Peter Kramer and Alan Lovell (eds), Screen Acting (London: Routledge, 1999) 
pp. 75–88.
4	 Karen Lury, ‘The involuntary dance: child actors, fidgeting and authenticity’, in 
B. Henzler and W. Pauleit (eds.), Childhood, Cinema and Film Aesthetics (Berlin: 
Bertz + Fischer, 2018), pp. 85–100.
5	 Nicolas Rapold, Interview with Barry Jenkins, Film Comment vol. 52, no. 5 (Sep/Oct 
2016), p. 45.
6	 Michael Boyce Gillespie, ‘One step ahead: a conversation with Barry Jenkins’, Film 
Quarterly, vol. 70, no. 3 (Spring 2017), pp. 52–62.
7	 Kevin Everod Quashie, ‘The trouble with publicness: toward a theory of black quiet’, 
African-American Review, vol. 43, no. 2–3 (2009), pp. 329–43, p. 334.
8	 It is inevitable that many readers might also think of the ‘quietness’ of ‘taking the 
knee’ in relation to recent sporting events, where sportsmen and women (black 
and white), bend on one knee to align themselves in protest against the treatment 
of African Americans, a gesture that is now increasingly understood as a shared 
symbolic act against racism in many countries. While this performative gesture is no 
doubt related, I suspect ‘quiet-ness’ in Quashie’s work is significantly and specifically 
linked to the performing bodies of individual African Americans. It is notable, for 
instance, that in Quashie’s example in the 1968 Olympics, the White sportsman, 
the Australian Peter Norman, who shared the plinth with Tommie Smith and John 
Carlos, was an ally (signalled by a pin he was wearing) but he did not make the salute.
9	 Ibid., p. 329.
10	 Ibid., p. 334.
11	 A.O. Scott, ‘A short-term affair leads to Big Questions’, New York Times, 29 January 
2009.
12	 Quashie, ‘The Trouble with Publicness’, p. 337.
13	 Rosemarie Garland-Thomson, ‘Ways of staring’, Journal of Visual Culture, vol. 5, no. 2 
(2006), pp. 173–92, pp. 176–7.
14	 Ibid., p. 180.
15	 Michael Wyness, ‘The Recognition and Distribution of Children’s Agency in the 
UK’, in Sandra Dinter and Ralf Schneider (eds), Transdisciplinary Perspectives 
on Childhood in Contemporary Britain: Literature, Media and Society (London: 
Routledge, 2018) pp. 230–47.
16	 See James Naremore, Acting in the Cinema (Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press, 1988).
17	 Rapold, Interview with Barry Jenkins, p. 44.
18	 Katherine Kinney, ‘Facing the camera: black actors and direct address in independent 
films of the 1960s’, JCMS: Journal of Cinema and Media Studies, vol. 59, no. 1 (Fall 
2019), pp. 66–88, p. 78.
19	 Rapold, Interview with Barry Jenkins, p. 45.
20	 The recent British film Rocks (Sarah Gavron, 2019) demonstrates how this material, 
embedded agency operates and how (unlike for Little) its practices can be spread 
across a number of children. Bukky Bakray as the eponymous ‘Rocks’ may not 
operate within institutional agency (she does her best to avoid the well-intentioned 
care of adults or to ‘tell’ anyone about her family difficulties) but is in other areas 
more typically verbose, outspoken, performative and expressive.
21	 Wyness, ‘Children’s Agency in the UK’, p. 241.
22	 Circulating around this nickname, of course, is the loaded distinction between ‘boy’ 
and man in relation to black men, as ‘boy’ is a historically racist appellation for black 
men, and while it is still a potentially patronizing tern, ‘little man’ as applied from an 
older black man to the black boy child implies at least some measure of respect.

100      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
23	 See the audiovisual essay by Kevin B. Lee, ‘The Spielberg face’ originally published 
13 December 2011 on Fandor, available at https://vimeo.com/199572277 (accessed 
July 2021).
24	 Mary Ann Doane, ‘The Close-Up, Scale and Detail in the Cinema’, differences: A 
Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies, vol. 14, no. 3 (2005), pp. 89–111, p. 105.
25	 See Roland Barthes, ‘The Face of Garbo’ in Annette Lavers (trans.), Mythologies (New 
York: Hill and Wang, 1972). In relation to Grace Kelly’s entrance/initial close-up in 
Rear Window there are many commentaries, but a useful and perceptive analysis (and 
summary of other readings) is provided by Douglas Pye, ‘Enter Lisa: Rear Window 
(1954)’, in Tom Brown and James Walters (eds), Film Moments: Criticism, Theory, 
History (London: British Film Institute, 2010), pp. 45–9.
26	 Problematically, one of the few image genres in which the black child’s face is often 
seen in close-up is in charity appeals, where the intent is clearly to provoke pity and is 
often at the expense of the child’s individuality.
27	 See Richard Dyer, White: Essays on Race and Culture (London: Routledge, 1997), 
specifically the chapter/essay ‘The Light of the World’ (pp. 82–144).
28	 Racquel Gates, ‘The last shall be first: aesthetics and politics in black film and media’, 
Film Quarterly, vol. 71, no. 2 (2017), pp. 38–45, p. 40.
29	 See Elle Silver, ‘Moonlight make up artist: Doniella Davy’, FRNDY LMRN, 24 February 
2018, available at https://www.frndylmrn.com/blog/2018/2/24/moonlight-make-up-
artist-doniella-davy (accessed July 2021).
30	 Gates, ‘The last shall be first’, p. 40.
31	 Gates, ‘The last shall be first’, p. 44.
32	 See ‘The Light of the World’, in Dyer, White.
33	 Rapold, Interview with Barry Jenkins, p. 44.

C
hildren in front of the camera in nonfictional situations are fascinating and 
often unusually affecting. Their appearances commonly seem spontaneous 
and uncontrolled and convey an authenticity that the ‘performances’ 
by adults in similar situations appear to lack. Each week in London Weekend 
Television’s popular series Child’s Play, which was hosted by Michael Aspel and 
ran from 1984 to 1988, two pairs of contestants (a member of the general public 
and a celebrity) watched video footage of primary-school children describing 
and defining something; the television audience was told what that something 
was, whilst the contestants had to work it out. The results were frequently 
hilarious as many of the children saw the mundane, supposedly familiar things 
they were being asked to describe in totally unexpected and idiosyncratic ways, 
the implication being that the state of childhood dictates that children see and 
interact with the world differently from adults. So what happens when the ‘adult’ 
genre of documentary looks at and engages with children? In this essay I will 
examine several examples of documentaries that feature children being and 
‘acting up’ in front of the camera, comparing the relatively ingenuous appearances 
in Seven Up (Paul Almond, 1964) and Être et avoir (Nicolas Philibert, 2002) to 
the more disingenuous ones in Capturing the Friedmans (Andrew Jarecki, 2003) 
and Tarnation (Jonathan Caouette, 2003). In each of these examples there is an 
explicit sense of the differences between childhood and adulthood (between 
‘innocence’ and ‘experience’) and there is an concomitantly implicit sense of how, 
taking account of this difference, children might be expected to act in front of the 
documentary camera – a camera that conventionally is allied with the adult point 
of view (although not in Capturing the Friedmans and Tarnation, which is one 
reason why these documentaries make for uncomfortable viewing).
But first I will turn briefly to the final reel of John Huston’s San Pietro (1945), 
the middle part of his wartime documentary trilogy, which shows the American 
army’s arrival (at the very end of 1943) into the liberated but virtually destroyed 
Italian hilltop town of San Pietro Infine, a town that was never rebuilt and now 
only exists as ruins in the Liri Valley between Rome and Naples. San Pietro is, until 
6 CHILDREN IN 
DOCUMENTARIES: OR, THE 
CAMERA NEVER LIES
Stella Bruzzi

102      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
the last ten minutes, extremely gritty, realistic and adult. Based on reconstructions, 
Huston and his crew filmed alongside the infantrymen and, until the last reel, its 
brutal images are accompanied by Walter Huston’s booming, insistent voice-over, 
describing the advances of the US Army’s 143rd regiment through the Liri Valley. 
The entry of some of the US forces into San Pietro (two battalions continued on 
towards Rome) marks a moment of significant transition as the documentary’s 
style alters completely. In the last ten minutes, instead of Walter Huston’s relentless 
narration, there is music, and rather than each shot being filled with the frantic, 
dangerous action of combat, each image now focuses on civilians, often children, 
returning to their ruined lives (many had been living in caves nearby as the battles 
for liberation raged around them). The images underline the starkly divergent 
perspectives on the experience of war between adults and children: weeping 
mothers breastfeed their suckling babies; women carry their life’s belongings 
on their heads – one carries baskets, others a suitcase or a sideboard, and one, 
with equal poise and purposefulness, balances aloft a small-sized coffin; a man, 
distraught with grief, turns to the camera after unearthing a body in the rubble. 
As the children emerge from hiding, they have an entirely different rapport with 
the camera: they run towards it, they grin into it, they are stopped in their carefree 
tracks by it; some of them point at it, some walk in front of it, others run past it and 
one little boy, walking thoughtfully up a steep, rubbly path, eyes the camera with 
deep suspicion and stops, as if it is in his way and will not let him pass.
Intermittently the narration does return, to remind us that ‘living has resumed 
in San Pietro’ or that ‘children are able to forget quickly. Yesterday they wept, today 
there are smiles and even laughter. Tomorrow it will be as if the bad things had never 
happened.’ However, rather like the remainder of the film (which was accused by 
the US Army at the time of being both too graphic and anti-war in its sentiments) 
this final reel is tonally ambiguous: children, we are told authoritatively, forget the 
horrors of war, they symbolize regeneration, life and the future, and yet, even as 
they beam unselfconsciously into the lens, Huston’s camera dwells on some of the 
realities of the children’s present existence, which we as spectators cannot help but 
project into the future: their wild, matted hair and dirty faces, their ramshackle 
get-ups of filthy trousers and makeshift belts, threadbare sweaters and grubby 
socks, crude handmade shirts and the battered adult shoes one child wears as he 
traipses through a muddy field. These children have a simple and straightforward 
relationship to the camera, but they also do not yet understand how it is 
representing them nor what messages – about class, poverty, war – are conveyed 
through the compelling images of them. The sparse use of voice-over for this reel in 
an otherwise narration-heavy documentary is highly suggestive of a certain adult 
guilt (or at the very least self-consciousness) to do with recognizing the grimness 
of these children’s lives whilst wanting to disavow the hardships probably still to 
come and the pressure to give the documentary an uplifting ending. The tensions 
between the adults’ and the children’s perspectives are silent, eloquent reminders 
that children find themselves caught up in events that circumscribe and damage 

CHILDREN IN DOCUMENTARIES      103
their lives forever, but over which they have little or no control. One of the most 
beautiful moments in Huston’s powerful documentary is a close-up shot, held for a 
couple of seconds longer than most, of a dishevelled, carefree girl smiling into the 
camera, breathing in an excessively heavy manner as if self-conscious or nervous 
of the scrutiny. This moment is sweet though heavily poignant, and carries several 
inferences: the girl has most likely been surviving in a cave alongside her family 
to escape the battle over her town; she has never seen anything as sophisticated as 
a movie camera before and is fascinated by it; she has been singled out and feels 
special, wanted, as a result. This is the uncomplicated version of the relationship 
between apparatus and subject – but this is a documentary about war, in which 
context is all, so the girl’s innocence is entirely circumscribed and compromised 
by the brutality it disavows.
The nonfictional camera is, as a rule, and as it appears in both San Pietro and 
Child’s Play, discernibly adult, as a result of which the relationship between who 
is doing the looking and who is being looked at becomes an unequal one. This 
imbalance inevitably recalls the early psychoanalytic film studies debates around 
the look, voyeurism and objectification. However cute the children are in the 
impressionistic final reel of San Pietro, they are nevertheless the vulnerable objects 
of a sophisticated subjective gaze, not yet equipped with the tools to comprehend – 
or challenge – the ways in which their images are framed. This lack of knowledge 
is rendered in San Pietro as innocence by Huston, who has so emotively and 
provocatively juxtaposed the images of children with the violence and loss of life 
that has preceded this final reel. If we contrast for a moment the hyperventilating 
girl’s excited look to camera with the distraught man’s anguished gaze into the 
same lens a few minutes previously, then it becomes evident that part of what these 
final minutes of San Pietro illustrate is that the art of being ‘looked at’ is something 
that is learnt, that falls within the realm of adulthood and experience, manifest 
only once innocence has been lost.
In an article principally about the torture of Iraqi prisoners in Abu Ghraib, 
Susan Sontag wrote:
To live is to be photographed, to have a record of one’s life, and therefore to go 
on with one’s life oblivious, or claiming to be oblivious, to the camera’s nonstop 
attentions. But to live is also to pose. The act is to share in the community of 
actions recorded as images.1
For Sontag this postmodern definition of living as having one’s life recorded in 
images is, within the parameters of this chapter, allied to adulthood in the sense 
that it is related to a time when one realizes some of the potential connotations 
of the photograph and the pose. The symbiosis between life and record argued 
by Sontag in relation to the photographs taken in Abu Ghraib is central to 
documentary (or ‘art of record’)2 more broadly, and is reminiscent of Judith 
Butler’s definition of gender as imitative and performative, while also recalling 

104      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
early writings on the gaze in art and cinema.3 I would like to propose that we 
use these ideas, alongside Sontag’s belief in life’s innate performativity, as tools 
through which to begin to articulate the collision and friction as opposed to the 
similarity between the child’s look and the adult’s perspective in documentaries. 
Children in documentaries – in a state of being ‘looked at’ – are usually unaware 
of the connotations their images carry, even in the most desperate and brutal 
situations. Vicky Lebeau, in her discussion of images of children argues: ‘It is often 
enough, the photographic image of a child – whether still or moving – that comes 
both to render our hostility and to rend the visual field’, before listing some of 
these pregnant, eloquent images:
the small boy, wearing a cap and a yellow star, raising his hands at gunpoint, 
during the Nazis’ destruction of the Warsaw ghetto in 1943 … a young girl, 
Elizabeth Eckford, surrounded by a white mob, as she walks to school in Little 
Rock, Arkansas in 1957; a naked young girl, nine-year-old Phan Thi Kim Phuc, 
fleeing her village in South Vietnam after being doused with napalm … the 
photograph of a newborn baby, buried in the rubble of a Beirut suburb … 
towards the beginning of 2006.4
Abused, distraught, murdered children speak so eloquently of the horrors of war 
because the child’s very innocence and lack of awareness exists in contradistinction 
to and highlights, for the adult audience, the violence of such images and situations. 
Echoing Sontag’s post-9/11 imperative ‘Let the atrocious images haunt us’,5 Lebeau 
goes on to remark that ‘such images may well have a unique capacity to haunt 
us’ as ‘they haunt the visual iconography of childhood’ and function as ‘evidence 
of the destruction of children and childhoods, cultures and communities’.6 These 
are documentary examples of the image of a child articulating the violation and 
destruction of childish innocence.
As further demonstration of the differences between the documentary 
performances by children or adults, it needs to be recognized that adulthood 
and adult performances are performative in ways that childhood and children’s 
performances seldom are. The children in San Pietro lack guile and self-awareness 
and they have not yet learnt that identity is imitative, that, as Judith Butler 
articulates in Gender Trouble,
acts, gestures, and desire produce the effect of an internal core or substance, 
but produce this on the surface of the body … Such acts, gestures, enactments, 
generally construed, are performative in the sense that the essence or identity 
that they otherwise purport to express are fabrications manufactured and 
sustained through corporeal signs and other discursive means.7
Nor do the children in Huston’s documentary think that to ‘live is to pose’. 
Similarly, the terrified girl fleeing her napalmed village is confronted with the 
extreme cruelties of the adult world, but she is also not aware – until later – of 

CHILDREN IN DOCUMENTARIES      105
the broader, transformative connotations of her image. Kim Phuc at first (in 
1972) hated the photograph and ‘struggled’ with the publicity that surrounded it. 
Eventually, she ‘came to realise’, as two journalists phrased it, ‘that if her pain and 
terror had not been captured on film that day, the bombing – like so many other 
wartime terrors – might have been lost to history’. Kim Phuc concluded forty-three 
years later: ‘I realized that if I couldn’t escape that picture, I wanted to go back to 
work with that picture for peace. And that is my choice.’8 Nick Ut’s ‘Napalm Girl’ 
was one of the most iconic, resonant and enduring images of the Vietnam War; it 
was also, as Kim Phuc’s ambivalence articulates here, an equally forceful example 
of the child’s powerlessness in front of the adult camera. As a war photograph 
Ut’s image is exemplary; alongside news footage of US soldiers in body bags, for 
instance, it brought ‘home’ – into living rooms, onto kitchen tables – the brutality 
of war. Ut (just 15 years old himself in 1972) did not just take the photograph, he 
also accepted some responsibility for it, taking Kim Phuc to hospital to receive 
treatment for her burns. And yet Ut’s photo ultimately also resonates with the 
child’s vulnerability and lack of control over her or his image and how it might be 
used. The photograph but not the child is in this instance performative.
In Documentary: Witness and Self-revelation, John Ellis frames similar 
discussions of documentary performance slightly differently, through engaging 
with sociologist Erving Goffman’s ideas of the presentation of the self in everyday 
life. Ellis argues that ‘Unlike the actor in a play, our everyday encounters involve 
performances of self, a display that involves identity and biography, mediated by 
the kind of “face” that we have developed in our dealings with different social 
situations.’9 Children, as in San Pietro, pose, yes, and acquire a self-consciousness 
understandably lacking when they were babies or toddlers, but this is not quite 
the same as having acquired an understanding of ‘performances of self’ as they 
have yet to acquire a sense of themselves as social constructs or that their ‘faces’ 
represent ‘the expression(s) of biography and experience’ as Ellis goes on to 
assert.10 Children necessarily complicate or invalidate the rules of the conventional 
documentary encounter; they can – as Kim Phuc does in Ut’s still image – affirm 
the idea that ‘there are moments when every person can choose to be sincere’,11 
not because they have yet learnt that to look or to be looked at are such loaded 
actions, but because they are not necessarily conscious of the choices they could 
make. Having said this, both Capturing the Friedmans and Tarnation offer potent 
examples in which the childhood home movie footage that dominates both 
documentaries suggests that their protagonists understand – only too well – the 
implications of the camera’s gaze. However, before discussing those films in more 
detail, I turn to the other end of the spectrum and focus on two more conventional 
examples of child-centred documentaries, namely Seven Up! and Être et avoir.
Although it has since become the first in a longitudinal documentary series, 
Seven Up! – one of the most instantly recognizable child-centred documentaries – 
was originally conceived as a one-off film for Granada Television’s current affairs 
World in Action strand. Paul Almond, a Canadian, and World in Action’s first series 

106      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
editor Tim Hewat, an Australian, were fascinated and horrified by the rigidity 
of the British class system and set about making a documentary through which 
to explore it. The starting premise for Seven Up! was the Jesuit, Francis Xavier’s, 
maxim ‘Give me a child until he is seven, and I will give you the man.’ Through 
interviewing and observing 7-year-old children, Almond and Hewat wanted to test 
the theory that it is a child’s social background that determines his/her adult future 
and their social positioning, so their two researchers, Michael Apted and Gordon 
McDougall, were tasked with finding twenty children in three weeks. Seven Up! is 
heavily didactic; it counterbalances Douglas Keay’s authoritative ‘Voice of God’12 
narration with the interviews with the children and footage of them being brought 
together for one day in London, which is when they go to the zoo, play in an 
adventure playground and have a party.
The interactive,13 interview-based form Seven Up! takes formalizes the 
relationship between the adults behind the camera and the children in front of it, 
unlike the less intrusive observational style adopted by either San Pietro or Être 
et avoir. The question and answer format leads to the clear demarcation of adult 
and child domains and roles, and imposes an adult perspective onto the children’s 
responses (reinforced by the fact that consent for the children’s participation in 
the documentary was granted not by them, but by their parents or guardians). 
Much of the narration and many of the prompting questions relate to social 
concerns (what are the children’s views of racial difference, what do they think of 
children from different social backgrounds to theirs) and to the issue of growing 
up (which schools and universities the children think they will attend; what they 
want to become). Many of the children already, aged 7, appear to have an adult 
perspective on their own futures, especially the more socially privileged ones. 
The trio of prep-school boys interviewed together on a sofa (John, Andrew and 
Charles), for example, cheerily rattle off the list of independent schools they will 
attend prior to going up to either Cambridge or Oxford while fidgeting about, 
talking over each other and fiddling with their regulation knee-high woollen 
socks. At the other end of Seven Up!’s social spectrum, a wary Paul asks ‘What 
does university mean?’, Sue says she is ‘going to work in Woolworth’s’, and Tony 
almost sings with excitement when he reveals that he wants to become a jockey 
when he grows up.
Although the only faces featured are those of the twenty children and their 
classmates, they are fitted into an adult-determined documentary. However 
likeable the grinning Neil is when explaining that he wants to ‘be an astronaut, 
but if I can’t be an astronaut, I think I’ll be a coach driver’ or however socially 
aware Jackie shows herself to be, despite being framed by the film as one of the 
less privileged East End girls, when she says that, if she had £2.00, she would help 
the poor, ‘because the poor, if you don’t help them they’d sort of die’, Seven Up! 
is prescriptive and the children’s performances defined by the documentary’s 
ideological parameters. It is the adult voices – Keay’s avuncular narration or 
the occasional questions from behind the camera – that usually come first in 

CHILDREN IN DOCUMENTARIES      107
a sequence and thereby dictate what ensues. Seven Up! is obsessed with class 
and although it sets out to subject the British class system to scrutiny, it comes 
nowhere near subverting it, but rather confirms its resilience and rigidity, through 
its script, its questions and also the hierarchical filmmaking techniques it adopts, 
notably the interview. The film ends with Keay suggesting it has given a glimpse 
of Britain’s future, but what Seven Up! rarely gives a glimpse into is the children 
in situations not directed by adults. The moments when the child subjects do 
arguably manage to shuffle off the shackles of the film’s didactic format are when 
they are captured doing other things besides being interviewed for Seven Up! – 
jostling in the queue for the pictures on Saturday morning (Fig 6.1), playing in 
the playground or visiting London Zoo. Despite the persistence of the nullifying 
and oppressive ‘voice of God’, these sequences are permitted to live and breathe in 
ways the interviews rarely do. The energetic hand-held camera mucking in with 
the children queuing for ‘the flicks’, observing their expectant faces and their lively 
exchanges, is fleetingly reminiscent of the puppet show in Truffaut’s Les 400 Coups 
and how that documentary-esque sequence momentarily leaves behind the fiction 
film that surrounds it. It’s a great pity that even here Keay feels the need to tell us 
what to think.
For all its fascination as a longitudinal study (and here I have consciously 
talked only about the first, stand-alone documentary), Seven Up! does not grant 
the children much freedom to exist beyond the social archetypes its script requires 
FIGURE 6.1  In the queue for the cinema. Seven Up! © Granada Television 1964.

108      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
them to conform to, so the children’s performances are circumscribed and the 
interviews very seldom elicit spontaneous responses or the sort of engagingly 
absurd answers Child’s Play recorded on a weekly basis. In the concluding 
playground sequence, for example, as the children interact with each other the 
narration draws our attention to the fact that the boys from the children’s home 
are building a house. As Symon rather half-heartedly takes a pickaxe to a mound 
of hard earth, the sequence’s contrivances seem to seep out, and one cannot help 
but wonder if these children were directed to build a house. The children in Seven 
Up! are representative figures as well as individuals; their social role as important 
as their personal performances. In Taking the Long View: A Study of Longitudinal 
Documentary Richard Kilborn observes that ‘One of the several consequences of 
the longevity of long docs is that viewers are, in many cases, able to follow subjects 
whom they first encounter as children through to the phase in their lives where 
they are bringing up children of their own.’14 From a performative perspective, 
what occurs as the series goes along in terms of the cumulative relationships 
between the children and the adults they become is that, whereas in Seven Up!, 
the adult point of view was imposed onto or dictated the child’s, later on in the 
series viewers are repeatedly invited to see the child in every adult (a process 
aided by the editing in of the childhood footage into each set of adult interviews), 
so that the child defines the adult in a way that becomes unusual (usually, as 
in Seven Up!, it is the other way round). This becomes the case especially with 
Neil, whose appearances at seven are the most overwhelmingly engaging and 
all-defining, and who later becomes so heavily defined by his psychological and 
nervous collapse. Through the painful later interviews our primary impulse 
whilst viewing them is probably to want to recall the happy child who grimaces 
at the thought of ‘coloured people’ because the term makes ‘you think of a purple 
person with red eyes and yellow feet’. The adult Neil – sitting in front of dirty net 
curtains in his London squat at 21, admitting at 28, as he walks along the side of 
a breathtakingly beautiful loch in the Western Highlands of Scotland, that he’s 
known locally ‘as an eccentric’, or painfully eloquent at 35 and in Shetland about 
how viewers ‘flooded me with letters and thought I could solve their problems’. 
Neil seemed to lose his childish unselfconsciousness earlier than the other Seven 
Uppers (maybe with the exception of Suzy), but our awareness of Neil’s painful 
loss of innocence cannot be the only reason for our powerful responses (and 
the collectivity of the Seven Up! series viewing experience over the decades is 
exemplified by the regular outpouring of emotion over Neil). Childhood, Neil’s 
passage through life seems to suggest, offers no preparation for, no protection 
against adulthood. He remains powerfully, movingly eloquent about both life and 
himself; his alienation from society as an adult being felt all the more keenly 
as, with each episode, Michael Apted reminds us of his engaged and engaging 
self. We probably look for clues in the ultra-serious, chess-playing boy of 14 for 
what was to come, but by and large the clips from the earlier Seven Up! provide 
seductive and nostalgic relief.

CHILDREN IN DOCUMENTARIES      109
The generational narrative dynamics of Être et avoir are not the same as those of 
Seven Up! in that the differences between childhood and adulthood are acted out 
on the screen as opposed to from one side of the camera to the other. Philibert’s 
documentary follows a tiny rural French primary school in the Puy-de-Dôme 
region (comprising a single class for children of all ages through to secondary 
school) through the seasons and from the start to the end of a scholastic year. 
The focal point of the interaction between children and adults is the pupils’ 
engagement with their teacher, Georges Lopez, and as Phil Powrie observes, ‘we 
rarely see the families of the children, as if the school, which has children of 
all ages in a single class, provides a surrogate family closer to what Roudinesco 
calls the “tribe” than the bourgeois family of modern times’.15 Lopez, who is in 
virtually every sequence of Être et avoir, is also, for his pupils, in omnipresent 
loco parentis, functioning as their teacher, mentor, counsellor and nanny. He is 
an idealized surrogate father, most effectively with Natalie, one of his older pupils 
about to depart for middle school. Natalie is an elective virtual mute, and one 
especially moving sequence occurs towards the end of the film as Lopez questions 
her about her extreme taciturnity and talks to her about the potential difficulties 
of transferring schools. The primary school classroom is portrayed as a cocoon 
for the children in Être et avoir, who are not ready yet for the adult world and 
who are here tenderly protected and looked after by Lopez, even when being 
reprimanded.
Philibert’s documentary, considering how recently it was made, is notably 
old-fashioned. In its cinéma verité languidness it seems blissfully unaware of 
docusoaps, reality television and all the other recent transmutations of the 
observational documentary mode, and the film’s depiction of children, school 
and life in rural France is similarly nostalgic and backwards glancing. Shari 
Kizirian considers the timing of Philibert’s seventh feature-length documentary as 
historically important – that Être et avoir premiered at Cannes in May 2002, some 
nine months after the attacks on the World Trade Center, 11 September 2001, and 
less than a year before the USA’s ‘misdirected fury was unleashed on the Iraqis’.16 
Although in this turbulent political context it ‘provided a brief respite of calm’, 
the film also, for me, functions as an act of nostalgic disavowal, intent on harking 
back to a different era of observational, people-centred and non-interventionist 
documentary filmmaking and is reluctant to confront or reinvoke the brutalities 
of the world around it. The much-cited sequence of Lopez asking Jo-Jo to wash 
his paint-encrusted hands is cute and moving, Philibert having captured the sort 
of privileged exchange of trusting, loving looks between teacher and pupil that 
only comes to a director and crew who have filmed with their subjects for almost 
600 hours. However, its historical proximity to 9/11 notwithstanding, the children 
in Être et avoir are exaggeratedly far removed from the images of children being 
liberated from the concentration camps, for example, or Kim Phuc running naked 
down a South Vietnamese road, which Butler argued ‘disrupted the visual field 
and the entire sense of public identity that was built upon that field’.17

110      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
The non-intrusive observation in Être et avoir of children learning how to 
read and write or spending time on non- and pre-word-based activities such 
as colouring in, hark back to an earlier, more innocent mode of documentary 
filmmaking and how to use the child on film, and point to the fact that the younger 
ones are only just beginning to learn the language that, in Lacanian terms, will 
mark them out as social entities equipped to engage with an adult-defined world. 
The children’s innocence and the film’s clearly demarcated distinction between 
the domains of childhood and adulthood are emphasized in the sequence only 
a few minutes in when Jo-Jo and some of the other smaller children are being 
taught to write through being asked to form the word ‘maman’. Moments later, 
a group of smaller children again are mixing the ingredients for pancakes that, 
in a while, the older pupils will toss, making a dreadful mess. The idyllic nature 
of this school experience is emphasized by the fact that so much of what we see 
being learnt in Être et avoir is being learnt for the first time. Conversely, the older 
children are overtly preoccupied at the prospect of having to leave this idyll 
behind. Natalie’s trauma at her imminent separation from Lopez – the surrogate 
parent who understands and is sympathetic to her pathological silence – or the 
pre-adolescent tensions between Olivier and Julien are framed negatively in Être 
et avoir as being part of growing up: the children’s necessary but painful transition 
to middle school, adolescence and experience. The sentimental attachment to the 
innocence of childhood harks back to Child’s Play and the amusement that series 
derived from looking at children through jaded adult spectacles as they strive to 
define things they only partially understand. An equivalent moment in Être et 
avoir is Jo-Jo and Marie performing the mundane task of trying to photocopy 
some pages from a book. Jo-Jo teeters on a chair and discards the many miscopied 
reproductions, clumsily moving the oversize book around the glass in the vain 
hope of positioning it correctly (Fig 6.2). We – as adult viewers – would be able to 
help, but in fact simply relish the spectacle of him getting it wrong and learning.
As he walks away (having been shoved off the chair by Marie who wants to 
try her luck at photocopying) Jo-Jo glances briefly into the camera, peripherally 
or fleetingly aware of its attentions, but not destabilized by it. The one in Être et 
avoir who is manifestly destabilized by the camera’s presence is the adult Lopez. 
There is, of course, Lopez’s only interview in the documentary (for the remainder 
of it, he is shown in action as it were – performing his job, being a teacher) which 
is especially stilted, but there are also less formal points at which he signals an 
awareness of the camera’s presence and implicitly responds to its gaze. A few 
minutes before the photocopying sequence, Lopez is in the classroom with his 
pupils and begins to ruminate aloud about how he has been giving dictations for 
thirty-five years, an observation that is surely as much for our benefit as it is for 
theirs (that Lopez is on the verge of retirement is significant in terms of his deep 
bond with the cheeky but lovable Jo-Jo, a pupil he would not have guided through 
to middle school). Lopez conforms squarely to Ellis’s notion of the ‘performances 
of self’ in ‘our everyday encounters’18 – doubly so, for in his everyday encounters 

CHILDREN IN DOCUMENTARIES      111
with his pupils as their teacher he is necessarily performing (even without the 
cameras being present), and in Être et avoir he is being asked to go about this 
everyday role for the benefit of the cameras whilst making out for the vast majority 
of the film that the camera is not there. The performative complexity of Lopez’s 
situation relative to the children’s is yet another way in which Être et avoir has to 
differentiate between the worlds of adult and child.
Two very different documentaries in which the distinction between child and 
adult perspectives is blurred if not altogether erased are Capturing the Friedmans 
and Tarnation, both documentaries that use a large amount of childhood home 
movie material juxtaposed with footage of the far more recent past, and which 
are also structured around personal testimony and memory. Through the course 
of both films, one comes as a spectator to appreciate that personal testimony and 
‘truth’ are neither consistently, nor reliably, related.19 This is especially the case with 
Capturing the Friedmans, a documentary that opens to the strains of the 1963 pop 
hit ‘Act Naturally’, an ostensibly facile song that equates the ability to act naturally 
with becoming a big movie star, used here to faux naive effect as a commentary on 
both the Friedman’s own ostensible naivety (in letting Jarecki in to film them) and 
their abilities to ‘act naturally’ for the home movie camera – even after Arnold’s 
trial has begun.20 As the opening to a film about charges of paedophilia (brought 
against father and son, Arnold and Jesse Friedman) the glibness of this opening is 
unsettling, especially set against the home movie archive, which, by its very nature, 
is footage – like the interviews in Seven Up! – framed by an adult perspective 
where family members perform for a sophisticated, knowing and adult onlooker. 
FIGURE 6.2  At the photocopier. Être et avoir directed by Nicolas Philibert © Maïa Films 
2002. All Rights Reserved.

112      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
This would not seem so uncomfortably ambiguous if it were not for the fact that 
Andrew Jarecki, the documentary’s director, is never explicit about his views on the 
case, namely that he thinks Jesse is innocent, and indeed, alongside his producer 
Marc Smerling, took an active role in the appeal and in attempting to get Jesse’s 
conviction quashed.21 Though compelling, Capturing the Friedmans makes me 
uneasy because of, as Xan Brooks put it in his review of the film, ‘its teasing lack of 
judgement’,22 which, in a film about alleged child abuse, is manifestly problematic.
As details of the case emerge, as the family falls apart and finally as Arnold 
dies in prison, the discordance between reality and happy memories (the joshing 
around in the home movies) becomes irreversible and it becomes traumatic to 
look at images of the Friedman children playing against the backdrop of this story 
of child abuse, especially as so many of the home movie sequences are prefaced by 
or juxtaposed with the words of mother Elaine Friedman, the one family member 
who, from the outset, believes her husband – at least – to be guilty. This proximity 
between adult testimony or commentary and childhood home movie footage 
makes for extremely disturbing viewing throughout. Home movies are artless, 
responsive, observational, spontaneous; they are not generally highly wrought 
or heavily constructed. Home movies offer access to events, although they are 
usually too close to those events to explain or comment upon them. They are 
fragments as opposed to complete actions or narratives. A quintessential example 
of this is Abraham Zapruder’s footage of the death of President Kennedy: the most 
infamous home movie as well as the most infamous snuff movie of all time. The 
family home movie is especially evocative, it both captures largely inconsequential 
action on film, while remaining emphatically performative.23 It is rare – except, as 
happens with Zapruder’s or the Friedman’s footage, when it becomes part of an 
alternative narrative – for other families’ home movies to be interesting to a wider 
audience. There are two layers of home movie in Capturing the Friedmans: there 
is the ‘authentic’ childhood footage, and there is the material David Friedman 
films around the time of his father’s and brother’s arrest. The juxtaposition of the 
two means that even the childhood footage has lost its innocence and no longer 
conforms to the ideal of ‘conscripted “togetherness”’ the family home movie 
putatively represents.24 When Jesse’s lawyer, Peter Panaro recollects, for example, 
that his client told him he had been abused by Arnold as a child, this revelation 
is juxtaposed with pictures of Jesse as a child. Elaine repeatedly asserts that the 
Friedmans were ‘a family’ (with all the suggestions of ‘conscripted “togetherness”’ 
that term implies) and home movie material to support her case – birthdays, 
holidays and the like – is edited in, only to be disavowed or contradicted by events 
and by Elaine herself. The apparent ‘truth’ in this case does not reside in these 
images of happy children smiling at and playing up for the camera, but in the 
shocking collision between these and the allegations of paedophilia. Both Seven 
Up! and Être et avoir are motivated by understanding the dialogue between the 
adult camera and the child subject and the more complex accompanying dialogue 
between childhood and adulthood – but also clearly demarcating these domains 

CHILDREN IN DOCUMENTARIES      113
as separate. Capturing the Friedmans, like Tarnation (which I will discuss in more 
detail in a moment) is a documentary about huge and tragic subjects (allegations 
of child abuse and a mother’s schizophrenia), which share and express a sense of 
the loss of that distinction between the generations. The separation and distance 
between the generations compels us as viewers to reconsider the status of the 
performances for and in front of the adult camera and to fret about the differences 
between the potential fakery of the performances of excessive ‘innocence’, 
‘naturalness’ and ‘happiness’ captured in Capturing the Friedmans and the apparent 
honest naivety of the childish performances in Être et avoir or Seven Up!. Although 
Capturing the Friedmans definitely encapsulates our shared understanding of the 
home movie as the family at its most ‘authentic’, it also carries more ambiguous 
notions of the family playing at being a family – the home movie as uncanny 
repetition of innocent domesticity. Again, the lyrics of ‘Act Naturally’ are relevant 
here: the idea that ‘they’ (adults) are going to ‘make a big star out of me’ if I – in 
this instance the child – ‘act naturally’ could be either facile or faux facile, carrying 
equal connotations of both welcomed fame and cynical exploitation.
Jonathan Caouette’s Tarnation offers a very different and morally unambiguous 
image of traumatic childhood. Released the same year as Capturing the Friedmans 
and only a year after Être et avoir, it is so vastly different that it could be from 
another era entirely. In Documentary: Witness and Self-revelation Ellis discusses 
‘slow film’ and how shooting and editing have both ‘undergone radical changes 
since the 1980s under the impact of successive forms of digital technology’.25 
Ellis is principally interested in the impact of these developments on working 
practices – noting that documentary filmmaking is now ‘more accessible beyond 
the confines of the broadcast and cinema industries’ and that ‘it has become easier 
to edit, and easier to construct complex combinations of sounds and images’.26 
He then goes on to cite Geoff King on the increase in the rapidity of particularly 
Hollywood editing and shot length, but Ellis’s distinction between slow and fast 
film accurately reflects the differences between Être et avoir, an ostentatiously 
‘slow’ documentary, and Tarnation, with its use of short shots, split screens and 
complex soundtrack as, at times, a parodically ‘fast’ one.
Caouette’s working methods and techniques have been well documented in 
virtually every article written about the film: that he shot the adult portions of it 
on a Sony Handycam and the childhood sections on Hi-8, that he edited over 160 
hours of footage using free iMovie software and that it cost a mere $218.32 to make, 
excluding distribution costs. As Caouette describes it, Tarnation is ‘an amalgam of 
everything: excerpts from my own CD collection; grabbing pieces from VHS and 
going to my Hi-8 camera. Then uploading that into the movie.’27 It borrows its style 
from the traditions of non-narrative avant-garde film and music video, despite 
the imposition of a very clear narrative arc, namely the story to date of Caouette’s 
turbulent life. As Caouette mentions in the same interview when asked about how 
he has been ‘compiling everything, grabbing everything starting at the age of ten 
and half or eleven’: ‘It is odd, isn’t it? It’s as if I’ve been inadvertently making this 

114      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
film all my life’,28 a filmed life that continues into Walk Away Renee, the follow up 
feature which premiered at Cannes 2011.29
If we remind ourselves of Sontag’s assertion that ‘to live is to be photographed’ 
and that to be photographed or ‘to pose’ offers the subject ‘deep satisfaction’, 
Tarnation moves us as spectators precisely because it suggests that, throughout 
Caouette’s life, living and posing have been interchangeable facets of the same 
experience, which for a child (as he is in the earliest home movie footage extracts) 
is atypical and destabilizing. The definition of ‘tarnation’ is the act of damning 
or the condition of being damned,30 and instead of signalling a distinction 
between childhood and adulthood, Tarnation suggests that they are points on 
the same continuum – that childhood is ‘damned’ by segueing all too smoothly 
into adulthood, a psychological and intellectual premise emphasized by its 
frenetic visual style and, most specifically, Caouette’s rapport with and use of 
the camera. Unlike the Friedmans, for whom filming was a communal, familial 
activity, for Jonathan Caouette it is solitary and solipsistic, and the camera’s gaze 
is ambivalently voyeuristic: it intrudes on and makes us uncomfortable viewers of 
the mental illness of Jonathan’s mother Renee, his grandmother Rosemary and his 
grandfather Adolph; it also captures the equally traumatic spectacle of Jonathan’s 
exhibitionist performances into it.
The most affecting and troubling of these is Caouette aged 11 filming himself, 
using his tripod-mounted camera in the hallway, as the fictional character Hilary 
Chapman, an abused wife, testifying in court and explaining why she murdered 
her violent husband. Quarter of an hour into Tarnation, this is its first extended 
sequence in close-up. Speaking directly into the static camera, ‘Hilary’ gives a 
painful, agitated account of her marriage to ‘Jimmy’, her ‘little baby Caroline’ and 
the repeated acts of domestic violence that culminated in ‘Jimmy’ pointing a gun to 
her head shouting ‘I’ll kill you, bitch, I’ll kill you’ before ‘Hilary’ ‘blew his ass away’. 
The image is of imperfect quality, but the sickly tungsten yellow hue is morbidly 
appropriate, while the close-up image framed by the fixed camera is oppressive 
and claustrophobic. This image of an 11-year-old boy giving a moving, hysterical 
performance of an abused wife is, to borrow from Sontag, atrocious and haunting, 
because it suggests that Caouette both knows and does not fully comprehend 
the implications of his performance and, as a result, it blows apart securely held 
beliefs about documentary’s inherent performativity: the surety of Ellis’s idea that 
‘Face is, in many ways, the expression of biography and experience’;31 Thomas 
Waugh’s notion of ‘the right to play oneself’;32 or my own borrowings from Butler 
in formulating my definition of all documentary as performative. In one interview 
Caouette gives this elliptical account of Hilary:
It wasn’t a character that I developed prior to [filming]. It was actually inspired 
by two compelling things that I saw on television that day, and I just turned the 
camera on and just kind of went to town … acting was the only out that I had. 
Definitely looking back, there was in Hilary an emulation of my mother … It 

CHILDREN IN DOCUMENTARIES      115
was a very abusive marriage she went through … Some of the story, specifically 
the gun held up to her head, being kicked in the stomach, all that stuff my mom 
has gone through, that she told me about, I believe.33
Caouette’s multiple performances and the fictional characters he constructs, 
especially within the context of his explosively fragmented documentary, enact 
the early loss and destruction of childish innocence. Tarnation is, ostensibly at 
least, a documentary about adult lives from a child’s point of view but, within 
this framework, presents the generational world turned upside down: its adults 
are so needy, so unstable that certainty, solidity and awareness reside more with 
the child – a child, though, who has never experienced the normative transition 
from childhood to adulthood. However, inasmuch as ‘in the ranking of suffering, 
children become substitutable and no longer recognisable as individual humans’,34 
Caouette’s uprooting and deeply unsettling ‘performances of self’ (and multiple 
others), become representative of childhood suffering and neglect more pervasively.
Children’s performances in documentaries problematize so many received 
ideas about documentary and how nonfictional images function. They are also 
full of contradictions: whereas for Caouette ‘to live’ may be ‘to be photographed’ 
as Sontag surmises, the children in San Pietro, Seven Up! and Être et avoir have 
not yet learnt the rules of that particular game. And although the whole film is 
concerned with the mutuality of photography and living, neither have the sons 
in Capturing the Friedmans. Life, like documentary, is inherently performative 
for adults, but such an assumption is necessarily more contentious when applied 
to children, for performativity implies social and self-awareness, which are often 
still forming in children. Children’s ‘performances of self’ are typically either 
representative, as Butler argues: that is, they are placed in the position – as the 
children are in Seven Up!, of standing for, representing a social group. Or, within 
the adult parameters of documentary film, mediated through adult eyes. ‘Be 
yourself’ is an oddly impossible instruction to an adult, but it is a more realizable 
proposition to a child because, as we see in the photocopier scene in Être et avoir, 
there is a greater chance that for children, what they are experiencing in their here 
and now is of more interest than the camera, or the performative layers of filming 
and how they might come across on film. Although not all children lack guile, the 
intellectual and psychological complexities of the gaze and the camera’s objectifying 
potential have not, by most children, been fully negotiated. Through discussing 
contrasting examples of the child in documentary I have sought to explore how 
they are all, in diverse ways, expressive of generational tensions between adult 
and child, between the adult looking at children and children returning that look. 
When, in a documentary such as Tarnation, in which its autobiographical status 
also serves to destabilize notions of separation between adult and childhood 
experiences, generational differences are subverted and childishness is in danger 
of being engulfed by the implied guile and disingenuousness of performances that 
we are aware have been constructed specifically for the camera. Conversely, in 

116      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
documentaries such as Être et avoir, the children are fascinating because they are 
so different from us as adults, so unaware – in most cases – of the perils of growing 
up. One of the most frequently viewed and cited sequences from Spellbound, Jeffrey 
Blitz’s spelling bee documentary (2002) is the boy Harry misspelling ‘banns’. Harry 
squirms and grimaces as he circles round the possibilities of this short but tricky 
word, unself-conscious – or so it seems – of the ‘performance of self’ he is giving 
for the camera. But what is the pleasure in watching this? It is not seeing a child 
fail, but rather having him confirm that he is still different from us and has not 
yet learnt either ‘to-be-looked-at-ness’ or the perils and powers of documentary 
performance. Children are perhaps at their most beguiling when they appear 
to be without guile, as they are in Être et avoir, when they are in the moment, 
responsive and unpremeditated. While we are fascinated with Caouette, his 
multiple performances of self exemplify adult audiences’ unhealthy predilection 
for freak show documentaries (to cite Jon Dovey’s book of that title) in which the 
children at least seem half-aware of the adult’s performative game.
Notes
1	 Susan Sontag, ‘Regarding the torture of others’, New York Times Magazine, 23 May 
2004, p. 28.
2	 See John Corner, The Art of Record: A Critical Introduction to Documentary 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1996).
3	 See, for example, John Berger’s description of gendered difference: ‘One might 
simplify this by saying: men act and women appear. Men look at women. Women 
watch themselves being looked at. This determines not only most relations between 
men and women but also the relation of women to themselves. The surveyor of 
woman in herself is male: the surveyed female. Thus she turns herself into an 
object – and most particularly an object of vision: a sight.’ John Berger, Ways of Seeing 
(London: Penguin, 1972), p. 45; also Laura Mulvey, ‘Visual pleasure and narrative 
cinema’, Screen, vol. 16, no. 3 (1975), pp. 6–18.
4	 Vicky Lebeau, Childhood and Cinema (London: Reaktion, 2008), p. 138.
5	 Susan Sontag, Regarding the Pain of Others (London: Penguin, 2003), p. 102.
6	 Lebeau, Childhood and Cinema, pp. 138–9.
7	 Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (London: 
Routledge, 1990), p. 136.
8	 Paula Newton and Thom Patterson, ‘The girl in the picture: Kim Phuc’s journey from 
war to forgiveness’, CNN, 20 August 2015, http://edition.cnn.com/2015/06/22/world/
kim-phuc-where-is-she-now/index.html (accessed July 2021).
9	 John Ellis, Documentary: Witness and Self-revelation (London: Routledge, 2012), p. 50.
10	 Ibid.
11	 Ibid., p. 51.
12	 ‘Voice of God’ narration is generally understood to be an authoritative, male voice-over, 
such as Laurence Olivier’s in The World at War. For a full discussion of narration in 
non-fiction film, see Stella Bruzzi, New Documentary (London: Routledge, 2006), ch. 2.
13	 For a full discussion of the ‘interactive mode’, see Bill Nichols, Representing Reality: 
Issues and Concepts in Documentary (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 
1992), pp. 44–56.

CHILDREN IN DOCUMENTARIES      117
14	 Richard Kilborn, Taking the Long View: A Study of Longitudinal Documentary 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2010), p. 89.
15	 Phil Powrie, ‘Unfamilar places: “heterospection” and recent French films on children’, 
Screen, vol. 46, no. 3 (2005), p. 345.
16	 Shail Kizirian, ‘Être et avoir: the medium and the moment’, Senses of Cinema, no. 60 
(2011).
17	 Butler, Gender Trouble, p. 150.
18	 Ellis, Documentary, p. 50.
19	 See my discussion of Capturing the Friedmans in Bruzzi, New Documentary (2nd 
edn), pp. 238–45.
20	 Lyrics quoted in Capturing the Friedmans include, ‘They’re gonna put me in the 
movies, They’re gonna make a big star out of me.’
21	 For example, Jarecki and Smerling ‘spent the years since the documentary’s 
release traveling the world at their expense to interview some of the 14 former 
students whose testimony contributed to Jesse Friedman’s conviction’. Tracey Levy, 
‘Exonerating the Friedmans’, Tablet, 21 November 2012, http://www.tabletmag.com/
jewish-arts-and-culture/117317/exonerating-the-friedmans (accessed July 2021).
22	 Xan Brooks, ‘Family viewing’ (review of Capturing the Friedmans), Sight and Sound, 
April 2004, pp. 40–1.
23	 Although it’s been subsumed for ever more into a different narrative, Zapruder’s 
twenty-six seconds of film was, abutting as it did conventional family home movie 
images, intended simply as a family memento of the president’s visit to Dallas.
24	 Marsha Orgeron and Devin Orgeron, ‘Familial pursuits, editorial acts: documentaries 
after the age of home video’, The Velvet Light Trap, no. 60 (2007), p. 49.
25	 Ellis, Documentary, p. 84.
26	 Ibid.
27	 Laurence Hegarty, ‘An interview with Jonathan Caouette’, Projections, vol. 1, no. 2 
(2007), p. 28.
28	 Ibid.
29	 However, the two features fulfil markedly different personal functions for their 
director: Tarnation ‘was made with a sense of urgency, and there was a heavy sense 
of catharsis connected to it’, while conversely Walk Away Renee was made ‘a lot more 
out of happenstance and circumstance … it was more about the idea that I had a lot 
of B-roll from Tarnation just residing on external hard drives, and I had the need to 
do something with it.’ Kurt Osenlund, ‘Interview: Jonathan Caouette’, 20 July 2012, 
www.slantmagazine.com/film/feature/interview-jonathan-caouette/319 (accessed July 
2021).
30	 Cf. http://www.thefreedictionary.com/tarnation (accessed July 2021), which also 
indicates that the term is specific to New England and the Southern USA.
31	 Ellis, Documentary, p. 50.
32	 Thomas Waugh, The Right to Play Oneself: Looking Back on Documentary Film 
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2011), p. xv.
33	 Hegarty, ‘An interview with Jonathan Caouette’, p. 21.
34	 Butler, Gender Trouble, p. 29.

118 

PART THREE
HISTORIES

120 

T
his chapter will examine the relationship between the cohesion and robust 
nature of grand historical narratives and the fragile but durable chaotic 
agencies of children. I will explore the centrality of children in Emir 
Kusturica’s ‘Yugoslavian’ films in order to demonstrate how, amongst the messy 
aesthetics of the films and the messy lives of the characters that inhabit them, 
children possess a remarkable resilience that undermines and ultimately shatters 
the monolithic ‘hardness’ of historical discourse.
Underground (Emir Kusturica, 1995), which won the director the Palme d’Or 
for a record second time, has forced an intense scrutiny of the interface between 
art and history. Released when the Bosnian phase of the Yugoslav wars was 
moving to its final and most tragic chapter, Underground’s epic narrative expands 
over fifty-five years of the region’s history, starting with the German invasion of 
1941 and ending in a loosely defined present. At a moment when political and 
moral clarity were in demand and calls for military intervention were appearing 
from several quarters – not only from the combatants but also an ever increasing 
number of Western politicians and intellectuals (Susan Sontag famously staged a 
performance of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo in 1993) – the film was criticized for 
being too messy, further muddying the waters of an already complex historical and 
political situation and contributing to confusion and apathy. Historical and critical 
clarity were demanded and the film’s ‘messiness’ had to be purified and fixed 
into an unambiguous statement on the conflict. Alain Finkielkraut denounced 
Underground from the pages of Le Monde; and, when it was revealed that he had 
not even watched the film, he defended himself in Libération by claiming that the 
urgency of the situation meant that the film had to be denounced immediately, 
branding Kusturica a ‘collaborator’.1 Slavoj Žižek castigated the film’s apparent 
unwillingness to take sides by classifying it as a typical case of a ‘neo-fascism’ that 
‘is more and more “postmodern”, civilized, playful, involving ironic self-distance, 
yet for all that no less fascist’.2
In its absolutism what such critical condemnation indicates is that ‘messiness’ 
threatens clear, unambiguous and orderly historical accounts, which in their 
­7 KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN: 
THE BUBBLE THAT BURSTS 
HISTORY
Dimitris Eleftheriotis

122      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
mastery of the past become elevated to official history. The multiple connotations 
of ‘messiness’ as a negative category in relation to, inter alia: the disciplinary 
upbringing of children; the political clarity of history; and cinematic style provide 
the focus of my essay. It is, however, important to address briefly how Underground 
functioned as a text that in its political ‘messiness’ retroactively influenced 
Kusturica’s overall career, including the pre-1990 films that I address here, both 
altering and redefining their significance.3 Dina Iordanova’s comprehensive study 
of Kusturica’s films up to 2001 opens its considerations with the question ‘Who is 
Kusturica?’, which is answered in the first instance in relation to his ethnic ‘roots’ 
and ‘allegiances’, a rather insensitive line of enquiry given the historical context.4 
What compounds the irony is that the pro ex-Yugoslavia stand that is attributed 
to Underground is then deployed as an interpretative framework for the pre-1990 
films, which earlier critical reception had actually praised for their ‘messing-up’ of 
the officially sanctioned and sanitized history of Yugoslavia as a socialist paradise. 
Viewed from the perspective of the ‘betrayal’ of Underground these earlier films 
are now either ignored or cited as manifestations of Kusturica’s alleged neo-fascist 
representation of the history of the Balkans as an ‘eternal orgy of drinking, singing 
and copulating’.5
I too was an actor on this stage – I could move, speak, react on my own 
volition. The inevitable counterforce would just have to wait.6
(p. 265)
Focusing on Do You Remember Dolly Bell? (Yug, 1981; henceforth Dolly), When 
Father Was Away On Business (Yug, 1985; henceforth When) and Time of the 
Gypsies (Yug, 1989; henceforth Time) this chapter will consider some of the ways 
in which Kusturica’s messing-up of official history is carried out during the volatile 
period following Tito’s death in 1980 and the disintegration of Yugoslavia that 
started in 1990, challenging any black and white binary accounts of the now extinct 
state’s history. The films are set in a clear historical context but one that cannot be 
defined as either an ever-improving socialist paradise, or a totalitarian communist 
hell. Rather they expose the naivety and reductive qualities of both official, state-
sanctioned versions of Yugoslavian history, and Western Cold War aphorisms, 
by constructing rich and chaotic narratives of everyday life. In Kusturica’s films, 
communities and extended families are employed as mediating structures between 
the forces and processes of history and the complex, infinite microcosms of 
individual lives with their often conflicting anxieties and desires. More specifically, 
this chapter will argue that the children,7 who are central in the three films, are 
potent agents in the interrogation and the process of ‘messing-up’ official history. 
Furthermore, the ‘child’ as a discursive category abounds with tensions between 
order, tidiness, cleanliness and messiness: since hygienic practices, well-organized 
and clean living space, neatness of presentation, to mention but a few, are all 
values held as essential for the ‘proper’ development of children, with messiness 
signifying a deep-rooted sign of immaturity that has to be ironed out through the 

KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN      123
deployment of a panoply of disciplinary and regulatory processes. The incessant 
pursuit or demand for order and tidiness identifies messiness as the natural mode 
of the child’s existence and the child itself as an agent of disorder. In addition, 
there is also discursive messiness around childhood as a category, with the child 
held as the ultimate explanatory framework (most obviously demonstrated 
in psychoanalysis) of what an adult becomes. Yet the child is always a ‘work in 
progress’, unstable at his or her core, an entity that requires adult attention and 
care in order to be fully formed.8 This leaves conceptualizations of the child’s 
subjectivity and agency suspended between past, present and future (what one is, 
was, will become); simultaneously the lynchpin of identity and its most volatile 
component.
In relation to children’s fiction, Jacqueline Rose sees, in the spinning of 
narratives about or for children, the desire to impose order: not only on the 
messiness of personal accounts of identity formation but also on the threatening 
mess of symbolic systems:
What we constantly see in discussion of children’s fiction is how the child can be 
used to hold off a panic, a threat to our assumption that language is something 
which can simply be organised and cohered, and that sexuality, while it cannot 
be removed, will eventually take the forms in which we prefer to recognise and 
acknowledge each other. Childhood also serves as a term of universal reference 
which conceals all the historical divisions and difficulties of which children, no 
less than ourselves, form a part.9
Order and messiness also enter the discourse through the construction of a 
protective ‘bubble’ of childhood created by adults, which seeks to isolate and 
sanitize the child from the ‘dirt’ of the real world of the adults: for instance, 
through careful use of language or the systematic classification of the suitability of 
cultural material. A whole set of discourses, practices, aspirations and values are 
in place in order to construct and secure that such ‘bubbles’ are indeed possible 
and functional. The clearest manifestations of such discourses are articles of 
legislation such as the various Children’s Acts in the UK and the controversial 
guidelines articulated by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the 
Child (1989), the latter underpinned by the promise to ‘help meet every child’s 
right to be healthy, to be educated, to be treated fairly, to be listened to, and to have 
a childhood protected from violence, abuse and exploitation’.10 Key institutions 
(legal, medical, educational, cultural, sociopolitical) are enlisted in the discursive 
production of such bubbles, but its primary location, the space within which it is 
created, respected and protected, is the family.
Through their dramaturgic and representational practices, Kusturica’s films 
also construct bubbles of childhood. Yet in his films, these bubbles are inhabited 
by children who are not protected, sanitized or isolated from the broad historical 
processes that surround them. Unlike the anxious discursive production of sterile, 

124      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
utterly protected bubbles imagined by legislation and policy, Kusturica’s bubbles 
are porous and permeable, fragile to historical forces but also hard enough to 
mess up the linearity and to confuse the rigidity of history. The children do 
not simplistically function as sentimental representational shorthand for the 
harshness and oppression of the political situation. Instead, they are involved 
in a dynamic relationship with historical reality by asserting and celebrating 
their existence in the micro-histories that run parallel to and interrogate such 
reality. The personal narratives of Kusturica’s children construct a type of agency 
and subjectivity that is in stark contrast with the anonymous subjects of the 
grand socialist meta-narratives and grants them a critical edge that ultimately 
explodes these narratives’ apparent legitimacy and historical accuracy. The films 
enable and foreground the incessant activities of the children, a ‘bubbling-up’ of 
agency that disturbs the powerful, linear surface of dominant history’s symbolic 
violence.
The ‘bubble of childhood’ in Kusturica’s films plays overlapping roles in 
the critical reception and political evaluation of his work. Firstly, it emerges as 
part of the accusation of ‘Yugo-nostalgia’ frequently levelled at him (which 
he mischievously accepts) and these bubbles are possibly an expression of the 
sentimental investment in childhood that his films can, in a certain reductive 
manner, evoke and which may then be conflated as an expression of nostalgia for 
the political regime. Secondly, Kusturica himself delves into mischief and chaos, 
creating an atmosphere which he often describes as ‘childlike’ – this refers not 
only formally to the construction of his films, through the chaotic planes of shot 
composition, movement of and in the frame and overall mise en scène, but also to 
the content; his deliberate ‘messing up’ of historical narratives and orders.
Life was too busy to dwell on things like age
(p. 26)
As I will demonstrate in my analysis, children in the early Kusturica films, at 
least partially because the treatment of gender operates in the most patriarchal 
and orderly manner imaginable, complicate and in effect mess up the politics of 
bio-power and the universality, coherence and manageability of other historical 
accounts and grand narratives. All three films place boys at the centre of their 
narratives but remain, one suspects deliberately, ambiguous about the precise age 
of the protagonists.
Dolly is set in the early 1960s in Sarajevo and revolves around a typical family with 
four children with a particular focus on Dino, an active, if ‘inclined to delinquency’ 
member of the Youth Club run by the Communist Party. Dino is a teenager but 
played by Slavko Stimic (a regular in Kusturica’s films) who at the time of the film’s 
production was 20. During the course of the film Dino becomes the lead singer 
of a popular music quartet, falls in love with ‘Dolly Bell’ (Liliana Blagojevic) – a 
sex-worker placed under Dino’s protection by her pimp Pog (Mirsad Zulic). Dino’s 
father Maho (Slobodan Aligrudic) dies following a brief but serious illness and at 

KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN      125
the end of the film and after a successful performance by Dino’s band, the family 
leave their neighbourhood as their long-expected relocation is finally authorized.
The protagonist of When is Malik, a 6-year-old boy played by Moreno D’E 
Bartolli, who was 10 years old at the time of production (and looking every bit 
his real age). The film’s story is focalized around two years of Malik’s life, the 
1950–52 period, when his father Mesa (Miki Manolovic, another of Kusturica’s 
regular leads) is sent first to prison and then to exile for making inappropriate 
political comments. The family moves from Sarajevo to Zvornik, Mesa’s place of 
exile, where Malik falls in love with Masa (Silvija Puharic) who suffers from a 
mysterious disease and eventually dies. Mesa’s political rehabilitation is completed 
and the family return to Sarajevo as the film ends with a chaotic wedding party.
Defining the age of Perhan, the protagonist of Time of the Gypsies is even more 
challenging. He is played by Davor Dujnovic who was 20 at the time of production. 
More confusingly, the film is playful and inconsistent with his appearance, 
employing costume, props and make-up to construct him initially as a very young 
teenager but later as significantly older, as he becomes more and more involved in 
the world of adults. Perhan lives in a Romany community with his grandmother, 
uncle and poliomyelitis-inflicted younger sister Dzamila (Suada Karisik). Perhan 
falls in love with his neighbour, Azra (Sinolicka Trpkova). In order to cure his 
sister and raise money to marry Azra, Perhan joins the gang of the ‘gypsy king’ 
Ahmed (Bora Todorovic) who operates a criminal business between Yugoslavia 
and Italy. Azra dies while giving birth and when Perhan discovers that Ahmed has 
been lying to him and using Dzamila in his gang of child-beggars, he kills him but 
is then shot and dies.
The three films are very uneven in their treatment of children, centralizing 
their narratives on one particular child but downplaying or even completely 
marginalizing others. Dino’s sister and two brothers are inconsequential to the 
story, contributing to the mise en scène of the family set-up but not endowed 
with narrative agency. Similarly, Mirza (Malik’s older brother played by Davoue 
Dujnovic) is primarily used for his accordion playing, providing diegetic iterations 
of the film’s main musical theme, Iosif Ivanici’s classic Balkan waltz ‘The Waves 
of the Danube’. In Time Dzamila’s main function seems to be her illness, which 
is used as a causal narrative force, ultimately only ‘meaningful’ in terms of her 
sentimental value for Perhan, since she says very little and has no influence on the 
future for herself or for her family. Justifying the feminist critique often levelled 
at Kusturica, the characters with narrative agency are therefore exclusively boys 
or men, with girls and women functioning as an affective and symbolic mise en 
scène, often reduced to iconographic clichés that draw on a repertoire of dubious 
stereotypes: the mother, the whore or the helpless little sister.
The ambiguity around the precise age of the young protagonists – and their 
status as children (of whatever age) – does not undermine the key place that Dino, 
Malik and Perhan occupy. Given the historical nature of the films it is important 
to recognize the specific significance that childhood holds in the context of the 

126      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
communist mode of governance that underpinned former Yugoslavia. Children 
had always been an important target group in communist societies in general, 
with a number of youth organizations playing a key role in the ideological and 
political control of society. Organizations such as the Soviet Komsomol or the 
Yugoslavian Pioneers provided a protective and controlled environment, which 
sanitized or protected children from what was perceived to be the contaminating, 
harmful influences of capitalist values and culture. One of these groups’ functions 
was the filtering of international cultural influences. The only works approved 
by the State were those produced in other countries of ‘existing socialism’, in the 
context of the international communist fraternity or representing the struggles of 
the oppressed around the world. Yet Yugoslavia’s case is peculiar, in that after the 
1948 break with USSR and Stalin, it became considerably more open to Western 
influence, allowing greater mobility to and from its national territory. Another 
crucial function of youth organizations was to cultivate the kinds of values that 
were believed to be appropriate to inspire the generations of future communists 
who would build the socialist utopia. The specific qualities of such modes of 
communist appropriations of childhood are explored in both Dolly and When, 
the former scrutinizing the Sarajevo Youth Club to which Dino belongs, the latter 
referring extensively to Malik’s experience of communist youth groups.
Every room has a room-feeling.
(p. 14)
I will now examine how the three films construct childhood through the use of 
setting and mise en scène and identify the ways in which they open that space 
to broader sociopolitical discourses and historical processes, creating a bubble 
that is well defined but also extremely porous. Two configurations surface with 
regularity in the films: a domestic space, usually identified as the family’s home, 
and a more public space where children enjoy a degree of autonomy with minimal 
adult presence and control. While I refer to the latter in passing as a significant 
arena where key aspects of the children’s agency and subjectivity unfold and where 
the intervention of state ideological control is most evident, my primary focus is 
on the domestic context and the family as a spatial articulation of the protective 
bubble of childhood.
The ambiguity with which Kusturica imbues his films is very evident in the 
treatment of domestic familial space. On one level, the families of his films are 
dysfunctional, teeming with dark secrets, with betrayals lurking at each turn of 
the narrative. Maho is an alcoholic, Mesa has an affair with physical education 
teacher Ankica (Mira Furlan), who eventually marries his brother-in-law and 
Perhan suspects that the father of his child is his uncle (Husnija Hasimovic). At 
the same time, however, the families share moments of intimacy, tenderness and 
companionship often expressed as a mise en scène of bodies bundled together on a 
shared bed or around a dinner table. Dialogue fades out in these instances with only 
music accompanying the tableaux vivants of familial togetherness. These moments 

KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN      127
are signalled by a slowing-down of the pace to a complete stillness, providing 
utopian pauses within the otherwise exuberant, fast and chaotic Kusturica style. 
They are rare and short-lived moments that become affective counterpoints to a 
familial space that is continuously invaded by the menacing presence of the state 
and its politics, or which, otherwise, implodes because of its own failings.
Even when we said a room was silent … there were still the tiny sounds of 
floor-board warping, or clocks ticking, or the rattling of stray water droplets 
in the radiators, the velveteen brush of cars outside.
(p. 309)
In Dolly the family dreams of larger and ‘proper’ accommodation as they scrape 
by daily in their current accommodation, a house that constantly leaks when it 
rains. With basins hastily commandeered to gather the rain, the ability of the 
house-as-home to act as an effective protective shell is graphically undermined. In 
Time Merdzan takes revenge on his family by mechanically lifting up the frame of 
the house, exposing Perhan, Dzamila and their grandmother to the rain, thereby 
leaving them – literally – without a roof over their heads. In When, Malik and his 
mother Sena (Miriana Karanovic) visit Mesa in his place of exile where they all 
share a tiny room. Here a blanket is employed as a partition between the adults 
who are trying to make love and their son. Malik feels left out and does everything 
he can to abolish this flimsy boundary. He succeeds and, perhaps ironically, the 
image of Malik in the bed squeezed between his parents becomes yet another 
instance of familial togetherness.
But such moments offer a flawed and short-lived togetherness in that they 
negate the desires of Malik’s parents and otherwise point to the very failure of the 
communist governance to provide adequate accommodation for its citizens. As 
Michel Foucault has noted, a key aspect of spatial distribution of sexual roles in the 
modern family household is the creation of private space, especially in the form 
of separate bedrooms for children and adults.11 The inadequate accommodation 
of the families, which is evident in all three films and most eloquently presented 
in When’s makeshift bedroom, therefore has a double effect: it enforces utopian 
moments of intimacy but also underlines the power of the political (in its systemic 
failures or oppressive control) to penetrate familial privacy.
The significance of the image of the ‘leaky home’ is a clear sign of the material 
collapse of the protected space of the family and a manifestation of the family 
sphere’s infiltration by the broader historical and social context that stealthily 
‘leaks’ into the bubble of childhood. This is a theme (the family at the mercy 
of historical forces, history experienced through the lens of the family) that 
Kusturica, in several interviews, has declared as underpinning the construction 
of his cinematic tales.12 These authorial ‘declarations of intent’ are supported by 
the remarkable inventiveness and variation with which his films express this 
visually. In Time children try to conceal themselves under boxes but as they move 
their presence becomes entertainingly obvious – the same comic visual trick is 

128      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
repeated in his later Black Cat, White Cat. Through this particular convention, 
the ‘child in the box’, the desire for privacy and cover is ridiculed as impossible, 
an ostrich-like act of self-deception which in its expression of an impossible 
desire for privacy taints the comedic mood with a bitter aftertaste. It is precisely 
the desire for a proper and functional ‘bubble’, a modern house, which becomes 
the main motivational force behind Perhan’s adventures, leading to his demise 
– the comedic visualization of the moving box therefore becomes tragic within 
the film’s narrative context.13
In the opening post-credit scene of When, as Malik’s voice-over begins to 
tell his story, a medium shot places him in the centre and foreground of the 
frame (Fig 7.1). The boy is on a moving cart with his best friend Joza (Slobodan 
Aligrudic). The intimacy of the shots of the boys is further emphasized by the out 
of focus background while the voice-over helps establish the cart and the boys’ 
passage as a self-contained autonomous space, an audiovisual manifestation of the 
bubble of childhood. However, the blurry figures of farm workers are recognizable 
in the background and their ‘Come on comrades’ chants are audible, infiltrating 
the space of the boys.
In Dino’s leaky home the family is not simply exposed to or infiltrated by the 
elements. Important family discussions are seen to be conducted in the same 
manner as Communist Party meetings, with Maho chairing the sessions and 
setting the agenda, with minutes taken and the sons addressed as ‘comrades’. In 
this particular case the presence of the state is felt as a force that is simultaneously 
‘soft’ (as an ideological influence on family relationships) and ‘hard’ (through the 
domination of the everyday familial proceedings).
FIGURE 7.1  On the trailer in When Father Was Away on Business directed by Emir 
Kusturica © Centar Film 1985. All Rights Reserved.

KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN      129
Another and more complex exploration of the interplay between the private 
and personal and the contextual and political takes place in a scene where Malik is 
accompanying his father on a business visit to a town near Zvornik. It is clear that 
this ‘business’ is just an excuse for Mesa and his friends to indulge in what Sena 
describes as ‘whore mongering’. The scene unfolds in a music hall decorated by 
an enormous banner that reads ‘Culture, Art, Entertainment’ – the official slogan 
of the cultural policy of the party. Three local women join the men at their table 
and Mesa begins his sexual advances to one of them, covertly using his feet. Malik 
slides under the table, thereby spying on his father’s activities and when things 
seem to go beyond his approval, he sets the tablecloth on fire. In this way, the 
film creates two concentric spaces: the space of the music hall whose walls are 
lined with the official ‘Party line’ on the event it apparently stages but which, in 
reality, facilitates Mesa’s ‘whore mongering’ and another space: the table under 
which the transgression is monitored and disrupted by Malik. It is Malik’s action 
that comes to the rescue of familial unity whilst simultaneously foregrounding the 
hypocrisy of the official narrative and its irrelevance to the most valued aspects 
of Malik’s life. In the close-ups of Malik’s pensive and observant face under the 
table we can perceive a spatial and more literal configuration of a ‘bubble’ that has 
a more private, personal and individualized character. There are two important 
aspects in these shots of Malik. While on a representational level the mise en scène 
of a self-contained bubble created under the table is disturbed by Mesa’s searching, 
desiring feet, Malik’s intervention temporarily interrupts his father’s sexual 
advances (Fig 7.2). Whilst the protection and care of the state and the family fail 
Malik, it is precisely their failure that enables and inspires his narrative agency. 
Furthermore, the shots under the table are similar in their construction – the 
framed face, the fascination and engagement with an object, the facial expression, 
the closed-form composition – with a series of images of other children across all 
three films. The shot of Dino’s fascination with the colourful light bulbs and the 
loudspeakers playing music in the opening of Dolly, that of Perhan’s absorption as 
he hypnotizes his pet turkey, and the concluding shot of When, with Malik flying 
over the land, carry a utopian affect in their self-sufficiency and completeness that 
is comparable to the images of the bundled family, however much they are short-
lived and fragile.
I suppose children are particularly susceptible to such irrational connections: 
with so much unknown, they are less concerned with the sticky details than 
with trying to create a working map of the world.
(p. 143)
A specific quality exclusive to children in these films14 is the possession of or 
obsession with a ‘paranormal’ ability of sorts, which informs the discursive and 
affective constructions of their ‘bubble’ and operates in a similarly complex and 
multidirectional manner: Dino practices hypnosis, Malik sleepwalks and Perhan 
has telekinetic powers. The presence of the paranormal in these films might 

130      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
be attributed to the discursive affinity that Adam Phillips identifies between 
childhood and insanity:
Our earliest lives are lived in a state of sane madness – of intense feelings and 
fearfully acute sensations. We grow up to protect ourselves from these feelings: 
and then as adults we call this defence ‘sanity’. Looked at this way, sanity begins 
to sound like a word we might use for all adult states of mind in which we are 
not children, in which we do not experience things intensely.15
While practice of the paranormal does not necessarily entail an insane subject, 
it does fall on the other side of rational discourse. And the paranormal activities 
of these children have important critical functions. Read as political allegories, 
hypnosis, sleepwalking and telekinesis can be seen as fundamental ideological 
representations of the way in which a totalitarian state relates to and controls its 
citizens: projecting and enforcing sets of beliefs and ideas as reality, compelling 
them into mindless actions, exercising remote regulation of their movements and 
desires. In Kusturica’s films the embodiment of the ideological apparatus of the 
state in the paranormal activities of the young protagonists is deeply ambiguous. 
Malik’s sleepwalking is not necessarily involuntary and the boy uses it tactically, 
such as in one particular escapade, which takes him from his home through the 
night streets of Zvornik and ultimately, into the bed of Masa. This raises interesting 
questions around agency, as here the apparent passivity of sleepwalking (citizenship 
under communism?) is used as a pretext for the covert but active pursuit of 
personal objectives. Similarly, Dino’s technique of hypnosis and the repetition of 
FIGURE 7.2  The disruptive ‘bubble’ of childhood in When Father Was Away on Business 
directed by Emir Kusturica © Centar Film 1985. All Rights Reserved.

KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN      131
the phrase ‘every day in every way, I’m getting a little better’, is resonant of the 
grand narrative of progress and of the idealized figure of the communist as the 
supremely evolved hero of humankind. And while Dino has long debates with 
his father about the similarities between personal improvement through self-
hypnosis and communist character-building, he mainly uses the technique in 
order to achieve mundane and practical goals such as the sexual conquest of Dolly 
Belle. The irrelevance of the grand narrative of progress (that underpins the all-
conquering communist subject) is also comically exposed when Dino advises his 
friend Marbles (who plans on making an advance to a girl at the Youth Club) to 
‘take control of his destiny’ by repeating the ‘every day in every way, I’m getting 
a little better’ mantra. Unimpressed by the promise of self-perfection Marbles’s 
response is poignant: ‘that’s all right but what will I do tomorrow?’ In this way, the 
belief in the paranormal – or irrational powers – that is characteristic of childhood 
is employed in a way that bursts the supposedly watertight construction of official 
history, reclaiming the primacy of mundane needs and desires over supposedly 
more significant teleological trajectories. The acceptance of the paranormal here 
also exposes the fundamental insanity of beliefs and ideas as articulated by the 
communist state, which claim to be materialist, rational, even scientific in nature, 
but are revealed here as little more than childlike flights of fancy that also verge on 
the paranormal and/or irrational.
These moments happened, perhaps, but they were not happening, they no 
longer existed, and so to collect them together seemed a bit false.
(p. 203)
Children in these films are also pivotal in their systematic undermining of neat 
binaries and as they frustrate attempts to impose clear either/or versions of 
Cold War history. This is reinforced by Kusturica’s proliferation of possibilities 
not only in relation to the young protagonists’ subjectivity and agency (hovering 
between activity and passivity, self-determination and subjugation, happiness 
and unhappiness) but through his busy, chaotic and ultimately ‘messy’ style of 
filmmaking that refuses to establish a hierarchical organization of events and 
objects. A comparable messiness informs Reif Larsen’s 2009 novel The Selected 
Works of T. S. Spivet – quotations from which frame this chapter. The novel itself 
consists of a dense and often confusing conglomeration of maps, notes, first-
person narratives, diary entries and drawings, all created by the titular boy who 
obsessively records almost everything that attracts his attention. The layout of the 
book is such that a lot of material appears in the margins of the pages, often in the 
form of notes related to the main text. The following note that the boy provides as 
he reads a discovered journal is particularly insightful:
I wanted to see Emma’s childhood sketchbook! I wanted to hold it up against 
my own notebooks and see if we were sketching the same things. What had 
happened to that sketchbook? What happened to all the historical detritus in 

132      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
the world? Some of it made it into drawers of museums, okay, but what about 
all those postcards, the photoplates, the maps on napkins, the private journals 
with little latches on them? Did they burn in house fires? Were they sold at yard 
sales for 75¢? Or did they all just crumble into themselves like everything else 
in this world, the secret little stories contained within their pages disappearing, 
disappearing, and now gone forever.16
This is an eloquent commentary on the reduction necessarily involved in the 
construction of any grand history and, in its evocation of a subjectivity fascinated 
with ‘historical detritus’, the book presents a literary parallel to the way in which 
children function in the pre-1990 Kusturica films; for what Dino and Malik 
primarily and, to a lesser extent Perhan, bring about in the films is a retrieval of 
detritus from the ‘dustbins of history’. The proliferation of the complex yet small 
stories that emerge, which bubble up and disrupt the smoothness of master or 
meta-narratives constitute a mighty centrifugal force that confuses simplistic and 
reductive versions of Yugoslavian history.
Post-1945 Yugoslavian history is messy: a country both communist and anti-
Soviet, consisting of several semi-independent republics but somehow holding 
together,17 exercising oppressive control over its citizens but also, uniquely for 
a communist state at the time, open to foreign visitors.18 Judith Keane outlines 
the critical role that a clear and orderly official history played in holding the 
country together, a role carried out through the subordination of difference and 
fragmentation:
A carefully contrived national history and collective memory provided the 
glue of Tito’s Yugoslav state. The foundation myths which nourished the over-
arching official story emphasized the experiences which citizens shared across 
the six constituents republics. By contrast, the personal stories of ordinary 
citizens were framed by their particular experiences of work and region and, 
most importantly of all, by the web of family networks in which their lives were 
embedded.19
­Kusturica’s films therefore operate on a personal level but the private sphere of the 
protagonists is permeated with the political and historical context, so that ultimately 
we are standing neither with post-Tito officialdom nor, as Keene explains, ‘with the 
Cold War warriors of the West’.20 In part, this is achieved through the particular 
historical moments that are chosen to provide the setting of the films.
In Dolly, Dino’s pop band is set up by the party as a way to ‘combat delinquency’. 
In the opening of the film, and in a manner that reveals the communist obsession 
with order and uniformity, the Secretary of the Sarajevo branch stands in front of 
a map and comically declares:
The situation today is very complex. In recent times the number of juvenile 
and adult delinquency in our vicinity has been on the rise … Look. One 

KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN      133
sociopolitical cell in our community has a band. Another hasn’t. That can’t go 
on, comrades.
However, Dino’s experiences in the Youth Club are not necessarily orderly and 
suggest a confusion of national origins, amorality and cultural influences. Aside 
from the impropriety of meeting Dolly Bell through her pimp – who is a prominent 
member of the Club – Dino’s cultural curiosities and interests are fuelled by a 
very mixed menu that consists of a hodgepodge of international trends. While 
folk nationalist music is performed in the Club, the young members mainly 
enjoy films like the Italian exploitation documentary Europa di notte (Alessandro 
Blasetti, 1959), which features night life in the European capitals with the young 
spectators swaying to the rhythm of Colin Hicks (an ‘English rock-n-roller’) 
performing in London21 and admiring the act of striptease artist Dolly Bell22 
in a night club in Paris. The Youth Club also hosts Dino’s band performance of 
Adriano Celentano’s 1962 hit ‘Ventriquattro mila baci’ (24,000 kisses)23 which 
features prominently in the film’s soundtrack: here then, the cultural influences 
come from an eclectic engagement with what the state has allowed, through 
international distribution and in national versions of current and international 
popular music genres. The celebration of such an arbitrary mix not only messes 
up any sense of national cultural hegemony but also foregrounds the incoherence 
of official cultural policy.
While in many ways Time appears to be the least historically explicit of the 
three films, its use of setting creates counterpoints that similarly complicate any 
official history. The story is clearly informed by widely reported child-trafficking 
stories at the time24 and was made just before the outbreak of the Yugoslav wars, 
taking the marginalized Roma community as its focus. Perhan and Djamilla’s 
first journey to Italy takes them through the length of Yugoslavia and most of its 
republics, travelling on the ‘Brotherhood and Unity’ Highway, opened by Tito in 
1950, that runs from Belgrade to Zagreb. As its name (an official party slogan) 
indicates, it was a key symbol of the post-war nation-building Titoist project. 
That the motorway was used for illegal trafficking and is traversed by the Roma 
children of the film (unwelcome outsiders to any of the nation’s republics), a year 
before the outbreak of the Yugoslav wars – a conflict that shattered any illusions 
of brotherhood and unity – is a perceptive anticipation of the country’s messy 
future. Also affectively undermining the official account of fraternity is Djamilla’s 
reception in the hostile and inhospitable hospital in Ljubljana, where the terrified 
girl is greeted by a doctor with the ‘reassuring’ statement that ‘Comrade Tito had 
his operation here’.
In When, Malik follows the Yugoslavian football team as they progress towards 
the final of the 1952 Olympic Games, with the radio coverage of the game against 
USSR dominating the soundtrack in the final scene of the film. This is a sporting 
expression of the open political hostility between the two countries that erupted in 
1948 and provides the historical context of the film.25 Mesa expresses the view that 

134      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Tito’s break with Stalin is ‘a step too far’ and is persecuted for his beliefs.26 However, 
this is an opinion complicated by the film, as it is clear that the persecution is 
very much orchestrated by his brother-in-law, the local party strongman, who is 
jealous of Mesa’s affair with Ankica. Thus Mesa, a Stalinist, becomes a victim of 
the pogrom that the anti-Stalinist policy of Tito instigated; and in any case, this 
apparent political motive is just a cover for the real reason, which is the personal 
antagonism between the two men.
The title of the film also captures some of the complexities of life as 
experienced by Malik. The excuse that ‘father is away on business’ is used to 
conceal the harsh political truth to his young son. On the other hand, it is what 
Mesa does when he is away (the affair with Ankica, the ‘whore mongering’ that 
Malik witnesses) that puts both himself and his family into trouble and arguably 
affects Malik in a more direct manner. ‘Being away’ in this context is therefore 
both a political punishment and the opportunity for personal betrayal. Malik, 
however, is not just a helpless victim of his father and the political system: he 
is also capable of wreaking havoc and disrupting the attempts at order that 
are thrown at him. Chosen to deliver a speech at a communist pageant, Malik 
messes up his concluding lines, pledging to ‘keep walking on the path followed 
by Tito led by the Party’, landing his father in trouble with the hierarchy, since 
this construction presents a deviation from the official line that suggests that 
it is the Party being led by Tito and not the other way around. Malik’s ‘error’ 
foregrounds the contradiction of the Yugoslavian ideology which criticized 
Stalinism but which, at the same time, built a personality cult around Tito. It 
encapsulates, like the semi-deliberate sleepwalking elsewhere in the film, the 
fluctuating agency that Kusturica’s films construct for his child protagonists. 
Hovering between activity and passivity, intentionality and error, knowledge 
and ignorance, neither Dionysian nor Apollonian,27 the children of Kusturica’s 
films are able to move freely between polar opposites, demolishing simplistic, 
politically purposeful, orderly accounts of history.
In Kusturica’s chaotic films the bubble of childhood that renders the children 
‘special’ is permeated by the familial and historical context. However, Dino, Malik 
and Perhan, in turn, ‘bubble up’ disruptively and make obvious the complexity of 
history as it is lived, thereby exposing the naivety of ideologues and historians from 
either side of the Cold War divide, who seek to identify clear and uncomplicated 
positions and a coherent teleological narrative. Of these children, perhaps Malik 
provides the best example of an agency capable of negotiating the most difficult 
situations that arise within the family, community and national historical context. 
After attending the funeral of Joza’s father (who is in fact not dead – his wife 
has provocatively requested a burial in order to expose the state’s silence on his 
disappearance) Malik delivers a particularly insightful interior monologue that 
concludes: ‘Is there anyone in the coffin? I know that when someone dies, he is 
no more but he can’t just vanish – when Mama told me to shut up I understood 
everything.’ The silence imposed by the state and demanded by his mother is only 

KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN      135
superficially upheld, his voice-over signalling both Malik’s understanding of its 
political significance and at the same time, revealing the key role that the film 
allows him to play in exposing the ‘messy reality’ of life in Yugoslavia.
The boundedness of a comic frame was satisfying, as nothing could penetrate 
the insularity of that world. Except the boundedness was what always left 
me feeling a little hollow.
(p. 319)
The attention to ‘detritus’ facilitated by Dino, Malik and Perhan works in tandem 
with the films’ aesthetics of disorder. It is beyond the scope of the present 
chapter to fully explore Kusturica’s style but I will briefly point out just two of the 
ways in which he systematically undermines order and simplicity both visually 
and audibly. Firstly, the homes of the protagonists are chaotic, messy places, 
which are in stark contrast to the officially sanctioned brutalist communist 
architecture;28 this is made explicit at the ending of Dolly, which abandons Dino 
and his family in an ambiguous urban space, in between their old neighbourhood 
(and leaky home) as we witness their move towards the bleak mass of high-
rise tower blocks, with the ambiguity of this final move tainted with irony, as 
Dino’s voice-over delivers for one final time, his mantra that in ‘every day in 
every way, I’m getting a little better’. Secondly, the chaos of Kusturica’s sets is 
amplified by the continuous movement of and within the frame, with multiple 
planes of composition and the inclusion of several narrative actions. The music 
of the soundtracks similarly function in an equally disorderly manner and they 
are distinguished by unpredictably shifting semantic possibilities and cultural 
referents. For example, When’s theme, the ‘Waves of the Danube’ waltz, is used as 
both diegetic and extra-diegetic music, arranged in a number of different ways, 
played in slow or fast tempo, in minor and major keys, and provides affective 
amplification of key moments, such as the orchestration of the weightless 
looping in the sky of Ankica’s glider or, alternatively, as an ironic commentary 
that provides a contrast between the grandiose and romantic connotations of 
the waltz and the trashy train toilet where Mesa and Ankica have their brief and 
‘cheap’ sexual encounter.
Kusturica’s cinematic style therefore uses chaos and disorder productively, 
constructing a formal context within which the children of his films not only find a 
comfortable home in the ‘mess’ but are pivotal to its creation. It is because of their 
celebration of messiness that Kusturica’s films are often described as ‘mad’, focusing 
on far from normal characters, taking place in bizarre settings and situations, 
involving unreal storylines and supernatural cause–effect relations. Adam Phillips 
provides some explanation for the productive connection between insanity, 
artistic creation and childhood in his observance of the following comment by 
D.W. Winnicott: ‘Through artistic expression we can hope to keep in touch with 
our primitive selves whence the most intense feelings and even fearfully acute 
sensations derive, and we are poor indeed if we are only sane.’29

136      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
In their demonstration of the ability of art to connect with intense but 
suppressed and denied feelings, Kusturica’s films enable us to go beyond the 
officially sanctioned and sanitized versions of history and to delve into the acute 
sensations of the messy everyday life in pre-1990 Yugoslavia. In that respect, as I 
have demonstrated, the role of the children in his films is crucial. By articulating 
the lives of the young protagonists as rooted in the everyday and effecting the 
messy proliferation of historical detritus, the films capitalize on the affective values 
invested in the bubbles and the bubbling-up of childhood, which serve to burst 
simplistic accounts of history that would otherwise negate the complexity of lived 
experience. The children are not mere symbolic tokens at the hands of a masterful 
if slightly insane film director. As this chapter has hopefully demonstrated the 
children are invested with a complex agency that is in itself irreducible to a simple 
and orderly category.
While the three films are set against a very grim political and historical 
background, their tone is celebratory. This is not just because the children manage 
to discover happiness and joy under these conditions but also because the films 
feel exuberant, full of energy and humour and are extremely pleasurable to watch. 
Kusturica’s films of the 1980s place their affection and establish an alliance with 
children who summon the resilience needed in order to get on with their lives 
despite their experience of oppressive, irrational, communist governance. And 
while more recent Kusturica films have turned up the volume (in the literal and 
metaphorical sense) in their celebration of everyday chaos, they are nothing but a 
natural continuation of his early tendency to complicate historical order with the 
messiness of life. The caustic criticism levelled against Underground and subsequent 
films is discursively akin to the communist desire for order. For many adult critics, 
Kusturica’s films infuriate in their childlike messiness and become anathema to 
all those who demand tidy versions of ‘good versus evil’ history, a tidiness that 
ignores the moral and political complexity and messiness of lived experience 
and the horrific reality of the Yugoslav wars. As with the obsessive, desperate but 
beautiful ordering of the world that T.S. Spivet creates, in the chaos, the trauma, 
the betrayals and the loss that underpin Kusturica’s films and Yugoslavian history, 
an incoherent but wonderful world emerges in the celebration of the disruptive 
and creative agency of childhood.
Notes
1	
‘L’imposture Kusturica’, Le Monde, 2 June 1995; ‘La propaganda onirique d’Emir 
Kusturica’, Liberation, 30 October 1995.
2	
Slavoj Žižek, ‘Multiculturalism, or, the cultural logic of multinational capitalism’, 
New Left Review, no. 225 (September/October 1997), pp. 28–51, p. 39 (emphasis in 
original).
3	
For a comprehensive survey of the changing international critical attitudes towards 
Kusturica’s films see Goran Gocic, The Cinema of Emir Kusturica: Notes from the 
Underground (London: Wallflower, 2001), esp. pp. 36–46.

KUSTURICA’S CHILDREN      137
4	 Dina Iordanova, Emir Kusturica (London: BFI, 2002), esp. pp. 1–43.
5	 Ibid., p. 38.
6	 All sub-headings are quotations from Reif Larsen, The Selected Works of T. S. Spivet 
(London: Harvill Secker, 2009). Page numbers are indicated in parentheses. I was 
reading the novel at the same time as thinking about this chapter and Spivet’s 
attempts to ‘map his world’ have very much permeated my reading of Kusturica’s 
films.
7	 Defined as anyone under 18 in ‘A Summary of the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child’, Unicef, https://www.unicef.org.uk/rights-respecting-schools/wp-
content/uploads/sites/4/2017/01/Summary-of-the-UNCRC.pdf (accessed July 2021).
8	 See Claudia Castañeda, Figurations: Child, Bodies, Worlds (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2002).
9	 Jacqueline Rose, The Case of Peter Pan: The Impossibility of Children’s Fiction 
(Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993), p. 10.
10	 ‘Summary of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child’.
11	 Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality, Volume 1: An Introduction (New York: 
Pantheon, 1978), esp. p. 46.
12	 See for example Kusturica’s interview in the DVD (Artificial Eye) of Do You 
Remember Dolly Bell?
13	 The mortally wounded Perhan falls from a bridge into an open wagon of a cargo 
train, where he dies in a large box. In the scene that follows, he lies dead in his coffin.
14	 Paranormal qualities of characters are used more widely and not exclusively in 
relation to children in later Kusturica films.
15	 Adam Phillips, Going Sane (London: Penguin, 2006), p. 93.
16	 Larsen, The Selected Works of T. S. Spivet, p. 91.
17	 The ability of Tito to ‘glue together’ Yugoslavia has ‘magical’, almost paranormal, 
undertones, something that Kusturica focuses on, most evidently in Underground, 
where national cohesion is ironically described as Tito’s ‘secret formula’.
18	 See for example an advertisement in The Sunday Times, 31 May 1953, which invited 
visitors to tour ‘Jugoslavia’ from North to South.
19	 Judith Keene, ‘The filmmaker as historian, above and below ground: Emir Kusturica 
and the narratives of Yugoslav history’, Rethinking History, vol. 5, no. 2 (2001), 
pp. 233–53, p. 234.
20	 Ibid.
21	 The case of Hicks is a perfect example of what might constitute cultural messiness; 
almost completely unknown in Britain he became a major star in Italy largely due to 
his appearance in the Blasetti film.
22	 ‘Dolly Bell’ is the name that the sex-worker of the film and Dino’s romantic interest 
have adopted.
23	 A big hit at the time Celentano competed with the song in the 1962 San Remo 
festival, an internationally significant annual event televised or broadcast by radio to 
many European countries in the 1960s.
24	 Gocic, The Cinema of Emir Kusturica.
25	 Often the political hostilities between communist nations were played out in sporting 
events; notorious in that respect was the Hungary–USSR water polo semi-final 
(‘blood in the water match’) of the 1956 Olympic Games.
26	 For a more detailed account of Tito’s break with Stalin see Keene, ‘The filmmaker as 
historian’.
27	 For a discussion of the binary see Chris Jenks, Childhood (London: Routledge, 1996), 
esp. pp. 70–80.

138      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
28	 For a photographic documentation that celebrates the architectural style in the USSR 
context, see Frédéric Chaubin, CCCP: Cosmic Communist Constructions Photographed 
(Cologne: Taschen, 2011).
29	 Cited in Phillips, Going Sane, p. 92; Phillips speculates that the quotation has 
been relegated to a footnote in Winnicott’s 1945 paper on ‘Primitive emotional 
development’ because of the implication that ‘what adults feel is mad is normal for the 
child’.

I
n the 2000s a transnational trend emerged across several Latin American 
cinemas towards films exploring national pasts under military rule through a 
child protagonist. Several such films were set in the 1970s, including five from the 
Southern Cone: Kamchatka (Argentina/Spain/Italy, 2002), Machuca (Chile/Spain/
UK/France, 2004), O Ano em Que Meus Pais Saíram de Férias/The Year My Parents 
Went on Vacation (Brazil, 2006), Paisito (Uruguay/Spain/Argentina, 2008), and 
Infancia clandestina/Clandestine Childhood (Argentina/Spain/Brazil, 2011). This 
chapter focuses on O Ano em Que Meus Pais Saíram de Férias, which situates its 
child protagonist, Mauro (Michel Joelsas) in a cinematically reconstructed 1970.
O Ano attempts to reclaim the national unity fostered by the 1970 World Cup 
from its association with the military dictatorship’s self-promotion, which used 
imagery, songs and slogans drawing on the success of the national team. An 
alternative ‘local’ view of the past is offered by focusing on the inhabitants of an 
ethnically diverse neighbourhood of São Paulo, Bom Retiro. This community 
provides Mauro with a sense of global/local belonging which, whilst clearly 
identified as ‘Brazilian’, is posited as coexisting with national celebrations over 
World Cup victory, as opposed to being entirely defined by them. The film also 
depicts the military persecution of the population that marked the era, and the 
neighbourhood’s resulting resistance to, or studied ignorance of, the association of 
the nation’s sporting success with its military government.
This is not to say, however, that O Ano offers a radical revision of history. 
Carolina Rocha has argued convincingly that the film illustrates the ‘still prevailing 
discomfort to fully revisit’ the period of the national past under dictatorship in 
Brazil.1 Rocha sees this in particular in the film’s backgrounding of political events2 
8 THE CHILD IMPRISONED 
IN HISTORY: CRYSTALLINE 
COMMUNITY BUILDING 
IN O ANO EM QUE MEUS 
PAIS SAÍRAM DE FÉRIAS 
(BRAZIL, 2006)
David Martin-Jones

140      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
and the focus on a child protagonist who has only a partial view of history.3 I 
would add to this that in many ways the film’s alternative view of the past rests on 
a cinematic construction of an ethnically diverse community in line with the myth 
of racial democracy which has structured Brazilian national identity throughout 
most of the twentieth century. Even so, whilst I would not go so far as to contradict 
Rocha by suggesting that O Ano readdresses the past directly, I argue that it does 
seek to separate the sense of community and patriotic support for the national 
team aroused by the World Cup victory from the government’s use of the same 
event for self-promotion as a nationally representative regime. In this way O 
Ano sets out to reclaim the past, in the service of the future, by challenging the 
way in which the footballing success was co-opted to legitimize the dictatorship. 
Thus my interpretation falls in line with approaches like that of Laura Podalsky, 
who sees certain genres of Latin American filmmaking as permitting ‘audiences 
to re-examine past social traumas in ways disallowed by the legalistic discourses 
surrounding public debates about accountability’.4 To uncover how this process 
works in O Ano, and indeed the integral role of the child protagonist, I take a 
theoretical approach, drawing on Gilles Deleuze, to the film’s narrative, mise en 
scène, cinematography, montage and characters.
O Ano em Que Meus Pais Saíram de 
Férias
O Ano begins with a young family in flight from the military state (1964–85). The 
parents drop off Mauro at his grandfather’s flat in Bom Retiro and flee, promising 
to return in time for the World Cup. However, they leave Mauro without realizing 
that his grandfather, Mótel (Paulo Autran), has died of a heart attack that morning. 
Locked out of his grandfather’s flat, but with no way of contacting his parents, 
Mauro is begrudgingly befriended by his grandfather’s neighbour, Shlomo 
(Germano Hauit). Gradually Mauro finds a place within a community of friends 
in his new neighbourhood, amongst the intermingled Eastern European Jewish, 
Italian and Greek immigrant populations. When his parents do not initially return 
as promised, during the World Cup Mauro occupies his grandfather’s flat, bonds 
with local children, especially his neighbour, Hanna (Daniela Piepszyk), local left-
wing students and the regulars of a local bar. At the film’s conclusion, Brazil’s World 
Cup victory is overshadowed by Mauro’s mother’s (Simone Spoladore) sudden 
return. She is in great pain, after capture and torture by the military government. 
His father will never be seen again. The film closes with Mauro and his mother 
leaving the country together.
O Ano was made on a budget of US$3.5 million, by Gullane Filmes and co-
producers, including Globo Filmes,5 the cinema arm of the Globo Network.6 It was 
released during what Carlos Eduardo Rodrigues, the executive director of Globo 
Filmes, describes as their second phase of development. This saw a conscious 
move away from the production of movies associated with television, and the 

THE CHILD IMPRISONED IN HISTORY      141
release of several films which performed well internationally, such as Cidade de 
Deus/City of God (2002).7 As Elaine Guerini notes, the production involvement of 
Miravista, Disney’s Latin American label, with O Ano ‘automatically guaranteed 
distribution in Latin America through Buena Vista International’.8 The film was 
well received internationally, premiering in competition at Berlin, winning prizes 
on the festival circuit (in particular in Latin America), placing amidst the final 
nine films nominated for the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film, and screening 
in over twenty countries.9 Yet, despite its international appeal, the story is deeply 
rooted in national concerns and clearly engages with Brazil’s national history. It 
does so, specifically, through the figure of the child.
Director Cao Hamburger wanted to revisit his childhood in the film. Although 
born in 1962 and therefore slightly younger than 12-year-old Mauro during the 
World Cup, Hamburger’s film is autobiographical. His parents, both university 
lecturers and left-wing militants, went on ‘vacation’ during his childhood,10 a 
memory that arose when he was recalling the 1970 World Cup. This confluence 
of memories created the inspiration for this, Hamburger’s second feature after 
Castelo Ra-Tim-Bum, O Filme/Castle Ra-Tim-Bum (1999), which was based on 
the children’s television series Hamburger created in 1995.11 Both Hamburger and 
his co-scriptwriter Claudio Galperin knew, intimately, life in the district of Bom 
Retiro, traditionally a neighbourhood which attracts newly arrived immigrants,12 
during the 1970s. However, as Bom Retiro has changed – in terms of population 
density, traffic and a demographic now constituted of Korean and Bolivian 
diasporas as opposed to the Greek, Italian and East European Jewish communities 
of the time – they decamped the film’s production to Campinas, outside São Paulo. 
There they were able to reconstruct the period setting in an ‘authentic’ looking 
neighbourhood, filming in a deserted apartment block on Rua Luzitana. In this 
setting, O Ano reconsiders history by self-consciously depicting Mauro as a child 
imprisoned in time.
Imprisoned in a crystalline layer of history
The recent Latin American trend to which O Ano belongs evokes the cinematic 
exploration of traumatic national transformations of the child-focused films of 
post-war Italian neorealism (e.g. Roberto Rossellini’s Roma, città aperta/Rome, 
Open City (1945) and Germania anno zero/Germany Year Zero (1948) or Vittoria 
de Sica’s Ladri di biciclette/Bicycle Thieves (1948)). Much like the Italian films, in 
the Latin American films the child is witness to events that they only partially 
understand but which transform their young lives.
Yet O Ano’s rather polished aesthetic treatment of the working-class community 
of Bom Retiro – akin to its Argentine, Chilean and Uruguayan counterparts in 
its avoidance of too gritty a social realist or ‘documentary’ aesthetic – contrasts 
with other Brazilian films that focus on socially disenfranchised children. Films 
like Pixote (1981) and Central do Brasil/Central Station (1998) are arguably closer 

142      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
to Italian predecessors, as Antonio Traverso notes, due to their similarities with 
the stylistic, thematic and aesthetic concerns of neorealism.13 For Traverso, these 
earlier Brazilian films ‘focus on the figure of children against the landscape of 
historical events’, representing childhood as ‘a state that requires the negotiation 
of homelessness, violence, sexuality and survival’.14 O Ano positions Mauro 
somewhat differently. Not only is he granted a home, he also escapes the social and 
economic privations of his counterparts in the earlier films, although he does lose 
his father to the military regime. The film also contrasts with the Italian neorealist 
narratives that are set in the ‘present’ of post-war Europe, since, like its Latin 
American counterparts, O Ano positions Mauro in history and, in this specific 
instance, through a process of aesthetic imprisonment that can be uncovered 
using Deleuze.15
In the Cinema books, Deleuze draws on Henri Bergson’s philosophy to argue 
that certain films, which he termed ‘time-images’, allow a glimpse of the virtual 
whole of time, or duration, as conceived by Bergson.16 In this model of time the past 
is shaped like an inverted cone, constructed of myriad, stacked up, virtual layers 
of time, each layer a different moment in, or memory of, the past. This model was 
used by Deleuze to explain the ‘time travel’ of protagonists in films by post-war 
European directors like Alain Resnais and Federico Fellini, in which protagonists 
navigate virtually through time, leaping or slipping between virtual layers of the 
past as they drift between present-day reality and past history, in fantasy, dream 
and memory.17 Thus, in the time-image, protagonists might be more accurately 
described as ‘seers’, rather than ‘doers’, whether they are witness to movements of 
a vast encompassing duration which catches them up within its virtual shifts, or 
simply mesmerized by the everyday passing of time.18
For Deleuze, the child, as seer, has a special role to play in the emergence of 
the time-image in post-war European cinema. He considered the child’s supposed 
‘motor helplessness’ conducive to a greater awareness, a greater capacity for ‘seeing 
and hearing’ than adults have.19 Deleuze argues that, in films like the Rossellini 
trilogy mentioned above, children are more susceptible to an awareness of the 
passing of time (what Deleuze terms the ‘pure optical situation’20), due to their 
lesser ability (in an adult-oriented world at least) to act in a way that will influence 
their situation. In short, the child is the ideal ‘seer’ of the cinema of the time-image.
Such a view is, of course, open to question, and in a previous work I argue that, 
whilst these post-war European neorealist films might give this impression about 
the child because they are filmed encountering history in the making (situated 
in action taking place in the present, or at least, as close to it as one might get 
with cinema), things are different when the child is reacting to events (‘seeing 
and hearing’) in a recreated past. This is the case, I have shown, in the Argentine 
film Kamchatka, for example.21 There is a distinction to be drawn, then, between 
the child seer ‘situated in history, as it happens, or … figured as history as it is 
recreated’.22 When history is created, with hindsight, the child seer may well 
function more as a surrogate who offers a conduit into the past for the viewer, 

THE CHILD IMPRISONED IN HISTORY      143
and, depending on the timing, perhaps even for a generation who were children 
at the time in which the film is set. In which case, the child is still valued for their 
capacity to witness or absorb the situations they encounter. Yet they are just as 
much of interest (due to the recreated nature of their encounter with situations, 
their experience of the ‘time’ they lived through) as portals into the past for a 
generation seeking a way to inform the present (and future) from this revisiting 
of their childhoods. Certainly this is the case in the trend of Latin American films 
identified above, including O Ano. Accordingly, the Deleuzian category of the 
time-image which seems best suited to explaining the function of the child seer in 
O Ano is that of the crystal of time in its seed/environment form.
O Ano reconstructs a version of Bom Retiro in 1970 as though it were a discrete 
layer of Deleuze’s Bergsonian cinematic time. Whilst this is evident in the retro 
clothing, cars and 1970s decor generally (equally true of most period films), what 
demonstrates its existence as a time-image is its self-conscious evocation of its 
virtual existence as a reconstructed layer of time through the use of mirrors and 
other reflective surfaces. Positioned at the heart of the myriad reflections that 
characterize the film’s layer of time is a Deleuzian ‘crystal of time’, oscillating 
around Mauro, which captures, in a single image, the moment in which time splits 
into an actual present that passes and a virtual past that is preserved.23 The crystal 
is thus the moment in which time’s virtual layers are formed, and its indiscernible 
oscillations of momentarily coexisting past and present are the process through 
which the cone of time is constructed.
For Deleuze, the crystal is evident in various figures, the most ‘familiar’ being 
the mirror, which, in its virtual reflection of the actual, demonstrates this process 
of time’s perpetual splitting:
Oblique mirrors, concave and convex mirrors and Venetian mirrors are 
inseparable from a circuit … This circuit itself is an exchange: the mirror image 
is virtual in relation to an actual character that the mirror catches, but it is 
actual in the mirror which now leaves the character with only a virtuality and 
pushes him back out-of-field … The actual image and its virtual image thus 
constitute the smallest internal circuit … Distinct, but indiscernible, such are 
the actual and the virtual which are in continual exchange.24
As Ronald Bogue clarifies in Deleuze on Cinema, Deleuze is referring to ‘a 
particular vision of the world-as-reflection, as infinite mirrorings … More than 
a mere theme, the world-as-reflection is a way of seeing and one that issues from 
a particular conception of time.’25 The mirror image, then, is an expression of 
‘the smallest internal circuit’ of time, articulating the divisive nature of duration 
glimpsed in the crystal. O Ano’s ‘world-as-reflection’ – its mise en scène populated 
by mirrors, windows, car ornaments, bumpers and windows, television screens, 
and even the shiny pendulum of a grandfather clock – provides the broader 
manifestation of this view of our temporal existence. For this reason we can say 

144      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
that O Ano self-consciously constructs one virtual layer of the Brazilian past. The 
film’s creation of a world-as-reflection foregrounds a reimagining of history, the 
offering of an alternative view on the past, that is occurring on this reconstructed 
virtual layer of time.
The child’s role is integral to this process because this particular crystal of time 
oscillates around Mauro, a character through whom the disparate demographics 
of the local community are able to coalesce. Mauro and his milieu form the seed/
environment26 – a coupling that Deleuze considers to be one of the three primary 
figures in which we discover the crystal of time:
It is the same circuit, which passes through three figures, the actual and the 
virtual, the limpid and the opaque, the seed and the environment. In fact, the 
seed is on the one hand the virtual image which will crystallize an environment 
which is at present amorphous; but on the other hand the latter must have a 
structure which is virtually crystallizable, in relation to which the seed now 
plays the role of the actual image.27
The seed is first visible when Mauro arrives in Bom Retiro with his parents. He 
is depicted inhabiting a seed-crystal at the heart of this virtual environment as 
he looks out of the rear windows of his parents’ Volkswagen Beetle, staring up at 
the skyscrapers of São Paulo. He is shot from outside the car, the city reflected off 
the window and paintwork of the car so that his upturned face is overlaid with 
(reflected) images of the city. Here virtual (reflection, environment) and actual 
(little boy, seed) are seen to coexist in a mutually informing relationship. Thus, 
initially the past is seen as a crystal whose reflecting facets imprison Mauro in 
this layer of time. His confinement is further emphasized when, inhabiting his 
deceased grandfather’s flat, Mauro’s every movement is reflected back at him by 
the mise en scène, in mirrors, television screens and windows, as he lives in hope 
of his parents’ return. Moreover, Mauro is repeatedly pictured looking out of the 
glassed-in balcony of his grandfather’s flat, the reflection of the street outside 
overlaid onto him by the glass, again creating the oscillation between virtual and 
actual, seed and environment, found in the crystalline internal circuit of time. This 
figure of the boy behind glass, looking out in hope, overlaid by a reflection of a 
recreated past, further emphasizes how trapped he is in this layer of time.
In this way, we see Mauro’s connection to this environment, the virtual 
surroundings that he will come to actualize in his role as seed. It becomes evident 
that Mauro’s only escape from the past as prison is through his local community. 
The neighbourhood’s multicultural bonding around the World Cup campaign is 
posited by the film as a way to recuperate an authentic sense of national pride 
it engendered, as distinct from the military regime’s promotion of itself on the 
back of the national football team’s victory. In this process, Mauro functions as 
the ‘actual-image’ that crystallizes the apparently ‘amorphous’ environment of the 
community into an overarching ‘Brazilian’ sense of belonging or identity, since it is 

THE CHILD IMPRISONED IN HISTORY      145
his presence and actions which bring together the various immigrant population 
facets (and in this respect their various histories) in his interactions with his new 
friends and neighbours.
The child seer in O Ano, then, is intended to indicate how, in the present, Mauro’s 
generation might come to look back on their childhood (as though seeing and 
hearing the past as a ‘pure optical situation’) so as to consider how best to live in 
the future. As David Deamer explains with respect to Deleuze’s seed/environment 
relationship, ‘the present is a seed, the future a virtual environment in relation to 
the seed, a virtual succession which subsists and insists within the seed image’.28 
Hence Mauro, in a recreated 1970 present, is the seed which can populate the Bom 
Retiro environment he encounters, but also a seed able to crystallize the potential 
for a new Brazilian identity in 2006 (‘the future virtual environment’) through 
the encounter between a certain generation of viewer and a proxy seer into their 
own childhood (‘in relation to the seed’). Thus the image of Mauro arriving in 
the family Beetle, a period indicator if ever there was one, encapsulates his role as 
seed (as Deamer summarizes, a ‘seed image … encompasses the environment as 
if it were a miniature scene within a sphere of opaque glass. The seed is the seed 
of an environment; and the environment is the mise-en-scène of the seed’29) with 
respect to what he can offer the national future, from out of the past.
Reimagining nation through local 
community
Before I explore how this process of crystallization functions aesthetically, it is 
necessary to fill in a little of the historical background. In a national context where 
the origins of Brazilian national citizenship have been described by James Holston 
as ‘inclusively inegalitarian’,30 O Ano reimagines a diverse but temporarily unified 
Bom Retiro community which considers itself as Brazilian whilst ignoring or 
rejecting the trappings of nationalism associated with the dictatorship. As Roberto 
Schwarz wrote in an essay composed between 1969 and 1970, at that time, the 
dictatorship did not necessarily attempt to construct an inclusive or authentic 
sense of national identity with which to mobilize the entire national populace:
What chance did the government have of forging a real national ideology? If it 
needs it, it is only because it has to confront subversion. In the previous situation 
it preferred to do without it, since in essence it is a government associated 
with imperialism, with demobilisation of the people and with technological 
solutions, to whom any verifiable ideological commitment will always seem 
like a limitation.31
Accordingly, the regime’s focus was on the promotion of a façade of nationhood, 
using techniques which can be described as ‘banal nationalism’, following Michael 
Billig’s notion of the ‘daily reproduction’ of the nation through such mundane 

146      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
signifiers as national flags hung in public places.32 Yet this ‘banal’ legitimacy of 
military rule was used to provide cover for brutal state repression. Schwarz again:
[A]t the end of 1968 … the existence of a state of revolutionary war in Brazil 
was officially recognised. To stop it spreading to the masses, police repression 
became really tough, denunciation of acquaintances was encouraged and 
protected from reprisals, torture took on terrifying proportions, and the press 
was silenced. As a result, the importance of ideology increased, all of which 
meant a proliferation of Brazilian flags, of propaganda leaflets, and the setting 
up of courses in gymnastics and civic values for university students. The 
phraseology of law-and-order patriotism, suddenly back in favour, could be 
found everywhere.33
In The Politics of Military Rule in Brazil 1964–1985 (1988), Skidmore concurs, 
noting that the Médici years ‘saw the “national security state” in its purest form’.34 
Whilst successful in economic terms with over 10 per cent economic growth, 
there was also evidence of growing social inequalities, along with censorship and 
the brutal repression of the population.35 This was especially true of the military’s 
1968–72 anti-guerrilla campaign, which provides the backdrop for the film.36 
Skidmore notes how, under President Emilio Garrastazu Médici (1969–74), the 
government’s public relations machinery used television to promote the military 
regime’s view of ‘Brazil’s national unity, its new purpose, its disciplined march 
towards the company of developed nations’.37 Skidmore observes:
One of the AERP’s [Assessoria Especial de Relações Públicas/Special Advisory 
Staff on Public Relations] most effective techniques in this effort was to link 
soccer, popular music, President Médici, and Brazilian progress. Médici 
was good material for such a campaign. He loved playing the father figure, 
and he was a fanatical soccer fan. AERP exploited both … Médici predicted 
Brazil would win the cup, and they did … The country got an official holiday 
to acknowledge the carnival-style celebrations already underway. Médici 
received the team in the presidential palace, gave each player a tax-free bonus 
of $18,500, and basked in the endless photos with the players and the huge 
silver cup … The presidential PR staff lost no time in following up on the 
World Cup glory. The catchy marching tune, ‘Pra Frente Brazil’ (‘Forward 
Brazil’), written for the Brazilian team, became the government’s theme song 
and was played at all official events. A multitude of posters appeared showing 
Pelé leaping aloft after scoring a goal and next to him the government slogan 
‘ninguém segura mais este país’ (‘Nobody can stop this country now.’)38
This link between football and the imagining of the nation is perhaps no surprise. 
Football has been at the heart of constructions of Brazilian identity since the 1930s.39 
Yet in O Ano, the same imagery used by the dictatorship for self-promotion is 
reconsidered in relation to a global/local identity. Whilst the film maintains the 

THE CHILD IMPRISONED IN HISTORY      147
seemingly racially inclusive image of a national identity underpinned by the myth 
of racial democracy, the local community offers an alternative view of national 
belonging to that of the superficial nationalism promoted by the military regime. 
In O Ano, then, a period of great economic prosperity is reimagined as a time when 
the state actively persecuted the population, and when patriotic sentiments aroused 
by football victory did not necessarily extend to support for the military regime.
Football
The predominant theme through which the community crystallizes around Mauro, 
in terms of narrative, montage and cinematography, is football. In contrast to the 
numerous televised games featuring the Brazilian national team, a neighbourhood 
grudge match provides an initial community focus to the narrative. This is an 
occasion for Mauro’s voice-over to describe the ethnically diverse constitution of 
the neighbourhood.
São Paulo is so big there are people from all over the world supporting every 
possible team. Shlomo is a Polish Jew. Now he’s always talking to Ítalo, who’s of 
Italian descent. Irene’s dad’s Greek. But her boyfriend … [Black Brazilian Edgar 
unveils his face and afro hairstyle from under his motorcycle crash helmet] … 
I think he’s the grandson of an African.
In diegetic terms, Mauro’s voice-over makes sense of his environment to assist 
the viewer in recognizing characters. However, his apparent belief that the origins 
of members of the community will mean that they have divided allegiances in 
the World Cup is not borne out by events. Although the local football match is 
constituted of Italian immigrants on one side versus the Jewish diaspora and the 
Black Brazilian Edgar (Rodrigo dos Santos) on the other, all of the community 
ultimately support the Brazilian national team. The entire scene – the players on 
both teams and the local crowd, including Shlomo, Mauro, Irene (Liliana Castro) 
and their friends and neighbours – constitute a united national community. This is 
an identity that is Brazilian, but also and at the same time local, and yet ethnically 
specific due to its global origins.
Hamburger notes his decision to depict the community of Bom Retiro in this 
way in order to counter preconceptions that international audiences have of Brazil 
as ‘all forests and favelas’. Instead, ‘The movie shows a facet that most foreigners 
don’t know; the Brazil of the immigrants and how they are blended together, 
respecting each other’s differences.’40 Thus O Ano offers a different view of Brazil 
to the favelas and violence of films like Cidade de Deus, or Tropa de Elite/Elite 
Squad (2007), which are often internationally considered to be representative of 
Brazilian cinema, or perhaps even Brazilian life. In line with a broader movement 
that Tatiana Signorelli Heise observes in contemporary Brazilian cinema, for 
‘reformist’ films which focus on the potential for nationally representative cultural 

148      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
practices such as football to unify Brazil in terms of class and race,41 O Ano invites 
us to consider the community in Bom Retiro as a different vision of how local 
inhabitants interpreted their sense of belonging to the imagined community of the 
nation in 1970. For this reason, the film contrasts the national team’s endeavours 
on the global stage with the neighbourhood teams, of varied international origins, 
interacting at a local level.
The montage and cinematography situate the viewer within this community in 
order to emphasize that their local support for the national team was tempered by 
local experiences of state repression. For example, during the only scene in which 
mounted police and military arrest militant student activists, the editing suggests 
that the entire community are eye witnesses to the raid. A bewildering montage 
provides different points of view at street level, including positions from amongst 
the crowd and within nearby buildings. This manner of filming so as to place the 
viewer amidst the community recurs on several occasions, not only to integrate 
the viewer into the community at, as it were, eye level, but also to illustrate the 
ability of the neighbourhood’s population to separate their pride in the national 
team from the related propaganda of the national government, due to their first-
hand knowledge of state repression.
Most effective in making this separation are the montage sequences which 
accompany the televised games. Initially, Mauro is figured as central to the 
actualizing community within the diversely populated environment. For example, 
he is positioned at the centre of a montage which introduces the neighbourhood, 
when he is depicted in various apartments being hosted for lunch by the building’s 
inhabitants. Then, when the World Cup starts, this montage extends beyond the 
apartment, as though radiating out from the central position of Mauro whose 
shouts of ‘foul’ and ‘goal’ are echoed by those of the groups enjoying the game 
elsewhere. These echoes within the environment include not only Mauro’s 
immediate, mostly Jewish neighbours, but also neighbourhood scenes of various 
ethnic groupings watching the football, such as the nearby left-wing students and 
the patrons of the Greek bar.
When the players are lined up and the national anthem is playing, it is 
noticeable how little attention is paid to television screens, as the local denizens 
engage in conversation. On other occasions Shlomo reads not a national daily 
newspaper but the Tribuna Israelita (a Jewish newspaper) and the left-wing 
students express - verbally - their solidarity with the Czechoslovakian team due to 
their shared political beliefs, even if their physical celebrations humorously betray 
their true support for Brazil. However, despite the local inhabitants’ obliviousness 
to the banal nationalism accompanying the games, whenever Brazil scores a goal 
the montage unites the different parts of the community in its celebrations, as 
the ethnic identities around the neighbourhood are brought together by this 
communal event, our central focus for which is Mauro.
Their shared sense of belonging, whilst clearly located in relation to an 
imagined Brazilian identity (they are all cheering for the national team) does not 

THE CHILD IMPRISONED IN HISTORY      149
necessarily extend to loyalty to the nationalist rituals that accompany the game, 
such as paying respect to the national anthem. Rather, the Bom Retiro community 
is shown to identify more with the various local identities of its inhabitants (be 
they religious, ethnic or political) than with banal signifiers of the nation, such as 
Brazilian newspapers which might foster a sense of national belonging. Mundane 
symbols of national belonging are not so much unnoticed amidst daily routines, 
as they would be, following Billig’s rationale, if they were effectively working to 
construct a shared sense of identity.42 Rather, they are purposefully ignored by a 
community that – due to events like the disappearance of Mauro’s parents and the 
arrest of the students – is not blind to the machinations of the military state, or its 
impact on the lives of Brazilians.
This use of montage has its most pointed effect during the World Cup final, when 
scenes of the national team celebrating, often appropriated by the dictatorship to 
promote the military regime, are here deliberately reappropriated by the film to 
construct its alternative view of collective identity. When Pelé heads Brazil’s first 
goal against Italy, the footage on the small black and white television in Irene’s 
father’s bar fills the screen. The edit cuts immediately to Mauro and Hanna in the 
bar, celebrating together. We cut back to the television, as Pelé leaps into the arms 
of teammate Jairzinho, exactly the type of image utilized by the dictatorship. We cut 
back to the bar, where Irene and Edgar sneak a celebratory passionate kiss behind 
Irene’s father’s back. The montage returns us to the television coverage, now framed 
as an image playing on a television set, a new establishing shot from which the action 
opens out onto the interior of a nearby apartment in which three elderly Jewish men 
celebrate. Finally we cut back to a shot of everyone celebrating in the crowded bar.
With this montage the film equates the national team with the locally united 
community of immigrants. Pelé and Jairzinho celebrating together find new, 
alternative ‘mirror’ images in the Jewish girl Hanna hugging Mauro (his father 
Jewish, his mother of Italian descent), the inter-ethnic kiss between Irene and 
Edgar, and the Jewish and various other European communities (Italian, Greek, 
etc.) in the apartment block and the bar respectively. By very deliberately replaying 
the images of victory previously utilized by the dictatorship in its public relations 
campaigns, in a montage that relinks them to a diverse range of ethnic identities 
interacting at a local level, the film tries to imagine an alternative history of 
national belonging.
Absent father/local fathers
The various characters with whom Mauro interacts further this historical 
reimagining, or crystallizing, of Brazilian community in 1970s Bom Retiro. Mauro, 
temporarily separated from both parents at the start of the film, and permanently 
from his grandfather and father by the end, interacts with three surrogate fathers: 
Shlomo, Edgar and Ítalo. They offer three ‘entrances’43 into the film’s reconstructed 
layer of the past, three facets of the crystalline environment with which Mauro 

150      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
can attempt to oscillate (one might say, thus to germinate), as seed. Ultimately the 
identity which he embodies, like the diverse community, does not have a singular 
teleological origin. Each of his virtual fathers, rather, is suggestive of the different 
histories and identities that intermingle at a local level in Bom Retiro.
Like Mauro’s grandfather, Shlomo belongs to the community of Ashkenazi Jews 
who settled in Brazil, including many arriving during or after the Second World 
War.44 Shlomo is initially reticent to help Mauro, especially after he discovers that 
Mauro is not circumcised and, despite his father bring Jewish, is unaware of Jewish 
customs. Shlomo is persuaded to help Mauro by the local Rabbi, who compares 
Mauro to Moishale (Moses) left in the bullrushes in the Old Testament story. 
Eventually Shlomo begins to look after Mauro, and from Shlomo and other members 
of the Jewish community Mauro learns the traditions of his Jewish heritage. He 
also brings the Jewish community into contact with the other neighbourhood 
populations as Shlomo seeks help in finding Mauro’s father from Ítalo.
Mauro appropriates many of the personal effects of his grandfather, trying on 
his grandfather’s hat and using his leather gloves for goalkeeping. Rooting through 
his drawers, Mauro discovers photographs of men at a harbourside (suggestive 
of his immigrant heritage) and one of his grandfather and father together, his 
grandfather in the hat that Mauro now wears. Later Mauro proudly tells Hanna that 
his grandfather fought against the Nazis in the Second World War. There is thus a 
clear engagement with both a Jewish identity and an immigrant history in the film, 
as Mauro ‘tries on’ a new heritage learned from Shlomo and inherited from his 
grandfather. This cinematic recognition of the Jewish population of Bom Retiro is 
telling for the film’s reimagining of history. Historically the dominant discourses on 
Brazilian identity typically excluded Jews from the normative positions of white, 
European and Christian. As Jeffrey Lesser notes in Welcoming the Undesirables, 
under the myth of racial democracy that has structured discourse surrounding 
Brazilian identity in the twentieth century, ‘Jews were deemed by many politicians 
and intellectuals as non-white and non-European – a dangerous “other” to whom 
immigration rights should be denied.’45 Elsewhere, Lesser observes that there was 
‘a 20th century history of attacks on Jews, blacks, Japanese and Middle Easterners’ 
in Brazil,46 and Bom Retiro’s Jewish community had previously been portrayed in 
a very negative light by Brazilian commentators.47
Racial democracy, which James Holston positions as a contemporary 
manifestation of much older Brazilian discourses on citizenship that are 
‘inclusionist and racist simultaneously’,48 has its origins in the work of Gilberto 
Freyre in the 1930s, who argued that Brazil was a racially inclusive democracy. 
Although some scholars have recently attempted to recuperate Freyre’s thinking 
in terms of his views on culture and ‘the sharing of values among community 
members’,49 his influential position has nevertheless been variously critiqued, for 
instance by Edward E. Telles in Race in Another America, for eliding the reality 
of racial inequality in Brazilian society,50 and by Amós Nascimento for ‘imposing 
one biological, historical, linguistic, or cultural ideal of ‘nation” that remains 
European and suspends the pluralistic perspectives and claims of different 

THE CHILD IMPRISONED IN HISTORY      151
groups and subjects’.51 Yet whilst O Ano offers a somewhat idealized, inclusive 
image of Brazilian community, very much in line with the conventional myth of 
racial democracy, it does at least use Mauro, unusually, to foreground the Jewish 
community’s presence and to show the interaction between the Jewish and 
neighbouring communities in Bom Retiro.
Although O Ano can be viewed as part of a further transnational movement 
in Latin America of films focusing on Jewish families or Jewish communities – 
e.g. El abrazo partido/Lost Embrace (Argentina/France/Italy/Spain, 2004), Whisky 
(Uruguay/Argentina/Germany/Spain, 2004)52 – by depicting this oft-neglected 
demographic of Brazilian society the film also recognizes what Nascimento 
describes as the ‘plurality of “Brazils”’, and their individual histories, which 
challenge homogenizing discourses like that of racial democracy.53 Shlomo’s role 
as first surrogate father to Mauro, then, provides an ‘entrance’ to the Bom Retiro 
Jewish community which at least acknowledges its existence as one of many 
‘Brazils’ on this layer of the past.
Mauro’s second surrogate father is the Black Brazilian, Edgar. Like Shlomo, 
Edgar plays his part in the adoption of Mauro by the local community, rescuing 
him from the crowd and taking him home on his motorcycle when he gets too 
close to the military crackdown. Mauro begins to idolize Edgar when he makes a 
vital penalty save whilst playing in goal for the local Jewish team, Mauro’s voice-
over tells us: ‘And suddenly I knew what I wanted to be. I wanted to be black and 
fly.’ We then cut to Mauro’s hands in close-up, in the apartment, as he tries on 
his grandfather’s leather gloves and begins to practise goalkeeping saves, leaping 
around on his grandfather’s bed. In this way O Ano brings the Jewish community 
together with the Black Brazilian Other, putting them both, as it were, in the same 
team. This move acknowledges their respective lack of acceptance historically, 
even if both were apparently considered to be included in Brazilian society. In 
doing so, the film further stresses the unacknowledged role played by the Jewish 
community in the construction of Brazil, and Brazilian identity, by equating them 
with the role models offered by the national team’s black players (including Pelé, 
Jairzinho, Everaldo et al.). Here, Edgar, as a Black Brazilian goalkeeper, after all, 
stands in opposition to the military, as he literally saves Mauro from the police 
and soldiers as though still playing a role for the Jewish community who are 
sheltering him. The entrance to the community offered by Edgar, then, is one that 
leads to a replacement of the government’s use of images of the national team’s 
Black Brazilian footballers with the local experience of life under dictatorship. 
Here such nationally representative figures as Pelé are replaced by the local and no 
less inspirational Edgar, who can foster a global/local identity by protecting and 
solidifying Mauro’s identification with his Jewish immigrant roots.
Finally, Mauro’s father’s friend, the left-wing student Ítalo, briefly offers Mauro 
a glimpse of his father’s possible return when he spends the night in Mauro’s 
grandfather’s apartment whilst on the run. Ítalo represents the young, persecuted 
generation to which Mauro’s parents belong, who are defined by their education 
and beliefs (in particular, Marxism) as much as their immigrant traditions 

152      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
(Mauro’s father is a non-practising Jew who has married an Italian woman). The 
two play table football together the following morning. Mauro plays in goal, as 
he and Ítalo recreate his relationship with his father, with whom Mauro plays 
table football at the start of the film. As Ítalo lines up his free kick, Mauro asks 
for news of his parents’ whereabouts. The camera remains trained on Mauro as 
the dialogue proceeds. Rather than provide a conventional reverse shot of Ítalo, 
focus racks to bring Ítalo’s reflection into focus in a mirror to Mauro’s right, 
before racking back to Mauro. As Ítalo explains to Mauro that his parents are on 
vacation, and that he will soon have to take a vacation, Mauro appears almost 
to be conversing with a virtual image of his father. The blurry image of Ítalo in 
the mirror suggests an equation between the two men, whilst also hinting at 
Mauro’s father’s likely fate, which is to be murdered by the dictatorship, and left 
only as a virtual image in the memory of his loved ones. Inevitably, the entrance 
into the past offered by Ítalo, Mauro’s third surrogate father, is also not the ideal 
solution, as he too is forced to take a ‘vacation’. However, through the three 
possible fathers (Shlomo’s Jewish tradition, Edgar the locally inspirational Black 
Brazilian, the educated and youthful Ítalo), Mauro has experienced a variety 
of Brazils that contrast with any overarching equation of Brazil with a single 
figurehead, such as Pelé, or Médici.
The figure of the goalkeeper that Mauro aspires to become is ultimately an 
amalgam of his father’s advice about the difficult job of being a goalkeeper with 
which the film starts, his grandfather’s gloves, Mauro’s idolization of the local team’s 
goalkeeper Edgar, and his brief, virtual re-enactment of his relationship with his 
father with Ítalo. Therefore this is as much a community-influenced goalkeeping 
position as it is one associated with a perhaps more typical identification between 
son and father, or national government and populace. The fact that there is no 
single father figure available to Mauro resonates with ongoing debates that draw 
links between fathers and nations in films from Latin American countries.54 
In many ways similar to Central do Brasil’s alternative vision of the national 
cultural identity of the state as a fraternal society (in the absence of a responsible 
patriarchal authority), O Ano offers a diverse local community instead of the 
military regime’s propaganda of unity. By becoming-goalkeeper as a response 
to the collective, Mauro attempts to actualize the ‘amorphous’ environment of 
Bom Retiro, momentarily bringing the various denizens into focus through his 
actions, and thereby intertwining their histories and potentialities. What is most 
striking about O Ano, however, is that ultimately Mauro fails in his attempt, and 
has to leave.
­Backward glance into history
O Ano does not have a happy ending. Mauro as the seed is not able to populate the 
environment during this cinematic visit to a turbulent layer of Brazil’s past. This 
is perhaps not entirely unexpected for as Deleuze argues, ‘certain seeds abort and 

THE CHILD IMPRISONED IN HISTORY      153
others are successful’.55 Prior to the ultimate victory of Brazil in the final, Mauro 
walks back to the apartment block through the empty streets. The rest of Brazil is 
watching the game on television. Mauro is depicted as though walking an empty 
celebratory parade route, hung with bunting and littered with paper, as one might 
in the aftermath of a triumphant procession. The off-screen noise that accompanies 
his prolonged, lonely, sad walk, as Mauro realizes that his parents have not returned 
home, are fireworks that evoke distant gunshots. The past that we access via Mauro 
in a moment like this seems as though it were a virtual, alternate reality, clearly 
one at odds with the celebrations which the military regime capitalized upon to 
promote their legitimacy.
The emptiness of the national football team’s victory for the many Brazilians 
who suffered or disappeared under military rule is further emphasized when 
Mauro, returning to the apartment disheartened, glumly tells Shlomo that ‘Brazil 
is winning’, only to be confronted by the sight of his wounded mother on the 
bed, and the news that his father will never return. As Mauro is reunited with his 
mother, the film cuts to footage of the joyous national team, and the people of 
Brazil celebrating in the street, enforcing the film’s alternative view of a national 
history and victory.
At the very end, Mauro leaves Brazil with his mother. His voice-over states his 
position as an exile in a manner that describes his individual position, but also that 
of a generation abandoned or persecuted under military rule:
And that’s what 1970 was like. Brazil won the World Cup for the third time, 
and without thinking about it and not really understanding how, I ended up 
becoming what is called an exile. I think exile means having a dad who is so 
amazingly late he ends up never making it home again.
Mauro’s history is ultimately that of an immigrant whose heritage passes through 
Brazil (his grandfather’s arrival being due to the disturbances in Europe caused 
by Nazism and the Second World War) and whose life accordingly moves on 
again, into exile. His seed does not populate the environment of the ‘cracked’ 
crystal,56 due to the divisive actions of the military state in cracking down on 
political opposition, which leads to the division of Mauro’s family and also makes 
impossible his role in crystallizing a sustainable community.
However, through its depiction of an ethnically diverse community united in 
its support of the national team, the film does successfully establish an alternative 
history of 1970s Brazil. It retains the focus on the amalgamated identities of the 
immigrants that make up Bom Retiro which we might expect of the myth of racial 
democracy. Yet, in the sad departure of Mauro, O Ano places a different emphasis 
on the global/local identity of Brazil, a country in which immigrants flow across 
national borders and where their local existence may or may not allow them 
to put down roots – always dependent on the political imagining of the nation 
by the ruling powers at the time. Hence Mauro continues the trajectory of his 

154      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
grandfather, a Polish Jew fleeing the Nazi regime in Europe, taking flight in turn 
two generations later from the dictatorship in Brazil.
Mauro’s backward gaze – from the departing Beetle, as his mother drives him 
away from Bom Retiro – is a recurring device in world cinemas. Typically it evokes 
a sense of nostalgic longing for a past that has definitively passed.57 This gaze into 
the past is often granted to children, especially in the cycle of Latin American films 
which includes O Ano. The role of the child thus offers a form of engagement with 
the crystalline facets of this virtual layer of history, through Mauro’s interaction 
with his surrogate fathers, who are in turn representative of the community’s 
diverse histories and identities. However, unlike Central do Brasil, in O Ano it 
is not possible to reunite the family in a manner that identifies the family home 
with the national homeland.58 Instead, an alternative construction of history is 
offered and the film marks a distinction between the official national discourse 
promoted by the government and the ethnically diverse community it purported to 
represent, whose loyalties were as much local (the neighbourhood of Bom Retiro), 
and global (the immigrant traditions) as they were national (the football team). 
What is crucial about the role of the child in O Ano, then, is that he is able to offer 
a way of reimagining the past, so as to offer a different future for the generation 
he represents. Like Mauro in Bom Retiro, such a future is one around which the 
whole of Brazil can potentially crystallize anew, as a (national) community.59
Notes
1	 Carolina Rocha, ‘Children’s views of state-sponsored violence in Latin America’, in 
Carolina Rocha and Georgia Seminet (eds), Representing History, Class and Gender 
in Spain and Latin America: Children and Adolescents in Film (London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2012), p. 97.
2	 Ibid., p. 92.
3	 Ibid., pp. 90–1.
4	 Laura Podalsky, The Politics of Affect and Emotion in Contemporary Latin American 
Cinema (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), p. 22.
5	 Elaine Guerini, ‘Brazil’, Screen International, no. 1585 (2007), p. 13.
6	 For an introduction to the Globo Network and Globo Filmes, see Lisa Shaw and 
Stephanie Dennison, Brazilian National Cinema (London: Routledge, 2007), 
pp. 36–40; Courtney Brannon Donoghue, ‘Globo Filmes, Sony and franchise 
filmmaking’, in Cacilda Rêgo and Carolina Rocha (eds), New Trends in Argentine and 
Brazilian Cinema (Bristol: Intellect, 2011), pp. 51–66.
7	 Jùlio Carlos Bezerra, ‘A decade of work and success’, Revista de Cinema, vol. 22, no. 3 
(2008), p. 22.
8	 Guerini, ‘Brazil’, p. 13.
9	 Belisa Figuerio, ‘Cinema of Brazil program increases co-production by 200%’, Revista 
de Cinema, vol. 22, no. 3 (2008), p. 39. Distribution in the USA was through City Lights 
Pictures, Elaine Guerini, ‘Cao Hamburger’, Screen International, no. 1619 (2007), p. 12.
10	 Guerini, ‘Cao Hamburger’, p. 12.
11	 Guerini, ‘Brazil’, p. 13.
12	 Jeffrey Lesser, Negotiating National Identity (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
1999), p. 1.

THE CHILD IMPRISONED IN HISTORY      155
13	 Antonio Traverso, ‘Migrations of cinema: Italian neorealism and Brazilian cinema’, in 
Laura E. Ruberto and Kristi M. Wilson (eds), Italian Neorealism and Global Cinema 
(Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 2007), pp. 165–86.
14	 Ibid., p. 178.
15	 David Martin-Jones, Deleuze and World Cinemas (London: Continuum, 2011), 
pp. 69–99; David Martin-Jones, ‘O “opsigno” de Gilles Deleuze em Machuca (2004): 
cinema e história após a ditadura militar’/‘Gilles Deleuze’s ‘opsign’ in Machuca 
(2004): cinema and history after military rule’, in Antonio Carlos Amorim, Silvio 
Gallo and Wenceslao Machado de Oliveira Jr (eds), Conexões: Deleuze e Imagem e 
Pensamento e … (Rio de Janeiro: DP et Alii, 2010), pp. 33–48.
16	 Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 2, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Robert Galeta (London: 
Continuum, [1985] 2005), pp. 1–23.
17	 For an introduction to the existing body of work on Deleuze and cinema, see David 
Martin-Jones and William Brown ‘Introduction’, in Martin-Jones and Brown (eds), 
Deleuze and Film (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2012), pp. 1–17.
18	 Deleuze, Cinema 2, p. 2.
19	 Ibid., p. 3.
20	 Ibid., p. 2.
21	 Martin-Jones, Deleuze and World Cinemas, pp. 69–99.
22	 Ibid., p. 76 (emphasis in original).
23	 Deleuze, Cinema 2, 66–94.
24	 Ibid., p. 6.(emphasis in original).
25	 Ronald Bogue, Deleuze on Cinema (London: Routledge, 2003), pp. 132–3.
26	 Deleuze, Cinema 2, pp. 67–9.
27	 Ibid., p. 72.
28	 David Deamer, Deleuze’s Cinema Books (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 
2016), p. 146.
29	 Ibid., p. 149.
30	 James Holston, Insurgent Citizenship (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2008), p. 41.
31	 Roberto Schwarz, Misplaced Ideas (London: Verso, 1992), pp. 138–9.
32	 Michael Billig, Banal Nationalism (London: Sage, 1995), p. 6.
33	 Schwarz, Misplaced Ideas, p. 138.
34	 Thomas E. Skidmore, The Politics of Military Rule in Brazil, 1964–1985 (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1988), p. v.
35	 Ibid., pp. 106–7, 124.
36	 Alfred Stepan, Rethinking Military Politics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1988), 33–4; Marcos Napolitano, ‘A chronology of Brazilian political history’, in 
Adriano Nervo Codato (ed.), Political Transition and Democratic Consolidation (New 
York: Nova Science Publishers, 2006), pp. 151–64, pp. 154–5.
37	 Skidmore, The Politics of Military Rule in Brazil 1964–1986, p. 111.
38	 Ibid., pp. 111–12.
39	 Eduardo P. Archetti, ‘The spectacle of identities’, in Stephen Hart and Richard Young 
(eds), Contemporary Latin American Cultural Studies (London: Hodder Arnold, 
2003), p. 118; Alex Bellos, Futebol: The Brazilian Way of Life (London: Bloomsbury, 
2002), pp. 36–7.
40	 Guerini, ‘Cao Hamburger’, p. 12.
41	 Tatiana Signorelli Heise, Remaking Brazil: Contested National Identities in 
Contemporary Brazil (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2012), p. 87.
42	 Billig, Banal Nationalism, pp. 37–59.
43	 Deleuze, Cinema 2, p. 86.

156      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
44	 Karen Backstein, ‘The year my parents went on vacation’, Cineaste, vol. 33, no. 2 
(2008), p. 54; Henrique Rattner, ‘Economic and social mobility of Jews in Brazil’, in 
Judith Laikin Elkin and Gilbert W. Merkx (eds), The Jewish Presence in Latin America 
(Boston, MA: Allen and Unwin, 1987), p. 189.
45	 Jeffrey Lesser, Welcoming the Undesirables (Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press, 1995), p. 176.
46	 Jeffrey Lesser, ‘Challenges to Jewish life in Latin America’, in William Frankel (ed.), 
Survey of Jewish Affairs (London: Blackwell, 1991), p. 232.
47	 Jeffrey Lesser, ‘“Jews are Turks who sell on credit”’, in Ignacio Klich and Jeffrey Lesser 
(eds), Arab and Jewish Immigrants in Latin America (London: Frank Cass, 1998), 
p. 47.
48	 James Holston, Insurgent Citizenship (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2008), p. 70.
49	 José Luiz Passos and Valéria Costa e Silva, ‘Freyre’s concept of culture in The Masters 
and the Slaves’, in Carmen Nava and Ludwig Lauerhas Jr, (eds), Brazil in the Making: 
Facets of National Identity (Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield, 2006), p. 64.
50	 Edward E. Telles, Race in Another America (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2004), pp. 6–10.
51	 Amós Nascimento, ‘Colonialism, modernism, and postmodernism in Brazil’, in 
Eduardo Mendieta (ed.), Latin American Philosophy: Currents, Issues, Debates 
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2003), p. 133.
52	 For a fuller discussion, see Carolina Rocha, ‘Jewish cinematic self-representations in 
contemporary Argentine and Brazilian films’, Journal of Modern Jewish Studies, vol. 9, 
no. 1 (2010), pp. 37–48.
53	 Nascimento, ‘Colonialism, modernism and postmodernism in Brazil’, p. 128.
54	 Deborah Shaw, ‘The figure of the absent father in recent Latin American films’, 
Studies in Hispanic Cinemas, vol. 1, no. 2 (2004), p. 85; Lúcia Nagib, Brazil on Screen 
(London: I.B. Tauris, 2007), p. 41; Shaw and Dennison, Brazilian National Cinema, 
p. 110; Stephen M. Hart, A Companion to Latin American Film (Woodbridge: 
Tamesis, 2004), p. 181.
55	 Deleuze, Cinema 2, p. 87.
56	 Ibid., p. 82.
57	 John Caughie, ‘Representing Scotland’, in Eddie Dick (ed.), From Limelight to Satellite 
(London: BFI/SFC, 1990), p. 25.
58	 Nagib, Brazil on Screen, p. 44.
59	 Thanks to Antonio Carlos Amorim, Susana Oliveira Dias and staff and students at 
the Laboratory for Journalism Studies (especially the Masters in Diverse Sciences 
and Cultures), at the Faculty of Education, State University of Campinas. Your input 
was generously given, and extremely influential. Thank you to Mark Harris also, and 
Soledad Montañez, Stephanie Dennison, Tatiana Signorelli Heise and Carolina Rocha 
for feedback on initial drafts. Thanks to Tatiana Signorelli Heise for allowing me to 
read extracts from Remaking Brazil (2012), and Carolina Rocha for extracts from 
Representing History, Class and Gender in Spain and Latin America (2012), in both 
cases prior to publication.

I
n the denouement of Dadasaheb Phalke’s Kaaliya Mardan (1919), the film cuts 
from scenes of Krishna’s childhood mischief on land to an underwater playground: 
through double exposure effects, we watch Krishna dropping himself into the 
river bed, the domain of the many-hooded snake, Kaaliya, who is feared by the 
villagers for having poisoned their river. Krishna lands on Kaaliya’s fanned hood 
and coiled body and is soon in the snake’s grip. A fight ensues, a battle between 
god and demon. On screen we see a pile of the coiled serpent’s body writhing 
vigorously while Krishna pulls at its tail, which we know is as an ingenious way to 
subdue Kaaliya’s capacity for strangling. In a series of cutaways we see Krishna’s 
friends bemoaning his premature demise, a conclusion that seems in keeping with 
Kaaliya’s invincibility. When the film returns to the river we see Kaaliya’s many-
hooded head above water but now firmly under the control of Krishna, who is 
dancing gleefully whilst straddling the subjugated serpent. Through a set of double 
exposures we see Kaaliya’s wives rising from the waters and beseeching Krishna 
for mercy. This final section of the silent film is a widely known mythological story 
of the god Krishna’s many antics as a child, a precocious, divine child, that here 
Phalke brings to life in what scholars have identified as the dominant style in his 
‘mythological’ genre: the tableau presentation of set pieces from popular myths.1
The child actor whose adorable frolics are idealized on screen is Phalke’s own 
daughter Mandakini, who has recounted to her father’s biographers that she was cast 
through a series of random incidents in a familial setting: her father’s narration of 
the stories excited her and it was these reactions that Phalke anticipated she would 
be able to reproduce on screen. Dressed up as the young Krishna with a feathered 
crown on her head and flute in hand, Mandakini appears to be enjoying herself on 
a set wrapped by sections of a coiled snake; obviously an outsized prop shaped as 
a snake is a source of jest rather than fear. To scholars writing on this pioneering 
figure of cinema in India, Phalke’s fascination with the medium’s possibilities lay 
in the direction of movement within the frame, such as the tableau scenario in 
Kaaliya Mardan rendered credible by flailing movements; in other films such as 
Krishna Janam, Ravi Vasudevan has noted the use of dissolves, or more precisely 
double exposure effects.2 Considered together these effects were deployed in the 
mythological genre in a manner that is well suited to such manipulations in the 
mise en scène and in-camera editing. In the infancy of cinema and under colonial 
conditions, Phalke’s experiments have been read variously: his canny use of the 
9 BEGINNINGS AND CHILDREN
Lalitha Gopalan

158      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
mythological genre appears as a subversive attempt to outflank colonial censorship, 
while at the same time reiterating certain impulses of nationalism undergirded 
by Hinduism. However, the formal experiments with image composition are less 
conclusive. Recalling a genealogy that is surely related to Méliès’s own fascination 
with the fantastical possibilities afforded by moving images when in its infancy in 
France, Phalke’s proclivity for choosing set pieces from Hindu myths in the early 
years of cinema in India appears an innovative way of exploiting the cinematic 
apparatus’s potential for bolstering tricks and sleights of hand, as well as upholding 
its ability to capture movements through space and eventually become visible 
through the projection of light. And as Phalke and his heirs gave shape to narrative 
cinema, the attendant economies of genre and stardom were not far behind; the 
mythological genre is introduced and his daughter Mandakini emerges as the first 
child star.
As Phalke’s endeavours have been written into the annals of a history of national 
cinema as the primogenitor of cinema in India, it seems banal yet tempting to 
call attention to a twinned beginning – the infancy of narrative cinema in India 
wrapped up in the antics of a child actor turned star – since this origin story has 
come to dominate the study of cinema in India. For example, Mandakini’s debut - 
as noted in Dilip Ghosh’s documentary on child stars in Indian cinema, Aadhi 
Haqueqat, Adda Fasana (1990) – suggests that her appearance as Krishna is the 
beginning of a long history of Indian cinema’s fascination with children on screen.3
The double exposure effect in Kaaliya Mardan as a hallmark of Phalke’s 
ingenuity has mesmerized filmmakers who have not hesitated to insert and quote 
the finale to emphasize their own stabs at experimentation. For instance, Reena 
Mohan’s Kamlabhai (1992) recounts the rise of the other woman, the other first 
lady of the Indian screen, from Phalke’s stable of actors, but cannot help inserting 
the double exposure of Mandakini’s slow drop towards Kaaliya’s supine body. 
In a series of relays, it is precisely this aquatic scene that is repeated in Ranjan 
Palit’s essay film In Camera (2011) – Palit also worked as the cinematographer for 
Mohan’s film. Both citations recognize Phalke’s originality whilst carving a place 
for their own interventions: Mohan’s film is a groundbreaking effort to complicate 
the biopic genre of non-narrative films; Palit’s film, similarly, offers a meditative 
reckoning of a cinematographer’s career over twenty-five years. Complicating the 
citation protocol is Amit Dutta’s Student Diploma film, Ksha Tra Ghya (2004), 
which prolongs the connection between child and novelty by inserting the double 
exposure of Krishna entangled in Kaaliya’s folds and subsequently bifurcating the 
details in his own revision of Phalke. In Dutta’s film, with a considerable distance 
from the original, we see a man picking up a mobile phone that morphs into a 
snake, an effect achieved through a cut, here an in-camera trick and not a post-
production editing rhythm. Dutta finds an equivalence for the child but not 
immediately, and in fact the doppelganger for Mandakini’s Krishna is dispersed 
across other parts of the film as a rambunctious boy rampaging through the 
rooms of a home. As we see, Dutta’s own critically acclaimed film shuffles images 

BEGINNINGS AND CHILDREN      159
to enhance cinema’s relationship to magic tricks that are most potently delivered 
though the rhythm of cuts, thus contributing to Ksha Tra Ghya’s well-deserved 
reputation as a landmark film in the emerging field of experimental filmmaking in 
India while deploying a technology from the 1930s – the Mitchell camera.
The decades intervening between Phalke’s conscription of Mandakini and 
Dutta’s insertion of a snake as mobile phone, proliferate with signals in the 
cinemas of India that further emphasize the place of the child in feature films and 
its indispensability to those cinemas. While children abound in other-language 
cinemas, it is worth exploring how their arrival on screen in India coincides with 
shifts in film form and style.
There are many such originary moments in Indian cinema; however, the longue 
durée after independence throws up a different kind of cinema that is very much at 
odds with the mythological genre and responds keenly to the postcolonial reality 
of poverty, development and progress, films that are not far from and are indeed 
inspired by the preoccupations of Italian neorealism. In this conjuncture, in India, 
Satyajit Ray’s Pather Panchali (1955) is the urtext. Ray’s film deserves the encomiums 
that have declared it a canonical text in world cinema; its appearance on various 
film lists is a facile way to reiterate this point. As the first part of ‘the Apu Trilogy’, 
the film borrows the structure of the Bildungsroman by unfolding the protagonist’s 
chronological development from boyhood to manhood. Amongst the many 
readings of the film there are those that have suggested the direct influence of Jean 
Renoir’s filmmaking of The River (1951) in India – perhaps most evident in Ray’s 
choice of outdoor locations. Richard Allen’s close reading of the film’s form provides 
us with a consideration of its style with a discriminating reading of the off-screen 
space, inferred through a rich soundtrack. This companionate reading feeds my 
own exploration of the relationship between children and scale in Pather Panchali: 
particularly in the composition of images and rhythm of editing.4
‘The train scene,’ as it is known widely, offers the most riveting play of scale. It 
begins with Apu and his sister Durga wandering away from home and towards the 
Kaash fields. The camera drops its centre of perspective to show us the children 
in full shot and at times, in medium close-up, when in repose and conversation; 
such a drop in the centre of the frame is not unusual in a narrative where the 
camera accommodates the varying heights of its actors to convey a ‘normal’ height 
differentiation between human figures. The Kaash grass, in full bloom, towers over 
the kids when they rest and effectively camouflages them as they walk desultorily 
through the fields, mimicking the movement of the feathery stalks. Dwarfing 
the human figures, the reeds of the grass appear as giant foliage, a trick of scale 
(trompe l’oeil) that is enhanced by the low-angle shots of the camera. As the kids 
huddle under the blossom, Durga alerts Apu (and by extension the spectator), to 
a sound off-screen, a train whistle that heralds a rushing train that mobilizes a 
sudden shift in perspective. There are several shots in this segment but I want to 
focus on the series of images that follow when the train is captured in long shot, 
emerging into the frame, right side, with billowing smoke from the far ground, 

160      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
where the film then cuts to a pan. The camera swings shakily right to left to a space 
into which the train is yet to arrive and cuts to an extreme long shot, revealing 
Apu’s dash towards the tracks; Durga, we note, is no longer in this frame. In a 
different rhythm, with less unsteadiness, the camera swings left to right from the 
other side of the tracks to capture Apu running towards the camera. The film cuts 
and the frame drops below the compartments and is now situated to record the 
moving wheels of the train, where, through the gaps of the moving wheels we 
can discern a human figure on the other side of the tracks-Apu. We now see that 
he is barely as tall as the wheels of the locomotive, diminutive, just as a child is 
expected to be in Quattrocento perspective. It is this classical arrangement of 
human figures set against a vanishing point that critics, including Allen, have 
commented on, implying that the film’s preferred plane of action encourages us 
to accept the film’s homage to neorealism. Strictly speaking, according to the 
conventions of continuity promoted by Hollywood and other cinemas that came 
under its influence, the camera has actually crossed or disrupted the 180-degree 
line of action and in effect, corrects our perception of scale. In this elegant flip 
over the axis of action, the children, more specifically Apu, are corrected to their 
‘actual’ size in relationship to the machine; the earlier impression that encouraged 
us to imagine either giant children or dwarfed figures running among Kaash grass 
is retroactively corrected so that we come to understand, with certainty, that the 
foliage is not oversized flora planted in a fantasy film, but credible vegetation 
whose length has been heightened by shortening human figures, revealing that 
children in their natural diminution can participate in tricks of scale in which the 
world appears differently.5
However, shoring up discourses of post-war neorealism forecloses the film’s 
expansive investment in the archive of world cinema. Apu’s small figure in 
relationship to the speeding train also recalls the series of images from the finale of 
Eisenstein’s Strike (1925): in this sequence a troop of horses ridden by Kulaks are 
rearing to attack the strikers. Minutes before the advance, there has been a tense 
stand-off between the Kulaks and the soldiers as seen by women and children on 
the edge of the frame. From this group, an infant has wandered into the legs of the 
horses. The low-angle camera position captures the infant in full shot amongst the 
columns of legs; a menacing sight that provokes his chaperone to retrieve him, 
moments before the legs kick off as the Kulaks begin their assault on the workers. 
Although not a pure metaphor this sequence is freighted with metonymic potential 
and prefigures the cruelty of the Kulaks; in a later sequence we see them toss 
babies from high apartment floors. Children and infants are rendered innocent in 
both Strike and October (1928), their helplessness metonymically extended to the 
working class.
Another commensurable comparison worth mentioning in regards to the 
low-angle position of the camera is from Ozu’s famous mode of composition, 
particularly his ‘tatami shots’. However, the dominant reading of Ozu’s films 
favours the adults in the mise en scène. In Tokyo Story (1953), for instance, scholars 

BEGINNINGS AND CHILDREN      161
have long commented on how the static low-angle shots have us observing adults 
in conversation in a room with right angle corners and sliding screens. The 
hallmark of Ozu’s style is not to ‘break’ classical Hollywood style that observes 
the 180-degree line of action, but instead opts for a 360-degree space of action, 
thus promoting a different language of continuity. Consider, for instance, a scene 
in Tokyo in which we find parents and grandparents arranged in a conversation 
circle. In this rhythm of editing, the camera focuses on adults seated with legs 
folded on tatami mats, their restrained demeanour contrasts sharply with the 
tantrums of the young boy, Isamu, who rushes in and out of the frame exhibiting 
his petulance. We see Isamu and his brother in full shot since the camera is already 
situated lower to capture the scene amongst the seated adults, a position that 
accentuates the children’s smallness, in contrast to the large adult torsos in plain 
sight. In an exceptional moment in Tokyo Story we see in long shot and in the same 
frame, the grandmother and Isamu standing together in the garden, so that their 
differences in height emphasize the generational gap between them.
Ray’s singularity has either been framed by scholars as emerging from within 
Bengali culture, or as an auteur in world cinema, whose style displays a promiscuity 
of influences akin to a cinephile’s archive. A not unreasonable assumption; as one 
of the founders of the Calcutta Film Society, in 1947, Ray wrote quite passionately 
about world cinema in essays that were subsequently collected in his Our Films, 
Their Films.6 What is of interest for me is the place accorded to the film society’s 
activities by Ray in the development of film culture in postcolonial India. Whether 
Ray influenced the policies of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (I&B) 
is not evident but, in a curious series of coincidences, it is worth observing how in 
an attempt to foster film culture among children, the Ministry of I&B – with the 
strong endorsement of India’s first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru – established 
the Children’s Film Society (CFS) in 1955, the very year Pather Panchali was 
released. The coincidence of interests between India’s first prime minister, and a 
filmmaker in the making, is yet to be written beyond the confines of hagiographies, 
but what we can hazard is the pervasive influence of the discourse of ‘sentimental 
education’ in postcolonial and post-war national cultures in which both figures 
participated. Ray was not involved directly in CFS activities but his various other 
films made explicitly for children have been embraced over the years by this 
institution for purposes of exhibition. A glance at the roster of films produced by 
CFS confirms Ray’s influence on its filmmakers; albeit not the melancholic despair 
of Pather Panchali, but work that is more evident in the light-hearted fantasies and 
detective stories that he made for children, such as Parash Pather, Sonar Kela.7 
A study of these films commissioned by CFS and the structure of subsidies and 
exhibition conditions deserve a fulsome exploration, but are beyond the confines 
of the present chapter.
Pather Panchali’s influence travels in other directions too, since the impression 
it made on subsequent generations of filmmakers remains substantial, especially 
those graduating from the national film school, the Film and Television Institute 

162      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
of India (FTII, established in 1964 by the Ministry of I&B to improve the quality of 
filmmaking in the nation), which was subsequently realized in the form of various 
‘New Wave’ film movements in regional cinemas. ‘New wave’ film movements 
worldwide conjure images of ‘Young Turks’ breaking free from the dictates of 
studio and conventional filmmaking, and a supplement makes its way into this 
pithy sketch in the shape of a film whose protagonist is a child. Truffaut’s 400 Blows 
(1959) sits beside Godard’s youthful Breathless (1960) as signposts in the birth of 
the French New Wave; Hou Hsiao-hsien’s Summer at Grandpa’s (1984) mobilizes 
Taiwan’s New Wave, which subsequently included Edward Yang’s children-
centred Yi Yi (2000). In the ‘second’ wave of the Taiwanese New Wave, filmmakers 
acknowledge previous ‘new waves’: in Tsai’s film What Time is it Over There? (2001), 
the protagonist, at various moments, watches Truffaut’s 400 Blows on his television 
monitor and an ageing Antoine Doinel makes a cameo appearance in the Paris 
section of the film. And Hou’s own second act in Taiwanese New Wave includes 
a remake of Lamorrise’s child-centred film, The Red Balloon (1956) as Flight of 
the Red Balloon (2007). Critics have similarly long remarked on the ubiquity of 
children in the Iranian New Wave of the 1990s, and Majid Majidi’s films provide 
the most obvious examples of privileging children. Simply put, children abound in 
New Wave films despite – or because of(?) – the impression of youthful rebellion 
that the concept connotes. So, it follows that the motif of children and trope of 
childhood should surface in one of the regional new waves in Indian cinema, the 
‘Kannada New Wave’.
By the time a child-centred film arrives in this short period of astounding 
films the New Wave is well under way, with works made by writers and theatre 
aficionados. In this context, a useful framing is afforded by M. Madhava Prasad 
who cites Chomana Dudi (1975) and Samskara (1970) as landmark films, based on 
well-known novels of the modern literary movement in Kannada that shaped New 
Wave cinema.8 Into this robust filmmaking scene arrives Girish Kasarvalli – fresh 
from FTII with his groundbreaking student diploma film, Avshesh (circa 1975). 
Legends circulate that though Kasarvalli never officially graduated from FTII, his 
diploma film was his passport into professional filmmaking. His first feature film, 
Ghatashraddha (1978), was an extended treatment of his student film and fits quite 
easily within the dominant social and political preoccupations of the Kannada 
New Wave cinema; but with a difference – since as Prasad suggests, it is narrated 
from the point of view of a child, Nani.
Prasad’s elegant reading of the film demonstrates how Kasarvalli’s figuration 
of space rearranges the earlier forays of other films in this film movement. The 
narrative revolves primarily in a Brahmin milieu, with minor but not significant 
challenges to this hierarchical and highly ritualized ambience in the form of an 
inter-caste relationship. Nani is sent off by his father to a religious school (Vedic 
learning) that is located in a village away from his home. The film observes, in 
detail, the quotidian rituals of upper caste Brahmin life that are akin to other 
films preceding it but, in this instance, from the young boy’s perspective, so that 

BEGINNINGS AND CHILDREN      163
we, as viewers, experience the claustrophobia and patriarchal dimensions of this 
milieu, most pointedly rendered in Nani’s growing friendship with a Brahmin 
widow, Yamuna. Yamuna’s sexual independence disrupts the routine activities of 
the community that ostracizes her socially – when witnessed from Nani’s point 
of view, we can see the gross injustice meted out to her. The final shot of the film 
deserves reiteration. The patriarchal dictate of the community performs a ritual 
ostracization (Ghatashraddha) by shaving off Yamuna’s hair. In tandem, Nani is 
escorted out of the village by his father and the scene is set in the outskirts of the 
village: from Nani’s point of view, we see – in long shot – Yamuna, head shaven 
and grief-stricken, standing under a large Peepal tree that fans out like an umbrella 
in the distance. Nani’s reaction prompts us to find this image shocking. The film 
closes on this image. Kasarvalli has openly admitted to being influenced by Ray’s 
filmmaking but unlike Apu’s awestruck wonder at the moving locomotive that we 
see in Pather Panchali, Ghatashraddha accords the assumed innocence of a child’s 
point of view within a carefully established ethics of viewing. The Brahmin habitus 
is no longer a neutral space in the film but rather a claustrophobic space where 
change is presented from Nani’s perspective.
The Kannada New Wave was short-lived – as Prasad notes – and Kasarvalli has 
long outlived its scriptures by directing films that have moved him away from the 
themes besieging both Avshesh and Ghatashraddha. In an uncanny way, however, 
critical reception of his films has not completely exhausted the discussion on 
Ghatashraddha’s originality. In the late 1980s soon after the release of Tabarne 
Kathe (1987), Kasarvalli was asked by the editors of Deep Focus to respond to 
his well-known moniker, ‘l’enfant terrible of Kannada New Wave’, an outdated 
(childish) designation that decidedly returns him (and us) to his two primary 
films as the dominant texts through which we should approach his oeuvre.
As much as new waves and art house films have enlisted children as protagonists 
to inaugurate a shift in style, both drastic and slight, children similarly crowd 
popular cinema. Among the different linguistic cinemas of India, Hindi films have 
nurtured and exploited child stars in family melodramas, socials, and romances: 
Daisy Rani, Master Alankar, Master Raju, Sachin and Sarika are all popular star 
monikers. In Tamil cinema, Kamal Hassan’s previous history as a child star is 
considered as a separate phenomenon from his adult success as actor, director 
and filmmaker. Whilst child stardom deserves exploration as a much-needed 
corrective to adult dominated star studies, it is worth returning to film itself to note 
how children revise other crucial mainstays of popular cinema: genre structuring 
and authorial signature.
Among contemporary narrative filmmakers it is no exaggeration to state that 
scholarship has identified the feature film director Mani Ratnam as having a 
distinct signature, legible across both Tamil and Hindi cinemas.9 That he shifted 
the course of popular cinema in the 1980s and 1990s in regards to film style is now 
beyond dispute, notwithstanding the controversial reception of his films.10 In my 
own readings of his style I have remarked particularly on his reworking of song 

164      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
and dance sequences through figures of metaphor and metonymy in relationship 
to narrative continuity. At times, children appear as part of the dancers’ entourage 
or more obviously as part of the unit in family dramas. Reconsidering his films 
through the lens of childhood, it is remarkable to see the ubiquitous presence of 
children in his films and how they serve a narratological function and as rhetorical 
figures. In his two gangster films, Nayakan (1987) and Dalapathi (1991), children 
are less widely dispersed throughout the narrative but nonetheless make for an 
arresting presence in pre-credit sequences. An Oedipal drama besieges the opening 
sequence in Nayakan: a son watches his father, a trade union leader, being shot by 
the police and subsequently runs away from the southern town of Tuticorin to 
Bombay. He emerges into adulthood as a gangster who challenges the law and has 
scant respect for the police. The pre-credit sequence thus offers an explanation for 
the protagonist’s biography in classic Oedipal terms: the son chooses a profession 
that betrays the father’s yet avenges his death. The narrative is suffused throughout 
with doublings and logics of vengeance in which children reappear before 
becoming criminal men. Thus in Nayakan, the logic of lawless activities hinges 
on a traumatic childhood of witnessing violence and flight. Released a few years 
later, Dalapathi returns to this logic by updating the epic Mahabharat. The film 
opens with the birth of a child who is abandoned and placed onto a moving train 
by a teenage mother and is soon adopted by a childless couple. His subsequent 
recruitment into a criminal gang pits him against his biological brother; pleas for 
peace from his ageing birth mother are dismissed as being too late. In different 
ways therefore, both films open with a damned childhood ignited by abandonment, 
which provides the narrative drive for their adult gangster heroes.
It is no coincidence that in Ratnam’s family dramas children are not solely 
consigned to film openings, a genre that he substantially revises by reworking 
the more popular romance genre that conventionally ends with a happy union 
of a couple. In contrast, his films narrate moments that occur beyond the 
closures offered by the conventional popular romance, either by propelling the 
film into a marriage or a family drama. The recursive plotting of family dramas 
in his films frequently depends upon the children to precipitate narratives that 
ironically threaten their own ontological status. For example, in Anjali (1990) the 
eponymous, mentally retarded child dies at the end of the film. Through the twists 
and turns in the narrative, we have learned how a couple and their two young 
children have struggled with the slow integration of Anjali – the youngest child. 
Initially presumed dead at childbirth by the family, and by extension the audience, 
Anjali’s birth and apparent death precipitate a crisis in the marriage through a 
series of misunderstandings: the wife assumes the husband is unfaithful. But as 
the film unfolds, we, along with the family, discover that while the father is indeed 
harbouring a secret, it is that he is caring for Anjali. Rather than burden his family 
with the care of their daughter, he has colluded with a doctor to arrange secretly 
for her care. Once confronted with the knowledge of their missing sibling and 
daughter, the family lobbies for Anjali’s return to her birth family despite her 

BEGINNINGS AND CHILDREN      165
disabilities. However, the film never completely erases the father’s doubts that a 
normal and healthy family unit can incorporate an ailing child – despite rousing 
efforts at integration. At the end of the film, Anjali therefore, perhaps conveniently, 
succumbs to her death. At this point, the soundtrack of the film replays a song 
from an earlier sequence, which depicted the children in the neighbourhood 
playing with Anjali. This time, however, the film closes with a shot of the empty 
wheelbarrow that the kids had previously deployed to wheel Anjali around in the 
song, establishing a shot whose metaphoric meaning is keenly available through 
metonymic reminders. Therefore, despite the goodwill apparently expended by 
the family, the film ultimately confers with the father’s initial hesitation regarding 
the viability of a normal family when caring for a member with a disability.
Although Anjali was a box-office success and won national awards for the Best 
Child Artist, Best Audiography, and Best Regional Film in 1992, it does not blunt 
the punitive drive of this closing sequence that asserts a normative ideal of the 
family. Yet the final shot of the wheelbarrow, a metonymic reminder of happier 
times in the life of family is more ambivalent, though equally decisive on the 
matter of Anjali’s absence. Through this closing sequence, the film posits the child 
with a learning disability features as ‘a structuring absence’ of the normal family 
unit. The death of the child therefore offers no real sense of closure for the viewer, 
since the empty wheelbarrow prompts us to recall the family’s initial intolerance 
to her additional needs. Ultimately, if the film has apparently been a long lesson 
in educating the family – and by extension the viewer – on the issue of learning 
difficulties, by ending the film with the death of the child and thereby restoring 
‘normalcy’ this reflects the family’s own inability to cope with such apparent 
aberrations in the long run.
Another inconclusive ending, even more burdened with double meanings, 
is literalized in Bombay (1995), which provides twin sons for a couple who get 
married against the religious sentiments of their hidebound parents (he is Hindu 
and she Muslim).11 The depiction of a Hindu–Muslim family with twins apparently 
offers an ideal image of communal harmony, a utopian ideal in a secular national 
culture. But this ideal is achieved only after being tested by patriarchal rejection at 
home and through the brutal antagonisms in the city of their choice, Bombay. On 
the one hand, the twins reverberate this doubling by standing together as figures 
of unity; on the other hand, they fall apart into polar antagonisms represented by 
the charred ruins of their shared mise en scène. In the final moments of the film – 
after the male protagonist has quelled the rioters in Bombay – the film ends with 
images of communal harmony. The family finds itself: first the twins find each 
other and together they spot their parents. The final shot of the film is a dissolve 
constituting two images: four members of the family huddled in an embrace 
that is superimposed on the detritus of the riots in the city streets.12 It appears at 
first, therefore, that the family has prevailed despite being thrown asunder by the 
antagonisms besieging the city and particularly their neighbourhood. However, 
the dissolve simultaneously evokes another scene, a mise en scène of ruin that is 

166      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
the backdrop of this tight embrace. Each image informs the other, producing its 
own doubling effect. In both Anjali and Bombay, therefore, children emerge as 
allegorical figures supplying us with closures that are ambivalent.
In an uncanny relation to these two earlier films, Ratnam’s Kannathil 
Muthamittal (2002) grapples with adoption. A couple adopts a third child who 
has been abandoned by her birth mother at a refugee camp for Sri Lankan Tamils 
in Tamil Nadu. Long scenes of domesticity display a happy and affectionate 
family enlivened by the antics of their three children. However, once the adopted 
daughter learns of her actual birth history, the film steers away from family drama 
to political theatre in Sri Lanka. The adopted parents accompany their daughter as 
she searches for her mother in the war-torn regions of Jaffna. In the final sequence 
of the film, on a rainy day, the birth mother materializes in guerrilla fatigues to 
meet her daughter and pleads with her to allow her to join her and her adopted 
parents and return to India. Yet the film eschews this possible ending. Instead, we 
watch the revolutionary soldier/birth mother retreating into the ruins and gun 
smoke while the film cuts to a family portrait: father, mother and adopted daughter 
under an umbrella looking into the distance (although we assume that they are 
looking at the receding figure of the birth mother). The film’s rendition of the 
family portrait as the preferred final shot interestingly evicts the two birth children 
who have been left behind in India in favour of the parents embracing their single 
adopted child. Adoption is therefore signalled as a powerful metaphor for an 
India-centred solution to the Tamil separatist movement, a quiet acquiescence 
that disentangles Tamils from their struggle for sovereignty in Sri Lanka. At the 
same time, the image suggests that the family itself undergoes its own bifurcation, 
and by evicting the birth children from the final portrait there is a suggestion that 
presents a possibility of ‘two families’, a solution that has long been forwarded by 
the Tamils in Sri Lanka. As is the case with the other two films directed by Ratnam, 
in the closing moments of Kannathil Muthamittal one meaning begets another 
and each resolution hinges on the figure of the child.
In the last decade, Tamil cinema has undergone a resurgence that I have called, 
elsewhere, a ‘cruel cinema’.13 These more recent films are vastly different from the 
urban milieu depicted in Ratnam’s films and instead exhibit a familiarity with the 
working-class neighbourhoods of Madurai, where desultory young men provoke 
endless fights, all set against a masculine fan culture that is devoted to the film star 
Rajnikant. Nevertheless, even in these later films, children recur in such a way as 
to coax us to see them as apposite responses to Ratnam’s genteel ambience. In this 
cycle of films, the escalating violence unleashed by the young men finds an anterior 
place in a brutal Oedipal struggle against patriarchal forces which implicates 
fathers, stepmothers and older siblings, resulting once more in causal scenarios 
linked to childhood that open films such as Veyyil (2006) and Paruthiveeran (2007) 
in which the young men play victimized children. In these texts and in other films, 
children appear in the narrative either as a sideshow or in the mise en scène of a 
family – as is the case in Pudhupettai (2006) and Subramaniapuram (2008). In fact, 

BEGINNINGS AND CHILDREN      167
many of these films are emphatic about casting children as victims in family and 
neighbourhood dramas whose resolutions are damned and violent.
Pasanga/Children (2009) is an odd supplement to ‘cruel cinema’ and casts 
children as protagonists and adults as the sideshow. Here, children, not young 
men, hurl epithets at each other and launch into quarrels that do not diminish 
their violent potential, yet they seem comical; in large part because these sequences 
are rendered in slow motion. The extended duration of a scuffle in slow motion 
shots retains a childish bravado but cannot help recalling the attenuated violence 
of adults seen in the other films in ‘cruel cinema’. Pasanga therefore disassociates 
childhood from innocence, and in that rupture provides a moratorium on ideas of 
a ‘sentimental education’ long associated with the genre of children’s film.
That the image of the child on screen indicates a perceptible shift at every turn 
in the form and style of narrative in Indian cinemas seems conclusive. That these 
alterations in style and form extract a price is most evident on a film set, which 
is where I found myself in July 2012. Kannan’s zombie film, Daayan, was under 
production at a defunct engineering factory. The cavernous factory floors had over 
one hundred zombies with their walking dead white countenance watching a child 
apparently on the verge of being sacrificed at an altar. This captivating moment 
was a finale, after a chase through a thicket of overgrown roots and ruins that had 
been shot earlier in the day. The camera was focused on two adult actors circling 
around a crying child whose fate was being decided by their different wills. On 
the other side of the camera, wincing in deep pain was the cinematographer 
Saurabh Goswami, carrying an Arri Alexa, which weighs about ten pounds with 
the magazine loaded. Tall, at six feet, Saurabh had spent a number days shooting 
the child whose short stature demanded that the cameraman shoot him kneeling, 
a position which when sustained over many days, wreaks havoc on the kneecaps. 
That the sacrifice was scheduled as the last workday for the child actor was a 
welcome relief to Goswami’s knees that had already surrendered to the gruelling 
schedule of shooting a child for two months. Labour pains mark all births, scars 
that may also be borne by the cinematographer’s body during the emergence of 
New Wave cinemas and shifts in style.14
Notes
1	 The large prop is either a man in a snake suit or a prop moved on a mobile platform 
being pulled hither and thither by strings.
2	 See revised version of earlier essays on Phalke in Ravi Vasudevan, The Melodramatic 
Public: Film Form and Spectatorship in Indian Cinema (New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2011).
3	 Thanks to K.U. Mohanan for recommending this film.
4	 Richard Allen, ‘Pather Panchali (1955)’, in Lalitha Gopalan (ed.), Cinema of India 
(London: Wallflower Press, 2010).
5	 An inverse reading based on a priori knowledge of scale regarding machines and flora 
yields the following for a viewer familiar with machines, the scale of children versus 

168      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
the running train in classical composition is self-evident; for the viewer familiar with 
these tall reeds, the tricks of scale promoted by me are irrelevant.
6	 Satyajit Ray, Our Films, Their Films (Bombay: Orient Longman, 1976).
7	 A study of these films commissioned by CFS and the structure of subsidies and 
exhibition conditions deserve a fulsome exploration, but are beyond the confines of 
the present essay.
8	 M. Madhava Prasad, ‘Ghattshradda (1978)’, in Gopalan (ed.), Cinema of India.
9	 See Lalitha Gopalan, ‘Nayakan … ’, in Cinema of Interruptions: Action Genres in 
Contemporary Indian Cinema (London: BFI Publishing, 2002). For an extensive 
reading of Ratnam’s style, see Lalitha Gopalan, Bombay (London: BFI Publishing, 
2005); Swarnvel Easwaran Pillai, ‘Iruvar’, in Gopalan (ed.), Cinema of India.
10	 See the critical reception of both Roja and Bombay.
11	 See my detailed reading of the film in Gopalan, Bombay.
12	 In my interview with Mani Ratnam he asserts that this dissolve was a mistake and 
that he meant to have a sequence of images: shots of the ruined city followed by the 
tight shot of the embracing family. That is not how the film arrived to its viewers, so 
the option of sequential stringing of images remains a hypothetical option.
13	 See Lalitha Gopalan, ‘Film culture in Chennai’, Film Quarterly, vol. 62, no. 1 (2008); 
also the Tamil Film series that I co-programmed with Anuj Vaidya, ‘Cruel cinema: 
Tamil New Wave’, 2011, at University of California, Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific 
Film Archive (BAMPFA), https://bampfa.org/program/cruel-cinema-new-directions-
tamil-film%E2%80%82 (accessed July 2021).
14	 Thanks to Roberto Tejada for lending his ear on matters both great and small. 
I dedicate this essay to my parents, for sustenance through a summer of misery.

PART FOUR
BEYOND CINEMA

170 

I
t is perhaps childhood that comes closest to one’s “real life”’ wrote André Breton, 
the surrealist leader, in the First Surrealist Manifesto of 1924.1 It is now widely 
understood that, within the surrealist avant-garde, the child was held to be 
closer to the irrational (via magical thought and fantasies of omnipotence), and 
to the unconscious, than the adult. This fascination with childhood is routinely 
mentioned in the literature on surrealism, but rarely isolated for analytic 
attention. Strangely, our current cultural preoccupation with children’s rights, 
and with children’s potential abuse at the hands of adults, has hardly impacted 
on this field of enquiry, and part of the purpose of this chapter will be to open up 
some methodological space for a rethinking of the surrealist child. In a sense, the 
child was everywhere within surrealism, but the adult investments involved in 
establishing that position of centrality, both among the surrealists themselves and 
their later historians and commentators, are left unexamined, as if ‘childhood’ was 
somehow inviolable or sacrosanct.
It is worth beginning by establishing a few basic principles regarding the 
surrealist child. One notable example of surrealist child-worship is the notion 
of the ‘femme enfant’. Several photographs exist of members of the surrealist 
group in 1935 standing respectfully around the 14-year-old child prodigy Gisèle 
Prassinos as she pours forth the automatic poetry, supposedly issuing directly 
from unconscious sources and thus uncontaminated by rational control, to 
which she, as a child, and a girl-child to boot, was thought to be particularly 
close. Alongside numerous other modernist and avant-garde formations in the 
early twentieth century, the surrealists aspired in their art and writings to a 
childlike spontaneity of expression, outside the strictures of formal educational 
or academic conventions.2 In broad terms, the surrealist attitude was one that was 
firmly rooted in Romantic conceptions of childhood, as a state closer to nature and 
to a form of natural ‘innocence’, which was itself tinged with Victorian nostalgia.3 
A strong argument for the radical nature of surrealism’s position is that it stood in 
counterpoint to the emphasis on strict parental control and on the unquestioned 
superiority of adult rational control of the child which was the bedrock, in France 
‘
­10 THE CHILD IN SURREALISM: 
BELLMER, CORNELL, 
HILLER
David Hopkins

172      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
in particular, of the paternalistic European cultures of the early twentieth century.4 
A critique of their position would no doubt hinge on their overly romantic 
idealization of childhood with its kinship to processes of ‘othering’ that can also 
be found in the orientalizing and primitivizing currents of Modernism.5 At the 
same time, the surrealists were part of the first literary and artistic generation to 
respond to the tradition of late nineteenth-century psychological thought as it 
reached its head in the early twentieth century in Freudian psychoanalysis, and 
therefore had to accommodate the view that children, as well as being conduits 
for an alternative inspiration and vision, were also actively sexual beings, with 
complex fantasy lives. This of course was grist to the surrealist mill, insofar as 
the exploration of sexuality was as central to surrealist concerns as the mining of 
the unconscious. The two could hardly be separated. Interestingly, though, it is 
possible to perceive in surrealist art and writing a structural vacillation between 
conceptions of childhood whereby, on the one hand, the child is seen to represent 
an opening onto an uncontaminated poetic ‘marvellous’, whilst, on the other, the 
child is seen to be unruly and instinctual, disturbingly sexualized.
The dichotomy I am pointing to is rarely cut and dried, and very often 
surrealist works attest to a confusion or melding of these views of childhood. The 
proto-surrealist painting by Giorgio De Chirico, ‘The Mystery and Melancholy 
of a Street’ (1914), for instance, offers a Victorian-era image of a young girl 
with a hoop as she walks into a vaguely threatening world in which an animal 
trailer’s door stands ominously open and the massively enlarged shadow of 
what looks like a male hunter, spear in hand, looms near to that of the child. 
There is frequently a sense that surrealist artists are thematizing precisely the 
incursion of sexuality and the irrational into the bourgeois worlds of their turn-
of-the-century upbringings. This is surely the case in Max Ernst’s collage-novels, 
especially ‘Une Semaine de Bonté’ (1934) in which the overstuffed parlours and 
boudoirs of his childhood become invaded with bird-headed beings. Ernst ‘s 1924 
painting ‘Two Children are Threatened by a Nightingale’ embodies this unease 
in its very title. But it is also possible to see quite polarized views of childhood 
in surrealist works, which attest to the root confusion between conceptions of 
childhood that I have discussed. This can be seen in two relative latecomers to 
surrealism, Hans Bellmer and Joseph Cornell. In the work of Bellmer, a German 
artist who entered the surrealist orbit in the mid 1930s, children are often 
disturbingly violated; in one famous drawing of 1935/6 a child curiously peels 
up her skin, like a garment, to stare perversely at her own insides; in numerous 
other images pre-pubescent girls indulge in Sadean fantasies. By contrast, in the 
work of the American Joseph Cornell, one of the last ‘true’ surrealists although 
never, strictly speaking, part of the group, there is, ironically, a reversion to a 
much more ‘romantic’ conception of childhood. This is partly an outcome of 
Cornell’s inundation with romantic and symbolist literature (Goethe, Nerval, 
Poe, etc.) and partly a consequence of his otherworldly personality. Largely 
confined to the place of his upbringing for his entire adult life, looking after 

THE CHILD IN SURREALISM      173
a demanding mother and a crippled brother, Cornell spent hours wandering 
through the bric-a-brac and curio shops of mid-town Manhattan, searching for 
the fragmentary objects which he would assemble in an associative matrix in the 
‘boxes’ he produced from the mid 1930s onwards.
What I want to do in this essay is to track the very different conceptions of 
childhood represented by these artists, and see how they operate, as structural 
underpinnings, in the work of a contemporary artist who is one of the clearest 
inheritors of the surrealist tradition, the American-born artist Susan Hiller. In so 
doing, it may be possible to see how sharply the cultural configuration of childhood 
has shifted in the eighty or so years since surrealism was at its height and offer 
some perspective on surrealist child-worship in the process. Film and video works 
will be privileged in the latter part of this discussion. Film was a central medium 
within the surrealist avant-garde (in the experimental Dalí/Buñuel collaborations 
and the work of Germaine Dulac to mention the most obvious examples) but my 
reason for privileging film is also partly methodological; it has the advantage, over 
the static mediums of painting, sculpture, assemblage and collage that dominate 
accounts of surrealism and post-surrealist production, of containing the residues 
of narrative impulses that help explicate psychological and social attitudes, 
whereas static objects may more immediately lure us into abstract considerations 
of aesthetics, iconography, style and so on. At the same time, it seems important 
here to emphasize that this discussion aims to focus on adult conceptions of 
childhood and not childhood itself. The question might therefore be: what forms 
of adult identification with children, and attendant forms of nostalgia and/or 
regression, are at play in these works? And what might we learn from this, not so 
much about the fantasies that adults impute to children and their imaginations, 
but the fantasies and anxieties that adults impose upon childhood?
In 1931, Bellmer’s mother, in the process of moving house in the wake of her 
husband’s cerebral haemorrhage, came across a box of Bellmer’s childhood toys, 
which she subsequently sent to him. The collection included broken dolls, linocut 
magazines, glass marbles, Red Indian disguises, conjuring tricks, penknives, 
spinning tops, and pink sugar pigeons, and, when Bellmer came to arrange 
the objects in a shadow box which he called his ‘Personal Museum’, it further 
incorporated objects such as a metal Puss in Boots, a gyroscope, toy trains and 
playing cards.6 It seems that the arrival of the box of toys acted as a catalyst in 
Bellmer’s artistic development. Along with other highly charged personal events 
of the period, notably Bellmer’s obsession with his adolescent cousin, Ursula, who 
became his neighbour in Berlin, it directly informed the construction of ‘The Doll’, 
the mannequin made up of multiple, interchangeable parts that the artist was to 
fabricate between 1934 and 1936. This in turn was reproduced photographically 
in the book ‘Die Puppe’ (1934) in which Bellmer’s text ‘Memories of the Doll 
Theme’ serves to underline the self-willed regression that had followed the artists’ 
revelatory re-acquaintance with his childhood playthings, and the way this 
reconnection was bound up with a recollection of early sexual fantasies. Talking 

174      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
of the association he had made in childhood between confectionery or objects 
associated with play and thoughts of young girls, he wrote:
­In fact certain objects from their world were always coveted for they were 
often as fragile as those black Easter eggs with their doves and pink sugary 
curlicues – so tempting, but thankfully having nothing more to offer … Yet, 
apart from such baroque confections, a single coloured glass marble was 
sufficient to extend the bounds of my imagination in disconcerting directions. 
The marble was less confiding, despite offering a view of its interior in which 
one could behold the frozen ecstasy of its spirals. It was enthralling. Lured 
by this miracle, pleated lace flounces nestled around the marble’s curves, the 
lost leg of a little doll curved over it, the lid of a cigar-box inclined to form a 
threatening perpendicular and the inscription on its surface disappeared up 
above, beneath the celluloid ball and the corkscrew curls that played about it.7
What is noteworthy here is the way that Bellmer combines a remarkable ability 
to empathize with the proto-fetishistic viewpoint of a child gazing at and through 
a marble with the emergence of a proto-paedophilic fantasy which he later 
developed, not only in the construction of ‘The Doll’ but also in certain drawings 
of the mid 1930s in which allusions to the decorative adornments of confectionery 
or clothing and to childish toys such as marbles figure prominently.8
Joseph Cornell would himself revert to a box format – not directly related to 
the ‘Personal Museum’ of Bellmer, but having interesting thematic connections 
to it – from about 1936 onwards. For Cornell, the box – small and glass-fronted, 
and usually either presented in the form of a poetic tableau, or compartmentalized 
internally to form a kind of jewel casket or reliquary – became his central means of 
expression. Particularly exquisite examples are the so-called ‘Medici’ boxes, dating 
from 1942 to the mid 1950s, in which reproductions of Renaissance portraits by 
Sofinisba Anguissola, Bronzino and Pintoricchio, pasted to the back of the boxes, 
are surrounded by compartments containing toy blocks or small balls, producing 
the overall effect of a penny arcade slot machine. The so-called ‘Untitled’ (Medici 
Princess) box of 1948 is especially interesting in terms of the relation to Bellmer for 
its utilization of the combination of the image of the beautiful young girl and the 
allusions to childhood games. As Diane Waldman points out, the claustrophobic 
homage to the unattainable princess could well be understood as an outcome of 
Cornell’s yearning for a female companion/lover. The work dates from a period 
when Cornell briefly held a factory job, a temporary respite from his normal 
confinement at home in Queens, New York, looking after his mother and brother. 
It appears that Cornell met a young woman in the factory at this time, but as his 
diary reveals, felt unable to consummate the relationship. Diane Waldman notes 
that the girl in the Medici Princess Box is the ideal of youth and innocence, but as 
royalty she is unattainable. Cornell, recognizing the futility of his longings, situates 
her behind glass, making her even more detached in time and place.9

THE CHILD IN SURREALISM      175
There is, then, a deeply melancholic, nostalgic cast to Cornell’s evocation of 
childhood, but it is arguable whether he enters into the self-willed regression of 
Bellmer. Whatever affinities might be observed between Bellmer and Cornell – 
and they certainly represent perfect examples of the idealized and sexualized 
polarities of surrealist attitudes to childhood – they were radically different 
artists, who have rarely been brought into proximity. Bellmer was self-consciously 
psychoanalytic in approach. Cornell, however, asserted on one occasion: ‘do not 
share the subconscious and dream theories of the surrealists. While fervently 
admiring much of their work I have never been an official surrealist, and I 
believe that surrealism has healthier possibilities than have been developed.10 
This talk of ‘healthier possibilities’ may suggest a certain anxiety on Cornell’s part 
regarding the ‘darker’ aspects of surrealism and it is not surprising to discover 
that Cornell was a lifelong follower of Christian Science, the religious movement 
set up in America by Mary Baker Eddy.11 Whereas Bellmer knowingly nurtured 
his paedophilic fantasies, Cornell’s work, and his personal diaries, often speak 
of a level of repression that he was surprisingly unreflective about. Yet there is 
plenty of biographical detail to suggest that Cornell had deeply peculiar relations 
to young children and women. Mary Ann Caws notes that in his diaries there were 
voluminous notes about the girls he watched from afar, who were discussed in the 
pages of his journal in terms of an obsessive childlike personal mythology:
‘Tina’ (a ‘be-bopper’ he says) entered into the general domain of his ‘fairies’ or 
‘fées’ – whom he named according to their clothing or associations. The ‘apricot 
angel’ wears orange; the ‘fée aux lapins’ or bunny fairy is a counter girl who sells 
toy bunny rabbits.12
Cornell even went as far as to arrange tea parties solely for children, and to invite 
them as privileged guests to his exhibitions.
Given such information, scholars tend to agree that sexual repression was a 
powerful motor behind Cornell’s work: Lindsay Blair notes of certain of Cornell’s 
boxes, that it is ‘impossible, for all their emphasis on the innocence of childhood, to 
ignore the lingering presence of the strong desire that originally caused the boxes 
to be made’.13 There has, however, been surprisingly little in-depth psychoanalytic 
investigation of the work. An exception to this occurs in one of the few detailed 
analyses of Cornell’s work as a filmmaker by Marjorie Keller.14
Attending to the theme of childhood in Cornell’s work, Keller argues that 
the construction of the child-figure in much of Cornell’s output approximates 
closely to certain typologies in the writings of Nerval, Lewis Carroll and Goethe, 
all of whose writings Cornell greatly admired. Keller pays particular attention 
to Cornell’s interest in the figure of Mignon from Goethe’s important ‘Wilhelm 
Meister’s Apprenticeship’ cycle (1795–96) which was extremely well known in 
Europe in the nineteenth century, partly via Thomas Carlyle’s translation into 
English (1824). A brief summary of Mignon’s role in Goethe’s epic tale will be 

176      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
helpful here. Having initially become entranced with the child when he glimpses 
an attractive creature at an inn and is unable to ‘declare it a boy or a girl’, the book’s 
central character, Wilhelm Meister, subsequently watches Mignon perform her 
strangely dislocated acrobatic act with a troupe of Italian rope-dancers.15 After she 
has been mercilessly beaten by the leader of the company for refusing to perform 
her ‘egg dance’, Wilhelm pays for the child to be released from the troupe and takes 
her as his own servant. Mignon continues to adopt a male identity (‘I am a boy, 
I don’t want to be a girl’),16 looking upon Wilhelm as her father, and only adopts 
women’s clothes after she has witnessed a sexual encounter between Wilhelm and 
an actress, which is a prelude to her tragic death, brought on by uncontrollable 
sexual jealousy. Throughout their relationship, Wilhelm is continually moved to 
pity by the child, sensing that there is something mysteriously injured or lacking 
about her: ‘He longed to take this forlorn being to his heart in place of a child, to 
feel her in his arms and with a father’s love to arouse in her an enjoyment of life.’17 
In his own copy of Goethe’s novel, Cornell apparently underlined a passage in 
which Goethe described a meeting with a painter who produced scenes depicting 
Mignon’s life: ‘And thus you might see the Boy-girl, set forth in various attitudes 
and manifold expression.’18 Keller argues that it is the gender confusion thrown up 
by Mignon that Cornell was especially drawn to. Hence, according to Keller, in a 
late collage by Cornell of 1960, which is actually titled ‘Mignon’, ‘her childhood is 
combined with an urchinlike appearance. She is very much a boy-girl.’19 The boyish 
girl can further be shown to be a recurring motif in many other works by Cornell: 
just one example is the text-piece produced by Cornell for the American journal 
View as a homage to one of the many Hollywood actresses he idolized, Hedy 
Lamarr, titled ‘Enchanted Wanderer: Excerpt from a Journey Album for Hedy 
Lamarr’, which incorporated a collage of the ethereal-looking actress transformed 
into a Renaissance boy. Keller goes on to suggest that the psychoanalytic logic 
of all this might accord with the conclusions reached by Otto Fenichel, one of 
Freud’s followers, who also made explicit use of the Mignon story, alongside other 
motifs in fairy tales, to develop the idea that the female child, in certain kinds of 
transgender male fantasy, is unconsciously equated with the penis (the ‘little one’, 
as in the name Mignon):
In feminine men who during childhood or puberty liked to fantasise themselves 
as girls, the same mechanism is present as in heterosexuals. They fell in love 
with little girls in whom they see themselves embodied, and to whom they give 
what their mothers denied them. Very probably this mechanism is also the 
decisive one in pedophilia. Always such fantasies are combined with the idea 
of mutual protection: the little woman is rescued by the great man, in actuality, 
the latter by the former in magical fashion. These women represent not only 
the man himself who loves them but, in particular, his penis. In the way in 
which the charm of such figures is generally described one invariably finds a 
suggestion of their phallic natures. They are phallus girls.20

THE CHILD IN SURREALISM      177
Whatever one may feel about the accuracy of Keller’s analysis in relation to the 
specific details of Cornell’s work, it is fascinating that, in one of the richest recent 
cultural analyses of representations of childhood in the nineteenth century in which 
the child is shown to embody the very notion of ‘interiority’ for the modern age – 
Carolyn Steedman’s Strange Dislocations of 1994 – the figure of Mignon is once 
again identified as an archetypal embodiment of adult fantasies about children. 
Having painstakingly examined the development of the nineteenth-century 
obsession with Mignon as it was carried over into the attitudes of audiences to 
various performing children – mainly child-acrobats, child-actors and children 
in melodrama – Steedman concludes that audiences in the nineteenth century 
identified with the pitiful figure of Mignon since the child represented ‘an aspect 
of the self, and all that the self had experienced and endured. Among all the 
other things members of that audience wanted, looking at the child, was their 
self.’21 Significantly, she too chooses to enlist the help of Otto Fenichel and his 
psychoanalytic reading of Mignon and Mignon-figures to further elucidate the 
narcissistic identifications of (male) audiences with the child performers they 
gloated over,
Otto Fenichel concluded that the desire of adult men was precisely this desire, 
for they saw themselves embodied in the child. They sought to rescue, save, 
have that child, he thought, so they might give to her ‘what their mothers had 
denied them’, specifically a baby, in more general terms what they had lost, what 
all of us have lost, which is the baby or child one formerly was.22
Whether one chooses to pinpoint the paedophilic valence of this analysis (deriving 
as it does from Fenichel) or chooses to simply underline the narcissistic process by 
which the attention to the image of the child answers to an internal sense of loss 
(which might loosely be allied with the notion of nostalgia),23 the advantage of using 
the Mignon trope is that it provides an analytic tool for understanding surrealist 
representations of children which moves us beyond the polarized categories of 
idealized/sexualized child, as discussed earlier. This tool seems especially helpful 
in the case of Cornell, where the degree of repressed sexuality positively begs 
for some mode of elucidation. It makes sense here, however, to return briefly to 
Bellmer. Images in which the bodies of young girls double as phalluses often crop 
up in his work, especially in certain late ‘Untitled (Phallus Girl)’ drawings of the 
1960s in which the young women are transformed into vaginas being penetrated 
by enormous penises.24 Similarly in certain photographs of his ‘Doll’ assemblages 
of 1932–34 and 1935 the articulated parts of the mannequin are swivelled round 
to suggest the transformation of the entire body into a phallic formation. The 
paedophilic associations of the latter images are underlined by the succinct 
explanatory text supplied by the surrealists when certain of these images were 
reproduced in their magazine, Minotaure, in 1934: ‘Doll. Hans Bellmer, variations 
on the assembling of an articulated female minor.’25 In the past, commentators on 

178      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Bellmer have scoured Freud and been quick to talk of the notion of the ‘phallic 
mother’ in relation to this kind of imagery. It might have made more sense to look 
to Fenichel and to the pathetic, dislocated-looking body of Mignon.
It is the work of Cornell, with its poignant overlaying of a celebration of 
childhood ‘innocence’ and an attitude of adult ‘longing’ towards the childish state, 
that I wish to concentrate on closely, and I want now to focus attention on a small 
group of films that deal precisely with the conjunction of childhood, acrobatics 
and entertainment, that figured so prominently in the Mignon story. Marjorie 
Keller has herself noted the direct parallels with Mignon in the trilogy of so-called 
‘Collage films’, dealing with children which Cornell produced, in collaboration 
with the filmmaker Larry Jordan, at some point between the 1940s and 1960s: The 
Children’s Party, The Midnight Party and Cotillion.26 These include fairly obvious 
motifs such as the girl-boy and the child-acrobat. My purpose, therefore, will not 
be to simply look for allusions (whether direct or unconscious) to Goethe, but to 
consider more broadly how we should assess the balance between a celebration of 
the iconography of childhood and an incipient sexualization of the child in these 
films, in the broader context of an assessment of the surrealist child.
Cornell’s small group of experimental films, in which he spliced together 
examples from the hoard of old movies and motion-picture stills that he picked up 
on his curio-hunting trips to Manhattan from Queens, have for a long time been 
seen as important in terms of ‘avant-garde’ film history, not least because they 
were massively influential for a subsequent generation of American experimental 
filmmakers, such as Bruce Conner, Ken Jacobs, Jack Smith and Stan Brakhage. The 
most celebrated example is Rose Hobart (c.1936), which is largely a re-edited version 
of a Universal Pictures movie from 1931 East of Borneo, but the trilogy of collage 
films dealing with childhood is especially rich in technical experimentation, with 
the principles of collage and montage being explored particularly inventively.27 
Interestingly, the three films in question, The Children’s Party, Cotillion and 
The Midnight Party share a great deal of the same found footage, with Cornell 
combining the images differently, and adjusting the speed of the film and style 
of editing, as well as introducing new imagery, to produce different emphases. 
In The Children’s Party Cornell confronts the viewer with a series of what look 
like sections of amateur film recording entertainment or vaudeville acts (circus 
acrobats, trapeze artists, high-wire act, Indian knife-thrower and a performing 
seal). This is intercut with sections of home-movie material showing children at a 
party, grouped around a table, apple-dunking (suggesting a Halloween party) or, 
in the case of a number of shots of very young children, simply staring into the 
camera and nodding off to sleep. There is also a third category of material in the 
film that seems to derive from educational films and scientific documentaries: for 
instance, a didactic section on astrological formations and a haunting fragment 
from a microscopic film of an amoeba.
The effect of all this is disorientating on first viewing, with the juxtapositions 
of differing grades and conditions of film and types of imagery appearing quite 

THE CHILD IN SURREALISM      179
random, but repeated viewings make it possible to discern a carefully orchestrated 
narrative logic by which the film falls into two main areas: the ‘world’ of the 
children and the ‘world’ of the entertainers. The entertainer’s world, although 
ostensibly created for the benefit of the children, is presented quite independently, 
as though containing its own logic. The children become witnesses to this 
inscrutable, seemingly autonomous, other world, but they never interact with 
it. They are often presented frontally in ‘freeze-frame’ images. Sometimes we 
are presented with the footage from an action sequence of a circus or vaudeville 
performance followed by a stop-frame image of a child, smiling or grimacing, as 
though registering the effect of what he or she has ‘seen’. (There is an interesting 
parallel here with a later short film by the Latvian/Israeli filmmaker Herz Franz, 
Ten Minutes Older of 1978, in which the film concentrates solely on the faces of 
children as they react to a theatrical performance, although the faces of Franz’s 
subjects are mobile whilst Cornell’s are poignantly frozen). The film constantly 
switches between the voyeuristic viewpoint of the camera entering into the sphere 
of the child/children and the sphere that they are supposedly observing. The 
latter is not necessarily comforting; there is a sequence in which a ‘Red Indian’ 
hurls a set of knives at a wrapped-up woman, skilfully outlining her body with 
the constellation formed by his daggers, before she emerges, grinning, from her 
wrappings. The image is made particularly uncanny by the film’s absence of sound; 
there is no reassuring response from the audience to provide us with a cue on 
how to respond (none of Cornell’s collage films has a soundtrack). Frequently, the 
images of adult performers have a sexual edge. The film is unified, at an almost 
subliminal level, by a series of sequences which deal with a voyeuristic exploration 
of the female. In the first of these a woman is seated on a chair held high by a 
strongman in his mouth. He is forced, in effect, to look up the woman’s skirts to 
do this. A little further on, there is a fragment of film in which a female tightrope 
walker in a white tutu springs up and down on her rope: the film slows down, 
and, in close-up, her skirt flies up, revealing her pants. In another sequence, a 
female trapeze artist in a circus, viewed from below, swings dramatically towards 
us, displaying her legs. Further on, we see a Busby Berkeley-style line of dancers, 
kicking their bare legs up in the air.
It might be inferred from this that, although The Children’s Party apparently deals 
with images redolent of ‘childish innocence’ (parties and circuses), it in fact deals, 
at a deeper structural level, with the theme of children in thrall to the behaviour 
of adults and, more particularly, to the spectre of sexuality. This is underlined at 
the end of the film. The penultimate sequence is a lengthy one in which two young 
girls, dressed as ballerinas, kick up their legs in unison, as though mimicking the 
earlier sequence of high-kicking adult dancers. There is little doubt that sexuality 
is creeping up on them, and that they now have become the ‘performers’. The final 
sequence seems to confirm this: in a setting worthy of Méliès, against a ‘fairy-tale’ 
backdrop, a naked girl of around ten or eleven years of age, with long flowing 
hair, poses coyly on horseback. Sitney has discerned a complex allusion to Lady 

180      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Godiva here, but it is hard to overlook the uncomfortable, vaguely paedophilic 
associations of the image.28 Jody Hauptman, for instance, notes that:
Echoing the original Lady Godiva, the child has hair so long it covers her 
naked body … This tiny girl, like the Alice in Lewis Carroll’s photographs, has 
not reached sexual maturity, yet she displays a marked degree of sexuality … 
Exacerbating the viewer’s discomfort is the child’s acknowledgement of her 
own eroticism; looking coyly at us, she collaborates in the spectacularization of 
her youthful sexuality.29
In conclusion, it might well be argued that Cornell himself identifies with the 
children presented in The Children’s Party and relives, to some degree, his own 
bafflement in the face of the sexual (a bafflement he seems not to have surmounted 
as an adult, given his confined lifestyle). The film might thus be seen as a covert 
exploration of his own sexuality, but the extent to which this becomes inter-fused 
with his young subjects is distinctly discomforting.
If we now turn to Cotillion and look at the way similar technical juxtapositions 
of freeze-frame and ‘action’ sequences, along with a sizeable proportion of the 
same filmic material, are handled, it is noticeable that the effect is more assertively 
‘abstract’ and less concerned with narrative. Here the stop-frame images of 
the children last for longer and seem to embalm or memorialize the children, 
suggesting the nature of (still) photography as ‘that which has been’.30 This deathly 
connotation is especially marked in a sequence where the camera is trained on 
the face of a sneezing baby. Suddenly the sneezing fit is halted in a freeze-frame 
image as if the baby’s breath has itself been halted. It becomes evident, then, that 
Cotillion is more concerned with mortality, and with reflecting nostalgically on 
the nature of the fragments of old film that it assembles, than The Children’s Party. 
Reworking the same material, Cornell actively de-emphasizes the sexual in favour 
of the nostalgic.
This, of course, chimes in with much that has been said so far about Cornell’s 
repression of his own sexuality and about a historical moment, in which pre- and 
post-Freudian views of childhood are simultaneously in play, that helps situate 
surrealist attitudes to childhood. Arguably, Cornell’s collage films of the 1940s sit 
more directly in a surrealist lineage than his better-known boxes. In the case of 
the film from the trilogy I have left out of this analysis, The Midnight Party, there 
is a distinctly dreamlike, or nightmarish, quality to it, suggesting that Cornell was 
dealing more straightforwardly here with the surrealist obsession with the oneiric. 
But in the case of The Children’s Party the surrealist inflection arises from the film’s 
‘anthropological’ recording of the vagaries of popular culture (more specifically 
the iconography of children’s play and entertainment), an attitude that was directly 
at the centre of surrealist concerns in the 1930s.
A key strategy of both the ‘official’ surrealist journal Minotaure (1933–39) and 
the organ of the ‘dissident surrealists’ headed by Georges Bataille, Documents 

THE CHILD IN SURREALISM      181
(1929–30) had been to view the products of Western popular culture (mass 
entertainment imagery, magazines, advertising, postcards, children’s toys and 
games) as if viewing ‘tribal’ or ‘primitive’ artefacts and to thereby reveal the 
fetishistic and ‘magical’ latencies underpinning the spell they exerted.31 In the 
trilogy of ‘collage films’ by Cornell there is one oft-repeated frame which seems 
to emblematize an analogous concern. Emphasized as a freeze-frame, but also run 
as part of an action sequence, it is the close-up image of a boy with a peculiar-
looking party hat, who, after the ‘apple-dunking’ ceremony indulged in by the 
children, lifts his face up to the spectator, with his mouth abnormally stretched to 
accommodate an enormous apple.
This might well be an allusion (whether conscious or unconscious) to the 
images of tribespeople with masks and facial adornments from the pages of either 
Documents or Minotaure, both of which Cornell would have been familiar with.32 
In his first surrealist film Rose Hobart (1936), Cornell had already flirted with 
‘primitivist’ imagery, juxtaposing re-edited shots of the star of East of Borneo with 
ones of the natives and landscape of the Indonesian principality of Maradu, the 
fictional setting for the film. It is interesting to note that, at that time, Cornell’s 
taste for the ‘exotic’ could arguably be seen as out of kilter with the mood of 
surrealism, in its official Parisian form. After their principled opposition to the 
Colonial Exposition in Paris in 1931, which featured their involvement in an anti-
colonial exhibition, ‘The Truth about the Colonies’, the Paris surrealists had become 
increasingly wary of appearing to uphold colonialist stereotypes.33 But the allusions 
to anthropological imagery in The Children’s Party in fact suggest that, by the 1940s, 
Cornell had himself become more self-conscious in deploying such conventions. It 
seems that part of the purpose of these films was to present a kind of quasi-scientific 
cultural anthropology of childhood, with phenomena such as performing seals 
or apple-dunking soberly documented as examples of Western ritual behaviour. 
In this sense, of course, the child is implicitly positioned as ‘other’, on a par with 
the ‘primitive’, but this move is not made without a degree of irony. What makes 
Cornell’s practice especially poignant, however, is the personal investment, akin to 
mourning, involved in this act of documentation. In a letter written, but not sent, to 
one of the many female stars Cornell admired from afar, Eva Marie Saint, Cornell 
wrote ‘I am particularly prone to Christmas, from childhood, in the context of New 
York, snow, magical store windows, (Christmas) Eve, etc, no matter how thin the 
personal mystique gets hammered out by the world condition.’34 Cornell’s attempt 
at memorializing this fast-disappearing world is similar to the impulse shown 
by Bellmer in creating his ‘Personal Museum’ (box of childhood toys), discussed 
earlier as a precursor to Cornell’s boxes. What the anthropological/nostalgic 
ambience of Cornell’s collage films serves to occlude, however, is the atmosphere 
of sexuality, verging on the paedophilic, which was present at a submerged level in 
works such as The Children’s Party. Cornell’s identification with his child subjects, 
delighted and appalled as they are by the allure of their entertainers, is arguably just 
as ‘unhealthy’ as he deemed surrealism to be.

182      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
In 1990 the artist Susan Hiller presented an installation in London titled ‘An 
Entertainment’, making use of four synchronized video programmes consisting of 
edited footage of ‘Punch and Judy’ shows filmed by her at various seaside locations 
throughout Britain during the 1980s. The critic Guy Brett evoked the effect on 
spectators of the piece as entering a large darkened space, where they were 
bombarded with fragments of images, flashed onto the walls, of Punch beating his 
child, along with imagery such as skeletons, the hanging of Mr Punch, and so on: 
‘A flash of red clothing, a noose jerked awkwardly up the wall. A pale flat skull, the 
relentless violence of the beatings which become almost like an abstraction of pain: 
all these images enter the bright arena and disappear into the darkness again.’35
Hiller’s work provides a very apt coda to this essay’s discussion of the surrealist 
attitude to the child. The artist is frequently characterized as part of the surrealist 
lineage, and she herself has made no bones about her debt to the movement, 
although she has also, understandably, emphasized her distance, as a contemporary 
artist, from it.36 It is clear that ‘An Entertainment’ has certain very clear affinities 
with Cornell in the way he has been discussed here: it is a ‘collage’ of kinds; there is 
a very pronounced anthropological aura to it; it deals with the theme of children’s 
entertainment put on by adults; it reveals the same fondness for the iconography 
of childish toys and rituals. Whether or not Hiller has seen Cornell’s trilogy of 
‘collage-films’ about childhood seems unimportant: her work undoubtedly speaks 
from within the same cultural idiom.
There are, however, numerous crucial differences. Apart from massive technical 
and aesthetic divergences (the shift that is effected between film and video being 
fundamental) the most obvious difference concerns the sheer level of disturbance 
and violence in Hiller’s work, compared with the ‘lightness’ of Cornell’s. As I have 
argued elsewhere, the spectator of ‘An Entertainment’ is not merely shown images 
of Punch and Judy, but is effectively placed, via the staging of the installation, in the 
position of a child who has to make sense of these ritualistic, hallucinatory images 
as they flash before his or her consciousness. It as though Hiller has compelled us 
to adopt the point of view of the children in Cornell’s films as they take in acts of 
knife throwing, sexual provocation and so on, and ratcheted up the effects another 
50 or so per cent.
I have argued elsewhere that one of the best ways of contextualizing ‘An 
Entertainment’ is in terms of the near-hysteria surrounding the issue of child abuse 
that was at its height in Britain at the time it was made. (The allegations of Satanic 
ritual abuse in the Orkney Islands in the late 1980s are one of several examples.37) 
Hiller herself has certainly hinted that abuse, although not necessarily sexual 
abuse, was one of her concerns. She has said: ‘The baby-battering, wife-beating, 
homicidal violence of the central character too reflects the actual conditions of 
patriarchy’38 and, on another occasion: ‘I was subjecting myself to what I saw 
children being subjected to in every Punch and Judy show … the child is being 
taught something through the terror of ritual.’39 In British society at large child 
abuse was, of course, something of a ‘discovery’ of this period. Carolyn Steedman 

THE CHILD IN SURREALISM      183
notes that, writing in 1992, in a review of a classic work by Otto Rank on incest, 
the journalist Liam Hudson pointed out that it was ‘scarcely five years since incest 
erupted in our midst as a vehicle for journalists in search of copy, and for all those 
paediatricians, psychologists and social workers who know in their bones that 
parents do their children irreparable harm’.40 It is tempting, then, looking back 
on the surrealist view of the child via the lens of Hiller’s recent work, to see her as 
de-sublimating what had been at issue, deep beneath the surface, in the relatively 
gentle, poeticized universe of Cornell.
The surrealists of the classic epoch, who had claimed the ‘rights’ to the imaginative 
and visionary splendours of childhood long before children had any ‘rights’ of 
their own (they have, of course, increasingly been in possession of legal rights 
since the 1970s)41 would no doubt have been appalled at the moral censoriousness 
implicit in Hiller’s position. But the surrealist valorization of childhood, which 
had to reconcile the dawning of a Freudian understanding of sexuality with a 
conviction of the omnipotence of the child’s imagination and desires, could hardly 
outlive its own paradoxes. One of the central themes of Cornell’s ‘collage films’ 
was the way that supposedly ‘innocent’ children (polymorphously sexual as they 
would be in Freudian terms) mimic and perform more adult versions of sexuality. 
After all, fantasies, sexual or otherwise, are not just things children possess; they 
are also things which are thrust upon them, both literally and metaphorically, 
from an adult world.42
Notes
1	
André Breton, ‘Manifesto of surrealism’, in Breton: Manifestoes of Surrealism, trans. 
Richard Seaver and Helen R. Lane (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 
1972), p. 40.
2	
For the modernist cult of ‘child art’, see Jonathan Fineberg, Discovering Child Art: 
Essays on Childhood, Primitivism and Modernism, rev. edn (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2001).
3	
For a discussion of the child in Romantic literature, see M.H. Abrams, Natural 
Supernaturalism: Tradition and Revolution in Romantic Literature (New York: Norton, 
1973), pp. 379–83. See also George Boas, The Cult of Childhood (Dallas, TX: Spring 
Publications, 1990) (originally published by The Warburg Institute, London, 1966).
4	
For a discussion of French attitudes to children in the early twentieth century, see 
Theodore Zeldin, A History of French Passions. Vol I: Ambition, Love and Politics 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993) (first published 1973), ch. 12, pp. 315–42.
5	
For a recent definition of these processes, see Michael Richardson, Otherness in 
Hollywood Cinema (New York: Continuum, 2010), pp. 12–15.
6	
Peter Webb and Robert Short, Hans Bellmer (New York: Quartet, 1985), p. 26. For a 
good reproduction of the ‘Personal Museum’, see also Therese Lichtenstein, Behind 
Closed Doors: The Art of Hans Bellmer (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 
2001), p. 20.
7	
Hans Bellmer, ‘Memories of the doll theme’, trans. Malcolm Green, in Bellmer, The 
Doll (London: Atlas Press, 2005), p. 37.
8	
For examples of these drawings, see Webb and Short, Hans Bellmer, pp. 61–4.

184      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
9	 Diane Waldman, Joseph Cornell: Master of Dreams (New York: Abrams, 2002), p. 74.
10	 Joseph Cornell, letter dated 13 November 1936, Archives of the Museum of Modern 
Art, New York; as cited in Dawn Ades, ‘The transcendental surrealism of Joseph 
Cornell’, in Kynaston McShine (ed.), Joseph Cornell (New York: Museum of Modern 
Art, 1980), p. 19.
11	 For Cornell’s devotion to Christian Science, see Lindsay Blair, Joseph Cornell’s Vision 
of Spiritual Order (London: Reaktion Books, 1998), pp. 75–7.
12	 Mary Ann Caws: Joseph Cornell’s Theater of the Mind: Selected Diaries, Letters and 
Files (New York: Thames & Hudson, 1993), p. 33.
13	 Blair, Joseph Cornell’s Vision of Spiritual Order, p. 126.
14	 Marjorie Keller, ‘Joseph Cornell: the symbolic equation’, in The Untutored Eye: 
Childhood in the Films of Cocteau, Cornell and Brakhage (London and Toronto: 
Associated University Presses, 1986), pp. 98–178.
15	 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Wilhelm Meister, Vol. I, trans. H.M. Waidson (London: 
Calder, 1977), pp. 83–93.
16	 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 10.
17	 Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 102–3.
18	 Goethe, Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship and Travels, trans. Thomas Carlyle (London: 
Chapman and Hall, 1824); quoted in Keller, ‘Joseph Cornell: the symbolic equation’, 
p. 103.
19	 Keller, ‘Joseph Cornell: the symbolic equation’; Cornell’s ‘Mignon’ collage is also 
reproduced in ibid., p. 102.
20	 Otto Fenichel, ‘The symbolic equation: girl=phallus’, in Collected Essays, Vol. II (New 
York: Norton, 1954), pp. 10–11.
21	 Carolyn Steedman, Strange Dislocations: Childhood and the Idea of Human Interiority 
1780–1930 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994), p. 169.
22	 Ibid. Steedman also cites Fenichel in footnote 23, p. 221.
23	 Nostalgia is often viewed pejoratively as a fundamentally unproductive, self-indulgent 
state of mind. However, in surrealist studies it demands greater theoretical attention. 
Walter Benjamin asserted the importance of the ‘outmoded’ in surrealism in his 
seminal essay, ‘Surrealism: the last snapshot of the European intelligentsia’ (1929), in 
Peter Demetz (ed.), Walter Benjamin: Reflections: Essays: Aphorisms: Autobiographical 
Writings (New York: Harcourt, 1978), and there are overlaps between a valorization 
of the ‘outmoded’ and an attitude of nostalgia within surrealism which await proper 
elucidation. For recent attention to the notion of nostalgia, see Svetlama Boym, The 
Future of Nostalgia (New York: Basic Books, 2001).
24	 See, for example, catalogue nos 212 and 213 in Michael Semff and Anthony Spira 
(eds), Hans Bellmer (Munich and London: Hatje Cantz, 2006), p. 216.
25	 Minotaure (Paris), no. 6 (1935), pp. 30–1.
26	 For Keller’s full analysis see ‘Joseph Cornell: the symbolic equation’, pp. 139–78. For 
an account of the making of the films, and Jordan’s role in the process, see P. Adams 
Sitney, ‘The cinematic gaze of Joseph Cornell’, in McShine (ed.), Joseph Cornell, 
pp. 77–8.
27	 For Cornell’s position in relation to ‘avant-garde’ traditions, see P. Adams Sitney, 
Visionary Film: The American Avant-Garde 1943–2000, 3rd edn (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2002), 315–45. For an overview of Cornell’s own production, see 
ibid., pp. 69–89.
28	 See ibid., 81. Unfortunately Adams Sitney’s account of the ‘collage film’ trilogy is 
seriously confused by the fact that he appears to be referring to The Children’s Party 
when discussing The Midnight Party and vice versa.

THE CHILD IN SURREALISM      185
29	 Jodi Hauptman, Joseph Cornell: Stargazing in the Cinema (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1999), pp. 192–3 (emphasis added).
30	 Jodi Hauptman also adopts this kind of Barthesian position on Cotillion in ibid., 
pp. 127–9.
31	 For introductory essays on Minotaure and Documents, see Dawn Ades, Dada and 
Surrealism Reviewed (London: Hayward Gallery/Arts Council of Britain, 1978), 
pp. 278–39, 228–49. See also Musée d’Art et d’Histoire, Geneva, Focus on ‘Minotaure’: 
The Animal-Headed Review (Geneva: Skira, 1988), and Dawn Ades and Simon 
Baker (eds), Undercover Surrealism: Georges Bataille and ‘Documents’ (London and 
Cambridge, MA: Hayward Gallery Publishing and MIT Press, 2006).
32	 Cornell might, for instance, have seen the photographs of tribal head adornments 
and masks in Dr Ralph von Koenigswald’s ‘Têtes et Crânes’, Documents, no. 6 (1930), 
pp. 353–8. He would also have been aware of Minotaure, no. 2 (1933), an issue 
devoted to the ‘Mission Dakar-Djibouti 1931–1933’.
33	 For a detailed discussion of the ‘Truth About the Colonies’ exhibition and subsequent 
shifts in surrealist aesthetics see Adam Jolles, The Curatorial Avant-Garde: Surrealism 
and Exhibition Practice in France, 1925–1941 (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 2013), pp. 93–173.
34	 Cornell Papers, Archives of American Art, 1055: 126, undated letter draft to Eva 
Marie Saint, c.1960, cited in McShine (ed.), Joseph Cornell, p. 93.
35	 Guy Brett, ‘Susan Hiller’s Shadowland’, Art in America, April 1991, p. 142.
36	 For Hiller on surrealism, see Alexandra Kokoli (ed.), Susan Hiller: The Provisional 
Texture of Reality. Selected Talks and Texts, 1977–2007, pp. 213–30.
37	 See David Hopkins, Childish Things (Edinburgh: Fruitmarket Gallery, 2010), 
pp. 69–76.
38	 Susan Hiller, as cited in Brett, ‘Susan Hiller’s Shadowland’, p. 143.
39	 Susan Hiller, interview with Stuart Morgan, in Susan Hiller (London: Tate Publishing, 
1996), p. 44.
40	 Liam Hudson, The Times Literary Supplement, 24 July 1992, pp. 7–8; cited in 
Steedman, Strange Dislocations, p. 165
41	 The publication of the ‘Convention on the Rights of the Child’ by the United Nations 
in 1989 was indicative of an increased sense of the importance of children’s rights in 
the late twentieth century. (Formal declarations of children’s rights had been made, 
however, in 1924 by the League of Nations and in 1959 by the United Nations General 
Assembly.)
42	 My thanks to Karen Lury for her helpful comments on this essay. Slightly modified 
sections of it (dealing with Cornell/Mignon and Bellmer/toys) also appear in 
my essay ‘Re-enchantment: surrealist discourses of childhood, hermeticism and 
the outmoded’, in David Hopkins (ed.), A Companion to Dada and Surrealism 
(Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2016). The argument of this current essay is, however, 
substantially different.

186 

L
ooking back, the 1970s now seem like a golden age for the public information 
film in the UK, particularly for those aimed at children. The structuring 
irony of many of the most memorable public information films from this 
era intended for young viewers is that, in order to promote safety, they chose to 
depict peril. These public information films target children, not simply in the 
sense that it is a genre aimed at a young audience, but that they take aim at the 
very children they represent on screen. To be young in a public information film 
from the 1970s is to be put at risk, even sacrificed, for the greater good. From 
the dangers of crossing the road to the risks of shallow water to the hazards of 
the farmyard, public information films from this era see peril everywhere and 
depict a world that tests and targets the children they represent, often sacrificing 
them cinematically to promote public safety. The injunction to Mind How You 
Go (1973), to take the title of one of the most iconic public information films, is a 
simple instruction to its young viewers to take care crossing busy roads, but it also 
serves more generally as the key to understanding the genre itself. In the safety-
related public information film, the world is a dangerous place, one filled with 
innumerable threats and hazards that attract the youthful, naive and unguarded. 
In cataloguing the sheer range of possible accidents and tragedies that might occur 
in the most ordinary of circumstances, public information films aimed at young 
viewers create a world in which children face injury or death at every turn. Within 
the space of these films, ‘mind how you go’ is as much a terrifying threat as it is a 
cautionary instruction or gentle warning.
In what follows I will to look at a number of public information films from the 
1970s that transform the world of the child into a space of temptation and terror. 
My argument is that these films draw on the generic conventions of suspense 
and horror to do their work. This accounts not merely for the grisly images of 
maimed accident victims that are the stock-in-trade of public information films 
from this era, but more importantly for the ambient sense of menace and doom 
that characterizes them. Ultimately, I think that these films are more interesting 
for their tone than for their content. However shocking the images of blood and 
11 MIND HOW YOU GO: 
CHILDREN AND THE 
PUBLIC INFORMATION FILM
Andrew Burke

188      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
violence might have been, the atmosphere of these films is somehow even more 
disturbing and distressing and sticks more resiliently in the memory. I will return 
at the end of my analysis to the idea that it is precisely this sense of unease that 
makes these films subject to nostalgic remembrance, but for now I want to turn to 
a film that exemplifies the way in which the public information film sacrifices lives 
on screen in the hope of saving them in reality.
Tone and atmosphere generate a kind of eerie surplus to the basic lessons 
of farm safety that John Mackenzie’s Apaches (1977) was ostensibly produced 
to convey. Commissioned by the Health and Safety Executive and made under 
the auspices of the Central Office of Information (COI), Mackenzie’s short film 
presents a complete catalogue of child fatalities, as a group of kids succumb each 
in turn to farm-specific forms of grisly death. The conceit of the film is there in its 
title. The kids in Mackenzie’s film play cowboys and Indians.1 They are imagined 
as, and imagine themselves to be, the eponymous Apaches, a brave tribe of fierce 
warriors whose native terrain is the countryside around the farming village in 
which they live. Their identification as Apaches, however, assumes a more 
profound significance in light of the way in which death diminishes their ranks. 
The film imagines the children as a tribe not made for the modern world and 
doomed to extinction when faced with the danger presented by the technologies 
of modernity.
The film begins with the kids playing in the hills above the village, costumed as 
Apaches and planning their attack on the town below. The title and credits appear 
in a typeface that immediately identifies the film as drawing on the history of the 
western. It is projected against a shot of a big sky with drums echoing softly on 
the soundtrack, and the children are silhouetted as they run along the crest of 
the hill. The film is narrated by one of the children, Danny, who is the chief of 
this adolescent tribe. He introduces his fellow warriors in voice-over and explains 
that they are at war because they are ‘tired of the broken promises of the great 
white father’. Two things are interesting about this scene. First, it establishes the 
force of the children’s imagination. They imagine the damp green of the English 
countryside to be the desert landscapes of Arizona or New Mexico, the traditional 
terrain of the classic western. This act of adolescent imagination proves fatal as 
their fantasies will prevent them from perceiving the clear dangers of the farm. 
Nevertheless, much of the power of Apaches comes in the way that it represents 
a child-centred rural geography. The spaces of the countryside are transformed 
through the imaginative play of its young characters and part of what makes the 
film feel so uncanny for adult viewers is the simultaneous familiarity with and 
inaccessibility of this experience of landscape. As Owain Jones argues, there is an 
otherness to childhood and the child-specific experience of space that renders it 
uncanny:
Yet children are always, in some respects, on their own, in other places, and 
need other places and other spaces (as in other spaces of solitude, solo play, 

MIND HOW YOU GO: THE PUBLIC INFORMATION FILM      189
dens and such like (Ward 1990). Riddell (2006, p. 31) talks of ‘the tribal cruelty, 
companionship, and wonderment that makes children’s lives as separate and 
as magical as they have always been’ (my emphasis). In other words, distances 
and intimacies are simultaneously present within child–adult relations. It is the 
affective geographies of their distant, other world which I feel are vital to what 
children’s lives are. They are thus vital to children’s geographies yet also very 
difficult to address.2
In drawing on the conventions of the western, Apaches finds generic form for 
the affective geography of these rural children, who are represented as being 
embedded in a world that is open to play but filled with hazard. Moreover, the 
western’s conventional sense of melancholic loss about the disappearance of the 
tribe connects, for adult viewers at least, with the impossibility of fully experiencing 
again the child’s imaginative engagement with landscape. I will return to this idea 
in my conclusion, but for now I want to establish that Apaches is about loss: not 
simply the accidental deaths of the children, but also the melancholic attachment 
we retain to the childhood experience of place once we become adults. Second, the 
scene suggests that the children have been betrayed by a society that has colonized 
the landscape of their childhood play. There is some suggestion of negligence, with 
the parents failing to protect the innocents from the dangers of the adult world, the 
hazards of the farm as a modern, industrialized space. To draw on Jones once more, 
the film, in order to represent the hazards of the modern countryside, retains an 
idea of the rural idyll.3 The sense that these accidental deaths are deeply tragic 
rests upon the idea that the countryside is the natural home of childhood and 
with the industrialization of agriculture also comes the loss of innocence of rural 
childhoods. Children in this romanticized, elegiac scenario become the doomed 
Apaches of the western as they succumb to the dangers of this transformed space.
There are, of course, profound ideological consequences to the way in which the 
film grafts the preventability of accidental adolescent death onto the ideological 
morass of the western. The film combines the elegiac and the fatalistic in the figure 
of the child pretending to be an ‘Indian’. The children are doomed from the start 
as they assume the role of a tribe under siege, their accidental deaths rehearsing 
the final historical stages of the genocide of westward expansion in America. As 
such, the film inherits the conventional ideological problems of the traditional 
liberal western in its representation of the children as the innocent, yet inevitable, 
victims of progress and industrial expansion.4 The children are represented as 
noble savages who must be protected from their own naivety and ignorance about 
the modern world and its dangers. Just as the conventional western demands the 
death, assimilation, and/or subordination of the Native Americans that appear 
on screen as the opponent of the white protagonists, so too does this particular 
subgenre of the public information film demand either the death of its young 
characters or their submission and subordination to a paranoid, if grown-up and 
mature, logic that sees danger everywhere and in everything.

190      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
While the generic coordinates of the western provide Apaches with its basic 
allegorical frame, its tone derives from the way in which it combines elegy and 
anxiety. As soon as it establishes the identity of the kids as Indians, as a doomed 
tribe, the film becomes an exercise in finding increasingly inventive ways to 
dispense of its young cast. In so doing, it brings together the realistic and the 
horrific. The set-up of each death involves both explaining the game the children 
are playing and showing the hazards of the farm as a space of work. The first 
child dies whilst the children are engaged in a game of wagon train. The warriors 
ambush a farm tractor that stands in imaginatively for the vehicle of colonial 
expansion. When Kim, the younger of the two girls who are part of the group, 
manages to jump on the trailer being pulled by the tractor, she shoots the young 
man driving with her toy gun. He playfully shoots back, thumb cocked with his 
index finger as the trigger, but when the tractor hits a rut in the muddy farmyard 
it throws the young girl forward and beneath the wheels of the moving vehicle. 
The film cuts to an image of blood splattered on the toy gun which, cracked and 
broken by the weight of the trailer and its load of hay, stands in for the crushed 
body of the child itself. The soundtrack goes eerily silent as the kids look on at 
the corpse that remains unseen by the viewers. Then, to underscore the gravity 
of the consequences of this dangerous play, the scene shifts in time and space to 
the children’s school and we see the headmaster remove the nametag from Kim’s 
hanger outside her homeroom. Even though the child’s death is telegraphed and 
anticipated by a whole set of generic markers and clues that commonly structure 
safety films, the sequence is shocking not least because of the speed with which the 
fatal accident occurs and its consequences are registered.
The other children each die in turn, their deaths linked to a game gone awry. 
Some of these games extend the imaginative world of the western, but these are 
complemented by other forms of play, either drawn from the classical repertoire of 
childhood games or from popular culture. Tom falls into a slurry pit and drowns 
trying to escape capture during a game of kick-the-can; Sharon suffers immensely 
after inadvertently drinking some poison in a mock ceremony to the gods after 
a game of ambush the fort; Robert dies when a gate falls on him while playing 
Starsky and Hutch.5 In each instance, the film toys with expectation, setting up 
potential accidents only for the child to step out of the way or avoid the danger in 
the very last second. Nevertheless, and rather perversely, the film demands each 
child’s death and ruthlessly exploits the sense of dread as close scrapes give way 
to fatal incidents. As such, Apaches at times feels something like a slasher film in 
the brutality of its inexorable, deadly logic. Carol J. Clover provides a definition 
of the slasher film that resonates strongly with the narrative arc of Apaches: ‘At the 
bottom of the horror heap lies the slasher (or splatter or shocker or stalker) film: 
the immensely generative story of a psychokiller who slashes to death a string of 
mostly female victims, one by one, until he is subdued or killed, usually by the 
one girl who has survived.’6 The children in Apaches are targeted by circumstance 
rather than by a psychokiller, yet the film reproduces the basic narrative form of 

MIND HOW YOU GO: THE PUBLIC INFORMATION FILM      191
the slasher film, not least in how its children are picked off one by one until the last 
has learned the lesson of safe play.7 The key here is the way that Apaches appeals 
to other generic and narrative forms in order to represent its young characters as 
victims. In this process of victimization, the film both indigenizes and feminizes 
the children. They become the doomed Apaches in a genre, the western, structured 
around their extermination and they become the feminized victims of an unseen 
and terrifying homicidal force akin to the psychokiller of the slasher film. As 
resolutely as the western or slasher film demands that its aboriginal or female 
characters must die, so too does the shock-based safety film require that its young 
cast be exterminated or eliminated.
In Apaches, the element of horror is also amplified by the look of the children. 
Almost uniformly blond, blue-eyed and androgynous, they are not unlike the 
flaxen-haired, glassy-eyed children in the Village of the Damned (1960). Even 
though they do not share the malevolent coldness of the children in the earlier film, 
they nevertheless retain some small portion of their weirdness, not least because 
once they start dying in sequence both nature and civilization seem against them. 
The relative absence of adults enhances this sense that the children are a force unto 
themselves, embroiled in a losing battle with a hostile universe that is eliminating 
them one by one. There is a basic instability here: on the one hand, the children 
in Apaches are innocents, sacrificially killed in order to help save their peers in 
the audience; but on the other hand, the fact that the children are so ruthlessly 
targeted combines with their slightly creepy homogeneity to make them seem 
like a malevolent force that must be eliminated. They are somehow innocent and 
sinister simultaneously and this, I would argue, is a result of the frantic generic 
mixing that both structures and defines Mackenzie’s film. Apaches draws primarily 
on the western and the splatter film for its structure and narrative shape, but the 
look of its country children also connect it to forms of rural horror and to tales 
of the supernatural and the uncanny, which in England at least have long been 
associated with the isolated countryside and those ways of life disappearing in the 
face of modernization.8
With only two of its original six children remaining, the film adopts an even 
more sombre tone near its end as rain descends on the village and it is enveloped 
by an atmospheric gloom. The game that Danny and Michael play is strikingly 
morbid. In voice-over Danny explains, ‘the Apaches have fought well against great 
odds. Our braves are few and the white man is many. We have no food. Winter is 
coming. Our people will starve. We have been robbed of our homeland, but we 
shall return. We shall survive. I, Geronimo, must gather together our scattered 
people and we shall survive.’ Having commanded Michael to remain in the hills ‘to 
protect the lodge of our fathers’, Danny goes alone to the village below. There is a 
conspicuous contrast here with the opening sequence. The sun is setting, the wind 
gusts audibly on the soundtrack, and Danny is isolated in a bleak and unforgiving 
landscape. The tone is autumnal and there is an air of complete desperation. 
Danny, as Geronimo, announces that he is going to make peace with the ‘white 

192      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
eyes’ and to learn from them the art of survival in the modern world. In terms of 
the film’s structuring conceit, this capitulation could be read as Danny’s realization 
that he must adhere to the rules of safety, yet the film has him helped onto a tractor 
parked on a muddy hill by an adult who merely tells him to ‘be careful’. When he 
inadvertently releases the brake, the tractor rolls down the hill, picking up speed 
until finally veering off the road, tumbling down a steep incline and killing Danny 
upon impact with the ground below. There is an inescapable perversity to Danny’s 
death, since by this time he embodies all the melancholy of tribal surrender. 
Danny, as the chief, must die to satisfy multiple generic demands, both in terms 
of the film’s allegorical allegiance to the western, its stylistic and tonal connection 
to the horror film, and its identity as a public information film for children that 
emphasizes safety through shock. At the film’s end, only Michael survives. We see 
him at the graveside during Danny’s funeral. He has lost his tribe, all his friends 
are dead, but he has also been, to extend the allegorical logic of the film itself, 
assimilated, uncomfortably dressed in a suit and tie at the Christian funeral of his 
tribal chief. The film does not linger on him, nor does it give him some kind of trite 
speech that would show that he has learned the lessons of safety as a result of this 
series of fatal accidents. The image of Michael is one of profound melancholy, of 
the last of the Mohicans, robbed of his land, his culture and his pride, but also of a 
child who has lost all his friends.
Throughout the film the accident scenes have been punctuated by short 
sequences that show a family preparing for a wake. It is only after the tractor 
accident and funeral that the film reveals that the wake is for Danny himself. He 
narrates the film from beyond the grave. This spectral narration adds yet another 
uncanny dimension to the film, but it is also weirdly flat in terms of emotion. 
The film as a whole is oddly affectless. Not only do the children not react when 
they see their friends die, they seem largely unaffected by these deaths generally. 
They continue to play and bear none of the psychological scars that should rightly 
come with the serial fatality of their closest friends. This criticism surely misses the 
point of the film and demands a level of psychological realism from a genre, the 
safety film, for which it is not the highest priority. Nevertheless, this lack of affect 
connects Apaches ever more strongly to the horror film, which likewise demands 
a kind of emotional and cognitive discontinuity on the part of its characters who 
in sequence must, against all logic, go back into the house or into the woods for 
the sake of the plot. The film might strive for a kind of quiet intensity in order 
to dramatize the seriousness of the accidental deaths, but the eerie silence only 
manages to lend the children an air of resigned fatalism and to assign the parents 
a deeply unsettling sense of indifference.
Apaches is perhaps in a class of its own with its distressing hybridization of 
the western and horror cinema, yet there are other safety films that approach it in 
terms of fatality and bloodiness. The Finishing Line (1977) and Building Sites Bite 
(1978) likewise rely on shock to convey their messages of safe play. There are also 
a number of driving safety public information films which rely on accident scenes 

MIND HOW YOU GO: THE PUBLIC INFORMATION FILM      193
for their impact, most notably 20 Times More Likely (1979). But from here I want 
to turn to films that are less bloody but no less psychologically disturbing in the 
way that they mobilize fear and anxiety to promote safety and security. There is an 
enduring creepiness to Lonely Water (1973), a 90-second public information film 
primarily designed to air during breaks between children’s television programming. 
Commissioned by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, the spot 
aimed to reduce drowning accidents that occurred as a result of play near rivers 
and ponds, or around water on construction sites or waste ground. The film is 
narrated in voice-over by ‘The Spirit of the Dark and Lonely Water’, a hooded 
figure of death who watches over, perhaps even compels, children to engage in the 
kind of reckless and heedless behaviour that results in drowning. Given voice by 
Donald Pleasance, the Spirit is not merely a malevolent figure, but a perverse one, 
taking pleasure in the deaths he both witnesses and also seemingly orchestrates.
As with Apaches, the creepiness here resides in the film’s construction of 
a universe that targets children, that lures them to their deaths through the 
temptations the world offers. The film opens with a low-level tracking shot over a 
murky swamp, eventually settling on the hooded figure of the Spirit shrouded in 
mist. As the Spirit tells us, this kind of Hammer horror landscape may seem the 
ideal site for terror and death, but it is not actually where he is at his most potent. 
The scene shifts to a building site where four kids try to retrieve a football from a 
rain-filled hole. Cheered on by the other children, the brashest of the bunch inches 
his way down the muddy slope reaching for the football with a stick. It is no surprise 
when he slides down into the murky water and cannot escape. The chillingly eerie 
element here is the way in which the film switches to the drowning child’s point-
of-view and shows us the Spirit silently approaching in the background, unnoticed 
by the other children who simply do not know what to do to save their friend. A 
second child drowns when the branch he is hanging on to breaks as he reaches 
with his net to catch fish from a pond. The lesson here is that the greatest danger 
is not in the conventional landscapes of the horror film, but in the most banal of 
sites and spaces. The Spirit specifically targets three types of children, ‘the unwary, 
the show-off, the fool’, all of whom fail to recognize the hazards of the everyday. 
But the terror of the film derives from how it gives this childhood inattention 
and negligence spiritual form and constructs a world view in which children do 
not simply make errors of judgement or fail to prevent the preventable, but are 
tracked and targeted by a malevolent force that lays in wait for such moments. 
When the film settles on a ‘No Swimming’ sign alongside a river near an illegal 
tipping site, there is a kind of gleefulness in Pleasance’s voice as he explains, ‘Only 
a fool would ignore this, but there’s one born every minute.’ The targeted victim in 
this final scenario, however, is saved by ‘sensible children’ playing nearby, whose 
attentiveness to safety neutralizes the Spirit’s power. Nevertheless, the Spirit is 
confident enough to announce, ‘I’ll be back’, as his cape sinks into the murky water. 
The artificial echo of the Spirit’s voice signifies his defeat but also, in a trope drawn 
from the horror film, heralds his eventual return.

194      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Even more than recklessness, it is inattentiveness that is the primary cause of 
death in both Apaches and Lonely Water. The equation of safety and mindfulness 
is a common one in public information films of all sorts, but it takes on a certain 
urgency in those targeted at children. Mind How You Go is largely free from the 
blood and shock that characterize many of the safety films for children made in 
the 1970s, yet, despite its relative gentleness, there is still something revealing in 
the way it constructs the world as a place that preys on childhood inattentiveness 
and distraction. The film, commissioned by the Department of Education, begins 
on a suburban high street with Valerie Singleton, the host of the renowned BBC 
children’s magazine programme Blue Peter, demonstrating the safe way to cross 
a busy road. She draws her lesson from the then recently published Green Cross 
Code (1970), which sought to simplify the basic procedures of pedestrian safety so 
that they could be remembered by even the youngest of children.
After this opening didactic sequence, which mimics the conventions and 
format of an on-location magazine-style report, the film shifts to the fictional 
story of a young boy, Graham, who must safely navigate his way to and from 
school. Graham’s problem is that, as his father puts it, he is prone to ‘mooning 
about’. His tale is, as the credits have it, ‘told by’ Singleton, the storybook phrasing 
suggesting that this public information film is geared towards a very young 
audience who might learn best from a simple story rather than a more complex 
or startling cautionary tale. Graham nearly steps out into traffic on his way to 
school, but escapes with only a warning from a lorry driver who has to slam on his 
brakes. Graham is admonished by the driver, who asks him, ‘Why don’t you look 
where you’re going? They don’t teach you nothing at school?’ This is an oddly self-
reflexive moment for a public information film in that it raises the very question 
of who is responsible for conveying this basic safety information to children, of 
versing them in the safety protocols of modern urban life, for which crossing the 
road stands metonymically.
As Michael Brooke explains, Mind How You Go was distributed free of charge 
‘to encourage schools, local education authorities and road safety officers’ to show 
the film.9 Combined with possible television broadcast on both public and private 
networks and screenings in cinemas before commercial films, there is a diffuse 
set of bodies, sites and contexts in and through which public information films 
target their young audience. Their reach and impact seems best explained in terms 
of governmentality, a concept Michel Foucault developed in part to explain the 
process by which individuals are subject to, and internalize, all kinds of rules 
and routines that regulate the self and enable productive self-governance.10 Even 
though learning how not to be run over by a car is surely one of the less pernicious 
aspects of this process of social integration and compliance, it does illuminate the 
odd dynamic that generates the uncanny atmosphere of many of these films. One 
of the consequences of the state assuming this task of edification and protection 
is the projection of a world that is both dangerous and sinister.11 This process is 
clear enough in Apaches and Lonely Water, where fate seems to take gleeful aim 

MIND HOW YOU GO: THE PUBLIC INFORMATION FILM      195
at vulnerable children, but even in the seemingly innocuous Mind How You Go 
Graham is subject to a world that requires his absolute vigilance.
Mind How You Go is not subtle in driving home the necessity of absolute 
alertness. Following Graham through his school day, the film show numerous 
times when he lets his attention lapse. Helpful and caring teachers gently 
admonish Graham but also repeatedly drive home the message that you must 
always look for both danger and opportunity. During a field trip to the zoo, 
one teacher tells Graham to look carefully at how a bird of prey is ‘looking and 
listening all the time in case of danger. Because when he’s not living in his cage, 
he’s a wild animal and there is danger all around him.’ Later, having given up 
the ball a little too easily during a football match, Graham is told by his Physical 
Education teacher, ‘you must remember to look around you before you move’. 
The effect of these clearly telegraphed lessons is faintly comic in the way they 
foreshadow Graham’s eventual revelation that they apply to everyday life as much 
as to the natural world or football pitch. Despite the comedic effect, which even 
the youngest of viewers might find somewhat corny and patronizing, there is a 
specific world being constructed here, one that is defined by the omnipresence of 
danger and the necessity of vigilance.
The film drives this point home even more strongly when it has Graham pass 
by the scene of an accident on his walk home. A young girl has been struck dead 
trying to cross the road and a tracking shot from Graham’s point of view shows 
the ambulance attendants covering the body, although his perspective is partially 
blocked by the legs of those gathered around the scene. No blood is shown, yet 
it is all the more disturbing for the way in which Graham seems the intended 
recipient of the message. In a perverse way, this young girl died to save Graham, 
to drive home for him the lessons of the day. Sure enough, when later tempted 
to cross the road at a busy junction, Graham is overwhelmed and initially 
cannot bring himself to do it. The film presents a terrifying montage of cars and 
lorries streaming by, their force and immensity emphasized by the angled shots 
that replicate the perspective of a child. A few tilt shots also suggest a level of 
psychological disorientation and anxiety. Graham is frightened and presumably 
the children watching the film are meant to be as well. He retreats to the window 
ledge of a corner shop to calm himself and to think things through. It is at this 
point that the various lessons of the day return to him, indexed precisely to the 
tenets of the Green Cross Code. Spectral images of his teachers, his schoolmates 
and the birds of prey appear above his head and the accompanying aphorisms 
about being visible, looking and listening, and seeing the way is clear before you 
move resound in his head. The echo effect is somewhat reminiscent of Lonely 
Water, but more importantly it establishes that the rules that should govern his 
behaviour have been wholly internalized. In a rather benign way, it signals that 
lessons have been learned, but there is a slightly more sinister aspect to the echo 
since it suggests that this learning ideally becomes a voice inside our heads, 
guiding us from within rather than from without. The electronic processing of 

196      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
these voices, the special effect that partially dehumanizes them and amplifies 
their insistence and force, ensures its overlap with those kinds of sci-fi horror 
that address autonomy and fears of being controlled. The film itself has a happy 
ending as Graham successfully makes his way home and Valerie Singleton 
returns to stress the importance of the Green Cross Code. Nevertheless, there are 
several moments in the film that are more complex and distressing than they may 
initially seem.
While Mind How You Go focuses on the process by which a child internalizes 
the necessity for vigilance, the last two films I want to examine target adults. 
Absent Parents (1982) is a 40-second public information film about the dangers of 
leaving very young children unaccompanied around water. It begins with a group 
of children playing indoors on a climbing structure, but juxtaposes this with shots 
of a child outdoors walking along the very edge of a wooden bridge that crosses 
a shallow creek. In a clever bit of cross-cutting, the image of a girl falling off the 
play structure alternates with that of the girl falling into the creek. The message is 
clear: what might be a harmless fall inside might be deadly outside if it occurs near 
water. As Tony Dykes observes, this scenario is ‘every parent’s nightmare’, and the 
short is reminiscent of the opening scene of Don’t Look Now (Nicolas Roeg, 1973), 
in which an unsupervised young girl playing outside drowns whilst her parents 
are busy bickering inside.12 The look of the film, with its crisp cinematography 
and bold colour palette, also invokes Roeg’s film. The girl is not wearing a red rain 
jacket or boots, yet red is the dominant colour and the film exploits the almost 
spectral pastiness of the children in a manner that emphasizes their fragility but 
also visually links them to the kids in Apaches. The ghostliness of the children 
invokes their death despite its prevention and points to the way in which their 
parents would be punished and haunted by any lapse in attention, no matter how 
brief. The message of the film is about the need for constant surveillance, and 
this point is driven home by the weird over-enunciation that distinguishes the 
voice-over: ‘Never let small children out of your sight if you know they can get 
anywhere near water, however shallow. Children love water, but water can kill.’ 
Once again, the natural world is transformed into a malevolent force or entity that 
attracts and targets children, luring them to a death that seems calculated rather 
than accidental.
Sewing Machine (1973) preys on parental guilt as ruthlessly as Absent Parents. 
Directed by John Krish, whose post-war documentaries have recently been re-
evaluated and rediscovered, this minute-long filler film is specifically about 
temporality.13 An on-screen countdown timer begins at one minute and works 
its inexorable way to zero. The voice-over announces, ‘this minute, the one you 
see being eaten up, is the last one of this little girl’s life’. With the spectre of death 
hanging over the remainder of the film, Krish follows the child as she ignores her 
mother’s command to stay on the pavement and away from traffic. The mother 
is just inside, at her sewing machine, but the child runs free. The problem, as the 
narrator explains, is that children are too easily distracted and this makes them 

MIND HOW YOU GO: THE PUBLIC INFORMATION FILM      197
supremely vulnerable: ‘When this child crosses the road because she sees her 
best friend, what she will not see or hear is the car that will knock her down. The 
sudden excitement blots out everything else. All she can hear and see is inside her 
own head. It is that simple. It is that deadly.’ The timer reaches zero as the impact 
occurs. This is heard but not seen. The film focuses instead on the mother’s stunned 
reaction as she comes to realize that the crash she has heard involves her child. The 
film’s force resides in the ruthless brutality of the clock. It is neither nature nor the 
machine that demands this child’s death, but simply time itself, which has been 
determined in advance and reaches zero with a mechanical coldness.14 Unlike in the 
later Absent Parents, where the mother is offered a reprieve by saving her daughter 
from the shallow creek and hugs her closely out of the fear of having nearly lost 
her, Sewing Machine lingers on the horrified and anguished face of the mother for 
several seconds after the counter reaches zero. These seconds are excruciating as 
they invite the viewer to identify not simply with the abjection of tragic loss but 
with the guilt that is its inevitable companion. But what binds Sewing Machine 
to the other public information films discussed here is its transformation of the 
ordinary into a space of peril for unwitting and inattentive children. The young 
girl in Sewing Machine seems especially joyous and carefree, which is what, quite 
cruelly and sadistically, makes her the ideal child protagonist for a safety-oriented 
public information film.
Although the production of public information films continued into the 
1980s and 1990s and even continues into the present day, the 1970s seem a 
high-water mark for the genre. This assessment is probably influenced by 
the temporality of nostalgia itself: those targeted by these films are now in a 
position to write about them, buy compilation DVD packages, obsessively 
assemble YouTube playlists of obscure examples, or even make films that draw 
on the language and vocabulary and replicate the tone and feeling of films half-
remembered from childhood viewing. As much as DVD technology has played 
a part in the compilation and redistribution of public information films, the 
internet, with its tendency to accumulation and aggregation fuelled by its ever-
expanding bandwidth, seems central to the rediscovery of these films in recent 
years.15 But this technological explanation is surely only part of the equation. 
The contemporary fascination with these films has something to do with feeling 
as well, not simply the affective force of hazy childhood memories but the sense 
of loss that these ageing films embody and trigger. Memory here is as likely to 
be prosthetic as actual, in that the sense of loss does not accrue only to those 
who lived during that time or experienced these films as contemporary warnings 
rather than historical artefacts.16
The broader power of public information films from the 1970s, I would argue, 
derives from their status as a remnant from a world that to a large degree has 
disappeared. This world was defined by a kind of ‘technocratic utopianism’ that 
understood state intervention into everyday life as both necessary and desirable,17 
an understanding which has steadily been eroded since the election of Margaret 

198      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Thatcher’s Conservatives in 1979 and the rise of neoliberalism as a state ideology 
in the UK and elsewhere over the past thirty years. Writing about a cohort of 
musicians (The Focus Group, The Advisory Circle, Belbury Poly) who take the 
atmosphere of public information films from the 1960s and 70s as inspiration for 
their sample-based evocations of the recent past, Simon Reynolds argues that a 
shift has taken place, among some at least, in the way this period is remembered 
and represented:
This lost era of planning and edification represented a paternalism (or perhaps 
maternalism, given its association with free milk for schoolkids or BBC 
children’s fare like Watch with Mother) that rock’n’roll in some sense rebelled 
against by celebrating desire, pleasure, disruptive energy, individualism. But by 
the early 2000s, these bygone ideals of progress started to acquire the romance, 
pathos and honour of a lost future. The idea of a ‘nanny state’ didn’t seem so 
suffocating and oppressively intrusive any more.18
Nevertheless, the work of these artists retains a sense of the weirdness and 
creepiness of many of the public information films upon which they draw. 
Indeed, the bureaucratic, even slightly robotized female voice that introduces The 
Advisory Circle’s Mind How You Go EP aims to soothe but sounds eerily sinister 
when she delivers the mandate of this fictional governmental body: ‘The Advisory 
Circle. Helping you make the right decisions.’ This clarifies the way in which the 
original films resonate in the present. I would argue that they are not simply the 
trigger for a nostalgia that misses the safety and security of an innocent past but 
rather are compelling precisely because of the way in which they blend fear and 
forward-thinking, paranoia and a sense of progress. These films persist in memory, 
they haunt the present, not because they represent an idealized safe world, but 
because they imagine a world in which adventure, imagination and possibility 
go hand in hand with risk, danger and uncertainty. Given this understanding, it 
is scarcely surprising that many of the most affecting public information films 
are the ones that feature children. In them the sense of loss is doubled. Not only 
do they evoke the imperfect, lost era of welfare state interventionism, but also 
a kind of childhood, free-ranging and in need of instruction of how to play 
safely, that has largely disappeared in a contemporary world where restraints and 
restrictions on children’s play have increased dramatically. As such, I would argue, 
to contemporary viewers of Apaches, the film presents not simply the lost world 
of the 1970s with all its technocratic ambitions and collective aspirations fully in 
view, but also a lost world of childhood in which play still trumped prevention. 
The sinister tone and sheer excess of Apaches as well as other public information 
films about safety that targeted children might have been the stuff of nightmares 
in its day, but oddly enough, in retrospect, anxiety becomes allure and nightmare 
turns nostalgic.

MIND HOW YOU GO: THE PUBLIC INFORMATION FILM      199
­Notes
1	 For more on the long history of ‘playing Indian’ and the political significance of such 
appropriations and identifications, see Rayna Green, ‘The tribe called Wannabee: 
playing Indian in America and Europe’, Folklore, vol. 99, no. 1 (1988), pp. 30–55; 
Philip J. Deloria, Playing Indian (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998).
2	 Owain Jones, ‘“True geography [] quickly forgotten, giving away to an adult-imagined 
universe”. Approaching the otherness of childhood’, Children’s Geographies, vol. 6, 
no. 2 (2008), pp. 200–1.
3	 Owain Jones, ‘Idylls and othernesses: childhood and rurality in film’, in Robert Fish 
(ed.), Cinematic Countrysides (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2008), 
pp. 189–90.
4	 As Edward Buscombe explains, the idea of the ‘Vanishing American’ can be 
traced back as far as the eighteenth century, but perhaps finds its most powerful 
expression in the ‘melancholic nostalgia’ that characterizes Edward S. Curtis’s 
photographs of Native Americans taken in the first decade of the twentieth century. 
Edward Buscombe, ‘Injuns!’ Native Americans in the Movies (London: Reaktion, 
2006), p. 70. The cinema draws on Curtis’s sentimental fatalism in the development 
of the western and oscillates between assimilation and attrition in its representation 
of the fate of Native Americans on screen. Buscombe argues, ‘the cinema offered 
two main routes towards extinction. In the one the Indian gracefully acknowledges 
that his time has come and consents to fade from the scene, agreeing to become 
progressively assimilated into white culture until the last traces of Indian identity 
have been effaced. In the other, the Indian, almost invariably a mounted warrior 
of the plains, defiantly fights against the white advance but is inevitably defeated’ 
(ibid., pp. 80–1).
5	 Starsky and Hutch (ABC, 1975–79) was a hugely popular American TV police series 
broadcast in the UK by the BBC from 1976.
6	 Carol J. Clover, Men, Women and Chainsaws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992), p. 21.
7	 Clover tracks the emergence and development of the slasher film in the 1970s, paying 
special attention to the way in which the genre provides ‘a clearer picture of current 
sexual attitudes’ than more mainstream fare from the era ‘not despite but exactly 
because of its crudity and compulsive repetitiveness’ (ibid., p. 22). The production 
date of Apaches in 1977 places it in the midst of the first cycle of 70s slasher pictures, 
the most famous of which is The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (1974). Interestingly, 
Donald Pleasance appears in another key and later film from this era, Halloween 
(John Carpenter, 1978.)
8	 Although he focuses primarily on American examples, David Bell usefully sketches 
out the basic generic variations of the subgenre, including its connection to the 
slasher film, in ‘Anti-idyll: rural horror’, in Paul Cloke and Jo Little (eds), Contested 
Countryside Cultures: Otherness, Marginalisation and Rurality (London: Routledge, 
1997), pp. 94–108. But Apaches also fits with a strain of 1970s British cinema and 
television that sees the countryside as a haunted, dangerous and creepy place, 
including The Owl Service (ITV, 1969–70), The Wicker Man (Robin Hardy, 1973), 
Penda’s Fen (BBC1, 1974) and Children of the Stones (ITV, 1977). Children frequently 
play a key role in these works, either as the adventurers who can see the continuing 
presence of the past or as representatives of that still living past who seem somewhat 
out of place in a modernized present. For more on children, the weird countryside 

200      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
and its connections to horror, see Rob Young, ‘The pattern under the plough’, Sight 
and Sound, vol. 20, no. 8 (2010), pp. 16–22.
9	 See Michael Brooke, ‘Mind How You Go’, BFI Screen Online, http://www.screenonline.
org.uk/film/id/1402597/index.html (accessed 14 July 2021).
10	 Foucault develops the concept of governmentality in a lecture delivered at the Collège 
de France in 1978, drawing primarily on examples from the sixteenth to eighteenth 
centuries. Governmentality, he argues, includes not simply questions of statecraft, but 
extends to questions of self-governance and, crucially, the ‘government of children 
and the great problematic of pedagogy’. Michel Foucault, ‘Governmentality’, trans. 
Pasquale Pasquino, in Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon and Peter Miller (eds), The 
Foucault Effect: Studies in Governmentality (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 
1991), p. 87.
11	 For a study that draws on Foucault’s concept of governmentality in order to analyse 
state-subsidized documentary filmmaking, see Zoë Druick, Projecting Canada: 
Government Policy and Documentary Film at the National Film Board (Montréal and 
Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2007). Druick develops the category 
of ‘government realism’ to describe films produced by the National Film Board of 
Canada in the period after the Second World War (ibid., p. 23). Even though the 
films I analyse here depart from orthodox realism, they nevertheless continue the 
process in which state-subsidized films communicate and transmit ideas about self-
governance and safe conduct. Indeed, there is a way in which the subcategory of UK 
public information films from the 1970s I am analysing here constitutes a kind of 
‘government horror’ in the way they mix safety and shock.
12	 See comments from Tony Dykes in his essay in the accompanying booklet for the BFI 
DVD release of The Best of COI: Five Decades of Public Information Films (the most 
recent version, including Dykes original essay, is April 2020).
13	 In an interview with Kier-La Janisse, John Krish speaks at length about his work on 
public information films for British Transport and, while he does not mention Sewing 
Machine, he does recount the hostility he faced from concerned parents about his rail 
safety film The Finishing Line (1977). For more, see Kier-La Janisse, ‘School of shock: 
Q+A: John Krish on railway scare film “The Finishing Line”’, Fangoria, 23 June 2013, 
http://www.fangotv.com/school-of-shock-qa-john-krish-on-railway-scare-film-the-
finishing-line/ (accessed 7 April 2017).
14	 The countdown timer links Sewing Machine to contemporary fears of imminent 
nuclear attack and to the Protect and Survive (1975) series of animated public 
information films. This series of twenty films detailed the steps to take in the 
event of a nuclear strike and is renowned for its chillingly detached and pragmatic 
approach to surviving thermonuclear war. Produced by Richard Taylor Cartoons, 
the same company responsible for the animated Charley Says safety films featuring 
the eponymous and much-loved accident-prone orange tabby, the Protect and 
Survive series disturbs because it normalizes and naturalizes nuclear war, making 
it seem imminent rather than merely possible. These films connect with fictional 
representations of life after nuclear war such as The War Game (BBC, 1965) and 
Threads (BBC2, 1984) in the way they combine the pragmatic and the catastrophic, 
but they share their sense of anxiety-driven preparation with public information films 
that deal with more everyday tragedies.
15	 For more on the connection between expanded bandwidth and the production and 
circulation of cultural knowledge, see Will Straw, ‘Embedded memories’, in Charles 
Acland (ed.), Residual Media (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 
2007), pp. 3–15.

MIND HOW YOU GO: THE PUBLIC INFORMATION FILM      201
16	 Alison Landsberg developed the concept of prosthetic memory to name those 
memories that ‘originate outside a person’s lived experience and yet are taken on 
and worn by that person through mass cultural technologies of memory’. Alison 
Landsberg, Prosthetic Memory: The Transformation of American Remembrance in the 
Age of Mass Culture (New York: Columbia University Press, 2004), p. 19.
17	 Simon Reynolds, Retromania: Pop Culture’s Addiction to Its Own Past (London: Faber 
& Faber, 2011), p. 339.
18	 Ibid., p. 338.

202 

D
iscussing representations of children in Scotland’s 2014 Understanding 
Cinema project, Luke Davies, the 11-year-old director of L<3B, remarked 
to me that ‘adults tell [children] what they think it’s like to be a child, what 
they think it’s actually like. But we know what it’s actually like.’
In the cinematic arena, children are perennially spoken for, spoken about and 
spoken ‘towards’, with rarely an opportunity to speak for themselves. Children’s 
perspectives and subjectivities are referred to in cinema to the point of fetishization, 
their perspectives constructed by adults, frequently underscored with a sense of 
nostalgia about the untainted innocence of child perspectives. The Understanding 
Cinema project, modelled upon Le Cinéma, cent ans de jeunesse (CCADJ) 
programme from Cinémathèque Française, creates opportunities for Scottish 
children to make films of their own. One of Understanding Cinema’s defining 
characteristics as a school-based programme of film education is the manner in 
which it encourages participants to make films about their own lives, and thus 
voice a sense of their own particular ‘dialect’: an articulation of ‘film language’ 
mediated by children’s own sense of location and identity and thus a sense of their 
own, located filmic ‘voices’. Alongside this prioritization of ‘dialect’, Understanding 
Cinema simultaneously pursues an inextricable sense of self-efficacy; through a 
contention that, in learning to voice located aspects of the self through cinema, 
children might also develop a greater sense of self-confidence and social agency. 
Whilst these objectives may well seem utopian when contextualized within the 
discourses of critical pedagogy, my experience working as a practitioner on 
Understanding Cinema between 2013 and 2014 (the experience upon which this 
12 ‘WE KNOW WHAT IT’S 
ACTUALLY LIKE’: VOICE, 
DIALECT AND SELF-
EFFICACY IN SCOTLAND’S 
UNDERSTANDING CINEMA 
PROJECT
Jamie Chambers

204      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
essay is drawn) has provided the opportunity for in-depth, qualitative exploration 
of the project’s approaches to dialect and self-efficacy, and has found Understanding 
Cinema to achieve considerable yet contingent success in both.
In broader terms, this chapter explores a strange sense of circularity about the 
place of children in neorealist cinema, and the place of neorealist technique in 
children’s film education in programmes. Children are frequently the subject of 
neorealist cinema, from Giuseppe and Pasquale in Shoeshine (Vittorio de Sica, 
1946), Bruno in Bicycle Thieves (de Sica, 1948), Maria in Bellissima (Luchino 
Visconti, 1951) and Pasquale in the second episode of Paisan (Roberto Rossellini, 
1946), to (if we employ Robert Sklar and Saverio Gioachinni’s notion of a refracted 
‘global neorealism’),1 Apu in Satyajit Ray’s trilogy (1955–59) and Ahmed and 
Mohamed in Abbas Kiarostami’s Where is The Friend’s Home? (1987). Christopher 
Wagstaff has speculated as to why neorealist filmmakers continually returned to 
children’s perspectives:
[C]hildren are, in social terms, ideal embodiments of sermo humilis (lowered 
voices) … De Sica has returned repeatedly to their rhetorical use in his elecutio. 
He uses them thematically, it is true; but stylistically they fit very well Auerbach’s 
definition of sermo humilis: the ‘sublime’ (being human) expressed through a 
‘lowly’ style, embodying a voice too low to make itself heard in the adult world.2
Given their deep roots in cinematic neorealism, CCADJ and Understanding 
Cinema can fittingly be seen to engage a disparate ‘community’ who have long 
lacked representation in cinema’s ‘politics of recognition’. Children themselves 
can perhaps be seen as something of an ‘othered’/‘undered’3 or ‘subaltern’ group.4 
To echo Edward Said’s loaded quotation of Marx, the pervading paternalist logic 
upon children’s place in cinema seems to be that ‘they cannot represent themselves, 
therefore they must be represented’.5 Understanding Cinema’s employment of 
neorealism is thus intriguing; for whilst the project aims to engage cinematically 
with the ‘lowered voices’ of children, the expectation is that children do so largely 
themselves, rather than via neorealism’s somewhat paternalistic claim to articulate 
the ‘lowered voices’ of marginalized communities from outside. The question 
Understanding Cinema thus presents its practitioners is how then to assist children 
in articulating their own neorealist ‘dialect’ without that assistance becoming an 
epistemic imposition in itself. Media scholars such as David Buckingham and 
Michelle Orner6 have expressed considerable scepticism regarding the affordances 
school-based creative projects create for children to express their own ‘authentic 
voices’; ‘authors have challenged the emphasis on “student voice” in so-called 
critical pedagogy: the notion that students can be “given” a voice by the teacher 
and that they will then use this to speak some kind of subjective truth is, they 
argue, an illusion’.7 Can a neorealist-inspired programme of learning then hope 
to afford children any degree of self-expression that is not merely interpellated by 
adult notions of what a child’s ‘authentic voice’ should be?

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      205
It would seem important at the outset, however, to relativize such notions 
of ‘epistemic imposition’ as being located, contingent phenomena, rather than 
essentialized and overreaching catch-all allegory. Whilst all teaching arguably is 
a form of epistemic imposition, different programmes of learning should be seen 
to create simultaneous impositions and affordances for their learners. It would 
therefore seem important for critical theories of pedagogy to move beyond simplistic 
and determinist conceptions in which authoritative voices inevitably interpellate 
and eclipse children’s own potential for self-representation, towards a perspective 
taking into account the unruly, contingent and over-determined experience 
of practice ‘on the ground’. To what extent does Understanding Cinema afford 
opportunities to voice aspects of the ‘dialect’ of the located self, amidst an adult-
driven programme of learning? To what extent did the children’s representations 
of their own lives articulate their own experience, and to what extent where they 
mediated and shaped by myself as the children’s teacher/practitioner?
This essay will focus in particular upon the delivery of the Understanding Cinema 
project and the teaching of what might be considered neorealist filmmaking 
technique in two Scottish primary schools in East Lothian: P5 (where the children 
are aged 9 to 10) in Law Primary School (North Berwick) and P7 (where the 
children are aged 11 to 12) in St Gabriel’s Primary School (Prestonpans). The 
discussion will focus upon issues I encountered as an Understanding Cinema tutor 
working with these two different groups of students, and will look at both the 
process and outcomes of the programme’s seven-month syllabus, alongside semi-
structured interviews I conducted with participants and their teachers once the 
programme had concluded. I will consider case studies of particular students and 
their films within a broader discussion of the possible benefits such an approach 
might engender. Whilst the discursive approaches I have adopted belong largely 
to film studies, I have also attempted to take note of the problematizing positions 
of media education scholars such as David Buckingham. All the Understanding 
Cinema films discussed below are available to watch online via the links given at 
the end of the chapter.
Neorealism and Bruno’s tears: 
performances of ‘the real’
Understanding Cinema’s annual topic is taken from CCADJ’s own annually 
revolving curriculum, arising from the work of French film theorist and filmmaker 
Alain Bergala. Now an international programme with participants in Brazil, Cuba, 
Portugal, Spain, Italy, Germany, Austria, Belgium and the UK, CCADJ builds upon 
France’s strong precedent of cine-pedagogy, addressing cine-literacy and opening 
up access to filmmaking in schools and community groups across the world.
Perhaps the core characteristics of CCADJ’s (and consequently Understanding 
Cinema’s) approach are the focus on aesthetics and insistence upon a sense of 

206      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
‘dirigisme’ or ‘direction’, interpreted by the Mark Reid of the British Film Institute 
(BFI) as a series of ‘constraints and parameters’. Amanda-Jane Thomson, class 
teacher of the P5 class I worked with at Law Primary School, described how the 
project’s approach allowed
[T]he children … a lot of time to experiment with [different types of shots] 
and to see how they could use that effectively to create specific meanings 
throughout their film. Which really is quite different compared to how I would 
have previously approached filming in the primary school. You know, you 
would have given them the camera, the camera would have been static, wide 
angle. We would have shot what happened in front of the camera and there 
would have been no understanding of what we could do with that camera to 
create meaning.
Each year participants explore a highly specific aspect of film aesthetics and 
‘grammar’. CCADJ’s and Understanding Cinema’s topic in 2014 was ‘le plan 
sequence’ or ‘the long take’, a cinematic trope with its own ties to neorealism 
through the work of the French film critic André Bazin. As postulated by Bazin, 
the ‘long take’ is a form of cinema with closer proximity to ‘real life’, and thus a 
form of cinema aspiring to greater epistemological ‘authenticity’ or verisimilitude. 
Describing filmmaking approaches that prioritized ‘long takes’ over montage, 
Bazin described ‘the regeneration of realism in storytelling’ and how film, through 
the ‘long take’, was ‘thus … becoming capable once more of bringing together 
real time, in which things exist, along with the duration of the action, for which 
classical editing has insidiously substituted mental and abstract time’.8
Bazinian notions that some traditions of representation are inherently more 
‘authentic’ or ‘real’ than others are deeply problematic. It would therefore seem 
sensible to frame neorealism at the outset as a genre of cinema that frequently stages 
compelling performances of ‘authentic reality’, but does not necessarily possess 
any privileged relationship with ‘the real’. In these terms, ‘the real’ or ‘the authentic’ 
could be seen as akin to an aesthetic, articulating itself through performance. 
Discussing neorealism’s performance of the ‘authentic real’, Christopher Wagstaff 
quotes Michaelangelo Antonioni’s maxim that ‘reality is like an onion: peel off one 
layer and you reveal another beneath it’. Focusing upon the famous scene in Bicycle 
Thieves where Bruno (Enzo Staiola) cries at his father’s actions, Wagstaff contrasts 
the myth of how the scene was created with a much less idealized account from 
the director’s daughter:
[De Sica] needed the boy to cry, and was having trouble getting this out of the 
sunny Staiola. Prompted by the production secretary De Sica surreptitiously 
put some cigarette butts into Staiola’s jacket pocket, and then proceeded 
to ‘discover’ them, and scold Staiola for hoarding butts to smoke in secrecy, 
whereupon the little boy burst into tears … [But] If you peel off the edifying 

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      207
anecdote I have just recounted, you uncover another layer where De Sica got 
Staiola to cry by shouting at him and smacking him.9
Aesthetically, Bruno’s tears achieve a compelling textual performance of the ‘real’, 
the ‘authentic’, of childhood. As fictional drama, one is intuitively aware, however, 
that such performances of ‘authenticity’ are achieved through degrees of artifice, 
contrivance and pragmatic contingency that may not concord directly with the 
aesthetic performance of ‘realism’ achieved textually by the film. Unsurprisingly, 
the myth surrounding how Bruno’s tears were achieved does, however, concord 
with the humanist sympathies pursued aesthetically by the film. The anecdote of 
the false accusation emphasizes Staiola’s innate nobility, integrity and authenticity; 
his tears arose from the accusation he was ungenerous; that he could have shared 
something and didn’t. Wagstaff’s account ‘unveils’ the means by which this 
performance may actually have been achieved, through a cruelty highly discordant 
with the scene’s performance of the ‘authentic real’; a concealed image of opportunist 
cruelty standing in stark contrast with the broader humanist claim of neorealism. 
Bruno’s tears thus illustrate the inventive properties of neorealism and the at-times 
discordant means through which performances of realism may be achieved.
Looking beyond critical unease with notions of ‘the real’, neorealism has been 
adopted by a diverse array of global filmmaking projects, as aptly illustrated 
by Giovacchini and Sklar’s discussion of ‘global neorealism’.10 Considering 
the adoption of neorealist technique by filmmakers as diverse as Satyajit Ray, 
Ousmane Sembene, Ken Loach and the Amber Collective, one of neorealism’s 
affordances seems to be its engagement with materialist, historical and shared/
social lived experience in a manner that would seem dialectical, productive and 
useful for dialect-driven identity projects. As this essay will go on to explore, 
neorealism might also be seen to serve a particular pragmatic purpose in helping 
children articulate certain experiences; to perform and represent experiences in 
a particular way. Whilst the insistence on a particular ‘way of speaking’ inherent 
in CCADJ is an epistemic imposition, it is an imposition that generates certain 
affordances. If CCADJ’s overriding sense of dirigisme (of ‘constraints and 
parameters’) imposes and restricts, Understanding Cinema participants are asked 
to mobilize a particular form of speaking that would seem to allow considerable 
possibility for the contingent ‘voicing’, or social performance of the located self.
­The Understanding Cinema project: 
parameters and constraints
As an Understanding Cinema practitioner coming to the project equipped with 
the CCADJ’s Bazinian philosophy of ‘realist authenticity’, I was interested by 
how deeply saturated children’s imaginations seemed to be with the tropes of 
Hollywood. When I first asked students to come up with their own film ideas, 

208      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
the results constituted a literal kitsch: zombies, vampires, ‘slasher’-killers, evil 
masterminds and ‘smart-ass’ one-liners; what seemed to me the refracted cultural 
detritus of commercial cinema as filtered through the imagination of Scottish 
schoolchildren. I was not alone in this experience; Mark Reid describes how ‘too 
often young people, given cameras for the first time, imagine they can create 
mini Jason Bourne-like escapades, set in their school playground’.11 Big-budget 
Hollywood associations seemed to underscore many of the children’s knee-jerk 
cinematic impulses on a linguistic level too. ‘Tell me abaad it …’, ‘Tohhhhtally …’; 
when the cameras started rolling, children would frequently abandon their own 
native Scottish/English accents to assume an adopted register of glitzy, fetishized 
‘otherness’ gleaned from American entertainment. It was a rhetoric they seemed to 
have learned through cultural osmosis, and one that felt to me, in representations 
of their own stories and lives, deeply incongruous and ‘inauthentic’. One can 
identify here a potential clash between my own (perhaps paternalist) sense of what 
was an ‘authentic representation’ of the children, and what the children felt was an 
‘authentic representation’ of themselves. My notion of ‘authentic representation’ 
involved the children using their ‘everyday’ voices, wearing their ‘everyday’ clothes 
and behaving as I myself saw them behave day to day. Perhaps the children’s 
own notion of an ‘authentic representation’ of themselves was drawn from more 
private or personal experiences than what I was able to see, or perhaps it was – 
at least initially – partially rehearsed in the same terms in which ‘authenticity’ is 
represented in children’s Hollywood cinema.
This might be seen to reflect what David Buckingham has described as the 
‘social worlds of production’, whereby children’s creativity in school-based 
exercises is frequently a ‘negotiation between the interests of the peer group (which 
are frequently drawn from popular culture) and the criteria of what counts as 
legitimate “school writing”’;12 in other words, a discordance between the children’s 
own frame of cinematic reference and the references I was pointing them towards. 
Buckingham’s suggestion that media work should be grounded amongst the ready 
references of children’s previous media experience highlights another area of 
tension with Understanding Cinema and CCADJ, which both insist upon primary 
reference to an expansive canon of international art cinema that may well be alien 
to the majority of participants. Whilst it is easy to frame art cinema as an elitist and 
‘closed access’ form of media literacy, one could equally postulate (recalling the 
broad, serious frame of Raymond Williams) a curriculum of art cinema uniquely 
concerned with localized working-class or ‘popular’ experience.13 ‘Art cinema’ 
(itself an unstable notion) would thus seem to denote merely a way of speaking, 
rather than a specification as to what is said. The diversity of British cinema 
engaging with working-class experience illustrates the expansive vocabulary and 
expressivity of art cinema that is, theoretically at least, open to anyone, to say 
whatever they want to say. Neorealist-inspired programmes like Understanding 
Cinema might thus be seen to broaden that access, creating opportunities to speak 
in art cinema’s supposedly exclusive register.

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      209
Whilst not intended to be a Leavis-ite polemic against ‘popular’ cinema (such 
a hyper-localist argument taken to its extreme would also preclude children from 
engaging with the European and global cinema that comprises most of CCADJ’s 
canon), nor to preclude children from expressing imagination, playfulness and a sense 
of the fantastical in their storytelling, the problem of the hegemonic pervasiveness of 
Hollywood archetypes would seem to me to be its implicit devaluing or ‘othering’ 
of the located self. So all-pervasive was Hollywood amongst the children’s cinematic 
references, and so absent any visible indigenous alternative, that the language and 
systems of signification of popular cinema were adopted by my Understanding 
Cinema participants as if they were ‘universal’, the language of the self. When asked 
to come up with film ideas, my students wanted to write about characters who did 
not seem to be them, and places they had not been to, thus mirroring the sense 
of ‘exteriority’ and ‘dispossession’ their relationships with commercial cinema 
seemed to engender. One of my students initially wanted to set his film in America, 
somewhere he had never been, but told me he felt was just somehow ‘better’ and 
‘less boring’ than Scotland. There seemed an implicit sense that children felt their 
own identities and concerns had no value within a cinematic arena. To be yourself 
was to be ‘boring’, ‘mundane’ and ‘commonplace’, whereas American accents, ‘sassy’ 
talk and superheroes/aliens/zombies were ‘cool’ and ‘exciting’.
Whilst my Understanding Cinema participants’ aping of Hollywood fantasy 
could be said to articulate a sense of ‘self’ through pursuit of ‘wish-fulfilment’ and 
a desire for escapism, such as the thematized treatments of escapism in Billy Liar 
(John Schlesinger, 1963), The Spirit of the Beehive (Victor Erice, 1973) and Pan’s 
Labyrinth (Guillermo del Toro, 2006), or indeed through a sense of both individual 
and social play (which should be seen to be part of the daily ‘reality’ of children’s 
experience), what seemed particularly problematic to me in the children’s early 
work was the manner in which a borrowed American ‘dialect’ (whether on a literal 
level of speech or the more analogous level of content and style) referenced an 
exteriorized and ultimately unachievable, unliveable experience, fetishized by the 
children as a desirable but unreachable sense of ‘otherness’. Ultimately the children’s 
adoption of modalities from popular cinema seemed to me to articulate a sense 
of alienation. Here Raymond Williams’s notion of the ‘unlearning of the inherent 
dominative mode’ takes on a very literal significance. In addressing the hegemonic 
presence of Hollywood the Understanding Cinema project, with its leaning towards 
neorealist filmmaking techniques, focusing on ‘dialect’ and cultural locality, could 
thus be seen to provide a potential counter to this sense of alienated, unreachable 
otherness, and thus a means by which to begin reinvigorating and rearticulating 
social performances of the located self.
Here one returns to the dilemma of how to assist children in articulating their 
own ‘dialect’ without that assistance becoming an epistemic imposition. One of 
the key problems I encountered was that, inevitably, trying to help children to find 
their own ‘dialect’ meant facilitating an ‘unlearning’ of assumptions about cinema, 
and thus a certain degree of short-circuiting of their initial instincts. In contrast 

210      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
to the fantastical pleasures of popular cinema a neorealist programme can risk 
seeming ascetic and, at worst, repressive. As such my concern was to attempt to 
foster a delicate dual programme of learning and unlearning: to help the children 
find a sense of their own ‘dialect’ without me necessarily telling them exactly 
what that dialect should be, and to encourage them to think more of themselves 
(rather than of far-off glitzy others) without that epistemological shift feeling like 
a compulsory imposition. Interestingly, as will be discussed below, that ‘dialect’ 
took different forms and modalities for different students within the filmmaking 
process; in places it was articulated through performance and script, and in others 
through camera placement and direction.
David Buckingham has claimed that ‘teacherly attempts at imposing cultural, 
moral or political authority children experience in their daily lives are very unlikely 
to be taken seriously. If, as in many cases, they are based on a paternalistic contempt 
for children’s tastes and pleasures, they certainly deserve to be rejected.’14 My own 
highly localized experience as a practitioner on the Understanding Cinema project 
does not seem to support these statements. As a figure of authority attempting to 
steer children away from non-reflexive emulations of popular cinema, my role was 
certainly paternalistic. My experience, however, was that many children took the 
project very seriously indeed and produced work within Understanding Cinema’s 
‘parameters and constraints’ that ultimately both they and myself considered to be 
of a high aesthetic standard and commitment.
The Understanding Cinema project in 
practice: Lumière Minutes
The first exercise of three for 2014 Understanding Cinema participants was the 
filming of ‘Lumière Minutes’; one-minute documentaries shot from a static 
perspective, after the fashion of the Lumière brothers. For Understanding Cinema 
participants, the Lumière Minute exercise was simultaneously a first experience 
of using a camera, framing a shot and cinematic ‘observation’, whilst providing a 
decisive first step towards engaging with a greater sense of autochthonous identity. 
Here the neorealist concern with dialect and ‘lowered voices’ manifested itself in a 
commitment to finding interest in the ‘mundane’ and ‘commonplace’: to borrow a 
phrase from Terence Davies, the challenge of the Lumière Minutes exercise was to 
find ‘the poetry of the ordinary’.
As part of Exercise 1, Understanding Cinema participants were encouraged 
to find moments in their day-to-day life which expressed their own ‘dialect’: a 
moment that somehow reflected the locality and specificity of their own day-
to-day experiences, and thus enacted a certain sense of ‘storytelling’, and the 
establishing of perspective. Among my classes there was at first a proliferation of 
domestic spectacle and exhibitionism – of children looking directly at the camera, 
of cats in hoodies and dogs performing tricks, of ‘over-the-shoulder’ shots of 
children playing video games or outside playing football – much of which seemed 

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      211
to lack the more detached sense of observation and aesthetic diegesis commonly 
associated with cinematic rhetoric. Unsurprisingly, such footage seemed to draw 
upon the semi-participatory ‘home mode’ of domestic video footage, as identified 
by Richard Chalfen and subsequently explored by Buckingham et al.15 Maria Pini 
has characterized the home mode as material created ‘if not necessary within the 
home, then dealing primarily with the “the home”, the domestic and the familial. 
Such material tends to be thought of as private, and as such, its significance closely 
resembles that of the traditional family photo album.’16 Contemporary discussion 
of the home mode has been updated to include camera-phone footage, which 
Rebecca Willett describes as extending the home mode’s possibilities to include 
both a broader spectrum of locations and acquaintances, addressing either a 
wider audience online of family, friends and peers, or indeed a narrowing to more 
private, personal reference.17
As Understanding Cinema participants were able to watch their Lumière 
Minutes with the class and get a sense of audience responses (thus learning what 
might interest those outside their lives and what might not), their work seemed 
to become more considered, perhaps reflecting a move away from the home 
mode’s semi-private address to family and friends, towards a more reflexive, 
aesthetic diegesis reaching beyond the home mode to address both their class 
and me – a demanding, ‘artsy’, outside tutor. It is interesting to consider the 
manner in which the communicative act of filmmaking in this sense became 
increasingly less ‘monological’ (less undilutedly personal and individual) and 
came to take into account a growing aspiration and expectation of shared 
significance with a widening audience. Hanging over Understanding Cinema 
activities was the expectation of a larger audience of strangers, through the 
possibility of the children’s work ultimately being screened on the project’s 
website and at the 2014 Edinburgh International Film Festival. ‘Speaking’ with 
a camera thus became an increasingly social act for the children, their films 
increasingly taking on the properties of ‘speech acts’ that voiced aspects of self, 
whilst simultaneously being couched in a semi-adopted rhetoric affording the 
possibility of speaking ‘socially’.
The prioritization of the ‘aesthetic’ moment embodied in group viewings 
of material (often shot a mere hour previously) reflects a key concern of the 
Understanding Cinema project: the moment at the end of each session when 
children watched back and discussed their work, and were thus able to evaluate 
their own decisions (as directors, actors and camera operators) with the rest of the 
class as an audience. Amanda-Jane Thomson identified this moment of evaluation 
and discussion as being one of the most fundamental aspects of the programme:
At the end of the session, it came back to discussion, and reflection on what had 
happened, and evaluating how it had worked … We would put the films on the 
board and we would have a discussion … about what had worked, why had it 
worked well, what wasn’t so good, how could we make things better.

212      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
Here the children seemed to grasp something of the tangle of epistemology and 
ontology inherent in the notion of cinema fostered by Understanding Cinema. 
Whilst the film was made from inside by them, the filmmakers, meaning and 
aesthetic success came to be defined as much from outside by audiences who might 
well know nothing about them, their lives and their priorities. As such the films 
deemed successful by the group usually expressed a complex dialectic, a complex 
‘speech act’ performed between these two perspectives.18
Watching the responses of their class, children went back and shot more 
Lumière Minutes which seemed increasingly to become more localized and 
specific, whilst simultaneously aspiring to a diegesis addressing audiences beyond 
the extended ‘home mode’ of camera-phone footage. We saw a community group 
sanding a boat; a grandparent who owned a hotel setting out cutlery before guests 
arrived for breakfast; one mother teaching her daughter to read the Koran, and 
another washing her 2-year-old daughter in the bath. Children seemed to actively 
enjoy this sense of ‘show and tell’ and for some participants the exercise began 
to serve something akin to a complex diary function, shooting upwards of 50 
Lumière Minutes in a single evening. The viewpoints started to gain a greater 
sense of ‘transportive’ viewing, and thus a sense of basic storytelling. Rather than 
watching a child staging a to-camera performance, we were starting to be actively 
shown aspects of children’s lives through their eyes, in a manner that made a more 
self-conscious address to a wider audience.
As we moved onto the second exercise (which involved filming a staged 
dramatic scene as a long take from both static and moving perspectives), I found 
elements of Hollywood-ized rhetoric starting to creep back into the children’s 
work as we progressed from the documentary approach of the Lumière Minutes 
to rudimentary staged dramas. The more we moved towards ‘drama’, the more 
fantastical the children’s stories became, as if the opportunity to be more imaginative 
was somehow synonymous with ‘make-believe’, escapism and mythic role-play. (It 
is important here to note that such a sense of play would seem itself to be part of 
children’s everyday lives, albeit articulated in a different modality to the perhaps 
more materialist arena of neorealism.) The reintroduction of ‘drama’ and ‘artifice’ 
seemed to draw us back towards the magnetizing influences of mainstream cinema 
that the Lumière Minutes had helped us begin to unpick and ‘unlearn’. Once again 
I encountered the sense that the children felt their own lives and concerns were not 
worthy of dramatization, something I resolved to tackle head-on.
Each week, I would draw up a cumulative list of elements that were not allowed 
in the children’s films. Aware that this ‘unlearning’ necessitated a certain degree 
of imposition in itself, I attempted (perhaps unsuccessfully!) to make this playful 
rather than draconian, framing the ‘rules’ as being like the rules of a game, once 
again reflecting CCADJ’s sense of dirigisme or creative restraint. In one instance, I 
introduced a weekly ‘close-up competition’, to see who could get the camera closest 
to its subject, in order to encourage the children to explore camera perspectives 
beyond the wide shot. I increasingly specified that everyone had to use their own 

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      213
voices, and play characters who were believable analogues for themselves. We 
talked about how it was important for ‘believability’ and the transportive claim of 
a film that events feel as ‘real’ as possible, aspiring to an aesthetic of verisimilitude. 
Thus real school bells were more ‘believable’ for audiences than children making 
trilling noises off-camera, and real teachers more believable for wider audiences 
than children playing teachers. One consequence of this process was that, 
eventually, in each of the children’s final films (at both Law and St Gabriel’s), there 
is not one child who isn’t either playing themselves or a version of themselves. Each 
child chose to use their own name in their films, and in particular cases, the film’s 
storylines were based on real-life happenings from the children’s lives. Michael 
Egan, class teacher of the P7 class I worked with at St Gabriel’s Primary School, 
identified the moment where we began to prioritize ‘realism’ as the moment when 
the children truly started to ‘take possession’ and feel a sense of ownership of their 
work, thus moving from the jokey pastiches of earlier exercises to a greater sense 
of application. As Egan described:
I think it was because the kids were tasked to make it as realistic as possible, 
and when we spoke about that as a group, we kind of said ‘you need to use what 
you’ve got’. So immediately, it was going to be characters their own age, they 
were going to use pre-existing settings, the likes of [Prestonpans] tower, the 
likes of the school building, going down the street, someone’s house: this was 
all available to them and it’s immediately authentic. And I think they then just 
naturally began to use their own names … I think like Luke’s film [L<3B], like 
them all, I think that they’ve just taken it all very personal and it comes over in 
the film that its personal issues and that its realistic. I think by saying to them 
that the films had to be realistic, that was a breakthrough moment. At that 
point, they started to really take it seriously, and it has shone through.
Similarly noting how the neorealist imperative placed upon an aesthetic of 
verisimilitude assisted students in finding greater depth of significance in their 
films, Amanda-Jane Thomson remarked upon the differences between the school-
based drama conventions in Scottish schools and this new style of naturalistic, 
‘neorealist’ acting:
In terms of drama it’s been really interesting, because usually you would go to 
drama and you would kind of go all into these roles which actually children 
don’t have a lot of experience of, but actually if we bring it right back to them, 
that’s where they can play an effective character, if it’s something that they’ve 
experienced.
As we moved towards Exercise 3, where the children were tasked with making a final 
10-minute film utilizing everything they had learnt about the long take, I tried to 
encourage each of my classes to make sure each film engaged in some way with the 

214      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
children’s own concerns, their own personalities and the realities of the situations 
they were trying to depict. Once again this involved a degree of gentle steering, away 
from knee-jerk Hollywood homage towards story ideas that demonstrated a greater 
localized significance to the lives of the children themselves (once again, a moment 
of tension between imposition and creativity). I encouraged students to investigate 
the real-life processes they were exploring. At Law, Max’s First Day explored what 
would happen if a new student came to school. Max’s classmate Elizabeth, playing 
the new student, was so cast (without intervention from me) by the group because 
she was the newest to the school and thus the member of the group who most 
distinctly remembered the emotions associated with arriving at a new school. 
I encouraged the group to research what exactly happened to new students who 
arrived at Law for their first day in the middle of a term: which member of staff 
would greet them at the front door and how they would be introduced to the school 
and their new class. The research was then worked up by the group into the opening 
sequence of their film with notable maturity.
Elsewhere at Law, Jack’s Blocked mixed aspects of popular genre (thriller, police 
procedural, comedy and even a hint of horror) with neorealist ‘authentication’ and 
verisimilitude. The film chronicles a mysterious blocking of the school toilets and 
allows ‘behind the scenes’ glimpses of the many different layers of Law’s institutional 
structure as they struggle to deal with the problem. Playing themselves, we witness 
the school janitor bemoaning this new spate of ‘blockings’, the senior management 
team debating the best approach to the problem, the Deputy Headmistress making 
an announcement about the problem at a real school assembly, and finally a pupil 
council meeting where the terrible truth of the matter is revealed. Interestingly, 
the senior management team’s scene was reshot (without my intervention) by Jack 
and his group after they watched it back with the class and, having scripted it 
themselves, deemed the script and performances ‘inauthentic’ and unconvincing. 
Having decided that the initial scene – which featured professional women in their 
forties and fifties reading dialogue written by 9-year-old boys – did not meet the 
film’s overriding tone of ‘authenticity’, Jack’s team subsequently refilmed the scene, 
encouraging the senior management team to improvise dialogue as they would 
have done ‘in real life’. This resulted in a rendering of a senior management team 
meeting that the filmmakers and their class felt was more believable for audiences, 
as can be seen in the final film.
Towards ‘embedded’ dramatic narratives 
with Blue Raspberry and Me and Mum
In my efforts to help Understanding Cinema participants find a sense of their own 
‘dialect’ in their films I still found overall that, when called upon to act, participants at 
Law Primary School in particular frequently returned to more playful, exaggerated 
and theatrical modes of performance that did not always achieve an aesthetic of 
verisimilitude. I therefore devised a homework exercise for a smaller group of the 

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      215
children who had responded well to Exercise 1, whereby each participant was 
tasked with filming a modest, naturalistic storyline to interweave with a selection 
of ‘documentary’ moments from their Lumière Minutes. I hoped this might serve 
to draw their performances into a more ‘naturalistic’ register whilst creating a film 
that had a greater performative sense of each child’s own voice and ‘dialect’.
Bridget Harley, director of Blue Raspberry, one of the films produced by this 
homework task, is a shy girl to whom the imposing ‘adult’ rhetoric of an interview 
does not do justice. However, her ‘voice’ seems highly articulate in Blue Raspberry, 
which ‘gives voice’ to the lived experience of a trio of young sisters through a 
grounded childhood perspective rarely seen in cinema. The film revolves around a 
central conflict between Bridget and her parents, where, against the wishes of her 
mother and father, Bridget spends her pocket money on ‘blue raspberry’ sweets, 
and then eats them secretly, only to be caught, blue-tongued, by her mother. She 
is scolded, and the film finishes ambiguously, without a definitive sense that any 
lesson has been learned. The film’s linear narrative is interspersed with documentary 
footage of Bridget’s life with her family and sisters, playing on the beach, sledging 
down the stairs at home, and playing atonal improvisations on the piano. The sea 
and the girls’ relationship to natural landscapes plays a central role of the film, which 
achieves a striking overall sense of lyricism through elided framings, naturalistic 
performances and its depiction of the girls’ play. There is something striking about 
the picture of childhood Bridget is able to capture seemingly unawares, and the 
relative sense in the film of an insider’s ontology of childhood. Put differently, Blue 
Raspberry achieves a convincing and compelling performance of ‘authenticity’. 
Bridget has unparalleled access to the relatively unmediated home life of her sisters 
and her family. She is a trusted family member, and her filming apparatus (a FlipVid 
camera the size of a mobile phone) is small enough to be fairly unobtrusive. She is 
therefore a director whose observational presence, whilst not without influence, is 
perhaps the closest cinema gets to invisibility.
Colin McArthur has discussed cinema’s potential to either sentimentalize or 
demonize the Platonic ideal of childhood, discussing how
[W]ith regard to the dominant narrative of childhood, the gaping trap that 
awaits any filmmaker is sentimentality … Just as there are dominant narratives 
about Scotland, so too is there a dominant narrative of childhood within 
which the child is seen as innately innocent, placid, asexual and ‘nice’. There is 
of course, an equally reductive counter-narrative of the innately evil child …  
However, certain filmmakers – for example Vincente Minnelli with Margaret 
O’Brien in Meet Me in St Louis, or Victor Erice with the child actors in The 
Spirit of the Beehive – have managed to construct a more complex view of 
childhood.19
What is significant about Blue Raspberry is the sense of childhood representing 
itself in a manner that does not engage the sedimented tropes and assumptions 
of popular cinema. Indeed Blue Raspberry’s portrayal of childhood is strangely 

216      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
evocative of The Spirit of the Beehive (albeit without the earlier film’s politicized 
subtext), in expressing the sheer wildness of childhood and the looming shadows 
of the adult world.
For Bridget, the film is about an ‘everyday’ conflict which finds consonance 
with the vignettes of daily life captured in her documentary, ‘diary’-like Lumière 
Minutes. Through a complex entangling of interior ontology (the director’s 
perspective on her own life) and exterior epistemology (the prospective adult 
audience in relation to Bridget’s rushes, as mediated through myself, as Bridget’s 
Understanding Cinema tutor and editor), the film also speaks to a wider audience, 
about childhood in the shadow of adulthood. Notably, the experience of expressing 
herself through cinema (both as an actor and director) seems to have had a 
positive effect on Bridget’s sense of self-efficacy, meaning she was able to make a 
presentation in front of an audience of 200 people at the Edinburgh International 
Film Festival, something Amanda-Jane Thomson tells me she would not have been 
able to do at the start of P5. Here, it would seem, the semi-neorealist imperative to 
speak socially – to voice ‘dialect’, or aspects of the self through the adoption of ways 
of speaking that conversely construct significance for a broader audience – seemed 
of considerable benefit to Bridget’s confidence and sense of self-efficacy.
Part of the same exercise, Jamie Thomson’s Me and Mum (2014) constructs a 
celebrative, inflected portrait of his hard-working mother, Jo. Like Blue Raspberry, 
the film centres around a modest domestic conflict in which Jo becomes frustrated 
with her son for his lack of responsibility. Throughout the film Jo is seen working, 
putting the needs of her family above her own. When Jamie forgets his water bottle 
on the way to rugby, Jo’s frustration provokes a rude response and the two fall out. 
After reflection, Jamie apologizes to his mother and the two bond whilst giving 
Jamie’s baby sister a bath. The film is built around a complex sense of perspective: 
of Jamie looking at his mum, and his mum looking at Jamie. Set amongst the daily 
rhythms of life at home, Me and Mum once again has a strong feeling of localized, 
rooted perspective, and in its specific rendition of a universal story of maternal 
frustration recalls Shane Meadows’s notion that ‘to make a universal film … you 
need a very particular focus’.20 Jamie seems aware of both the film’s specificity and 
universality, and how the two are interlinked:
The bits which felt most real were the bits, the ‘Lumière Minutes’, the pizza at 
the start … It gave you a sense of our life as well. Because you normally see my 
brothers getting angry at my mum because my mum’s forgotten what they’ve 
said or something like that. And it shows you what someone’s normal life is like. 
Because there will be mums all over the world – my mum is definitely like that … 
they’ll think, I hope we’re not the only family which does this and that, and what 
I’d say is ‘you’re not’. There are loads of people who do the same things as you.
It is interesting to consider how both Me and Mum and Blue Raspberry employ 
aspects of the home mode in their intimate recordings of family life, whilst 

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      217
simultaneously repurposing it to address an audience outside an enclosed group 
of friends and family. Whilst being constituted largely of the normative locations, 
characters, scenes and events of the home mode, both films take reflexive, 
aesthetically aware perspectives upon family life in a manner that presupposes a 
wider audience of strangers outside the family’s community of significance.
For an expressive and confident student like Jamie, Me and Mum also helped 
find a register of acting that was more naturalistic than some of his more bombastic 
performances in class. Indeed, speaking to teachers and participants across the 
project, there was an interesting consensus that acting for film differed to the 
theatrical drama classes that are a staple of the Scottish school week. Amanda-Jane 
Thomson described to me how
I have some children in my class that in drama, before we started the project, 
would have been very unwilling to go in and take a role on, sort of realistically. 
There was a lot of kind of – some that just didn’t want to do it, others that would 
just play up as a result, because it was just too embarrassing to take a role, and 
to watch some of those children now in front of the camera is just amazing, the 
confidence in them in front of the camera.
There was a sense throughout the project that film, affording a quieter, more subtle, 
arguably ‘naturalistic’ register of performance than theatre, could potentially foster 
greater confidence of self-expression, and thus act as a gateway to subsequent 
participation in the more ‘exhibitionist’ arena of school drama productions. 
Sabilla, one of the project participants at St Gabriel’s, told me how acting in films 
had given her a new confidence, and in particular the confidence to play the role 
of ‘the parrot’ in the school play: ‘first of all I didn’t want to be the parrot, but now 
I actually wanted to be the parrot, because then I’m doing more filming, being 
more confident, ‘cos a parrots got lines I can remember. So yeah, I liked filming 
and it helped me.’ Sabilla told me that when she acted in her group’s film L<3B it 
was easier to act because she just played a version of herself; ‘I was trying to be 
myself, because I don’t want to be anybody else. Because, whenever I be somebody 
else I feel a bit shy. So I like being myself.’ Sabilla tells me that the whole process 
has given her more confidence and that ‘now I can go anywhere, and I don’t need 
to feel shy, and make Sumaiya [Sabilla’s twin sister] say it, so I can … say more stuff 
and say it confident’.
Self-efficacy via narrative analogy: L<3 B 
at St Gabriel’s
One of the most remarkable films produced by my Understanding Cinema 
students in 2014 was Luke Davies’ L <3 B (2014) from St Gabriel’s Primary School, 
Prestonpans; a film with a marked sense of ‘dialect’ and aesthetic achievement. 

218      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
L <3 B begins with Luke being rejected when he ‘asks out’ his classmate Bailey in 
the playground. He then suffers further indignities at the hands of his mother, his 
teacher and several of his friends, before earning the affections of Charley, Bailey’s 
best friend. The film was birthed by Luke in response to a discussion I had with the 
class about the importance of using the camera to convey emotion. Under Luke’s 
direction, a group of students produced a short one-minute, one-shot film where 
Luke waits uneasily in the foreground, left of frame, whilst Bailey and Charley 
approach background to foreground on the right. Luke hesitantly asks Bailey if 
she will go out with him, only to be callously rejected (the sequence which now 
opens the finished film). What initially struck me about the short was the bravery 
involved on Luke’s part in conceiving a story that placed him in a position of such 
vulnerability. When I first encountered him, Luke was a shy student, frequently 
hesitant to express himself in front of the rest of the class. In L<3B, however, Luke 
conceived of a film where, playing himself, he suffers a considerable degree of 
humiliation from both adults and fellow students. As Luke’s teacher, Michael Egan, 
describes it:
The big concern when he made [L<3B] in his group was how much Luke had 
put himself out there for public ridicule, bearing in mind that Luke’s quite a 
quiet withdrawn boy in class. Socially I wouldn’t say that he struggles, but he’s 
got a very small group of friends who are all of the same gender […] So yeah, 
I was really surprised when he came up with that film, and I think he almost 
played himself. I thought there was a lot of Luke in that.
Luke’s bravery in ‘putting himself out there’ in the film did not go unnoticed by his 
classmates. His co-star Bailey remarked to me that ‘Luke was so confident to do all 
the stuff we had to do, because a lot of people wouldn’t have been able to do that. 
And he made the film the best, I think’.
L<3B’s production was underscored by a very complex interplay between the 
narrative of the film and Luke’s own, personal (and much more complex) narrative 
whilst negotiating P7. There is a sense in Luke’s own words that the film gave him 
a sense of licence and freedom to express himself in ways he couldn’t in real life: 
‘you could just do what you want, say what you want, act whatever you wanted 
to act’. L<3B thus seemed to create a ‘safer’ forum in which Luke was able to 
negotiate and explore certain conflicts through a particular performance of self. 
By ‘affording’ himself greater social agency in the film, Luke was then, through 
a complex analogical process where his efforts were validated both personally by 
himself and socially by his peers, seemingly afforded a greater degree of social 
agency in ‘real life’.
There is a strong sense of ‘emotional literacy’ in L<3B, of exploring issues that 
are deeply personal to many of Luke’s peers and yet difficult to talk about. Another 
film from St Gabriel’s, Copycat (based on a real-life falling out between its two lead 
actors) explores competition, feuds and racism from a 12-year-old’s perspective 

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      219
with similar maturity and attention to dialect and verisimilitude. Both films would 
seem to provide strong vindications of the benefits of helping children find ways 
to express and explore their own concerns and priorities. Michael Egan described 
to me how a visiting Quality Improvement Officer remarked upon how the class’s 
film work enabled them to explore complex emotional ramifications of situations 
affecting children their age. Worries about rejection and peer esteem are an issue 
for more than just Luke, and when I asked Bailey if L<3B ‘rang true’ in terms of P7 
at St Gabriel’s, she told me with a pained smile and an awkward cough that ‘a lot 
of people get rejected.’ L<3B seemed to provide Luke with a vehicle to explore, in a 
safer arena, emotions and worries which were very real and personal to both him 
and the class, in a manner seemingly both cathartic and constructive. Michael Egan 
describes L<3B as helping Luke ‘really explore his own emotions at a good time in 
his life’, and crucially the project falls just at the end of P7, just as the St Gabriel’s 
P7s are about to make the transition to senior school. Luke himself admitted that 
the freedom he felt acting in the film ‘actually made me feel a bit better. Because I 
know people would say, “that’s a really good film” and stuff like that’. The last time I 
saw Luke he was, like Bridget, presenting his film before a packed cinema of 200+ 
Scottish schoolchildren at the Edinburgh International Film Festival, standing 
under the spotlight with a microphone and laughing happily with his audience 
about the ‘kissy scene’ in the film. Compared to the quiet student I had first met six 
months before, the contrast was remarkable. Egan described to me how the new 
sense of confidence and self-efficacy Luke seemed to find through L<3B has had a 
knock-on effect in his school experience as a whole:
His spelling age has gone up from 9 to 13, his reading has improved, I can see 
a huge difference socially. His pupil comment on his report card is that he felt 
more confident, and for me, that’s all hung off the film topic. I think its the first 
time he’s put himself out there, he’s realized that he maybe had a bit more to 
offer than he thought, and the other kids are viewing slightly differently … I’ve 
watched Luke grow – its transformed Luke’s Primary 7 experience. If we hadn’t 
done this, Luke would have had a very different Primary 7. I think academically 
its just given him enough of a boost. It’s almost like by putting himself out there 
in the film, he’s put himself out there in other ways.
Conclusion
The manner in which L<3B assisted its participants’ personal development would 
be remarkable in its own right, if the film didn’t also achieve such a pronounced 
aesthetic success. Luke’s own cathartic personal trajectory overlaps with the film’s 
bruising emotional diegesis, particularly in the scenes in which Luke is exposed 
to humiliation at the hands of the girl he ‘fancies’, his mother, his friends and his 
schoolteacher, played by Michael Egan himself. Here we could recall neorealism’s 
aspired proximity between history and text, and its emphasis upon couching 

220      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
narratives in relatively materialist, social terms. In drawing tentative conclusions, 
it is important to underline how the parallel aesthetic and social-developmental 
success of L<3B both seem to arise from the very specific, neorealist-inspired model 
of the Understanding Cinema project. On a script level Luke conceives of a story 
taken from his own life, from his concerns and his worries, exploring a powerful 
set of emotions that are very real to P7s at St Gabriel’s. Luke keeps his own name 
in the film, and thus plays an analogue of himself (as do his co-stars), and the 
performances in the film are largely improvised. It is this neorealist approach that 
creates the film’s robust and aesthetically successful sense of projected ‘ontology’, of 
self-sanctioned representation, and thus its bruising emotional power and highly 
successful performance of ‘authenticity’. In parallel with these aesthetic dimensions, 
the Understanding Cinema project’s insistence on ‘dialect’, and articulation of self, 
means Luke creates a forum in which he is able to explore difficult, real issues and 
concerns via a vicarious sense of self, and thus enact a complex sense of emotional 
literacy which is beneficial both for him and his classmates who share the same 
worries. The project’s insistence that Luke invests or performs a direct sense of self, 
as manifested aesthetically through neorealist technique (a ‘realness’ of the script, 
improvisatory techniques, long takes) all conspire to create a sense of the self both 
at work and at play, negotiating the worries Luke and his classmates have ‘in the 
real world’, in the safer arena of a film. Therefore, in the case of L<3B at least, there 
seems to be a correlation between a process that attempts to help children realize 
aspects of their own ‘dialect’ (in exploring their own issues and concerns through 
cinema) and a greater sense of self-efficacy.
Luke’s story is only one of many, but it is reflective of children’s testimonies about 
the Understanding Cinema project as a whole. In spoken and written evaluations 
conducted across Scotland a considerable number of children commented that the 
project had made them ‘feel more confident’. On a preliminary basis at least, then, 
there would seem to be significant value in granting children access to filmmaking 
opportunities, encouraging them to find something resembling their ‘own voice’ 
amidst a cacophony of inherited preconceptions from commercial cinema, and 
in creating a means through which they can ‘safely’ explore their own emotions, 
concerns and priorities: in other words, a means of expressing their own ‘dialect’.
It is worth acknowledging once again, however, the media studies discourses 
that would seem to problematize these conclusions. The notion that school-based 
film projects such as Understanding Cinema provide children with the affordance to 
express ‘authentic selves’ is an argument that has provoked considerable scepticism 
from scholars such as Buckingham and Orner. Considering some of the problems 
underlying the conclusions of this chapter, one must return to the sense of 
performance inherent in articulations of self in the Understanding Cinema project. 
This essay has largely taken the view that Understanding Cinema’s neorealist-
inspired insistence on ‘dialect’ and ‘locality’ leads to a creative expression of 
children’s voices that could be considered more ‘authentic’ or ‘in tune’ with their 
own day-to-day lives, if not their taste in films: the neorealist ‘documentary’ claim 

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      221
of proximity between the filmic and the extra-filmic. Despite these more ‘localized’ 
narrative frameworks some students eventually adopted at my insistence, there 
remains, in many of the films, a sense of identity performance, of students 
donning both a figurative and literal costume that recalls Buckingham’s discussion 
of the ‘social worlds of production’. Despite my best attempts, elements of the 
heightened ‘sassy’ talk that seemed so alien to my experience of the children’s day-
to-day speech crept back into some of the films. Jack Hamilton’s Blocked stages a 
successful, anti-purist mix of neorealist ‘verisimilitude’ and popular genre, with its 
fusion of police procedural and school documentary. Some of the films’ narratives 
implicitly enact a sense of fantasy, wish-fulfilment and myth. Luke gets the girl in 
L<3B, and the film simultaneously affords Sabilla a sense of authority and wisdom 
when the boys ask her for her advice. (Similarly, Luke’s co-star Aidan told me 
he was playing ‘the cool one’ in the film). It would seem that no matter what the 
aspired proximity between film and extra-filmic historical experience, a sense of 
and a desire for myth-making remains.
Perhaps it is a mistake to see this as a problem, however. Interestingly, Copycat’s 
writers and crew insisted upon weaving opportunities for each of its actors to 
speak into the narrative, even if this undermined its teleology. There was a sense 
amongst the group that each child had to have their moment in the spotlight, their 
chance to be ‘heard’. This was an interesting incidence in which I was proved wrong 
by my students, who politely refused to follow my McKee-ist script logic (that they 
should cut the ‘flashforward’ scenes of Sumaiya talking to Stephanie because they 
were narratively redundant), because they wanted to cleave out space in the film 
for Stephanie to be seen and heard. Ultimately I believe the film proves me wrong, 
as the ‘flashforward’ scenes contribute eloquently to the film’s choral aesthetic of 
generosity and plurality. In this instance, the presence of voice is literal – the film 
creates the affordance for each one of its characters to literally speak and be heard.
This essay has attempted, pragmatically, to mobilize an unfashionable 
discourse – the notion of the children’s ‘authentic voice’ and how that might be 
articulated by creative work in educational contexts – that has been rendered as 
problematic by various critics in media and education studies. Throughout, I have 
attempted to locate the discussion somewhere between parallel experiences as a 
theorist and practitioner, from a perspective that attempts to juggle an awareness of 
theory with the contingent, unruly and worldlier experience of classroom teaching. 
Ultimately, it would seem one of the fundamental questions underlying this 
discussion is perhaps less whether a convincing case can be rehearsed for projects 
like Understanding Cinema allowing children to articulate their ‘authentic voices’, 
but rather, what affordances are opened up for children when an idea of ‘authentic 
voice’ is pursued pragmatically? As an unworldly ideal, the notion of ‘authentic 
voice’ would seem ultimately unachievable. Yet what happens if that impossibility 
is both accepted and ignored, and a child’s ‘authentic voice’ is viewed as a sort of 
unreachable destination – a goal that can be strived towards, if not arrived at? 
Where do we find ourselves if we embark towards such utopian coordinates? The 

222      THE CHILD IN CINEMA
sort of pessimism surrounding ‘voice’ postulated by Buckingham and Orner would 
seem to risk a serious degree of determinism; of precluding certain experiences 
and practices because they risk incurring intellectual dissonance or discomfort 
when rehearsed in the less-worldly arenas of academic discourse. Whilst it would 
be disingenuous to claim that the Understanding Cinema project allows children 
unmediated opportunities to articulate a ‘pure’, ‘authentic’ sense of their own voices 
free from any sense of epistemic imposition, it would seem equally disingenuous 
and deeply determinist to claim that, considering the diverse vocalities present 
in any given film production, the voices of children filmmakers are not present – 
strongly present even – in Blue Raspberry, Me and Mum, New School, Blocked, 
Copycat and L <3 B.
Understanding Cinema films
Copycat (Megan Thomson, Wiktoria Karbowniczek and Sumaiya Alim, Scotland, 
2014) http://vimeo.com/groups/257525/videos/100746759
L <3 B (Luke Davies, Scotland, 2014) http://vimeo.com/groups/257525/
videos/100150740
The Den (Eve Duncan, Zoe Gormley, Sophie Hetherington, Alex Kane and 
Reon McSherry, Scotland, 2014) http://vimeo.com/100796087
Blocked (Jack Hamilton, Scotland, 2014) http://vimeo.com/groups/257525/
videos/103998120
Blue Raspberry (Bridget Harley, Scotland, 2014) http://vimeo.com/groups/257525/
videos/100150741
­First Day (Max Mayer, Scotland, 2014) http://vimeo.com/groups/257525/
videos/103998121
Me and Mum (Jamie Thomson, Scotland, 2014) http://vimeo.com/groups/257525/
videos/103997956
Wednesday (Connal Tolmie, Scotland, 2014) http://vimeo.com/groups/257525/
videos/10079
Notes
1	 Saverio Giovacchini and Robert Sklar, Global Neorealism (Jackson, MI: University 
Press of Mississippi, 2011).
2	 Christopher Wagstaff, Italian Neorealist Cinema: An Aesthetic Approach (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 2007), p. 90.
3	 Michael Denning, Culture in the Age of Three Worlds (London: Verso, 2004).
4	 Gayatri Spivak, ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, in Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg 
(eds), Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois 
Press, 1987), pp. 271– 313.
5	 Edward Said, Orientalism (London: Penguin, 2003), p. xxvi.
6	 David Buckingham, Media Education: Literacy, Learning and Contemporary Culture 
(Cambridge, MA: Polity Press, 2003); Michelle Orner, ‘Interrupting the calls for 

SCOTLAND’S UNDERSTANDING CINEMA PROJECT      223
student voice in liberatory education: a feminist poststructuralist perspective’, in 
Carmen Luke and Jennifer Gore (eds), Feminisms and Critical Pedagogy (New York: 
Routledge, 1992).
7	 Buckingham, Media Education, p. 129.
8	 André Bazin, ‘The evolution of the language of cinema’, in What is Cinema: Volume I, 
ed. Hugh Gray (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1967), p. 39.
9	 Christopher Wagstaff, Italian Neorealist Cinema, p. 33.
10	 Giovacchini and Sklar, Global Neorealism.
11	 Mark Reid, ‘Cinema Cent Ans de Jeunesse: an integrated film education programme’, 
AMES (2014).
12	 Buckingham, Media Education, p. 128.
13	 Considering British cinema alone, the films of the British New Wave, of Ken Loach, 
the Amber Collective, Bill Douglas, Terence Davies, Shane Meadows, Andrea Arnold 
and Clio Barnard all explore British working-class and subaltern experience in a 
manner utilizing the full, aesthetic palette of ‘art cinema’. Such a canon would thus 
seem to challenge the perhaps patronizing presumption that ‘art cinema’ is completely 
out-of-step with and out-of-reach of working-class or ‘popular’ experience.
14	 Buckingham, Media Education, p. 33.
15	 Richard Chalfen, ‘Home movies as cultural documents’, in Sari Thomson (ed.), Film/
Culture: Exploration of Cinema in its Social Context (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 
1982), pp. 126–37; subsequently explored in David Buckingham and Rebekah Willett 
(eds), Video Cultures: Media Technology and Everyday Creativity (London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2009).
16	 Maria Pini, ‘Inside the home mode’, in Buckingham and Willett (eds), Video Cultures, 
pp. 71–92.
17	 Rebekah Willett, ‘Always on: camera phones, video production and identity’, in 
Buckingham and Willett (eds), Video Cultures, pp. 210–29.
18	 One can perhaps identify this as one of the moments of liminality between criticism 
and creativity that media scholars such as David Buckingham believe foundational 
to the construction of media literacy: ‘for literacy clearly involves both reading and 
writing; and so media literacy must necessarily entail both the interpretation and 
production of media’. Buckingham, Media Education, p. 49. He continues: ‘[t]here has 
to be a kind of translation from the “passive” knowledge that is derived from viewing 
or reading – or indeed from analysis – to the “active” knowledge that is required for 
production or viewing’ (p. 132). Indeed it would seem to be one of the key strengths 
of the Understanding Cinema project that textual criticism (‘reading’) and film 
production (‘writing’/‘speaking’) are inextricable, with students emulating in practical 
work the techniques they have just analysed in canonic examples, before once more 
returning to their seats in the audience to consider the aesthetic achievements of their 
own work.
19	 Colin McArthur, Whisky Galore! and The Maggie (London: I.B. Tauris, 1982).
20	 Jason Scott, ‘From local roots to global screens: Shane Meadows’s positioning in the 
ecology of contemporary British film’, Journal of British Cinema and Television, vol. 
10, no. 4 (2013), pp. 829–45.

7 Up!/Seven Up! (1964–) 3, 10, 16, 
101–112, 115
10 Minutes Older (1978) 96, 179
20 Times More Likely (1979) 193
400 Blows (1959) 3, 107, 162
Aadhi Haqueqat, Adda Fasana (1990) 158
Absent Parents (1982) 196, 197
‘Act Naturally’ (1963) 111, 113
A.I.: Artificial Intelligence (2001) 94
Alexander, Katherine 74, 75–77
Ali, Mahershala 86, 87
Alice (through the looking glass) 4, 16
Aligrudic, Slobadan 124, 128
Allen, Richard 159, 167 n. 4
Almond, Paul 101, 105
An Entertainment (1990) 13, 182
Anjali(1990) 164, 165, 166
Apaches (1977) 13, 188–94, 196, 198–99
Aveshesh (c.1975) 162, 163
Bachelard, Gaston 8, 17, 22, 33 n.3, 34n.14
Badlands (1973) 8, 22–25, 34
Banks, Russell 28, 33 n.1
Baron, Cynthia 9, 72, 82, 98 n.3
Barthes, Roland 95, 100 n.25
Bazin, Andre 14, 206, 223 n.8
Beasts of the Southern Wild (2012) 44
Bellissima (1951) 203
Bellmer, Hans 12, 13, 172–75, 177–78, 
181, 183
Bennett, Jane 6, 16 n.13
Bergala, Alain 14, 17, 205
Bicycle Thieves (1948) 141, 204, 206
Billig, Michael 145, 149, 155 n.32
Billy Liar (1963) 209
Black Cat, White Cat (1998) 128
Blair, Lindsay 175, 184 n.13
Blue Peter (1958–) 194
Bogle, Donald 85, 98 n.1
Bogue, Ronald 143, 155 n.25
Bombay (1995) 165, 166
Boyhood (2014) 8, 16, 35, 40, 42, 43
Breathless (1960) 162
Breton, Andre 171, 183 n.1
Brett, Guy 182, 185 n.35
­Brickman, Barbara Jane 24, 34 n.9
Brooke, Michael 194, 200 n.9
Brooks, Xan 112, 117 n.22
Bruzzi, Stella 10, 101, 116–17
Buckingham, David 204–5, 208, 210–11, 
220–23 n.6, 7, 14, 18
Building Sites Bite (1978) 192
Burke, Andrew 12, 13, 187
Butler, Judith 103–4, 109, 114, 116 n.7, 
117 n.17, 34
Calcutta Film Society 12, 161
Caouette, Jonathan 10, 101, 113–15, 116 
n.7, 117 n.17
Capturing the Friedmans (2003) 10, 101, 
105, 111–13, 115
Carnicke, Sharon 9, 72, 82, 98 n.3
Carroll, Lewis 4, 16 n.7, 175, 180
Castle Ra-Tim-Bum (1999) 141
Central Station (1998) 141, 152, 154
Chalfen, Richard 211, 223 n.15
Chambers, Jamie 12, 14, 203
Charley Says (c.1960–1970) 200
Chase, Ilka 72, 73
child
agency 90, 124
‘becoming’ 3, 40
‘bubble’ 11, 121, 123, 124, 126, 127, 129
in/as history 142, 154
othered/otherness 39, 204
INDEX

INDEX      225
point of view 2,3, 142
‘seed/environment’ 11, 144, 145, 150
voice 14, 204, 211, 214, 216, 220, 221
Children’s Film Society (CFS) 161, 168
Child’s Play (1984–1988) 101, 103, 108, 110
Children of the Stones (1977) 199
The Children’s Party (1940–1960) 13, 
178–81
Chomana Dudi (1975) 162
Le Cinema Cent Ans De Jeunesse (CCADJ) 
14, 203–9, 212
City of God (2002) 141, 147
Clandestine Childhood (2011) 139
Cloke, Paul 38, 46 n.12, 47 n.24, 199 n.8
Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977) 94
Clover, Carol J. 190, 199 n.6
Cooper, Gladys 72, 73
Cornell, Joseph 13, 172–83, 185
Cotillion (1940–1960) 13, 178, 180
The Creeper (1948) 82
‘Cruel Cinema’ (Tamil) 12, 166
Dalapathi (1991) 164
Davis, Bette 9, 71–5, 77–9, 82–3
Daayan (2013) 167
Days of Heaven (1978) 27
Deamer, David 145, 155 n.28
Deleuze, Gilles 3, 11, 14–5, 40, 47 n.18, 95, 
140–42, 144, 152, 155–56 n.16
Diffr’nt Strokes (1978–84) 98
­Do You Remember Dolly Bell (1981) 10, 
122, 124, 126–27, 129, 132–137
Doane, Mary Ann 10, 95, 96, 100 n.24
Documents (1929–30) 180–1
Dogsbody (1975) 57
Don’t Look Now (1973) 196
Dyer, Richard 10, 96, 100 n.27
Dykes, Tony 196, 200 n.12
E.T. (1982) 94
East of Borneo (1931) 178, 181
Edelmen, Lee 4, 5, 16 n.9
Egan, Michael 213, 218, 219
Egoyan, Atom 8, 28
Eleftheriotis, Dimitris 10, 121
Elite Squad (2007) 147
Ellis, John 105, 110, 114, 116 n.9, 117 n.18
Engelmann, Sasha 6, 16 n.12
Erice, Victor 95, 209, 215
Etre et Avoir (2002) 10, 101, 105–06, 
109–13, 115–16
Everyday (2012) 16
Europa di note (1959) 133
Fenichel, Otto 176, 177–78, 184 n.20
The Finishing Line (1977) 192, 200
Fire and Hemlock (1985) 57
Flight of the Red Balloon (2007) 162
Foucault, Michel 127, 137 n.11, 194, 200 
n.10
Frank, Herz 96, 179
Freud, Sigmund 14, 21, 23–4, 32, 33. N.4, 
34 n.22, 172, 176, 178, 183
Freyre, Gilberto 150, 156 n.49
Garland, Judy 71, 73, 82
Garland-Thomson, Rosemarie 88, 99 n.13
Gates, Racquel 96, 100 n.28
Germany Year Zero (1948) 141
Ghattashraddha (1978) 162, 163
Ghobadi, Bahman 38, 44
Gillespie, Michael Boyce 88, 99 n.6
Giovacchini, Saverio 203, 207, 222 n.1 223 
n.10
Girl, Interrupted (1999) 10
Glick, Megan H 6, 16 n.11
Gocic, Goran 136, 137
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 13, 172, 
175, 176, 178, 184 n.15
Good Morning (1959) 39
Gopalan, Lalitha 10, 12, 157, 168
The Grave of the Fireflies (1988) 38, 44
Gregg, Melissa 39, 46 n.14
Green Cross Code (1970) 194, 195, 196
Guattari, Felix 42, 47 n.27, 95
Halloween (1978) 199
Hamburger, Cao 11, 141, 147
Hastie, Amelie 8, 13, 21
Hauptman, Jodi 180, 185 n.30
Heading for Heaven (1947) 82
­Heise, Tatiana Signorelli 147, 155 n.41
Henreid, Paul 72, 73
Henry, Julie 40, 47 n.19
Hibbert, Alex 10, 87–8, 90, 93–4, 97
Hickey-Moody, Anna Catherine 15 n.4, 
39, 40, 47 n.18
Hicks, Colin 133, 137 n.21
Hiller, Susan 13, 182–83, 185
Hitchcock, Alfred 80, 95
Holston, James 145, 150, 155 n.30, 156 
n.48
Home (2008) 44

226      INDEX
The Homeward Bounders (1981) 57
Hopkins, David 12, 171, 185
Howl’s Moving Castle (2004) 9, 57–65
Hudson, Liam 183, 185 n.40
Hunt for the Wilderpeople (2016) 87
Huston, John 101, 103, 104
I Was Born But . . . (1931) 39
Illich, Ivan 41–42, 47 n.26
In Camera (2011) 158
In this World (2002) 44
Iordanova, Dina 122, 137 n.4
It’s Love I’m After (1936) 72
Jackson, Michael 4, 98
Jamie, Kathleen 38, 46 n.11
Jane Eyre (1943) 71
Jarecki, Andrew 10, 101, 111–12, 117
Jenkins, Barry 4, 10, 85, 88, 91–3, 96–8
Jones, Owain 3, 8, 13, 35, 38, 46 n.12, 
188–9, 199 n.2–3
Jordan, Larry 13, 178
Journey for Margaret (1942) 71
Kaaliya Mardan (1919) 12, 157, 158
Kamlabhai (1992) 158
Kamchatka (2002) 139, 142
Kannada ‘new wave’ 12, 162, 163
Kannathil Muthamittal (2002) 166
Keay, Douglas 106, 107
Keene, Judith 132, 137 n.9
Keller, Marjorie 175, 176–78, 184 n.14
Kelly, Grace 95, 100
Kilborn, Richard 108, 117 n.14
Kinney, Katherine 92, 99 n.18
Kizirian, Shari 109, 117 n.16
Klevan, Andrew 9, 72, 82 n.3
Koree-da, Hirokazu 3, 16
Kracauer, Siegfried 26, 34 n.15
Krish, John 196, 200 n.13
Krishna 12, 157
Krishna Janam (1918) 157
Ksha Tra Ghya (2004) 158, 159
Kuhn, Annette 25–26, 34 n.11
Kusturica, Emir 10, 121–27, 130–32, 
134–36
­Ladybird (2017) 10
Larsen, Reif 11, 131, 137 n.6
Laputa: Castle in the Sky (1986) 49
Lebeau, Vicky 34 n.23, 104, 116 n.4
Le Havre (2011) 44
Lesser, Jeffrey 150, 154, 156 n.45
Linklater, Richard 3, 8, 16, 35
The Little Rascals (1934–44) 97
Little Women (1949) 71
Lonely Water (1973) 13, 193, 194, 195
Lopez, Georges 109, 110, 111
Lost Embrace (2004) 151
Lury, Karen 29, 33 n.6, 39 n.17, 46, 81, 82 
n.2
Machuca (2004) 139
Mackenzie, John 188, 190
McArthur, Colin 215, 223 n.19
McCormack, Derek 6, 7, 16 n.12 n.14
Madame Curie (1943) 71
Malick, Terence 8, 27
Martin-Jones, David 11, 12, 139, 155 n.15 
n.17
Maslen, Robert 8, 49
Maxwell, William 38, 46
Meadows, Shane 4, 216
Medicine For Melancholy (2008) 88
Meet me in St Louis (1944) 71, 215
Mermaids (1990) 2
The Midnight Party (1940–1960) 13, 178, 
180
‘Mignon’ 13, 175–78
Milestone, Lewis 72, 82 n.1
Mind How You Go (1973) 13, 187, 194–96, 
198
Minnelli, Vincente 71, 215
Minotaure (1933–9) 177, 180–81, 184 
n.25
Miyazaki, Hayao 9, 49, 54, 67
Moonlight (2016) 4, 10, 85–98
My Childhood (1972) 87
My Neighbour Totoro (1988) 9, 50–53, 54, 
67
My Reputation (1946) 79, 81
Nancy Drew (1938–39) 72
Naremore, James 91, 99 n.16
Nascimento, Amos 150, 156 n.51
Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind (1984) 
54
Nayakan (1987) 164
News of the World (2020) 87
Nobody Knows (2004) 16
Now, Voyager (1942) 9, 71, 72, 73, 74, 78, 
79, 81, 82

INDEX      227
O’Brien, Margaret 71, 73, 82, 215
October (1928) 160
Orner, Michelle 204, 220, 221, 222 n.6
The Other Bank (2009) 47
The Owl Service (1969–70) 199
Ozu, Yazujiro 160, 161
­Paisan (1946) 203
Paisito (2008) 139
Pan’s Labyrinth (2006) 209
Paresh Pather (1958) 161
Paruthiveeran (2007) 166
Pasanga/Children (2009) 167
Pather Panchali (1955) 12, 159, 161, 16
Pender’s Fen (1974) 199
Pearson, Mike 37, 40, 46 n.9
Phalke, Dadasaheb 157, 158
Phalke, Mandakini 157, 158
Philibert, Nicolas 10, 101, 109
Phillips, Adam 130, 137, 138 n.29
Philo, Chris 2, 15 n.3
Phuc, Kim 105, 109
Pini, Maria 211, 223 n.16
Pixote (1981) 141
Play Sufficiency Measures (Welsh) 35, 36, 
37
Podalsky, Laura 140, 154
Pom Poko (1994) 53
Powrie, Phil 109, 117 n.15
Prasad, M. Madhava 162, 163, 168
Protect and Survive (1975) 200
Public information films 12, 13, 187, 197
Pudhupettai (2006) 166
‘Punch and Judy’ 13, 182
Quashie, Kevin Everod 10, 88, 89, 90, 97, 
99 n.12
Rains, Claude 72, 73
Ratcatcher (1999) 8, 22, 25–28, 87
Ramsay, Lynn 8, 25, 27,28, 87
Ratnam, Mani 163, 166, 168
Ray, Satyajit 12, 159, 161, 168 n.6, 203, 
207
Rear Window (1954) 95
Rebecca (1940) 80
The Red Balloon (1956) 162
Reid, Mark 206, 208, 223 n.11
Reynolds, Simon 198, 201 n.17
The River (1951) 159
Robida, Albert 60, 68 n.11
Rocha, Carolina 15, 139, 140, 154 n.1, 156 
n.52
Rocks (2019) 99
Rome, Open City (1945) 141
Rose Hobart (c.1936) 178, 181
Rose, Jacqueline 123, 137 n.9
Rossellini, Roberto 141, 203
Said, Edward 204, 222 n.5
Samskara (1970) 162
San Pietro (1945) 101, 103, 105, 106, 115
Sanders, Ashton 10, 87–8, 91–4, 97
Schwarz, Roberto 145, 146, 155 n.31
Scott, Sarah 40, 47 n.22
­The Secret Garden (1949) 71
The Selected Works of T.S. Spivet 11, 
131–132, 136, 137 n.6
Seven Days of Luke (1975) 57
Sewing Machine (1973) 196, 197,200
Shingler, Martin 9, 10, 71, 86
Shoeshine (1946) 204
De Sica, Vittoria 141, 203
Singleton, Valerie 194,196
Sitney, P. Adams 179, 184 n.28
Skidmore, Thomas E. 146, 155 n.34
Sklar, Robert 203, 207, 222 n.1
So Long, See You Tomorrow (1996) 38, 46
Sontag, Susan 103, 104, 116, n.5
Spelling Bee (2002) 116
The Spirit of the Beehive (1973) 95, 209, 
215, 216
Stanwyck, Barbara 71, 79
Starsky and Hutch (1975–79) 190, 199
Steedman, Carolyn 13, 17, 24–6, 33 n.8, 
177, 182, 184 n.21
The Strange Love of Martha Ivers (1946) 
72, 79, 80, 81
Strike (1925) 160
Subramaniapuram (2008) 166
Summer at Grandpa’s (1984) 162
The Sweet Hereafter (1997) 8, 21, 22, 28–33
synchrony 8, 49, 53, 56, 65–7
Tabarne Kathe (1987) 163
Takahata, Isao 38, 44, 53
Tarnation (2003) 10, 101, 105, 111–14, 117
Taylor, Elizabeth 71, 73, 82
Telles, Edward E. 150, 156 n.50
Temple, Shirley 73, 82
Texas Chain Saw Massacre (1974) 199
Thirteen (2003) 10

228      INDEX
This is England (2006) 4
Thomson, Amanda-Jane 206, 211–12, 213, 
217
Threads (1984) 200
Time of the Gypsies (1989) 11, 122, 125, 
127, 133
Todorovic, Bora 125
Tokyo Story (1953) 160, 161
Traverso, Antonio 142, 155 n.13
Turtles Can Fly (2004) 38, 44
Underground (1995) 121, 122, 136, 137
‘Understanding Cinema’ (project) 14, 
203–11, 214, 216–17, 22–21
United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (1989) 8, 14, 35,36, 41, 
123, 137, 185
Veyyil (2006) 166
Village of the Damned (1960) 191
Wagstaff, Christopher 204, 206, 207, 222 n.2
Waiting for Godot (1953) 121
Waldman, Diane 174, 184 n.9
Walk Away Renee (2011) 117
The War Game (1965) 200
­War of the Worlds (2005) 94
Ward, Colin 41, 47 n.23
Watch on the Rhine (1943) 71, 79, 81
Watch with Mother (1952–73) 198
Waugh, Thomas 114, 117 n.32
Welcome Home (1945) 82
What Time is it Over There? (2001) 162
When Father Was Away on Business (1985) 
10–11, 122, 125–30, 133
Where is the Friend’s Home? (1987) 203
Whisky (2004) 151
Whistle Down the Wind (1961) 40
Whisper of the Heart (1995) 9, 53, 54–56, 
59, 65
The Wicker Man (1973) 199
Will it Snow for Christmas? (1996) 44
Willett, Rebekah 211, 223 n.17
Williams, Raymond 208, 209
Wilson, Janis 9, 71, 72, 74–82
Winnicott, D.W. 135, 138 n.29
Winterbottom, Michael 3, 16, 44
Wyness, Michael 90, 92, 93, 99 n.15
Wynne-Jones, Diana 57, 68 n.8
The Year my Parents Went on Vacation 
(2006) 11, 139, 142–151
Yi Yi (2000) 162
Zapruder, Abraham 112, 117
Zizek, Slavoj 121, 136

